Prophet’s appearance, character, physique and some miracles
===========================================================

It is mentioned in reliable traditions that Imam Hasan and Imam Husain
(a.s.) said that Prophet’s nobility was visible through his eyes and
that his chest reflected his bravery and awe. His face always remained
radiant like the bright moon of the fourteenth night of the lunar month.
The height above the waist was more which made him appear tall.

He had a big head and his hair was neither curly nor straight. The hair
did not extend beyond the lower tip of his ears. When it grew longer the
Holy Prophet (S) used to comb it from the middle and divide it on both
the sides. His holy face was fair and radiant, forehead broad and
eyebrows thin and extended like bows and not joined with one another.
According to some narrations they were joined. There was a nerve in the
middle of the forehead which swelled up at the time of anger.

His nose was protracted and slender upraised in the middle wherefrom
sprouted radiance. His holy beard was dense with hair well leveled - not
spread here and there. The holy mouth was not very small. Teeth were
very white, glittering and spacious. Very soft hair grew from chest to
the navel. His neck was clean, shinning like silver and slender like an
oriental jug. All the parts of his holy physique were quite appropriate
and strong. His chest and belly were in a level.

There was ample space between his two shoulders and all his joints were
strong, a sign of courage and bravery, which was very popular in Arabia.
His holy body was white and radiant. A tiny line of black shining hair
between his chest and navel shone like silver because of cleanliness.
There was no hair on his nipples and belly. There was hair on his
shoulders and hands. His wrists were wide and palms broad and his hands
and legs were strong; signs of male potency and strength.

His fingers were long and arms and shins, clean and broad. The lower
soles of his feet were long and his arms and shins, clean and broad. The
lower soles of his feet were not leveled but hollow in the middle and
did not touch the ground. The back of his feet was so soft and clean
that if a drop of water fell on it, it did not remain but slipped down.

While walking, he did not drag his feet on the ground but advanced
lifting his feet. He used to lower his head as if descending from a
height. He never tilted his head like arrogant persons. He walked with
long steps and with soberness. While talking with others, he never
looked at others sideways like proud and affluent persons but always
faced them directly. He mostly kept his eyes downcast, more towards
earth, not the sky.

While looking he did not open his eyes fully but looked from corners. He
greeted first whomsoever he met. He always remained in thought and never
blank in mind and without engagement. He did not talk unnecessarily.
While speaking, he never opened his mouth wide and yet his talk was
always clear and understandable. His talk was comprehensive with few
words and wide meaning clarifying the truth. Though not lengthy, his
talk fully expressed the aim. His temperament was very soft without any
harshness and adamancy.

He never considered anybody low. He was always thankful for even a small
comfort and never scolded anyone. At the same time he did not praise the
worldly eatables of this vanishing world. He did not become angry but at
the violation of a right. He was angry only for God’s pleasure in such a
manner that no one could recognize him. No one could withstand his anger
which did not disappear until he restored a usurped right by force.

If he wanted to mention something with a sign he never did so with his
eye but pointed to it with his hand. To express wonder, he used to raise
and move his hand sometimes striking his left hand with the right one.
When angry for the sake of His Lord, he expressed it clearly. When happy
he lowered his eyes and did not express too much of happiness. His laugh
was only a smile which seldom gave out a noise. Sometimes his teeth
shone like pearls when he smiled.

He divided his working hours at home into three parts: a part for
worship, a part for his wives and a part for himself. He never did any
other thing in an hour reserved for work. His own time was utilized for
others without reserving any time for personal needs. First he met the
appointed persons and then spent time with others.

He respected everybody according to the other man’s religious knowledge
and nobility. He gave attention to the need of others telling them what
was beneficial to them and to the refinement of the society. He used to
repeatedly tell those present to convey his words to absentees. He also
asked the present ones to convey to him the needs of those not present.

He used to say that undoubtedly God will help, on Judgment Day, one who
conveys the needs of others to the rulers. Only this kind of useful
discussion was being held in his meetings. The Holy Prophet (S) never
took anyone to task for any mistake. His companions attended his
gathering to gain knowledge and they returned to spread that knowledge
to guide others. These were the ways of the Holy Prophet (S) in his
house.

Outside, the Holy Prophet (S) never indulged in vain talk. He pleased
others and never hated anybody. He always respected the leaders and
chiefs of other communities making them guardians of those people. He
saved himself from the evils of others but never separated himself from
them. He did not stop behaving with them in a noble and pleasant manner.

He always met his companions and acquainted himself with their
condition. He praised their admirable and popular goodness and
encouraged them. He tried to make people dislike their undesirable
things so that they might give up evils. Everything that the Prophet did
was in moderation. He never overlooked the problems of others so that
they too may not ignore them and so that they might not incline to
falsehood.

He never hesitated to express truth and never gave up the right thing.
He gave company to good people. In his view, nobler was one who cared
more for the good of Muslims and noblest was he that behaved in the best
manner with others.

His meetings never either began or ended without remembering Almighty
Allah. He never reserved a particular place for himself in a gathering
nor did he ever allow others to do so. While entering a gathering, he
sat in the last available vacant seat and also encouraged others to do
so. When he spoke to anyone that person imagined himself to be the most
respectable in the Prophet’s view. When he sat with anybody, he never
got up until the other man arose.

If anybody demanded anything, the Holy Prophet (S) fulfilled it to the
best of his ability. Otherwise he replied to him in the sweetest manner
with a pleasing promise. His sweet behavior covered the entire world. In
his view, all people have equal rights. His gatherings were always full
of piety, patience, modesty, truth and honesty without any kind of
noise. Nobody’s faults were discussed or even mentioned. All behaved
with justice, equity, goodwill and kindness.

Everybody advised others to practice piety and behaved with mutual
humility. They honored the aged and were kind to the young. They gave
preference to the needs of others over their own and assisted the poor.
The Holy Prophet (S) always met others with a smiling face and kind
attitude. No one ever experienced any discomfort in his company. He was
never rude in talk or harsh in behavior. He never uttered obscene words
or talked bad of others; or describe their defects or over praise
anybody. He ignored unpleasant things.

Nobody ever felt disappointed after meeting the Holy Prophet (S). He
never quarreled with others or indulged in excessive talk. He paid no
attention to useless things. He never scolded anyone or condemned
anybody. He never found fault with others. He never spoke anything
unless it was likely to result in God’s pleasure. When the Holy Prophet
(S) was speaking in a meeting, the audience used to be so attentive and
motionless as if birds perched on their heads which they did not want to
be disturbed. No one could quarrel in his presence.

If someone was speaking, others listened attentively and never talked in
between. The Holy Prophet (S) shared the wonder and pleasant mood of the
audience. He used to tolerate even the uncivilized behavior of
illiterate desert Arabs. When the companions brought such persons and
when they asked the Holy Prophet (S) about something, he replied to them
also satisfactorily. The Holy Prophet (S) used to tell everyone: “If you
see any needy person, bring him to me.” The Holy Prophet (S) did not
like flattery, except some heartfelt words of gratefulness from one to
whom the Holy Prophet (S) had done some good.

The Holy Prophet (S) never disturbed anybody’s talk unless it was wrong.
In that case either the Holy Prophet (S) would stop him or go away from
there. The Holy Prophet (S) would keep silence for four reasons: Because
of calmness when an ignorant man would talk nonsense, or to remain safe
from evil or a silence which was proportionate to the other man’s rank,
or when he was engaged in some thought. Considering the rank of all, he
used to pay attention to each and every one’s say in the gathering
equally and his thought and pondering was about the passing world and
the everlasting Hereafter.

The Holy Prophet (S) was all patience and forbearance. Nothing could
make him furious or restless. He was always careful of four things: to
do good so that others might follow him, to avoid evil so that others
may follow suit, make more effort for something which was more
beneficial for the community and to undertake a deed which would
guarantee the good of both the lives of Ummah.

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
said that the complexion of the Holy Prophet (S) was fair with slight
redness, his eyes were dark and wide, his eyebrows thin and shoulder
bones strong, nose long to such an extent that while drinking water it
reached almost to water. No one was anywhere near the beauty and
character of the Holy Prophet (S) nor could one ever be so.

He said in another tradition that there was a mole on the lower lip of
the Prophet. It is narrated by Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that while in
anger, drops of perspiration dropped like pearls from his forehead.
Abdullah bin Sulaiman is reported to have said: “I have read in the
Injeel of Isa that Allah revealed: O Isa! O son of the chaste lady! Tell
the Syrians that I am the Everlasting God Who has no end or decline.

Testify to the Ummee Prophet, who is the possessor of a camel, armor,
headwear and a staff and whose eyes will be wide and forehead vast and
eyebrows clear and nose long and teeth white. His neck will be like a
silver jar radiating at the lower part as if gold plated. Thin hair will
grow from his chest to the navel. There will be no hair on his whole
chest and belly. His complexion will be wheaten. In every gathering he
will appear tall.

Drops of perspiration on his face will look like pearls spreading the
fragrance of musk. His like will be seen neither before him nor after
him. He will be a great admirer of fragrance and will marry a number of
women. He will have fewer children but his progeny will extend through
his auspicious daughter, who will have a house in Paradise; wherein will
be neither gloom nor sorrow. He will maintain that daughter till last as
Zakariya had maintained his mother.

Two sons will be born to that daughter, who will be martyred in the due
course. That Prophet’s word will be Qur’an and his religion, Islam.
Fortunate is one born in his time and who will hear his words directly
from him. Isa (a.s.) asked: “My Lord, what is Tuba?” Came the reply?
“Tuba is a tree in Paradise, which I have sown with My hands of might.
Its shade covers all heavens. Its root is Rizwan, its water is the
spring of Tasnim, which in winter tastes like camphor and ginger.

One who drinks from it even a mouthful will never feel thirsty.” Isa
(a.s.) said: “My Lord, let me have a little of that water.” The Lord
replied: “Isa, the water will be forbidden for all until that promised
prophet and his followers drink from it. O Isa! I will raise you up to
the heavens and then send you back to the world in the last age so that
you may worship with them as they are a blessed community.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
said: “I have not seen anyone having such broad shoulders as the
Messenger of Allah (S).” It is narrated through good chains of narrators
that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: “The Holy Prophet (S) said that
the eyes of we prophets sleep but our souls remain awake and I see from
behind as I see in front.”

It is mentioned in some other traditions that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said: Once Abu Dharr went to meet the Holy Prophet (S) but was told that
he was in another orchard. When Abu Dharr reached there, he saw the
Prophet asleep. Abu Dharr took a dry stick and broke it just to
ascertain whether he was really asleep. The Prophet opened his eyes and
said: “O Abu Dharr, are you testing me? Do you not know that I see you
in my sleep as I see you when awake? My eyes sleep but not my soul.”

It is also narrated through many chains that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
said that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “I see you from behind as I see you
in front. Therefore keep your rows straight in prayer; otherwise God
will put discord in your hearts.” It is mentioned in two reliable
traditions from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that Almighty Allah once sent Hareesa (a dish of ground wheat and meat)
from Paradise for the Holy Prophet (S).

After partaking it, his sexual potency multiplied to the power of forty
males. It is also mentioned in another tradition that once when the
Prophet complained about pain in the back, the Almighty Allah said: “Eat
Hareesa.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam Ja’far said that the
Holy Prophet (S) looked like a shining moon in a dark night due to his
radiating face.  
 Both Shia and Sunni scholars have narrated many miracles relating to
the holy physique of the Holy Prophet (S). Some of them are:

First: His holy face was always radiant and during night, it brightened
the walls like lamp. One night Ayesha lost her needle. She found it when
the Holy Prophet (S) entered her apartment. It is also narrated that
when people walked with him during dark nights, he raised his hand from
which a sort of light spread and lighted the path. Second: About his
fragrant physique: If one walked a path treaded by the Holy Prophet (S)
two days earlier, one could know from fragrance that the Prophet had
passed that way. People gathered the sweat of the Prophet for miracle
cures.

Nothing could equal its pleasing fragrance. They mixed it with scents.
People used to bring a bucket of water to the Holy Prophet (S). The
latter took some water therefrom in his mouth and then threw it out in
the bucket whereby the entire bucket became fragrant like musk. Third:
When the Holy Prophet (S) walked in the sun, he did not cast any shadow.
Fourth: While walking with anybody, the Holy Prophet (S) always appeared
taller than the other man.

Fifth: A cloud always shaded him in the sun. Sixth: The Holy Prophet (S)
could see from his back as he saw in front of him. Seventh: No foul
smell ever reached the Holy Prophet (S). Eight: Anything in which the
saliva of the Holy Prophet (S) fell became auspicious. It could heal the
sick. Ninth: The Holy Prophet (S) could speak every language. Tenth:
There were seven strands of white hair in his beard, which shone like
sun.

Eleventh: The Holy Prophet (S) could hear voices even when asleep. He
could hear talks of angels which others could not. He also could know
what was in other’s minds. Twelfth: The seal of prophethood on the back
of the Holy Prophet (S) was brighter than sunlight. Thirteenth: Water
flowed from his holy fingers. Pebbles recited the glory of God in his
holy palm. Fourteenth: He was born circumcised with his umbilical cord
detached. Fifteenth: No one could see his excrement which smelt of musk.
Earth used to hide it by divine command.

Sixteenth: The animal on which the Holy Prophet (S) rode never became
old. Seventeenth: No one could equal his strength. Eighteenth: Entire
creation used to honor the Holy Prophet (S). In his childhood, moon
swung his cradle and flies or other insects never sat on him.
Nineteenth: When the Holy Prophet (S) walked on soft soil, his feet did
not leave marks thereon. On the contrary when he walked on hard ground,
it left his foot marks.

Twentieth: Almighty Allah had put a kind of awe in his holy face due to
which, despite his being kind and merciful, nobody could stare at his
holy face. Every denier or hypocrite trembled while looking at his holy
face. His fright could be felt by unbelievers from a distance of a
two-day journey.[^1]

According to a reliable tradition, Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) is reported to
have said that when Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) was reciting the Holy
Qur’an, passers-by fainted under the effect of his sweet voice. He is
reported to have said that had the Holy Prophet (S) read Qur’an, people
would not have been able to bear its sweetness. The narrator asked the
Imam: “How then was the Holy Prophet (S) reciting the Holy Qur’an during
congregational prayers?” The Imam replied: “He recited only upto a
bearable extent.”

It is narrated through authentic chains of narrators that Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) said: After Yusuf (a.s.) became a king, Zulaikha arrived at
his door and asked permission to enter. When she went in, Yusuf (a.s.)
asked: “Did you commit those mischiefs?” She replied: “Your elegance
made me almost mad.” Yusuf (a.s.) said: “What would you have done had
you seen the Holy Prophet (S) who is to be far more handsome and also
more virtuous and generous?”

Zulaikha said: “You are right.” Yusuf (a.s.) asked: “How could you know
that I am right?” She replied: “The moment you took his name, his love
filled my heart.” At that moment Almighty Allah revealed to Yusuf that
Zulaikha was telling the truth, “and as she loves My beloved, I also
love her.” Then Yusuf (a.s.) married her.

According to another tradition, in reply to those who asked him why his
holy beard turned gray so soon, the Prophet said: “The Qur’anic chapters
of Hud, Waqia, Mursalaat and Amma Yatasaaloon have made me old as they
describe divine punishment in the Hereafter and what was meted out to
earlier people.”

It is mentioned in authentic books that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said
that the Holy Prophet (S) did not allow his hair to grow to the extent
requiring a comb. At the most it reached his ear tips. He did not cut it
but at the time of Hajj and Umrah. At the time of Hudaibiyah when the
Holy Prophet (S) was prevented from performing Umrah, it remained uncut
for the whole year. The reason was that in those days shaving of head
was considered ugly. No prophet or Imam ever did anything which appeared
loathsome to people. When Islam spread and dislike for shaving the heads
was no more, our Imams also shaved their heads

Habits, character and behavior of the Prophet (S)
-------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in a good tradition that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said
that once the dress of the Holy Prophet (S) was worn out. Someone
presented twelve dirhams to the Holy Prophet (S). The Holy Prophet (S)
said to Amirul Momineen (a.s.): “Take this amount and buy a shirt for
me.” Ali (a.s.) says: “I went to the market and bought a shirt for
twelve dirhams.” The Holy Prophet (S) looked at it and said: “A cheaper
shirt would suit me better. O Ali! Do you think the shopkeeper will take
it back?”

I said: “I don’t know.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Just see, maybe he
does.” So I went to the shopkeeper and said: “The Holy Prophet (S) does
not like this costly shirt and prefers a cheaper one.” He returned the
twelve dirhams which I handed over to the Holy Prophet (S). Then the
Holy Prophet (S) accompanied me to the market. On the way we saw a slave
girl weeping. The Holy Prophet (S) asked her and she said: “O Messenger
of Allah (S)! My master gave me four dirhams to buy something from the
market but I lost the money.

Now I cannot dare to go home.” The Holy Prophet (S) gave her four
dirhams and asked her to go home. Then he went to the market, bought a
shirt for four dirhams and put it on, thanking Allah, while returning,
he saw a naked man saying: “One who gives me a dress will be dresses by
Allah in Paradise.” The Holy Prophet (S) gave the shirt to him. He then
went back to the market and bought another shirt for four dirhams, wore
it and thanked God.

While returning he again saw that slave girl sitting on the path. He
asked her why she had not gone back home and she replied: “O Messenger
of Allah (S) I am afraid my master will punish me for being so late.”
The Holy Prophet (S) told her: “Walk ahead and show me your house.” So
she went ahead and stopped at the door of her master’s house. The
Prophet also stopped there and said (somewhat loudly): “Peace upon you,
O inmates of the house.” Nobody gave any reply. The Holy Prophet (S)
repeated Salam but no response.

Then he conveyed Salam for the third time when came a reply: “And peace
be upon you, O Messenger of Allah (S) and the mercy of Allah and His
blessings.” The Prophet asked why they had not responded to his Salam
twice and they said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), we wished that the
blessings of your Salam may increase in our favor.”

Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: “This slave girl is late. Don’t take her
to task.” They replied: “O Messenger of Allah (S), in exchange of the
joy we got by your honor’s arrival, we have freed her from our slavery.”
The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Never before have I seen so much
auspiciousness of these twelve dirhams due to which two unclothed bodies
were dressed and a slave girl freed!”

It is recorded by both Shias and Sunnis that the Holy Prophet (S) said:
“I will not give up five habits as long as I live: To eat sitting on
ground with slaves, to ride on pony without a saddle, to milch goat with
my own hands, to wear coarse woolen cloth and to greet children, so that
it may become a popular habit after me and people follow suit.”  
 In another tradition, mending shoes is mentioned in place of ‘milching
goat.’ It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said that he was asked by some people: “It is narrated that your
great grandfather (Prophet) never ate wheat bread to satiation?” He
replied: “No, the fact is that he never ate wheat bread; he ate only
barley bread and that too never to satiation.”

It is narrated through authentic chains of narrators that Imam Musa
Kazim (a.s.) said that the Holy Prophet (S) was indebted to a Jew to the
extent of a few dinars. One day he came and demanded his money. He said
that he was not having the money at the moment but the Jew said: “I will
not leave until you pay.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “All right, I will also sit with you.” The
Holy Prophet (S) sat there with the Jew so long that he offered his
Zuhr, Asr, Maghrib and Isha prayers as well as the Fajr prayer of the
next day at that spot. The companions of the Holy Prophet (S) then began
to scold and threaten the Jew. But the Holy Prophet (S) asked them:
“What have you to do with this matter?”

The companions said: “O Messenger of Allah (S)! This man has almost
imprisoned you and he does not allow you to move from here!” The Holy
Prophet (S) said: “Allah has not appointed me a prophet to oppress one
who is in our security.” When the sun rose somewhat higher, the Jew
said: “I witness that there is no god and that Muhammad is His slave and
His Messenger. O Messenger of Allah (S)! I give away half of my wealth
in the path of Allah.

By God! I had behaved like this only to ascertain whether you possess
the virtues of the last prophet as mentioned in the Torah. I have read
in that scripture that the birth place of Muhammad bin Abdullah will be
Mecca and that he will migrate to Medina; he will not talk harshly nor
will he be hot-tempered, he will not talk loudly and will never utter
obscene words. I testify that God is One and that you are His Messenger.
O Messenger of Allah (S)! My wealth is here. Please spend it yourself
according to God’s commandments.” It is said that he was a very rich
man.

Thereafter Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) says: Prophet’s bed consisted of a bed
sheet and a pillow of leather, full of date leaves. One night his sheet
was folded twice with a view to give him more comfort. Next morning he
said: “Due to more comfort last night, I could not wake up for night
prayer earlier.” Henceforth the sheet may not be folded.

It is narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that one night the Holy Prophet (S) was in Umm Salma’s
apartment. At midnight, when Umm Salma awoke she could not find the
Prophet in his bed. She arose to look for him and saw him standing in a
corner with raised hands, weeping and praying: “My Lord! Let not the
things which You have gifted to me be wasted and do not make the jealous
enemies joyful regarding me.

My Sustainer! Do not turn me to the evils from which You have saved me
and do not leave me to myself even for a split second.” Umm Salma
returned from there weeping. When the Prophet heard her, he asked for
the reason. She replied: “O Messenger of Allah! May my parents be
sacrificed on you. How can I stop weeping when you are wailing and
weeping like this in spite of the fact that your rank is very high in
God’s sight and when the Almighty Allah has already forgiven your
errors?”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “How can I rest assured when I know that what
should not have happened did happen through Yunus (a.s.) when he was
left to himself by God just for a moment!”  
 It is narrated through authentic chains of narrators that Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) said that a beggar came to the Holy Prophet (S) and asked
for something. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Is there anyone who can give
me a loan.” An Ansar got up.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked him to give four hundred wasaq[^2] dates to
this man. It was given. After some days that Ansari came back and
demanded the dates loaned by him. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Let me get
it. I will repay, Insha Allah.” That man again demanded after a few
days. The Holy Prophet (S) again replied in the same way. It happened
likewise on the third occasion. Then that man said: “O Messenger of
Allah (S)! Whenever I ask for my loan you say ‘let the dates arrive and
I will give.’”

Hearing this somewhat harsh talk the Holy Prophet (S) asked: “Is there
anyone who can give me a loan?” Again another man got up. The Prophet
asked him what quantity of dates he had and the man said: “I can give
whatever quantity is required.” So the Holy Prophet (S) told him: “Give
eight wasaqs to this man.” That man said: “I gave you only four wasaq.”
The Prophet replied: “Four wasaqs is from my side.” In another authentic
tradition it is mentioned that when the Holy Prophet (S) left this
world, he did not leave any dirham, dinar, slave girl, goat or camel
except only one animal for riding.

His armor was mortgaged with a Jew for twenty saa of barely which the
Holy Prophet (S) had borrowed to feed his family members. Then Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: During the days of the Holy Prophet (S) poor
people slept in the Masjid. One day the Holy Prophet (S) broke his fast
with them near the pulpit in a stone vessel. Thirty persons dined to
satiation with the Holy Prophet (S) and also took food for their family
members who also were satiated.

It is mentioned in an authentic tradition that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said that when, due to old age, the Holy Prophet (S) had become somewhat
obese, he, in order to exercise, offered non-obligatory prayers on one
leg. Then Almighty Allah revealed the verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طٰهٰ. مَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لِتَشْقٰى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Ta Ha. We have not revealed the Qur’an to you that you may be
unsuccessful.”***[^3]

Thenceforth he was praying standing on both legs.  
 It is narrated through reliable traditions from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.)
that once an angel came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said that “the
Almighty Allah sends greetings to you and says that if you wish, the
entire desert of Mecca may be turned into gold for you.” The Prophet
raised his head to the sky and submitted: “My Lord! What I intend is
that I may thank You and also continue to ask from You.”

Then the Imam said: “The Holy Prophet (S) had, till his demise, never
eaten wheat bread contentedly for three consecutive days. He wore a ring
in his right hand. He sacrificed a black and white goat having horns. It
is also mentioned in traditions that people asked him (the Imam) if the
Holy Prophet (S) practiced dissimulation to which the Imam replied:
after the revelation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and Allah will protect you from people…”***[^4]

…he never resorted to dissimulation; prior to that he did so
sometimes.  
 It is narrated by Ibn Abbas that the Holy Prophet (S) sat and ate
sitting on the floor, tethered his goats himself and if a slave offered
him a feast of barley bread, he would accept that invitation at his
(Prophet’s) house.

In another tradition, Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) is reported to have said
that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said that no one thanked the Holy Prophet
(S) though he had obliged mercifully all including Quraish, non-Quraish,
Arab and non-Arab. Whose right on the creation can ever be there except
that of the Holy Prophet (S)? Similar is the case with us, the Ahlul
Bayt. None is thankful to us. Similarly good and the virtuous faithful
people also do good to the common man but nobody shows thankfulness to
them too.

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) is
reported to have said that once angel Jibraeel came to the Holy Prophet
(S) and said: “O Messenger of Allah (S)! Allah sends to you His
greetings and says that virgins of age are like ripe fruits hanging from
the trees. When a fruit becomes ripe it must be plucked, otherwise sun
destroys it and the air changes its quality. Similarly when young
virgins come of age the only remedy is to get them married. One should
not be careless regarding them.

The Holy Prophet (S) gathered the people, climbed the pulpit and
conveyed this divine message to all. People asked with whom should they
(virgins) be married? The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “With those who are
their suitable matches.” And the believers are mutual matches for
marrying off the daughter of his uncle (Zubair) with Miqdad. Then he
said: “O people! I have married my cousin to Miqdad so that marriage may
become an easy and light task and that you may understand that race must
not be considered in marriages.”[^5]

In a reliable tradition, it is mentioned that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said that the Holy Prophet (S) never went to relieve himself in the
presence of people. Once there was no barrier to conceal behind. There
were only two palm trees. One of the companions was with the Holy
Prophet (S) at that time. The Holy Prophet (S) signaled to those trees
and they came nearer and joined together making a barrier. Then the Holy
Prophet (S) went behind them and relieved himself. When that man went to
look behind those trees he could not find anything.

It is narrated by Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that before his appointment
as Divine Messenger, the Holy Prophet (S) grazed his sheep in Marz
Zahran. He used to say: “Bred and nourish black sheep as they are
better.” People asked him whether it was good to bred sheep and the
Prophet replied: “There is no prophet who did not graze sheep.” It is
narrated by Ammar Yasir that: I was grazing sheep before the appointment
of the Holy Prophet (S) to God’s messengership, and so also was the Holy
Prophet (S).

Once I told the Holy Prophet (S): “Dense grasslands are more suitable,
let us go there.” He replied: “All right.” When I reached there the next
day I found that the Holy Prophet (S) was present there but he had held
up his sheep from entering that grassland. The Holy Prophet (S) told me:
“Since I promised you, I did not like that my sheep should go ahead of
yours and start grazing.”[^6]  
 It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said: When the Almighty Allah created intelligence, He commanded:
“Come.” When it came He ordered: “Go back.” It went back. Then Allah
said: “I have not created anything which is dearer to me than you.” Then
the Almighty Allah divided it into ten parts, granted nine to the Holy
Prophet (S) and the rest to the entire creation.

It is reported through authentic chains that Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said:
the Holy Prophet (S) said: Once I experienced weakness due to prayer and
sexual intercourse. Then food arrived for me from Paradise, through
which I attained potency equal to forty males in the matter of courage,
movement and sex.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) is reported to have said: I was busy digging
trench with the Holy Prophet (S) when Fatima (s.a.) brought a piece of
bread for the Holy Prophet (S). The Holy Prophet (S) asked: “What is
it?” She replied: “I had prepared a loaf for Hasnain and have brought a
piece for you.” The Prophet said: “No seed of corn has entered your
father’s stomach for the last three days. This is the first food which I
am taking.”

It is mentioned in reliable traditions that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said that the Holy Prophet (S) ate without tablecloth like slaves and
also ate in a sitting position adopted by slaves (on two thighs). He
slept on the floor without spreading a mattress, considering himself a
slave. It is mentioned in another reliable tradition that once a
villager woman came and saw that the Holy Prophet (S) was dining on the
floor.

She exclaimed: “O Messenger of Allah! How is it that you sit and eat
like slaves?” The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “In the sight of the
Almighty Allah, which slave can be lowlier than me?” She said: “Kindly
give a morsel from your food.” When the Holy Prophet (S) extended his
hand to give some food she said: “Please give me from what is in your
mouth.” The Holy Prophet (S) gave the morsel he was chewing and she ate
it. Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says: Thereafter that woman never suffered
any illness or pain.

According to another narration that woman was formally foul-mouthed and
shameless and that she became decent and modest thereafter. According to
yet another reliable tradition Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: “By God,
ever since the Prophet was appointed by God as a prophet till his
demise, no one ever saw him eating in a reclining position (taking
support) nor did he ever eat wheat bread to satiation for three
consecutive days.” The Imam reiterated: I do not say that he never got
it. Rather sometimes it so happened that he himself gave away hundred of
camels to others. If he wanted he could eat full stomach. But he did
never do so.

Once angel Jibraeel arrived and offering keys of Paradise said to the
Holy Prophet (S): “O Messenger of Allah (S)! If you so desire, you can
own the whole world without any decrease in your heavenly reward.” But
the Holy Prophet (S) didn’t accept the offer and adopted humility
saying: “Instead of the world, I prefer the High Friend (God’s
pleasure).” Also the Holy Prophet (S) never said no to anyone who asked
for anything from him.

Rather if he had anything he would give it away, otherwise he would say:
“At present I don’t have anything, I will give you whenever I get it.”
If he gave guarantee of anything to anybody relying on God, God surely
gave it to him. So much so that even if he gave anyone the guarantee of
Paradise, God would accept that too. It is mentioned in another
tradition that his followers always guarded him but when the Qur’anic
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and Allah will protect you from people…”***[^7]

…was revealed, the Holy Prophet (S) told his companions: “Now I don’t
need any protection. Allah Himself protects me.” Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said: The Holy Prophet (S) daily, used to recite: *Alhamdu
lillaahi Rabbil A’laameen Katheeran A’laa kulli Haalin* (Excessive
praise in every condition, be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds) 360
times, that is, equal to the number of veins in the human body; and that
he did not rise up from a gathering without reciting Istigfar 25 times
even if it was a very brief meeting; and that daily he used to recite
*Astagfirullaah* (I seek forgiveness of Allah) and *Atoobu ilallaha* (I
turn to Allah in repentance) seventy times each.

It is also mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) said: The Holy Prophet (S) used to say: “How strange that I don’t
become aged when I recite the Holy Qur’an.” It is also mentioned in good
tradition from the same Imam that one day when Ayesha was sitting near
the Holy Prophet (S) a Jew came and said *Assaamu Alaikum* (death to
you). The Holy Prophet (S) responded *Alaikum* (same to you).

Then two other Jews came and said the same thing. The Holy Prophet (S)
also responded as before. Ayesha became angry and said: “O sons of
monkeys and swines, God’s curse be on you.” The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Ayesha! Had bad words to take any form, those words would certainly
take very ugly forms! If kindness and mildness is put on anything it
beautifies it and if the same kindness is lifted up from anything it
turns that thing into ugly and detestable.” Ayesha said: “Perhaps you
didn’t hear what they said.”

The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “I did hear. But I turned on them whatever
they hurled at me. If a Muslim tells you: *Salam*, you too should say:
*Wa alaikumus salaam* and if an unbeliever says *Salam* you should say:
*Alaik*.” It is mentioned in another tradition that while sitting, the
Holy Prophet (S) sometimes raised his knees and clamped them with both
his hands and sometimes he used to sit on two knees and sometimes he
joined one leg with another but never sat squarely.

It is narrated through reliable chains that Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said:
An Arab brought frequent gifts for the Holy Prophet (S) saying: “O
Messenger of Allah! Please pay me back for my gifts.” The Holy Prophet
(S) smiled at him reciprocating his happiness. When gloomy, the Holy
Prophet (S) used to say: “Alas, had that Arab come and removed my sorrow
to please me.” It is mentioned in a true tradition that Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) said: The Holy Prophet (S) paid equal attention to his
companions, never more to one and less to another.

He never stretched his legs before others. While shaking hands he never
withdrew his hand before the other man. When people became aware of this
they withdrew their hands sooner. In another tradition, it is reported
by the same Imam that the Holy Prophet (S) said: Jibraeel so much
emphasized on brushing the teeth that I feared they would be rubbed out
or fall out. It is reported again from the same source that whenever
anyone died from the tribe of Bani Hashim, his grave was moistened with
water and then the Holy Prophet (S) put his finger on that grave leaving
an imprint.

This was not being done in case of non-Bani Hashims. It is mentioned in
many other traditions that, due to his humility, the Holy Prophet (S)
never swung to his right or left, because he did not like to appear like
kings. It is stated in one narration that once the Holy Prophet (S) was
busy in his prayers in a journey. Some riders came and began to praise
the Holy Prophet (S) and said: “Had we not been in a hurry, we would
gave waited till the Holy Prophet (S) finished his prayer to talk with
him. Kindly convey our Salam to him.

Saying this they left. When the Holy Prophet (S) concluded his prayers
he expressed his unhappiness and said: “People come to you to inquire
about me and convey Salams to me, yet you neither stop them nor give
them any refreshments. This makes me very unhappy, especially when
people like Ja’far bin Abi Talib are also present here, and such
gentlemen leave without any feast.” It is mentioned in reliable
narrations that the Holy Prophet (S) used to keep a small staff with him
and plant it in front of him while offering prayers in a desert.

It is also written that Prophet’s *Rahal* (stand for Qur’an) was one
foot high which he used to place in front of him while praying so as to
make it a barrier between him and passers by. It is mentioned in yet
another tradition that once the Holy Prophet (S) was in Ayesha’s
apartment, where he was very deeply engrossed in prayer.

Ayesha asked: “Why do you undertake so much hardship and trouble when
God has forgiven all your past and future errors.” The Holy Prophet (S)
replied: “Should I not be a thankful slave of Allah?” Imam (a.s.) says:
The Holy Prophet (S) used to pray standing on his toes. Finally the
Almighty Allah revealed the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طٰهٰ. مَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لِتَشْقٰى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Ta Ha. We have not revealed the Qur’an to you that you may be
unsuccessful.”***[^8]

In another authentic tradition, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to
have said that in one journey the Holy Prophet (S) was riding a camel
when suddenly he dismounted and offered five prostrations, then mounted
the camel and proceeded on his journey. The companions exclaimed: “O
Messenger of Allah, today you did something which you never did before.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Yes, Jibraeel was welcoming me and he gave
me five glad tidings and I performed a prostration of thankfulness for
each of them.” In another reliable tradition, the same Imam is reported
to have said that good morals are always pleasing and desirable. One day
the Holy Prophet (S) was sitting in the Masjid when all of a sudden a
slave girl belonging to Ansar arrived there and caught hold of a corner
of the Prophet’s sheet, so he got up thinking that she needed something
but she did not say anything, so he sat down again.

This happened thrice. On the fourth occasion when the Prophet arose, she
was able to break a thread from his sheet. People scolded her why she
was troubling the Prophet repeatedly. She replied: “Someone is sick in
our house. They sent me to bring a thread from the Prophet’s sheet
because of its miracle cure. Every time I tried to pluck a thread, the
Holy Prophet (S) got up and I could not ask due to modesty. At the final
attempt I succeeded in obtaining this thread.”

In an authentic tradition, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) is reported to
have said that a Jewess made poisoned mutton and brought it to the
Prophet. That food spoke up: “O Messenger of Allah! Don’t eat me, I have
been poisoned.” The Holy Prophet (S) called that woman and asked her why
did that? She said: “I thought that if you are a true prophet, the
poison would not harm you. Otherwise people would get rid of you.”

The Prophet pardoned her. It is mentioned in a reliable narration, that
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said that once the Holy Prophet (S) went to
Ayesha’s and saw a piece of dry bread lying on the ground and it was
likely that someone may step on it. So the Holy Prophet (S) took it up
and put it in his mouth and said: “O Humaira! You should appreciate
God’s blessing, because if that blessing is withdrawn, it returns
never.” In a good tradition, it is narrated through the same source that
one Friday night the Holy Prophet (S) intended to break fast in the Quba
Masjid and asked: “Is there anything to break the fast with?”

Aws bin Khubi Ansari offered a cup of milk mixed with honey. The Holy
Prophet (S) sipped a little and threw out at once saying these are two
things. One can suffice. I do not like to consume two things at a time,
though I don’t forbid people from doing so. I do it to show humility
before the Almighty Allah and to gain His pleasure. Allah raises the
rank of one who adopts such humility. He degrades one who shows
haughtiness. Allah gives provision to one who adopts moderation and
deprives one who indulges in extravagance. God loves one who remembers
death.”

It is mentioned in a true tradition that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said
that one day an angel came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: The
Almighty Allah has authorized you and now it is upto you to be either a
messenger slave (of Allah) and a man of humility or a prophet king. Your
rank will not be lower in any case. Then he offered the keys of earthly
treasures to the Holy Prophet (S) saying: Allah says that you may take
them and open the treasure of your choice and use the same.

The Holy Prophet (S) replied: I prefer to be a slave of God and His
messenger and a man of humility. I don’t like being a king. According to
another narration he said that this world is the house of one who has no
house in the Hereafter and he gathers worldly wealth who has no wisdom.
The angel then said: By God Who made you a true Messenger, when these
keys were given to me I heard the words which you uttered from an angel
speaking on the fourth heaven.

In another reliable tradition, it is mentioned that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said that nothing was dearer to the Holy Prophet (S) than one who
lived in the world in hunger, thirst and fear. It is mentioned in yet
another tradition that the curry most pleasing to the Holy Prophet (S)
was vinegar and olive oil. It is mentioned in yet another reliable
tradition that one day the Holy Prophet (S) was sitting in Umm Salma’s
apartment who brought a piece of bread to the Holy Prophet (S). He
asked: “It seems you have no other curry?”

She replied there is nothing except vinegar. The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Vinegar is the best curry. A home having vinegar is not without curry.”
Imam (a.s.) says that once hot food was brought to the Holy Prophet (S).
He said: “God has not made fire our food. Let it cool down, because
there is no merit in hot food and it is shared by Satan.” Imam (a.s.)
said: Sometimes the Holy Prophet (S) used to eat musk-melon with ripe
dates and sometimes with sugar.

In vegetables, he preferred mountain basil (*Baadrooj*). While drinking
water, the Holy Prophet (S) used to recite *“Alhamdulillaahil Ladhee
Saqaana Adhban Dhulalan wa lam yasquna milhan ujaajan wa lam yuwakhidhna
bi dhinoobina.”* (Praise be to Allah, who gave us sweet water to drink
and not salty water and He will not make us pay for our sins) The Imam
says that while breaking fast, the Holy Prophet (S) used to eat sweets
first. If sweet was not available, then sugar or dates. If it was not
available, then tepid water.

It is mentioned in another tradition that in the season of dates he
broke the fast with dates and during the season of dried dates, with it.
It is also mentioned in a reliable tradition that once the Holy Prophet
(S) participated in horse race and placed a bet for three date trees. It
is narrated through reliable traditions that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said that once the Holy Prophet (S) received some money and he
distributed it.

But it did not reach all the Ahle Suffa (poor living in the mosque).
Some got and some didn’t. The Holy Prophet (S) was sorry thinking that
those who did not get would be grieved. So he went to them and said: “O
Ahle Suffa! I apologize both to you and to God as I wanted to distribute
all that was brought for me to all of you but it was not enough. So I
gave to those who were most needy.”

It is mentioned in the same narration that immediately after having
received the office of prophethood, the Holy Prophet (S) fasted
consecutively for several days. People thought that he would never
remain without fasting. Then he gave up fasting for some days. People
imagined that he will never fast again. Thereafter, like Prophet Dawood,
he fasted alternate days.

Then he discarded this routine and began to fast on 13th, 14th and 15th
of every month. Then he stopped that and fasted on the first and last
Thursday and on the first midmonth Wednesday. This practice continued
till he met his Lord. He always fasted the whole month of Shaban.

He said in another reliable tradition that the Holy Prophet (S) used to
give away whatever was demanded by the people; so much so that once a
woman taught her son to ask for something from the Holy Prophet (S). She
also told him that if the Holy Prophet (S) replied that he had nothing
to give, request him to give his shirt. The boy did likewise and after
that the Holy Prophet (S) could not leave home as he had no other shirt.
Finally, Almighty Allah revealed the command regarding moderation
through the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَجْعَلْ يَدَكَ مَغْلُولَةً إِلٰى عُنُقِكَ وَلَا تَبْسُطْهَا
كُلَّ الْبَسْطِ فَتَقْعُدَ مَلُومًا مَحْسُورًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not make your hand to be shackled to your neck nor stretch it
forth to the utmost (limit) of its stretching forth, lest you should
(afterwards) sit down blamed, stripped off.”***[^9]  
 It is said in another reliable tradition that the Holy Prophet (S),
while going to bed, used to apply stone antimony oddly. It is mentioned
in a correct tradition that he applied four sticks in the right eye and
three in the left.

It is narrated through reliable chains that once the Holy Prophet (S)
was passing through Medina where an Abyssinian slave girl was picking
droppings. People asked her to move away from the path of the Holy
Prophet (S). She replied: “The road is wide enough.” The companions
intended to punish her but the Holy Prophet (S) restrained them saying:
“Leave her, as she is proud.”

It is mentioned in other reliable reports that during summer, the Holy
Prophet (S) slept out from Thursday and at home from Friday in winter.
It is mentioned in yet another narration that such start was made only
on a Friday eve, be it summer or winter. Another tradition says he used
to milch his sheep himself.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) is reliably reported to have said that right
from the start of the last ten day period of Ramadan, the Holy Prophet
(S), used to prepare himself for worship, to keep away from women and to
pass his nights in nothing but prayers. It is mentioned in another good
tradition that during the last ten days of Ramadan, a tent of fur was
fixed in the mosque for the Holy Prophet (S). He remained in it without
sleeping (only worshipping).

He did not go to his wives during those nights. When the Battle of Badr
took place in the month of Ramadan the Holy Prophet (S) could not engage
in such worship (Etekaaf). The following year he doubled that period of
worship and remained in Etekaaf for 20 days. The Holy Prophet (S)
circumambulated the Holy Kaaba both during day and night.

He sacrificed two sheep on Eidul Adha: one on his behalf and another on
behalf of one who, from his followers, was unable to make a sacrifice.
He restrained people from fencing the orchards of Medina so that
passers-by could also eat fruits therefrom. When trees bore fruits, the
Holy Prophet (S) asked the owners to make gates for others to enable
them to eat fruits. He liked pumpkin much and he had planted it in his
courtyard.

It is mentioned in a tradition that once Abu Saeed Khudri went to visit
the Holy Prophet (S) who was ill. Abu Saeed felt the heat of fever even
when he touched the blanket covering the Holy Prophet (S). He said: “You
have a very high temperature.” The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “We the
Ahlul Bayt are like that: our illness and troubles are very hard and so
also is our reward high.”

It is mentioned in another reliable tradition that when the Holy Prophet
(S) departed from this world he was indebted. In another reliable
tradition, it is mentioned that the Holy Prophet (S) ate a gifted thing
but did not accept Sadaqah. He used to say: Even if hooves of sheep are
gifted to me, I would accept it. According to another narration about
the prayer of Prophet it is reported that the Holy Prophet (S) placed
water for making ablution near his bed and brushed his teeth covering
his head in a blanket. He slept very little.

When getting up he looked at the sky and recited the last verses of
Surah Aale Imran, then made ablution, and offered four rakats prayer. He
prolonged bowing and prostrating proportionate to recitation. When he
bowed, he remained bowed for such a long time that observers would think
he might not raise his head till dawn and so also were his prostrations.
Then he would go to bed for a while.

Then while rising he looked at the sky and recited and did as mentioned
earlier and then performed the voluntary prayers. Then he used to go to
the mosque for Morning Prayers. It is mentioned in another reliable
tradition that if you fear that your longing for worldly comforts will
subdue you, you should think about the life of the Holy Prophet (S).

His food was barley bread. His sweet was dates. His firewood was date
tree branches, if available. According to another narration, the Holy
Prophet (S) never talked with others from the level of his wisdom and
intelligence. He used to say: We prophets have been ordained to talk
with people on their level of intelligence. According to another
tradition, the Prophet’s food was a loaf of barley bread without curry.

In another tradition, Imam Ja’far is reported to have said that once a
foster sister of the Holy Prophet (S) came to him. He became very happy
to see her, spread out his sheet for her and made her sit thereon and
talked happily with her. When she left, her brother arrived. The Holy
Prophet (S) did not display as much welcome for him.

When companions asked about it he said: “She is more respectful to her
father.” In another narration, the holy Imam is reported to have said
that once the Holy Prophet (S) passed by a man belonging to Bani Fahad
tribe who was beating his slave. The slave repeated: “I seek God’s
refuge. But that man went on beating him.”

When that slave saw the Holy Prophet (S) he said: “I seek refuge of
Muhammad.” That man withheld his hand at once. The Holy Prophet (S)
asked why he did not stop beating when he took refuge in Allah but gave
him refuge when he sought his refuge? Allah deserves more and hence one
who takes refuge in Him ought to be given preference. That man said: “I
emancipate him for the pleasure of Allah.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “By the one Who made me His prophet, had you
not freed this slave, hellfire would certainly have scorched you.” It is
mentioned in yet another tradition that once the Holy Prophet (S) was
proceeding somewhere with some companions. On the way they saw a dead
lamb on a dunghill, with both of its ears slit.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked his companions: “Who will purchase this for a
dirham?” They replied: “We will not purchase it even if it is free.” The
Prophet said: “In my view this world is worth less than this.” In one
more reliable tradition, it is mentioned that a man came to the Holy
Prophet (S) while the latter was sleeping on a mat which left marks on
his body. He also saw the Holy Prophet (S) reclining on a pillow filled
with palm leaves which too had left marks on his cheeks.

That man exclaimed: “Arab and non-Arab kings sleep on beds of silk; how
is it that you sleep on a mat and recline on such a hard pillow?” The
Holy Prophet (S) replied: “By Allah! I am better than them and more
precious to my Lord than they are. What have I to do with this world,
which is like a tree under which a passer-by rests and then goes away?”
In yet another tradition it is mentioned that an Arab arranged a camel
race with the Holy Prophet (S) with a bet that if he wins he would take
possession of the camel of the Holy Prophet (S).

That man’s camel won the race. Addressing the companions the Holy
Prophet (S) said: “As you praised my camel and said that he would win
the race, the Almighty Allah made him low like all mountains had raised
their heads for the Ark of Nuh, so Allah drowned them in the deluge; but
as Mount Judi showed humility, the Lord made it the resting place for
Nuh’s Ark.”

It is narrated through reliable traditions that even though he never
sinned, the Holy Prophet (S) recited Istighfar seventy times daily. It
is mentioned in another tradition that once a man gifted the Holy
Prophet (S) one Saa of ripe dates. The Holy Prophet (S) asked his
servant to bring a cup or a vessel but he returned and said that he
could not find anything. The Holy Prophet (S) swept the ground with a
corner of his robe and asked the servants to place the dates there.

Then he said: “By the one in whose hands is my life, had the value of
this world been equal to even a tiny wing of a mosquito in the sight of
Allah, He would have never given even a particle from it to an infidel
or a hypocrite.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has said in *Nahjul Balagha*:
“If you want to renounce this world it is enough for you to follow the
character of the Holy Prophet (S) and that for condemning the world it
is enough to remember that the Holy Prophet (S) had no share in it at
all, and that others had a lot of it.

The Holy Prophet (S) never made his lips wet with the milk of the world.
He considered worldly comforts valueless and he never longed for them.
He had taken the least benefit from it - less than all others. He never
dined to satiation. Allah presented the world to the Holy Prophet (S)
but he did not accept it, because he knew that God does not like it. So
he was always inimical to it.

Verily the Holy Prophet (S) dined sitting on the floor, sat on knees
like slaves, mended his clothes and shoes himself and mounted bare backs
of mules seating someone else also with him. Once he saw a curtain on
one of his wife’s doors having pictures drawn on it. The Holy Prophet
(S) said: “Conceal this from me, because when I see it, it reminds me of
worldly decorations.”

The Holy Prophet (S) had fully turned away from the world and had driven
out its lust, love or remembrance from his mind and he wished that
worldly pomp should never come before his eyes as he did not consider it
a lasting abode. Verily one who does not like a thing wants that it
should not come before his eyes nor does he like to hear its mention.

Undoubtedly, in the life of the Holy Prophet (S) there is everything
that can show you the defects and evils of this world, because many
times it so happened that he and his companions remained hungry and God
did not like that he should possess worldly comforts and wealth and
decorations despite His love for him. Verily he left this world in a
state of hunger and proceeded to the Hereafter without enjoying worldly
comfort. He never built a house for himself in the world.

It is mentioned in reliable traditions that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said that the Holy Prophet (S) liked mutton shoulder as it was from a
part near to the organs of eating and farther from the organs of
excretion. He did not like thigh, as it was nearer to the lower organs.
According to another tradition, somebody asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):
“Why did the Holy Prophet (S) prefer a shoulder of a sacrificed animal
over the other limbs?”

He replied: “The Holy Prophet (S) said that when Adam sacrificed an
animal for one of his sons who were to be messengers of Allah, he gave
the name of a prophet on every part of that animal’s body. He gave the
name of the Holy Prophet (S) to the hand. That is why the Holy Prophet
(S) liked that part most.”

According to a reliable narration, Imam Husain (a.s.) is reported to
have said that whenever the Holy Prophet (S) raised his hands in prayer,
he moved his fingers restlessly like a beggar asking for food.

According to a reliable tradition, Imam Ali (a.s.) is reported to have
said that the Holy Prophet (S) said: I have been appointed with
admirable morals and praised habits and character. In another reliable
narration, it is mentioned that Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) said: May my
parents be sacrificed for my grandfather, the Holy Prophet (S), because
despite his utmost nearness to God and in spite of the Lord’s promise,
he used to stand in worship for such a long time that he got swelling on
his feet.

When people asked him why he put himself to so much trouble when the
Almighty Allah has already forgiven his past and future errors, the Holy
Prophet (S) replied: “Should I not be a thankful servant of Allah?”

According to a reliable tradition, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) is reported
to have said that the Holy Prophet (S) applied musk perfume to such an
extent that his head smelt of musk. He kept a perfume pack with him.
While making an ablution, he rubbed musk all over his body. Whenever he
had a headache, he applied mustard oil to his hair. While making a
swearing he used to say *Laa wastagfirallaah* (No! And I seek the
forgiveness of Allah) but be never swore.

He has said in another report that once a scorpion stung the Holy
Prophet (S). The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Curse of God upon you; you do
not hesitate in hurting a believer or a denier, a good person or an evil
one!” Then he called for salt and applied it to the wound and it gave
him relief. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “If people know how much
beneficial salt is, they will not care for any antidote.”

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) is reported to have said, according to a
reliable tradition that one day when angel Jibraeel was sitting near the
Holy Prophet (S) he looked to the sky and his color suddenly changed and
became reddish like saffron, and he took refuge of the Holy Prophet (S).
Then he looked at the sky and found that a giant angel was descending
from the sky and his stature had covered the entire east and the west.

Then that angel came down to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: “O Messenger
of Allah (S)! God has sent me to you with a message that if you like,
you can be a king prophet or if you so desire you may remain a slave
prophet.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “I prefer to be a slave-like
Messenger of Allah (S).” The angel went back putting one foot on the
first sky and the other on the second sky. In this way he appeared
smaller and smaller until he looked like a tiny sparrow.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked why he was so frightened. Jibraeel replied:
“O Messenger of Allah (S)! Don’t ask for the reason. Do you know who the
third angel was?” The Holy Prophet (S) replied in the negative. Jibraeel
said: “He was Israfeel, the chamberlain of the Almighty Allah. Ever
since the Lord created the universe he has never come down to earth. Now
on seeing him I imagined that perhaps Judgment Day is approaching and so
I was frightened.

But when I observed that came only to pronounce your honor’s greatness
and high status, I was assured. Didn’t you see that the higher he went,
the smaller he became; that the more he was getting nearer to the
Creator of the universe, he was decreasing in size thereby becoming
lowly. He is the custodian of the Lord and nearest to Him. The Lauh (the
tablet of destiny) is in front of his two red ruby eyes.

When the Almighty Allah sends a revelation, the Lauh touches his
forehead and whatever he sees therein, he conveys it to us and then we
(angels) carry it to the heaven and the earth. He is at the nearest
point in the vicinity of the place from where revelations are issued.
There are ninety curtains between the source of divine revelation and
the spread of divine grandeur that no eye can withstand and that is
beyond description and I am nearest to Israfeel among the entire
creation. There is a distance of a thousand year journey between me and
him.”

Ibn Shahr Ashob narrates that some of the noble virtues and precious
characters of the Holy Prophet (S) as mentioned in various traditions
are: He was wiser, intelligent, tolerant, judicious, just, kind and
courageous than all. His holy hand never stretched to a lady who was not
permissible to him and he was most generous. Money never remained with
him for more than a few moments. If ever night fell before he could
distribute his wealth, he used to remain restless till he distributed it
among the needy.

He never kept food that was enough for more than a year.[^10] All that
exceeded his needs was given away to the needy at once. He used to keep
only the cheapest grains like barely and dates etc. and that too was
given away when asked by the poor, and in the path of God. He used to
sit, eat and sleep on the floor. He mended his shoes himself, and
patched up his torn clothes. He opened and closed doors himself, milched
his cattle and secured his animals himself. If his servants became tired
of grinding grains, he would help them in their job.

He fetched water himself for making ablutions etc. He slept at night
keeping his head on the floor. He never sat reclining on pillows before
others. He was always helping his domestics. He used to lick his fingers
after eating and he never belched or bellowed. He accepted the
invitations of both the freemen and the slave even if there was a feast
of only a piece of meat. He accepted even if gifted merely a mouthful of
milk. But he never accepted Sadaqah. He never looked at others more than
necessary and never frowned for earthly causes.

His anger was only for and in the cause of Allah. Whenever very hungry
he fastened stones on his belly. He ate whatever was offered and never
declined. He put on Yemeni chador and wore woolen *jubbah* (long gown)
and used clothes of cotton and thick jute. He reserved a nice pair of
clothes for Fridays. While wearing new clothes, he gave away the old to
the poor. He kept a chador with him and doubled it to sit on. He wore a
silver ring on the small finger of his right hand. He liked musk melon
and abhorred foul smell.

He brushed his teeth at the time of every ablution and to ride every
available animal, to make his servant or any companion sit with him and
to sit without putting a saddle. He rode horses, ponies as well as
mules. He also went bare head and barefoot upto the outskirts of Medina
while accompanying a burial procession or when visiting a sick person.
He sat and dined with the poor and befriended the wise, the
knowledgeable and people of good morals.

He won the hearts of the leaders of other communities, behaved
generously with his relatives and never preferred others to them except
in matters commanded by the Almighty Allah. He took care of the status
of all, accepted the excuse of all. He smiled most of the time except
when the Holy Qur’an was being revealed to him. He never laughed out
aloud, never gave preference to himself over his slaves while eating. He
never used abusive words for anyone or expressed dislike to his wives or
servants.

He accompanied even his slaves and slave girls whenever they wanted him
to accompany them for some purpose. There was no harshness at all in his
behavior. He never shouted with anger. He recompensed evil with good. He
was the first to salute the newcomer and to extend his hand for a hand
shake. In a meeting, he always sat facing the Kaaba and kept on
remembering Allah all the time.

He accorded respect to whoever came to him and spread his chador to give
him a seat. He also provided a pillow to the newcomer. Other’s pleasure
or dislike never prevented the Holy Prophet (S) from telling the truth.
He ate cucumber sometimes with fresh dates and sometimes with salt. He
liked grapes and watermelon much. Mostly he took fresh dates, milk and
water and he preferred meat and pumpkin curry.

He never hunted but would eat the meat of permissible hunted animals. He
also took cheese and ghee. He liked shoulder meat, pumpkin gravy,
vinegar, dates; vegetables like salad leaves (*kasni*) and mountain
basil (*baadrooj*).

Shaykh Tabarsi (r.a.) has mentioned that the Holy Prophet (S) was so
modest that during the battles of Khyber and Bani Nuzayr he rode a
donkey with a saddle and rein of palm leaves. The Holy Prophet (S)
saluted ladies and children. Once while talking with the Holy Prophet
(S) a man was trembling.

The Holy Prophet (S) exclaimed: “Why are you trembling? I am not a
king.” Anas says: “I served the Holy Prophet (S) for nine years but
throughout that period he never asked me why I did this or that nor he
ever found any fault in my work. I never smelled a fragrance better than
that coming from the Prophet.

While sitting with others, he never stretched his legs. Once a Bedouin
came and snatched Prophet’s sheet with force so much that only a corner
of it remained around the neck of the Holy Prophet (S). Then he said:
“Give me something from the wealth given by Allah.” The Holy Prophet (S)
attended nicely to him and asked his men to give something. At that
juncture, the Almighty Allah revealed the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلٰى خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most surely you conform (yourself) to sublime morality.”***[^11]

The Holy Prophet (S) was so modest that despite dislike for a thing he
never expressed his displeasure; we only knew it from his expression. He
was so generous that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said that none in the world
could equal his generosity and his company was better than all other
companies and his tone more pleasing than all other tones.

His courage was more than all others, his temper most soft, he surpassed
all in giving refuge and shelter to others and also in fulfilling his
promises. One who met him for the first time became awestricken but
after some visits, he would love him. I have not seen anyone like him
neither before nor afterwards.

Ibn Abbas is reported to have said that the Holy Prophet (S) said: I
have been taught discipline and manners by Almighty Allah and Ali (a.s.)
is taught by me. Allah ordered me to be generous and kind and prevented
me from being an oppressor and miser. Allah does not dislike anything
more than miserliness and bad behavior.

Prophet’s courage and bravery was such that according to Imam Ali (a.s.)
during a raging battle we took his shelter whom no enemy could dare
approach. It is mentioned in many narrations that Prophet’s pleasure or
dislike was apparent from his face. When he was happy, his face lit up
to such an extent that walls reflected in his holy cheeks. It became red
hot when angry.

The Ummah was so dear to the Holy Prophet (S) that if anybody was not
seen for three consecutive days he used to inquire about him. If he knew
that man had gone on a journey the Holy Prophet (S) would pray for his
safety and security. If he was in town, the Holy Prophet (S) would go to
meet him. If ill the Holy Prophet (S) would visit him.

Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari has said that the Holy Prophet (S)
participated in twenty one holy wars and that he (Jabir) was with the
Holy Prophet (S) in nineteen. In one of those battles my camel became
tired and sat down. The Holy Prophet (S) was behind, making the old and
weak join the caravan and seated them on his animal and he prayed for
them.

Likewise he came to me and asked who was I? I replied: “I am Jabir, may
my parents be sacrificed for you.” He asked what was the matter with me?
I replied: My camel has become tired. He asked for a stick and I gave it
to him. Hitting the animal with that stick he made the camel get up. But
that animal soon sat down. Then the Holy Prophet (S) put his holy foot
on the front leg of that camel and asked me to ride it.

My camel began to move faster than the camel of the Holy Prophet (S).
During that night, the Holy Prophet (S) prayed for my pardon five times
and then asked me how many issues my father Abdullah had left behind. I
said: Seven daughters. He asked me whether he was indebted too? I
replied in the affirmative. He said: When you go to Medina, request the
creditors to recover their dues in easy installments.  
 If they are not agreeable, inform me at the time of harvesting.”
Thereafter the Holy Prophet (S) asked me: “Are you married?” I said: “I
married a widow.” He asked: “Why did you not marry a young woman with
whom you should have played and who could have played with you?” I
replied: “O Messenger of Allah (S)! I did not do so for fear of disputes
with my sisters.” He said: “That is all right.”

Then he asked: “How much did you pay for this camel?” I replied: “Five
Awqiya gold.” He said: “I purchase it from you.” Finally, when we
reached Medina, I handed the camel to him and he told His Eminence,
Bilal: “Pay five Awqiya so that he can repay his father’s debts and give
him three Awqiya more and also return this camel to him.” Then he asked
me: “Have you settled the deals with your father’s creditors?”

I said: “Not yet.” He asked again: “Has he left enough money to repay
his debts?” I replied: “No.” He said: “Don’t worry. Inform me at the
time of harvest.” So at the time of harvest I informed the Holy Prophet
(S) and he arrived and prayed for us and due to that blessing our trees
produced so much that besides clearing our debts we had much for our
consumption.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked me: “Pluck the dates but don’t weigh or
measure them.” We acted accordingly and ate the dates for quite a long
time. Ibn Abbas says: “Whenever any question was asked to the Holy
Prophet (S) he used to reply twice so that there may not remain any
doubt.”

Abil Hameesa is reported to have said: I made a deal with the Holy
Prophet (S) before he was appointed to the office of prophethood and
promised to meet at a place. But I forgot that promise and did not reach
the appointed place. When I went there, I found the Holy Prophet (S)
waiting there since three days.

Jarir bin Abdullah is reported to have said that once when I went to the
residence of the Holy Prophet (S), the house was full and there was no
room to sit, so I sat near the door. Seeing this, the Holy Prophet (S)
gave his own shirt so that I may sit on it. But he (Jarir) rubbed that
shirt on his body and kissed it. Salman Farsi says: Once I went to the
Holy Prophet (S) who was then reclining on a pillow. The Holy Prophet
(S) extended the pillow to me saying: Allah forgives a believer who
offers his pillow to his believing visitor brother.

It is reported that when Prophet’s son, Ibrahim was on death bed, tears
rolled down Prophet’s eyes and he said: My eyes overflow with tears and
my heart is in pain but my tongue cannot utter anything detestable to
the Almighty Allah. O Ibrahim! We are full of sorrow for you.” It is
also reported that the Holy Prophet (S) wept mourning the death of Zaid
bin Haritha and said: This is an expression of feeling for a friend.

Also Jabir is reported to have said that while walking, the Holy Prophet
(S) walked ahead of his companions leaving room behind for angels.
According to yet another narration while riding the Holy Prophet (S)
seated his companion with him and never rode alone. If that man did not
agree, the Holy Prophet (S) would tell him: Please go ahead and meet me
at such and such place. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has said that when faced
with two kinds of worship the Holy Prophet (S) would prefer the harder
one.

His prayer was always light and perfect and his sermon shortest and full
of beneficial substance. When the Holy Prophet (S) passed by any place,
people would know his direction from his fragrance. While dining with a
group, the Holy Prophet (S) would extend his hand ahead of all and pull
it back after all others. He would pick the food only in front of him
and never extended his hand here and there.

If it were date or dry date he would pick from any place. He drank water
in three breaths, taking a small quantity of water every time and never
filled his mouth with water. He was doing all his work with his right
hand except the acts pertaining to the lower half of the body. He began
every work from the right side except that of putting on the clothes and
putting on and taking off shoes.

When the Holy Prophet (S) went to see anybody before entering the
latter’s home the Holy Prophet (S) would ask for permission thrice. His
talk (words) always separated the truth from falsehood and were explicit
in expressing his aim. While talking, his teeth would radiate making
others think that he had opened his mouth though it was not so. He never
looked at others with wide eyes and he never talked in an unpalatable
manner.

It is reported by Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that once the Holy Prophet
(S) promised someone that he would wait for him at a certain place until
his arrival. So the Prophet waited there for quite a long time. When the
sun became hot, companions told him to move under a shade but he
declined saying: “I had promised to wait at this place. Therefore I will
remain only here. If he does not come, I will die here and will rise
also from here in the Hereafter.”

According to another narration, if somebody brought a child to the Holy
Prophet (S) so that the latter might pray for the child’s well being or
give it a good name, the Holy Prophet (S) took the child in his arms. If
that child passed water in the lap of the Holy Prophet (S) and people
shouted, the Holy Prophet (S) would tell them to keep quiet and not to
prevent the child from urinating.

Thereafter the Holy Prophet (S) would pray for the health of the child
giving it a good name, so that its relatives might be pleased and might
not think that the Holy Prophet (S) was unhappy over the happening.
After they left, the Holy Prophet (S) used to clean his clothes. He used
to say: “Don’t keep standing in front of me like non-Arabs who stand
before their leaders.”

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) has said that when eating with others, the Holy
Prophet (S) used to say: “Fasting people broke their fast with you and
good people dined with you.” According to another narration the Holy
Prophet (S) never used more than three fingers to eat and never ate with
only two fingers. According to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) the Holy Prophet
(S) ate only barley bread all his life.[^12]

It is mentioned in another report that once the Holy Prophet (S) was
eating ripe dates with his right hand and collecting the seeds in the
left instead of throwing on the ground. Meanwhile a sheep passed by. The
Holy Prophet (S) signaled to it and it came to him. He extended his left
hand and the animal ate the seeds from his holy hand.

Thereafter he ate dates and threw the seeds towards the sheep. When the
Holy Prophet (S) finished eating, the sheep also went away. According to
another narration the Holy Prophet (S) did not eat garlic, onion, turai,
(a kind of cucumber) and foul smelling honey. He never condemned any
food. He ate if he liked it, otherwise he left it.

He cleaned cups with his fingers after eating and also licked his
fingers. After eating, he washed his hands and wiped his mouth. As far
as possible, he never ate alone. He uttered *Bismillah* before drinking
water, after drinking a little he used say *Alhamdullillaah* thrice and
he never drank it one gulp. He sometimes drank water in a wooden vessel
and sometimes in a leather bag. If these things were not available, he
used his hands.

Sometimes he drank holding the leather bag to his holy lips. He washed
his head and beard with berry water. He liked oiling his body and did
not like to keep his hair wavy. He used various kinds of oil. He began
with his holy head and then his beard. He also used violet oil and
combed his hair and beard. People collected the falling strands of hair.
He used to say: “The hair on the hands of the people are mine.” When the
Holy Prophet (S) cut his hair during Hajj and Umrah, that hair was taken
up by angel Jibraeel to heavens.

He combed his beard twice a day. On every occasion, he drew the comb
forty times from below and seven times from above. He used to apply musk
and ambergris a and mixture of the two. He also enjoyed the incense of
aloes wood. It is reported by Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Prophet’s
expenditure was more on fragrance and less on food.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) has said that three virtues were exclusive
for the Holy Prophet (S). His holy physique never threw a shadow. The
road he passed by remained fragrant for three consecutive days. People
knew that the Holy Prophet (S) had passed by that path. Every tree or
rock by which the Holy Prophet (S) passed, prostrated for him.

He used to say” “I love fragrance in women. Prayer is the light of my
eyes.” He used to apply three sticks of antimony in his right eye and
two in the left. He looked in the mirror while combing and groomed
himself before attending a meeting with companions. While traveling, he
kept a bottle of oil, antimony, scissors, mirror, toothbrush, comb,
needle, thread with him. Miswak was uppermost.

Sometimes he wore turban without cap and sometimes with it. Sometimes he
wore only a cap. During journeys he used to fasten a black silken turban
and sometimes wore jubbah and woolen turban. He thanked Allah while
wearing new clothes. While sleeping, he rested on the right side and
kept his right hand under his head and recited Aayatul Kursi. Imam
(a.s.) says: The Holy Prophet (S) thanked Allah when waking up from his
sleep and made a prostration thanking Allah. Before sleeping, he brushed
his teeth thrice.

While getting up for prayer during nights, he brushed his teeth once and
so also before offering the Morning Prayer. He used *piloo*[^13] twig to
brush his teeth. The Holy Prophet (S) resorted also to jokes but never
used indecent words. It is said that once the Holy Prophet (S) held the
hand of a man and said: “Who will buy this slave, that is, the slave of
Allah?” Once a woman was talking about her husband. The Holy Prophet (S)
asked her: “Is he having white eyes?”

She said: “No.” When that woman described this to her husband he told
her that the Holy Prophet (S) had cracked a true joke because the white
part in everybody’s eye is more than the black portion. Once a woman of
Ansar requested the Holy Prophet (S): “Please pray that Allah admits me
to Paradise.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Old women have no place in
Paradise.” That woman began to weep. But the Holy Prophet (S) soon told
her smiling: “Old women became young virgins before entering Paradise.”

It is mentioned in another report that once the Holy Prophet (S) told an
aged woman that old women will not go to Paradise. She went out and
began to weep. When Bilal saw her weeping, he asked about it and she
told him what the Holy Prophet (S) had told her. Hearing it Bilal took
her to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: “O Messenger of Allah (S)! This
woman says you said so and so.”

The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “Yes, and black people will also not enter
Paradise.” Hearing it Bilal also began to weep. Meanwhile Abbas also
arrived there and inquired about the event. The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“An old man will also not go to Paradise.” Abbas also became gloomy.
Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: “Allah will recreate them in the best
youthful forms before admitting them to Paradise.”

It is said that a woman complained to the Holy Prophet (S): “Such and
such man kissed me.” The Holy Prophet (S) called that man and asked why
he did that? The man said: “O Messenger of Allah (S)! If I have done
wrong, she may also do the same to me.” The Holy Prophet (S) smiled and
said: “Never do it again.” He said: “All right, I will not.”

Regarding jokes and witticism of the companions of the Holy Prophet (S)
it is written that once Suwaibat, a migrant (*Muhajir*), came to Naeeman
Badri and asked for food. He said: “My companions are not present.” Then
Suwaibat saw that a group of travelers had just arrived. He approached
them and said: “One of my slaves talks excessively and I want to sell
him. If he says that he is not a slave, don’t believe him, otherwise he
will escape from me.”

Then he sold out Naeeman in exchange of ten camels. The buyers put a
rope around the neck of Naeeman and began to drag him. Naeeman asked:
“Who suggested this fun about me?” They replied: “We have already heard
about your excessive talk.” They dragged him away. Thereafter their
friends brought him back. When this story was told the Holy Prophet (S)
was much amused. Naeeman also was cracking many jokes.

Once a blind man Mahramah bin Naufal needed to pass water. He said:
“Take me to a place where I can pass water.” Naeeman held his hand,
brought him to a corner of the mosque and told him: “You may relieve
yourself here,” and he ran away. People saw this and became angry. They
abused Naufal asking why he urinated in a mosque. Naufal asked: “Who
brought me here?” People replied: “Naeeman.”

He said: “I swear by Allah that when Naeeman is found I will beat him
with my stick.” Naeeman also came to know about this and he came to him
and asked: “Do you want me to take you to Naeeman so that you may beat
him with your stick?” He replied: “Yes.” So Naeeman held his hand and
brought him to Uthman who was praying, and said: “This is Naeeman,” and
ran away from there. Naeeman raised his stick and beat Uthman forcefully
with it.

People raised a hue and cry asking why he was beating Uthman. He asked:
“Who brought me here?” They said: “Naeeman.” He said: “Now I will have
nothing to do with Naeeman.”[^14]

Virtues, excellences and specialties of the Prophet (S)
-------------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in both Shia and Sunni traditions, that the Holy Prophet
(S) said: “Allah has given me seven specialties which were never given
to anyone before me. He made the earth a place for prayer and
prostration whereby I can pray wherever I want, He made the earth a
purifying agent for me and therefore, I can wipe (do tayammum) in lieu
of ablution and bath and it (earth) cleans the soles of shoes and the
end of the stick.

Secondly he made the war booty of unbelievers permissible for me and
thirdly, He put my awe in the hearts of non-believers thereby helping me
and fourthly He gave me comprehensive words having less words and much
meaning and fifth, He gave me intercession on Judgment Day.”

According to a reliable tradition of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and Jabir
Ansari (r.a.) people asked the Holy Prophet (S): “Where were you when
Adam (a.s.) was in Paradise?” The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “I was in
his loins. I was also in his loins when he descended to the earth;
thereafter I was riding a ship when in the loins of my father Nuh (a.s.)
and I was in the loins of Ibrahim (a.s.) when he was thrown into the
inferno.

None of my forefathers ever committed adultery. The Almighty Allah
always transferred me from pious loins to clean wombs. Almighty Allah
took confession from all prophets about my messengership. Similarly He
took confession of my religion ‘Islam’ from all the followers of
previous prophets and He revealed my virtues to them all. He put my
description in Torah and Injeel and made me travel in the skies and gave
me a part of His Name.

My Ummah is a praising one (doing Hamd), the Throne is Mahmud and I am
Muhammad. It is narrated through reliable traditions by Ibn Abbas that
the Holy Prophet (S) said: Almighty Allah divided His entire creation in
two parts: *Ashaabe Yameen* and *Ashaabe Shimaal* and made me among the
best of the *Ashaabe Yameen*.

Then He divided it into three divisions: Ashaabe Maimanah, Ashaabe
Mashamah and Sabiqeen, and made me among the best among the Sabiqeen.
Thereafter He divided it into three tribes and placed me in the best of
the tribes. He has mentioned in His Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثٰى
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you men! surely We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other…”***[^15]

And in the sight of Allah I am most pious among the sons of Adam. But I
am not proud; rather I remember Allah and thank Him. Then Allah divided
the tribes into families and placed me in the best family. As He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.”***[^16]

It is mentioned reliably that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said that one
day Abu Dharr and Salman (r.a.) came to see the Holy Prophet (S) and
came to know that he had gone to Masjid Quba. When they went there, they
saw him prostrating under a tree. They sat there waiting for him to
conclude his prayers. After quite a long time they imagined that the
Holy Prophet (S) had fallen asleep. As they thought of awakening him, he
raised his holy head and said: “I was aware of your arrival and also
could hear your voice.

I was not asleep. You should know that all the prophets that Allah sent
before me spoke the language of their people but He made me a messenger
for every white and black with Arabic language. Allah gave me five such
things that were not given to any prophet before me. He helped me
through awe and fear. People hear about my greatness and fearing me they
believe me, though there is a distance of a month long journey between
them and me.

He made war booty permissible for me. He made the earth a place for
worship and a purifying agent and hence I can make Tayammum on it and
pray on it wherever I may be. Allah has accepted one recommendation of
His messengers regarding their people. But when He inquired of me about
my recommendation in favor of my Ummah, I postponed my intercession till
Judgment Day and the Almighty Allah granted my request.

He gave me comprehensive language and all inclusive knowledge. He gave
me what He never gave to other prophets. Therefore my intercession is
guaranteed in favor of one who did not associate anyone with Only One
God, and who believed in my prophethood and who accepted my legatee, Ali
bin Abi Talib’s caliphate and who is the friend of my Ahlul Bayt.

And according to another tradition, it is mentioned that the Holy
Prophet (S) said: “The beginning of the manifestation of my
messengership was with the prayer of Ibrahim (a.s.) when he asked me
from the Almighty Allah and when Isa (a.s.) gave glad tidings of my
arrival and when my mother saw, at the time of my birth, a light which
made the palaces of Syria visible to her. It is mentioned in yet another
tradition that the Almighty Allah selected the Arabs from among the
people of the world and chose Quraish from the Arabs and preferred Bani
Hashim and gave top preference to me from among the children of Abdul
Muttalib.

It is mentioned that the Holy Prophet (S) said: The Almighty Allah gave
me five virtues and five miracles to Ali. He gave me *Jawamiul Kalam*
(comprehensive words) Holy Qur’an and granted comprehensive *Ilm*
(knowledge) to Ali. He gave me prophethood and made Ali my legatee.
Allah granted me Kauthar and gave Salsabeel to Ali. He sent revelation
to me and gave inspiration to Ali. Allah took me up in the heavens and
He opened the doors of sky for Ali, whereby whatever I saw in the skies
was seen by Ali from the earth.

According to reliable narrations, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said that the
Almighty Allah sent four prophets with swords so that they may wage
Jihad and they were Ibrahim, Musa, Dawood and Muhammad (S). It is
mentioned in another tradition that the Holy Prophet (S) said: On
Judgment Day, I will arrive at the gates of Paradise and ask the
door-keeper to open the gate. He will ask who I am and I will say: “I am
Muhammad.”

He will reply: “I was ordered not to open this gate for anyone before
you.” It is mentioned in many repeated narrations that the Holy Prophet
(S) said: “I am Sayyid and the best of the sons of Adam but I am not
proud. On Judgment Day, I will attend the field of accounting and I will
be the first to intercede and my intercession will be granted.”

It is mentioned in another reliable tradition that the Holy Prophet (S)
said: Allah manifested Islam on my hands, revealed the Holy Qur’an on
me, made me conquer Kaaba, gave preference to me over entire creation
and Allah made me the chief of the children of Adam, made me the
decoration of Judgment Day in the Hereafter and Allah banned entry to
Paradise for all prophets before me and for all people before my Ummah.

He also ordained that after me, till Judgment Day, caliphate should
remain in my Ahlul Bayt. So anyone who disbelieves in my words has
disbelieved in Allah. According to a reliable narration, Ibn Abbas said
that forty Jews came to Medina saying: “Come, lets go to the liar (God
save us!) who says: I am the best of prophets, so that we may prove his
falsehood.” When they approached the Holy Prophet (S) he said: “I make
Torah an arbiter between me and you.”

They said: “We agree.” Then they said: “Adam is better than you because
Allah created him with his own hand and blew His spirit in him.” The
Holy Prophet (S) said: “Adam (a.s.) is my father. Yet the grace given to
me by the Almighty Allah is more than what is given to him.” The Jews
asked what it was. The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “The callers of Azan
call five times daily: I witness that there is no god, except Allah and
I witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.

He does not say: Adam is the Messenger of Allah and on Judgment Day the
standard of praise will be in my hand, not in the hand of Adam (a.s.).”
The Jews said: “Of course what you said is true, because it is written
thus in Torah.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “This is the first grace.”
Then the Jews said: “Musa is better than you, because Allah spoke to him
in four thousand words but He did not talk with you even in one word.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “I am given more than him as Jibraeel seated
me on his wings and took me upto the seventh heaven and I passed by
Sidratul Muntaha which is near Jannatul Mawa and I reached upto the leg
of the throne (Arsh). There I heard a voice: “I am Allah except, whom
there is no god and that I have no defects or drawbacks whatsoever and
that I am to give security to the creation from punishment and I am a
witness over them.

I am Victorious, Mighty, Powerful and Enforcer. I am kind and Merciful.”
I have seen Allah not with physical eyes but with the eyes of the soul.
Hence this is better than what Musa (a.s.) had. The Jews said:
“Muhammad, you have told the truth as this also is written in the
Torah.” Then they said: “Nuh is better than you as Allah made him ride
the Ark and made that Ark rest at mount Judi.” The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “Allah has given me better than that.

He gave me a canal which flows from beneath the Throne (Arsh). There are
thousands of palaces on the banks of that canal having bricks made of
gold and silver. Their grass is saffron and pebbles are pearls and ruby.
Its ground is of white musk. That canal is called Kauthar. Allah granted
it to me and to my Ummah. He says in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَعْطَيْنَاكَ الْكَوْثَرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We have given you Kauthar.”***[^17]

The Jews said: “You said the truth, because it is mentioned like this in
Torah.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “This is the third distinction.” They
said: “Ibrahim is better than you as Allah made him His friend
(Khalil).” The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “If Allah made him His friend
(Khalil) He made me His beloved, and He named me Muhammad.” They asked:
“Why did He give you the name of Muhammad?”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “He gave me a part of His Good Name as He is
Mahmud and I am Muhammad, and my followers are Hamid.” The Jews said:
“You are right.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “This is the fourth grace.”
Then the Jews said: “Isa is better than you, because one day when he was
in Baitul Maqdas and satans wanted to harm him, Allah ordered Jibraeel
who hit the satans with his wings and threw them into fire.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Allah has bestowed me with a better miracle.
On the day of the Battle of Badr, when I was hungry, a Jewess welcomed
me with a big bowl of roasted mutton and sugar. She said: Thanks to
Allah who made you victorious over the enemies. I had vowed that if He
brought you back safe from Badr, I will sacrifice a sheep for you. The
Holy Prophet (S) said: I dismounted from my mule, Shahba, and extended
my hand to that bowl when, by the command of Allah, it became alive and
stood up on its four legs saying: O Muhammad! Don’t eat me as I have
been poisoned.” The Jews said: You are right, as this also is mentioned
in Torah.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “These are the five distinctions.” The Jews
said: “One more question remains after which we will return. Sulaiman is
better than you, because Allah had made humans, jinns, birds and beasts
subservient to him.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Allah made Burraq
subservient to me, which is better than all that is in the world. It is
one of the quadrupeds of Paradise. Its face is like humans and legs like
horse.

Its tail is like that of the cow. It is bigger than an ass and smaller
than a mule. Its saddle is of ruby, rein of white pearls having seventy
thousand golden ropes. Two of its legs are decorated with pearls, ruby
and emeralds. “There is no god, except Allah, the One without a partner
and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah,” is written on its forehead.

The Jews said: “You are right. It is written like this in Torah and also
that this is better than what Sulaiman had. O Muhammad! We testify to
the Oneness of God and also that you are His Messenger.” Thereafter His
Eminence (S) said: “Nuh (a.s.) guided his people for nine hundred and
fifty years, but Allah says that only a few believed in him. But the
number of my followers, during my short life is far bigger than those
who believed in the messengership of Nuh (a.s.).

Verily there will be 120000 rows in Paradise. 80000 will be for my
followers and 40000 for the followers of all other prophets. Almighty
Allah has made my Book (the Holy Qur’an) a testifier of all the previous
scriptures and it has annulled all of them. I have been sent to legalize
that which was banned for the previous prophets and also to prohibit
some of the things which were admissible during the times of the earlier
messengers.

One of such things is that in the Shariat (religious law) of Musa (a.s.)
fishing was prohibited on Saturday. Allah had turned some of them into
monkeys for disobeying the said commandment. But in my code of laws this
is permissible, as mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُحِلَّ لَكُمْ صَيْدُ الْبَحْرِ وَطَعَامُهُ مَتَاعًا لَكُمْ
وَلِلسَّيَّارَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lawful to you is the game of the sea and its food, a provision for
you and for the travelers…”***[^18]

…and my followers are allowed to eat the fat of slaughtered animals
which you cannot eat. And Allah has sent Salawat on me as He has
mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَمَلَائِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ ۚ يَا
أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا صَلُّوا عَلَيْهِ وَسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah and His angels bless the prophet; O you who believe!
call for (Divine) blessings on him and salute him with a (becoming)
salutation.”***[^19]

Moreover Allah has called me compassionate and merciful:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ عَلَيْهِ مَا
عَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُمْ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly an Apostle has come to you from among yourselves; grievous
to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous respecting
you; to the believers (he is) compassionate, merciful.”***[^20]

Allah ordained that people should not confide anything to me until they
pay something to the poor (Sadaqah). No such command was issued in
respect of any other messenger. Then after making it obligatory, the
Lord, annulled this order, as a mark of His mercy.

It is reported in a reliable tradition, that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said: Almighty Allah gave Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa and Isa’s codes of laws
(Shariats) to Prophet Muhammad (S) which comprise of belief in the
oneness of Allah, sincerity in His worship and giving up of polytheism
and taught him the manners of the upright faith of Ibrahim (a.s.).
Monasticism is banned in the religion of Muhammad; clean and pure things
are permitted.

Hardships have also been removed from the Islamic code of life, which
were must for earlier communities. Thus the supremacy of the Holy
Prophet (S) was manifested. In his Shariat, prayers, fasting, Zakat,
Hajj, enjoining good and forbidding evil was made compulsory.
Distinction between lawful and prohibited and laws of inheritance and
criminal punishments and fighting in the cause of Allah have been added
to the code of conduct and so also making ablution. Allah graced him
over other messengers by revealing the Qur’anic chapters of Baqarah and
other detailed Surahs from Surah Muhammad till end.

He helped him by installing his (prophet’s) awe and fear in the hearts
of his opponents. Allah made the earth a place for worship and allowed
worship anywhere and made it a purifying agent. Allah made Muhammad (S)
His Messenger for the entire creation: humans, jinns, blacks and whites.
He also allowed collection of Jizya tax from Ahle Kitab and to arrest
the polytheists and obtain ransom from them. He also entrusted to
Muhammad (S) affairs which were not entrusted to any prophet earlier.
Allah sent a naked sword for Muhammad and commanded:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَاتِلْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ لَا تُكَلَّفُ إِلَّا نَفْسَكَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“Fight then in Allah’s way; this is not imposed on you except in
relation to yourself.”**[^21]

Hence it was incumbent on the Holy Prophet (S) to wage the holy war even
if nobody supported and assisted him. It is mentioned in another
tradition that after the revelation of this verse, the Holy Prophet (S)
rushed to the battlefield so fiercely that only the bravest one could
dare to confront him.

According to another narration, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said that Imam
Husain (a.s.) said that after the demise of the Holy Prophet (S), once
companions were sitting in the Masjid and talking about the virtues and
graceful manners of the departed soul when a Rabbi from Syria arrived.
He had read Torah, Injeel, Zabur and scriptures of Ibrahim (a.s.) and
other scriptures revealed on other prophets.

He was also aware of the miracles shown by the earlier prophets, and so
also their arguments. He saluted us and sat down. After some time he
said: O followers of Muhammad! You have not left any virtue and any
grace for any other prophet except for your prophet and are proving the
same all the time.

If I ask you some questions will you be able to reply? Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said: Yes, O Jew! Ask whatever you want, I will reply with the
help of Allah. Mind well that Allah has given three times more grace to
our prophet than to other prophets. The Holy Prophet (S) himself used to
say that I am not showing pride for my grace. But today I will describe
Prophet Muhammad’s virtues in such a way that no other prophet will be
dishonored and the believers will be pleased because of their
thankfulness for what Allah has granted to Prophet Muhammad (S).

O Jew! Know that one of the graces granted by the Allah to Prophet
Muhammad (S) was that He had made it incumbent on Him to forgive one who
kept his voice low in front of Muhammad (S). The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَغُضُّونَ أَصْوَاتَهُمْ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ
أُولٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوٰى ۚ لَهُمْ
مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely those who lower their voices before Allah’s Apostle are they
whose hearts Allah has proved for guarding (against evil); they shall
have forgiveness and a great reward.”***[^22]

Moreover Allah has made obedience of the Holy Prophet (S) His obedience
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ يُطِعِ الرَّسُولَ فَقَدْ أَطَاعَ اللَّهَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever obeys the Apostle, he indeed obeys Allah.”***[^23]

Allah also made Muhammad (S) nearer to the hearts of believers and their
beloved who himself says my love is running in the blood of my followers
and they (Muslims) love me more than their parents and their own lives.
And the Holy Prophet (S) too loved his followers more than they loved
themselves and was more kind to them. The Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ عَلَيْهِ مَا
عَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُمْ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly an Apostle has come to you from among yourselves; grievous
to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous respecting
you; to the believers (he is) compassionate, merciful.”***[^24]

He says at another place:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّبِيُّ أَوْلَىٰ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ ۖ وَأَزْوَاجُهُ
أُمَّهَاتُهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves, and his wives are (as) their mothers.”***[^25]

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: Prophet’s graces and virtues are so many in
this world and Hereafter that they cannot be described fully. Yet I tell
you that which you can digest and which your intelligence cannot deny.
Doubtlessly, the graces of the Holy Prophet (S) are so many that people
of Hell say in regret: Why did we not respond to his call in our worldly
lives? Describing their condition, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تُقَلَّبُ وُجُوهُهُمْ فِي النَّارِ يَقُولُونَ يَا لَيْتَنَا
أَطَعْنَا اللَّهَ وَأَطَعْنَا الرَّسُولَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the Day when their faces shall be turned into the fire they shall
say: O would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the Apostle.”***[^26]

Moreover, whenever the Holy Qur’an mentions the Holy Prophet (S) along
with other prophets He is mentioned first even though he was sent last
of all. For instance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِنَ النَّبِيِّينَ مِيثَاقَهُمْ وَمِنكَ وَمِن نُّوحٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And when We made a covenant with the prophets and with you, and with
Nuh…”[^27]  
 Also Allah gave him preference over all other messengers and to his
community over all other Ummahs; as is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنتُمْ خَيْرَ أُمَّةٍ أُخْرِجَتْ لِلنَّاسِ تَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
وَتَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنكَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You are the best of the nations raised up for you enjoin what is
right and forbid the wrong…”***[^28]

Then the Jew said: “Allah ordered angels to prostrate for Adam. Did He
do so in case of Muhammad? Has He given him such honor?” The Imam said:
“Allah made angels prostrate for Adam because He was carrying the Noor
(light) of Muhammad and his legatees and that prostration was not by way
of worship of Adam.

Rather it was for obedience of Divine order and as a mark of respect to
Adam (a.s.) like a salutation which is said to anyone. It was also to
acknowledge that Adam is superior to angels. Moreover Allah gave more
grace than this to Muhammad as He Himself sends benediction on the Holy
Prophet (S) and He commanded not only angels but all to send Salawat on
the Holy Prophet (S) till eternity. Just as He has ordained in the Holy
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَمَلَائِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ يَا أَيُّهَا
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا صَلُّوا عَلَيْهِ وَسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah and His angels bless the prophet; O you who believe!
call for (Divine) blessings on him and salute him with a (becoming)
salutation.”***[^29]

If a person recites Salawat on the Holy Prophet (S) once either during
the lifetime or after Prophet’s demise, the Lord of the worlds Himself
sends ten Salawats on that man and grants ten rewards for every such
Durood. If anybody sends Salawat on the Holy Prophet (S) after his
demise, he knows who sent it to him and he (the Prophet) also
reciprocates. Also Allah has made the acceptance of every supplication
subject to Salawat on the Prophet which is greater than the excellence
of Adam (a.s.).

Moreover Allah made every rock and every tree talking and so they
saluted the Holy Prophet (S) and congratulated him from his grandeur.
Whenever we walked with the Holy Prophet (S) every valley, rock or tree
by which he passed used to salute him saying: Peace be upon you, O
Messenger of Allah (S). All confirmed his prophethood. Allah had, in
order to raise his ranks, though obtained confirmation of the
prophethood of the Holy Prophet (S), He took a promise from all
messengers that they would obey him and be pleased by his distinction
and testify to his prophethood as mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِنَ النَّبِيِّينَ مِيثَاقَهُمْ وَمِنكَ وَمِن نُّوحٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when We made a covenant with the prophets and with you, and with
Nuh…”***[^30]  
 And further said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللّهُ مِيثَاقَ النَّبِيِّيْنَ لَمَا آتَيْتُكُم مِّن
كِتَابٍ وَحِكْمَةٍ ثُمَّ جَاءكُمْ رَسُولٌ مُّصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنصُرُنَّهُ قَالَ أَأَقْرَرْتُمْ وَأَخَذْتُمْ
عَلَى ذَلِكُمْ إِصْرِي قَالُواْ أَقْرَرْنَا قَالَ فَاشْهَدُواْ
وَأَنَاْ مَعَكُم مِّنَ الشَّاهِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when Allah made a covenant through the prophets: Certainly what
I have given you of Book and wisdom- then an apostle comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
aid him. He said: Do you affirm and accept My compact in this (matter)?
They said: We do affirm. He said: Then bear witness, and I (too) am of
the bearers of witness with you.”***[^31]

Again Allah has said that the prophet has more right on the lives of
believers than they themselves have and He has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَفَعْنَا لَكَ ذِكْرَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We exalted for you your esteem.”***[^32]

In addition, in every Azan, Iqamat, Eid prayers, during Hajj and in
every sermon of Nikah (marriage) too “Muhammadur Rasoolullaah” (Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah) is being recited with “Laa ilaah illallaah”
(There is no god, but Allah). In short, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) described
more gracefulness of the Holy Prophet (S) in reply to what the Jew said
regarding other prophets (a.s.) and he proved it. At last the Rabbi
said: “God talked with Musa through 117 words on Mount Tur and He said
with every phrase *Innee anallaah* (Indeed I am Allah) Has Muhammad (S)
been graced with such an honor?”

His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) replied: “The Almighty Allah took the Holy
Prophet (S) to visit the seven skies and beyond that He talked with the
Holy Prophet (S) at two distant places: firstly at Sidratul Muntaha
which is Maqame Mahmud (a praised station) and therefrom took him
further up until the Holy Prophet (S) reached the leg of the Throne and
God provided green Rafraft (a vehicle) surrounded by the greatest
radiance.

From there the veil of Might was so close that the distance between them
was only equal to two bows or even less; Allah spoke with the Holy
Prophet (S) at that place as mentioned in Holy Qur’an that all that is
in the earth and in the skies belongs to Allah. Express or conceal
whatever is in your heart, Allah knows everything and is keeping account
of your deeds.

He forgives whom He wishes and punishes whom He wishes. Almighty Allah
presented this verse to everyone from Adam’s (a.s.) followers to those
of Muhammad (S). But due to its heavy weight none except the Holy
Prophet (S) accepted it. When Allah observed that the Holy Prophet (S)
and his followers have accepted it, He made it lighter and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِن رَّبِّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The apostle believes in what has been revealed to him from his
Lord…”***[^33]

In short, Allah graced the Holy Prophet (S) and He considered the weight
too much for his followers. So He Himself said in response:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللهِ وَمَلآئِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ
وَرُسُلِهِ لاَ نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِّن رُّسُلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and (so do) the believers; they all believe in Allah and His angels
and His books and His apostles; We make no difference between any of His
apostles…”***  
[^34]  
 When Allah said: If they believe like this then for them is forgiveness
and Paradise, the Holy Prophet (S) said: My Lord,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَمِعْنَا وَأَطَعْنَا غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…We hear and obey, our Lord! Thy forgiveness (do we crave), and to
Thee is the eventual course.”***[^35]

Then Allah said: “We accepted this prayer of those who repented among
your followers and We made it incumbent on Us to pardon them,” and He
said: “O Prophet! Since you and your followers have accepted a thing
which was presented to you, but not accepted by all other prophets and
their followers, it is now necessary for Me to make it lighter for your
followers.” So He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُكَلِّفُ اللّهُ نَفْسًا إِلاَّ وُسْعَهَا لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent of its
ability for it is (the benefit of) what it has earned, and upon it (the
evil of) what it has wrought.”***[^36]

Then Allah inspired the Prophet and he prayed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا لاَ تُؤَاخِذْنَا إِن نَّسِينَا أَوْ أَخْطَأْنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord! Do not punish us if we forget or make a mistake.”***[^37]

The Lord said: “We accepted this also in your honor. O Muhammad! In the
past communities, when they forgot Our commands, We used to punish them
severely, but We have removed this hardship from your followers.” Then
the Holy Prophet (S) requested:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَلاَ تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَا إِصْرًا كَمَا حَمَلْتَهُ عَلَى
الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord! do not lay on us a burden as You didst lay on those
before…”***[^38]

“For them (said the Lord) We had decided not to accept prayers but only
those offered on the prescribed parts of land even if it was far away
from their residence. But We have made this entire earth pure and worth
performance of prayer thereon and made it (earth) a purifier for your
followers. Thus We removed a big difficulty from your people. It was
necessary for other communities to carry their animals for sacrifice on
their necks upto Baitul Maqdas.

Then I used to send fire on the sacrifice acceptable to Me and it was
burnt down. One whose sacrifice was not accepted by Me had to return
disappointed and gloomy (in front of others). But I made the meat of
your sacrificed animals eatable for the poor. Moreover, I multiply the
reward of the accepted sacrifice. I defer punishment in this world even
for one whose sacrifice I do not accept. So to say, this also was a big
hardship which I removed from your followers. For earlier believers many
prayers were obligatory through the day and night.

It was hard for them. But we lifted up this burden also from your
people. I imposed prayers only at the beginning of day and night when
they are both free and restful. Past believers had to offer fifty
prayers fifty times but We eased this also for your followers. During
the times of earlier Ummahs, We used to give one reward for one good
deed and one punishment for one bad deed. But for your people, We have
decided to give ten rewards for one good deed and only one punishment
for every bad deed. Formally no reward was given for good intention
unless that good deed was performed.

Moreover a punishment was inflicted at an evil thought even if it was
not acted upon. But this harshness has also been taken off from your
community. Now for your people, no evil is recorded unless it is acted
upon and We record a good intention even before its being put to
practice. From the past communities, the person who committed a crime,
it was written on his door and their repentance was accepted in such a
way that I prohibited to them their favorite dish and as a result of a
crime they used to seek repentance for hundreds of years but I did not
accept their repentance till I had not punished them, but your community
is absolved of this.

And if someone from your community commits a sin for a hundred years and
if he is regretful of those sins even for a moment, I will forgive their
sins. In the past communities, if a part of anyone’s body was defiled,
he or she was ordered to cut off that part. But for your community,
water and sometimes dust is also made a purifying agent. And these were
the hardships from which your community is exempted. The Holy Prophet
(S) said: “Since You have bestowed these bounties to me and my
community, please increase your blessings.” That is since the Lord
inspired him, he prayed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَلاَ تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَا إِصْرًا كَمَا حَمَلْتَهُ عَلَى
الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord! do not lay on us a burden as You didst lay on those
before…”***[^39]

The Almighty Allah said: “I have given this ease to your Ummah and this
command of Mine is for each member of your community. After that the
Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْفُ عَنَّا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَآ أَنتَ مَوْلاَنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and pardon us and grant us protection and have mercy on us, Thou
art our Patron…”***[^40]

The Almighty Allah said: “I have accepted this also for your people.”
Then the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…so help us against the unbelieving people.”***[^41]

The Almighty Allah said: “I have accepted this also. O Muhammad, to
honor you and exalt your status, I have made your community
distinguished from the infidels and they shall overcome their enemies
and the tyrants will force the infidels to serve them but the infidels
cannot force your community to serve them and it is obligatory on Me to
make your religion dominant over all the religions of the world, till it
reaches to all the corners of the world.

And infidels and idolaters will pay Jizya to your followers. Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) said: When the Holy Prophet (S) returned from there he
met Jibraeel again at Sidratul Muntaha near which there is Behisht,
which is a place of good deeds, when the souls of angels and believers
had surrounded the Sidra. He was not dazzled by the effulgence of the
Almighty. He saw everything in its true form. Indeed, the Holy Prophet
(S) saw the great signs of his Lord. So it is much higher than what
Prophet Musa (a.s.) saw at Mt. Sina.

The Almighty Allah gathered all the prophets to pray behind the Holy
Prophet (S) and that same night he was also shown Paradise and Hell. And
angels of every sky greeted him when he passed from there. The Jew said:
When the Almighty Allah gave his love to Prophet Musa. Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said: “Yes, it is right, but the Almighty Allah bestowed the Holy
Prophet (S) with His love as well as made him His beloved.

Because the Almighty Allah showed to Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) the face of
Muhammad (S) and also showed his community to him. Ibrahim (a.s.) said:
“O Lord, I have not seen any community more radiant than them. Who are
they?” A voice same: “This is Muhammad My beloved and I have not made
anyone else My beloved from My creatures.

And his remembrance was created before I created the heavens and the
earth and appointed him as the prophet when your ancestor, Adam was in
the form of dust and water, and I had not inserted soul into his body.
When I brought out the progeny of Adam (a.s.) from his back and spread
it, I had kept you also with them. O Jew, the Almighty Allah has sworn
by the life of the Holy Prophet (S) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَمْرُكَ إِنَّهُمْ لَفِي سَكْرَتِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By your life! they were blindly wandering on in their
intoxication.”***[^42]

And this is sufficient for his greatness. The Jew said: Please tell me
in which matter the Almighty Allah has given precedence to this
community over other communities. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: The
Almighty Allah has give much excellence and some of them are as follows:
Firstly, the Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنتُمْ خَيْرَ أُمَّةٍ أُخْرِجَتْ لِلنَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You are the best of the nations raised up for (the benefit of)
men…”***[^43]

Secondly on Judgment Day the Almighty Allah will gather all creatures
and then ask the prophets if they had conveyed His message and they will
reply in the affirmative. Then the Almighty Allah will ask their
communities and the people will say that no warner and giver of glad
tidings had come to them. The Almighty Allah will ask the prophets who
is their witness although He knows better.

They will say: Muhammad (S) and the pious people of his community are
witnesses from our side. After that their testimony will be supported by
the community of Muhammad that they had propagated religion and the Holy
Prophet (S) will testify for them. This is the implication of the
following verse: ***“And thus We have made you a medium (just) nation
that you may be the bearers of witness to the people and (that) the
Apostle may be a bearer of witness to you.”***

Thirdly, on Judgment Day before all the communities accounting will done
for this Ummah and it will be the first to enter Paradise. Fourthly, the
Almighty Allah has made five times prayer obligatory; two at night and
three during the day and made them as rewarding as fifty prayers and
also made them as expiation of their sins as mentioned in the following
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْحَسَنَاتِ يُذْهِبْنَ السَّـيِّئَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…surely good deeds take away evil deeds…”***[^44]

That is the five daily prayers act as expiation if one refrains from the
greater sins. Fifthly, if they make an intention of a good deed, one
reward is written, even if one does not actually perform that deed. And
if he performs it, he gets the reward of ten to 7000 good deeds.
Sixthly, 70000 people of this Ummah will enter Paradise without
accounting, whose faces will shine like a full moon. Some faces will be
lighted like stars.

In this way, according to levels there will be no mutual discord between
them. Seventhly, if one of them kills another, if the heirs of the
deceased wish, they can forgive or they can accept blood money or kill
in revenge, but O Jew, in your religion it is obligatory to kill in
retaliation and blood money and forgiveness are not allowed. As the
Almighty Allah says: In this matter also there is discount and mercy
from your Lord. Eighthly, the Almighty Allah reserved half of Surah
Fatiha for Himself and half for the people.

When a person says: Praise be to Allah, he has praised Me. When he says:
Lord of the worlds, he has got my cognition that I am the Lord of all
the worlds. When he says: the beneficent and the merciful, he has
introduced Me as being compassionate and kind. When he says: Master of
the Judgment Day, he has extolled Me. When he said: You alone we worship
and only Your help we seek, he has declared his worship to be exclusive
for Me and the seeking of help is only from Me. The remaining Surah is
related to man. Ninthly, the Almighty Allah sent Jibraeel to the Holy
Prophet (S) to give him glad tidings of glory and divine help to his
community. Tenthly, the Almighty Allah made their Sadaqah lawful for
themselves that they may consume from it and give to the poor.

In the past communities, the Sadaqah was taken to a remote place so that
the fire from the sky may burn it. Eleventh, allowed them intercession
which was not for previous communities. The Almighty Allah through the
intercession of the Holy Prophet (S) will forgive their serious sins.
Twelfth, on Judgment Day, a call will be issued that praisers should
come forward. The Ummah of Muhammad will move ahead of all other
communities.

And it is mentioned in past scriptures that the Ummah of the Holy
Prophet (S) is a praiser community and its people always praise the
Almighty Allah and recite the slogan of God is the greatest. There
caller of Azan everyday raises the call which echoes in the sky.
Thirteen, the Almighty Allah does not kill them through starvation and
does not make them unite on a wrong thing and does not make the infidels
powerful over them and does not involve all of them in chastisement and
gives the status of martyrdom to those who die as a result of plague.

Fourteenth, one who invokes blessings on Muhammad and Aale Muhammad is
given ten rewards and ten of his sins are erased and the same amount of
mercy is sent on them. Fifteenth, the Almighty Allah had divided the
Ummah into three parts, one of them oppresses themselves. Second is the
medium one and third is the group of those who take precedence in good
deeds. Those who take precedence will be admitted into Paradise without
accounting. The moderate ones will have an easy accounting and those who
oppress their selves will be forgiven if He likes.

Sixteenth, the Almighty Allah has made their forgoing of sins as
repentance and seeking forgiveness, but for Bani Israel, repentance was
only possible by killing among themselves. Seventeenth, the Almighty
Allah revealed to the Prophet that his community is in the position of
divine mercy and for them there is no chastisement of earthquake and
hardships in the world. Eighteenth, the Almighty Allah writes for the
sick and old people reward just as they had performed in their healthy
times and youth. And the Almighty Allah reveals to the angels: “Write
the same rewards for My servants as he performed previously.

Nineteenth, the Almighty Allah has made the word of piety which is
Tauheed as obligatory with the Wilayat for the Ummah of Muhammad and
made it necessary for intercession. And it will become clear only in the
hereafter. Twentieth: On Meraj, the Holy Prophet (S) saw some angels
that since they are created, they are standing for prayer and some are
in Sajdah so he asked Jibraeel if this was worship.

Jibraeel said: O Prophet, ask your Lord so that He may give you Qunut,
Ruku and Sujood in prayer. The Holy Prophet (S) asked and the Almighty
Allah bestowed it to him. Thus the Ummah of Muhammad follows the
heavenly angels. And the Holy Prophet (S) said: Jews are jealous because
of your prayer, Ruku and Sujood.

According to reliable tradition, it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that the Almighty Allah sent 124000 prophets and appointed a
similar number as their legatees who were all truthful, pious in the
world and trustworthy. But no prophet was superior to Muhammad and no
successor was superior to Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). It is mentioned in
another tradition from the same Imam that someone asked the Prophet why
he got precedence over all prophets even though he was sent last.

He said: Because I was the first to bring faith on my Lord. And when the
Almighty Allah took covenant from the prophets and made them witness and
asked: Am I not your Lord? The first to respond was me.

In another trustworthy tradition, he said: There are five Ulul Azm
prophets whose Shariats repealed the previous codes of religious law.
Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa, Isa and Muhammad (S). His Shariat will remain in
force till Judgment Day and the lawful of this Shariat will remain
lawful till Judgment Day and the unlawful of this Shariat will remain
unlawful till Judgment Day.

It is mentioned in reliable traditions from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that
the Holy Prophet (S) said: Prophet Musa said to the Almighty Allah: O my
Lord, include me in the community of Muhammad and the Almighty Allah
revealed to him that it cannot be done.

It is mentioned in reliable traditions that the Holy Prophet (S) said: O
Ali, the Almighty Allah has chosen me from all the men of the world and
after me He chose you, then the Imams from your progeny. And Fatima from
all the women. It is mentioned in many traditions from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) and Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
the Imams after him have as much excellence over the people just as the
Holy Prophet (S) is having excellence. He is the door to the court of
the Almighty Allah.

No one can reach the court of the Almighty Allah except through him. One
who follows him in the path of Allah can get the proximity and pleasure
of the Almighty Allah. It is mentioned in many traditions from the Holy
Imams (a.s.) that: We infallibles, all of us are same in obligation of
obedience, knowledge, understanding and cognition of lawful and
prohibited but the Holy Prophet (S) and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) have
precedence on us.

It is mentioned in reliable traditions from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that when the Holy Prophet (S) was taken to the heavens in Meraj the
Almighty Allah revealed to him: O Muhammad, I have chosen from all the
earth and selected you and derived your name from My name. Wherever I
will be mentioned, you also will be mentioned. I am Mahmud and you are
Muhammad and then I chose Ali from all the people, and derived his name
also from My names.

I am the Ali-ul Aala and he is Ali. O Muhammad, I have created you and
Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain My effulgence and presented your Wilayat
to the heavens and earth and all they contain. So whoever accepted it is
successful near me and those who denied are infidels. O Muhammad, if a
slave of Mine worships so much to be reduced to shreds of musk, and
comes to Me as a denier in your Wilayat, I will never give him
salvation.

It is mentioned in another reliable tradition that he said: Faith is not
complete of any man till he does not believe that all the Imams have the
same excellence with regard to Divine Proof and in the obligation of
their obedience. But Muhammad and Ali (a.s.) have a special excellence.
It is mentioned in reliable tradition from Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) that
the Holy Prophet (S) said: I am the best creature of Allah, I am better
than Jibraeel, Israfeel, carriers of the throne and all privileged
angels and messenger prophets.

I am the owner of intercession and Hauz. I and Ali are the two fathers
of this Ummah, one who recognized us recognized Allah and one who denied
us, denied Allah. Two grandsons of this Ummah will be born from Ali
(a.s.) who will be the chiefs of the youths of Paradise; that is Hasan
and Husain (a.s.).

And there will be nine Imams from the progeny of Husain whose obedience
is my obedience and whose disobedience is my disobedience. The ninth of
them will be Qaim and Mahdi.  
 It is narrated through reliable chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that when the Almighty Allah created the Arsh, He created two angels
around it and He told them to testify that there is no god except Allah,
and they gave the testimony.

Then Allah asked them to witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah
(S) and they testified to this also and then asked to testify that Ali
is the Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and they testified to this also. In
another tradition, it is narrated from Abu Dharr Ghiffari that he said:
I heard from the Messenger of Allah (S) that he said: “Israfeel boasted
that he was better than Jibraeel as he was the chief of the eight angels
who were the carriers of the Arsh.

And I will be the one to blow the bugle. And I am the nearest to the
source of divine revelation.” Jibraeel said: “I am better than you as I
am the trustee of the Almighty Allah on His revelation and I am His
messenger to His prophets and messengers. I am the one who enters the
surface of the earth and overturns it on the evil ones.” The Almighty
Allah did not chastise any nation but through me. Thus they presented
their case to the Almighty Allah.

The Almighty Allah revealed to them to keep quiet, I swear by My Might,
I have created someone better than you. They asked: Did you really
create someone before us, greater than us? While You created us from
Your Noor?” “Yes,” and issued a command to remove the veils from before
them and they saw inscribed on the right side of the leg of the Arsh:
There is no god, except Allah. And Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, Hasan and
Husain are the best of the creatures. Jibraeel said: “My Lord, I ask you
in their name to make me their servant.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “O
Abu Dharr, Jibraeel is from us, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and he is our
servant.”

It is narrated from authentic chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
once a Jew came to the Holy Prophet (S) and stared at him. The Prophet
asked what he wanted. He said: “Are you better or Musa bin Imran with
whom the Almighty Allah conversed and gave him Taurat and the miracle of
staff and split the sea for him and shaded him with a cloud? It is
detestable that a person should praise himself, but it is necessary for
me to make you aware.

When Adam committed Tarke Awla he sought divine forgiveness through the
words: O the Almighty Allah please forgive me for the sake of Muhammad
and Aale Muhammad. So the Almighty Allah forgave him. When Nuh boarded
the Ark and he feared drowning, he said: O Lord, I ask you to protect
from drowning for the sake of Muhammad and Aale Muhammad. So the
Almighty Allah saved him.

And when Ibrahim was thrown into the inferno, he asked for our sake and
the Almighty Allah made the fire cool and comfortable for him. And when
Musa cast his staff and it turned into a python, he said: For the sake
of Muhammad and Aale Muhammad make me fearless. So the Almighty Allah
revealed to him: Don’t fear, you will be victorious.” O Jew, if Prophet
Musa (a.s.) had been present in this age, and had no faith in me and my
prophethood, his faith and prophethood would have given no advantage. O
Jew, the Mahdi will be from my progeny.

When he will reappear, Isa (a.s.) will come down from the heavens to
assist him and pray behind him. It is mentioned in another tradition
from the same Imam that when Adam ate from the forbidden tree, he raised
his head and said: O Allah, for the sake of Muhammad and Aale Muhammad
have mercy on me.

So the Almighty Allah revealed to him: “Who is Muhammad?” He replied:
“My God, when you created me I looked at the Arsh on which was
inscribed: There is no god except Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah. I understood that no one is having such a status in Your view,
such that You have mentioned their names with Your name.”

The Almighty Allah revealed: “O Adam, he is from your progeny and is the
last of the prophets. If he had not been there, I would not have created
you.” It is mentioned in another tradition from Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
that the words that Adam (a.s.) learnt from the Almighty Allah and which
enabled him to earn forgiveness were: “O God, for the sake of Muhammad
accept my repentance.

The Almighty Allah asked: Who is Muhammad? He replied: I saw that his
name was written on Your Arsh, when I was in Paradise.” And it is
narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through reliable chains that he
said: Accord respect to the Almighty Allah and His Messenger and do not
give precedence to anyone over him, because the Almighty Allah has given
him excellence over all.

It is narrated through reliable chains that the same Imam was asked if
Muhammad was the best of the children of Adam? He replied: By, Allah, he
was the best of the creatures and the Almighty Allah did not create
anyone superior to him. It is mentioned in reliable traditions from
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that the Almighty Allah did not create anyone
superior to Muhammad (S).

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that: We, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
are the first of those whose name was exalted and publicized by the
Almighty Allah; when He created the heavens and the earths, He commanded
the announcer and he called three times: I witness that there is no god,
except Allah.

And three times: I witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. And
three time: I witness that Ali is the Wali of Allah, truly. It is
mentioned in reliable traditions from the same Imam that the Almighty
Allah sent the Holy Prophet (S) to the prophets in the spiritual world
and he invited all the prophets to confess to the oneness of Allah.

Through reliable chains, it is narrated from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that
the Messenger of Allah (S) said: We are Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and Sadaqah is
not allowed to us. And we have been commanded to perform the complete
ablution and to race the ass with Arabian horse and not to perform
wiping (*Masah*) on the socks. And it is mentioned in reliable
traditions from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
in the interpretation of the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى الْعَزِيزِ الرَّحِيمِ. الَّذِي يَرَاكَ حِينَ
تَقُومُ. وَتَقَلُّبَكَ فِي السَّاجِدِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And rely on the Mighty, the Merciful. Who sees you when you stand
up. And your turning over and over among those who prostrate themselves
before Allah.”***[^45]

That is your transfer from the loin of one prophet to another.  
 Shia and Sunni scholars have narrated much about the distinctive
qualities of the Holy Prophet (S). Some of them are as follows: The
obligation of Miswak on the Prophet and there is difference about it.
Second: The obligation of Midnight Prayer and Watr Prayer; there are
many traditions about this.

Third: Obligation of sacrifice on the Prophet. Thus one who dies
indebted, his debts are obligatory to be repaid by the Prophet. Five: To
take counsel with companions; and there is difference in this also. Six:
Obligation of forbidding evil and expression of evil if seen in others.
Seven: To give the women free choice that either they remain as his
wives or separate from him, whose laws are mentioned in books of Islamic
jurisprudence.

Eight: Unlawfulness on the Holy Prophet (S) and his Ahlul Bayt of
obligatory Zakat. And there is difference about the unlawfulness of
recommended Zakat and recommended Sadaqah. Nine: That he never ate onion
and garlic. Some say that it was unlawful for him eat them. But it is
not proved. Ten: He never ate reclining on a pillow. Some say that it
was unlawful for him but it is not proved.

Eleven: Some say that it was unlawful for him to write a letter or
compose couplets. But there is difference in this also. Twelve: When he
put on arms for a battle, it was not unlawful for him remove them
without fighting and some say that it was detestable. Thirteen: When he
began a recommended action he could not leave it unfinished. But there
is controversy in this also. Fourteen: It was unlawful for him to make
signs with his eyes to kill anyone.

But there is controversy in this also. Fifteenth: It was unlawful for
him to recite the funeral prayer of those who die indebted. But this is
not proved. Sixteenth: Some say that it was unlawful for the Holy
Prophet (S) to give someone something to get more in return. But there
is controversy in this also. Seventeenth: Keeping a wife who detested
him. But there is controversy in this also.

Eighteenth: Most say that Nikah was unlawful for the Holy Prophet (S)
with a slave girl or a Christian or Jew lady. Nineteenth: No Iftar
between two fasts or to abstain from Iftar till the time of Seher which
was allowed for the Prophet but is not allowed to others. The Holy
Prophet (S) himself says: I am not like you. I spend the night in the
court of my Lord and He gives me food and water.

Twentieth: It was allowed for him to take whatever he liked from war
booty. Twenty-one: It was allowed for the Holy Prophet (S) to enter
Medina fully armed, whereas it was not allowed for others. Twenty-two:
It was allowed by the Prophet to confiscate any land for grazing sheep
but not for others. Some say that it is allowed for the Imam also.
Twenty-three: It is allowed for the Prophet to take anyone’s food even
if he needed it at that time. Some say that the Imam is also having this
power.

Twenty-four: It was allowed from the Messenger of Allah (S) to marry
permanently more than four women at a time while it is unlawful for
others. Twenty-five: It was sufficient for a woman to dedicate herself
to the Prophet but it is not allowed for others. Twenty-six: It is said
that if the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to marry a woman without husband, it
was obligatory for her to accept the proposal and if she had a husband,
it was obligatory on that husband to divorce. But there is controversy
in this also.

Twenty-seven: There is controversy whether it was obligatory for him to
distribute the nights between his wives or not. Twenty-eight: It is
unlawful for all to marry the wives of the Prophet either in his
lifetime or after his passing away, whether he had consummated his
marriage with them or not.

Twenty-nine: It was obligatory for people not to raise their voices
above the voice of the Prophet. Thirty: It was unlawful for the people
to call the Prophet from behind the chambers. Thirty-one: It was
unlawful for people to address him as O Muhammad, or O Ahmad and the
Almighty Allah has also never addressed him by name: He mentioned: O
Prophet, O Messenger. O Wrapped One, O clothed one.

Thirty-two: It is infidelity to demote the Prophet from his sacred
station and the same order applies to the Imams. Thirty-three: Some say
that if the Holy Prophet (S) called anyone and he was busy in prayer, it
became obligatory to reply to the Prophet and his prayer was not
invalidated but there is no absolute text about it. Thirty-four: It is
said that the sons of his daughters were considered as his sons and it
was not there for others.

Thirty-five: It is not allowed for anyone to adopt the name and Kunniyat
of the Prophet and some have completely forbidden Kunniyat. But it is
not proved by any authentic text.[^46]

Obedience and Love of Prophet is obligatory and opposing him is prohibited
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

We should know that there are many verses about the obedience and love
of the Prophet and about the refutation of his enemies and it would
prolong the discussion to mention their interpretation, so we suffice
only with their translation.  
 It is mentioned in a true tradition from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
the Almighty Allah taught His Messenger aspects of good behavior as He
liked.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلٰى خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most surely you conform (yourself) to sublime morality.”***[^47]

And left the matters connected with the community to him. And He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and whatever the Apostle gives you, accept it, and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back…”***[^48]

And he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ يُطِعِ الرَّسُولَ فَقَدْ أَطَاعَ اللَّهَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever obeys the Apostle, he indeed obeys Allah…”***[^49]

Imam (a.s.) said that after that the Holy Prophet (S) entrusted the
matter of Ummah and religion to Imam Ali (a.s.) and made him the
trustee; so you Shias accepted and the opponents denied. So, by Allah,
we like that you say what we say and to remain quiet when we are quiet,
because we are medium between you and the Almighty Allah and the
Almighty Allah has not given any good to our opposition.

There are many true and reliable traditions about this and since all
their matters are common, it will prolong the discussion to mention them
all. It is mentioned in authentic tradition that the Holy Prophet (S)
said: No ones faith is complete till one does not prefer me more than
ones life and who does not love my progeny more than his children and
relatives. And everything of mine is more preferable than his own.

From authentic chains of narrators it is narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “Love Allah, because of the
bounties that He has given you. And love me for the pleasure of Allah.
And love my relatives for my sake. It is mentioned in another reliable
tradition from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that an Ansari came and said: “O
Messenger of Allah (S), I cannot bear your separation. When I go home, I
remember you and I leave my business to come and visit you. Then I
realize that when you enter Paradise on Judgment Day and go to the High
Heavens, where I will get your company?” At that juncture, the Almighty
Allah revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُطِعِ اللَّهَ وَالرَّسُولَ فَأُولٰئِكَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمَ
اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنَ النَّبِيِّينَ وَالصِّدِّيقِينَ وَالشُّهَدَاءِ
وَالصَّالِحِينَ ۚ وَحَسُنَ أُولٰئِكَ رَفِيقًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever obeys Allah and the Apostle, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favors from among the prophets and the truthful
and the martyrs and the good, and a goodly company are they!”***[^50]

Thus the Holy Prophet (S) summoned that man and gave him this glad
tiding and according to another tradition a desert Arab came to the
Prophet and asked: “When will Qiyamat occur?” The Holy Prophet (S)
asked: “What preparation have you made for Qiyamat?” He said: “By Allah,
prayer, fasting etc. They aren’t sufficient but I love Allah and His
Messenger.” The Prophet said: “One will be in the company of that one
loves.”

Obligatory to respect the Prophet – an account of his social etiquettes
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Only those are believers who believe in Allah and His
Apostle…”***[^51]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا كَانُوا مَعَهُ عَلٰى أَمْرٍ جَامِعٍ لَمْ يَذْهَبُوا حَتّٰى
يَسْتَأْذِنُوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and when they are with him on a momentous affair they go not away
until they have asked his permission…”***[^52]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَأْذِنُونَكَ أُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…surely they who ask your permission are they who believe in Allah
and His Apostle…”***[^53]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that this verse was revealed in the honor
of those who when the Holy Prophet (S) gathered them for battle etc.
they used to disperse without the permission of the Holy Prophet (S), so
the Almighty Allah restrained them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا اسْتَأْذَنُوكَ لِبَعْضِ شَأْنِهِمْ فَأْذَنْ لِمَنْ شِئْتَ
مِنْهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…so when they ask your permission for some affair of theirs, give
permission to whom you please of them…”***[^54]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that this verse was revealed about the
seeking of permission by Hanzal bin Aamir, as will be mentioned in the
account of Battle of Uhud, Insha Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمُ اللَّهَ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and ask forgiveness for them from Allah; surely Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.”***[^55]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا تَجْعَلُوا دُعَاءَ الرَّسُولِ بَيْنَكُمْ كَدُعَاءِ بَعْضِكُمْ
بَعْضًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not hold the Apostle’s calling (you) among you to be like your
calling one to the other…”***  
[^56]

So don’t consider calling the Prophet like O Muhammad, O Abul Qasim and
don’t call from behind the chambers. Call him with respectable titles of
O Prophet, O Messenger, and this last cause is narrated from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ يَعْلَمُ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ يَتَسَلَّلُونَ مِنْكُمْ لِوَاذًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah indeed knows those who steal away from among you, concealing
themselves…”***[^57]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَحْذَرِ الَّذِينَ يُخَالِفُونَ عَنْ أَمْرِهِ أَنْ تُصِيبَهُمْ
فِتْنَةٌ أَوْ يُصِيبَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…therefore let those beware who go against his order lest a trial
afflict them or there befall them a painful chastisement.”***[^58]

In another instance He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتَ النَّبِيِّ
إِلَّا أَنْ يُؤْذَنَ لَكُمْ إِلٰى طَعَامٍ غَيْرَ نَاظِرِينَ إِنَاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! do not enter the houses of the Prophet unless
permission is given to you for a meal, not waiting for its cooking being
finished…”***[^59]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلٰكِنْ إِذَا دُعِيتُمْ فَادْخُلُوا فَإِذَا طَعِمْتُمْ فَانْتَشِرُوا
وَلَا مُسْتَأْنِسِينَ لِحَدِيثٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…but when you are invited, enter, and when you have taken the food,
then disperse- not seeking to listen to talk…”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ ذٰلِكُمْ كَانَ يُؤْذِي النَّبِيَّ فَيَسْتَحْيِي مِنْكُمْ ۖ
وَاللَّهُ لَا يَسْتَحْيِي مِنَ الْحَقِّ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…surely this gives the Prophet trouble, but he forbears from you,
and Allah does not forbear from the truth.”***

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) married
Zainab and he used to love her much, he held a Walima dinner for his
companions. After the companions had eaten, they sat down with the
Prophet to make conversation. And sometimes they entered the Prophet’s
house without his permission and began talking and waited for food being
prepared. All this was a waste of time, so the Almighty Allah revealed
these verses in their condemnation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا سَأَلْتُمُوهُنَّ مَتَاعًا فَاسْأَلُوهُنَّ مِنْ وَرَاءِ
حِجَابٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when you ask of them any goods, ask of them from behind a
curtain…”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذٰلِكُمْ أَطْهَرُ لِقُلُوبِكُمْ وَقُلُوبِهِنَّ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…this is purer for your hearts and (for) their hearts…”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لَكُمْ أَنْ تُؤْذُوا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ وَلَا أَنْ تَنْكِحُوا
أَزْوَاجَهُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ أَبَدًا ۚ إِنَّ ذٰلِكُمْ كَانَ عِنْدَ
اللَّهِ عَظِيمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and it does not behove you that you should give trouble to the
Apostle of Allah, nor that you should marry his wives after him ever;
surely this is grievous in the sight of Allah.”***[^60]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that the cause of revelation of these
verses is that when the verse was revealed that the wives of the Prophet
are mothers of believers and it is unlawful to marry them, Talha, the
hypocrite was infuriated that although the Prophet wants to marry our
women, but we cannot marry them. He said: “But I will definitely marry
his wives after him like he has married our women.” At that juncture,
this verse was revealed. On another occasion, it was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَمَلَائِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ ۚ يَا
أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا صَلُّوا عَلَيْهِ وَسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah and His angels bless the Prophet; O you who believe!
call for (Divine) blessings on him and salute him with a (becoming)
salutation.”***[^61]

It is mentioned in Sunni books through various chains that when this
verse was revealed, the companions said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), we
know the method of saluting you, but how should we invoke blessings on
you? The Holy Prophet (S) said:

*Allahumma s’alli a’laa muh’ammdinw wa aali Muh’ammad kama s’allaita
a’laa Ibraheema wa aala Ibraheema innka h’ameedum majeed. Wa baarik
a’laa muh’ammdinw wa aali Muh’ammad kama baarakta a’laa Ibraheema wa
aala Ibraheema innka h’ameedum majeed.*  
*“O Allah, consecrate Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad like You
consecrated Ibrahim and the progeny of Ibrahim. Indeed you are the
praised and the honored. And bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad
like You blessed Ibrahim and the progeny of Ibrahim. Indeed you are the
praised and the honored.”*

It is narrated through reliable chains that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) was
asked what is the meaning of invoking blessings on the Messenger of
Allah (S); he replied: The Almighty Allah praises him in the heavens.
They asked: What does submission implies. He replied: His obedience in
everything he commands.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُؤْذُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ لَعَنَهُمُ اللَّهُ فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا مُهِينًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely (as for) those who speak evil things of Allah and His
Apostle, Allah has cursed them in this world and the hereafter, and He
has prepared for them a chastisement bringing disgrace.”***[^62]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that this verse was revealed about those
who usurped the rights of Ali and Fatima (a.s.) and who harassed them in
various ways, even though the Messenger of Allah (S) had time and again
reiterated that one who hurts Fatima hurts the Prophet. At another
instance, the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ آذَوْا
مُوسَىٰ فَبَرَّأَهُ اللَّهُ مِمَّا قَالُوا ۚ وَكَانَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ
وَجِيهًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! be not like those who spoke evil things of Musa,
but Allah cleared him of what they said, and he was worthy of regard
with Allah.”***[^63]

On another occasion, He has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللَّهِ
وَرَسُولِهِ ۖ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! be not forward in the presence of Allah and His
Apostle, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is
Hearing, Knowing.”***[^64]

And on another occasion, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَرْفَعُوا أَصْوَاتَكُمْ فَوْقَ
صَوْتِ النَّبِيِّ وَلَا تَجْهَرُوا لَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ كَجَهْرِ
بَعْضِكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ أَنْ تَحْبَطَ أَعْمَالُكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ لَا
تَشْعُرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the
Prophet, and do not speak loud to him as you speak loud to one another,
lest your deeds became null while you do not perceive.”***[^65]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَغُضُّونَ أَصْوَاتَهُمْ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ
أُولٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوٰى ۚ لَهُمْ
مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely those who lower their voices before Allah’s Apostle are they
whose hearts Allah has proved for guarding (against evil); they shall
have forgiveness and a great reward.”***[^66]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُنَادُونَكَ مِنْ وَرَاءِ الْحُجُرَاتِ أَكْثَرُهُمْ
لَا يَعْقِلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(As for) those who call out to you from behind the private chambers,
surely most of them do not understand.”*** [^67]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ صَبَرُوا حَتّٰى تَخْرُجَ إِلَيْهِمْ لَكَانَ خَيْرًا
لَهُمْ ۚ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If they wait patiently until you come out to them, it would
certainly be better for them, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***[^68]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that when people of Bani Tamim used to
visit the Prophet they used to scream from the door of his chambers: “O
Muhammad, come out.” When the Prophet came out and walked with them they
walked in front of the Prophet and when they spoke to him they used to
raise their voices above that of the Prophet like they spoke to their
colleagues. So these verses were revealed in their condemnation. On
another occasion, the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ نُهُوا عَنِ النَّجْوٰى ثُمَّ يَعُودُونَ
لِمَا نُهُوا عَنْهُ وَيَتَنَاجَوْنَ بِالْإِثْمِ وَالْعُدْوَانِ
وَمَعْصِيَتِ الرَّسُولِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you not seen those who are forbidden secret counsels, then they
return to what they are forbidden, and they hold secret counsels for sin
and revolt and disobedience to the Apostle…”***[^69]

It is narrated that these verses were about hypocrites and Jews who used
to meet each other in secret and ridicule the Muslims which harassed
them a great deal. The Holy Prophet (S) told them to refrain from such
behavior, but when they did not amend their ways, the above verses were
revealed. And it is mentioned in some traditions that these verses were
about Abu Bakr and Umar and others like them as will be explained in the
coming pages, Insha Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا جَاءُوكَ حَيَّوْكَ بِمَا لَمْ يُحَيِّكَ بِهِ اللَّهُ
وَيَقُولُونَ فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ لَوْلَا يُعَذِّبُنَا اللَّهُ بِمَا
نَقُولُ ۚ حَسْبُهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ يَصْلَوْنَهَا ۖ فَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and when they come to you they greet you with a greeting with which
Allah does not greet you, and they say in themselves: Why does not Allah
punish us for what we say? Hell is enough for them; they shall enter it,
and evil is the resort.”*** [^70]

It is narrated that when Jews used to visit the Holy Prophet (S) they
used to salute him saying As-Saamu Alaika, which means ‘death be upon
you,’ at that juncture, this verse was revealed. And according to
another traditional report some people came and said in the style of the
period of Jahiliyya: *Innahum Sabahan* or *Anama Masa-an*, so the
Almighty Allah revealed the verse that why they do not salute like the
people of Paradise.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا تَنَاجَيْتُمْ فَلَا تَتَنَاجَوْا
بِالْإِثْمِ وَالْعُدْوَانِ وَمَعْصِيَتِ الرَّسُولِ وَتَنَاجَوْا
بِالْبِرِّ وَالتَّقْوَىٰ ۖ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ الَّذِي إِلَيْهِ
تُحْشَرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! when you confer together in private, do not give
to each other counsel of sin and revolt and disobedience to the Apostle,
and give to each other counsel of goodness and guarding (against evil);
and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, to Whom you shall be gathered
together.”*** [^71]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا النَّجْوٰى مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ لِيَحْزُنَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
وَلَيْسَ بِضَارِّهِمْ شَيْئًا إِلَّا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ۚ وَعَلَى
اللَّهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Secret counsels are only (the work) of the Shaitan that he may cause
to grieve those who believe, and he cannot hurt them in the least except
with Allah’s permission, and on Allah let the believers rely.”*** [^72]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا قِيلَ لَكُمْ تَفَسَّحُوا فِي
الْمَجَالِسِ فَافْسَحُوا يَفْسَحِ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ ۖ وَإِذَا قِيلَ
انْشُزُوا فَانْشُزُوا يَرْفَعِ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ
وَالَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ دَرَجَاتٍ ۚ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
خَبِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! When it is said to you, Make room in (your)
assemblies, then make ample room, Allah will give you ample, and when it
is said: Rise up, then rise up. Allah will exalt those of you who
believe, and those who are given knowledge, in high degrees; and Allah
is Aware of what you do.”*** [^73]

Tabari has narrated that in gatherings, companions of the Prophet used
to sit reclining in a proud manner and used to dislike allowing space to
newcomers. The Almighty Allah commanded them to allow the newcomers
space.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا نَاجَيْتُمُ الرَّسُولَ
فَقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ نَجْوَاكُمْ صَدَقَةً ۚ ذَٰلِكَ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ
وَأَطْهَرُ ۚ فَإِنْ لَمْ تَجِدُوا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! when you consult the Apostle, then offer
something in charity before your consultation; that is better for you
and purer; but if you do not find, then surely Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.”*** [^74]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَشْفَقْتُمْ أَنْ تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ نَجْوَاكُمْ صَدَقَاتٍ ۚ
فَإِذْ لَمْ تَفْعَلُوا وَتَابَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْكُمْ فَأَقِيمُوا
الصَّلَاةَ وَآتُوا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ ۚ
وَاللَّهُ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do you fear that you will not (be able to) give in charity before
your consultation? So when you do not do it and Allah has turned to you
(mercifully), then keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey Allah
and His Apostle; and Allah is Aware of what you do.”*** [^75]

We should know that the Almighty Allah had tested the companions through
these verses and the exigency behind this was to ensure that people do
not trouble the people and by giving Sadaqah they earn more rewards and
it may enhance the Prophet’s respect.

Shia and Sunni tradition scholars and commentators have agreement that
after promulgation of this law, companions also stopped speaking in
secret to the Prophet and except for Imam Ali (a.s.) no one followed
this rule. He had one Dinar, which he exchanged for ten dirhams and
spoke to the Prophet secretly and each time he gave one dirham in
Sadaqah.

After that, this command was abrogated. Shia and Sunni, through many
channels narrate from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said: There is one
verse in Qur’an on which no one except me has acted and that is the
giving of Sadaqah before seeking the counsel of the Prophet. Insha Allah
we will mention it in detail in the account of Imam Ali (a.s.).

It is mentioned in reliable traditions from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that when the name of the Prophet is mentioned in your presence you must
invoke excessive blessings on him, because one who invokes blessings on
him once, the Almighty Allah blesses him a thousand times. And nothing
created by the Almighty Allah is such that does not follow suit.

One who refrains from this is arrogant and the Almighty Allah, the
Prophet and Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) are aloof of him. And it is mentioned in
another reliable tradition that the Holy Prophet (S) said: If one before
whom I am mentioned does not invoke blessings from me, he is turned away
from Paradise by the Almighty Allah.

It is mentioned in another reliable tradition from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.)
that Jabir Ansari says that the Holy Prophet (S) was seated in a leather
tent and we were outside, when Bilal came out of the tent holding some
water that was left from which the Holy Prophet (S) had washed his
hands. Companions took that water and applied it to their faces to seek
blessings therefrom and one who could not reach the vessel rubbed their
hands on the hands of others and applied it to their faces. In the same
way the water used by Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was also considered
blessed.

It is narrated from reliable traditions from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that when the Holy Prophet (S) was having any problem related to his
physical health he used to resort to cupping. Abu Tayyaba says that once
I opened a vein of the Prophet and he gave me a gold coin and asked me
what I did with that blood. I said that I consumed it for its blessing.
He said: Don’t repeat it in future.

This will protect you from illnesses, troubles and Hellfire. It is
narrated from Usamah Ibn Shareek that he says: I went to the Holy
Prophet (S) to find him surrounded by companions absolutely silent as if
birds perched on them. And during the Battle of Hudaibiyah when Urwah
bin Masud came to the Prophet on behalf of Quraish, he saw that when the
Prophet washes his hands or performs ablution, people compete with each
other to get that water, so much so that they could have killed each
other and each time the Prophet gargled or put water in his mouth,
people used to take that water and apply it to their faces and bodies
and the strands of hair that fell by combing were also collected.

When the Messenger of Allah (S) issued a command, people used to compete
with each other to fulfill it. When the Holy Prophet (S) spoke, people
used to lower their voices. They never looked upon the Messenger of
Allah (S) with a sharp glance. They used to hang down their heads. After
seeing this, Urwah returned to his people and said: “I have visited
kings of Iran, Rum and Habasha, but I never found any subjects according
such honor to their rulers as I found the companions of Muhammad
respecting him.”

Anas says: “The barber used to cut the hair of the Holy Prophet (S) and
companions used to surround him and collect each strand of his hair.
Royal messengers who visited the Prophet used to tremble on seeing him.

Mughira says: “When companions knocked the door of the Prophet, they
used their fingers instead of banging with a stone or shaking the door.”
Baraa bin Azib says that most of the time I wanted to ask something from
the Prophet but because of his awe the matter used to be delayed for as
long as two years.[^76]

The Prophet was immune from sins, mistakes and forgetfulness
------------------------------------------------------------

Proofs of greatness of all the prophets have already been explained in
the first volume and most proofs are mentioned with explanation in
*Biharul Anwar*. There is consensus of Imamiyah scholars, that from his
birth till his last moments the Messenger of Allah (S) was immune from
greater and lesser sins, intentionally and unintentionally.

Although Ibn Babawayh has mentioned reports of some omissions caused by
the Almighty Allah but such a thing was not possible in matters of
religious propagation. But notable scholars have not accepted this,
justifying those reports to be based on Taqayyah. Since this book is
compiled for common people who cannot distinguish between such reports
it may cause some deviation, so full explanation of them is mentioned in
*Biharul Anwar.*

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in reliable books that the
Almighty Allah imbued the being of the Prophet with five spirits: (1)
Spirit of life, by which he moved and walked about (2) Spirit of
strength, by which he fought Jihad and bore difficult worships (3)
Spirit of carnality, by which he ate and had lawful relations with women
(4) Spirit of faith, by which he commanded and dispensed justice (5)
Spirit of sacredness (Ruhul Qudus), by which he bore the responsibility
of prophethood and when a prophet goes away from the world the Ruhul
Qudus is related to the Imam. Ruhul Qudus does not sleep, rest or
forgets. The Holy Prophet (S) and the Imams, through Ruhul Qudus see
whatever is there in the world.

It is mentioned in Shia and Sunni traditions that one night the Holy
Prophet (S) camped at Maras near Medina and asked Bilal to remain awake,
while he went to sleep and Bilal also went to sleep as the Almighty
Allah made sleep overcome all of them, till sunrise. When they awoke,
Bilal said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), one who overcame you with sleep
also put me to sleep.”

So, all recited Qaza prayer and the Almighty Allah had mercy on people
and made sleep overcome all of them so that if anyone goes to sleep till
sunrise and people chastise him he can quote that the Messenger of Allah
(S) had also once missed his Morning Prayer when sleep overcame him. But
this report is also controversial and objections against it and their
replies are mentioned in *Biharul Anwar*.

Prophet’s perfect knowledge and heritage of past prophets
---------------------------------------------------------

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) in reliable traditions
that the Almighty Allah says in Qur’an that only the Almighty Allah and
those who are deeply rooted in knowledge know about the interpretation
of ambiguous verses. The Holy Prophet (S) was the best of those who are
deeply rooted in knowledge.

And the Almighty Allah taught him all the sciences that were revealed on
him. He knew the interpretation of all that was revealed to him. All his
successors after him are learned in all the sciences. And it is narrated
in another reliable tradition that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has said: The
Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذٰلِكَ لآيَاتٍ لِّلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely in this are signs for those who examine.”***[^77]

That is in the story of the chastisement of the community of Prophet Lut
(a.s.) there were signs for those who possess intelligence and
understanding. Imam Ali (a.s.) said that the Holy Prophet (S) was
Mutawassim as many sciences, news and secrets were revealed to him.
After him, the Imams from my progeny are also like that. And it is
mentioned in many traditions that everyday the deeds of good and bad
people of this Ummah are presented to him. So one should keep away from
evil deeds.

It is mentioned in another trustworthy report from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he told one of his companions, “Why do you harass the Holy
Prophet (S)?” “How can we harass the Prophet?” they asked. The Imam
said: “Perhaps you don’t know that your deeds are shown to the Messenger
of Allah (S). If he sees any sin, he is troubled. So do not hurt the
Prophet with your sins. On the contrary you should please him with good
deeds.

It is narrated through the Holy Imams (a.s.) in many traditions that the
Almighty Allah gathered all the sciences of the prophets from the Holy
Prophet (S) and he bequeathed all those sciences to his successors. The
Holy Prophet (S) was given all the heavenly scriptures from Taurat,
Injeel, Zabur and the scrolls of Ibrahim, Idris, Sheeth etc. And the
Almighty Allah did not give any miracle to any prophet but that he gave
the same to the Holy Prophet (S) also and He also gave that which had
not been given to the previous prophets. It is related in reliable
traditions from Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) was the
inheritor of the sciences of the prophets and was more knowledgeable
than them.

The narrator asked: “Isa (a.s.) revived the dead and Sulaiman (a.s.)
understood the language of the birds but the Holy Prophet (S) had all
these capacities. Indeed, when Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) did not see Hud
Hud, he searched for it and was infuriated when he did not find it. It
was so because he used to consider his knowledgeable of the seas and the
knowledge of Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) was to that extent even though he
commanded the Jinns and men and even ants.

But he did not have the knowledge of the water under the wind while Hud
Hud knew about it. And the Almighty Allah says: “If there is a Qur’an
through which mountains can be moved or the earth split into pieces or
distances covered or the dead revived, it is this Qur’an and we have
received it in inheritance through which we can move mountains, traverse
the earth and enliven the dead and know the circumstances of water below
the wind. There are some verses in the Book of Allah through which we
can do whatever we intend to do.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in some reliable reports
that the Almighty Allah gave two Isme Azam to Isa (a.s.) through which
he enlivened the dead and performed miracles. Prophet Musa (a.s.) had
four Isme Azam. Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) had eight. Prophet Nuh (a.s.) had
fifteen and Prophet Adam (a.s.) had twenty-five and all these, on the
contrary more than these were given to the Holy Prophet (S).

There are seventy-three Isme Azam (great names of Allah). One of them is
exclusively for the Almighty Allah which has not been given to anyone.
And 72 names were taught to the Messenger of Allah (S). It is narrated
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) through reliable traditions that on the
night of Meraj the Almighty Allah revealed to the Prophet all the past
and future knowledge.

It is mentioned in authentic traditions from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that he said: Every Thursday, we experience a great joy. “What is it?”
asked the narrator. He replied: “On Thursday, the soul of the Prophet
comes to the Arsh with the souls of the Imams and all circle the Arsh
seven times and pray two units of prayer at each leg. And our souls come
back to our bodies with fresh knowledge. If this had not been there, our
knowledge would have been finished.

It is mentioned in other traditions that every fresh knowledge bestowed
to us, is first given to the Holy Prophet (S) and after that to Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and to each Imam in turn till the last. It is mentioned
in reliable and correct traditions from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Jibraeel gave two heavenly pomegranates to
the Prophet. He ate one of them and from the other he ate half and gave
half to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and said: O Ali, the whole pomegranate I
ate was because of prophethood, in which you did not have a share. The
second pomegranate was of knowledge in which you are my partner.

It is mentioned in certain reports that a Yemenite came to Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) and he asked: “Do you know so and so mountain pass?” He
replied: “Yes.” He asked: “Have you seen so and so tree there?” He
replied: “Yes.” He said: “Have you seen so and so stone under that
tree?” He replied: “Yes, I have not seen anyone more knowledgeable in
local geography.” The Imam said: “It is the stone under which the
tablets of Prophet Musa (a.s.) were kept and they reached to the
Messenger of Allah (S) and now they are in our possession.

It is related through Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in reliable traditions
that the tablets of Musa (a.s.) were of heavenly emeralds. Those tablets
contain all the past and future knowledge. After the period of Prophet
Musa (a.s.) the Almighty Allah revealed to him to entrust these tablets
to the mountain and he came to the mountain which split by the order of
Allah. Musa (a.s.) wrapped the tablets in a cloth and placed them in the
gap and the mountain rejoined and the tablets remained in it till the
time the Almighty Allah raised the Messenger of Allah (S). A caravan was
coming from Yemen to meet the Prophet and when it reached the mountain,
it split and the tablets came out wrapped in cloth as placed by Prophet
Musa (a.s.).

The members of the caravan picked them up and the Almighty Allah
inspired them not to open them and they brought the same to the
Messenger of Allah (S). Jibraeel came down and told him about the
tablets. When the company reached the Prophet, he told them about the
tablets and asked them give him the same. They asked: “O Messenger of
Allah (S), how did you learn that we found them?” He replied: “My Lord
told me so. And these are the tablets of Prophet Musa (a.s.).” They
said: “We witness that you are the Messenger of Allah (S),” and they
handed the tablets to them. The Holy Prophet (S) saw them and read them.
They were in Hebrew.

The Holy Prophet (S) summoned Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and gave the
tablets to him and said that they contained the past and future
knowledge and the Almighty Allah has commanded him to entrust them to
Ali (a.s.). Imam Ali (a.s.) said: O Messenger of Allah (S), I cannot
read them.” “Jibraeel has asked me to tell you to keep them under your
head tonight and the following morning you will be able to read them.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) did the same and on waking up the next morning
the Almighty Allah had taught him everything that was mentioned in the
tablets. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Write it down.”

And Amirul Momineen (a.s.) wrote it on a goatskin. This same writing is
Jafr which contains the past and future knowledge. Imam (a.s.) said: “It
is in our possession and so are the tablets of Musa and his staff. We
have inherited them from the Holy Prophet (S).” Through authentic
traditions, it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that the tablets
of Musa (a.s.) were of green emerald.

When Prophet Musa (a.s.) was infuriated with Bani Israel due to their
devotion to the golden calf, he threw the tablets. Some of its pieces
were raised to the sky. When his anger was dispelled, Yusha asked him,
“Do you what was written in the tablets?” He replied in the affirmative.
Thus those tablets were inherited from one successor of Musa (a.s.) to
another till they came into the possession of the four persons from
Yemen. When they were informed about the advent of the Prophet, they
made inquiries as to what he taught.

They were told that the new prophet prohibited wine and adultery and
encouraged good behavior and helping the neighbors. They said: “He is
more eligible for these tablets.” So they fixed a time to meet the
Prophet.” Jibraeel informed the Prophet that so and so persons are
coming to meet him and they are having the tablets of Musa (a.s.).

The Holy Prophet (S) waited for the appointed time of their arrival.
They came and knocked the door and the Prophet told them their names
along with the names of their ancestors. And he asked them: “Where are
the tablets that you inherited from Yusha (a.s.)?” On seeing this
miracle, they said: “We witness to the oneness of Allah and your
prophethood, since these tablets came into our possession, no one knew
about them.”

The Holy Prophet (S) looked at the tablets, which were inscribed in
Hebrew. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says: “The Prophet gave those tablets to
me and I slept with them below my head.” I got up in the morning to find
that they were changed into Arabic. They contained every incident since
the first day of creation till the last day, which I read and
understood.”

In another reliable tradition, it is narrated that Imam Musa Kazim
(a.s.) was asked if Ubayy was the divine proof on the Messenger of Allah
(S). He replied: “No, he was only a caretaker of scriptures and heirloom
that were entrusted to him to pass them to the Prophet, which he did
before passing away.” It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
through trustworthy chains that Abu Talib was the last successor of
Prophet Isa (a.s.).

It is also narrated from the same Imam that Balit was the last successor
of Prophet Isa (a.s.). And it is narrated in another reliable tradition
that Salman (r.a.) had obtained knowledge from many scholars till he
came to Ubayy and stayed with him for a long time. When the Holy Prophet
(S) arose, Ubayy said: “The one you are searching for has risen in
Mecca. Go to him.” So Salman came to the Holy Prophet (S) in Medina.

In another reliable tradition, it is mentioned that Abu Talib was a
trustee of bequests and trusts; he had faith in the Almighty Allah and
the Messenger of Allah (S) and when he entrusted all the trusts to the
Prophet, he passed away the same day.

According to reliable traditions, it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that Musa (a.s.) willed to Yusha. Yusha neither willed in favor
of his sons or the sons of Musa (a.s.); he willed to the sons of Harun
(a.s.) as it is the Almighty Allah who decides about the succession of
prophet. Musa and Yusha (a.s.) gave glad tidings of the coming of
Prophet Isa (a.s.).

When Prophet Isa (a.s.) appeared, he said: “After me a prophet will
arrive, whose name will be Ahmad and he will be from the progeny of
Ismail. He will testify for me and for you.” Those who were in charge of
the religious laws and knowledge of Isa (a.s.) transferred the
responsibility from one to another and continued to issue glad tidings
of the arrival of the Last Prophet as the Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَا التَّوْرَاةَ فِيهَا هُدًى وَنُورٌ ۚ يَحْكُمُ بِهَا
النَّبِيُّونَ الَّذِينَ أَسْلَمُوا لِلَّذِينَ هَادُوا
وَالرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالْأَحْبَارُ بِمَا اسْتُحْفِظُوا مِنْ كِتَابِ
اللَّهِ وَكَانُوا عَلَيْهِ شُهَدَاءَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We revealed the Taurat in which was guidance and light; with
it the prophets who submitted themselves (to Allah) judged (matters) for
those who were Jews, and the masters of Divine knowledge and the
doctors, because they were required to guard (part) of the Book of
Allah, and they were witnesses thereof…”***[^78]

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “The Almighty Allah had named him as
Mustahfaz as he had been taught a name through which knowledge can be
gained about anything, which was given to the prophets. That is Taurat,
Injeel, Zabur, Book of Nuh, Book of Salih, Book of Shuaib and the
scrolls of Ibrahim (a.s.). All these bequests and trusts were
transferred from one scholar to another till they came in possession of
the Holy Prophet (S).

When he was appointed to the office of prophethood the progeny of those
Mustahfizun brought faith on him and another party of Bani Israel
apostasied. It is mentioned in another reliable tradition from that same
Imam that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “I am the chief of the prophets and
my successor is the chief of all the successors and my successors are
better than the successors of prophets.

Adam beseeched the Almighty to give him a capable successor, so the
Almighty Allah revealed to him that: I have exalted the prophets because
of their prophethood, and after that I chose the best of the people
through a test to be their successors. O Adam, appoint Sheeth as your
successor, who is Hibtullah. Then Sheeth made a will in favor of his
son, Shaban who was born through Hawriya sent from Paradise and Adam
(a.s.) had married her to Sheeth.

Shaban made a will in favor of Muhlith, Muhlith to Mahuq; Mahuq to
Amisha, he to Akhnuh, who is known as Idris. Idris to Nahur and Nahur to
Nuh (a.s.). Nuh willed to Saam and Saam to Athahmir and he to
Barishasha, he to Yafith. Yafith to Baraa, he to Janisa, he to Imran and
Imran to Ibrahim. Ibrahim willed to Ismail and he to Ishaq. Ishaq to
Yaqub. Yaqub to Yusuf. Yusuf to Thabariya. Thabariya to Shuaib. Shuaib
to Prophet Musa (a.s.). Musa appointed Yusha as his successor and he to
Dawood (a.s.). Dawood to Sulaiman (a.s.). Sulaiman (a.s.) to Asif bin
Barkhiya. Asif bin Barkhiya to Zakariya and Zakariya to Isa (a.s.). Isa
(a.s.) willed to Shamun and he to Yahya Ibn Zakariya. Yahya to Manzar.
Manzar to Salima. Salima to Burdah.

Burdah to me. And O Ali I am entrusting to you. You hand them to your
successor so that he may entrust them to your successors from your sons,
one by one till the trusts reach to the Twelfth Imam who is the best
after you and O Ali, indeed the people of my nation will commit heresy
and differ a lot about you. O Ali, one who accepts your Caliphate will
be with me. And one who leaves you will go to Hell, which is the abode
of the disbelievers.[^79]

It is narrated in authentic traditions that Ammar Yasir said to the
Messenger of Allah (S): “I wish you had lived among us as long as
Prophet Nuh (a.s.) lived in his community.” The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“O Ammar, my life is good for and my passing away is also not bad for
you.

I seek forgiveness for you for the sins you commit during my lifetime
but after me you should continue to fear Allah and invoke blessings on
me and my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) in the best way, indeed your deeds are
presented to me along with your names and genealogies. If they are good,
I thank the Almighty Allah; if bad, I seek divine forgiveness on your
behalf, as the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلِ اعْمَلُوا فَسَيَرَى اللَّهُ عَمَلَكُمْ وَرَسُولُهُ
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And say: Work; so Allah will see your work and (so will) His Apostle
and the believers…”***[^80]  
 The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Believers imply Aale Muhammad
(a.s.).” And it is mentioned in another report that the Holy Prophet (S)
said: “Your deeds are reported to me every Thursday.” In another
tradition, it is mentioned ‘every Monday and Thursday.” And it is
mentioned in many reports, “Every morning of Monday and Thursday or
every morning or night or everyday.” Insha Allah, this will be further
explained in the book of Imamate.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in a reliable tradition
that he said: “By the Lord of the Kaaba, if I was between Musa and
Khizr, I would have told them that I am better than them and I would
have told them that which they were unaware of because the two of them
only knew what was past and not that which was to come in the future and
the Almighty Allah has bestowed all the knowledge till Judgment Day to
the Messenger of Allah (S) and it has come to us; and in another
reliable tradition, he said: The Almighty Allah gave excellence to Ulul
Azm prophets over all creatures for their knowledge and bequeathed their
knowledge to us and gave us more precedence in knowledge. The Messenger
of Allah (S) knew everything which they did not know. And we have also
received that knowledge. In many reliable traditional reports the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذٰلِكَ نُرِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ مَلَكُوتَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ
وَلِيَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُوقِنِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And thus did We show Ibrahim the kingdom of the heavens and the
earth and that he might be of those who are sure.”***[^81]

…is interpreted to mean that when the Almighty Allah removed the veils,
Ibrahim (a.s.) looked at the earth and saw whatever exists in it. He
looked at the heavens and saw whatever exists in them. He looked at the
Arsh and saw whatever there is and saw the angels who are the bearers of
the Arsh. He saw all of them and the same was done about the Messenger
of Allah (S) and his successors.

In many reliable traditions it is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Almighty Allah on the night
of Meraj gave to the Prophet the scrolls of deeds of the folks of
Paradise as well as the folks of Hell. The Holy Prophet (S) took the
scrolls of the folks of Paradise in the right hand and saw the names of
the folks of Paradise along with the names of their ancestors and
relatives.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) saw the scroll of deeds of the folks of Hell
and saw the names of the folks of Hell with the names of their
ancestors. Then the Messenger of Allah (S) came to the earth carrying
those scrolls. He mounted the pulpit, delivered a sermon and said: “O
people, do you what this is?” companions said: “Allah and His Messenger
know better.” The Holy Prophet (S) raised his right hand and said:
“These are the names of the people of Paradise along with their
ancestors and relatives till Judgment Day.”

Then he raised his left hand and said: “These are the names of the
people of Hell along with their ancestors and relatives till Judgment
Day. Not one less and not one more. The Almighty Allah has decided it
and He has decided with justice. All these will become deserving of
Paradise or Hell according to their deeds.”

Then the Holy Prophet (S) gave those names to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
it is mentioned in many reliable traditional reports that the Holy
Prophet (S) said: “The Almighty Allah has shown to me my nation from my
essence till Judgment Day and I recognized them through their names,
genealogies and characteristics. On Judgment Day those who perform good
deeds will come before me in hordes.

I have seen all and recognized them as you recognize your acquaintances.
So O Ali, I sought divine pardon on behalf of you and your Shias from
them. O Ali, the Almighty Allah promised me deliverance to those of your
Shias who bring faith and perform good deeds. And He will change their
sins into charitable acts.” In another report it is mentioned that, “The
Almighty Allah on the day of “Alast” (Am I not your Lord?) presented my
Ummah, and the first to testify for me was Ali.”[^82]

Miracle of the Holy Qur’an
--------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) was sent to a nation which was accomplished
in eloquence and oratory. They judged everyone on the criterion of
literary accomplishments. They idolized poets and litterateurs and
considered them to be the best of creatures. So the Almighty Allah gave
to His Prophet the best miracle of literature. That is the Holy Prophet
(S) brought the Qur’an and challenged them to bring its equal if they
didn’t believe in his claim of prophethood, even though there were
numerous people having literary expertise among them.

All of them were determined to disprove the Prophet’s claim, because he
was invalidating the religion into which they had been brought up and he
condemned their deities and labeled their ancestors as infidels. And he
used to call their arrogant leaders to observe humility and obedience.
He also used to threaten them with Hellfire his opposition and the
opposition to his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

But in spite of this, they could not bring an equal of Qur’an. And it is
obvious that if they had been capable of it, they would have indeed
brought it. After that the Messenger of Allah (S) reduced the challenge
to bring only ten chapters like it, but still they could not. The
Messenger of Allah (S) further challenged them to come together and
bring only one chapter like that of Qur’an. But they could not bring
anything equal to the shortest chapter. If they had been capable, they
would have indeed made a like of it and saved themselves from battles
and loss of property.

If they had brought an equal, they would have indeed publicized it and
through it, made allegations on numerous occasions about which we
definitely would have been informed. Scholars have difference if the
miracle of the Qur’an is from the aspect of eloquence and clarity or
when the idolaters made efforts to create something like it, the
Almighty Allah made their minds blocked and they failed to compose
anything like it.

Even though both the things are possible, but the fact is that a miracle
has many aspects: (1) From the aspect of eloquence and clarity that even
if one is ignorant of Arabic, he would be able to distinguish it from
other discourses and each phrase, which is between other statements
seems to be distinct in them. And all experts have agreed to its
eloquence.

It is mentioned in reliable traditions that during the time of Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) Ibn Abil Awja[^83] and three heretics, who were
literary experts decided to compose a book like Qur’an and each of them
decided to contribute one-fourth of it. Thus they made this secret pact
in Mecca and declared that they would meet again in Mecca the following
year and finalize the arrangement. The next year, they gathered at the
Place of Ibrahim and one of them said: “When I saw the following verse,
I decided that it is impossible to imitate the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَرْضُ ابْلَعِي مَاءَكِ وَيَا سَمَاءُ أَقْلِعِي وَغِيضَ الْمَاءُ
وَقُضِيَ الْأَمْرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…O earth, swallow down your water, and O cloud, clear away; and the
water was made to abate and the affair was decided…”***[^84]

Second man said: When I saw the following verse, I also despaired from
competing with Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا اسْتَيْأَسُوا مِنْهُ خَلَصُوا نَجِيًّا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then when they despaired of him, they retired, conferring privately
together.”***[^85]  
 Meanwhile, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) passed before them and miraculously
recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَئِنِ اجْتَمَعَتِ الْإِنْسُ وَالْجِنُّ عَلٰى أَنْ يَأْتُوا
بِمِثْلِ هٰذَا الْقُرْآنِ لَا يَأْتُونَ بِمِثْلِهِ وَلَوْ كَانَ
بَعْضُهُمْ لِبَعْضٍ ظَهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: If men and jinn should combine together to bring the like of
this Qur’an, they could not bring the like of it, though some of them
were aiders of others.”***[^86]

When they witnessed the miracle of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) they were
humiliated and they went away from there. Whoever composed a good poem
used to display it on the wall of the Kaaba to show it off. When the
following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَرْضُ ابْلَعِي مَاءَكِ وَيَا سَمَاءُ أَقْلِعِي وَغِيضَ الْمَاءُ
وَقُضِيَ الْأَمْرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…O earth, swallow down your water, and O cloud, clear away; and the
water was made to abate and the affair was decided…”***[^87]

…all of them removed their compositions from there, fearing insults.  
 From other aspects of literary expertise, no matter how eloquent a
person may be, he cannot compete with the extraordinary style of the
Qur’an. Thus it is mentioned that when the Quraish was bewildered by the
style of Qur’an, they came to Walid bin Mughira who was among the
intellectuals of Arabs and was famed for his literary expertise and
philosophy, and told him to come and listen to the discourses of the
Holy Prophet (S) and tell them what it actually was.

He came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: “O Muhammad, recite your
poems.” The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “They are not poems, it is the
discourse of the Almighty Allah sent for the prophets,” and he recited
the verses of Surah Ha Mim. When he reached the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ أَعْرَضُوا فَقُلْ أَنْذَرْتُكُمْ صَاعِقَةً مِثْلَ صَاعِقَةِ
عَادٍ وَثَمُودَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But if they turn aside, then say: I have warned you of a scourge
like the scourge of Ad and Thamud.”***[^88]

…he began to tremble and his hair stood on their ends. After that he
arose silently and went home. Quraish was worried lest he embrace Islam.
He was an uncle of Abu Jahl. Abu Jahl came to him and said: “Uncle, by
inclining to the religion of Muhammad you have insulted us.” He said:
“No, I am on your religion, but I heard such a meaningful discourse from
Muhammad that makes one tremble.” Abu Jahl asked: “Is it poetry,” to
which he replied in the negative. “Is it a sermon?” “No, a continuous
speech is called a sermon whereas it was disjoined discourse, but
contains such beauty and sweetness that cannot be fully described.”

He said, “It must be soothsaying.” “No.” Abu Jahl asked, “Then what
should we refer to as?” “Wait for a couple of days and allow me to think
upon it.” Later he said, “It is a magical discourse as it bewitches the
people.” It is mentioned in another report that Walid came to the
Messenger of Allah (S) and said: “Let us hear that discourse.” The Holy
Prophet (S) recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالْإِحْسَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good (to
others)…”***[^89]

“Repeat it again,” said he and the Prophet repeated it and he said, “By
Allah, this discourse possesses beauty and freshness and it branches are
fruitful and its stem will fructify.  
 Thirdly, it is the absence of contradiction, as the Almighty Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ كَانَ مِنْ عِنْدِ غَيْرِ اللَّهِ لَوَجَدُوا فِيهِ اخْتِلَافًا
كَثِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if it were from any other than Allah, they would have found in
it many a discrepancy.”***[^90]

Because in such a long discourse of anyone other than Allah, it is
impossible that it should be free of discrepancies. And also when we
examine the different discourses of every eloquent person there is
difference in eloquence. If one statement is eloquent, the other is not.
If one stanza is powerful, other is not. such a uniform discourse cannot
be composed by anyone except through one who has not an iota of
discrepancy in his being.

Fourthly, since it is based on divine recognition, especially when there
was no existence of it among the Meccans and there was no intellectual
atmosphere because they had completely become aloof from the People of
the Book. And they also did not travel much to other places that they
could have gained knowledge from there.

In spite of the fact that all the sciences expounded in thousands of
years were all mentioned in every verse and chapter of Qur’an. And there
is nothing against common sense in it, which is the greatest miracle of
the Holy Qur’an. And the Arabs who were famed for ignorance and bad
manners as a result of knowledge and good manners became as ideals of
all the people of the world due to the auspiciousness of the Holy
Prophet (S) and the scholars of the world were needful of them in
acquiring perfections.

Fifthly: Since it consists of noble manners and good ethics because
regarding good manners, scholar and intellectuals who have pondered on
this subject throughout the ages, same is mentioned in the verses and
much more. And such a law for the reform of people and their mutual
conflicts were removed from it. Intellectuals of the world examined each
of its subjects but they were unable to find any deficiency in the law
promulgated by the Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet (S). No one can
bring a better code of ethics.

If anyone decides from his reasoning capacity, he would decide that
there cannot be a miracle greater than this. Sixth: It consists of
accounts of previous prophets and future events, which were exclusive
with People of the Book and others, especially the people of Mecca were
ignorant of all that is narrated in such a way that in spite of the fact
that numerous enemies were present from People of Book, regarding the
portions of the stories of the prophets they could falsify the Prophet
but they testified to his veracity as was famous against them.

And the laws of their books which they used to conceal were proved for
them like in the matter of stoning etc. and the flesh of the camel as
the Jews used to say that it was unlawful for the prophets. The Almighty
Allah refuted them saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ فَأْتُوا بِالتَّوْرَاةِ فَاتْلُوهَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Bring then the Taurat and read it, if you are
truthful.”***[^91]

That is he mentioned with certainty the command of Taurat in spite of
the fact that the Holy Prophet (S) had neither seen the Taurat nor read
it. Then it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولُنَا يُبَيِّنُ لَكُمْ
كَثِيرًا مِمَّا كُنْتُمْ تُخْفُونَ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ وَيَعْفُو عَنْ
كَثِيرٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O followers of the Book! indeed Our Apostle has come to you making
clear to you much of what you concealed of the Book and passing over
much…”***[^92]

Seventh: From the aspect of special qualities of the chapters and verses
which contain the cures for all the diseases of the body and soul. And
it contains cure for satanic whisperings and spiritual harms. And
security from external and internal fear and peace from external and
internal enemies, everything is present in the Qur’anic verses. And from
correct experience it is known that the effects of Qur’an are much more
for illuminating the hearts, curing the hearts, to create connection to
the Almighty Allah, to save one from satanic doubts and no honest person
can deny this fact. Or if an intelligent man can think upon which moves
the heart of the stone-hearted people and from them issues springs from
the streams of eyes. It creates love for the Almighty in the hearts of
people and enlivens in them a spirit of faith.

Eighth: Miracle of the knowledge of the unseen, which could not have
been known to anyone except the Almighty Allah. They are countless such
prophecies in the Holy Qur’an. They are of two types: In many verses,
the Almighty Allah has exposed some secrets of infidels and hypocrites
that they used to say in the secret of their homes or which they used to
conceal and often on their exposure, they did not refute the Prophet, on
the contrary they repented and regretted it. And when they said it they
used to fear and say that Jibraeel will tell the Prophet that we are
discussing all this. The Holy Qur’an contains many such verses, as the
Almighty Allah mentions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا لَقُوا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قَالُوا آمَنَّا وَإِذَا خَلَا
بَعْضُهُمْ إِلٰى بَعْضٍ قَالُوا أَتُحَدِّثُونَهُمْ بِمَا فَتَحَ
اللَّهُ عَلَيْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when they meet those who believe they say: We believe, and when
they are alone one with another they say: Do you talk to them of what
Allah has disclosed to you…”***[^93]

When they came to the Prophet they used to say: We have brought faith in
you and read your description in Taurat and when they met alone, some of
them said to others: Why do you mention them to Muhammad? So the Holy
Prophet (S) used to expose those secret talks. At another place, he
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلِمَ اللَّهُ أَنَّكُمْ كُنْتُمْ تَخْتَانُونَ أَنْفُسَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Allah knew that you acted unfaithfully to yourselves…”***[^94]

On yet another occasion, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَتْ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ آمِنُوا بِالَّذِي أُنْزِلَ
عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَجْهَ النَّهَارِ وَاكْفُرُوا آخِرَهُ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And a party of the followers of the Book say: Avow belief in that
which has been revealed to those who believe, in the first part of the
day, and disbelieve at the end of it, perhaps they go back on their
religion.”***[^95]

It is narrated that from the Jews of Khyber, eleven persons decided: Let
us go to Muhammad and embrace Islam at his hands in the morning and by
the end of the day we will apostatize and show off that Muhammad does
not fit the description we have seen in Taurat. Perhaps the Muslims will
turn away from him through this trick. The Almighty Allah informed the
Prophet about this.  
 And at another place in Qur’an, their hidden conditions are mentioned
as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا خَلَوْا عَضُّوا عَلَيْكُمُ الْأَنَامِلَ مِنَ الْغَيْظِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and when they are alone, they bite the ends of their fingers in
rage against you.”***[^96]

Then He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُونَ طَاعَةٌ فَإِذَا بَرَزُوا مِنْ عِنْدِكَ بَيَّتَ طَائِفَةٌ
مِنْهُمْ غَيْرَ الَّذِي تَقُولُ ۖ وَاللَّهُ يَكْتُبُ مَا يُبَيِّتُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they say: Obedience. But when they go out from your presence, a
party of them decide by night upon doing otherwise than what you say;
and Allah writes down what they decide by night…”***[^97]

In the incident of Tama bin Abi Raqq, He mentions about the cunnings of
Jews who had hatched another plan and did not inform others:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْتَخْفُونَ مِنَ النَّاسِ وَلَا يَسْتَخْفُونَ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَهُوَ
مَعَهُمْ إِذْ يُبَيِّتُونَ مَا لَا يَرْضٰى مِنَ الْقَوْلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They hide themselves from men and do not hide themselves from Allah,
and He is with them when they meditate by night words, which please Him
not…”***[^98]

Insha Allah the details and explanation of this incident will be
presented in the coming chapters. After that, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا جَاءُوكُمْ قَالُوا آمَنَّا وَقَدْ دَخَلُوا بِالْكُفْرِ وَهُمْ
قَدْ خَرَجُوا بِهِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْتُمُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when they come to you, they say: We believe; and indeed they
come in with unbelief and indeed they go forth with it; and Allah knows
best what they concealed.”***[^99]

And at another occasion, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَحْلِفُونَ بِاللَّهِ مَا قَالُوا وَلَقَدْ قَالُوا كَلِمَةَ الْكُفْرِ
وَكَفَرُوا بَعْدَ إِسْلَامِهِمْ وَهَمُّوا بِمَا لَمْ يَنَالُوا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They swear by Allah that they did not speak, and certainly they did
speak, the word of unbelief, and disbelieved after their Islam, and they
had determined upon what they have not been able to effect…”***[^100]

This verse was revealed about Abu Bakr, Umar and other hypocrites who
talked heretically about the Caliphate of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
planned to assassinate the Prophet when he reaches the top of cliff. And
they threw cans from the mountains to frighten his camel, but the
Almighty Allah had informed the Holy Prophet (S) about this before and
then they came and swore falsely that they had not hatched any such plan
but the Almighty Allah exposed their falsity and other statements are
also mentioned in the interpretation of this verse. Thus the Almighty
Allah informed the Holy Prophet (S) about their true intentions and
secret affairs and this is a miracle of Qur’an. And at another place He
has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا تَعْتَذِرُوا لَنْ نُؤْمِنَ لَكُمْ قَدْ نَبَّأَنَا اللَّهُ
مِنْ أَخْبَارِكُمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Urge no excuse, by no means will we believe you; indeed Allah
has informed us of matters relating to you…”***[^101]

Then He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيَحْلِفُنَّ إِنْ أَرَدْنَا إِلَّا الْحُسْنَىٰ ۖ وَاللَّهُ يَشْهَدُ
إِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and they will certainly swear: We did not desire aught but good;
and Allah bears witness that they are most surely liars.”***[^102]

And on another occasion He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا الْمُسْتَقْدِمِينَ مِنْكُمْ وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا
الْمُسْتَأْخِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We know those of you who have gone before and We
certainly know those who shall come later.”***[^103]

It is narrated that a beautiful lady used come to pray in the mosque.
Some pious companions used to move ahead to avoid glancing at her and a
group of mischievous persons used to stand to see her. The Almighty
Allah described their true intentions and then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقُولُونَ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ مَا لَيْسَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They say with their mouths what is not in their hearts…”***[^104]

Thus the Holy Qur’an contains many such reports.  
 The second type of information is present in verses in which the
Almighty Allah has mentioned events that were to occur in future and
except for the Almighty Allah no one could have been aware of them
except through revelation and divine inspiration and the same thing
happened as predicted. These are further divided into many types: First:
The prophecy that Abu Lahab etc. will never accept Islam to refute the
claim of the Messenger of Allah (S) as mentioned in the first verse of
Surah Lahab. And at another place, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَوَاءٌ عَلَيْهِمْ أَأَنْذَرْتَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ تُنْذِرْهُمْ لَا
يُؤْمِنُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And it is alike to them whether you warn them or warn them not: they
do not believe.”***[^105]

There are many such statements in Qur’an.  
 Second: Many verses of the Holy Qur’an challenge all the people of the
world to bring a like of the Qur’an or a chapter of Qur’an. And no one
was able to answer this challenge, as He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلُوا وَلَنْ تَفْعَلُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But if you do (it) not and never shall you do (it),…”***[^106]

If the Messenger of Allah (S) had not been certain, he could not make
such emphasis that those infidels would never believe. Third: To inform
about the degradation and humiliation of the Jews in the end after they
had harassed the Prophet and he had imprecated them and this is what
happened that till now they have not received any rulership and wherever
they reside in the world they are the most degraded people as mentioned
in many verses. Some of them are as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَنْ يَضُرُّوكُمْ إِلَّا أَذًى ۖ وَإِنْ يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ يُوَلُّوكُمُ
الْأَدْبَارَ ثُمَّ لَا يُنْصَرُونَ. ضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الذِّلَّةُ
أَيْنَ مَا ثُقِفُوا إِلَّا بِحَبْلٍ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَحَبْلٍ مِنَ
النَّاسِ وَبَاءُوا بِغَضَبٍ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ
الْمَسْكَنَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They shall by no means harm you but with a slight evil; and if they
fight with you they shall turn (their) backs to you, then shall they not
be helped. Abasement is made to cleave to them wherever they are found,
except under a covenant with Allah and a covenant with men, and they
have become deserving of wrath from Allah, and humiliation is made to
cleave to*** ***them…”***  
[^107]  
 All this happened as predicted because they were his worst enemies and
they were neighborly enemies who live all around Medina and they were
more likely to gain dominance rather than others. The Almighty Allah
destroyed and degraded them and all fled from there they could not harm
the Muslims in any way and till now they are degraded in such a way that
they quoted as examples of degradation. Such information is given in
Qur’an in many places. Like the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَلْقَيْنَا بَيْنَهُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ وَالْبَغْضَاءَ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ
الْقِيَامَةِ ۚ كُلَّمَا أَوْقَدُوا نَارًا لِلْحَرْبِ أَطْفَأَهَا
اللَّهُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and We have put enmity and hatred among them till the day of
resurrection; whenever they kindle a fire for war, Allah puts it
out…”***[^108]

Then He said: O Messenger, your Lord has informed you that someone or
the other will continue to have power on the Jews who would continue to
wreak havoc upon them till Judgment Day. Fourthly, the domination of the
religion of the Prophet over all the religions of the world and the news
of the defeat of the idolaters, although initially the Messenger of
Allah (S) could not have expected him to gain such dominance. On the
contrary there was excess of powerful enemies and deficit of helpers,
hence the domination achieved by the Holy Prophet (S) was a rare thing,
as mentioned in the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا سَتُغْلَبُونَ وَتُحْشَرُونَ إِلَىٰ
جَهَنَّمَ ۚ وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say to those who disbelieve: You shall be vanquished, and driven
together to hell; and evil is the resting-place.”***[^109]

And on another occasion, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ كَانَتْ لَكُمُ الدَّارُ الْآخِرَةُ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ خَالِصَةً
مِنْ دُونِ النَّاسِ فَتَمَنَّوُا الْمَوْتَ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ .
وَلَنْ يَتَمَنَّوْهُ أَبَدًا بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ ۗ وَاللَّهُ
عَلِيمٌ بِالظَّالِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: If the future abode with Allah is specially for you to the
exclusion of the people, then invoke death if you are truthful. And they
will never invoke it on account of what their hands have sent before,
and Allah knows the unjust.”***[^110]

This is also from the news of unseen that the Almighty Allah has
declared that they will not wish for death and they did not wish for it.
The Holy Prophet (S) says: If they had wished for death each Jew would
have died in his own place and not a Jew would have remained in the
earth. And similar was the case of Christians, as will be mentioned
after this. And this is the greatest proof of the veracity of the
Prophet; and the invalidity of his opponents. And on another place, He
has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللَّهُمَّ مَالِكَ الْمُلْكِ تُؤْتِي الْمُلْكَ مَنْ تَشَاءُ
وَتَنْزِعُ الْمُلْكَ مِمَّنْ تَشَاءُ وَتُعِزُّ مَنْ تَشَاءُ وَتُذِلُّ
مَنْ تَشَاءُ ۖ بِيَدِكَ الْخَيْرُ ۖ إِنَّكَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: O Allah, Master of the Kingdom! Thou givest the kingdom to
whomsoever Thou pleasest and takest away the kingdom from whomsoever
Thou pleasest, and Thou exaltest whom Thou pleasest and abasest whom
Thou pleasest; in Thine hand is the good; surely, Thou hast power over
all things.”***[^111]

According to reliable traditional reports, this verse was revealed when
in the conquest of Mecca the Battle of Khandaq, the Messenger of Allah
(S) had prophesied that “the Almighty Allah has given me and my
followers the kingdoms of Iran, Rum and Yemen.” And the hypocrites said:
“Muhammad is not content with Mecca and Medina and he is vying for the
kingdoms of the kings.” At that time, the Almighty Allah revealed this
verse and it was also a prophecy that proved true. Its interpretation
will be given in the coming pages. Then He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعَسَى اللَّهُ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ بِالْفَتْحِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…but it may be that Allah will bring the victory…”***[^112]

In Qur’an ‘may be’ implies ‘without any doubt’. It is narrated that the
victory implies the conquest of Mecca. Some have said that it implies
victory of territories of infidels and all this was proved true. Then He
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِي اللَّهُ بِقَوْمٍ يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ أَذِلَّةٍ
عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَعِزَّةٍ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ يُجَاهِدُونَ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلَا يَخَافُونَ لَوْمَةَ لَائِمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…then Allah will bring a people, He shall love them and they shall
love Him, lowly before the believers, mighty against the unbelievers,
they shall strive hard in Allah’s way and shall not fear the censure of
any censurer…”***[^113]

This verse was revealed about Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and companions of
the Holy Prophet (S); and the Holy Prophet (S) after the revelation of
this verse said: Very soon you will fight those who break allegiance
given to you. That is Ayesha, Talha and Zubair and those who will rebel;
that is Muawiyah and his followers; and those who will renounce religion
and go out of the pale of Islam like an arrow leaves the bow; that is
the Kharijis of Naharwan. This verse means that very soon the Almighty
Allah will bring such a group whom He will love and they would love Him
and they adopt humility with the believers and who are severe to the
idolaters, they perform Jihad in the path of Allah and they do not care
for criticism in this path. Then He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ يَعِدُكُمُ اللَّهُ إِحْدَى الطَّائِفَتَيْنِ أَنَّهَا لَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when Allah promised you one of the two parties that it shall be
yours…”***[^114]

That is either you will gain an upper hand on Quraish or their wealth
will fall into your hands. And they got victory in the Battle of Badr in
a peculiar manner as will be mentioned later, Insha Allah. Then He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَيُنْفِقُونَهَا ثُمَّ تَكُونُ عَلَيْهِمْ حَسْرَةً ثُمَّ
يُغْلَبُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…so they shall spend it, then it shall be to them an intense regret,
then they shall be overcome…”***[^115]

And the same thing happened. And on another occasion, He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يُطْفِئُوا نُورَ اللَّهِ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَيَأْبَى
اللَّهُ إِلَّا أَنْ يُتِمَّ نُورَهُ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ. هُوَ
الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ لِيُظْهِرَهُ
عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and
Allah will not consent save to perfect His light, though the unbelievers
are averse. He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion
of truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though
the polytheists may be averse.”***[^116]

This promise of the Almighty Allah was proved true and the true religion
of the Messenger of Allah (S) spread in the whole world. The complete
fulfillment will take place during the time of Imam Mahdi (a.s.), Insha
Allah. Then He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ النَّاسِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“and Allah will protect you from the people…”***[^117]

And this was also proved true and even though enemies tried to harm him
in many ways but they never succeeded in it. It is narrated that before
the revelation of this verse, a group of companions, like Saad and
Huzaifa etc. used to stand guard for the Prophet at nights but when this
verse was revealed, the Holy Prophet (S) told them to discontinue and
that the Almighty Allah will protect him. It is also a proof of the
veracity of the Messenger of Allah (S). The Almighty Allah has also
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُلْ لَنْ تَخْرُجُوا مَعِيَ أَبَدًا وَلَنْ تُقَاتِلُوا مَعِيَ
عَدُوًّا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…say: By no means shall you ever go forth with me and by no means
shall you fight an enemy with me…”***[^118]

This occurred after the return from Battle of Tabuk as mentioned by the
Almighty Allah. Then He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلٰى مَعَادٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely He Who has made the Qur’an binding on you will bring you
back to the destination.”***[^119]

That is Holy Mecca as is well known. After that very soon the Almighty
Allah caused the conquest of Mecca for the Holy Prophet (S). Then He
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الم. غُلِبَتِ الرُّومُ. فِي أَدْنَى الْأَرْضِ وَهُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ
غَلَبِهِمْ سَيَغْلِبُونَ. فِي بِضْعِ سِنِينَ ۗ لِلَّهِ الْأَمْرُ مِنْ
قَبْلُ وَمِنْ بَعْدُ ۚ وَيَوْمَئِذٍ يَفْرَحُ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ. بِنَصْرِ
اللَّهِ ۚ يَنْصُرُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۖ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ. وَعْدَ
اللَّهِ ۖ لَا يُخْلِفُ اللَّهُ وَعْدَهُ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ
لَا يَعْلَمُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Alif Lam Mim. The Romans are vanquished. In a near land, and they,
after being vanquished, shall overcome, Within a few years. Allah’s is
the command before and after; and on that day the believers shall
rejoice, With the help of Allah; He helps whom He pleases; and He is the
Mighty, the Merciful; (This is) Allah’s promise! Allah will not fail His
promise, but most people do not know.”***[^120]

These verses were revealed because when the Holy Prophet (S) was in
Mecca there used to be conflicts between idolaters and Muslims and
meanwhile it was learnt that Khusro the King of Iran sent an army which
attacked the Romans who were Christians and they defeated them. The
Christians fled and many of their territories were conquered by the
enemies. The idolaters were pleased at this and they began to ridicule
the Muslims that you and Christians are People of Book and we and Fire
worshippers are not People of Book.

Thus like the Fire worshippers defeated the Christians, we will also
defeat you. At that moment the Almighty Allah revealed the above verses
and predicted that after some years, the Romans will defeat the
Iranians. At that time the Muslims will also be happy that the Almighty
Allah has helped them against the idolaters. Thus on the day of Battle
of Badr when Muslims defeated the idolaters of Mecca it was learnt that
Romans had defeated the Iranians and won back their territories.

It is narrated in good traditions from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) in the
interpretations of these verses that except for the Almighty Allah and
those who are firmly rooted in knowledge, no one knows about the
interpretation of these verses. Doubtlessly, when the Holy Prophet (S)
migrated to Medina and Islam became public, the Prophet sent a letter to
the King of Rum inviting him to Islam.

A similar letter was dispatched to the King of Iran. King of Rum
accorded respect to the letter and messenger of the Prophet but the King
of Iran tore up the letter and insulted the messenger. During that
period, there was conflict between the two kings and Muslims were in
support of the King of Rum as more good was expected from him and they
were fearful of the King of Iran. When the King of Iran defeated Romans,
Muslims were aggrieved; so the Almighty Allah revealed the following
verses and promised that the army of Islam will defeat the kings of
Iran.

After the passing away of the Prophet, Muslims made war against the
kings of Iran, defeated them and annexed their territories. Thus it is a
miracle of Qur’an that it informed about something which none but Allah
could have known. At that time the Holy Prophet (S) has predicted that
the kings of Iran will gain only nominal victories and after that they
will be finished.

And the people of Rum will rule for years till the last period of time.
According to the prediction of the Messenger of Allah (S) the kings of
Iran were destroyed in spite of their power and Romans, who are in fact
the Europeans, survive and they will survive till the time of Imam Mahdi
(a.s.) who will drive them away. In some other verses, the Almighty
Allah has mentioned about the victories of Persia and Rum and other
victories are also mentioned, all of which cannot be mentioned in this
book but are mentioned in *Biharul Anwar*. The Almighty Allah said in
another place:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيُهْزَمُ الْجَمْعُ وَيُوَلُّونَ الدُّبُرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Soon shall the hosts be routed, and they shall turn (their)
backs.”***[^121]

It came true and Battle of Badr occurred in a short time, in which the
idolaters fled from the battlefield. Then He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ صَدَقَ اللَّهُ رَسُولَهُ الرُّؤْيَا بِالْحَقِّ ۖ لَتَدْخُلُنَّ
الْمَسْجِدَ الْحَرَامَ إِنْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ آمِنِينَ مُحَلِّقِينَ
رُءُوسَكُمْ وَمُقَصِّرِينَ لَا تَخَافُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly Allah had shown to His Apostle the vision with truth: you
shall most certainly enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah pleases, in
security, (some) having their heads shaved and (others) having their
hair cut, you shall not fear…”***[^122]

As will be mentioned after this, and:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَعْطَيْنَاكَ الْكَوْثَرَ. فَصَلِّ لِرَبِّكَ وَانْحَرْ. إِنَّ
شَانِئَكَ هُوَ الْأَبْتَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We have given you Kauthar. Therefore pray to your Lord and
make a sacrifice.*** ***Surely your enemy is the one who shall be
without posterity.”***[^123]

Which is the shortest chapter of Qur’an, in addition to excellent
eloquence it consists of many miracles. Thus it is narrated through many
channels that Aas bin Wail and his associates and Amr bin Aas etc. said
when Abdullah the Prophet’s son passed away that Muhammad is ‘Abtar’
that is issueless. The Almighty Allah revealed the above Surah and said
that He has bestowed Kauthar to the Messenger of Allah (S). Kauthar
means excess.

Thus he is having every perfection in excess and made his nation better
than all nations and gave him descendants in spite of the fact that
enemies killed many of them in every age; still they became so many that
they almost become equal to others. And the intercession of the Holy
Prophet (S) was made more effective than that of other prophets. And He
gave him Hauze Kauthar, which will be needed by all the creatures in
Qiyamat.

His status was raised higher than all and the status of his successors
was raised higher than all the successors of the prophets. In other
words, every perfection that can possibly be given to any human, was
given to the Messenger of Allah (S). Then He said: “Indeed your enemy
will be without posterity.”

Those who used to call him Abtar themselves become extinct in spite of
their huge numbers and in spite of having so many descendants; and Bani
Umayyah in spite of their glory and excess very always busy to destroy
Bani Hashim and also took part in their elimination in every age, but no
sign remains of them whereas the purified progeny of the Holy Prophet
(S) has illuminated the world.

Thus this chapter of Qur’an is sufficient to prove the miracle of the
Prophet for one who is in search for certainty. The author says: Of the
innumerable excellences I have been able to mention only a thousandth
part of the miracles of Qur’an but if you pay attention to them you will
find that I have opened eight gates for Paradise for each of the
excellence through the mention of eight miracles of Qur’an. You can
approach from any gate you like, you indeed stand to benefit. And in the
book of *Ainul Hayat*, I have mentioned many points of divine
recognition.

The peculiarity of the miracle of the Qur’an is that the miracles of the
previous prophets were restricted to their lifetimes but the miracle of
Qur’an is not confined to the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S) and it
will last forever. Another superiority is that the miracles of other
prophets did not have any benefit except the expression of truth. And if
at all they had some benefit it was not a general benefit. But the
miracle of Qur’an is open for all till Judgment Day to gain everlasting
life and thousands of spiritually blind and deaf people are blessed with
sight and hearing and every afflicted group is cured by it.

It is mentioned in reliable traditions from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) was asked: “Why is it so that as much one reads
the Qur’an as much fresh it seems to be and it does not seem to be a
repetition.” He replied: “It is so because the Almighty Allah did not
send it for a particular time or for a particular group.

On the contrary it is revealed for all the people till Judgment Day.
Therefore it is made such that it should remain fresh forever.” And in
another tradition he said that Qur’an is the firm rope of God and for
those who remain attached to it, it is a firm handle and a straight path
which conveys its wayfarers to Paradise and delivers them from the
chastisement of Hell.

It does not become old by the passage of time and it does not become
valueless by constant repetition. It is so because it was not sent for a
particular period. It is a proof for people of every age and falsehood
cannot approach it from behind and from the front and it is sent from
the Wise and the Praised Lord.

### Miracles similar to all prophets were shown by the Holy Prophet (S)

Someone asked: O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), the raising of the mountain
over the heads of Bani Israel who did not accept the commands of Allah
was a miracle of Musa (a.s.). Has Allah given such a miracle to the
Prophet (S)? Ali (a.s.) replied: I swear by the One Who sent him as a
true Prophet, that from Adam (a.s.) to Muhammad (S) no miracle was given
to any prophet, a like of which or better than which was not given to
the Holy Prophet (S).

Indeed a miracle like this was also given to Prophet Muhammad (S) and
its story is that when the Holy Prophet (S) declared his prophethood in
Mecca and disclosed Allah’s intentions, all Arabs became his enemy and
made plans to kill him; and I was the first to accept Islam and I took
oath of allegiance on Monday and prayed with him on Tuesday. For seven
years, I prayed with the Prophet alone, till a few people became
Muslims.

After that, Allah helped His religion. Thus a group of polytheists came
to His Eminence (S) and said: O Muhammad, you think that you are the
prophet of the Lord of the worlds and you are not even content with
that; you consider yourself chief of all prophets and the most excellent
of them. If you are a prophet, as you claim to be and relate miracles of
other prophets, you also show your miracle. As you say that Nuh (a.s.)
showed the miracle of deluge and all infidels drowned and he, along with
the believers boarded the boat and were saved.

And as you mention about Ibrahim (a.s.) that fire became cool for him
and he remained safe. About Musa (a.s.) you say that the mountain was
raised above the heads of his followers and at last they accepted faith
in disgrace. You also talk about Isa (a.s.) that he informed about what
they had eaten and what they stored at their homes.

These polytheists divided into four groups. The first group demanded the
miracle of Nuh (a.s.). The second, miracle of Musa (a.s.). The third
group sought the miracle of Ibrahim (a.s.) and the fourth was seeker of
the miracle of Isa (a.s.).  
 His Eminence (S) said to all of them: Apparently I have been sent to
warn you and brought a clear sign to you, which is the Qur’an. You,
other nations and all Arabs are helpless against it although it has come
in your language. Thus it is a clear argument on you and the generations
after you. And to ask for additional signs from Allah is not appropriate
for me. It is only necessary for the apostle to give the message through
his truthfulness to those who accept it.

It is not right for him that after establishing his argument, he
requests Allah what the people demand from him as they don’t know
whether the request is good for them or not. At that time, Jibraeel
(a.s.) appeared and said: O Muhammad (S) after Durood and salutation,
Allah says: Now I will show these signs for these people and they will
deny them, except those whom Allah protects; they will be safe. But I
shall increase your proof and clarify it more and show it. To those who
seek the miracle of Nuh (a.s.), tell them to go towards Mount Abu
Qubais.

And when they reach the foot of that mountain, they will soon witness
the miracle of Nuh (a.s.). And when they get caught in the whirlpool,
they should hold the hands of Ali (a.s.) and his two sons and ask them
to save their lives and these personalities shall be ahead of them. To
the group that wants to see the miracle of Ibrahim (a.s.) say: Go out of
Mecca wherever you like, you will see the fire of Ibrahim (a.s.) and
when you are caught in it, you will see a lady in space, hanging a
corner of her chador. You catch it and you shall be saved and the fire
will go away from you.

Tell the third group: Go to the Holy Kaaba, and you will soon see the
miracle of Musa (a.s.) and my uncle Hamza (r.a.) will save you from it.
Direct the fourth party, whose leader is Abu Jahl, to stay near you so
that they can get the information of all three miracles and the miracle
they want to see will be manifested here only. Then Abu Jahl, the
accursed told the three parties to go to the designated places: So that
you learn about the falsehood of Muhammad.

Thus the first group went towards Mount Abu Qubais. When they reached at
its foot, water started flowing from beneath the ground and it began to
rain without clouds from the sky. The rain was so heavy, that water
reached up to their mouths and they were caught in it, so they had to
take refuge at the mountain top. As they climbed, the water was also
rising high, till they reached the top and there was no way to escape.

They were certain to be drowned, because there was no other way.
Suddenly they saw Ali (a.s.) at the top with a boy at his right and a
boy at his left. Ali (a.s.) called out to them: Hold the hand of anyone
of us. They had no other way; helplessly some of them held the hand of
Ali (a.s.) and some held the hand of one or the other son.

Then holding their hands, Ali (a.s.) began to descend the mountain and
the water began to recede till they reached the bottom. Some water went
into the earth and some evaporated to the sky. Then Ali (a.s.) came
along with them to the Holy Prophet (S). The people were crying and
said: We give witness that you are the chief of all apostles and the
most superior of them. We have seen the sign of Nuh’s Deluge and Ali
(a.s.) and his two sons, who were with him, but who are now not seen,
saved us.

His Eminence (S) said: They were Hasan and Husain (a.s.), who will be
born in my brother’s house and they are the chiefs of the youths of
Paradise and their father is better than them. O people, remember the
world is like a deep ocean; many have drowned in it and to escape it,
the only way is the Ark of Aale Muhammad (a.s.); and they are Ali (a.s.)
and his two sons, who will be born very soon and others of my Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) who are the best of people. One who boards this boat, will be
safe, and one who leaves it, will drown.

After that His Eminence (S) said that in the hereafter, Paradise and
Hell are like examples of oceans and these people are like boats of my
Ummah; they will take their friends and followers across from Hell and
make them reach Paradise.

Then he asked Abu Jahl: Have you heard what the people said? He said: I
have heard and now I am waiting for the second and third parties. At
that time, the second party came crying. They were saying: We witness
that you are the chief of the apostles and the most excellent of all
people. We had gone into the desert, discussing your words when suddenly
we saw the sky split and sparks of fire fell down.

We saw the ground split and flames arose from it till the ground was
full of fire and we felt very hot and slowly our skin started burning
and we were sure that we would be reduced to ashes. We were amazed, that
in spite of its intensity, the fire did not reach our heads. At that
time, we saw the figure of a lady in space, a corner of whose chador was
hanging below. She brought the corner near our hands and somebody
announced from the sky: If you want to escape, hold on to a thread of
the chador.

We all caught hold of a thread each and that lady flew high in the air
taking us and we passed through the sparks and flames but they caused us
no harm. Neither the threads found us heavy and nor, in spite of being
so thin they slipped from our hands. Thus we crossed the fire with her
and came to our homes safely. And after that we came out of our houses,
gathered in one place and came to you.

Now we understand that there is no escape from your religion and you.
You are the best support for all and you are truthful and trustworthy in
words and wise in your acts. His Eminence (S) told Abu Jahl: “This is
the second group to which Allah showed His signs.” Abu Jahl said: “I am
waiting to meet the third group and listen to what they say.”

His Eminence (S) asked the second group that had accepted faith: “Do you
know who the woman is, through whom Allah helped you?” They replied:
“No, we don’t know.” His Eminence (a.s.) said: “She is my daughter,
Fatima (s.a.); she will born in future and will be the chief of all
ladies of the world. When Allah gathers people on Judgment Day, an
announcer will announce from Allah’s side: O people! Close your eyes so
that Fatima binte Muhammad (s.a.), Chief of the ladies of the world, may
pass over the Sirat bridge.

All will close their eyes and Fatima (s.a.) will pass over the bridge.
At that time everybody will close their eyes except for Muhammad, Ali,
Hasan, and Husain (a.s.), their descendants and their family members,
because they would be her Mahram (close relatives). When she enters
Paradise, her chador will be spread on the Sirat bridge, a corner of
which will be in the Field of Gathering.

Then an announcer from Allah will announce: O devotees of Fatima (s.a.),
catch hold of a strand of her chador. Hearing this, all the followers of
Fatima (s.a.), chief of the ladies of the world, will cling to the
threads of her chador and they number more than two thousand Fiyam
(**فيام**). They asked, O Allah’s Messenger, how many does Fiyam denote?
His Eminence (S) replied: Its represents one million.

After that, the third party came wailing and saying: We give witness
that you are the Messenger of Allah and chief of all creatures and Ali
(a.s.) is superior most among all the successors of prophets and your
progeny is superior to the progenies of all apostles, your companions
are superior to the companions of all the prophets, your followers are
superior to the followers of all other apostles.

We have seen such miracles and proofs from you that no excuse is left
for us. His Eminence (S) asked: “What did you see?” They replied: “We
were sitting under the shade of the Holy Kaaba discussing about you and
your claims that you brought resembling Musa (a.s.); and were laughing
at these things. At that time the Holy Kaaba rose up from its place
above our heads and we were shocked to see this. We could not even dare
to move.

At that moment, your uncle, Hamza (r.a.) arrived and took out a spear
and balanced the Kaaba on its tip even though it was so big. He kept it
raised above our heads and asked us to get out from under it and we
moved out fast. He then said: Move away, and we moved away from there.
Hamza then removed the spear and the Kaaba returned to its original
place. Seeing this miracle, we became Muslims and have come to you. His
Eminence (S) told Abu Jahl: The third party has also come to you and
reported what it saw.

Abu Jahl said: God knows whether they are right or wrong. Whether it
really happened or it is a product of their imagination. But I asked for
the miracle of Isa (a.s.). If I see it, it will be incumbent on me to
believe you, otherwise it is not necessary for me to verify them. His
Eminence (S) said: O Abu Jahl. If in spite of their majority and
intelligence it is not incumbent on you to verify them, how you verified
the excellence of your ancestors and wickedness of your past enemies?

And when China, Arabia and Shaam is mentioned, how do you verify it,
even though informers of those places will indeed be less than those who
have described this miracle to you? Besides, there are many who saw it
with their own eyes, who never agree on false matters, that they would
act on conjecture and no one passed by them who has falsified them. O
Abu Jahl, beware, all the parties who have seen those miracles, it is
evidence on them and what you heard from them, is evidence on you.

Then the Prophet said to the third party: This Hamza, uncle of Messenger
obtained a high status because of his true love and faith for Muhammad
and Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). See how he prevented Kaaba from toppling
on you and in the same way he will save you from fire in the hereafter.
People asked: O Allah’s Messenger, how will that be? His Eminence (S)
said: A large group, whose strength nobody knows except Allah, will be
trying to cross the Sirat Bridge but they will be prevented from this by
a wall of Fire.

Most of them will be sinners among them and they will be forbidden to
pass over the bridge to enter Paradise. They will cry out: O Hamza, do
you see our condition? And Hamza (r.a.) will ask me and Ali (a.s.): Do
you see how my friends are crying out for assistance? I will tell Ali,
the Wali of Allah: Help your uncle to assist his friends and free them
from Hell.

Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) will bring a spear by which Hamza (r.a.) used
to fight the enemies of Allah, and give it to his uncle saying: O uncle
of the Prophet and his brother, take this spear and relieve your friends
with it just as you helped them in the world from the enemies of Allah.
Thus, Hamza (r.a.) will put his spear on the walls of fire, which would
be hindering the people from crossing the bridge entering Paradise. He
will push the walls and they would recede to a distance of five hundred
years’ travel. Then he will ask his friends to cross the bridge and they
will pass over it safely without fear of Hellfire and enter Paradise,
successful and victorious.

After that His Eminence (S) told Abu Jahl: The third party has also seen
the signs of Allah and miracle of the Messenger (S), now your request is
left, tell me which sign you want to see? He said: You say that Isa Ibn
Maryam informed about things they had eaten and things they stored in
the house; you tell me what I ate today and what is stored in my house?
And since you claim that Allah has given you more excellence than Isa,
you also tell me what I did after lunch?

His Eminence (S) said: I will inform you what you ate and Allah will
disgrace you in your request. If you believe in Allah, you will not be
harmed and if you persist in your infidelity, your disgracefulness will
be more in the hereafter than the world and you will not escape from it.

Abu Jahl said: Reply to my question. His Eminence (S) said: Abu Jahl,
today you ordered for chicken Kebab and when you wanted to eat and
stretched your hand towards it, your brother Abu Jatri bin Hassham came
and asked permission to enter the house but because of your miserliness,
you feared that he would eat from it, so you hid it under your skirt and
did not open it till he went away. Abu Jahl said: O Muhammad, you have
lied.

There is not an iota of truth in it and I have not eaten chicken and
left some from it. Now tell me, according to your opinion, what did I do
after eating? His Eminence (S) said: You had 300 dinars of your own and
ten thousand entrusted to you by people. Some deposited a hundred, some
two hundred, three hundred, five hundred, seven hundred and some had
kept a thousand etc. with you, and their money was kept in separate
bags; but you decided to embezzle it and told everyone that you don’t
owe anything to them.

And today you ate the chicken’s breast and kept the rest of it aside.
And you happily buried all entrusted money thinking that it now belongs
to you. But what Allah has decided is something else. Abu Jahl said: O
Muhammad, what you said is not true and neither more nor less of this
has happened and I have not buried anything and the amount of ten
thousand dinars which was entrusted to me, has been stolen.

His Eminence (S) said: O Abu Jahl! I don’t say anything of my own.
Jibraeel Amin is present here and he conveys what Allah says. After
that, His Eminence (S) asked Jibraeel (a.s.) to bring that chicken from
which he had eaten and all of a sudden that chicken arrived there. His
Eminence (S) said: O Abu Jahl! Do you know this chicken? He said: No,
and I have not eaten from it; you don’t know anything and such chickens
are many in the world that some part is eaten from it.

His Eminence (S) said: O chicken, Abu Jahl gives a lie to Jibraeel
(a.s.) and Allah also. Now you give witness about my truth and Abu
Jahl’s lie. The chicken spoke up by Allah’s command and said: O Muhammad
(S), I give witness, that you are the Messenger of the Lord of the
worlds and the chief of the whole world and Abu Jahl is the enemy of
Allah, the Exalted; and he denies all this knowingly. He has eaten a
side of mine and left the remaining part.

You have informed him about it and summoned me here to falsify him;
curse of Allah and of all those who curse, be upon him. Besides being an
infidel, he is also a miser. When his brother asked permission to enter,
he feared that his brother may not eat a morsel and he hid me under his
skirt. O Prophet! You are the most truthful of all and Abu Jahl is
accursed and a confirmed liar. Then His Eminence (S) said to Abu Jahl:
Is this miracle not sufficient for you?

Now accept faith so that you be safe from Allah’s chastisement. Abu Jahl
said: In my opinion all this is superstition and imagination. His
Eminence (S) said: Between seeing and hearing this chicken and hearing
all Quraish and Arabs, do you find any difference? He said: Nothing. His
Eminence (S) said: Whatever you see and feel, is it all mere
imagination? He said: It is not. His Eminence (S) said: Then this is
also not imaginary, otherwise how can it be true that you see anything
in the world and believe it?

After that, His Eminence (S) touched the eaten part of the chicken and
more flesh appeared than it had before. His Eminence (S) said: O Abu
Jahl, have you seen this miracle? He said: O Muhammad, I have no
confidence and trust on you. After that His Eminence (S) asked Jibraeel
(a.s.) to bring what this enemy of Allah has buried. That very moment,
all the bags of 10300 dinars came before His Eminence (S). His Eminence
(S) picked up one and said: Call such and such person. He came and he
was the owner of that money.

The Prophet said: This is your bag that Abu Jahl had embezzled; and he
returned it to him. Then he called, one by one, all the owners of the
money and returned all ten thousand dinars; Abu Jahl was badly
humiliated. Finally three hundred dinars remained with the Prophet. His
Eminence (S) asked Abu Jahl to bring faith: so that you would get these
300 dinars and Allah would bless you and you would be richer than all
Quraishites.

He said: I don’t believe all this but I am taking the dinars as they
belong to me. And he tried to reach out to them but His Eminence (S)
asked the chicken to prevent Abu Jahl and remove him away from the
dinars. As soon as the chicken heard the Prophet’s order it jumped up,
caught Abu Jahl in its beak and carried him up and finally left him on
the roof of his house.

Then His Eminence (S) distributed the dinars among the poor and told the
people: O my companions, Allah manifested His miracle for Abu Jahl but
he remained an infidel and continued to disbelieve. And this bird would
be one of the birds of Paradise and it would fly about there. There are
many birds like big camels with colored stripes that fly between the
earth and the sky.

Whenever a believer wants to eat any of them, it drops by itself; its
fur and feathers separate and it becomes clean, then it is automatically
baked and the believer eats its flesh from one side. When the believer
is satisfied and praises Allah, the bird becomes alive again, returns to
its original condition and starts flying. It also becomes proud of
itself and says: Who can be like me, that a friend of Allah has eaten my
flesh by Allah’s command!

It is narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam Musa
Kazim (a.s.) that once companions of the Prophet had gathered and Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) was sitting among them. A Jew arrived there and said: “O
Ummah of Muhammad there is no prophetic grade that you don’t prove in
favor of your Prophet.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Yes it is so.” If
the Almighty Allah spoke to Prophet Musa (a.s.) at Mt. Tur, He spoke
with our Prophet at the seventh sky. If Isa (a.s.) used to cure the
blind and revived the dead, Muhammad (S) was asked by the Quraish to
revive the dead. So he called me to accompany them to the graveyard.

I prayed and the deceased came out of the graves by the power of Allah,
and dust was falling away from their heads. In the Battle of Uhud, Abu
Qatada was hit by a spear on his eye which caused his eyeball to come
out of the socket. He brought it to the Messenger of Allah (S) and said:
“O Prophet of Allah, my wife would begin to dislike me,”

The Prophet placed his eyeball into the socket and it became better and
brighter than the other eye. In that same battle, Abdullah bin Atik’s
hand broke off and he brought that hand to the Holy Prophet (S) that
same night and the Prophet joined it again in such a way that no joint
was visible.

Then Imam (a.s.) said: The former Apostles were not given any miracle
from Allah a like of which or one better than it is not given to
Muhammad and Ali (a.s.). A man said: O son of Allah’s Messenger, tell us
which miracle was conferred to Muhammad and Ali (a.s.) resembling that
of Isa (a.s.)? Isa (a.s.) made the dead alive and cured the born blind
and lepers; he also informed about food eaten and stocked in homes.

His Eminence (a.s.) said: One day the Holy Prophet (S) was walking
through Mecca accompanied by his cousin, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). Abu
Lahab, the Prophet’s uncle was throwing stones from the back and
shouting: O people of Quraish, he is a sorcerer and a liar. Drive him
away, shun him and avoid his magic. In this way, he instigated the
Quraishites to harass them and those evil ones started pelting stones at
them. The stones they threw at His Eminence (S) also hit Ali (a.s.). One
of the mischief-makers shouted: O Ali (a.s.)! Are you a follower of
Muhammad (S)?

You are not so brave to fight. Besides in your youth no one is like you,
so why not join the fight? Why don’t you help Muhammad (S)? Why don’t
you save him? Ali (a.s.) said to those accursed people: O unfortunate
Quraish! I am such an obedient one of His Eminence (S) that I never
disobey him. If he commands, I can show you miracles.

Thus they all continued to follow them till His Eminence (S) and Ali
(a.s.) came out of Mecca. By the power of Allah, the rocks of the
mountain started rolling down automatically to His Eminence (S). Seeing
this, they said to each other: Now these rocks will fall on Muhammad and
Ali and kill them and we shall be rid of them. At last the people moved
aside, lest the rocks may fall on them.

Then they saw that the rocks came to Muhammad and Ali (a.s) and each of
the stones called out: Peace be on you O Muhammad Ibn Abdullah Ibn Abdul
Muttalib Ibn Hashim Ibn Abde Manaf – Peace be on you, O Ali Ibn Abi
Talib Ibn Abdul Muttalib Ibn Hashim Ibn Abde Manaf. Peace be on you, O
Messenger of the Lord of the worlds and the best of all the creation.
Peace be on you, O chief of the successors and vicegerent of the
Messenger of the Lord of the worlds.

The Quraishi became very sad at this and finally the ten most wicked
among them said: These rocks are not speaking; Muhammad (S) has hidden
some people below the ground near the rocks and they are calling out to
deceive us. When the accursed ones uttered such nonsense, ten of those
rocks rolled towards them and surrounding them arose and fell on their
heads breaking them up again and again till each of their brains flowed
out through their nostrils, their heads became spongy and they all died.

Learning of their fate, their family members and clansmen came weeping
and wailing and said: More than the grief of their death, we are worried
of the fact that Muhammad is pleased that they are killed by the stones
which are proof of his miracle. Almighty Allah gave speech to their
coffins and they called out: Muhammad is true and not false; and you are
liars and not truthful. Then the coffins shook and expelled their dead
bodies and shouted: We are not made to carry enemies of Allah to the
chastisement of Allah.

Seeing this, Abu Jahl said: Muhammad has enchanted the coffins like he
enchanted the rocks to make them speak. If their being killed by the
rocks verifies his words and is proof of his prophethood, ask him to
pray to Allah, Who has created them, to make them alive again. Hearing
this request, His Eminence (S) asked Ali (a.s.): O Abal Hasan! Did you
hear what these ignorant people said? These are the ten persons who were
killed at that time. Now tell me, how many wounds are caused in your
body due the stones they threw on us? Ali (a.s.) said: I suffered four
wounds yesterday.

The Prophet said: You’ve got four and I got six. Now we must pray to
Allah to make alive as many dead among these ten. Thus His Eminence (S)
prayed for six and Ali (a.s.) prayed for four. They all became alive and
said: O Muslims! Muhammad and Ali (a.s.) have great esteem in the
kingdom, where we were. We saw a facsimile of Muhammad (S) on a throne
near the prototype of Holy Kaaba in heaven and one near Allah’s empyrean
and many facsimiles of Ali (a.s.) are near the prototype of Holy Kaaba
and near Allah’s throne and a group of angels are near the curtain of
Allah’s throne.

They gather around the two images and pay respects and recite Durood on
them. They follow their commands and to have their wishes fulfilled,
they invoke Allah through their names. Finally seven of them accepted
faith and others were overpowered by wickedness.

The Almighty Allah helped Isa (a.s.) through the Holy Spirit and its
like with regard to His Eminence (S) was that one day Jibraeel (a.s.)
came to His Eminence (S). At that time the Prophet (S) had covered
himself with a cotton sheet and inside it also were Ali, Fatima, Hasan
and Husain (a.s.). He prayed: O Allah, these are my family members.

I hate those who hate them and I am at peace with those who make peace
with them. I am a friend of those who are friends to them and an enemy
of those who are inimical to them. You also fight those who fight them,
and make peace with those who are at peace with them. Befriend those who
befriend them and be inimical to their enemies.

Allah revealed: O Muhammad, I have accepted your prayer. In the
meantime, Lady Umm Salma lifted the corner of the sheet and intended to
enter it. His Eminence (S) freed the corner of the sheet from her hand
and said: “This place is not for you. But indeed you are on goodness and
your hereafter is also good.” At that moment, Jibraeel (a.s.) came
covered with a blanket and said: “O Messenger of Allah (S) make me join
your Ahlul Bayt.”

His Eminence (S) said: “You are from us.” Jibraeel (a.s.) asked: “Can I
lift a corner of the sheet and come inside?” The Prophet (S) said:
“Yes.” Thus Jibraeel (a.s.) entered the sheet and after sometime came
out and flew to the heavenly kingdom. His face had become more
illuminated and elegant. The other angels asked: “How come the elegance
of your face has increased and it is completely changed?”

Jibraeel (a.s.) said: “Why it should not be so? Now I have been admitted
in the progeny of Muhammad and his Ahlul Bayt.” The angels of the
heavens, empyrean and the veils said: “What you say is right; and you
deserve this honor and status.” And when Ali (a.s.) went to battles,
Jibraeel (a.s.) was on his right, Mikaeel (a.s.) to the left and
Israfeel (a.s.) at the back and Israel (a.s.) moved in the front.

The miracle of Isa (a.s.) of curing the born blind and leper was
emulated in the case of His Eminence (S) and it is reported that the
Messenger of Allah (S) was in Mecca, when some polytheists came and
said: O Muhammad, our god is Hubal, he cures the sick, delivers the dead
and heals our wounds. His Eminence (S) said: You lie. Hubal is not doing
anything. On the contrary, Allah treats whatever He likes.

The polytheists did not like to hear this. They said: O Muhammad (S) we
are afraid that Hubal would involve you in paralysis, leprosy and many
other diseases for making a claim against him. His Eminence (S) said: He
is helpless and unable to do anything. But yes, Almighty Allah is
Omnipotent. He does whatever He likes.

The polytheists said: O Muhammad! Request your god whom you worship, and
if there is no god except Him, to involve us in the above diseases. Then
we will go to Hubal and request him to relieve us from this disease. So
that you may know that Hubal is a partner of your god whom you point to.
At that time Jibraeel Amin (a.s.) appeared and said: O Allah’s Messenger
(S) imprecate for some of them and Ali may do for some others.

His Eminence (S) imprecated for twenty and Ali for ten person. They
hardly reached their homes when they were struck with leprosy, paralysis
and blindness. Their hands and feet separated from their bodies and
except for their tongues and ears, no part of their bodies remained free
of disease. When this happened, they were taken to Hubal and he was
requested to give them health.

They said: These people fell into this because of the imprecation of
Muhammad and Ali, so please cure them. By the power of Allah, Hubal
spoke up: O enemies of Allah! I am unable to do anything. I swear by One
Who appointed Muhammad to all creation and made him excel all prophets
and apostles. If he imprecates for me also, each and every part of my
body will break into small pieces and fly away in air and my sign will
not be seen.

If Allah does this for me, my greatest part will be smaller than
one-hundredth of a rye seed. When the polytheists heard this from Hubal,
they came to the Prophet (S) helplessly, weeping and wailing and saying:
All our hopes are dashed and no one can help us except you. Help us and
pray to Allah to cure our men. They will never harm you in the future.
His Eminence (S) said: They will become healthy just as they became ill.

I am responsible for twenty of them and ten are Ali’s responsibility.
They brought twenty sick persons to the Prophet and ten to Ali (a.s.).
His Eminence (S) told those twenty men to close their eyes and pray as
follows: O Allah, for the sake of the status of this person, for whom
You involved us in diseases, now for the sake of Muhammad and Ali (a.s.)
and their purified progeny, cure us of these diseases and give us
health.

In the same way, Ali (a.s.) asked the ten persons and they did as told,
and the very moment they became healthy and stood up as if freed from a
rope and no sign of disease as left and they became healthier than what
they were before falling in that trouble. All the thirty men and a few
friends of theirs accepted Islam while others were overpowered by
wickedness.  
 Another miracle of Isa (a.s.) was that he informed the people about
what they had eaten and what they had stored in their houses. In the
same way when the sick were cured and His Eminence (S) told them: Bring
faith in me. They said: We have brought faith in you. Then His Eminence
(S) said: Do you want me to increase your insight?

They replied: Yes. He said: I will inform you what they ate and what
medicine they took. So and so ate this and so and so took such medicine
and such quantity is left with him. In this way, he mentioned for each
and everyone. Then he said: O angels of Allah, bring to me their
remaining food and medicines which are kept in their dishes and trays.

At once the angels brought these things from the skies. After that His
Eminence (S) addressed the dishes and asked: How much has been eaten
from you? The dish answered that this much is eaten from me and
remaining is before you. One dish said: O Allah’s Messenger (S), my
owner has eaten this much from me and remaining is before you. A morsel
said: O Allah’s Messenger (S) my owner has eaten this much only and
remaining is here.

Then His Eminence (S) said: Who am I? The food and the medicines
replied: You are the apostle of Allah, may Allah bless you and your
purified progeny. Then His Eminence (S) pointed to Ali (a.s.) and asked:
Who is he? The food and medicines replied: He is your brother, leader of
the first and the last, your vizier and most excellent of the viziers,
your vicegerent and successor and the chief of all caliphs.

And its story is as follows: One day a group of Jews came to His
Eminence (S), asked him many questions and argued with him. His Eminence
(S) answered them from their books. Finally they said: O Muhammad, if
you are a prophet, show us a miracle like that of the staff of Musa. The
Prophet said: The book I have brought to you is better than the staff of
Musa (a.s.) because it will remain even after me, till the hereafter,
and confront the enemies and none will be able to bring even a verse
like it.

Whereas the staff of Musa (a.s.) is no more and no one can test it
anymore. While the Qur’an will remain forever and be tested all the
time. Still, let me show you a miracle greater and stranger than that of
the staff of Musa (a.s.). The Jews said: Show us. His Eminence (S) said:
Musa (a.s.) used to hold the staff in his hand and infidels alleged that
Musa is doing something in his staff that it performs such tricks.

Now Allah will turn sticks into serpents even though I have not touched
them and I am not present there. When you go back home and gather in a
room at night, Allah will turn each of the roof beams into a serpent.
And there are more than a hundred beams in that room. Seeing this, four
of you will die and others will be unconscious till morning next.

Then many other Jews will come to you and you will tell them all about
the incident, but they will not believe you. After that, the beams will
again turn into serpents as the night before. Seeing this, many will
die, many go mad and many will faint. Imam (a.s.) says: By the One Who
sent Muhammad as a true prophet, the Jews began to laugh aloud without
any respect for the Holy Prophet (S) and without any fear.

They said to each other: See what claim he has made, exceeding all
limits! His Eminence (a.s.) said: You may laugh now, but you will have
to cry very soon and become perplexed. Listen, whoever falls in this
miserable condition and is afraid of death or madness, he should pray as
follows: O Allah, for the sake of Muhammad Mustafa (S) and Ali Murtaza
(a.s.) and their successors, that whosoever leaves their affairs to them
is chosen and liked by You, give me the strength to see this incident.

And if one has a friend from among the dead and one wants him to come to
life again, he must pray to Allah in the same way. Allah will make him
alive and give him strength. They went and gathered there and started
laughing on the Prophet’s words that beams will turn into serpents etc.
Suddenly they heard the roof make a move and all of a sudden the beams
turned into serpents that hung their heads on the wall and made a move
to swallow them.

First they swallowed the pots, vessels, stones, chairs, the door posts
of wood and doors. They swallowed all this and what His Eminence (S) had
said came true. Four people died, some became mad and many feared for
their lives and prayed to Allah as the Prophet had advised and their
hearts became strong. Then some of them prayed for the four dead people
and they came back to life. When they saw this, they said: Our prayer is
accepted and Muhammad is a true Prophet, but we find it difficult to
testify and obey.

That is why, it is better to pray as above so that our hearts become
soft to testify and obey. At last they prayed. Allah made their faith
strong, purified their hearts and removed wickedness from their hearts.
They believed in Allah and His Messenger (S). In the morning, when Jews
arrived, the beams again turned into serpents like the previous night.
Seeing this, they became perplexed and they were overpowered by
wickedness.

The Prophet (s.a.) was bestowed with a miracle resembling the
illuminated hand. It was a thousand times better and superior to it
because whenever His Eminence (S) wanted to meet Hasan and Husain (a.s.)
at night and they were at home, His Eminence (S) used to call out: O Aba
Muhammad and O Aba Abdullah, come to me.

In spite of the distance, they could hear the voice of the Prophet and
at once they came out to join His Eminence (S). At that time the Prophet
used to point out with his forefinger from the door and a light more
powerful than that of the moon and the sun used to spread in the
atmosphere and both chiefs of the youths of Paradise reached their
grandfather. After that the finger returned to its original condition.

When they finished talking, they were given permission to go home. Again
the Prophet took out his index finger out of the door and a light more
powerful than the sun and moon used to spread and both the infallibles
returned home in that light, after which the finger returned to its
original condition.

Also, the storm that Allah sent on the atheists. In the same way, Allah
sent a storm on polytheists as a miracle for the Holy Prophet (S). The
story is that Thabit bin Aflakh, a follower of the Holy Prophet (S) had
killed a polytheist in a battle and his wife vowed that she would drink
liquor in the skull of her husband’s killer. Thabit was killed in the
Battle of Uhud, in which the Muslims had to suffer huge losses.

When the polytheists went away, the Holy Prophet (S), along with his
companion, came to bury the dead. The woman came to Abu Sufyan and
requested him to send some men with her slave so that they may go and
bring the severed head of Thabit so that she may drink wine in the skull
and fulfill her vow. When her slave had conveyed the news of Thabit’s
killing she had freed him and also given him a maidservant as reward.

Thus when she requested Abu Sufyan, he ordered two hundred of his brave
men to go and cut off the head of Thabit and bring it to this woman.
Went they set out for this purpose, a storm blew up and carried the dead
body to a depression and they had also went in that same direction.
Suddenly it started raining and the two hundred men drowned in the
floods and no sign remained of either the dead body or those men and
Allah did not allow that woman to fulfill her vow. Thus this miracle of
His Eminence (a.s.) is greater than the storm of Copts.

Like the swarm of locusts that was sent on Bani Israel, Allah sent a
greater and more terrible scourge on the enemies of Muhammad (S), so
much so, that this swarm of locusts ate up men whereas Musa’s swarm only
ate their crops. The story is that once His Eminence (S) had traveled to
Syria and was on his way back to Mecca.

Two hundred Jews followed him in order to eliminate him, so that their
wealth may not fall into his hands. But mostly, His Eminence (S)
remained with his caravan and they did not dare to kill him in this
position. But it was the practice of the Prophet that whenever he wanted
to relieve himself, he would go far away from the people, among the
trees or in a deserted place where he could conceal himself.

So, one day, according to his habit, the Prophet went far away from his
caravan and the enemies followed and surrounded that area; and drawing
out their swords were about to attack him when Allah brought out
innumerable locusts from below the feet of the Prophet in that desert.
They came out, surrounded the Jews and began to feed on them.

Seeing this, they tried to save themselves and forgot about His Eminence
(S). When the Prophet finished, he left them among the locusts and
returned to his caravan. People asked: Where are those who were
following you? None have returned. His Eminence (S) said: They had come
to kill me, but Allah sent locusts upon them and they are in great
trouble.

When the people went there, they saw that some of them were dead and
some were dying and the locusts were feeding upon them. They stood
gazing while the locust finished them all, without leaving any trace.
The miracle of lice was also manifested in the case of the Holy Prophet
(S). When the Messenger of Allah (S) declared his prophethood in Medina
and his position strengthened, one day His Eminence (S) was giving a
discourse about how Allah had taken the trial of His apostles to see
whether they remained patient in calamities.

He mentioned that between the Rukn and Maqam are buried seventy prophets
who died of hunger and lice. The Jews, hypocrites and the wicked Quraish
heard this and decided among themselves that they will eliminate the
Prophet and join him with those prophets so that he may not continue to
fabricate such things. So they decided that when they find him alone
outside Medina, they would surround him and finish him off. T

hey were two hundred men who had devised this plot. One day His Eminence
(S) went alone out of Medina and they followed him. Suddenly one of them
saw lice on his clothes and on account of this he began to scratch his
body and back. He felt ashamed of his companions and went away from
them. One by one, the same thing happened with each and everyone and
they all went away. After that, the lice increased beyond limits, their
throats choked and they could not even eat and drink, and they died
within a period of two months.

Some died within five days and some in ten, some in less and some in
more; but none lived for more than two months. On account of the scourge
of lice and hunger they were all destroyed. This lice were sent by Allah
as a divine sign on the enemies of His Holy Prophet (S).

Like the scourge of frogs in the case of Musa (a.s.) Allah sent on the
enemies of Muhammad (S), who wanted to kill him, the scourge of rats and
the rats destroyed them. The story of is that from the Arab infidels,
Jews and others, two hundred people gathered in Hajj season in Mecca and
decided to eliminate His Eminence (S) and set out to Medina Munawwara
with this aim.

On the way, they halted at a place where they found a pond having water
which was more clear and fragrant than the water they carried with them.
So they threw away the water they were carrying and filled their water
skins with that water and set out from there. After sometime, they
halted at a place where there were many rats. Allah imposed the rats on
them and they chewed up the water skins and all the water leaked out in
the rocky area and they knew nothing about it.

When they became thirsty, they found that there no water in their skins.
They returned to the pond from which they had filled water but the rats
had reached there first and made holes in the edges of the pond spilling
all the water in the rocky ground. They despaired of finding water and
perished in thirst. Only one survived and he was writing the name of
Muhammad (S), on his tongue and stomach and saying: O Allah, I repent
for my wrong deed.

For the sake of the status of Muhammad (S) remove this trouble from me.
Thus he remained alive and Allah quenched his thirst. A caravan was
passing by, which picked him up with the belongings of the dead along
with their camels. And he was more patient in thirst than his
she-camels. Then he came to Medina and accepted faith at the hands of
the Prophet. His Eminence (S) gave all the camels and goods of the dead
people to him.

The miracle of blood’s precedent is that, one day the Holy Prophet (S)
bled himself and gave the blood to Abu Saeed Khudri and asked him to
bury it, but he drank it. His Eminence (S) asked: What did you do with
the blood? He said: I drank it. His Eminence (S) said: I told you to
bury it. He said: I have kept it in a safe vessel. His Eminence (S)
said: Never do this again. After sometime, His Eminence (S) said: O Abu
Saeed! Allah has made your blood and flesh unlawful on Hellfire because
my blood and flesh has mixed up in it.

Hearing this, forty hypocrites laughed on His Eminence (S) and said: He
thinks that on account of mixing his blood in the blood of Khudri he
would be free from Hellfire. Though he is a liar and we consider his
blood impure. The Holy Prophet (S) came to know this by divine
revelation and he said: Allah will subject them to the punishment of
blood and destroy them in it even though the Copts were not killed by
the punishment of blood.

After sometime, their nose and molars started bleeding. Their blood was
mixing in their food and water and they were eating like that. They
suffered this for forty days and then perished. The miracle of famine
afflicted the opponents of the Prophet like it had troubled the
Egyptians during the period of Prophet Yusuf (a.s.).

The Holy Prophet (S) cursed the tribe of Bani Mudhir saying: O Allah
make Your chastisement severe on them like in the time of Yusuf (a.s.).
So Allah involved them in famine. Grain and cereals coming from other
cities were purchased by them, before they could reach home, worms
appeared in them and turned it into a foul smelling material and their
money was wasted. Because of this, severe famine and hunger overtook
them.

They started by eating dead dogs and then bones of the dead and even
dead bodies removed from graves, which they burnt and consumed. So much
so, that there were cases of women who fed upon their children. At last
they came to His Eminence (S) and said: You may be inimical to our men
but what is the mistake of women, children and animals?

His Eminence (S) said: This punishment is for you, not for your children
and animals. It is a benefit for them; and whenever Allah wants, He will
recompense them in the world or hereafter. Finally the Prophet forgave
them and prayed: O Allah, remove this calamity from them. Thus the
famine was over and they became prosperous once again. Allah has
mentioned the blessings upon them and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَعْبُدُوا رَبَّ هٰذَا الْبَيْتِ. الَّذِي أَطْعَمَهُمْ مِنْ جُوعٍ
وَآمَنَهُمْ مِنْ خَوْفٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So let them serve the Lord of this House. Who feeds them against
hunger and gives them security against fear.***[^124]

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has said that the like of the miracle of ‘Tamas’,
in which belongings of the people of Firon turned to stones, was also
conferred by Allah on Muhammad and Ali (a.s.). The story is that, one
day an old man came with his son to His Eminence (S) and said: O Allah’s
Messenger, I brought up my son and loved him very much and supported him
with money etc.

Now he has become rich, while I have exhausted my money and strength for
him; and because of old age, I have become very weak as you can see. But
he doesn’t pay any attention to me and refuses to give me food to at
least keep me alive. His Eminence (S) asked that youth what reply he
had. He said: Allah’s Messenger, I don’t have more than what is needed
for my wife and children.

His Eminence (S) asked his father: What do you say, O Shaykh? The old
man said: Allah’s Messenger, he is in possession of large quantities of
wheat, barley, dates and figs and (also) dirham and dinar etc. He is
very rich. His Eminence (S) asked that boy to explain. He said: Sir, I
have nothing at all. His Eminence (S) said: Young man, fear Allah and
behave nicely with your father. Allah will bless you.

He said: I don’t have anything. His Eminence (S) said: All right, this
month I will give on your behalf but after that you provide him. Then
the Prophet told Usamah to give a hundred dirhams to this old man for a
month’s expense for his dependants and himself. When the next month
started, the old man again came with his son and the son said: I don’t
have anything.

His Eminence (S) said: You have much wealth at present but by nightfall
you will be poorer than your father and nothing will be left. The young
man went away from there. Suddenly people who lived near his storehouse
came and said: Take away all your grains from there and keep it
somewhere else, because it smells badly. He went there and saw that his
wheat, barley, dates and figs have all become rotten, dirty and smelly.

They forced him to remove all that, so he employed laborers to carry
away everything out of the town. Then he came back to his house along
with the laborers to pay their wages from the cash at home, but all of
it had turned into stones. The laborers forced him to pay and he had to
sell his clothes and household things to raise money for them and at
last came out with empty hands.

He became very helpless, not even having a day’s rations. The shock also
made him sick. Then His Eminence (S) said: O those who are disobedient
to their parents, take a lesson from this and beware that as just as
properties and riches are destroyed in the world, in the same way the
ranks prepared for him in Paradise shall also be replaced by pits of
Hell.

After that the Imam (a.s.) said: Allah flays the Jews that even after
seeing these signs, they left Allah and adopted calf worship. Beware,
you also do not become like them. Companions asked: O Allah’s Messenger,
how can we become like them? His Eminence (S) said: By falling into sin
and by obeying a creature; and that you rely on him to the exclusion of
Allah. In that case, you will also be like them.

It is narrated from Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) through authentic chains of
narrators that a Jew came to Medina, who was well acquainted with the
Taurat, Zabur, Injeel and other prophetical books, and with the miracles
performed by them, came to Medina to dispute the mission of Muhammad
whose companions he found, and engaged in the Masjid.

Among the number was Amirul Momineen (a.s.), who rebutted the
allegations of the Jew and vindicated the pre-eminence of Muhammad. The
Jew commenced the controversy saying: O community of Muhammad, you claim
for your Prophet every excellence found in the prophetical ranks; will
you then answer my questions?

At that time the companions included Ibn Abbas and Abu Saeed Khudri. The
rest of the Muslims remained silent, Ali joined issue with the
disputant, saying that all the excellences possessed by all the prophets
were united in Muhammad, to whom additional ones were likewise imparted
of God. The Jew replied, I will propose certain questions, be prepared
to answer me.

Jew: God commanded the angels to prostrate before Adam; has such a
distinction been conferred on Muhammad? Ali: The adoration offered to
Adam was not worship, but simply recognition of his exalted rank, and
this distinction was far surpassed by the benedictions conferred on
Muhammad by God Himself, and by the angels in the kingdom on high.
Moreover it is obligatory on all believers to pronounce blessings on the
Prophet down to the Judgment Day.

Jew: God accepted the repentance of Adam.  
 Ali: And He has done more than this for Muhammad, for, notwithstanding
he was sinless, the Almighty Allah said to him in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That Allah may forgive your past faults and those to
follow…”***[^125]

When he shall appear at the judgment no sin or error will be attached to
him.  
 Jew: God conveyed Idris to a high place, and after his death gave him
of the fruit of Paradise.  
 Ali: And he said to Muhammad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَضَعْنَا عَنْكَ وِزْرَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And exalted for you your esteem?”***[^126]

This is sufficient to prove his superior rank; and if the Almighty Allah
gave Idris fruit in Paradise, He bestowed on Muhammad, a fatherless and
motherless orphan, celestial food in this world. One day Jibraeel
brought him a dish from Paradise, full of its dainities, which on being
taken by the Prophet uttered praises and repeated the creed, There is no
God but God. Myself, Fatima, Hasan and Husain, and no others, were
permitted to partake with him, and on touching the dish it uttered
praises anew.

When a companion of the Prophet tried to take the plate Jibraeel said
that only the Prophet and his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) can eat from it. So we
all ate from it. My palate still retains the flavor of that celestial
food.

Jew: Nuh was patient under the abuse he suffered from his people, and
although they charged him with lying, he still performed his prophetical
office.

Ali: Our Prophet was likewise patient under the injuries inflicted on
him by the Quraish, and although accused of falsehood, he was more
diligent in the exercise of his prophetical office. At last they worried
him with small stones, and Abu Lahab cast the entrails of a camel on
him. Upon this the Almighty Allah commanded Jabeel, the angel of the
mountains, to open them and execute whatever Muhammad might order to be
inflicted on his people. T

he angel waited on the Prophet, and tendered his services saying, If you
command it, I will rend up the mountains from their base and hurl them
on the heads of your enemies. He replied, “I am raised up in mercy; O
Lord, guide my people, for they are ignorant of my status.” When Nuh saw
that his people were drowned, he grieved for his son, and in his
affection for the lost child, said, “O Lord, my son belongs to my
family.”

The Almighty Allah consoled him by declaring, “He is not of your family,
but is verily an evil doer.” On the contrary, when Muhammad knew that
his people were the enemies of the truth, he drew the sword of vengeance
against them, nor felt for them the tenderness of kindred ties, nor
turned on them a look of kindness, because they were enemies of Allah.

Jew: Nuh pronounced a curse on his people, and in consequence water
beyond measure poured down from the skies and drowned them.

Ali: The prayer of Nuh was offered in anger; Muhammad prayed for mercy
on his people, and water beyond measure descended for their relief. This
miracle was manifested at Medina, after his flight to that city, when
everything was perishing from drought. Not a cloud was to be seen when
he raised his blessed hand towards heaven, and he had not moved from his
place when rain began to descend in such torrents that the people with
difficulty got to their houses.

Seven days incessantly poured the rain, till the people came to the
Prophet, complaining that their houses were ruined and the roads made
impassable. He smiled and said, “Do the children of Adam so quickly
grieve under favors?” He then prayed that the rain might cease at the
city, but continue on the surrounding country and pasture grounds, which
it did.

Jew: God sent a wind which avenged Hud of his enemies.

Ali: But for the Messenger of Allah (S) there was a better miracle: At
the siege of Khandaq, the Almighty Allah sent a wind filled with gravel
against the enemy, and moreover an army of eight thousand invisible
angels, which makes the miracle twice as great as that of Hud. The first
thing is that eight thousand angels accompanied the Prophet. Secondly
the wind of Hud was sent in wrath against the people of Aad, but the
wind of Muhammad was sent in mercy to protect the Muslims, did no harm
even to the infidels; all of which is thus expressed in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ
إِذْ جَاءَتْكُمْ جُنُودٌ فَأَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ رِيحًا وَجُنُودًا
لَمْ تَرَوْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! call to mind the favor of Allah to you when there
came down upon you hosts, so We sent against them a strong wind and
hosts, that you saw not…”***[^127]

Jew: For Salih (a.s.) the Almighty Allah caused a camel to come out of a
rock, as an argument to convince his people.  
 Ali: Yes, it was thus, but He gave a better miracle to the Prophet.
That camel neither spoke nor testified to Salih’s prophethood, but in
one of our battles when we were sitting with the Prophet a camel came to
him, and Allah caused it to speak, and it said, “O Messenger of Allah
(S), such a man made me labor till I am old, and now he plans to
slaughter me; in you I take refuge.” The Holy Prophet (S) sent to ask
the camel of its owner, who gave it to him, and he set the creature
free.

On another occasion we were present with the Prophet when a Bedouin
arrived pulling a camel and another man came behind him also claiming
the ownership of the camel. They had also brought witnesses with them
and they gave a false testimony but the animal testified on behalf of
its true owner and said by the command of Allah: O Prophet, this another
Bedouin is my master, such and such Jew had stolen me from him.

Jew: The Almighty Allah imparted divine knowledge to Ibrahim in his
childhood, so that he was able to adduce proofs from the wonders of
heaven and earth.

Ali: So it was when Ibrahim was fifteen years old; but when the
Messenger of Allah (S) was only seven years of age a party of Christian
merchants came to Mecca, and encamped between Safa and Marwah. Some of
them, seeing the Prophet, recognized him by the description they had
read in sacred books, and after questioning him as to his name. His
Eminence, replied: Muhammad (S). They asked who his father was. He
replied: “Abdullah.”

Then they asked what this is (pointing the earth) and he replied: “It is
the earth.” Then they asked what this is (pointing the sky) and he
replied: “It is the sky.” Then they asked who was their preserver. He
replied, “The Lord of the universe.” He then demanded of them if they
wished to make him doubt his own faith, adding such a doubt he had never
known.

“I have never doubted my faith.” He was acquainted with divine things,
although living among people who worshipped idols, gambled, and
associated creatures with the Creator, and amid all this wickedness he
alone declared, “There is no god but Allah.”

Jew: Ibrahim was concealed from Namrud three times and he could cause no
harm to him.

Ali: Yes, but Muhammad was concealed from a person who attempted to kill
him by five veils, and two veils more than that of Ibrahim as the Qur’an
itself testifies:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا مِنْ بَيْنِ أَيْدِيهِمْ سَدًّا وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ سَدًّا
فَأَغْشَيْنَاهُمْ فَهُمْ لَا يُبْصِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have made before them a barrier and a barrier behind them,
then We have covered them over so that they do not see.”***[^128]

And also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْآنَ جَعَلْنَا بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَ الَّذِينَ لَا
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ حِجَابًا مَسْتُورًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when you recite the Qur’an, We place between you and those who
do not believe in the hereafter a hidden barrier…”***[^129]

This is the fourth veil. Then He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا جَعَلْنَا فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ أَغْلَالًا فَهِيَ إِلَى
الْأَذْقَانِ فَهُمْ مُقْمَحُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We have placed chains on their necks, and these reach up to
their chins, so they have their heads raised aloft.”***[^130]

Jew: Ibrahim’s argument for the truth was perfect against infidel Namrud
who disputed with him about Allah.  
 Ali: A man, Ubayy bin Khalaf, one day came to the Prophet and denied
resurrection. The skeptic had a decayed bone in his hand, which he
crumbled to pieces, saying, “Who can make a rotten bone live?” Divine
revelation came down on the Prophet and he said: “He who formed
creatures at first and whose omniscience distinguishes each individual.”
At this rebuke the infidel went away ashamed.

Jew: Ibrahim, indignant for the honor of God, broke the idols of his
people.

Ali: The Messenger of Allah (S) broke and cast out of Kaaba three
hundred and sixty idols, and banished idolatry from Arabian peninsula,
subduing the infidels with the sword.

Jew: Ibrahim caused his son to lie down that he might sacrifice him for
the pleasure of the Almighty Allah.

Ali: But Allah spared him that anguish by substituting an animal for the
sacrifice. Trials of the Messenger of Allah (S) surpassed this, when, at
the Battle of Uhud, he saw his uncle Hamza, the lion of God and the
Prophet, slain and horribly mutilated, yet he acquiesced in the will of
God, uttered no lamentation, nor did even a sigh or tear escape him,
such was his perfect resignation.

Moreover he said, “Were it not that Hamza’s sister, Safiya would be
grieved at the neglect, and the act might hereafter be quoted to show
that carelessness of the dead as meritorious, verily I would leave Hamza
in this shocking condition to beasts and birds of prey so that they
might have eaten him up and on Judgment Day he would have been raised up
from their bellies.”

Jew: Ibrahim’s people cast him into a fire which God rendered cool and
refreshing to him.

Ali: The Messenger of Allah (S) camped at Khyber where a woman of that
place gave Muhammad poison, but God changed the fiery portion to
salubrity, till his appointed time had come, when at last the poison
acted and secured him the prize of martyrdom.[^131]

Jew: God gave Yaqub (a.s.) a good fortune in making him the father of
the tribes, and Maryam was also his child.

Ali: the Messenger of Allah (S) has a greater share of good as Fatima,
the best of all women, was his daughter, and Hasan and Husain, and the
imams descending from Husain are his children, which surpasses the
fortune of Yaqub.

Jew: But Yaqub was patient under the separation from his beloved son
till he nearly died.

Ali: And his grief at last was ended when his son was restored to him,
whereas the Prophet was voluntarily content at the death of his son,
Ibrahim, and said, “Though it is very sad and the heart laments, yet
will I say nothing that may be displeasing to the Lord.” He was always
satisfied with the divine allotments, and in everything obeyed the law
of God.

Jew: Yusuf tasted the bitterness of separation from his father and
preferred the horrors of a prison to the commission of a crime; and
though innocent, was cast into a dark pit.

Ali: The Messenger of Allah (S) in fleeing to Medina left the sacred
Kaaba and his dear native place which was safe, and endured the
bitterness of exile, voluntarily separating himself from his people and
children. To soothe his excessive grief at his separation from Mecca and
the Kaaba, Allah sent him a dream like that of Yusuf by revealing to
him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ صَدَقَ اللَّهُ رَسُولَهُ الرُّؤْيَا بِالْحَقِّ ۖ لَتَدْخُلُنَّ
الْمَسْجِدَ الْحَرَامَ إِنْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ آمِنِينَ مُحَلِّقِينَ
رُءُوسَكُمْ وَمُقَصِّرِينَ لَا تَخَافُونَ ۖ فَعَلِمَ مَا لَمْ
تَعْلَمُوا فَجَعَلَ مِنْ دُونِ ذَٰلِكَ فَتْحًا قَرِيبًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly Allah had shown to His Apostle the vision with truth: you
shall most certainly enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah pleases, in
security, (some) having their heads shaved and (others) having their
hair cut, you shall not fear, but He knows what you do not know, so He
brought about a near victory before that.”***[^132]

If Yusuf was cast into prison, the Prophet was three years shut up in
Shebe Abu Talib, while his relatives and friends reduced him to the
greatest straits, till at length Allah sent worms which destroyed the
contract his enemies had sealed and placed in the Kaaba, by which means
the league formed against him was annulled and they came to know the
facts about the Prophet.

After that another Jew came and said: God sent the Taurat to Musa, which
contains the divine statutes and commandments.

Ali: The Lord of the universe gave to the last Prophet the two Surahs of
the Qur’an entitled Surah Baqarah and Surah Maidah, as equivalent to
Injeel; the three Surahs of Ta Seen, and the Surah of Ta-ha, and lengthy
Surah that is Surah Muhammad to the end of the Qur’an, and seven Surahs
entitled Ha Mim as equal to the Taurat; the other half of the short
Surahs as equivalent to the Zabur; the Surahs entitled Bani Israel, and
the Declaration of Immunity, as equal to the books of Ibrahim and Musa;
and as more than an equivalent to the books of all the other prophets
were given to the Prophet the seven long Surahs of the Qur’an, and the
Surah of praise, which contains seven verses; all this, besides
innumerable communication of divine wisdom.  
 Jew: God spoke with Musa on Mt. Tur.

Ali: And the Almighty Allah addressed our Prophet at Sidratul Muntaha
(the farthest lote tree). The position of the Messenger of Allah (S) is
well known in all the skies and he is mentioned near the empyrean of
God.

Jew: God imparted such love to Musa (a.s.) that whoever beheld him loved
him involuntarily.

Ali: Allah bestowed on our Prophet this same distinction, that wherever
the creed is repeated, following the testimony to the divine unity, is
the declaration of Muhammad’s prophethood.

Jew: The Almighty Allah on account of Musa’s rank sent a divine
communication to his mother.

Ali: Allah likewise sent angelic communications to the mother of
Muhammad, testifying that he is the Messenger of Allah (S), and his name
is celebrated in all divine books. In a dream, she saw angels who said
to her, “Your unborn son is the chief of first and last; call him
Muhammad, a name derived from the great divine titles, for God is Mahmud
and he is Muhammad.”

Jew: God raised up Musa to oppose Firon, and gave him the power of
performing mighty miracles.

Ali: The Messenger of Allah (S) had many Firon to contend with, as Abu
Jahl, Atba, Shaibah, Abul Bakhtari, Nazar bin Harb, Umayyah bin Khalaf,
Mabnan Maiban and five others, that is Walid bin Mughairah Makhzumi, Aas
bin Wail Sahmi, Aswad bin Abde Ghauth Zuhri, Aswad bin Muttalib and
Harith bin Talatala who ridiculed the Prophet and the Almighty Allah
showed the miracles till it was evident that the Holy Prophet (S) was
true.

Jew: God avenged Musa of Firon.  
 Ali: And he took vengeance on the Firons of the Holy Prophet (S),
particularly on five men who ridiculed him, and who perished miserably
in one day. About them the Almighty Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا كَفَيْنَاكَ الْمُسْتَهْزِئِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We will suffice you against the scoffers…”***[^133]

Walid had gone to a village; there a person from Qaza-a had sharpened an
arrow and left its piece there, which pierced Walid’s foot and he began
to bleed. All efforts to stem the bleeding failed and he used to scream
in pain: Muhammad’s God has killed me. And he finally died.

Aas bin Wail had gone out of the city on some purpose and on the way his
foot slipped on a rock and he fell down the ravine and his body was
shattered. He was also lamenting: Muhammad’s God has killed me. And he
finally died.

Aswad Ibn Abde Ghauth had come out of his house to welcome his son,
Zam-a and stood under the shade of a tree. Jibraeel came and bashed his
head against the tree. He kept on screaming to his slave: “Catch the one
who is bashing my head.” But his slave said that he was doing it
himself. He kept on screaming: “Muhammad’s God has killed me.” And he
finally died.

The Messenger of Allah (S) cursed Aswad bin Muttalib that he should
become blind and make him suffer the tragedy of his son’s death. One day
he left his house and Jibraeel hit his eye with a green leaf and he
became blind. Then his son died and he also accompanied him to Hell.

In the same way, Aswad bin Harith was also punished. One day he ate
roasted fish and he felt so thirsty and he drank water in such a large
quantity that his stomach burst and he also went on repeating:
Muhammad’s God has killed me. And he finally died.

All these enemies die on the same day, because once they had come
together to the Messenger of Allah (S) and said: O Muhammad, we give you
respite till afternoon, if you do not give up your mission, we would put
you to death. The Messenger of Allah (S) became aggrieved and he came
home and closed the door. Jibraeel came down with the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore declare openly what you are bidden and turn aside from the
polytheists.”***[^134]

His Eminence asked, “What shall I do about those who have threatened me
with death? Jibraeel then recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا كَفَيْنَاكَ الْمُسْتَهْزِئِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We will suffice you against the scoffers…”***[^135]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: They had come to me. Jibraeel said: I
have dealt with all of them. So the Prophet came out and resumed his
duties. After that the Almighty Allah slew the rebellious Firons on the
day of Badr with the swords of angels and believers and the other
polytheists ran away.

Jew: Allah gave a staff to Musa which whenever he cast down, became a
serpent  
 .  
 Ali: He gave Muhammad a better miracle than this. A certain man had a
claim on Abu Jahl for a camel he had sold him, but could not recover his
money, the purchaser was so constantly devoted to wine that the seller
could not meet Abu Jahl. One who held the Prophet in derision met the
creditor and asked him who he was searching for.

He replied: Amr bin Hasham and I want to recover the price of my camel.
The man said: Shall I not tell you about someone who restores the rights
of the people? He replied: Yes, why not? He sent him to the Messenger of
Allah (S). This direction was given in order to bring reproach on the
Prophet, for Abu Jahl had repeatedly said he wished Muhammad would apply
to him for something, that he might disgrace him by a refusal.

The creditor as he was directed applied to Muhammad, desiring him to use
his influence with Abu Jahl and secure payment of the debt. The Prophet
immediately went with the man to the debtor’s house and said, Abu Jahl,
give this man his due. That was the first time the debtor had been
greeted by such a title, signifying Father of ignorance or boorishness,
as his true name was Amr bin Hasham; but the nickname afterwards became
his common appellation.

To the astonishment of all present, he immediately paid the debt, and
after Muhammad had retired, said to his companions, “Excuse what I have
done. I saw on Muhammad’s right, men with glittering weapons in their
hands, and on his left two monstrous serpents gnashing their teeth,
while fire sparkled from their eyes. If I had refused his demand,
doubtless I should have been instantly destroyed by those men and
serpents.” Now one of these serpents is equal to Musa’s, and the other,
with eight armed angels, is over and above what was conferred on your
Prophet.

Verily the Holy Prophet (S) greatly annoyed the infidel Quraish in
summoning them to embrace Islam. On one occasion he accused them of
being very foolish, abused their religion, reviled their idols, and
called their fathers wanderers from the right way. They were very
dejected under these rebukes, and Abu Jahl said, “By Allah! death is
better for us than a life of such reproach.

Is there no one who will devote himself to death by killing Muhammad?”
As the Quraish declined the deed, Abu Jahl declared he would do the
business himself, whether the sons of Abdul Muttalib took his life in
retaliation or forgave the act. The Quraish encouraged him by saying
that he would thus confer a favor on the people of Mecca, for which he
would ever be held in grateful remembrance.

Said Abu Jahl, “Muhammad performs a great deal of prostration at the
Kaaba; the next time I find him prostrate there I will dash out his
brains with a stone.” Soon after, the Prophet came, performed seven
circuits around the Kaaba, prayed and prostrated himself in adoration,
and continued long in that attitude.

Abu Jahl took up a heavy stone, and approached the Prophet’s head, but
was met by a mad camel that rushed at him with open mouth, which so
frightened him that he dropped the stone on his foot, which was thereby
severely wounded. With ghastly countenance and heavy perspiration on
him, he called to his companions, and begged them to excuse his plight,
for he had beheld such a sight as never met his eyes before.

Jew: God gave Musa a luminous hand.

Ali: Better than this he bestowed on His chosen one; wherever he was,
light beamed all around him.

Jew: A way in the sea was opened for Musa.

Ali: As we were marching to the Battle of Hunain, we came to a river
whose depth was fourteen fathoms. One of the companions exclaimed, “O
Messenger of Allah (S), what a position is ours, with a sea in front and
enemies in our rear, like the people of Musa when they thought
themselves prisoners.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا لَمُدْرَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely we are being overtaken.”***[^136]

The Prophet dismounted and said, “O Lord to every Prophet you has given
a miracle, then show me a sign of Your power.” Remounting his camel, he
advanced on the surface of the water, on which the whole army proceeded
after him, and not even the hooves of the horses became wet in the
passage. We advanced to the battle, and Allah gave us victory.

Jew: God gave Musa a rock from which twelve fountains flowed.

Ali: When the Prophet encamped at Hudaibiyah, and was there besieged by
the people of Mecca, his army was reduced to great distress for water,
and their animals were near perishing of thirst. He ordered a vessel to
be brought, in which he placed his blessed hand, when such a quantity of
water issued from between his fingers that we and our animals were all
satisfied, after which we filled our water-skins at the same miraculous
fountain.

There was a well at this place and it had dried up. The Holy Prophet (S)
took out an arrow from the quiver and gave it to Baraa bin Azib and
asked him to fix it in that well. When he did that, twelve springs
erupted from that arrow. Again, in the expedition of Miqat the Prophet
put his hand into a vessel, from which sufficient water immediately
flowed to satisfy eight thousand men, and enable them to perform
ablution before prayers, besides supplying their animals and
water-skins.

Jew: The Almighty Allah gave Musa manna and quails.

Ali: Allah made the wealth of infidels lawful plunder to Muhammad and
his sect, which favor was never granted to any before him, and this is
better than the manna and quails of Musa. Moreover, such is the divine
munificence of the Prophet and his sect; that a good intention secures a
reward of merit, which grace has been enjoyed by the votaries of no
other religion. If a Muslim resolves to perform a good action but fails
to accomplish it, one degree of reward is credited to him; but if he
performs his vow, ten degrees of reward are set down to his account.

Jew: God caused a cloud to shade Musa and his host.

Ali: This was done for Musa when he and his people were distressed in
the desert of Tiyah, but a cloud shaded our Prophet from his birth till
his death, whether he was at home or on a journey.

Jew: God softened iron for Dawood so that of it he easily made coats of
mail.

Ali: And for Muhammad, in the expedition of Khandaq, He softened a
stone, and the hard rocks of Baitul Maqdas were soft as dough under his
feet. We have often seen the same miracle repeated in our military
expeditions.

Jew: Dawood wept so much for his sin that the mountains felt and wailed
likewise.

Ali: The asylum of prophecy, through extreme awe of God, when engaged in
prayer, emitted from his bosom, where divine knowledge was casketed, a
sound like that of a boiling pot, so excessive was his weeping,
notwithstanding Allah had secured him from wrath. Still he would humble
himself before his Lord, and for ten years, in the standing posture of
prayers, he rested his whole weight on his toes, till his sacred feet
were swollen and his rosy complexion sallowed.

Moreover he prayed the whole night, till at length his excessive
devotion was reproved by the communication “We have not sent down the
Qur’an unto you, that you shouldst be unhappy.” Besides, he sometimes
wept so much as to swoon away. Those who saw him in this condition would
say, “Has not Allah pardoned your sins, past and future?” “Yes,” was his
reply, “but should I not render thanksgiving to Allah?”

If the mountains were excited on Dawood’s account, they were not less so
for our Prophet. One day I was with him on Mount Hira, which presently
began to move. “Be quiet,” said the Prophet, “there is no one on you but
a Prophet and the true martyr,” meaning myself: Hira obeyed. On another
occasion we passed a mountain that distilled drops like tears.

The Prophet asked the mountain why it wept. By divine power it replied,
“O Messenger of Allah (S), one day Masih (a.s.) passed and alarmed
people by mentioning fire whose fuel shall be men and rocks, and in
terror I have wept till now lest I should be of them.” “Weep not,” said
the Prophet, “for those rocks are brimstone.” At this declaration the
mountain was quiet and its tears ceased.

Jew: God gave Sulaiman an empire of which no one after him is worthy.

Ali: And better than this he gave the Prophet, for one day He sent an
angel to him who had never before visited the earth, and said: “O
Messenger of Allah (S), if you wish, live forever on earth in possession
of all its pleasures and power; here are the keys of its treasures; for
you the mountains shall be transformed to gold and silver, and attend
you wherever you go; and notwithstanding all this, when time shall end,
nothing shall be subtracted from your reward in the future world.”
Jibraeel, the Prophet’s angelic friend, who was present when this
magnificent offer was made, gestured to him to choose humility and
helplessness.

The Holy Prophet (S) replied to the angel, “I desire to be a Prophet and
humble slave, to find a supply for my wants one day and be destitute
another, and soon join my brethren the prophets who have gone before
me.” For this choice Allah gave him in addition to what his rank before
entitled him, the fountain of Kauthar in Paradise, and the office of
intercession on Judgment Day, which seventy times outweighs the
sovereignty of the world from the beginning to the end of all things.
Allah promised him Maqame Mahmud - a seat on the empyrean at the
judgment, and that it should be his province to issue commands on that
day.

Jew: God made the winds obedient to Sulaiman, so that they took his
throne on a month’s journey at dawn, and the same distance at evening.

Ali: The Almighty Allah transported the Prophet in less than a third
part of a night, from Mecca to the distant Masjid which is a month’s
journey, and thence to the kingdom of heaven, which is fifty thousand
year’s journey; and in nearness of approach to the Deity he was brought
within two bow’s length, and even nearer the divine presence.

Standing by the pillars of the empyrean, with the eyes of his heart, he
beheld the effulgence of the Lord of glory, while the Almighty Allah
graciously condescended to him and eased the hardships imposed on other
sects.

Jew: God made the devils obedient to Sulaiman.

Ali: The devils under Sulaiman were infidels but He made both devils and
Jinns so obedient to Muhammad that they believed in him. Nine principal
chiefs of the Jinns of Nasibian and Yemen, of the children of Amr bin
Aamir, whose names were Shasad, Masah, Al-Hamlakan, Marzban, Maziman,
Madha, Sahib, Hazib, and Amr, waited on the Prophet at Batan-ul-Nakhl,
and received his faith, as the Almighty Allah declares in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ صَرَفْنَا إِلَيْكَ نَفَرًا مِّنَ الْجِنِّ يَسْتَمِعُونَ
الْقُرْآنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when We turned towards you a party of the jinn who listened to
the Qur’an…”***[^137]

…and when they were present at the reading of the same, they said to one
another, Give ear: and when it ended, they returned back to their
people, preaching what they had heard.”

After that seventy-one thousand Jinns came and rendered obedience to the
Prophet, engaging to fast, pray, pay Zakat, perform Hajj, fight in the
cause of God and be well-wishers of Muslims. They repented and implored
forgiveness for their infidelity and idolatry, and voluntarily accepted
Islam. The Messenger of Allah (S) indeed was raised up a Prophet for
Jinns and all mankind.

Jew: God gave Yahya understanding and knowledge in his infancy, and he
wept, although he had not sinned at all.

Ali: Yahya was raised up when there was no idolatry, or ignorance on the
subject of religion; but the Almighty Allah imparted wisdom to the
Prophet in his infancy, among a crew of idolaters who were part of
Satan’s army.

Although surrounded with such wickedness, he never inclined in the least
to idolatry, he attended no idolatrous festivals, a lie was never heard
from him; on the contrary, he was titled Amin and Sadiq, the honest and
the true. He used to fast a week, more or less, without tasting food or
drink, and he said to the people around him, I am not like you, at night
I attend on the worship of my Lord who gives me food and drink. Though
innocent and faultless, he wept so profusely as to wet the place where
he prayed.

Jew: It is well known that Isa (a.s.) spoke in his cradle.

Ali: The Prophet at the instant of his birth placed his left hand on the
ground, and raising his right hand to heaven, pronounced the formula of
the creed respecting the divine unity, and such light beamed from his
mouth that the people of Mecca saw the houses of Shaam and their
environs, the red dwellings of Yemen, and the white palaces of Istakhar
in Fars.

The whole world was illuminated on the night of his birth, and Jinns,
mankind, and devils trembling said, “Some wonderful event has happened
that such a marvelous sign appears.” On that night angels were seen
descending and ascending, and voices of praise and adoration were heard.
There was great turmoil among the stars, which fell in countless
numbers, and meteors darted to all parts of the horizon.

In view of the wonders, Satan was greatly agitated, and attempted to
ascend the heavens and ascertain the cause, for hitherto he had access
to the fourth heaven, to which he and the devils were wont to ascend to
overhear the conversion of the angels, but that night the infernal
spirits were driven away by meteoric arrows shot at them by the angels,
and the way, until then open to the fiends, was forever barred against
them. All these amazing wonders were signs of the prophethood of the
Holy Prophet (S).

Jew: They say that Isa by divine power restored sight to the blind, and
healed the leprous.

Ali: The Messenger of Allah (S) healed many of his companions who were
suffering under various diseases, and relieved them from calamities
which befell them. One day he inquired after the health of a certain
Muslim, and was answered that from extreme disease the man was like a
bird whose feathers had all fallen off.

The Prophet went immediately to visit the sick person, and asked him if
he performed prayers when in health. He said, “Yes, I was in the habit
of offering this prayer: “O Lord, the punishment you has decreed me in
the future world send upon me now in this world.” The Holy Prophet (S)
inquired, “Why did you not pray?”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَفِي الآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً
وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord! grant us good in this world and good in the hereafter, and
save us from the chastisement of the fire.”***[^138]

The sick man repeated this prayer and was immediately restored to
health, and freed as it were from bonds, rose up and came away with us.
Again, a man of the tribe of Jahina was so desperately attacked by
leprosy, that some of his limbs dropped off. He came to the Prophet and
supplicated for a cure.

The Holy Prophet (S) took a cup of water and ejected into it some saliva
from his blessed mouth, and ordered the man to wash himself with the
contents of the cup. On doing so, the cure was perfect as if he had
never been diseased. In another instance a leprous Bedouin came to the
Prophet, and was instantly healed by Muhammad’s casting on him some
saliva from his blessed mouth.

If you say that Isa cured the insane and those possessed by Jinns, then
know that a woman once came to the Prophet and said, “My son is near
dying; when I carry him food he gapes, but cannot eat.” On going to the
house of the patient, the Prophet said: “Enemy of God, get far hence
from a friend of Allah; I am the Messenger of Allah (S) and I order you
to go away.” Satan was immediately driven away, the man rose up, and is
now in our army.

Furthermore, if you say that Isa restored sight to the blind, be assured
that the Prophet did more than this. A very handsome man by the name of
Qatada bin Rabi had his eye struck out by a spear, at the Battle of
Uhud. He picked up his eye and brought it to the Prophet, saying, “After
this disfigurement my wife will treat me as an enemy.”

The Prophet took the eye and restored it to its place, and so perfect
was the cure that the only difference discoverable in Qatada’s eyes was
that the wounded one was the more beautiful and brilliant of the two. In
the Battle of Ibn Abil Haqiq, Abdullah bin Atik had his hand cut off. At
night he brought the amputated member to the Prophet, who replaced it,
and drawing his hand over it, every trace of the amputation was removed.

In Battle of Kaab bin Ashraf a man named Muhammad bin Muslima in like
manner lost his eye and hand, which were completely healed by the touch
of the Holy Prophet (S). All these were evidences of his prophetical
office. In the same way Abdullah bin Anis was also injured in a similar
manner and the Prophet passed his hand over it and it was completely
cured. All these things prove the prophethood of the Messenger of Allah
(S).

Jew: They say that Isa by the power of God raised the dead to life.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: Pebbles used to recite the divine praises
in spite of the fact that they were non-living; their voices were
audible and they had no spirits. The dead spoke to the Prophet, and
implored deliverance from the divine punishment they were suffering.
After praying on a certain occasion over a man who had fallen a martyr,
he inquired, Is there any here of the tribe of Bani Najjar, who can
repay his debt so that he can be freed from chastisement? The deceased
is detained in the gate of Paradise for three dirhams, which he owned to
such a Jew.

Let payment be made and the prisoner freed. “If you say Isa spoke with
the dead, the Prophet did a more wonderful thing than this. When he
besieged the castle of Taif, a roasted sheep prepared with poison was
sent to him. The shoulder of mutton immediately addressed him saying, “O
Messenger of Allah (S), do not taste me, for I am laced with poison.” If
a living animal speaks, it is one of the greatest of miracles.

But for a creature slaughtered and roasted, to exercise the faculty of
speech is much more astonishing. Trees obeyed the Prophet’s call and
they came to him; domestic animals and beasts of prey in many instances
spoke with him, testifying to his prophetical office and warning men not
to oppose him, which miracles exceed those wrought by Isa.

Jew: They say Isa told his people what they had eaten and stored in
their houses.

Ali: Isa told his people what was concealed behind walls, but the
Prophet related the progress of the distant Battle of Muta, saying, “Now
such a person is martyred,” when there was a month’s journey between the
Prophet and battlefield. On several occasions in which people came to
ask something of the Prophet, he said to the applicant, “Shall I declare
your request, or will you do it yourself?”

As the matter was left for him to state, he would say, “You came for
such a purpose,” relating what was in the heart of the petitioner. He
told the people of Mecca what they had covered with the mantle of
secrecy. A man called Umair bin Wahab came to Medina and waited on the
Prophet, saying he wished to ransom his son. “You lie,” said the
Prophet; “you met Safwan bin Umayyah in such a place, and talked with
him about those slain at the Battle of Bade, and said: By Allah, after
the defeat Muhammad has given us, death is better than life.

Were it not that I have a family and am in debt, verily I would rid you
of him. Upon this Safwan engaged to pay your debts, and endow your
daughters equally with his own. You charged him to conceal the
engagement and made your preparation for the journey, and came here to
kill me.” The man acknowledged the fact, then became a Muslim. The
Prophet gave innumerable proofs of this sort of his divine mission.

Jew: They say Isa made of clay figures of birds, breathed on them, and
they became real birds and flew away.

Ali: The Prophet wrought a similar miracle: In the expedition of Hunain
he took a stone in his hand, which uttered adoration and praise. He then
ordered the stone to cleave, and it separated into three parts, from
each of which the voice of adoration was renewed, every piece, however,
differing in its utterance from the others.

On another occasion he called a tree to him: the ground broke away from
around it, and it obeyed the summons, every branch of it with a loud
voice proclaiming divine unity, and uttering ascriptions of praise. He
then ordered the tree to cleave asunder in the centre, which was
instantly done. Next he commanded the parts to unite, which forthwith
followed. “Now,” said the Prophet, “testify to my prophetical office.”
The tree obeyed; after which he remanded it to its place, and to utter,
in the act of returning, ascriptions of praise to God. This miracle was
manifested at Mecca, near the slaughter house.

Jew: They say Isa traveled around the world and journeyed over the whole
face of the earth.

Ali: The Prophet fought twenty years in the cause of the Prophet, and
marched with his army against infidel Arabs, and innumerable hosts of
them he slew with his glittering sword, drowned them in the sea of
abasement, and cast them into the lowest abyss of Hell, though they were
celebrated for valor and were veterans in war. The journeys of the
Prophet were all for the purpose of fighting the enemies of faith.

Jew: They said Isa was devout.

Ali: The Prophet was the most devout of all the prophets,
notwithstanding he had thirteen wives, besides maidservants with whom he
cohabited. His table was never so well supplied as to be taken away with
food remaining on it. He ate no wheat bread, and of barley had not
enough to satisfy his hunger three nights on succession.

Such was his poverty that at his departure from the world, his coat of
mail was pledged in the hands of a Jew for fourteen dirhams. As to
money, he had none, notwithstanding the cities he had captured and the
treasures he had taken from infidels. It often happened that he
distributed among his followers three hundred thousand or four hundred
thousand dirhams in a day, and when at night applicants for his bounty
still flocked to him, he would swear by the God who sent him that there
did not remain in his house one saa of wheat of barley, and not a single
dirham or dinar.

Jew: Then I testify that besides the one God, there is no Lord, and I
testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (S), who has conferred
on him double the powers and excellences distributed among the whole
company of prophets that preceded him.

“And I testify,” added Ibn Abbas, addressing Ali, “that you are of those
most profoundly learned.”  
 Ali concluded by saying, “How can I properly describe the excellences
of a person on whom God bestowed such greatness and glory which is thus
expressed in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلٰى خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most surely you conform (yourself) to sublime
morality.”***[^139]

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said that when the Holy Prophet (S) arrived in Medina
and the evidences of his prophethood became apparent to all, the Jews
conspired against him extremely maliciously and desired to harm him in
every way. They wanted to put off his light and wipe out his proofs.
Among such mean-minded people were Malik bin Zaif, Kaab bin Ashraf, Huyy
bin Akhtab and Abu Lubabah bin Abul Manzar and his followers. Finally,
one day Malik said to the Holy Prophet (S): “Do you consider yourself to
be Allah’s Messenger?”

The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “Yes, of course, because Allah Almighty,
Who is the creator of the entire cosmos, has said so.” That fellow said:
“O Muhammad! We will never recognize you as a divine messenger until and
unless this mat under your feet gives witness and believes in your
messengership. Till then we will also not testify your prophethood.”

Then Abu Lubabah said: “O Muhammad! We will not believe in your
messengership until this whip in my hand believes in your messengership
and testifies to your claim. Kaab bin Ashraf said: “We will not attest
your prophethood until this ass which I am riding believes in you.” The
Holy Prophet (S) replied: “Once Allah’s evidence has become clear and
His miracles have been shown, it does not become for people to ask such
things from Allah. It is better for them to believe in God’s words and
follow His commandments and be satisfied with what He has shown.

Is it not enough for you that I have made Torah and Bible and Psalms
testify to my messengership and made them proofs of my truthfulness?
Therein is the mention of Ali bin Abi Talib who is my brother and my
legatee after me, superior to the entire creation of Allah? Is the
miracle of Qur’an not sufficient for you which has been made shining by
Allah for the entire creation. Allah disabled all to make anything like
it.

I do not dare to ask Allah regarding what you have asked. I only say
that proofs and arguments He has given to me are enough for me and you.
What He has shown according to your wishes, are extra favors on me and
you. So if He prevents us from what you desire, it will be so because He
knows that whatever he has shown, is sufficient in this matter to
exhaust arguments for what He wants from us.”

When the Holy Prophet (S) concluded his statement, the Almighty Allah
gave speech to the floor mat. It said: I give witness that there is no
god except Allah Almighty. He is One and He has no partner. He is Only
One and none or nothing is like Him; He is needless, changeless and
decline-less and from ever till ever, living.

He has neither a wife nor son and He has not engaged anyone as a partner
in His affairs and I testify that: O Muhammad! You are His servant and
His Messenger and that He has sent you with Guidance and True Religion
so that He may make your religion triumphant over all other religions,
even though polytheists may hate it. And I testify that Ali bin Abi
Talib bin Abdul Muttalib bin Hashim bin Abde Manaf is your brother and
your deputy for your Ummah and he is the best of all after you among the
entire creation.

And I give witness that whosoever befriended him, befriended you and
whoever showed enmity towards him, showed enmity towards you and whoever
obeyed him, obeyed you and whoever disobeyed him, disobeyed you and that
whoever obeyed you, in fact, obeyed Allah and became worthy of His
pleasure and consequently of good fortune. And whoever disobeyed you, in
reality, disobeyed Allah and so became fit for the painful punishment of
Hellfire.

When the Jews observed this miracle, they were amazed and told one
another that this was clear magic. Hearing this, the mat moved, lifted
itself from the ground whereby Malik bin Zaif and his fellow travelers
tumbled head down. Almighty Allah once again enabled the mat to talk and
it said:

I am a mat, but Allah gave me the power to talk and granted me the
miracle of describing His Oneness and to testify in favor of His true
messenger, who is the chief of His messengers and who is His messenger
towards the entire creation and the establisher of truth among His
servants. He enabled me to testify in favor of his brother, Ali, who is
also his Wasi (legatee) and vizier and is born from his *Noor*
(Radiance) and is his Khalil (friend) and the repayer of his debts and
the fulfiller of his promises and the helper of his friends and the
uprooter of his enemies.

I have also to testify the Imamate of Ali (a.s.) and I am the follower
of one whom Muhammad (S) has appointed as his Wali and as the Imam for
Muslims and I abhor those who may fight against him and who are his
enemies. Therefore it is not fit for any denier to step on me.
Henceforth only believers would sit on me. Then the Holy Prophet (S)
said to Salman, Miqdad, Abu Dharr and Ammar (r.a.): Sit on it as you
have put faith in all the things testified by it. Hearing this command
(which must be obeyed) they sat on it.

Thereafter, Almighty Allah gave voice to the whip of Abu Lubabah bin
Manzar and it said: I give witness there is no one and nothing worth
worship except Only One Allah Who is the Creator of the universe,
Expander of their sustenance, Director of His servants’ affairs and
Mighty over all things and I testify that, O Muhammad!

You are His Messenger and his selected one and His friend and His
beloved and Wali and the keeper of His secrets and that He has made you
the intermediary between Him and His servants, so that because of you,
His good servants may get salvation and the unfortunate ones may be
destroyed, and I testify that Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is mentioned in
the Higher world as the chief of creation after you and that he fights
for Qur’an to compel its opponents to willy nilly accept it; that he,
after your departure, fights in the matter of its interpretations with
the hypocrites who have deviated from religion and whose worldly desires
have won over their minds because they have altered the meanings of
Allah’s Book and changed its implications and I give witness that Ali
(a.s.) will, as a result of what Allah has granted to him, take the
friends of Allah towards His pleasure and push His enemies who defy and
oppose Him, into Hell with his powerful sword.

Thereafter that whip bent round and pulled Abu Lubabah so forcefully
that he fell down headlong and then got up. But the whip once again,
brought him down a number of times until he sighed: Woe unto me, what
has happened to me? Almighty Allah once again gave voice to that whip
and it said: I am a mere whip to whom Almighty Allah has made vocal with
His Oneness and honored me with His praise and gave me the honor of
testifying the messengership of Muhammad (S), the leader of all His
Servants and made a friend of one (Ali) who is, after Muhammad (S), the
best among the entire creation and is better than all friends of Allah
and who is the brother of Muhammad (S) and the husband of his daughter
(chief of the ladies of Paradise) and who earned the reward of greater
Jihad due to his sleeping on the bed of the Prophet on the night of
migration and who disgraced with his powerful sword, enemies of the
Prophet and who is the propagator of the commands about right and wrong
and legal and illegal in this community. So it is not befitting for a
denier who is an open enemy of the Holy Prophet (S) to use me.

Therefore I will continue to drag you down like this until I finish you
off and go out of your dirty hands or unless you put faith in Muhammad
and in his purified progeny, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Abu Lubabah said: O whip! I also testify to all that you have testified
and I also believe in what you believe. The whip replied: Then I also
remain still in your hand because you declared your faith and as Only
One God knows the condition of our heart and only He will decide
regarding your being right or wrong.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) has said that the ‘Islam’ of this Jew did not
do any good and he acted in bad ways thereafter also.

When they dispersed from the presence of the Holy Prophet (S) they said
to one another secretly that Muhammad is not a true prophet. When Kaab
bin Ashraf wished to ride his donkey, the animal reared up and threw him
down, injuring him badly. He rose up again and mounted, but the animal
once again threw him down.

This happened again and again. At the seventh or eighth attempt, the
animal spoke up by God’s command: O Servant of God! You are a very bad
fellow. You did not believe even after observing His signs. You remained
a disbeliever. I am only an animal.

But Allah has honored me with belief in His Oneness and I give witness
that there is no God except Allah, Who is the Creator of entire universe
and is Mighty and Powerful and that Muhammad (S) is His servant and
Messenger and the chief of all men of Paradise and who has been raised
by Allah so that he may make those people successful and fortunate whose
being so (faithful) is in the knowledge of Allah and so that He may make
them stonehearted and unfortunate whose being so (faithless) is also
written in the Knowledge of Allah and I give witness that Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.) is one who, if he makes one fortunate, Allah also makes
that one fortunate and will enable him to accept admonition and to learn
manners and to abide by His orders and to refrain from what has been
made unlawful by Him, because Almighty Allah will, through his sword and
revengeful attacks, disgrace the enemies of Muhammad (S) until they
either believe in him, otherwise remain in revolt and finally send them
to Hell by his sword.

Now it is not becoming for any disbeliever to ride on me. Only he can
ride me who believes in Only One Allah and testifies to all sayings of
Muhammad (S) and regards all his deeds correct, especially of his cousin
and legatee, Ali (a.s.), who is his vicegerent and heir of all of his
knowledges, defender of his religion, protector of his community,
repayer of his debts, fulfiller of his promises, friend of his friends
and the foe of his foes and who believes that Muhammad (S) is totally
right in appointing him (Ali) as his deputy and thereby abides by his
orders.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) told Kaab bin Ashraf: O Kaab! Your donkey is
better than you, because it does not allow you to ride it. So now you
may sell it to any of our believer brother. Kaab said: I also don’t need
it now, because (God forbid) it is under your spell of magic. Hearing
this, the donkey spoke up again: O enemy of Allah! Stop speaking ill of
the Prophet. By God, had I not been afraid of the opposition of the
Prophet I would have killed you, finishing you with my hooves and teeth.
Kaab felt ashamed and could not say anything.

He became restless in heart but haughtiness overpowered him and he did
not bring faith. Thabit bin Qays bought that ass for 100 dinars, rode it
and came up to the Holy Prophet (S) very often when the animal behaved
very mildly, nicely and lovefully. The Holy Prophet (S) told Thabit: O
Thabit! This ass has become so nice and obedient due to your
faithfulness.

In short, when those Jews left the Holy Prophet (S) and no one of them
believed, Almighty Allah revealed this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْهِمْ أَأَنذَرْتَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ
تُنذِرْهُمْ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who disbelieve, it being alike to them whether you warn
them, or do not warn them, will not believe.***[^140]

Simply: They will never believe and testify you. When they disregarded
miracles, how will they pay heed to your invitation and admonition in
favor of Islam?

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) said: I asked my respected father, Imam Naqi
(a.s.), to describe the details of the signs and miracles shown by the
Holy Prophet (S) in Mecca and Medina, he said: I will describe it
tomorrow morning. So, next morning he said: O my son! The event of the
cloud is like this: When the Messenger of Allah, on behalf of the famous
Meccan, pious, lady tradeswoman, Her Eminence, Khadija binte Khuwailad,
went to Syria with a caravan it was a very hot season and the distance
was of one month journey.

The season was very hot. The caravan people were feeling very disturbed
as hot winds blew flinging hot sand grains in their faces. In those
situations Almighty Allah used to send clouds to shade His holy
messenger (S). When the Holy Prophet (S) stayed at any place that cloud
also used to stop moving and when he moved, that cloud also moved above
him, turning in whichever direction he turned, right or left. It did not
allow the sun to pour heat on him. Sand grains and dust used to fall on
the Quraish and their she camels.

Reaching the Holy Prophet (S), the wind too used to slow down, which
made the caravan people remark that Muhammad’s company is better than
any tent. They used to get as near to him possible. Yet the cloud shaded
only him. When other travelers joined their caravan they would notice
that the cloud was moving away from them which made them exclaim: The
man who is near this cloud is indeed very noble and graceful.

The caravan people then told those astonished travelers: Just look at
the cloud. It contains the names of its owner and that owner’s
companions and his fast friends and his brother. When they looked at the
cloud they could read these words: There is no deity except Allah and
Muhammad is Allah’s messenger. I have made Ali (a.s.) the Commander of
the Faithful, his Legatee and helper and made him honorable along with
those companions who befriend him and Ali (a.s.) and their friends; and
those who are inimical to their enemies.

In short, everyone could read that writing. The story about the
mountains and big rocks and small pebbles saluting the Holy Prophet (S)
is that when the Holy Prophet (S) returned from the trade journey of
Syria and when he gave away all he had earned in the path of Allah, he
started to climb mount Hira every morning to observe with his inner eye,
the Signs of Allah’s mercy, miracles of His wisdom and varieties of His
creations.

He used to look at the horizon and at seas as well as deserts, he used
to gain thoughtful insight to worship the only One True Allah. When he
reached the age of 40 years, Almighty Allah looked at his heart and
found it great, graceful, obedient and extremely meek and fearful of
divine Might. At that moment, by the Command of Allah, doors of the sky
opened and the Holy Prophet (S) began to look at it to find that Allah
had ordered angels to come down with His mercy.

That mercy then rained from the base of the Divine Throne (Kursi) on the
holy head of the Holy Prophet (S). Then it covered the whole being of
the Holy Prophet (S), who saw Jibraeel, the Peacock of Angels, wearing a
necklace of Radiance, come down to him. He (the angel) held both the
arms of the Holy Prophet (S) and said: O Muhammad! Read. The Holy
Prophet (S) said: What should I read? The answer was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْرَأْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ ﴿١﴾ خَلَقَ الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ
عَلَقٍ ﴿٢﴾ اقْرَأْ وَرَبُّكَ الْأَكْرَمُ ﴿٣﴾ الَّذِي عَلَّمَ
بِالْقَلَمِ ﴿٤﴾ عَلَّمَ الْإِنْسَانَ مَا لَمْ يَعْلَمْ ﴿٥﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Read in the name of your Lord Who created. He created man from a
clot. Read and your Lord is Most Honorable, Who taught (to write) with
the pen. Taught man what he knew not.***[^141]

Simply: O Muhammad, read. Read in the Name of your Lord Sustainer, Who
created everyone and everything, Who created man with a clot of blood. O
Muhammad! Read and your Lord is very Great, Who taught the pen how to
write and Who taught man what he did not know.

In short, the angel revealed to the Holy Prophet (S) whatever he was
commanded to reveal and flew back to heavens. The Holy Prophet (S) came
down from the mountain. The Signs of divine Grandeur and Might had put
the Holy Prophet (S) in a condition of almost trembling fever. What
worried him most was the thought that when he conveys the divine Message
to the Quraish tribesmen, they would not believe him and brand him
insane.

They would say that some unseen evil spirit has haunted him even though
from early years of his life, he was known among all as the wisest,
honest, truthful and respectable gentleman. The Holy Prophet (S)
believed that the words and deeds of satans and mad people as are the
worst of all words and deeds. So Allah Almighty desired to widen the
Holy Prophet’s heart and make him strong and courageous.

So He made rocks of hills and pebbles on earth speak up. Whenever the
Holy Prophet (S) passed by, they cried: Peace be on you, O beloved of
Allah! Allah has granted you Grace and elegance. He made you higher than
the entire creation in the matter of respect and honor. You need not be
gloomy at the thought that Quraish may call you mad or may say that you
have fallen in a trial regarding religion because graceful is one, whom
Allah makes graceful and miracle-owner is he, whom Allah grants
miracles.

O sir, you need not get disheartened at the falsification by the
Quraish. Very soon, Almighty Allah will raise you to the highest ranks
of greatness and very soon your friends will, due to your legatee, Ali
(a.s.), become pleased. Shortly Ali bin Abi Talib, who is the key to the
City of Knowledge, will spread your knowledges in all cities to all the
servants of Allah. Very soon, your eyes will be made cool, because of
your dear daughter Fatima (a.s.).

Through her and Ali (a.s.) will be born, Hasan and Husain (a.s.), who
are the chiefs of the youths of Paradise. Very soon your religion will
spread in all cities. In near future, the rewards of yourself and your
brother, Ali bin Abi Talib’s friends and admirers will multiply. Soon
you will be given the Liwa-e-Hamd (Flag of Praise) and you will hand it
over to your brother, Ali (a.s.). All prophets and messengers will
gather under that Liwa-e-Hamd and he will enter Paradise with all of
them.

Hearing this glad tiding, I asked myself: O Lord! Who is that Ali bin
Abi Talib about whom I have been given this promise? It was a time when
Ali (a.s.) was still very young. He was my uncle’s son.  
 When Ali (a.s.) started walking and when he was with the Prophet, the
latter prayed: O Allah, is this one about whom You gave me good news?

In short, whenever the Holy Prophet (S) thought like this, a balance of
awe would come to the Holy Prophet (S). The Holy Prophet (S) would be
placed in one pan and Ali (a.s.) and the whole Ummah till Qiyamat would
be made similar-looking and the Prophet would be weighed against them.
The Prophet would weigh heavier.

Thereafter the Holy Prophet (S) would be replaced by Ali (a.s.) in the
scale and Ali weighed against the entire Ummah and Ali (a.s.) weighed
heavier. Then the Holy Prophet (S) recognized his self and his
attributes. In his heart, came a voice from the Lord Almighty: O
Muhammad! This Ali bin Abi Talib is My selected servant.

I will cause him to help My religion. He is, after you, higher than the
entire Ummah of yours. The last Prophet said that this happened when my
chest was widened for the purpose of fulfilling the duties of
messengership. Thus the management of the Ummah was made lighter for me
and it was made easier for me to face the oppressors and revolters among
Quraish.

Thereafter Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) said that this is the story of those who
were bent on killing the Prophet of Allah and whom Almighty Allah had
killed by the miracle of His True messenger and because of (not)
testifying to the Prophet in the matter of death. The Holy Prophet (S)
was living in Mecca and his age was then seven years.

His noble character was so great that no other child of Quraish could
equal him in goodness. In those days some Jew traders arrived in Mecca
from Syria. Observing the high standard of the Holy Prophet (S), they
talked to one another in secret: By God! This is Muhammad, who is to
appear in the last era and who will defeat and disgrace the Jews and
other religions and destroy them thoroughly.

They had read in their religious books that the coming prophet is
unlettered, yet most intelligent and truthful. In short, their jealousy
compelled them to keep this matter secret and so they began to conspire
to avoid his kingdom. They told one another: Let us devise a plot to
kill him, because the Lord Almighty destroys whom He will and
establishes whom He will. Perhaps he may be removed by our conspiracy.

They became firm in their evil resolve and told one another: Don’t make
haste. First, let us take a test of him and examine his deeds because
sometimes it also happens that a person looks very similar to another in
character, appearance and behavior. We have read in our holy books that
Almighty Lord will always prevent Muhammad from unlawful and even
doubtful things. So let us invite him to dinner and induce him to eat
unlawful and doubtful things.

If he extends his hands or eats, either it will show that he is not
Muhammad (the promised one), even though he looks like him in
appearance. But if he did not eat either of the things, we should
understand that he is the same Muhammad and then we must make every plan
to remove him from the world so that Judaism remains safe.

Finally after their consultations they came to His Eminence, Abu Talib
(r.a.) and invited him to attend their feast. When the Holy Prophet (S)
went there, the Jews put before him and in front of Abu Talib (r.a.)
kebab of chicken, which was killed with a stick (unlawfully). Abu Talib
and other chieftains of Quraish started eating, but when the Holy
Prophet (S) extended his hand, it turned either on the right or left
automatically and despite several trials, never reached that
impermissible meat.

The hosts asked him: O Muhammad! Why do you not eat this meat? The Holy
Prophet (S) replied: I tried more than once to take it up, but every
time my hand turned away from it. Therefore, I understand that this food
is unlawful and hence my Lord wants me to refrain from it. The Jews
said: No, no. This is a quite lawful food.

Then they said: Let us make a morsel of it and put it in your mouth. The
Holy Prophet (S) replied: Try it, if you so desire. So they prepared to
make a morsel with their own hands, but their hands too would not reach
that meat. Observing all this, the Holy Prophet (S) said: I am prevented
by Allah from eating this food. If you have any other eatable, bring it.

Then they brought another fat hen which belonged to their neighbor but
they had not paid for it and had stolen and killed it unlawfully,
thinking that they would pay the price when the owner arrived. Then that
meat’s kebabs were placed in front of the Holy Prophet (S). But when the
Holy Prophet (S) tried to pick it, it became heavy and fell down.

It happened several times. The Jews again asked the reason of not eating
it and the Prophet replied: I am prevented by Allah and I understand
that it is a doubtful thing. They said: It is not so. If you allow, we
may feed you. The Holy Prophet (S) replied: Do so, if you can. When they
tried to put a morsel of it in the Prophet’s mouth, they could not lift
it, as it had become heavy.

Then the Prophet said: Surely it is an unlawful thing as I told you and
that is why my Lord saves me from it. This event made the people of
Quraish extremely astonished. This was one of the reasons of the Quraish
being inimical to the Holy Prophet (S) when he proclaimed his
messengership. The Jews were also amazed by this event and they told the
Quraish: We know that you will face many calamities due to this boy; he
will destroy your lives and properties and very soon he will attain a
very high rank and position.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: These Jews planned to kill the Holy Prophet
(S) when he returned from Mount Hira. They were 70 persons. They dipped
their swords in poison and sat in ambush, one dark night, waiting for
the Prophet to arrive. When the Prophet climbed Hira, they too followed
him and drew out their swords.

Among those seventy, there was a famous and strong sandow. When all they
attacked the Prophet, both sides of the hill joined together creating a
barrier. When they lost hope of hitting him with their swords, the hill
sides separated. Seeing this, they again drew out their swords but the
mountain came in between them and the Prophet.

This happened several times until the Holy Prophet (S) reached the
hilltop. In all, this closing and widening of the hill happened 47
times. Thereafter the Jews also reached the hilltop and encircled the
Holy Prophet (S) to kill him. But then the path became very long for
them. The Almighty Allah widened the hill and they could not cross it,
until the Prophet finished his prayers and worship.

The Jews also began to descend with him. Then they attacked him with
their swords. At once both sides of the hill closed in. They withdrew
their swords. The hill regained its previous state. This closing and
widening of the hill and flinging and withdrawing of swords took place
47 times. Finally when the Holy Prophet (S) came down and when the
enemies tried to hit him, both sides of the hill closed in and crushed
all the Jews.

There came a voice: O Muhammad! Just look back and see what the Almighty
Allah has done with your evil most enemies. When the Prophet turned
back, the hill sides widened and the Jews fell down with swords in their
hands. Their faces, hands, feet, back and bones were totally crushed;
blood flew out of their veins.

The Prophet was released safely and the hill, vales, trees and rocks
were loudly congratulating him, telling him how powerfully and
wonderfully the Almighty had protected him. He made us help you against
the evil enemies. Very soon, when your (Muhammad’s) messengership will
be proclaimed, the Almighty will assist you through Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.) against the oppressive and revolting people of the community.

Ali (a.s.) will help you so thoroughly and with such sincerity, making
your religion succeed and in making our friends and admirers
respectable, that Almighty Allah will declare him (Ali) as your heart,
which is between your sides and your ear, with which you hear and your
eye, with which you see and your hand, with which you hold things and
your leg, with which you stand up and your deputy, your legatee and your
vicegerent. Also, in near future, he (Ali) will repay your debts and
will fulfill your promises and vows becoming the adornment of your
community and the beauty of your people. Before long, Ali (a.s.) will
become the cause of pleasing his friends and destroying his enemies.

Now the story of the two trees which joined together: It so happened
that one day the Holy Prophet (S) was traveling between Mecca and
Medina. In his army there were both infidels and hypocrites of Mecca and
Medina. They were discussing among themselves. One of them told his
companions: This man eats like us.

He also urinates and relieves himself like us and yet claims to be the
messenger of Allah. One of those hypocrites said: This forest is quite
open. When he sits to relieve himself, I will see whether the thing
which he throws out is like what we do or something different? Another
one said: He will never sit to relieve himself in your presence, because
he is more modest than an unmarried young woman who might not have
looked at others and whom none would have seen.

Almighty Allah informed His messenger of these mischievous desires. The
Holy Prophet (S) asked Zaid bin Haritha: Go to those two trees which are
at a distance of about half a mile from one another. Just stand between
them and call upon them that the Messenger of Allah wants you two to
come close and join with one another at this particular point, so that
he may sit behind you for relieving himself.

Zaid (r.a.) complied with the Prophet’s order, and lo, by Allah, those
two trees uprooted themselves and by One, Who sent Muhammad as His
truthful messenger, they came close and embraced one another like two
close friends. The Prophet then sat behind these trees. Seeing this, the
hypocrites said: He has disappeared from our eyesight.

Then one of them said: Let us go on the other side. When they approached
them, the two trees also turned their direction, keeping the Holy
Prophet (S) hidden from their sight. The more they tried to view the
Prophet, the more the trees kept revolving. Finally they decided to
encircle the trees from all sides so that some of them could observe the
desired scene.

But then, the trees also formed a circle and remained like that until
the Prophet purified himself, made ablution and returned to his army in
the open. Then he again asked Zaid (r.a.) to tell those trees that
Allah’s Messenger commands you to go back to your earlier positions.
Zaid (r.a.) complied with the order and so did the trees.

By Almighty Allah, Who sent Muhammad (S) as His true Messenger, those
trees were running fast like a man who runs away speedily from an enemy
with an open sword in his hand. Finally, when the hypocrites failed in
observing the Holy Prophet (S) in sitting position they told themselves:
Let us see what he has thrown out from his body over there. It will show
us whether we and he are same or not. When they went there, they could
not find anything!

After observing this event, companions of the Prophet became astonished;
they heard a voice from the sky: Are you surprised at seeing the trees
running towards one another? The rushing of angels towards the friends
of Muhammad and Ali (a.s.) with divine miracles is far more faster than
what you saw. On Judgment Day, running away of flames of Hellfire from
friends of Ali (a.s.) and those who are aloof from the enemies of Ali
(a.s.) will be quicker than the departing of the trees that you saw.

Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) said: A similar miracle was shown by Ali (a.s.). He
had returned from the Battle of Siffeen and quenched the thirst of his
companions with water, which had gushed out from a big slab of stone. He
had turned it upside down, so that he could relieve himself behind it. A
hypocrite from his army said: I would like to see his private parts and
things getting out therefrom, because he shows to the world his
closeness to the Prophet.

Then I will inform my companions of this lie. The Imam (a.s.) then
ordered his man, Qambar: O Qambar! Go to the two trees over there
standing at a distance of more than a Farsakh and tell them that the
successor of Muhammad (S) asks you two to come close and get united.
Qambar said: Sir, will my voice reach them?

Ali (a.s.) replied: One Who makes your eyesight reach the sky, which is
at a distance of 500 years’ journey, will also enable your voice to
reach those trees. Finally Qambar did what Ali (a.s.) had demanded and
those two trees rushed towards one another so quickly as if they were
two friends who meet one another after a long period of time, eager to
embrace each another.

They got stuck with one another. Observing this, a group of hypocrites
of his army said: Ali thinks himself (God forbid) to be like Muhammad
(S) in showing magic. Neither he was a prophet nor is this one an Imam.
Rather both are sorcerers. But we will go round them to observe what
their private parts expel.

Almighty Allah made Ali (a.s.) aware of their dirty plans and he told
Qambar in clear terms that the hypocrites have tried to cheat the
legatee of the Prophet; and they imagined that he can make a barrier of
only two trees and nothing more. So, go to those trees and tell them
that the Wasi of the Prophet asks you to depart. So the two departed and
ran away from one another like cowards running from a courageous man.

Thereafter, when Ali (a.s.) drew up his cloak to sit down and all the
hypocrites became blind. They could not see anything. But when they
turned their faces from that direction their eyes could see as before.
But again when they tried to look at Ali (a.s.), they again became
blind. This seeing and blinding occurred for several times, until Ali
(a.s.) got up after relieving himself and returned to his place. This
trial took place 80 times.

Finally they desired to go and see what had been thrown out by Ali
(a.s.). But they could not move from their place. Their legs stuck to
the ground. But when they wanted and tried to return, they could walk as
usual. This also happened a hundred times. Finally all left that camp.
The hypocrites gained nothing, except increase in their disobedience,
disbelief and hot-headedness.

Thereafter they told one another: Look, despite such miracles, Ali was
humbled against Amr, Muawiyah and Yazid. Almighty made these talks reach
Ali (a.s.). The Imam (a.s.) told the angels: O my Lord’s servants! Bring
Amr, Muawiyah and Yazid here. The hypocrites then saw in the air, three
angels in the forms of black Abyssinian soldiers and each of them had
caught one of the said three men. Then the angels brought them before
Ali (a.s.).

Suddenly what they saw was that one of them is Muawiyah, another, Amr
and the third, Yazid. Ali (a.s.) told those hypocrites: Just look at
them. Had I liked, I would have killed them, but I left them for the
time being, just as Almighty Allah gave respite to the accursed Iblis
till a fixed period of time. What you have seen from your chief, that
is, from me, is not due to weakness or inability but it is a trial for
you, so that it may become clear what you do.

What if you taunt Ali? Prior to you also, infidels and hypocrites
taunted the Holy Prophet (S), saying that one who could visit heavens,
Paradise and divine kingdom and come back in a single night, why he
should flee Mecca and hide in a cave?! How is that he should need eleven
days to reach Medina?! So everything is from Almighty Allah.

Whenever He wishes, He shows you His Might through miracles, so that you
may see the truthfulness of His messengers and their legatees. Again it
is He, Who takes your test by confronting you with things, which you
dislike and abhor so that He may watch what you do and so that Allah’s
evidence may come clearly before you.

The story of the tree which was called by the Holy Prophet (S) is like
this: In Bani Thaqif tribe, there was an experienced physician named
Harith bin Kaldah Thaqafi. He came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: O
Muhammad! I have come to treat you (God forbid) for insanity as I am
expert in this matter and many lunatics have recovered through my
treatment.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: How is it that you consider me a lunatic
while you yourself are acting like mad people? You have not yet either
examined me nor have you still thought at all about my truthfulness or
otherwise?! Harith replied: Have I not yet known your truthfulness or
telling lies when you claim to be a messenger but are unable to show
your ability about it?

The Holy Prophet (S) said: These words of yours are a deed of a lunatic,
because before uttering, you have not asked me why I make a claim and
you have not found me unable to produce any proof required by you.
Harith replied: It is true. So now I demand from you a miracle to try
you. If you are a messenger of Allah, call up this tree (pointing
towards a deeply rooted big tree). If it comes to you, I will know that
you are God’s prophet.

I will testify to it. Otherwise I will repeat that you are a lunatic as
I have heard. The Holy Prophet (S) pointed his holy hand towards that
tree, calling it to him. At once that tree got itself uprooted and
rushed speedily towards the Holy Prophet (S) digging the ground like a
canal and then stood meekly in front of the Holy Prophet (S). It spoke
most clearly: O Allah’s Messenger! Here I am. Kindly give command! The
Holy Prophet (S) told that tree: I have called you to testify that the
God is Only One Allah and that I am Allah’s messenger, and thereafter,
that Ali (a.s.) is the Imam.

You should also testify that Ali (a.s.) is my confidant, assistant and
helper, of whom I am proud and that had he not been born, Allah would
not have created any of His creations. That tree at once spoke up: I
give witness that there is no one worth worship, except Only One Allah;
that He has no partner. I testify that, O Muhammad (S)! You are His
servant and His Messenger.

He has sent you with truth, so that you may give glad tidings of
Paradise to the obedient people and warn the defiant, disbelievers and
sinners of Hellfire. You may invite Allah’s creations towards Him and
you may be a Lamp of Guidance for all. I also testify that Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.), your cousin, is your brother-in-faith who makes maximum
effort in the matter of religion and Islam and that he is your
confidant, supporter and uprooter of your enemies and helper of your
friends and the door of your knowledge.

I also testify that all of your friends who befriend him and who regard
his enemies as their own foes will enter Paradise and also I testify
that your enemies who befriend your enemies and who are enemies of your
friends will fill Hell. Thereafter, addressing Harith, the Holy Prophet
(S) asked: O Harith! Can one who produces such miracles ever be a
lunatic?!

Harith then said: O Allah’s Messenger! By Allah, it can never be so.
Therefore, I give witness that you are the messenger of the Lord of the
Universe and the chief of the entire creation. His Islam was thus nice.
Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) said: A similar miracle was shown by Ali
(a.s.) also. Once a Greek physician, who claimed to be an expert, came
to him and said: O Abul Hasan! Actually I had come to treat your elder
(the Prophet) who was reportedly afflicted by madness.

But since he has died, I could not attain my desire. But I heard that
you are his cousin and also his son-in-law. Now I see that your whole
face and body is pale (yellowish) and both your legs are so thin that I
don’t think they can withstand your body weight. I do have medicine for
removal of the yellow color but there is no way of fattening your legs.
It is better you walk less and carry less weight so that your legs may
not break.

Then he took out some medicine for his yellow color and said: It will
neither harm nor trouble you. But you will have to refrain from eating
meat for forty days. The yellow color will go away. The Imam (a.s.)
replied: Well, you have prescribed a medicine for removing this
yellowness. Now also tell me whether you have any medicine which can
increase the yellowness and which may harm me more?

That man said: Here (pointing towards another medicine) is a thing which
if taken by a yellow man, can at once kill him and if he is not
yellowish he may become yellow and then die. The Imam (a.s.) demanded it
from that man, who gave it, telling that even a tiny particle of it can
kill a man. The Imam (a.s.) at once put the whole quantity of it in his
mouth and gulped it down. It made him perspire.

That fellow began to tremble fearing that he would be caught for killing
the son of Abu Talib (a.s.); that no one would believe that Ali (a.s.)
had killed himself. Observing his fear, the Imam smiled and said: O
servant of Allah! I am now healthier than before. Your deadly medicine
did not harm me at all. Now, just close your eyes. That fellow closed
his eyes. Then Ali (a.s.) said: Now open your eyes and see. What he saw
was that the Imam’s face had become bright and reddish. That fellow
again trembled.

Smiling, the Imam asked: Where has the paleness gone? That man replied:
By Allah! I feel that you are not what you were. Formerly your face,
which was yellowish, is now like a red rose. The Imam said: This poison,
which was deadly in your opinion, has removed my paleness. Then
disclosing his legs, the Imam said: You imagine that due to weakness in
my legs, I must decrease walking and refrain from taking up heavy things
to protect my legs from breaking! But, now I will show that the
treatment of Allah is different from yours.

Saying this, Ali (a.s.) hit the pillar on which that two-storied
building had stood and which had two halls also above and, shaking that
pillar, uprooted the whole structure. Seeing this, the Greek man
fainted. The Imam (a.s.) got some water sprinkled on that fellow’s face
and when he came to senses he spoke up: By God! I have never seen such a
thing before. The Imam (a.s.) said: O Greek! You have seen the strength
of these thin legs.

Where has gone your medicine now?! That fellow asked: Was the knowledge
of Muhammad (S) also this much grand? The Imam (a.s.) said: My knowledge
is from his knowledge and my strength is also from his strength. A man
from Bani Thaqif in Arabia had once approached the Holy Prophet (S) and
told him: If you have been afflicted from madness, I may cure you. The
Holy Prophet (S) had told him: If you so desire, I may show you a sign
that will convince you that I don’t need your treatment, rather you need
mine.

That man said: Yes. The Holy Prophet (S) asked: What sign would you like
to see? That fellow replied: Please call that tall date tree to you. The
Holy Prophet (S) called that tree and within no time, it uprooted itself
and came fast dragging and digging the path and stood in front of the
Holy Prophet (S).

The Holy Prophet (S) asked: Is it enough? That fellow said: No. Now ask
this tree to go back to its original place. So the Holy Prophet (S)
ordered the tree to return and it complied with the command instantly.
Now the Greek said: What you have described is about the Prophet, whom I
have not seen. But here I feel it sufficient to ask you an easier thing.
Just see. I go to a distant point from you and stand there.

You may call me. I would not obey your order and would not like to move;
let me see what you can do. If you compel me, it will be enough sign.
The Imam (a.s.) told him: What you have demanded is limited only to your
benefit, because you will be knowing that you did not comply with my
command willingly. It would also show that only I overcame your wish
without holding your hand nor did I make anyone else to fetch you to me
and that whatever happened was by the Allah’s might.

It also is possible that you may say or anyone else may say that both
you and he had agreed in this matter. So it is better if you ask for
such a thing which may become a Sign for all the people of the world.
That fellow replied: Since you have made this offer, I demand that all
the parts of this date (tree) should disintegrate and fall apart far and
away from one another. Then you may ask them to join with one another as
before and that the tree should stand as it stood.

Ali (a.s.) said: Okay, this is a sign. You yourself may go to that tree
and tell it: The Wasi of Muhammad (S) orders that your parts should
break and go away from one another at a distance. That fellow complied
with the Imam’s advice and the tree also did it. It broke down into
several parts and each part fell far and wide.

It disintegrated into small invisible particles, as if no tree ever
stood there before. Seeing this, the Greek fellow trembled with fear
from head to feet and said: O Wasi of the Prophet! You have fulfilled my
first wish. Now accept the second one too. Ask this tree to become as it
was earlier. The Holy Imam said: This time too, you yourself convey my
command to it and say: The legatee of the Prophet calls upon you to join
together and become the original tree.

The Greek did as asked by Ali (a.s.) and the particles of the tree rose
up in the atmosphere and then began to join one another until there
appeared branches, leaves and roots. Then the tree stuck to ground
firmly. Since it was not a fruit season, date fruits did not appear.
Therefore the Greek man said: I wish that first green fruits should show
up, then they should become first yellow and then red and ripen fully so
that you may eat them and also feed me and so also give it to all others
here.

The Imam (a.s.) again said: As before, you only may convey my command to
this effect and ask it on my behalf to fulfill your wish. The Greek
fellow complied with the Imam’s command, and the tree bore first, green,
then yellow and then reddish ripe date fruits. Thereafter that fellow
expressed yet another desire: Now I wish that lumps of this fruit may
either come near my hand or my hand may become long enough to reach
them.

Rather, prefer that one lump should automatically reach my hand and my
other hand may reach another lump. The Imam (a.s.) said: Extend the
hand, which you wish to reach to the fruits and while so doing, recite
these words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مُقَرِّبَ الْبَعِيدِ قَرِّبْ يَدِي مِنْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O one Who brings far things near, make my hand near this thing.”***

Also withdraw to yourself the hand, which you intend to catch up fruits
without making any movement and recite:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مُسَهِّلَ الْعَسِيرِ- سَهِّلْ لِي تَنَاوُلَ مَا تَبَاعَدَعَني
مِنْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O easer of difficulties! Make it easy for my hand to catch the
distant lump.”***  
 The Greek fellow did as advised by the Imam and recited the
supplications. Consequently, his right hand lengthened and reached the
date lump. Other lumps fell down to the earth and their branches
lengthened. The Imam (a.s.) then said: O Greek man, if you, even after
these dates, do not put faith in the person who showed these miracles to
you, Almighty Allah, will soon chastise you in such a severe manner that
all the learned and ignorant will take a lesson from your fate.

That man replied: Sir, even after observing all these divine Signs, if I
remain a disbeliever and if I do not accept the truth, then, in fact, I
will be exceeding all limits of enmity and will be assisting my own
destruction. So, I witness that you are Allah’s selected and well-chosen
servant and are true in all the things which you say from the Almighty.
Now give me any order and I will carry it out.

The Imam told him: Believe that Allah is Only One and testify that He is
Forgiver and Most Wise and is clean of corruption and vain things; that
He never oppresses His servants and slave-girls (women). Also give
witness to the effect that Muhammad (S) whose Wasi I am, is the chief of
the entire creation and is higher than everyone in ranks and grades of
Paradise.

Also testify that Ali (a.s.), who made you observe all these wonderful
events, and provided you with so many bounties, is, after Muhammad (S),
more gracious than the entire creation; that he is his (Prophet’s)
rightful vicegerent and fit for enacting the commands of his religion.
Also testify that his friends are Allah’s friends and his enemies,
Allah’s enemies and that all those believers who cooperate with you and
who support you in these Islamic commands and deeds are the best in the
whole community of Muhammad (S); that they are the selected Shias of Ali
(a.s.).

I also order you that you should sympathize with and share pleasure and
pain with all those who are with you in testifying Muhammad (S) and me
and in following him and me and who are with you in that Almighty has
granted to you and has given you excellence. You must sympathize with
them and fulfill their needs and remove their poverty. You must consider
that man equal to you in sharing your properties and means, who is equal
to you in the rank of faith and spirit.

Regarding one who is higher than you in spiritual matters, you must give
him preference in the matter of your wealth and property to such an
extent that Almighty Allah may observe that you really give preference
to His religion over your life and wealth; that you regard His friends
nearer than your own blood relatives. I also command you, that you must
protect your religion and safeguard the knowledges which have been given
to you and shield the secrets shown to you.

You should not uncover our knowledges to those who oppose them and who
use bad words for you due to it all and may malign and condemn you and
may harm you physically or mentally. You must not disclose our secrets
to one who maligns us or who is totally unaware of our affairs or who
may behave badly with our friends, due to lust for money offered the
ignorant. I also order you to adopt dissimulation, because the Almighty
Allah says in Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَتَّخِذِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِنْ دُونِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۖ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللَّهِ فِي
شَيْءٍ إِلَّا أَنْ تَتَّقُوا مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Let not the believers take the unbelievers for friends rather than
believers; and whoever does this, he shall have nothing of (the
guardianship of) Allah, but you should guard yourselves against
them.”***[^142]

Simply: Believers should not make infidels their friends. They must
befriend believers and whosoever will do so (will befriend infidels)
will not get any share from the affection of Allah, except when you, in
order to safeguard your lives and property, make friendship with them
(no harm therein).

I permit you, if necessitated due to fear and hazard, you may give
preference to others over us and show displeasure for us. If you face
real danger to your lives and great calamities, you may, doubtlessly,
give up even obligatory Prayer, because in times of danger, your giving
preference to others neither gives any benefit to our enemies nor does
it harm us in any way.

In such a situation of dissimulation, your giving preference to our
enemies over us and your show of abhorrence for us does not degrade us.
In that case you, only for a while, show displeasure towards us
outwardly but from within the heart you continue to love us. It is only
to keep your life and property safe for a long time thereafter. Your
position may also remain safe.

Therefore you may keep safe and concealed all those near and dear ones,
who are known to others due to you and due to whom you are known to all.
This (dissimulation) may continue until danger is removed and hazards
disappear. It is better than your throwing yourselves in destruction and
becoming disabled in the task of carrying out religious duties and of
improving the condition of your believer brothers.

Hear, I repeat, you must never refrain from performing dissimulation for
the purpose mentioned by me. Do not push yourselves in destruction,
otherwise you will destroy the lives and properties of your other
believer brothers too and all of you will be disgraced by your enemies.
Almighty Allah has ordered you to respect your brothers-in-faith. Now,
if you disregard my warning and suggestion about dissimulation, the
resulting harm to your brothers will be far heavier than what can be
inflicted by our deniers and enemies.

The story of the poisoned shoulder is thus: When the Holy Prophet (S)
was returning to Medina after capturing Khyber, a Jewess approached and
said that she had accepted Islam. Then she put before the Holy Prophet
(S), a roasted lamb shoulder, saying: O Allah’s Messenger! May my
parents be sacrificed for you, I was very worried due to your advance
towards Khyber, because I knew that those people were very brave. I had
a little lamb. I had nourished it like a child. I also knew that you are
fond of roasted mutton shoulder. Therefore, I vowed that if Allah brings
you back victorious, I will present this to your honor to fulfill my
vow.

At that time Ali (a.s.) and Baraa bin Maaroor were also present near the
Holy Prophet (S). Baraa extended his hand, picked a piece of meat and
was about to put it in his mouth, when Ali (a.s.) told him: Don’t begin
anything before the Holy Prophet (S). Baraa who was a Bedouin, replied:
O Ali! Do you consider that the Prophet is stingy?

Ali (a.s.) replied: No, I am telling you this just to give respect to
the Holy Prophet (S). Neither I nor you or any believer should ever try
to precede the Holy Prophet (S) in eating, drinking or in any other
matter. When Baraa replied that he did not consider the Holy Prophet (S)
stingy, Ali (a.s.) said: The reason for which I prevented you is that
this meat is brought by a Jewess, whom we do not know.

Therefore, if you eat from it with the prior permission of the Holy
Prophet (S) it would be safe for you, but if you go ahead without his
permission, only you will be responsible for your life. Ali (a.s.) was
saying this when Baraa had begun to chew that meat. Suddenly that meat
spoke up by Allah’s command and said: O Allah’s Messenger! Please don’t
consume this. It is poisoned. That very moment Baraa fainted and died.

The Holy Prophet (S) called that woman and asked her the reason for such
a heinous act. She replied: You have done great injustice to me. You
killed my father, brother, uncle, husband and son. I told myself: If
Muhammad is only a king like other rulers, he will be killed by this
poison. But if he is a true messenger of God, Allah will fulfill His
promise of capturing Mecca and also protect him from this poison.

The Holy Prophet (S) told her: Well, you are telling the truth. Now
don’t be proud of killing Baraa, because Almighty Allah has only tried
him, as he went ahead of His Prophet in eating. Had he taken my
permission earlier, he would have been protected from fatal
consequences. Then the Holy Prophet (S) called ten persons from his
companions. The wise men included Salman, Miqdad, Ammar, Suhaib, Abu
Dharr and Bilal (r.a.). His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) was also present.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked them all to sit down and they sat down in a
circle. Then the Holy Prophet (S) placed his hand on that poisoned meat
and blew from his holy mouth over it, reciting:  
 In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. In the Name of
Allah, the Healer. In the Name of Allah, the Sufficient. In the Name of
Allah, the Protector. In the Name of one, after taking Whose Name
nothing and no pain can harm, neither on earth nor in the sky and He is
the Hearer, the Knower.

Then he asked all of them to begin eating the meat taking the Name of
Allah. The Holy Prophet (S) himself also ate therefrom. All ate fully.
Then all drank water. Thereafter the Holy Prophet (S) ordered: Detain
this woman. Next day when she was brought to the Holy Prophet (S) he
told her: Did you see that all these persons ate your poisoned food and
all of them have been saved by Allah with His grace?

She said: O Allah’s Messenger! Until now I had a doubt regarding your
messengership, but now I am fully convinced that you are Allah’s true
messenger and I give witness that there is no one worth worshipping
except Only One Allah; that He is One and He has no partner and that you
are His servant and Messenger. The faith of that lady turned out
sincere.

Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) has narrated from his ancestors that when the
Holy Prophet (S) was invited for the funeral prayer of Baraa, he asked:
Where is Ali? The companions replied: He has gone to Quba for some
errand for a Muslim. The Holy Prophet (S) sat down and did not offer
Prayer. The companions asked about the reason of doing so.

The Holy Prophet (S) replied: My Lord has asked me to delay the prayer
till Ali arrives and forgives Baraa for uttering some words, which he
had uttered addressing him in the presence of His Prophet, and thereby
Allah may make Baraa’s death an expiation of his misdeed. A person
present at the time of Baraa’s talk with Ali (a.s.) said: Baraa was
merely joking and not talking seriously and truly from his heart.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: Had his words been seriously true, Allah
would have nullified his deeds even if it were equal to donating in the
path of Allah, gold and silver enough to fill the space between earth
and sky. But it was mere witticism and Ali (a.s.) has forgiven him. Yet
I want that none of you should imagine that Ali (a.s.) is angry with
him. Therefore he may again appear and forgive him front of you, so that
the latter’s nearness to Allah may enhance.

In the meantime, Ali (a.s.) came up there, stood in front of the body
(of Baraa) and said: O Baraa! May Allah have mercy on you. You were
fasting numerously and offering Prayer frequently and you died in the
path of Allah. Thereafter the Holy Prophet (S) said: Had there ever been
any dead person who had become needless of the burial prayer led by the
Holy Prophet (S), he would have been Baraa, because Ali (a.s.) has
prayed in his favor.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) stood in front of Baraa’s body and offered the
funeral prayer and the burial was finalized. When the group returned
from the graveyard and sat for condolence the Holy Prophet (S) remarked:
O heirs and friends of the late Baraa, you are deserving congratulation
more than condolence because your master went, for the sake of Baraa,
from the first to the seventh sky and from the Kursi to the Arsh and
took the soul of Baraa covered in curtains and made it enter Paradise.

All treasurers of Paradise came out to welcome him and the Houries
looked at him from their apartments and all of them talked with him that
which is known only to Allah (what they said). O soul of Baraa, glad
tidings to you for the Prophet of Allah remained in wait for your sake,
so that Ali may arrive and pray in your favor.

Know that upholders of Arsh have on behalf of Almighty Allah, informed
us that He says: My servant and O one who died in My faith, had your
sins been as many as pebbles on the earth, particles of dust, drops of
rain, leaves of trees, hair of animals and their looks and breaths and
movements and stops, I would have pardoned them all because of Ali’s
prayer in your favor.

Thereafter, addressing the audience, the Holy Prophet (S) said: O
servants of Allah! Be worthy of Ali’s pleasure and refrain from His
displeasure and curse, because one whom he curses will be destroyed even
if his good deeds are equal to the number of entire creation. Similarly,
if Ali prays in favor of one, one will be made successful by Almighty
Allah even if his sins equal the number of creations.

The incident wherein a wolf talked with him is like this: The Messenger
of Allah (S) was once sitting when a shepherd came up trembling due to
what he had observed. Looking at that shepherd from a distance the
Prophet said to the companions: The story of this man is indeed very
strange. When he approached and came close, the Prophet told him: Tell
us, why are you shaking so much? That man replied: It is because of a
very wonderful and awful happening.

I was in the midst of my goats, when suddenly a wolf arrived and took
away one of my animals. I at once hit that animal with a stone from a
sling and got the lamb released. Then that wolf came from another side
and took off another lamb, which also I got from his clutches as before.
This happened four times. Finally that wolf came up with its female and
was about to attack my lambs.

Again I intended to stone it but lo, it sat upright and spoke up: Are
you not ashamed of depriving me of my food? Why do you not allow me to
take what Almighty has created for my survival? Do I not need
sustenance? This strange happening made me speak up: How wonderful that
a tongue-less wolf talks like a human being! Thereupon that wolf told
me: May I tell you about an event which is more wonderful than my
talking like men?

Once upon a time the Holy Prophet (S) was sitting between two rocks,
giving information about the past and future to people. But the Jews,
despite knowing through their religious books, that the Holy Prophet (S)
was absolutely truthful and more graceful and excellent, deny him and do
not believe in his messengership. The Holy Prophet (S) resides in
Medina, giving remedy for every ailment, both physical and spiritual. So
O Shepherd! Go there and put faith in him, that is in Muhammad (S), so
that you may be protected from divine chastisement.

Go to Medina and become an obedient Muslim to save yourself from divine
hardships and other calamities. Hearing this, I said to that wolf: By
God, I am extremely astonished by your words. I now feel ashamed for
preventing you from devouring these goats. Here they are. Take and eat
at your will. I do not come in your way now.

Then the wolf replied: O servant of Allah! Be thankful to Almighty
Allah, Who included you in those who take lesson from events showing
Signs of Allah and who obey His commands. But still more hard-hearted is
one who disregards the rights of Ali (a.s.), the brother of Muhammad (S)
despite observing his greatness and in spite of the bounties, which he
grants from Allah.

He also sees the vastness of his knowledge which is unparalleled and his
courage and bravery which are also same. Equally incomparable are his
sacrifices in defense of Islam. He also knows that the Holy Prophet (S)
has ordered all to befriend his friends and to oppose his foes. The Holy
Prophet (S) has also stated unequivocally that Almighty Allah will not
accept any good deed of his (Ali’s) opponent, however great that fellow
may be.

Despite all this, that unfortunate fellow opposes Ali (a.s.) and
oppresses him and befriends his foes. It is much more astonishing than
your preventing me from eating the goats. The shepherd then asked the
wolf: Will it ever so happen against Ali (a.s.)? The wolf replied: Yes.
Rather worse than that. The evildoers will, shortly, kill him and his
innocent offspring and arrest their womenfolk. Despite these evil-doings
they will claim to be Muslims.

This is stranger than all others and hence Almighty Allah has decided
that we, the wolves, will in Hell, tear them into pieces and this
torment and chastisement of these evildoers will give us real pleasure.
Their wailings will make us joyful. Then I said: Had there not been now
in my possession, some goats which are the trusts of other people, I
would have left them here and proceeded to the Holy Prophet (S) to be
fortunate enough to kiss his holy feet.

The wolf said: Then you may now at once go there and leave these goats
in my protection. I’ll take care of them on your behalf. The near-most
angels will protect me, because I am a friend of Allah’s Wali. In short,
I entrusted my goats to that wolf and its female and came to you. At
that moment, the Holy Prophet (S) glanced at his audience and found that
some were pleased, but some were thinking that it was a made up story
and they doubted its reliability.

Their faces showed disbelief. Such hypocrites began to tell one another
in a low voice that this Muhammad (S) had hobnobbed in advance with this
man to entangle unaware people in his snare. When the Prophet came to
know about this through divine revelation, he said smiling: If you have
doubt about what this shepherd has said, let it be with you.

But I am convinced that he is telling the truth and that person has also
believed in the words of this shepherd that Ali was with me in the
heavenly domain (Arsh) of the Almighty in the world of spirits and who
will also take rounds with me in the canals of life in Paradise and who
will also follow me in escorting good people to Paradise and whose Noor
was with mine in pure loins and holy wombs. That Noor even now walks
with me rising in ranks of excellence.

The costly dresses of Ilm (knowledge). Hilm (tolerance) and Aql (wisdom)
given to me by Allah have been given to him too. He is my brother who
got separated from me, when my heavenly Noor was transplanted in the
loins of Abdullah and his in those of Abu Talib (a.s.). He is my
companion in attaining ranks and he is fully just, that he is Ali Ibn
Abi Talib (a.s.), the Siddiq-e-Akbar and the Saaqi of Hauze Kauthar and
his Wilayat (guardianship) and Mawaddat (love) is a treasure for the
believers. He is the pillar of religion and its support.

He knows most of what I know and he is a forerunner in wars for truth.
He is brave and courageous, while facing my enemies like a lion. He
became a believer first of all and he is above all in being happy at
what Allah desires. He is also unique in wiping out the disobedient and
rebels. He is able to defeat false allegations. He testifies the words
of this shepherd. Allah has said that his eyes and ears and hands are
like my eyes, ears and hands. He has been made my supporter and helper.
So when he is with me, I don’t care for those who give up my company and
go wayward. I have no grief for such deviators.

This perfect gentleman testifies what this shepherd has said and states
that Almighty Allah will decorate Paradise with him and his friends and
fill up the Hell with his enemies. No one from my Ummah can try to equal
him. When he is pleased, I care the least for what others dislike and
when he has true affection for me, I do not fear the enmity of others.

This is Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). Even if all in the world and the sky
become disbelievers, Allah will make him help His religion himself
alone. If the entire creation become his enemy, he alone will rise up to
oppose them all and sacrifice his life to help the religion of Allah and
to nullify the path of Satan.

Thereafter he said: The eyewitness of this event is not far away. Let us
go to the herd and see those two wolves. If they talk with us and if we
observe them grazing the sheep, the fact will be testified. Otherwise we
will stand on our earlier view. Finally the Holy Prophet (S) along with
the Ansar and Muhajireen, proceeded towards that herd. Observing it from
some distance, the shepherd exclaimed: That is my herd.

The hypocrites asked: Where is the pair of wolves? Getting nearer, they
saw that the two wolves were taking rounds protecting the herd. Whenever
any of the sheep separated from the herd, the wolves drove them back.
The Prophet said: If you desire, I may prove that my only aim was to
make you hear the wolves talk. The companions replied: Yes, O Allah’s
Messenger, Do so. Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: You may encircle me,
hiding me from the eyes of the wolves.

After compliance with this command, the Holy Prophet (S) asked the
shepherd: Just go to the wolves and say: Which one of you had talked
with me about Muhammad? Then the male wolf began to approach one person
and returning from him to another one finally reached the middle of the
herd and then came up with its female to the Holy Prophet (S).

Then by the Might of Almighty Allah, both spoke up: Our Salaam to you, O
Messenger of the Lord of the worlds and O the best among the creation!
Then they rubbed their cheeks on ground and rolling and tossing about on
ground said: We are inviting people towards your honor and we sent this
shepherd to you. Then addressing the hypocrites the Prophet said: Now no
excuse is left for the disbelievers and hypocrites.

Then he added: Now, this shepherd’s words about my messengership have
come true. Now if you like, you may also get testified the other thing,
that is, the truthfulness of Ali (a.s.). The companions replied: Oh yes,
Messenger of Allah! The Holy Prophet (S) then said: All of you now
encircle Ali (a.s.). The companions encircled Ali (a.s.). So when they
hid Ali behind them, the Holy Prophet (S), addressing the wolves said:
Just as you pointed to me and gave my sign to the people, give the sign
of Ali (a.s.) also so that people may know that what you said in his
praise is true.

Hearing this, the wolves came forward. They began to look closely at the
faces and feet of all present there. They left all and finally when they
reached Ali (a.s.) they rubbed their cheeks on ground and rolling and
tossing at his feet spoke up: Peace be on you, O Mine of magnanimity,
peak of intelligence, Scholar of the earlier scrolls, legatee of
Muhammad Mustafa (S), one whose friends have been made fortunate by
Almighty Allah and whose foes have been declared as doomed forever by
Almighty Lord. Allah has made you the chief of the progeny of Muhammad
(S) and of the holy family members.

Peace be on you, O one whom all on earth if they befriend you like those
who have befriended you in the heavens all of them would have become
good and selected. Salam on you, one about whom it has been destined
that if anybody donates everything between the earth and the sky in
God’s path but with even an iota of grudge against you in his heart that
fellow would earn nothing but hellfire and wrath of God.

The companions became extremely astonished at all this. They said: We
never knew that even animals are so respectful and obedient to Ali
(a.s.). The Holy Prophet (S) said: You are amazed by seeing only one
animal’s obedience. Who knows how will be your astonishment if you
observe how much high is the rank of Ali (a.s.) in the eyes of all the
animals on the land and sea and angels in high heavens.

By Allah! I have seen the image in the sky near Sidratul Muntaha.
Almighty had created that image to fulfill the longing of angels who
were eager to see him. There I witnessed that the respect and humility
shown by angels to the image of Ali (a.s.) was much more than the
humility shown by these two wolves.

Why should all wise people and angels not become respectful for him
about whom the Almighty has, swearing by His self said: I will raise the
rank in Paradise equal to 1,00,000 years’ journey in favor of one who
shows even an iota of humility towards Ali (a.s.). So now you can
understand that Ali’s rank is much more than what you are being shown
here.

The event in which a branch of a date tree wept for the Holy Prophet (S)
is thus: The Holy Prophet (S) used to reclined on a tree trunk in the
mosque of the Prophet, whenever he gave any sermon. One day the
companions said: O Allah’s Messenger! The audience has now increased and
all of us desire to be able to look at your holy face. So if you allow,
we may erect another pulpit wherefrom you may deliver the sermons.

The Holy Prophet (S) allowed them to do so. The following Friday, when
the Holy Prophet (S) went on that pulpit, the earlier post began to weep
like a woman weeping over her dead child. That pillar then cried loudly
like a woman in labor. Hearing this, all in the mosque began to cry and
became very restless. They approached the Holy Prophet (S) who, then,
went to the weeping pillar, embraced it and said affectionately: The
Messenger of Allah has not discarded you to belittle you. The aim was
only to ensure the good of Allah’s servants to some more extent.

So rest assured that your rank and honor can never become less, because
you have been a resting support for the Messenger of Allah. This calmed
that pillar and the Prophet went on the stage and said to the audience:
“O Faithfuls! Just observe, this pillar is weeping for being separated
from the Messenger of Allah, saddened by this distance. But there are
some people who oppress their own selves and don’t care for nearness or
distance from the Prophet.

Had I not embraced and calmed this pillar, it would have continued to
weep and shriek till Judgment Day. On the other hand, there also are
some people who weep like this pillar due to their separation from
Allah’s Messenger and his legatee, Ali (a.s.). For being a true
believer, it is enough that his or her heart gets full of affection for
Muhammad and Ali (a.s.). You have just seen how and why this post was
weeping and how it calmed.” The companions said: “Indeed, O Allah’s
Messenger.”

Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: “By Allah! Who sent me to His creation
making me His true messenger, the longing of the managers of Paradise
and of all the servants and Houries therein and of the palaces and
gardens in the high heavens to see the faces of those who love Muhammad
and his purified progeny (S) and who are against their enemies is far
more than the longing of this wooden pillar.

What calms them is the Durood recited by our Shias for Muhammad (S) and
the pious household of the Prophet of Allah, their voluntary Prayer or
fasts or charities. They get the greatest happiness and satisfaction
when they hear how Shia faithfuls have helped their brothers-in-faith
and supported them in difficult times.

On hearing such good news, they talked among themselves: Make no haste,
because your master has delayed his arrival so that his or her ranks in
Paradise may go higher by behaving nicely with their believer brothers
and sisters.

Their grief due to separation from believers becomes less and they get
peace the most when Almighty Allah informs the residents, servants and
Houries etc. in Paradise that the Shias who are your owners are being
suppressed by enemies and Nasibis; that they are suffering many
hardships; that they are pulling on with dissimulation and are being
patient. After hearing this, they also say: We are also resorting to
patience in their separation just as they keep patience even after
hearing indecent talks about their leaders and elders, control anger and
refrain from exposing the truth when they see the oppression of the
oppressors and when they find themselves in weak condition unable to
defend themselves.

At that time our Lord Protector says: O residents of My Paradise! O
treasurers of My Mercy! I have not been miserly in getting your husbands
and beloved to you. Rather, the aim is that they may attain maximum
Kindness and Mercy by doing more and more good to their
brothers-in-faith, and by helping their poor and oppressed
friends-in-faith, and by practicing dissimulation while tolerating the
high-handedness of infidels and sinners. When they will be perfect in
this regard, I will send them to you in a very good condition. So,
congratulations to you. When they hear this voice, their weeping stops.

The story about the Jews who died due to the poison they had prepared to
kill the Holy Prophet (S) is thus: When the Holy Prophet (S) proclaimed
the religion of Islam in Medina, Abdullah bin Ubayy became extremely
jealous; so he resorted to a conspiracy, dug a pit in his house and
erected poison coated knives and lances and covered it all by a thick
mat or carpet.

He also tied a border of that carpet with a wall so that when the Holy
Prophet (S) and his companions arrive, they may fall in that pit. He
also hid some of his evil-minded companions armed with swords, so that
when the Holy Prophet (S), Ali (a.s.) and other companions come out,
they might be attacked and killed. Besides, he also prepared poisoned
food so that if the first plan fails, they may be finished by the
poisoned food.

Finally he went and invited the Holy Prophet (S) and his close
companions for the feast, and the Almighty Allah, through angel
Jibraeel, informed the Holy Prophet (S) about all these evil plans.
Jibraeel (a.s.) advised the Prophet to sit where the mischief-maker
Abdullah bin Ubayy might suggest and also to eat the food offered by him
so that this miracle may be observed by them all quite clearly.

In short, the Holy Prophet (S) went to that fellow’s house with his
companions and sat on the carpet prepared by him. Yet they remained safe
because Allah had hardened the carpet and the ground beneath it became
stony and leveled. The hypocrites were amazed beyond measure. Then he
put the poisoned food before his guests. Before extending his holy hand
to the food, the Holy Prophet (S) asked Ali to recite these words (as he
himself recited):  
 In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. In the Name of
Allah, the Healer. In the Name of Allah, the Sufficient. In the Name of
Allah, the Protector. In the Name of one, after taking Whose Name
nothing and no pain can harm, neither on earth nor in the sky and He is
the Hearer, the Knower.

Then all of them ate the food, got satisfied and returned hale and
hearty. When companions of Abdullah bin Ubayy saw this, they thought
that perhaps he had forgotten to poison the remaining food, so they
poisoned it. His daughter who had prepared all these plans saw that the
mouth of that pit had been closed and that it had become hard like the
ground she herself sat on.

But when she sat, Almighty Allah reverted that to its earlier condition
and that cursed woman fell down into it and died and the inmates of that
house began to weep and cry in grief. Abdullah bin Ubayy warned the
people of his house and ordered them not to say that she died after
falling in the pit otherwise, they will be disgraced and Muhammad will
know that it was all due to their conspiracy.

So they were weeping and saying: The bride for whose marriage this feast
was arranged, has died. And all who ate that leftover food also died.
When Abdullah bin Ubayy came to the Prophet, the latter asked the cause
of that girl’s death. The great liar replied that the girl fell down
fatally from the upper floor of the house and all who ate, died due to
overeating. Thus the conspirators did not reveal the true cause.

Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) has said that a similar situation was faced
by Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) with regard to Jadd bin Qays. Jadd was a
follower of Abdullah bin Ubayy in hypocrisy. On the other hand, Ali was
very much like the Holy Prophet (S) in character and elegance. After
Allah made Abdullah bin Ubayy and his co-conspirators lick dust and made
their own trap destroy them, Abdullah bin Ubayy met Jadd and said:
Muhammad is an extremely clear magician, but Ali is not so clever.

Therefore, invite Ali for a feast in your house and after digging the
foundations of the walls of your garden, make some men stand behind
holding that wall with the help of wooden planks. When Ali and his
companions begin to eat, let the wall fall on them, so that all may die
together. The cursed one did so.

When Ali (a.s.) arrived, he gave that wall a support of his holy hand
and prevented it from falling. Then he asked his faithful companions to
start eating reciting: Bismillaah. Ali (a.s.) himself also began to eat
with them. When all ate perfectly, then also he kept the wall, which was
thirty yards long, fifteen yards high and two yards thick, from falling.

His faithful companions said: O Sir! How can it be that we continue
eating and you continue to hold this heavy wall from falling. How hard
it is for your honor. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) replied: I find this wall
lighter than the morsel of food in my right hand. Jadd bin Qays then
fled away from there imagining that Ali (a.s.) and his companions will
be killed under the falling wall and then the Prophet will call him to
compensate. He hid in the house of Abdullah bin Ubayy.

Finally they came to know that Ali (a.s.) had stalled the wall from
falling with his left hand and was eating with his companions with his
right hand and that they had not been crushed under the wall. Hearing
this, Abu Shurur and Abud Dawahi, who were the original planners of this
plot said: Ali is very expert in the magic of Muhammad, so we cannot
defeat him. At last when all had eaten, Ali (a.s.), with his left hand,
made that wall stand upright, filled up its gaps and returned from there
with his companions safely.

Seeing him back, the Holy Prophet (S) told Ali (a.s.): O Abul Hasan!
Today you acted like brother Khizr (a.s.). He had also repaired a
falling wall. Almighty Allah had made that job easy for Khizr (a.s.)
through our Ahlul Bayt’s supplication.

The story wherein the Almighty Allah had made little food more for the
sake of the Holy Prophet (S) is thus: One day the Holy Prophet (S) was
sitting with his companions, including righteous Muhajirs and Ansar. He
said: I feel like eating Harira prepared with ghee and honey. Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) said: I also feel like you.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) asked Abul Fazl: How do you feel? He replied:
I would like to eat roasted shoulder meat of a sheep. When inquired from
Abu Sharur and Abud Dawahi they also said: A lamb’s roasted meat of
chest. Then the Holy Prophet (S), addressing the audience said: Who from
the believers will give a feast to the Messenger of Allah (S) and his
companions? Who will give them food desired by them?

When Abdullah bin Ubayy heard this, he thought of planning some mischief
to kill them all, sparing the world from them. So he got up saying: O
Allah’s Messenger! I am prepared to give you all the proposed feast. I
have ample wheat and ghee for making Harira and also have a lamb for
roasting. The Holy Prophet (S) said: All right, we agree. So the
hypocrite went to his house, prepared the said eatables and mixed poison
in them. Returning to the audience, Abdullah bin Ubayy said: Please come
alone as the food is ready.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked: Whom should I bring with me? The hypocrite
replied: You may come with Ali, Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad and Ammar
(r.a.). The Holy Prophet (S) then asked: Should Abushuroor, Abud Dawahi,
Abul Malahi and Abu Nakat not come? Abdullah bin Ubayy said: No please.
The reason for excepting was that they were partners in his hypocrisy.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: I will not eat unless all of them and the
Helpers and the Ansars are also invited. Abdullah said: O Prophet! The
food is not that much in quantity. It can be served only to a few
persons. The Holy Prophet (S) said: O Abdullah! Almighty Allah has sent
down a plate of food containing some loaves and some fish. Yet he gave
such a bounty in it that 4700 persons ate and became fully gratified
therefrom. Then Abdullah said: If it is so, you may bring all of them.

The Holy Prophet (S) then called out: O Muhajireen and Ansar! Come along
with me for a feast at the house of Abdullah bin Ubayy. Seven to eight
thousand persons proceeded along with the Prophet. Then Abdullah told
his companions: What should be our plan now? We wanted to kill only
Muhammad and few of his close associates. We never wanted to kill all
these people who are here. We understand that when Muhammad will be no
more, all his companions will get separated from one another; not even
two will agree on a point (so what is the use of killing them all?).

Then he asked his companions take up arms and be ready for a fight so
that when Muhammad dies of poison and when his companions think of
taking revenge, they may be able to fight them. Finally, when all the
invitees entered the compound of Abdullah, he asked the Holy Prophet (S)
and his close friends Ali, Salman, Miqdad and Ammar (r.a.) to sit in a
small room. He asked all others to sit in the garden and in other parts
of his house. Some may wait at the door.

They may take the place of the first group when they finish eating. But
the Holy Prophet (S) said: The Almighty, Who can give bounty in a little
food can also widen this house amply. Then the Holy Prophet (S) called
out: O Ali, Salman, Miqdad, Abu Dharr, Ansar, Muhajireen all of you may
enter this house. So all entered and made a circle around the Holy
Prophet (S) (like Hajis who circle the holy Kaaba). Wonderfully all of
them accommodated in that house comfortably and there still was room for
one person between all seated there.

When Abdullah came in, he was extremely astonished to observe such
vastness in his room. Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: Bring to us
whatever you have prepared for this feast. Then he placed the eatables
in front of the Prophet and said: O Allah’s Messenger! You may take food
first, then may Ali and thereafter your nearest companions, one by one.

The Holy Prophet (S) replied: Never mind that. Then the Holy Prophet (S)
put his holy hand on the plate, likewise did Ali (a.s.). Seeing this,
Abdullah asked: Is it not better that you may, O Ali, eat along with
your friends and allow the Holy Prophet (S) to take his food
separately?! Hearing this, the Holy Prophet (S) said: O Abdullah!
Compared with you, Ali (a.s.) is more knowledgeable about Allah and His
Messenger.

Allah has never kept distance between me and Ali. He created me and him
with same Noor. He then brought our Noor before the residents of the
earth and heavens, and angels, Jinns and wind and took a word of promise
from them all that all of them will befriend our friends and oppose our
opponents. The intention of myself and of Ali is always the same; my aim
is his aim. Whatever he likes, I also wish for that.

His pleasure pleases me and his sorrow makes me sorrowful. Therefore, O
Abdullah, Ali will eat with me, because he is more well versed with me
than you are. Abdullah replied: All right. Then he sent a word to Jadd
bin Qays and Mazat saying: We wanted to kill one, but now they are two.
Now both of them will die and we will get rid of them. So this is the
hour of their destruction and of our happiness, because had Ali remained
alive, he would have surely fought against us.

Abdullah had gathered his co-hypocrites around his house so that when
the Holy Prophet (S) dies of poison, they may attack and finish his
companions. Finally the Prophet and Ali (a.s.) ate that Harira fully.
Then the desired two things were put before those who had asked for side
and chest meat of a lamb and they also got satisfied.

All the time Abdullah kept looking at them thinking that they were about
to die. But the eaters were hale, healthy and joyful. Thereafter the
Holy Prophet (S) said: O Abdullah! Bring that roasted lamb. When it was
brought, the Holy Prophet (S) said: Keep this roasted lamb in the centre
of this house. Abdullah exclaimed: O Prophet! How will the hands of the
people reach this meat?! The Holy Prophet (S) told him: The Almighty Who
widened this house so much, will also lengthen the hands of the eaters.

And so it happened and the hands of the guests became long enough to
reach that mutton and they ate it. Allah made that lamb enough to
gratify so many people. Only bone remained. When all had eaten, the Holy
Prophet (S) covered those bones with his handkerchief and asked Ali
(a.s.): Just pour the Harira on this and so he did. All took that also
to their gratification.

Then the guests said: O Allah’s Messenger! We would like to have milk.
The Holy Prophet (S) said: The rank of your Prophet, compared to that of
His Eminence, Isa (a.s.), is far more higher. Allah had enlivened dead
ones for the sake of Isa (a.s.). He will do so also for your prophet.
Then the Holy Prophet (S) spread his handkerchief over those bones and
recited a supplication, saying:  
*O Allah! Just as You provided bounty in this animal please recreate the
same bounty again and feed us with its milk.*

Next moment, by the Command of the Almighty, flesh covered those bones
and it made movement and the animal got up and its udders filled up with
milk. The Holy Prophet (S) then called out for utensils and got them
filled with a lot of milk and gave it to all in ample quantity and it
satisfied them all. Thereafter he also said: Had I no fear of my
community becoming animal-worshipper like the people of Bani Israel, who
had begun to worship a calf, I would have allowed this goat to live and
to graze at it’s will.

Then he again made a supplication, requesting Almighty Allah to turn
that animal into bones and it so happened at once. Then the Holy Prophet
(S) returned therefrom along with his companions. The companions then
began to discuss the amazing events of the small house becoming big and
the little food becoming more and of the dispelling of the effect of
poison. The Holy Prophet (S) told them: These happenings make me think
of the bounties of various gardens of Paradise, which will be made more
bountiful for our Shias.

He said that some Shias are so noble that the Almighty will grant them
high ranks, palaces and fairies and other rewards of niceties that, in
comparison, all the bounties of this world together would appear like
only one grain of sand in an endless desert. It also so happens, he
added, that often a noble believer gets entitled to such a rank in
Paradise. Then he (in the world) observes a needy believer brother and
behaves kindly with him, honors him, helps him and does not leave him to
dishonor himself by approaching someone for help.

At that moment, Lord Almighty Allah makes his residence in Paradise much
more spacious just as you saw the broadening of this narrow house and
the increase in this food. At such times, angels in charge of those
places, request the Almighty saying: O Lord! We are not strong enough to
serve here, so please appoint some more angels to help us in carrying
out Your Commands. Almighty Allah responds: O angels! I do not wish to
load you beyond your ability.

Just tell Me how much more help you need? They urge: O Lord! A thousand
fold more than our number may kindly be appointed. Yet there are also
some such noble believers that for rewarding them in heavens, the
concerned angels request for a million times more helpers. The reward of
some is even greater. So Allah grants as much as is needed.

Whenever any believer behaves more nicely with his faithful brother,
Lord Almighty multiplies the number of his heavenly helpers. Thereafter
the Holy Prophet (S) said: Whenever I remember the event of eating that
poisoned food and of our being patient and of Allah’s removing that
calamity from us and of granting bounty in our needed things, I also
remember the patience of our Shias during dissimulation. Almighty Allah
will grant great reward in Paradise due to their patience.

So much so, that others will envy them in the heaven. Allah will address
them saying: Congratulations for these bountiful luxuries which have
been granted to you as reward of the patience you observed when you were
being oppressed by unjust people in the world; when you were observing
dissimulation against the enemies of religion.

### Miracles related to the Celestial World

The first of these is his cleaving asunder of the moon, regarding which
the Almighty Allah has declared in Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْتَرَبَتِ السَّاعَةُ وَانْشَقَّ الْقَمَرُ. وَإِنْ يَرَوْا آيَةً
يُعْرِضُوا وَيَقُولُوا سِحْرٌ مُسْتَمِرٌّ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The hour drew nigh and the moon did rend asunder. And if they see a
miracle they turn aside and say: Transient magic.”***[^143]

Majority of both Shias and Sunnis relate that this verse was revealed
when the Quraish demanded a miracle of Muhammad, who gestured to the
moon, and by divine power it was cleft into two pieces.  
 With regard to this miracle, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) informs us that
fourteen hypocrites, who attempted to assassinate the Prophet at Aqbah,
waited upon him on the fourteenth night of the month, when the moon was
full, and said, “Every Prophet has had a miracle to attest his divine
mission, and tonight we demand of you a great miracle.”

“What is it?” said Muhammad. They said: “If you are respectable near the
Almighty Allah, command the moon to be divided into two.” Instantly
Jibraeel announced to Muhammad greetings from the Lord, and that all
things were subjected to his command. The Prophet then raised his head
to heaven and said to the Moon, to divide into two; which was
immediately done. The Prophet prostrated himself in thanksgiving to God,
and our Shias did the same.

On arising, he was asked by the hypocrites to restore the moon to its
former state, which was forthwith accomplished. His visitors then said,
“Let one side of be moon split, and the other side remain in its natural
state.” At his command this likewise was done. The Prophet and Shias
again prostrated in thanks.

His adversaries now said, “We have friends coming from Syria and Yemen;
if they shall have seen tonight what we have witnessed, we will believe;
if they report nothing of these signs, then we shall know that you have
imposed it on us by sorcery. At this conclusion, the Almighty Allah sent
down the verses quoted above. Ahle Sunnat have narrated the traditional
report of the splitting of the Moon through many companions.

Like Ibn Masud, Anas, Huzaifa, Abdullah Ibn Umar, Abdullah Ibn Abbas and
Jubair Ibn Motam and all have narrated that it occurred in Mecca. Jubair
says that the travelers referred to by the Quraish declared that they
saw the same wonders which appeared to the visitors of Muhammad. Ibn
Masud swore that the parts of the moon separated so far that he saw
Mount Hira between them. Zahak says…Abu Jahl declared the whole affair
was magic, but that they would inquire in surrounding places and
ascertain if any change was observed in the moon on that night, and
finding that the appearances at Mecca were seen everywhere, the infidels
declared that it was sorcery that has spread to all the places.

Another tradition in reference to this same subject declares that the
Prophet was sitting by Hajar Ismail, when the infidels of Quraish said
among themselves, “The matter of Muhammad has made us helpless. We know
that a sorcerer can do nothing in heaven, therefore show us a miracle
from thence. He then asked if he should show them a miracle in the full
moon. They replied in the affirmative.

With his miracle-working finger he then gestured to the moon, and it was
split into two; one half fell on the roof of the Kaaba, and the other
half on Mount Abu Qubais. On requesting him to reunite the parts, it was
instantly done, upon which they said to one another, “Let us be gone,
Muhammad’s magic acts in heaven and earth.” According to another report
the Moon remained in two pieces from Asr to evening and the infidels
were observing it and saying that it was an enduring sorcery.

It is narrated from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) through authentic chains that
the Moon was split into two pieces through the miracle of the Prophet
and His Eminence said, “Be a witness to this.”

**Second miracle:** Bringing back of the sun after it had set. Shia and
Sunni scholars have through many chains narrated from Asma binte Umais
etc. that one day the Holy Prophet (S) sent Ali away on some business,
and he did not return till the time for afternoon prayers had passed.
When Ali came back the Prophet laid his head in his lap, and in that
state received a divine communication, which was not ended until the sun
was setting.

He then inquired of Ali if he had performed prayers. “No,” said he, “I
could not lay aside your blessed head for any purpose.” The Prophet then
prayed, “O Lord, Ali was in service of You and Your Prophet, therefore
bring back the sun for him to perform prayers.” Asma says: “By Allah, I
saw the sun returned several degrees above the horizon, and again shone
on the earth.”

Till it was the best time of Asr Prayers and Imam Ali (a.s.) performed
the prayers. Then the Sun set again. There are many traditions about
this phenomenon, which will be mentioned in the chapter of the miracles
of Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Insha Allah. It is narrated in another report
that when the Messenger of Allah (S) described his night ascent to
heaven he announced that he had seen the Quraish caravan at such a
stage.

And when people asked him on which day would it reach Mecca, he said
that it would arrive the following Wednesday. That day, however, drew
towards a close and the caravan did not appear, and Muhammad’s enemies
were in high expectation of convicting him of falsehood. But the
Almighty Allah at the Prophet’s prayer caused the sun to linger an hour
longer than usual above the horizon, in which time the caravan arrived
and Muhammad’s veracity was proved.

**Third miracle:** Falling of stars and innumerable meteors at the
Prophet’s birth, and the prohibition of evil spirits from ascending to
the heavens.

**Fourth miracle:** Shia and Sunni scholars have narrated that when Arab
tribes agreed to harass the Prophet, he (S) prayed against them to
restrain rain for seven years from the tribe of Mudhir. A dreadful
famine was the consequence of this as happened in the time of Prophet
Yusuf (a.s.). So there was no rain for seven years. There was a terrible
drought in Medina. A Bedouin came to the Prophet and said that their
trees were dried up and there was no grass.

There was no milk in the udders of quadrupeds and with women, and the
animals had perished. The Holy Prophet (S) went to the pulpit, praised
and glorified the Almighty and beseeched for rain. It began to rain and
continued for a week. It rained so heavily that people of Medina
complained that they would drown and their houses would collapse.

The Holy Prophet (S) gestured to the heavens and said: O Allah, let
there be rain in the surrounding areas and there should not be rain in
this town. Wherever he indicated, the clouds moved to that place and
there was no rain in Medina. This continued for a month. The Holy
Prophet (S) said if His Eminence, Abu Talib has been alive at this time
he would have been highly pleased at this.

**Fifth miracle:** It was a cloud that overshadowed him before and after
his assumption of the prophetical office, as mentioned in full in the
previous chapters when the Prophet traveled to Syria with Abu Talib and
on the way the monk, Bahira had seen him and after that also others
witnessed it and after this also it would be mentioned. It is one of his
continuously narrated (*Mutawatir*) miracles.

**Sixth miracle:** A table was sent down to the Holy Prophet (S) laden
with viands and fruits. Thus it is narrated from Umm Salma through
authentic chains of narrators that one day Lady Fatima (s.a.) came to
the Prophet and she was accompanied by Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husain
(a.s.). She had prepared a Harira that she had brought for the Prophet.

The Messenger of Allah (S) called for Ali (a.s.), placed Imam Hasan
(a.s.) on his right knee and placed Imam Husain (a.s.) on his left and
made Lady Fatima and Ali (a.s.) sit in his front and at the back and
covered them with Khyber cloak. Then he stated three times: O Allah,
these are my Ahlul Bayt, keep doubt and sins away from them and keep
them purified as it is wont to be.”

Lady Umm Salma says that I stood at the entrance and I said: “O
Messenger of Allah (S), am I also from them?” He replied: “No, but you
shall have a good end.” Meanwhile Jibraeel came down and brought a tray
filled with the fruits of Paradise. When the Holy Prophet (S) handled
the fruits, they began to praise and glorify the Almighty.

Then he ate from them and also gave to Hasan and Husain (a.s.); again
the fruits said: Glory be to Allah, and Hasan and Husain (a.s.) ate
them. Then he gave them to Ali (a.s.); the fruits praised the Almighty
and he also ate. At this point, a companion of the Prophet arrived and
tried to partake of them. Jibraeel said: “Except for the Prophet,
successor of the Prophet or the sons of the Prophet, no one else can eat
from them.

It is narrated from Lady Umm Salma that one day the Holy Prophet (S) had
sent Imam Ali (a.s.) on some business. When he returned, the Messenger
of Allah (S) was in my room. On seeing Ali (a.s.), the Holy Prophet (S)
arose and welcomed him and brought him in the courtyard with his hand
around him. Suddenly a cloud covered the two of them and they became
invisible to me.

When the cloud went away I saw that the Holy Prophet (S) was holding a
bunch of white grapes from which he and Ali were eating. I said: “O
Messenger of Allah (S), you eat and give to Ali and you don’t allow me
to share it.” He said, “They are from Paradise and none except a prophet
or a successor of a prophet can eat them.”

Shia and Sunni scholars have narrated through authentic chains of
narrators from Anas that one day the Messenger of Allah (S) mounted and
rode to the peak of a mountain and told to go to a particular place
where Ali was chanting the praise of Allah in the company of pebbles.
Convey my greetings to him and bring him to me mounted on this mule.

Anas says that he went to that place and brought Ali to the Prophet. Ali
(a.s.) greeted the Prophet and he replied and asked him to be seated.
“Seventy prophets have sat at this spot and I am the best of all. In
this way their successors have also sat here and you are superior to
all. Anas says: I saw a cloud approach them and the Prophet extended his
hand and took out a bunch of grapes from it and placed it in front of
Ali (a.s.) and himself and said: “O my brother, eat from it as it is a
gift from the Almighty Allah.” Anas asked, “Is Ali your brother?”

The Prophet replied in the affirmative, “Because 3000 years before the
creation of Adam, the Almighty Allah created water below the Arsh and
placed in a green pearl and its knowledge is only with Allah. Finally He
created Adam (a.s.) and placed that water in his loins. Then he
transferred it to the loins of Sheeth. In this way, it was transferred
from one to another till it came to the loins of Abdul Muttalib. At this
point it was divided into two – a part of which went to the loins of
Abdullah and another part went to the loins of Abu Talib.

I am created from one part and Ali from another. Therefore Ali is my
brother in the world and the Hereafter. It is mentioned by the Almighty
Allah in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ مِنَ الْمَاءِ بَشَرًا فَجَعَلَهُ نَسَبًا
وَصِهْرًا ۗ وَكَانَ رَبُّكَ قَدِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He it is Who has created man from the water, then He has made
for him blood relationship and marriage relationship, and your Lord is
powerful.”***[^144]

It is mentioned in another report that Anas said: They ate and drank
from that cloud and then it went away to the sky. And the Prophet said:
313 prophets and a similar number of their successors have eaten and
drank from this cloud. I and Ali are the most superior to them in the
view of the Almighty Allah.

It is mentioned in another reliable tradition from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: You should prefer eating
Hareesa as it imparts strength of praying for forty days and it was
included in the tray that had arrived from the heavens for the Holy
Prophet (S).[^145]  
**Seventh Miracle:** It is related on the authority of Anas, that the
Prophet sent summons to a Firon among Arabs, to invite him to embrace
the faith.

When the messenger came to him, he asked: “What is that God made up of,
gold, silver or iron to whom you call me?” The messenger returned and
then the Prophet sent him again and he invited him to Islam and he
refused and was speaking to the messenger of the Prophet when a cloud
appeared, from which issued lighting that burnt away his skull, on which
this verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُرْسِلُ الصَّوَاعِقَ فَيُصِيبُ بِهَا مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَهُمْ
يُجَادِلُونَ فِي اللَّهِ وَهُوَ شَدِيدُ الْمِحَالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and He sends the thunderbolts and smites with them whom He pleases,
yet they dispute concerning Allah, and He is mighty in
prowess.”***[^146]

**Eighth miracle:** In the commentary of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.), it is
related that one day the Prophet said to Abu Jahl: “Allah has preserved
you from punishment because you will be the father of a son who will
embrace Islam, that is Akrama. And the problem of Wilayat will crop up
and in that if he obeys Allah, he will gain salvation.

Same is the case of all Quraish that the Almighty Allah gives respite to
some because He knows that some will embrace Islam and regarding some it
is that there will be Muslims in their progeny. Then the Holy Prophet
(S) said: “Look at the heavens.” On doing so they beheld its gates open
and fire coming down and impending over their heads. It approached so
near that they could feel its heat and they began to tremble.

“Be not alarmed,” said the Prophet, “for it will not burn you yet. It is
sent as a lesson for you.” Then they saw an effulgence emerge from their
backs and it extinguished that fire. So much so that it reached upto the
sky. Some of these effulgences belong to those about whom the Almighty
Allah knows that they would become Muslims and some of their descendants
would embrace Islam.

### Miracles manifested in terrestrial objects

Shia and Sunni tradition scholars have narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) and Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that when the Holy Prophet (S)
passed the passes of Mecca every rock and tree he passed, reverently
bowed before him, and greeted him saying: Peace be upon you, O Messenger
of Allah (S).

**Second miracle:** It is narrated through authentic chains of narrators
that Fatima binte Asad says: “When the last moments of Abdul Muttalib
approached, he asked his sons, “Which of you would undertake the
guardianship of Muhammad?” They said, “Muhammad is himself intelligent,
and he should be given in the guardianship of one he prefers.”

Abdul Muttalib said: “O Muhammad, your grandfather is about to pass
away, which of your uncles would you prefer to take care of you?” the
Holy Prophet (S) glanced at all the uncles and then moved to His
Eminence, Abu Talib. His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib said: “Abu Talib, I am
aware of your honesty and trustworthiness you should be for Muhammad
like I am. So Abu Talib brought the Holy Prophet (S) home.

Fatima binte Asad says that she looked after him and he addressed her as
mother. We had some date trees in our courtyard and it was the first
season of fruits. There were forty boys of the same age of the Prophet
and they used to pick up the dates that had fallen from the trees. And
they used to snatch dates from one another and fought among themselves.
But I never saw the Messenger of Allah (S) taking away dates from any
boy. I used to pick some dates for the Prophet and sometimes my slave
girl used to so that.

One day, by chance, both of us forgot to pick the dates and the Prophet
was asleep. The boys arrived and took away all the dates. I lied down
and hid my face in shame. When the Prophet awoke, he went to the orchard
and did not find a single date fruit and he returned from there. My
slave girl said sorry that she had forgotten to pick the dates. The
Prophet again went to the orchard and said to the tree: I am hungry.

I saw the tree bow down as if placing its head at the feet of the
Prophet and he took as many dates from it as he wanted. The tree was
overjoyed at this honor. Lady Fatima binte Asad says that she was
astonished at this. His Eminence, Abu Talib arrived and I ran to open
the door and narrated to him all that I had witnessed. Abu Talib said:
Don’t be surprised at these miraculous acts, because he will be a
prophet and a son will be born to you in your senior age who will be
like him and who will be his successor and vizier. Twenty years after
that, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was born.

**Third miracle:** Through reliable chains of narrators it is narrated
from Ammar Yasir that he had accompanied the Prophet on a journey, “and
we halted at a place where vegetation was sparse. When the Holy Prophet
(S) wanted to relieve himself, he looked here and there but there were
no trees to be seen in the vicinity.

He told me: O Ammar go to those trees and say that the Holy Prophet (S)
orders you to join together so that he may relieve himself behind you.
Ammar did as bidden. So they came together and after the Prophet had
relieved himself, he told them to go back to their places.” It is
narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S)
himself ordered them to join.

When he finished, he ordered them to go back and they returned. Some
companions went there to inspect the feces but could not find anything
at that place.

**Fourth miracle:** It is narrated through many authentic chains by Shia
and Sunni that when the Holy Prophet (S) migrated to Medina and built a
Masjid there, there was a dried date tree near the prayer niche. When
the Prophet delivered the sermon he used to lean upon it. After some
days a Roman arrived and he said: O the Messenger of Allah (S), if you
permit, I can make a pulpit for you to deliver the sermons.

The Prophet allowed him and he made a pulpit having three steps. The
Holy Prophet (S) used to recite the sermon sitting at the third step.
When he came to it for the first time, wailing was heard from the dried
post just as a she-camel screams for her little one. The Prophet
descended the pulpit and embraced the post, which soothed her.

The Holy Prophet (S) said, “If I had not embraced it, it would have
wailed till Judgment Day. This post was called by the name of Hannanah.
It remained after the Prophet till Bani Umayyah demolished the Masjid
and rebuilt it anew and cut off that tree. It is mentioned in another
report that the Holy Prophet (S) ordered that the tree should be
uprooted and buried below the pulpit. It is mentioned in another report
that the Prophet said: Don’t cry, if you want, I can make you a tree of
Paradise so that the righteous may enjoy your fruits, if you like you
can be returned to your previous state, the tree chose the hereafter.

According to another report, when that tree wept and wailed and the
Prophet was seated on the pulpit, he summoned the tree and it reached
the Prophet tearing the ground. The Prophet embraced and comforted it.
It was wailing like a young boy and this is a continuously narrated
miracle. Today the spot of tree is clearly marked and it is called
Ustawana Hannanah.

**Fifth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Nahjul Balagha* etc. that Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) said: I was with the Prophet when a party of the nobles
of Quraish came to him and said to him, “O Muhammad, you have made a big
claim which none of your forefathers or those of your family have made.
We ask you one thing; if you give us an answer to it and show it to us,
we will believe that you are a prophet and a messenger, but if you
cannot do it, we will know that you are a sorcerer and a liar.”

The Messenger of Allah said: “What do you ask for?” They said: “Ask this
tree to move for us, even with its roots, and stop before you.” The
Prophet said, “Verily, Allah has power over everything. If Allah does it
for you, will you then believe and stand witness to the truth?” They
said “Yes”. Then he said, “I shall show you whatever you want, but I
know that you won’t bend towards virtue, and there are among you those
who will be thrown into the pit, and those who will form parties
(against me).”

Then the Holy Prophet said: “O tree, if you do believe in Allah and the
Day of Judgment, and know that I am the Prophet of Allah, come up with
your roots and stand before me with the permission of Allah.” By Him who
deputed the Prophet with truth, the tree did remove itself with its root
and came with a great humming sound and a flapping like the flapping of
the wings of birds, till it stopped before the Messenger of Allah while
some of its twigs came down onto my shoulders, and I was on the right
side of the Holy Prophet.

When the people saw this, they said by way of pride and vanity. “Now you
order half of it to come to you and the other half of it to remain (in
its place).” The Holy Prophet ordered the tree to do the same. Then half
of the tree advanced towards him in an amazing manner and with greater
humming. It was about to touch the Prophet of Allah. Then they said,
disbelieving and revolting, “Ask this half to get back to its other half
and be as it was.”

The Prophet ordered it and it returned. Then I said, “O Prophet of
Allah, I am the first to believe in you and to acknowledge that the tree
did what it did just now with the command of Allah, the Sublime, in
testimony to your Prophethood and to exalt your word. All the people
shouted, “Rather a sorcerer, a liar; it is wonderful sorcery, he is very
adept in it. Only a man like this (pointing to me) can stand testimony
to you in your affairs.”

**Sixth miracle:** It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through
authentic chains of narrators that a certain man came to the Prophet and
asked him to show a miracle. There were a couple of trees before the
Prophet and they were at some distance from one another. The Prophet
ordered: Come together and they joined each other. Then he told them to
go away and they separated on seeing which, the man embraced Islam.

**Seventh miracle:** It is narrated from Abbas through authentic chains
of narrators that Abu Talib asked the Prophet to show him a miracle if
Allah had appointed him as a Prophet. The Prophet called a tree to him
which prostrated itself before him. After that it went back to its
place. Abu Talib said, “I witness that you are true; O Ali, pray at the
side of your cousin.”

**Eighth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)*
that when the following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ قَسَتْ قُلُوبُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ ذٰلِكَ فَهِيَ كَالْحِجَارَةِ أَوْ
أَشَدُّ قَسْوَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then your hearts hardened after that, so that they were like rocks,
rather worse in hardness…”***[^147]

…the Jews found it very painful and they came to him respectfully and
said: O Muhammad, you speak ill of us and what you claim about our
hearts is quite wrong. Though Allah knows that we are good; we fast,
give alms and help the poor.

His Eminence (S) said: A good deed is one performed only for Allah and
according to His command. If it is done to show off ones wealth and
status, or to oppose Allah’s apostle, it is not a good deed; it is only
a mischief. One who commits such acts will be involved in nothing but
trouble and Allah will subject him to a severe punishment in the
Hereafter.

The Jews said: O Muhammad, this is what you say; but we say that
whatever we do is to destroy your name, finish your rulership and make
your companions separated from you. It is a religious war for us and we
hope that Allah will give us great reward for it. At the minimum we can
say that you and we, both are alike in our claims.

Now tell us what excellence you have over us? His Eminence (S) replied:
O Jews! Indeed, in the matter of claims, both, the party of truth and
the party of falsehood, are equal; but Allah’s proofs show the
difference between both. They falsify the party of falsehood and confirm
those who are righteous. And Muhammad, the Prophet of Allah never
becomes aggrieved with your ignorant statements and neither does he
compel you to accept his prophethood without evidence. He establishes
such a divine proof, which you cannot defeat.

You cannot escape from its imminent consequences. If Muhammad (S) shows
any sign from himself you will be in doubt and say it is all false. He
has deceived us or has done it by taking others’ help. But when you
yourself ask according to your choice, you will not be able to say thus.
Whatever you request, will come before your eyes. So that the excuses of
infidels would be finished and insight of believers increase.

The Jews said: O Muhammad, you have said justly. If you fulfill the
promise you made and you fail to bring what we request, you will become
helpless to give up your claim of prophethood, you will have to enter
our community and submit to the commands of Taurat. His Eminence (S)
said: Making threats is of no use; truth will expose your real
condition. Ask whatever you want, so that no excuse remains for you.

They said: O Muhammad, you think that we have no intention to help the
poor and weak? And that our hearts are harder than rocks and more
obedient to Allah? Let us go to one of the mountains and ask it to
testify your claim and our falsehood. If it gives evidence in your
support, it would become incumbent on us to start following you; if it
falsifies you or remains quiet, we will know that you are a liar and you
fight to fulfill your selfish desire.

His Eminence (S) said: Very well, come, let us go to the mountain and
ask for its testimony. They went to a mountain on the outskirts of the
town and Jews said: O Muhammad, ask this mountain to testify. His
Eminence (S) addressed it: O mountain! For the sake of Muhammad and his
purified progeny (by the auspiciousness of whose name Allah made His
empyrean light on the shoulders of eight angels though before that
numerous angels could not move it; and by those names Allah forgave the
mistake of Adam (a.s.) and returned his original status.

And for the sake of those names, Allah sent Idris (a.s.) to the abode of
Paradise.) I ask you in the name of those blessed ones that you give the
testimony for Muhammad (S) that Allah has entrusted you with, which has
the mention of his confirmation about the hardness of their hearts and
their denial of prophethood. When His Eminence (S) said this, the
mountain started moving, a quake ensued, and water started flowing from
it.

It called out: O Muhammad (S)! I give witness that you are the Messenger
of the Lord of the worlds, chief of all the prior and the latter
creatures; and I give evidence that their hearts are harder than rocks
as you said. Not an iota of good comes out from them like sometimes
floods erupt from rocks and sometimes water comes out little by little.
I testify that these people who blame you for attributing lies to God,
are themselves liars.

Then His Eminence (S) said to the mountain: I ask you to say that Allah
has ordered you to obey my orders in all circumstances for the sake of
Muhammad and his purified progeny, for whose sake Allah delivered Nuh
(a.s.) from a great calamity, made the fire cool on Ibrahim Khalilullah
and kept him safe from fire by making him sit on a throne that none had
seen before, between flowers and fruits that grow in different seasons.

The mountain replied: O Muhammad (S), yes, I witness that whatever you
said is true. I also give evidence that if you call on Allah to turn all
men into apes and pigs, Allah will indeed do so or if you ask Him to
turn them into angels, it will be surely done. If you pray to turn fire
into ice and ice into fire, indeed it will happen so; or if you pray to
Allah to make the sky fall on the earth and to raise the earth on the
sky it will come about.

If you pray to Allah to make the East and West of the earth like a bag,
then indeed Allah will do so. I testify that Allah has made all skies,
earth, mountains, seas and forests obedient to you. The winds,
lightning, animals and all people are obedient to you; and they shall do
whatever you say.

After seeing these obvious miracles, the Jews said: O Muhammad, you are
deceiving us. You have hidden your followers behind the rocks and they
speak to you and you say that the mountain is speaking. We don’t know,
whether the voice we hear is of the mountain or people. Only the foolish
can be duped in this way. If you are true in your claim, move away from
this mountain and order it to uproot itself and come to you.

When it comes to you, order it to split into two horizontally and that
the lower part rise up and upper part come down; when this is done, we
will accept that it is from Allah and that nobody has cheated us. Then
His Eminence (S) gestured to a stone that weighed around two kilos and
said: O stone, start rotating. The stone began to rotate at once.

When it came near, His Eminence (S) said to the Jew who was standing
near to pick it up and bring it to his ear so that this may also give
the testimony that the mountain had given because that stone was a piece
of that mountain. When the Jew brought it to the ear, the stone began to
speak by the power of Allah and said that in the same voice that came
from the mountain that whatever blame the Jews laid on Muhammad were
invalid and they were only to the detriment of the Jews themselves.

His Eminence (S) said: Did you hear what the stone said? Was there
someone sitting behind this stone also and talking with you to deceive
you? Or this stone is talking with you? The Jew said: No, it is not so,
but you fulfill what I have requested you.

His Eminence (S) went to stand in a big open field and called out: O
mountain! For the sake of Muhammad and his progeny, just as Allah sent
the swift wind on the people of Aad, which destroyed the people just as
dates fall from the trees and ordered Jibraeel (a.s.) to raise a
dreadful loud voice on the people of Aad; hence it happened so and
because of the severe fatal blow, all people dropped dead like hay, you
also dislocate from your place and come to me. Saying this, he put his
hands on the ground.

The mountain made a movement and immediately came to stand where His
Eminence (S) had indicated and its roots came near the fingers of His
Eminence (S). Then it said: O Messenger of the Lord of the worlds (S), I
am here to listen to your commands with heart and to obey you. If you
want me to disgrace your enemies, I can do it for you.

His Eminence (S) said: These opponents have asked me to order you to
uproot from the earth and split into two in such a way that your upper
half may come down and your lower part go to the top. The mountain
asked: O Allah’s Messenger, do you order me this? He said: Yes.
Immediately the mountain split into two and its lower part went up and
the upper came down.

Then the mountain called: O Jews! Is this miracle less than what Musa
(a.s.) showed and whom you believe? The Jews stared at each other. Some
said: We have no excuse left. And some said: This man is very fortunate.
He gets whatever he intends and shows many wonders. Don’t be tricked by
his wonder acts.

The mountain said: O enemies of Allah, you falsified the prophethood of
Musa (a.s.) in the same way. Did you not say that the turning of Musa’s
staff into a python, splitting of the sea and the raising of the
mountain was all because he was fortunate to show those wonders? And
that you will not be deceived by those wonder acts?

**Ninth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)*
that the infidels of Quraish who opposed him asked the Prophet to come
to the idol Hubal and ask it to judge between them. When he came to it,
it fell down on its face before Muhammad, testifying to his prophethood
and to the Imamate of Ali (a.s.).

**Tenth miracle:** It is mentioned in the same Tafsir that when they
confined the Holy Prophet (S) in the valley of Abu Talib and a party
besieged the defile so that none may supply them with food and clothing
etc. and that no one should come out to procure goods, at that time the
Almighty Allah supplied bounties better than the bounties of Manna and
Salwa that was supplied to Bani Israel and through the prayers of the
Prophet everything they desired was supplied from Paradise.

When they said that they were tired of this narrow place, the Prophet
slashed to his left and right and said to the mountains: “Move away!”
And they moved away and a wide field was seen between the pass, such
that its edges were not visible. Then the Holy Prophet (S) gestured with
his hands and the place became filled with fruits, vegetation and
flowers.

**Eleventh miracle:** It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
through good chains that the prophet put a stone in the middle of a road
to turn water from his field, where it still remains, but through his
miraculous influence no person has ever struck his foot against it,
neither has it occasioned any harm to animals. That stone is still in
its place and no one has stumbled against it and it has caused no harm
to anyone.

**Twelfth miracle:** It is narrated that a Jew had done something for a
Muslim on condition that he would plant for him a date-orchard. When the
prophet came to know about it he ordered Ali (a.s.) to collect as many
seeds as there were date-trees in the bond.

He put the seeds into his blessed mouth and gave them to Ali, who buried
them into the ground, and vegetation followed so rapidly that the
orchard was no sooner planted than it appeared laden with various kinds
of dates, yellow, red, white and black. This miraculous orchard was
delivered to the Jew, and his claim on the Muslim was cancelled. A
similar miracle will be related in the biography of Salman.

**Thirteenth miracle:** It is mentioned in reliable traditions that one
day the Messenger of Allah (S) was passing through a date orchard with
Ali (a.s.) when a tree said to another, “This is the Messenger of Allah,
and he who accompanies him is his successor.” Due to this the dates
produced in that orchard are called ‘Sihani’ because they had witnessed
the prophethood and successorship.

**Fourteenth miracle:** It is narrated from Jabir Ibn Abdullah that: We
were digging the trench during the Battle of Ahzab when a great mound of
earth appeared. We told the Prophet about it. He said don’t worry very
soon you will witness a strange phenomenon.

When it was night, voices were heard from that mound and some couplets
were also heard which meant: Dig up the mound and throw it away at a
distance and help Muhammad the guiding one and assist his cousin. But no
one was visible there. In the morning there was no sign of the mound.

**Fifteenth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that the Prophet
once leaned his back against a dry tree, which immediately became
verdant and produced fruit.

**Sixteenth miracle:** Then he has narrated that one day the Holy
Prophet (S) was encamping at when he sat down under a tree of small
shadow, but being grieved for his companions exposed to the beams of the
sun, by divine power he caused the tree to grow and overshadow them all,
on which occasion the following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلٰى رَبِّكَ كَيْفَ مَدَّ الظِّلَّ وَلَوْ شَاءَ
لَجَعَلَهُ سَاكِنًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you not considered (the work of) your Lord, how He extends the
shade? And if He had pleased He would certainly have made it
stationary.”***[^148]

**Seventeenth miracle:** Ayyashi has narrated from Saeed bin Jubair that
the infidels of Quraish had placed three hundred and sixty idols in the
Kaaba; and each tribe had one or two idols there. When the verse of ‘I
testify that He is such; there is no god except Allah’, all of them fell
in prostration.

**Eighteenth miracle:** Ibn Babawayh etc. have narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that once the Holy Prophet (S) was circling the Kaaba and
he omitted to put his hand on the west corner, which immediately
exclaimed, “Am I not a corner of the House of the Lord? Why do you not
put your blessed hand on me? He then returned and said, “Peace be on
you, I will not ignore you.”

**Nineteenth miracle:** Saffar, Qutub Rawandi and Ibn Babawayh have
narrated that once the Holy Prophet (S) visited a date-orchard, and each
tree began to speak: Peace be upon you, O Messenger of Allah (S) and
begged him to partake their fruit, bending down the branches.

The Holy Prophet (S) ate from them; but when he came to Ajwa, its
branches bowed down in prostration to the Prophet and he said: “O Allah,
bless this tree so that it may benefit the people.” Hence it is related
that it is a tree of Paradise.

**Twentieth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated from
Ibn Abbas that a villager from Bani Aamir came to the Prophet and asked
to convince him of his prophethood. So the Prophet called a cluster of
dates from the tree, and then remanded it to its original position; this
man was convinced and he embraced Islam saying: I witness that you are
the Messenger of Allah, and he came out of there saying: O sons of Aamir
bin Sa-sa I will never refute the Prophet.

**Twenty-first miracle:** It is again narrated from Ibn Abbas that a
notorious infidel and famous wrestler, named Rakana, of the Bani Hashim,
as he was pasturing sheep one day in a valley of Zamm, met the Prophet
alone, and said, “Were it not for the relationship between us, my first
salutation would have been to kill you, the reviler of our gods. Can
your God deliver you from me? Let us wrestle; if you throw me, I will
give you ten sheep. Muhammad raised him up and dashed him to the ground.

“This was not your own feat, said Rakana, your God did it for you.” But
not satisfied with this, he twice again staked ten sheep and was thrown.
He said: “May the Laat and Uzza be destroyed, they have not helped me!”
The Prophet however, refused the thirty sheep he had won, and invited
him to become a Muslim and said, “I don’t want you to go to Hell. If you
become a Muslim you will be safe from divine punishment.”

He said: “I will not convert until you show me a miracle.” The Prophet
said: “I make Allah a witness on you that if you see a miracle you will
accept Islam.” He was near a tree. The Prophet ordered that tree to come
to him. The tree split and came to the Prophet. Rakana said: “This
indeed is a great miracle. Now tell it to go back.” The Prophet ordered
it to go back and it returned and joined with its other half.

The Prophet asked if he was willing to accept Islam? He replied: I don’t
want the ladies of my tribe to ridicule me that I was cowed down by you
to accept Islam. But you may take the sheep that you have won.” The
Prophet said: “I don’t need your sheep if you don’t want to embrace
Islam.”

**Twenty-second miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that on a
certain expedition with his companions, the Messenger of Allah (S) and
his army came to a mountain impassable for horses. At his prayer the
mountain sunk into the earth, was broken to pieces and a way opened up
for the army.

**Twenty-third miracle:** Ibn Babawayh, Saffar and Rawandi, may Allah
have mercy on them, have narrated that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:
“When the Messenger of Allah (S) sent me to propagate Islam in Yemen, I
said that they were very old and I was a young man.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: When you ascend the summit of Afiq, to
proclaim with a loud voice: O trees, pebbles and dust, the Prophet of
Allah sends you his salutation. On ascending Afiq, I beheld the people
of Yemen with drawn swords ready to attack me. I proclaimed the
salutation as I was commanded, when the trees, clods and pebbles in the
valley, with one voice cried, “Peace be to Muhammad, the Messenger of
Allah, and to you.”

This so terrified the Yemenis, that their knees trembled, and casting
down their weapons they surrendered to me and I taught the faith to
them.

**Twenty-fourth miracle:** Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that when the
Messenger of Allah (S) reached below the fort of Bani Quraiza to besiege
it, he was surrounded with date-orchards, to which he gestured, saying,
“Move away.” So they obeyed and dispersed in the field far away.

**Twenty-fifth miracle:** Shaykh Tusi and Qutub Rawandi have narrated
through authentic chains of narrators from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said: I recognize that rock in Mecca which
saluted me before I declared my prophethood.

**Twenty-sixth miracle:** Shaykh Tusi has narrated through authentic
chains from Salman that he said: I was in the company of the Prophet
when Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) arrived and handed a pebble to the Holy
Prophet (S).

It had hardly reached the hand of the Prophet that it began to speak by
the power of Allah and said: There is no god, except Allah. Muhammad is
the messenger of Allah. I am pleased that Allah is the Lord, Muhammad is
the Prophet of Allah, and that Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is the Wali. The
Holy Prophet (S) said: Whoever recites this in the morning will be safe
from chastisement of Allah.

**Twenty-seventh miracle:** Ibn Babawayh and Rawandi have narrated
through authentic chains of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
a Jew, named Sajat, came and said to the Prophet, “Where is your Lord?”
The Prophet replied, “His knowledge and power encompass every place, but
He has no locality.” “What is his condition?” asked the inquirer.

The Prophet said, “How can I explain His mode of being, since He has
created every direction and He cannot be described by the qualities of
the creatures.” The Jew concluded by demanding how he should know
Muhammad was a prophet. Immediately rocks and everything else declared
in clear Arabic that Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah.” Sajat said: “I
have not seen anything more clear, so I testify to the oneness of God
and your prophethood. Indeed you are the messenger of Allah.”

**Twenty-eighth miracle:** It is narrated from authentic chains in
*Basairud Darajat* that one day the Messenger of Allah (S) enter a
certain garden of Bani Najjar in the company of Sahal bin Hunaif and
Khalid bin Ayyub Ansari, when a stone on the mouth of a well saluted
him, and besought him to intercede that it should not be numbered among
the stones of Hell. The Prophet prayed: O Allah, do not make this stone
a stone of Hell.

**Twenty-ninth miracle:** Shaykh Tabarsi, Qutub Rawandi and Ibn Shahr
Ashob have narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) during the expedition
of Taif, was passing through a wilderness in which were many lote-trees,
sleep having overcome the prophet, his camel advanced against a
lote-tree, which parted to open him a way, half standing on one side of
his path and half on the other, where it still remains in the state, and
is honored by the people and called as the Prophet’s lote-tree, and is
much venerated. People hang its leaves on their sheep and camels to
protect them from harm. It is a miracle whose traces remain to this day.

**Thirtieth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that soon after the
Prophet’s assumption of the prophetical office, a group of Arabs had
assembled to worship an idol, when a sound came from it and in clear
language it warned: “Muhammad (S) has appeared, calling on all to
embrace the true religion. Hearing this, the group dispersed and most of
them believed in the Prophet.

**Thirty-first miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated that the Prophet
was returning on a dark rainy night from the Masjid after Midnight
Prayer and a bolt of lightning was flashing before him when he decried
Qatada bin Noman and he recognized him. Qatada said: “O Prophet of
Allah, I want to pray with you, but this darkness had made it
impracticable to attend the Masjid.”

The Prophet gave him a date stem saying, “This will light you for ten
nights”, which proved true. He further warned the man that a Satan had
taken possession of a corner in his house, whom he must attack with a
sword. On entering his house the man saw a black object in a corner,
which, on his assaulting it, climbed the wall and disappeared.

**Thirty-second miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated that one day
Jibraeel came to the Prophet and found him distraught and inquiring
about the cause, he said he was grieved at the violence and denial of
infidels. “Shall I give you a proof, said the angel, that God has
subjected all things to you?” “Yes.” Jibraeel said, “If you call that
tree it will come to you.” He ordered a tree and it came and when he
commanded it to return, it returned.

**Thirty-third miracle:** Rawandi has narrated through some chains that
a Bedouin came to the Prophet from a far off place. Prophet Muhammad (S)
said: “Shall I show you the best path?” “Yes”, said he. “Then say: I
testify that there is no god but Allah, and Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah.”

The Bedouin asked, “Have you any proof of this?” inquired the Bedouin.
“Yes”, said the Prophet. “Go and tell that tree that the Messenger of
Allah is calling it,” which it did. The Bedouin then asked the tree to
testify to the truth of the Prophet, which it did. The Bedouin then
asked the Prophet to make it return.

The Bedouin then asked the Prophet to allow him to prostrate before him
but the Messenger of Allah (S) said, “None is worthy to be prostrated
before, but Allah; or I would have ordered the women to prostrate before
their husbands. The Bedouin became a Muslim and kissing the hands of the
Prophet sought his permission to go back to his tribe and invite his
people to Islam. The Prophet issued the permission and he returned.

**Thirty-fourth miracle:** Pebbles praise and glorify God. Shia and
Sunni scholars have continuously related from Abu Dharr that Makor Amiri
came to the Prophet and asked him to show a miracle. The Holy Prophet
(S) took nine pebbles, which in his hand uttered praises to Allah, but
were silent when he laid them on the ground. Again when he picked them
up they began to recite the praise.

It is mentioned in another report that they used to recite: *Glory be to
Allah, and praise be to Allah, and there is no god except Allah, and
Allah is the greatest.* It is narrated from Ibn Abbas the ruler of
Hadhramaut came to the Prophet and asked: “How do we know that you are
the Messenger of Allah?” The Holy Prophet (S) picked a handful of
pebbles and said: “They testify to my prophethood.” The pebbles began to
praise the Almighty and also testified to the messengership of the
Prophet.

It is narrated from Anas that: “The Messenger of Allah (S) picked up a
handful of pebbles, which began to recite divine praise. After that he
transferred them to the hand of Imam Ali (a.s.) and they continued to
extol Allah as before. When we handled them, they fell silent.”

**Thirty-fifth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Abu Usaid that the
Messenger of Allah (S) one day said to his uncle, Abbas, that he should
remain at home with his sons the next day as he had some business with
them. Next morning he went to their house and called them and prayed for
them; when he did this the sound of Amen came from the corners of the
house.

**Thirty-sixth miracle:** Kulaini, Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have
narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when a man died, his friends
attempted to dig his grave but in vain. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “He
was a good man and there should be no difficulty in digging his grave.”

He then personally went there and called for a cup of water; placed his
blessed hand in the bowl and sprinkled the water on the ground after
which it became as soft as sand. It is mentioned in another report that
when the Holy Prophet (S) prayed, it was dug up easily.

**Thirty-seventh miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) was encamped in a certain place
dining with his companions, on one of his expedition from Medina, when
Jibraeel came and asked him to mount, and presently they arrived a
Fadak, the earth having been folded like a garment, thus shortening
their way.

The people of Fadak heard the sound of horses approaching, and were so
frightened that they fled to the mountains, after locking their town and
giving the keys to an old woman who lived outside. Jibraeel took the
keys for her, and after they had entered the city and been through the
place, the angel announced to the Holy Prophet (S): “O Messenger of
Allah (S), Allah has given this to you and no one has any share in it.”
Then the following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَفَاءَ اللَّهُ عَلٰى رَسُولِهِ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْقُرَىٰ فَلِلَّهِ
وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whatever Allah has restored to His Apostle from the people of the
towns, it is for Allah and for the Apostle, and for the near of
kin…”***[^149]

Then He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا أَوْجَفْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ خَيْلٍ وَلَا رِكَابٍ وَلٰكِنَّ
اللَّهَ يُسَلِّطُ رُسُلَهُ عَلٰى مَنْ يَشَاءُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…you did not press forward against it any horse or a riding camel,
but Allah gives authority to His apostles against whom He
pleases…”***[^150]

Since neither the Muslims fought nor had they accompanied the Prophet in
Fadak. The Almighty Allah had given it to His Prophet without any fight
or struggle. Jibraeel took the Prophet through their homes and orchards
and then after locking the doors handed the keys to him. The Messenger
of Allah (S) placed them in the scabbard and hung the sword on the camel
saddle along with other goods.

Then he mounted and on their return the earth was contracted in the same
manner it had been before. The Messenger of Allah (S) reached his
companions while they had not even dispersed from that gathering and the
Holy Prophet (S) said: I had gone to Fadak and the Almighty Allah has
bestowed it to me. Hypocrites glanced at each other and gestured with
their eyes (we seek refuge of Allah) that the Prophet was lying! The
Messenger of Allah (S) removed the keys from the scabbard and said:
These are the keys of the Castles of Fadak.

Then he set out from there and came to Medina. First of all he visited
Fatima’s house and said: “The Almighty Allah has given Fadak to your
father, in which Muslims have no share. I have the discretion to do
whatever I like with it.

I give it to you and your heirs in perpetuity, to cancel the dower I
have to pay to your mother, Khadija. Then he called for a skin and
called for Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to write out a document for the same.
That Fadak was a gift from the Holy Prophet (S) and he had it witnessed
by Ali and Umm Ayman. Umm Ayman is a lady of Paradise. The people of
Fadak agreed to pay twenty-four thousand dinars (gold coins) annually,
which are about three thousand six hundred tomans of our time.

**Thirty-eighth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that when the Messenger of Allah (S) returned from Hunain and
halted at Jarana and the companions divided the spoils, people still
continued to press upon him for more, and annoyed him so much that he
went and leaned his back against a tree, where they pressed upon him
till his back was bruised and his chador stuck to the tree.

The Messenger of Allah (S) escaped to another tree and asked for his
chador. By Allah, if I had sheep equal in number to the trees of Mecca
and Yemen I would have distributed them among you people. You will never
find me miserly. Thus he set out from Jarana in the month of Zilqad and
by the auspiciousness of the back of the Prophet that tree derived such
virtue from his leaning against it, that it was always verdant the whole
year.

**Thirty-ninth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob and Ibn Masud etc. have
narrated that when people dined with the Prophet, we heard voices from
the food uttering praise of Allah.

**Fortieth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that when the
Messenger of Allah (S) was building a Masjid at Medina, he summoned a
tree from Mecca, which came and testified to his prophethood.

**Forty-first miracle:** It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S)
sent Abdullah bin Tufayl to guide his own people in the faith; and the
Prophet gave him as a miracle, light constantly beaming from the end of
his whip, by which light he introduced his people to the effulgence of
Islam. There is another report that Quraish said to Tufayl bin Amr that
when he entered the great mosque he should stuff his ears with cotton so
that he might not hear the preaching of Muhammad.

But the more cotton he thrust into his ears, the plainer he heard all
the Prophet said. And this miracle caused him to become a Muslim. And he
said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), I am the chief of my community; if you
grant a sign to me, I will call my people to faith. The Messenger of
Allah (S) prayed for a sign. So when he returned to his people, a light
emanated from his whip like it was a bright lantern.

**Forty-second miracle:** Shia and Sunni scholars have narrated that in
the Battle of Ahzab, the Messenger of Allah (S) divided the labor of
digging the trench that each group of ten persons should dig 40 hands.
The land which fell in the share of Salman and Huzaifa was full of
rocks. They told the Prophet who with three strokes of a pickaxe broke
it to pieces, every stroke eliciting a blaze that illumined the world.

And the Holy Prophet (S) used to shout: Allah is the greatest and the
companions followed suit. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: In the first
light were seen the forts of Yemen. And the Almighty Allah granted them
to me. The second time the palaces of Syria were visible and the third
time, I saw the forts of Madayan and the Almighty Allah granted me the
territories of the Kings of Iran. After that the Almighty Allah revealed
the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.”***[^151]

It is mentioned in another report that when it was found rocky, and the
pick-axe was ineffective upon it, the Holy Prophet (S) called for a bowl
of water, and placed some of his miraculous saliva in it; then he
sprinkled the water on the ground. By the miracle of the Prophet it
became so soft that the pick-axe penetrated it easily.

**Forty-third miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated that at the
Battle of Badr, Akasa broke his sword, upon which the Messenger of Allah
(S) gave him a stick, saying, “Fight with this.” The stick was
transformed into a sword in the man’s hand, and he forever fought with
it.

**Forty-fourth miracle:** It is narrated that in the Battle of Uhud, the
Prophet gave a stick to Abdullah bin Jahash, and a stem of date to Abu
Dujana, both of which were transformed to fine cutting swords. Both used
them in battles after that.

**Forty-fifth miracle:** It is narrated that during the conquest of
Mecca, the Messenger of Allah (S) told Imam Ali (a.s.) to bring a
handful of pebbles; then the Holy Prophet (S) threw them at the idols,
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَاءَ الْحَقُّ وَزَهَقَ الْبَاطِلُ ۚ إِنَّ الْبَاطِلَ كَانَ زَهُوقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The truth has come and the falsehood has vanished; surely falsehood
is a vanishing (thing).”***[^152]

Immediately all the idols fell down, and the people of Mecca said: “We
never saw a more powerful magician than Muhammad.”

**Forty-sixth miracle:** It is narrated that a bow was presented to the
Messenger of Allah (S), on which was painted the figure of a black
eagle. On putting his blessed hand on the figure, it was instantly
obliterated.

**Forty-seventh miracle:** It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam* that Ammar
Yasir one day said to the Holy Prophet (S), when Ammar was in doubt
about the prophethood of the Prophet: “O Messenger of Allah (S), I
cannot testify in you as there is a doubt in my heart respecting your
prophetical office; have you a miracle which will remove the doubt?” He
replied, “When you return home, inquire about me of every tree and stone
you see.” On following this direction, the trees and stones testified
that Muhammad was the Messenger of God.

**Forty-eighth miracle:** In *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)* it is
related that one day a believer came to the Prophet who asked him how he
found his heart towards his brother believers? The man said he regarded
them as his own soul; their joys and sorrows were his own. “You are a
friend of Allah”, said the Prophet, shrink not at the calamities of this
world, and although you possess nothing, you will become richer than all
others by invoking blessings on Muhammad, Ali, and their holy family.

The man was rejoiced at this declaration, and constantly invoking
blessings as he had been directed. One day he was met by the well known
hypocrites who had usurped the rights of the progeny of Muhammad. The
first of them said: Muhammad has nicely made you suffer hunger and
thirst. Another said: Muhammad has fooled you nicely through false
promises that he uses for others. Again they met him the next the day in
the Bazar.

They conspired to make joke of this simpleton. Another said: “There is
brisk trade, and large profits have been realized today,” said he, “What
business have you done?” “I have nothing to trade with”, he replied,
“but have been invoking blessings on Muhammad and his family.” “That is
a profitless business”, observed the hypocrite; “When you go home you
will find hunger spread on your table with all sorts of vexation and
troubles, and the angels that bring Muhammad hunger and thirst and
degradation, will be ready to serve you.”

The man swore by the Almighty Allah that it was not so, but that
Muhammad was the Prophet of Allah, and whoever believed in him would
soon enjoy divine blessings”. In the midst of this dispute, a fishmonger
passed carrying a rotten fish. “Sell your fish to this man”, said the
hypocrites; on which the fishmonger said to the believer, “Buy the fish,
for nobody else will.”

“I have no money”, he replied. “Buy it”, said the hypocrites, “and the
Messenger of Allah (S) will pay for it.” The Muslim accordingly took the
fish, and the fishmonger called on the Prophet for his payment. The
Prophet told Usamah to pay him a dirham. He returned happily, saying,
“This is several times the value of the fish.”

The believer now cut opened his fish and found two precious stones in
it, worth two hundred thousand dirhams. The hypocrites were excessively
vexed at the Muslim’s good fortune, and went to the fishmonger and told
him what had been found, adding. “You sold the fish only, not the
jewels, therefore come and claim them as your property.”

The fishmonger was not slow in asserting his claim, which the Muslim
yielded, but the former no sooner took the precious stones in his hand
than they turned into two scorpions and stung him. He yelled and threw
them from him. The hypocrites remarked, “This is not strange,
considering the sorcery of Muhammad.”

Meanwhile the believer found two more valuable pearls in the fish, which
the hypocrites urged the fishmonger to take, but on his attempting to do
so the gems were transformed into two serpents, which attacked the man
furiously and stung him. He yelled and said to the believer, “Take these
things yourself, I don’t want them.”

The believer therefore took the serpents, which by the miraculous power
of the Prophet, were restored to precious gems. The two hypocrites
observed, “We never saw a more expert magician than Muhammad.” “Enemies
of God”, retorted the believer, if this is magic then Paradise and Hell
are magic also. Believe in God, who has bestowed great favors on you and
manifested His miracles before your eyes.” The believer then brought the
four jewels to the Prophet, and afterwards sold them to some Arab
merchants at Medina for four hundred thousand dirhams.

The Holy Prophet (S) said to the man, “This good fortune Allah has given
you because you honor me, His Prophet, and Ali, my successor. Do you
wish me to tell you of a profitable trade in which you may invest this
capital?” “Yes”, replied the believer. The Messenger of Allah (S)
replied, “Make them as seeds for trees in Paradise, by dividing it among
your brethren in faith, of whom some are your equals in religion, some
your inferiors, and others your superiors.

Every particle of beneficence you bestow upon them insures you a reward
a thousand times greater than the mountains of Abu Qubais, Uhud, Sur and
Bashar. For this benevolence on your part, Allah will bestow on you
golden palaces in Paradise, having turrets of ruby and emerald.” A man
now arose in the assembly, inquiring what would be the reward of one
like him, who had nothing to give. The Prophet replied, “A high rank in
Paradise will be conferred on you for your love of me and my family, and
your hatred of my enemies.”

**Forty-ninth miracle:** The story of Surakha bin Malik which is widely
related and the poets have also composed it in their poems, is as
follows: When the Holy Prophet (S) migrated to Medina, the infidels of
Mecca sent Surakha in pursuit. On overtaking him, the feet of the
pursuer’s horse sunk into the ground at the prayer of the Prophet.

He then implored the Messenger of Allah (S) to pray that he might be
delivered, which was no sooner done than he again attempted to attack
the Prophet. This was repeated three times, after which the horseman
besought an assurance of safety for himself, and returned. Its details
are mentioned in the account of Hijrat.

**Fiftieth miracle:** It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
the Holy Prophet (S) after sucking a date-stone, used to sow it into the
earth and it immediately vegetated.

### Miracles manifested in children and animals

**First miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that a polytheist woman
who had often reviled the Prophet, passed him one day with an infant on
her shoulder, two months old. When she came close to the Prophet by
divine power the boy saluted him: “Peace be upon you, O Messenger of
Allah (S), O Muhammad bin Abdullah.” The woman was amazed by this. On
being questioned by the Messenger of Allah (S), the child said that the
Lord of the universe and the Trustworthy Spirit had taught him who he,
the Prophet was.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked: “Who is the Trustworthy Spirit?” The child
replied: “It is Jibraeel who is standing in the air near your head right
now and he is looking at you.” The Holy Prophet (S) asked what his name
was. The child said: “I have been named Abdul Uzza, although I do not
believe in Uzza.” O Messenger of Allah (S), give me another name.” “I
have named you as Abdullah.”

He pleaded: “O Messenger of Allah (S), please pray to Allah to make me
one of your servants of Paradise.” The Prophet prayed for him. He said:
“One who brought faith in you was successful and one who denied it was
unfortunate.” After that he raised a slogan and passed away.

**Second miracle:** Kulaini, Rawandi and Ibn Babawayh have narrated from
reliable traditions from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that on the farther
side of Yemen is a valley called Barhut, whose only animals are owls and
black serpents. In that valley is a well, named Balhut, to which souls
of infidels and idolaters are brought every evening and made to drink of
the ichor of Hell containing blood, puss and hot water.

Beyond that vale are several clans called Zarih, among whom, after the
Messenger of Allah (S) had assumed the prophetical office, a calf struck
his tail on the ground, saying with a loud voice, “A man has arisen in
Tahama, who summons the people to testify there is no god but Allah. And
according to another report he said: O people of Zarih, I call you to a
good matter and a caller was calling out in simple language: There is no
god, except Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

And Muhammad is the messenger of Allah, the best of the prophets, and
his legatee Ali, is the best of the legatees.” The people said: “The
Almighty Allah has made this calf speak up for some important matter.”
Again the calf called out in the similar manner. They prepared a boat
and made seven persons board it and gave them whatever they could think
of. Then raising the sails they left the boat in the sea. That boat
miraculously arrived at the port of Jeddah.

The men then traveled to Mecca and waited on the Prophet, who told them
they had been warned by a calf before they could say anything. “Yes, O
Messenger of Allah (S),” they said, “Please teach us your religion and
Book. After explaining the faith to them, he sent them home, accompanied
by a man of Bani Hashim to instruct their tribe. They are faithful to
Islam to this day and there is no dispute among them.

**Third miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that a boy belonging to
a monastery was so late in beginning to speak that it was thought that
he was dumb. He was brought to the Prophet, who asked him, “Who am I?”
“The Messenger of Allah,” replied the boy. After this he gained the
faculty of speech.

**Fourth miracle:** It is narrated that Amr bin Muntashar came to
Prophet and complained, “There is a serpent in our valley, and it is
impossible for us to drive it away. If you expel it and restore a dry
and decayed date-trees there to verdure and fruitfulness, we will
believe on you.” The Holy Prophet (S) arrived in that valley and the
serpent came out.

It was moving like a mad camel crawling on the ground. When it decried
the Prophet it stood on its tail and saluted the Messenger. He commanded
him to leave the valley. Then he came to the dried trees and drew his
blessed hand over them. They rose up and fructified immediately and a
spring burst forth from beneath them.

**Fifth miracle:** It is narrated that during the Farewell Hajj a child
yet in swathing clothes was brought to the Messenger of Allah (S) so
that he may pray for him. The Holy Prophet (S) asked, “Who am I?” “The
Messenger of Allah, Muhammad,” replied the infant. The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “You are right, O Mubarak.” Then people began to call him by the
name of Mubarak Yamama.

**Sixth miracle:** Many miracles were seen when the Prophet fled the
polytheists of Mecca and hid in the cave. One of it was that the
Almighty Allah sent a spider, which spun a web over the entrance, and a
pair of doves of Kaaba built a nest there, so that when the Quraish
traced the Prophet to the cave following his footprints and saw that
spider’s web and doves’ nest, they said, “If a person had entered this
cave last night, the web would have been torn away, and the doves would
not have settled here;” therefore they returned without searching the
cave.

On this account the Prophet forbid killing spiders and hunting doves for
meat, and by divine authority ordained a particular penalty for killing
one of them. Its details will be mentioned in the coming pages, Insha
Allah.

**Seventh miracle:** Shaykh Tusi, Ibn Babawayh, Rawandi and Ibn Shahr
Ashob etc. have narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and Ibn Abbas
that when the Prophet wanted to relieve himself, he used to retire to a
distance. One day he took off his sock, performed his ablutions, as he
was about to draw on his socks, a bird which from its color is called
green-robe, snatched the sock up into the air, and on throwing it down a
black serpent issued from it.

According to another report it had snatched the sock from the serpent
and that is why killing the green-robe was prohibited. According to the
report of Ibn Abbas, the Holy Prophet (S) said that the Almighty Allah
has secured me from this calamity, and then he recited the following
supplication: “O Lord, I seek Your refuge from creatures which crawl,
that which goes on two legs, that which goes on four, legs, and every
other harmful thing, and everything that moves on the ground whose
control is in Your hand.”

**Eighth miracle:** Shaykh Tusi and Qutub Rawandi etc. have narrated
from Abu Saeed Khudri and Jabir Ansari that one day a person of Bani
Aslam was grazing his sheep in Baidah, suddenly a wolf attacked and
carried away a sheep. That man shouted and after hitting the wolf took
his sheep away. The wolf sat up in front of that man and asked: “Do you
not fear Allah that you are taking away my livelihood.” The man said: “I
have never seen such a strange thing.” “What are you surprised at?”
asked the wolf. “Your faculty of speech.”

The wolf said, “More surprising is the fact of the Prophet of Allah
between the two mountains of Medina who talks about the past and future
events of the world while you are grazing your sheep here.” That man
gathered his sheep and brought them home. Then he set out for Medina and
made inquiries about the Holy Prophet (S). People informed him that the
Prophet was staying at the house of Abu Ayyub Ansari. He came to the
Prophet and narrated the story of the wolf. The Prophet said: “You are
right.

You should come after Noon Prayer, and narrate it in public.” After Noon
prayer when people gathered, the same man came and narrated the story of
the wolf. The Messenger of Allah (S) said three times: “You are right.”
It is one of the astonishing matters that will happen near Judgment Day,
by the one in whose hands is the life of Muhammad, a time is to come
that if someone goes out of his home and returns, his whip, staff and
shoe will tell him what they had done in his absence.

Rawandi says that the man’s descendants are well known and they feel
proud to be the descendants of one with whom the wolf talked. And in
another report it is narrated from Jabir that at that time the Holy
Prophet (S) was in Mecca and when the wolf spoke to the man, the man
said: “Take care of my sheep, so that I may go and meet the Prophet.”
The wolf said, “I will mind your sheep till you return.”

**Ninth miracle:** Ibn Babawayh and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated from
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that some Jews having bought poison at a great
price, delivered it to a woman of their nation, named Abdah, offering a
large reward if she would contrive to administer it to Muhammad, who,
they declared was destroying their religion.

She accordingly laced a roasted sheep with the poison, assembled the
chiefs of the Jews at her house, and then waited on Muhammad, saying, “I
am your neighbor, and neighborly courtesies are obligatory. The chief
are my guests today, and I beg that you and your companions would adorn
my dwelling with your presence.” Accordingly he visited the woman with
several of his companions including Imam Ali (a.s.), Abu Dujana, Abu
Ayyub, Sahal bin Hunayf and some Muhajireen.

She laid the food and placed the poisoned meat in front of him. When he
entered the house, the Jew rose, leaned on their staffs, and held their
noses, saying to the Prophet, it was a rule with them that when a
Prophet came to their houses they should stand in his presence, and hold
their mouths, lest he should be disgusted with their breath.

The accursed were lying, and it was only because they feared inhaling
the poison. But the shoulder warned the Messenger of Allah (S) that it
had been laced with poison. The Holy Prophet (S) called for Abadah and
asked: “Why do you want to eliminate me?” She replied, “I thought that
if you are the true Prophet the poison will not affect you. If you are a
liar and a sorcerer, I will rid my people of you.”

Jibraeel came down and said: “After greetings the Almighty Allah advises
you to recite the following supplication:“In the name of Allah with whom
all believers are named and through whom all the believers are exalted.
And with whose Noor are illuminated the heavens and the earth and whose
power subdues all the deviant oppressors and breaks up every rebellious
Satan from the evil of poison, magic and evil eye.

In the name of Allah the High, the Ruler, the One, except whom there is
no god. And We reveal of the Qur’an that which is a healing and a mercy
to the believers, and it adds only to the perdition of the unjust.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) recited the above supplication and said to
the companions that they must also recite this supplication and then
start eating. Then he said: Get yourself cupped. It is mentioned in
another report that the woman was Zainab binte Harith bin Salam bin
Muslim and Bashar bin Baraa bin Maroor had eaten a morsel before the
Prophet and he died as a result of it.

His mother came to the Prophet during his last moments. The Prophet told
her that the food he had eaten in Khyber was such that its poison kept
on returning and which caused the death of her son. Finally it rent
asunder his cardiac nerves. Some say that the Messenger of Allah (S)
died of its effect after four years and some have said that it was after
three years.

And in *Basairud Darajat* it is narrated from authentic chains from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that a Jewess fed poisoned mutton shoulder to the
Prophet, as he was very fond of shoulder meat and was averse to leg meat
since it was near to the urinary organs. When that meat was brought to
the Prophet he was much inclined to it.

He had eaten some of it when it spoke up: O Messenger of Allah (S),
don’t eat from me, I have been laced with poison. So he left it, but
that poison continued to wreak havoc on his body till he passed away
because of its effect, and no prophet or successor of prophet passes
away without martyrdom.

**Tenth miracle:** Shaykh Tusi has narrated from Zaid bin Thabit that a
group of companions set out with the Messenger of Allah (S) on an
expedition and on the way they were approached by a Bedouin holding a
camel. He said: “Peace be upon you, O Messenger of Allah (S) and mercy
of Allah and His blessings.”

The Holy Prophet (S) replied the salutation. The man asked about the
Prophet’s well being. He was followed by two persons who claimed that
the camel was stolen from them. The she-camel testified to which of them
it belonged. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “You are making an allegation.
Don’t dispute with this Bedouin.” So that man went away and the Holy
Prophet (S) asked the Bedouin, “When you had decided to meet me, what
intention did you make?”

He replied: “O Allah, sanctify Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad till
the sanctities endure. O Allah, bless Muhammad and the progeny of
Muhammad till the blessings endure. O Allah, grant safety to Muhammad
and the progeny of Muhammad till the safety endures. O Allah, have mercy
on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad till the mercy endure.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I understood that you must have
started after performing a very good deed that is why the Almighty Allah
made the camel speak and lowered the horizon for you.

**Eleventh miracle:** Shaykh Tusi has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that one day the Messenger of Allah (S) passed a gazelle which
was bound to a tent-rope. By divine power she spoke and said, “May my
parents be sacrificed on you, O Messenger of Allah (S), I have two young
ones that are thirsty while my udders are full of milk; liberate me that
I may go and nurse my young, and then I will return to my bonds,” which
she did.

The man who had caught the gazelle was a hypocrite, but this miracle
converted him to faith. The Holy Prophet (S) told him sell the gazelle
to him but he himself set the animal free. The Holy Prophet (S) said: If
the animals had known about their death, like you do, no animal would
have eaten to satiation. And Rawandi and Ibn Babawayh have narrated from
Umm Salma (r.a.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) was passing through
wilderness when someone addressed him: O Messenger of Allah (S), he
looked around but no one was visible. Again he heard the sound but could
not make out who it was.

The third time he saw a gazelle which was in captivity. She said: O
Messenger of Allah (S), this man has taken me, while I have two young
ones in this glade. Please free me, I will come back soon after feeding
them. The Holy Prophet (S) asked her if she would really return. She
replied: If I don’t come back may Allah punish me with the customary
punishment of Bedouins. The Prophet freed her and she came back after
feeding the young ones and the Prophet tied her up again. When the
desert Arab saw this, he requested the Prophet to set it free.

The Prophet freed her and she jumped about happily saying: I testify
that there is no god, except Allah, and that you are the Messenger of
Allah. And Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that the gazelle had been caught
by a Jew. When the gazelle, after being liberated by the Prophet, went
and told her young what had passed, they refused to suck till they had
waited on him. They came and began to rub their heads at his feet and
the Jew began to weep at this and embraced Islam. He said: I have freed
her. People built a Masjid at that spot.

The Holy Prophet (S) put a chain on her neck, as a sign that it was not
lawful to hunt her. It is mentioned in another traditional report that
Zaid bin Thabit says: I heard that gazelle reciting divine praise in the
forest and chanting: There is no god except Allah and Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah. It is narrated that the hunter named Uhaib bin Sama.

**Twelfth miracle:** Saffar, Shaykh Mufeed, Rawandi and Ibn Babawayh
have narrated from many trustworthy and reliable chains from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that one day a camel arrived and prostrated itself before
the Prophet. Then it began rub its hooves on the ground and wailed. Umar
observed, “This camel has prostrated itself in adoration of you; we are
more worthy to adore you than this animal.”

The Prophet replied, “Your prostration must only be to Allah. If I had
commanded anyone to prostrate to another, verily I would have ordered
women to prostrate to their husbands.” He then summoned the owner of the
camel, and asked, “The animal complains that you wish to kill it, after
it has served you its whole life, and become old, blind, lean, and
weak.” “It is true, said the man; we have guests and I wish to slaughter
the creature.”

At the order of the Prophet, the man agreed not to kill the camel. It is
narrated from Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that the Messenger of Allah (S)
on his return from the Battle of Zaturiqa reached near Medina. Suddenly
a runaway camel came to him and placing its belly on the ground began to
weep and protest. The Messenger of Allah (S) asked his companions if
they had any idea what it was saying. “No”, they replied.

He says: “My owner has made use of me till now. But when I have become
weak and old, he wants to slaughter me and sell my meat.” The Holy
Prophet (S) told Jabir to call its owner. Jabir said, “I don’t know who
the owner is.” The Prophet said that the camel will tell him about it.
So Jabir set out from there with the camel.

Jabir says: “That camel took me through streets and markets and finally
arrived to a place where some people were sitting. He stopped there.
They asked me about the well being of the Prophet and the Muslims. I
said: All are well, but tell me who is the owner of this camel. One man
owned up. I said that the Prophet wanted him. “What for?” asked the man.
I said: “This camel has complained about you.”

He accompanied me to the Prophet and the Prophet told him that it has
complained to him. The Prophet told him to sell the camel even though
the man was prepared to give it in free. So the Prophet purchased the
camel and set it free. It used to roam the streets of Medina and
approach the door of Ansar like beggars do. People respected him and
gave him fodder. Girls used to save food for him especially and people
used to say that he is the freed one of the Prophet. Gradually it grew
very fat.

**Thirteenth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Basairud Darajat* through
authentic chains from Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that a camel complained
to the Prophet that it was worked very hard and had little to eat. He
called the owner, who acknowledged the fact as he was a poor man and had
no occupation but of drawing water from the wells and he promised to
improve the animal’s condition.

**Fourteenth miracle:** Saffar, Rawandi, Ibn Babawayh and Mufeed have
narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that some wolves complained to
the Prophet of hunger. He called the shepherds and directed them to set
apart a portion of their flocks for those beasts of prey. The shepherds,
however, were too miserly to do it.

Again the wolves complained and again the shepherds were called but they
gave the same response and this happened thrice; at last the Prophet
allowed the wolves to seize the sheep, whereas if a portion had been
allotted, they never would have taken more than their allowance to the
Judgment Day.

**Fifteenth miracle:** Saffar etc. have narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that on the night of Aqbah, where the hypocrites attempted to
kill the Prophet, by frightening his camel to throw him down, she swore
to Allah, that if they cut her to pieces she would not stir a foot out
of the path.

**Sixteenth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated that
one day the Messenger of Allah (S) entered an orchard in which there
were some sheep who fell in prostration before the Prophet. Abu Bakr
said, “Shall we also prostrate before you?” “No,” he replied, “it is not
lawful to prostrate before anyone except Allah.”

**Seventeenth miracle:** Ibn Babawayh and Rawandi have narrated that one
day the Prophet was seated with some companions when a desert Arab
arrived mounted on a red she-camel and saluted the Prophet. Someone said
that it was stolen property.

Suddenly the she-camel spoke up and said: “By the one who sent you with
miracles, this desert Arab has not stolen me.” The Prophet asked the
man, which supplication had you recited today that the Almighty Allah
made the camel speak up in your favor?” He replied: “I had recited the
following supplication:

“O Allah, You are not a deity that we have created and neither is there
any deity like You who has helped You in creating us. And neither is
there any helper who helped you in creating us. And neither is there any
lord to share Your vocation of rearing and sustaining the creatures. And
You are our Lord as You have said and more than what the describing ones
describe.

I ask You to bless Muhammad and Aale Muhammad and make me pure as it
behoves and make me absolved of all allegations.” The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “By the one who sent me with miracles, O man of desert, I saw the
angels writing down your supplication and anyone who is in such serious
trouble should recite it and invoke blessings on me and my progeny.

**Eighteenth miracle:** Ibn Babawayh, Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have
narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) conquered Khyber, he took a
black or blue mule as booty. It spoke up and testified that he was the
sixtieth lineal descent of a mule on none of which any but a prophet had
ridden. Now, except for me, no one remains in my generation and no
prophet is to come after you. I was waiting for you since ever.

I was owned by the Jew rulers before you but I never obeyed them. I used
to purposely throw them down from my back. They used to hit on my back
and belly. My ancestors have told me that my first ancestor was in the
Ark of Nuh (a.s.) and he used to pass his hands over my back and say:
“From this mule will descend a mule on which the chief of the prophets
and the seal of the messengers will ride.

His Eminence, Zakariya (a.s.) had also given this glad tiding that
praise be to Allah, I have been given this honor.” The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “I have named you as Yafur. Some say that he was named as Afir.
Then he said: “Tell me if you have desire of a female.” But it declined.
Whenever it was told that the Prophet was calling him, he used to
present himself at once.

When he was sent to summon anyone, it used to go to his door and the
master of the house came out. The mule used to indicate that the Holy
Prophet (S) wanted him. After the passing away of the Prophet, he ran
haywire till he jumped into a well and it became his grave.

**Nineteenth miracle:** Rawandi, Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated from
Ibn Abbas that a group from Bani Abdul Qays came to the Prophet with
some sheep and requested him to mark them so that they may be
distinguished from each other. At his touch their ears became white,
which mark distinguishes their offspring to this day.

**Twentieth miracle:** Rawandi, Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated from
Ibn Abbas that one day a desert Arab came to the Prophet and he had
concealed a porpoise in his sleeve. He asked the people, “Who is this?”
“The Messenger of Allah”, they replied. “By Laat and Uzza,” replied the
man addressing the Prophet, “you are my greatest enemy, and were it not
that my people would call me precipitate, I would immediately kill you.”
“Believe,” said the Prophet. He said, “I will not believe till this
porpoise does.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said, “O lovable porpoise.” It replied in clear
language, “Here I am, O ornament of those who will be assembled on
Judgment Day, you will lead the pure ones to Paradise. What is your
order?” “Whom do you worship?” asked the Prophet. The porpoise answered,
“That God whose Arsh is on the sky and whose kingdom is in the earth.
His miracles are in seas and whose creations are in desert.

He knows whatever is in the wombs. He has made fire the instrument of
His punishment.” “Who am I?” asked the Prophet. She replied, “You are
the messenger of the Lord of the universe, and the seal of the Prophets;
successful is he who acknowledges you, and destroyed is he that denies
you.” “There can be no clearer evidence than this,” said the desert
Arab, “and although I came here as your bitterest enemy, I now hold you
dearer than my life, my father or mother.”

He then repeated the creed, became a Muslim, and returning to the tribe
of Bani Salim, to which he belonged, brought more than a thousand of
them to embrace faith. His name was Saad bin Maaz, and the Prophet made
him chief of his tribe.

**Twenty-first miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Abdullah bin Adna
that he said: One day we were present in the service of the Holy Prophet
(S) when a man arrived and said: The camel of such and such person has
become mad and no one could approach it, it kills whoever comes before
him.” The Holy Prophet (S) went with him and we also accompanied. When
the camel saw the Prophet it prostrated itself before him, who drew his
blessed hand over the animal’s head, and binding it with a rope restored
it perfectly submissive to its master; and told them to be kind to him.

The same incident is narrated from another chain from Jabir in which it
is mentioned that the camel belonged to Bani Najjar. When the Prophet
came to him, he complained that his master did not feed him properly.
The Prophet requested the master and urged the camel to obey him.

**Twenty-second miracle:** It is narrated that once the Prophet was
passing on a street when a camel came and began to rub its head before
him. The Holy Prophet (S) said that it was complaining about the
ill-treatment of his master. Then he summoned the master and asked him
to sell the camel to the Prophet but he refused.

When the Prophet returned, the camel accompanied him and although people
tried to stop it, it refused to let the Prophet go. At last the Prophet
asked the owner to sell it to him and he was forced to sell it. The Holy
Prophet (S) gave it to Ali and he had it till the Battle of Siffeen. It
was used to carry loads.

**Twenty-third miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated that one night Saad
bin Ubadah entertained the Prophet and Ali, and as they had fasted
during the day, the Prophet said to him, “We have broken our fast with
you, and righteous persons ate at your place and the angels have sought
blessings for you.” On leaving, Saad entreated the Prophet to ride his
ass, which was very bad tempered, but the Holy Prophet (S) had no sooner
mounted it that it became so swift that no other quadruped could
overtake it.

**Twenty-fourth miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated from Shia and
Sunni tradition scholars that Safina, a freed slave of the Prophet, was
sent on a certain expedition, and was shipwrecked. “My comrades and
goods were all lost,” said Safina, but on a wooden plank I was borne by
the waves to a mountain in the midst of the sea. On attempting to get
ashore a receding wave swept me away and carried me out to sea.

Again I was hurried to the mountain, and again washed away. This was
repeated several times, till at last I succeeded in reaching the shore,
and rendered hearty thanks to God for deliverance. As I was wandering in
amazement along the beach, suddenly a lion leaped from his covert to
seize me, and I quite despaired of escape, but said, “O Lord, I am Your
servant, and the freed slave of Your Prophet; having saved me from the
sea, will You now leave me to be destroyed by a lion?”

It then fell into my heart to say, “O beast of prey, I am Safina, the
slave of the Messenger of Allah; respect me for his sake.” “By Allah, I
had no sooner said this than he ceased roaring, came to me like a cat,
and rubbed himself first against my right leg, then against my left, and
looking in my face, lay down, signing to me to mount him, which I did
and was carried with the utmost swiftness to an island where trees, and
fruit and good water abounded.

He now signified that I should dismount, and he stood by while I
quenched my thirst, allayed my hunger, and gathered some leaves for a
partial covering to my body. Of other leaves I made a basket, which I
filled with fruit. I dipped a garment which I still retained in water,
so that if thirsty in the expedition I was about to make, I might wring
the garment for a drink of water.

When I had finished these preparation, the lion lay down and made a
signal for me to mount, after which he carried me by another route to
the seashore. Here I saw a vessel at sea, and swinging my garment the
signal was observed, and the vessel came towards the shore. On
approaching and seeing me mounted on a lion, they were amazed, repeated
the creed, and demanded if I were a Jinn or a human being.

I replied that, “I was Safina, a slave of the Prophet, for whose sake
the lion was so obedient to me.” At the name of the Prophet, they
lowered their sail, cast anchor, and sent two men in a boat with clothes
for me. I dismounted and dressed, the lion attentively observing my
motions. One of the men said, “Let me carry you on board the boat; a
lion might not be more favorable to anyone except the members of the
community of the Prophet.”

Before going aboard I took leave of the lion, saying, “May Allah reward
you for the Prophet’s sake.” Verily, at this, tears flowed from his
eyes, and he constantly watched me till I had boarded the vessel and it
was lost to sight. It is mentioned in another report that the Holy
Prophet (S) had sent him with a letter for Maaz to Yemen. He saw a lion
on the way sitting in the middle of the road and was terrified at the
sight.

He said, “I am a messenger of the Prophet of Allah, and carrying a
letter for Maaz.” The lion ran away swiftly and Safina moved on from
there. The same thing was repeated on the return journey. When Safina
narrated the story to the Prophet, he said, “The first time it had
asked: How is the Messenger of Allah (S)? and on the return journey he
said: Convey my greetings to the Messenger of Allah (S).”

**Twenty-fifth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that Ammar bin Yasir
narrates that once he was on a journey with the Messenger of Allah (S)
and his camel failed and he was left behind the caravan. The Prophet
returned to the end of the caravan, dismounted his she-camel, took some
water in his mouth and threw it on the camel, which immediately
recovered and became as swift as a deer and then the Holy Prophet (S)
told me to mount.

I mounted and accompanied the Prophet; it had become so fast that
Ghazba, the camel of the Prophet could not keep up with him. The Prophet
offered to purchase the camel but I begged him to accept it as a gift.
“No,” said he, “you must sell me the animal at its value.” He then
bought it in a hundred dirhams, and on entering Medina I gave the camel
to him and the Prophet ordered Anas to pay and hundred dirhams to me and
also return the camel as a gift from the Prophet.

**Twenty-sixth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated through authentic chains
of narrators from Jabir that the Prophet cursed Atba, the son of Abu
Lahab, saying, “May Allah send a beast of prey upon you.” Some time
after, Atba, having waylaid the Prophet, was caught in his own ambush by
a lion that brought him to the presence of the Prophet, saying, “This is
Atba, son of Abu Lahab; he came from Mecca only to murder you.” The lion
then tore him to pieces, but ate none of his flesh.

**Twenty-seventh miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Salman that: One
day we were sitting with the Prophet when a desert Arab arrived and
said: “O Muhammad, tell me what is in the womb of my camel, so that if
you are right I would believe in you?” The Messenger of Allah (S) told
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to tell what the Arab’s camel had conceived.

Ali (a.s.) took the bridle, and putting his hand on the belly of the
animal, prayed: O Allah, in the name of Muhammad and family of Muhammad,
and through the perfect names of Allah, I ask You to cause the camel to
speak and answer the question that had been proposed.” Immediately the
she-camel spoke up: One day this desert Arab mounted me to visit his
cousin. When we reached the Khasak valley he made me sit and had
intercourse with me.”

This caused the Arab to hastily inquire which of the two personages
before him was the Prophet and the person with whom the she-camel was
speaking was his brother and legatee; and being informed, he repeated
the creed and became a Muslim. He than besought the Prophet to pray that
the effects and ignominy of his sin might be removed, which was done.
The faith of the desert Arab proved sincere.

**Twenty-eighth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated
from His Eminence, Abu Dharr that: One day I came to the Prophet who
asked me what had happened to my goats. I said that strange was their
story: one day I was in prayers when a wolf attacked the flock and
carried off a lamb.

This did not interrupt my devotions, and immediately I saw a lion
approach and take the lamb from the wolf and return it to the flock. The
lion, moreover, cried to me saying, ‘Keep your heart on your prayers;
God has made me the protector of your sheep.’ After I had finished
prayers, the lion bade me go and assure the Messenger of Allah (S) that
the Almighty Allah esteems the friends and those who observe the rules
of the Prophet. When the others who were present heard this they were
very much astonished.

**Twenty-ninth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that on the day
of Arafat, the Prophet addressed the people, and urged them to give
Sadaqah. A man said, “O Prophet of Allah, I give this camel to the
poor.” On looking at the animal, the Prophet ordered that it should be
purchased from the poor for himself.

At night, on being brought to his house, the camel saluted him, and said
she once fled from her master and wandered in the wilderness where
vegetables and animals pointed her out as belonging to the Messenger of
Allah (S). “What was your master’s name?” asked the Prophet. She replied
it was Ghazba. The Holy Prophet (S) gave her the same name.

During the last moments of the Prophet, Ghazba came and asked the
Prophet, “To whom will you now deliver me?” He replied, “May God bless
you, I give you to my daughter, Fatima, who will ride you in this world
and the next.” After the Prophet’s death, one night Ghazba came to her
mistress Fatima and said, “Peace be on you, O daughter of Prophet of
Allah! My end is near, water and herbage are no longer pleasant to me
since the death of the Prophet.” Three days after the death of the Holy
Prophet (S) his favorite camel adopted the comfort of the Hereafter.

**Thirtieth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Jabir Ansari
and Ubadah bin Samit that in the orchard of Bani Najjar entered a very
mad camel and whoever came there was injured by it. The Holy Prophet (S)
came there and summoned the camel which it immediately did and began to
rub its head on the ground; the Prophet bridled it and delivered it to
his master.

The companions said, “Your honor, animals are aware of your prophetic
office?” His Eminence, replied, “There is nothing in the world which
does not recognize me, except Abu Jahl and all disbelievers. Companions
said, “We are more deserving to prostrate before you.” He replied: “I
will die one day, prostrate before one who is alive and who would never
die.”

**Thirty-first miracle:** It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s.)* that ten Jews came to His Eminence (S) to ask him some questions
just for argument sake. In the meantime, a Bedouin came running there as
if someone was pushing him from behind. And he had a stick on his
shoulder and a bag on his head and the bag was tied up tightly. Nobody
knew what was inside it.

He came and loudly shouted: O Muhammad, answer my question at once! His
Eminence (S) said: O brother Arab, these Jews have came before you and
want to ask some questions. If you allow me, I will answer them first.
That Bedouin said: No, because I am a traveler and I have to move on.
His Eminence (S) said: Indeed, being a traveler you are worthier than
them.

The Bedouin said: I want to warn you that these people have a book also
and according to their view it is right. And I am afraid that they may
testify you and enter the folds of Muslims only to spoil the religion of
others. I shall not be content with this without seeing any sign. His
Eminence (S) asked his companions: Where is Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)?
Call him here at once. Ali (a.s.) came to attend His Eminence (S).

That Bedouin said: O Muhammad (S)! When we both are talking, why has he
come? His Eminence (S) said: O Bedouin! You asked me a question of
clarification, and Ali (a.s.) has sufficient knowledge. I am the city of
knowledge and he is the gate. Whoever wants to pose any question, must
enter from the gate.

When Ali (a.s.) came before the Holy Prophet (S), His Eminence (S) said
in a loud voice: O people, one who wants to see the grandeur of Adam,
wisdom of Sheeth, intelligence and awe of Idris, gratitude and worship
of Nuh, faithfulness and friendliness of Ibrahim, enmity of Musa with
enemies of Allah, love to believers and way of living of Isa (a.s.),
should look at Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).

These words of His Eminence (S) increased the faith of believers and the
hypocrisy of the hypocrites increased. The Bedouin said: O Muhammad, you
have praised the son of your uncle as his excellence is your excellence,
his prestige is your prestige, I do not agree with any of this till such
a one testifies, whose testimony I don’t doubt. When he was asked who
was that, he said: If the porpoise testifies, I shall agree.

His Eminence (S) said: O brother Arab, open your bag and take it out and
ask for its witness. It will testify of my prophethood and my brother’s
excellence. The Bedouin said: I took too much pain to catch it and I am
afraid it would run away. His Eminence (S) said: Don’t be afraid. It
will not run away. It will testify to my excellence and truth. The
Bedouin said: But I am afraid it will run away. His Eminence (S) said:
If she runs away it would be enough for you to falsify us. She will not
run away, and she will give true witness of me.

After she gives the witness, let it go. I shall give you such a reward
that will be better than it. Hence the Bedouin took it out from his bag
and put it on the ground. It stood still there and looked at His
Eminence (S) and rubbed her head on the ground and then raised her head.
Allah make her speak and she said: I testify that no one is worthy of
worship except Allah.

He is One and has no partner and I testify that Muhammad (S) is His
Apostle and His obedient one and he is such a Prophet that he is the
leader of all apostles and most excellent of them and the last apostle
and he will take the believers to Paradise. And I testify that his
brother, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) has excellence and qualities mentioned
above, and I testify that his friends will be respected in Paradise and
his enemies will be disgraced in Hell.

Seeing this miracle, the Bedouin cried and said: O Allah’s Messenger, I
also testify to all that this porpoise testified. I cannot deny what I
have seen and heard. Then he turned to the Jews and said: Woe to you,
seeing this miracle, which other miracle you want to see and ask for
divine sign? Now believe in him or you shall all be destroyed. On
hearing his argument, all the Jews became Muslims and said: O brother
Arab, your porpoise is blessed for us.

After that His Eminence (S) asked the Bedouin to release the porpoise so
that Allah gives him something better in return, because she has brought
faith on Allah and His Prophet (S) and on the brother of the Prophet
(a.s.) and given true testimony. It is not desirable to catch it and
keep in captivity, it should be released, so that she should be the
leader of all porpoises.

The porpoise said to the Prophet (S): O Allah’s Messenger, allow me to
compensate him. The Bedouin asked: What compensation can you give? The
porpoise replied: O Bedouin, the burrow from where you caught me is
having ten thousand dinars and three hundred thousand dirhams of
Choesroe in it, you may take them.

The Bedouin said: What should I do? All have heard this porpoise and
right now I am very tired. Those who have rested will surely go there
and take away all the wealth. The porpoise said: O Bedouin, Allah has
kept that wealth for you, in exchange of releasing me. Allah will not
allow anyone to touch it before you. If anyone tries to take it, Allah
will destroy him.

Since the Bedouin was very tired, he set out from there slowly but a
group of hypocrites present there, set out before him and reached the
spot. When they put their hands into the hole to take the wealth, a
large snake came out of it and stung them and they all died. The snake
waited there till the Bedouin arrived. When he reached there, the snake
cried: O brother Bedouin, look at them! Allah appointed me to kill them
before they could take away the treasure, now you may take it.

The Bedouin took out all the dinars and dirhams but could not lift them
all. The snake said: Untie the string from your waist and tie one end of
it to this bag and another to my tail. I will pull it and bring it to
your house and protect you and your wealth. Thus the snake came along
with the treasure. He did not spend the money in buying luxuries and
gardens and the snake protected him and his riches and after that it
went away from there.

### Miracles of raising the dead, talking to them, healing the sick etc.

**First miracle:** Shaykh Mufeed, Shaykh Tusi, Qutub Rawandi and Ibn
Shahr Ashob; rather all Shia and Sunni tradition scholars have narrated
that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: The Messenger of Allah (S) called me
during the siege of Khyber, when my eyes were sore and I could not open
them, and the pain was extreme.

The Prophet put some of his saliva on them, and they were healed
immediately. He tied his turban to my head and prayed: O Allah, keep
away from Ali the trouble of winter and summer. At his prayer, I was
totally exempted from the inconveniences of heat and cold. Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) used to dress in thin shirt during the winter and he
didn’t feel cold.

**Second miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated that there was a
severe famine in Mecca during his childhood. Some persons of Quraish
said: Seek help from Laat and Uzza. Some advocated praying to Manat.
Waraqa bin Naufal said: Why are you straying away from truth? Among you
is the remnant of Ibrahim and sign of Ismail; that is Abu Talib. Take
him as an intercessor and pray for rain.

So Abu Talib was persuaded to come out with some children one of whom
was like the Sun. That is the Prophet of the last age. He leaned his
back against the Kaaba and raised his hand to the heavens. Immediately
clouds appeared and there was rain. Abu Talib recited an elegy in the
praise of the Prophet, one of its couplets was as follows:  
 The Prophet is so elegant that clouds drop rain and he is beneficial
for the widows and a refuge for orphans.

**Third miracle:** Shaykh Tusi narrates that in the Battle of Hudaibiyah
Muslims faced drinking water shortage and were about to die of thirst.
The Holy Prophet (S) raised his hands in prayer. Suddenly a cloud
appeared in the sky; there was rain and all quenched their thirst.

**Fourth miracle:** In *Basairud Darajat* it is narrated from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through authentic chains that a visually challenged
person came to the Prophet and asked: O Messenger of Allah (S), please
pray that the Almighty Allah restores my vision.

The Holy Prophet (S) prayed and he could see. Another blind man came and
requested for the same thing. The Holy Prophet (S) asked: “Do you prefer
Paradise to blindness?” He asked, “Is Paradise the recompense of
blindness?” The Messenger of Allah (S) replied: “The Almighty Allah is
kinder than that He should keep a believer blind then not give him a
place in Paradise.”

**Fifth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Basairud Darajat* and *Kharaij*
that Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) said: One day the Prophet was saying
that he had not tasted meat for several days. An Ansar heard this and
went home and told his wife it was a fortunate day for them, as they
could now relieve the Prophet’s wants.

Accordingly the man slaughtered his goat, the only animal he had, and
having roasted it brought it to the Messenger of Allah (S). The Holy
Prophet (S) directed the companions to eat from it but collect its
bones. On going home the Ansari man found the same goat prancing about
in his house.

**Sixth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Basairud Darajat* from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when the respected mother of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.), Fatima binte Asad passed away, Ali (a.s.) informed the Prophet.
The Messenger of Allah (S) began to weep in sorrow and said: By Allah
she was my mother too.

Then he said to Ali (a.s.): Take my shirt and cover and include them in
her shroud and let me know when you finish the shrouding. After bath and
shrouding, the Holy Prophet (S) prayed the funeral prayer in such a way
that he had never before or after that prayed like it. Then he descended
into her grave, lied down there and then she was laid in the grave. Then
she was addressed: “O Fatima.” She replied, “Here I am, O Messenger of
Allah (S).”

He asked: “Did you receive all that the Almighty Allah had promised?”
“Yes, O Messenger of Allah (S), may Allah reward you nicely.” Then the
Holy Prophet (S) spoke to her secretly for a long time. When he came out
of the grave, people asked: O Messenger of Allah (S), you acted in such
a way as you have never done before.”

He said, “One day I had told her that people will be raised from their
graves in a naked condition. And she was extremely aggrieved at this. So
I gave her my shirt and prayed to Allah, that it should not even get
dirty till she enters Paradise. And one day I had told her about the
questioning in the grave and the squeeze of the grave. She had started
wailing. So I lied down in her grave and prayed to Allah that may He
open a door into her grave from Paradise and make her grave verdant like
Paradise.”

**Seventh miracle:** It is mentioned in *Kharaij* that one day the
Messenger of Allah (S) asked for a gazelle. It was caught, slaughtered
and its flesh was cooked. When it was placed before the Prophet he said:
“Eat from its flesh but leave the bones intact.” After dinner he
gathered her bones in her skin and then prayed, due to which the animal
was restored to its living condition.

**Eighth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Kharaij, Alamul Waraa* and
*Manaqib* that a lad was brought to the Prophet who was bald and the
Prophet was asked to pray for him. The Prophet drew his hand over his
head and immediately he got hair and was cured of his condition. When
the people of Yemen learnt of this, some of them brought a lad to
Musaylima, the Liar and he drew his hand over the head, but whatever
hair he had fell off and even today a child born in his progeny is bald.

**Ninth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Kharaij* that a man from Jahina
had lost some of his members through leprosy. He complained to the
Prophet, who called for some water and dropped some saliva from his
mouth into it then he told the man to sprinkle that on his body, which
he did and was immediately cured.

**Tenth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated from Imam
Husain (a.s.) that one day a man came to the Prophet and said, “During
the Jahiliyya period I returned from a certain journey, and finding my
daughter, five years old, decked with ornaments and running about the
house, I led her to such a vale, where I abandoned her to perish.”

“Come and show me the place,” said the Prophet. The Prophet asked for
the name of the girl and then said: O so and so girl, rise up.”
Immediately the daughter appeared, saying, “Here am I, Messenger of
Allah.” The Prophet said: “Your parents have become Muslims, if you wish
I will restore you to them.” “No,” she replied, “I have no need of them;
I have found Allah better to me than they were.”

**Eleventh miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated that Salma bin Al-Akwa
suffered a severe wound in the Battle of Khyber, which was healed by the
Prophet’s blowing on it three times. And in the Battle of Uhud, Qatada
bin Noman’s eye was gouged out by a spear and according to another
report it was completely destroyed. The Messenger of Allah (S) drew his
hand over it and it was completely cured.

**Twelfth miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated that a mother of a young
Ansari man was a blind old woman. He fell sick and the Prophet went to
visit him. When he reached the home he found the young man dead, and his
mother praying: “O my Lord, if You know that I have fled to You and Your
Prophet in the hope that You will help me in every trial, then do not
lay this calamity upon me.” The Messenger of Allah (S) removed the
shroud from the face of the dead, the young man was immediately restored
to life; he rose up and ate with the Prophet.

**Thirteenth miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated from Usamah bin Zaid
that: I set out for Farewell Hajj in the company of the Prophet and when
we reached the Ruqar valley, a woman came with a boy on her shoulders.
She said: Since his birth his throat gets blocked and he loses
consciousness. The Holy Prophet (S) inserted some of his saliva in the
boy’s mouth and he was cured.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to relieve himself but there was no
place where he could have concealed himself from the people. The Holy
Prophet (S) told me: Go to those date trees and tell them that the
Messenger of Allah (S) orders you to come together and ask the stones to
go away.

Usamah says: By the one who sent the Prophet with truth, when I conveyed
the order of the Prophet they moved close to each other and joined and
the stones dispersed from there. The Messenger of Allah (S) relieved
himself behind the trees and when he returned from there, the trees and
the stones went back to where they belonged.

**Fourteenth miracle:** Shia and Sunni scholars have narrated through
many channels that before migration, Medina was most susceptible to
plague and other epidemics. When the Prophet came to Medina he prayed: O
Allah, make Medina as congenial for us as You had made Mecca.

And make its atmosphere healthy and make its measures blessed. And shift
the maladies to Johfa. Due to this the climate of Medina is better than
that of other towns and it is having so many bounties and plague and
other epidemics caused the abandonment of Johfa.

**Fifteenth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated
that once when Abu Talib was sick, the Messenger of Allah (S) visited
him. He asked the Prophet to pray for his health. His Eminence prayed
for him, and he was instantly cured and sprang up as if he was not sick
at all.

**Sixteenth miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated that once Ali (a.s.)
was seriously ill, so he prayed: O Allah, if my death is near, make it
easy; if distant, remove this pain or give me patience to endure it. The
Holy Prophet (S) prayed: O Allah, please bestow cure to him and he told
Ali (a.s.) to get up. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says: “I got up and after
that due to the auspiciousness of the prayer of the Holy Prophet (S) I
never suffered any illness or pain ever.”

**Seventeenth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Buraidah that Amr bin
Maaz lost a leg in a certain battle. The Holy Prophet (S) applied some
saliva on the stump, which now joined in a perfect manner.

**Eighteenth miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated from Ibn Abbas that a
woman brought her little boy to the Prophet, saying that he was
suffering from insanity. The Holy Prophet (S) drew his hands over the
child’s breast and prayed, on which he vomited something like cream, and
was cured.

**Nineteenth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated
from Shia and Sunni tradition scholars that during the Battle of Badr,
Maaz Ibn Afra lost his hand by the attack of Abu Jahl. He came with his
amputed hand to the Prophet and he applied his miraculous saliva and
joined the member and it became stronger than it was before.

**Twentieth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that a person used to lose
some of his hair when he prostrated. The Holy Prophet (S) prayed to
Allah to make his head despicable and all his hair fell down.

**Twenty-first miracle:** It is narrated that the mother of Anas asked
the Prophet to pray for her son as he was a servant of the Prophet.
Since he was not deserving of success in the Hereafter, the Messenger of
Allah (S) prayed: O Allah, give him too much of wealth and children and
give increase in all that he has. So he had more than a hundred sons and
grandsons. But they all perished in a plague.

**Twenty-second miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have
narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) saw a man eating with his left
hand and advised him to eat with the right. He said it is beyond my
power and it was a lie. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: You will not be
able to eat. After that he tried to eat with his right hand but his hand
could not reach his mouth.

**Twenty-third miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated
from Umar bin Akhtab that the Messenger of Allah (S) called for water
and I brought it for him. There was a strand of hair in it, which I took
out and threw away. The Holy Prophet (S) said: O Allah, bestow him with
elegance. Abu Nahaik Azwi says that I saw him at the age of ninety and
not a single strand of hair from his head or beard had greyed.

**Twenty-fourth miracle:** Sayyid Murtaza, Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob
etc. have narrated that Nabigha Juda recited couplets in praise of the
Messenger of Allah (S) and one of them purported to state:  
***“We reached to the sky of honor and nobility and we are hoping for
more.”***  
 The Holy Prophet (S) asked, “What do you imply by ‘higher than sky’?”
He replied: “Paradise.” He said: “You are right; may Allah keep your
teeth intact.” The narrator says that he saw him at the age of hundred
and thirty, that his teeth were extremely white even though his body had
grown old and weak. And according to another report whenever a tooth
fell off he got a better one in its place.

**Twenty-fifth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that one day a woman came
to the Prophet and said: O Messenger of Allah (S), I am a Muslim woman
and my husband stays at home like ladies. The Holy Prophet (S) summoned
her husband and asked the woman if she disliked him to which she replied
in the positive.

He prayed from them and joined their foreheads saying: O Allah, create
love between them.” After that the wife used to say: “No one is dearer
to me than my husband.” The Holy Prophet (S) told her to confess that he
was the Messenger of Allah.

**Twenty-sixth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated that
Amr bin Atnaq Khuzai gave a drink of water to the Holy Prophet (S) and
he prayed for him to remain youthful forever and he lived for eighty
years and not a single strand of his beard turned grey.

**Twenty-seventh miracle:** It is narrated that Az said: “The head of my
slave, Saib bin Yazid was black at the center and all his head and beard
was grey. When I asked him about it he said: One day I was playing with
boys, when the Messenger of Allah (S) passed us and I saluted.

The Prophet asked me who I was. I said: I was Saib, brother of Samar bin
Qalast. The Holy Prophet (S) passed his hand over my head and prayed for
me. That is why the center of my head till where the Prophet touched me,
has remained black.

**Twenty-eighth miracle:** It is mentioned in many traditional reports
that when the Messenger of Allah (S) sent Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to
Yemen, he asked: “O Messenger of Allah (S), what should I do if I have
doubt in something?” The Holy Prophet (S) said, “Allah will guide your
heart and make your tongue speak with truth.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
says: “After that I never had any doubt in any matter.”  
**Twenty-ninth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated that
Murra bin Jabal says: I was in the company of the Prophet when I was
riding a mare. He said: O rider, accompany me. I said: My female horse
is thin and weak.

The Holy Prophet (S) was holding a whip with which he lashed gently at
the animal and prayed: “O Allah, bless this mare.” After that she became
so swift that I used to restrain her but she overtook the males; and she
produced so many young ones that I sold them all for 12000 dirhams.

**Thirtieth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Uthman bin Junaid that
a blind man came to the Prophet and complained about his condition. The
Holy Prophet (S) told him to perform ablution, pray two units of prayer
and then recite the following supplication:  
*“O Allah, I indeed I ask You and turn to You through Muhammad, the
Prophet of mercy. O Muhammad, indeed I turn to your Lord through you to
illuminate my eyes. O Allah, accept his intercession from me and accept
my intercession for myself.”*  
 Uthman says: I had not gone away from there when he regained his vision
in such a way as if he had never been blind.

**Thirty-first miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that Ajmal bin Jamal
narrates: My face had turned white (due to leucoderma). The Holy Prophet
(S) prayed for me and drew his blessed hand over my face and it was
cured immediately leaving no trace.

**Thirty-second miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Fazl bin Abbas that
a man came to the Prophet and said: “I am a miser, coward and I sleep
too much. Please pray for me.” The Holy Prophet (S) prayed and he became
generous, brave and one who slept less.

**Thirty-third miracle:** Rawandi and other tradition scholars have
narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) prayed: “O Allah, like You
imposed disgrace on the former ones of Quraish, in the same way bestow
with grace their latter ones. And it happened in the same way.

**Thirty-fourth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from some companion that
one day the Messenger of Allah (S) was sitting and then suddenly arose,
went a short distance from his companions and appeared to shake hands
and talked with some persons although they could see no one. On his
return they inquired into the matter, and he said that he had met
Ismail, the angel of rain, who had come with Allah’s permission to meet
me.

He promised rain on such a month and day. When the day arrived, we
performed the Morning Prayer and there was no trace of any cloud. But
after Asr a cloud appeared and there was heavy rain. We began to laugh
and the Prophet asked us about it and we said that the promise of that
angel is fulfilled. He said: “Remember these incidents and narrate them
frequently to propagate the truth.” A similar report is narrated through
authentic chains from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) also.

**Thirty-fifth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that once the Messenger
of Allah (S) asked for a loan from a Jew, who obliged and then asked,
“Did you get what you asked for?” He said: “You may ask for it whenever
you want.” The Holy Prophet (S) prayed for him enduring elegance. That
Jew lived to an age of eighty years and not a single strand of hair
turned grey.

**Thirty-sixth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that during the Battle of
Tabuk a man was struck with severe thirst and there was no water
available. People asked the Prophet to pray for water. He replied: “Yes,
the Kind Lord will not reject my prayers.”

Then he prayed and there was heavy rain. Some people talked like
astronomers and said that the rain was caused due to the position of
such and such star. The Holy Prophet (S) asked the companions: “Can you
see what these faithless people are saying?” Khalid asked permission to
strike off their heads. The Holy Prophet (S) said, “No, they are
claiming like this but they are aware that it is the Almighty Allah who
has sent the rains.”

**Thirty-seventh miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Anas that one day
the Prophet said: “Just now a person will come from here who is the best
of the successors and he is most honorable in the view of the prophets.
At that moment arrived Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “O Allah, remove the harms of heat and cold from him.” After that
as long as Amirul Momineen (a.s.) lived, he was not affected by heat or
cold. He used to pass the winter in a simple shirt.

**Thirty-eighth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that an Ansari man
possessed a little goat and asked his wife to prepare roasted meat from
some of it and also cook some curry from the rest, perhaps the Holy
Prophet (S) would stop to dine at their place. Saying this he went to
the Masjid but he had two young boys who had seen their father slaughter
the goat.

One of them said to the other, let me slaughter you; and he instantly
killed his brother with the knife. Their mother shrieked with horror and
agony at the sight, on which the boy that had killed his brother fled,
and fell out of the terrace and perished. The poor woman hid the two
dead boys and prepared the food as directed.

When the Prophet came to the man’s house at the time of Iftar, Jibraeel
directed him to order the man to present his sons. Accordingly he went
out to call them, but their mother told him they had gone somewhere, on
which he returned and said, “they are not here.” “They must certainly be
present,” said the Prophet. Their father went out to find where they
were, when his wife told what had befallen them. The man brought his
dead sons before the Prophet, at whose prayer they were restored to life
and lived to a great age.

**Thirty-ninth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that the
Messenger of Allah (S) wrote a letter to the Bani Haritha tribe inviting
them to Islam. They washed the letter and used it to patch their bucket.
The Holy Prophet (S) cursed them that may Allah destroy their
intellects. After that they became so foolish that they were quoted in
Arabs as examples of foolishness.

**Fortieth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that when the
Messenger of Allah (S) was fed up with the harassment of Quraish in
Mecca, he walked to Arak Arafat where some camels belonging to Abu
Atharwan were grazing. He asked: “Who are you?” He replied: “I am
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah (S).”

He said: “Go away from here, as the camels among whom you are sitting
are undeserving.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Prolong his age and pain.”
The narrator says: I saw him that he had aged much and used to pray for
death due to his extreme pain, but death did not oblige him. People used
to say that it was due to the Prophet’s curse.

**Forty-first miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that the Messenger
of Allah (S) asked the companions to release the prisoners of Hawazin
and all followed his directions but two persons were given the choice of
either freeing the prisoners or to take some ransom for them. One of
them also released the prisoner without any ransom, whereas another
agreed to take ransom.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “O Allah, make his share degraded. When he
came to the prisoners to choose a slave for himself, he glanced at
spinsters and young lads then reached to an old woman and said: I will
take her, since she is the mother of the tribe and I will get more
ransom for her. She was a lowly woman and had no relative in the tribe.

That person kept her with himself for a long time and continued to pay
for her maintenance with the hope that someone will come with ransom to
free her. But when no one arrived, he freed her without ransom.

**Forty-second miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that Lady Khadija
(r.a.) had a blind woman. One day the Holy Prophet (S) prayed for her
sight and immediately she gained her vision. Lady Khadija remarked:
“What a blessed prayer it was!” The Prophet said: “I am a mercy for the
worlds.”

**Forty-third miracle:** Shias and Sunnis relate that when the King of
Firang honored the letter of Muhammad, and the King of Iran tore the one
sent to him, the Prophet prayed for the former but cursed the latter,
wherefore the empire of the firangees (Europeans) endures, while that of
Iranians was soon after destroyed, and its progeny captured by Muslims.

**Forty-fourth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Ja’far bin
Nastur Rumi that he says: I was present with the Prophet during the
Battle of Tabuk. The Holy Prophet (S) dropped his whip. I picked it up
and handed it over to him. The Prophet, looked at me and said, “May
Allah grant you a long life!” Consequently he lived to the age of three
hundred and twenty years.

**Forty-fifth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that one day the
Holy Prophet (S) passed by Abdullah Ibn Ja’far and saw that he was
playing as a child and making a castle of sand. The Holy Prophet (S)
asked him what he would do with that to which he replied that he will
sell it away. The Messenger of Allah (S) asked him what he will do with
the money realized from it. He said he will purchase dates.

The Prophet prayed: “O Allah, bless his transaction.” Due to this
prayer, it so happened that whenever he conducted any transaction he
made a lot of profit and he earned so much money that people quoted his
generosity by way of example. When the people took loans they promised,
that they would repay the amount when Abdullah bin Ja’far pays them.

**Forty-sixth miracle:** It is narrated that Abu Huraira brought a
handful of dates to the Prophet and requested him to pray that the
Almighty Allah gives him increase in that. The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Place them in a bag and you can take out from it how much ever you
like.” He took out tons of dates from the bag but the initial quantity
remained.

**Forty-seventh miracle:** It is narrated that Saad Ibn Waqqas shot an
arrow and the Holy Prophet (S) prayed that his arrow should not miss the
target. After that he never missed the target.

**Forty-eighth miracle:** It is narrated from Salman that when the
Messenger of Allah (S) migrated to Medina and stayed in the house of Abu
Ayyub Ansari, at that time he was having nothing but a young one of a
goat and a Saa of wheat. He cooked the mutton and baked the bread and
brought them to the Prophet, who ordered them to make a public
announcement that whoever wanted to eat should come to the residence of
Abu Ayyub.

Consequently people arrived in droves and the house was full and all ate
and there was no decrease in the food. After that by the order of the
Prophet the bones of the goat were gathered in its skin and the Prophet
said: “Rise up by the command of Allah!” The goat became alive again and
people recited the dual formula of faith in delight.

**Forty-ninth miracle:** It is narrated that during the marriage of Lady
Fatima, Abu Ayyub slaughtered a lamb, cooked it and brought it as a gift
for the Prophet, who told them to begin eating in the name of Allah and
not to break its bones. After the people had finished, he said: “Abu
Ayyub is a poor man, O Allah, You are the creator of this animal, only
You can make it alive again.

O one who is ever living and powerful to make it alive. There is no god,
except You.” So that lamb became alive again and Allah blessed it so
much that the sick were cured by its milk and the people of Medina used
to call her, Mabusa. That is one who is raised after death.

**Fiftieth miracle:** Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains of
narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that a Jew came to the Prophet
and said: As-Saam Alaik (Death to you!) to which the Messenger of Allah
(S) replied, “Same to you.” The companions observed to the Prophet, “He
said, destruction to you.”

“But I returned the same compliment,” replied the Prophet, “and today a
black serpent will sting his back and kill him.” The Jew went his way to
the wilderness, and having collected a quantity of fuel, came back, on
which the companions said, “O Messenger of Allah (S), he has returned
alive.” Muhammad called the man and said, “Lay down your burden.” On his
doing so, a black serpent appeared in the bundle, holding a stick
between his teeth.

“What have you done today?” inquired the Prophet. “Nothing,” replied the
Jew, except, having two loaves of bread, I ate one and gave the other to
a poor man.” The Holy Prophet (S) said, “For this act of charity, Allah
has prevented the serpent from stinging you, and because of charity
Allah repels a bitter death.”

**Fifty-first miracle:** Shaykh Tabarsi, Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob
have narrated that Abu Bara was called Malaibus Sana. He was an Arab
noble and he became afflicted with dropsy.[^153] He sent Labib bin
Rabiah to the Prophet with two horses and some camels that the Prophet
returned saying that he did not accept gifts from idolaters.

Labib said: I did not even think that anyone among the Arabs could
reject a gift of Abu Bara. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: If I had
accepted a gift from any idolater I would never have returned it. Then
Abu Labib said: Abu Bara is suffering from a disease of the stomach and
he requests you to provide some cure for it.

The Prophet picked up a pinch of dust, mixed it with his spit and said:
“Go and tell him to eat this.” Labib took it thinking that the Prophet
has played a joke on him, but when Abu Bara took it he was immediately
cured as if freed from a prison.

**Fifty-second miracle:** Shaykh Tusi, Rawandi, Tabarsi and Ibn Shahr
Ashob have through authentic chains narrated from many companions that:
In the expedition of Tabuk, we were fighting the Roman army and having
exhausted our rations were suffering hunger. People wanted to slaughter
their own camels for dinner but the Prophet had it announced that
whoever had anything to eat should bring it out.

Sheets were spread. And man brought a measure of food, another one
brought half a measure and in this way the whole army gathered the food,
which did not exceed thirty Saa and the whole army comprising of four
thousand men gathered. The Prophet prayed and placed his hand in the
food and said: Eat in the name of Allah and do not compete with each
other. A group of people came and the Prophet told them to fill their
vessels in the name of Allah. They filled all their vessels. This went
on and the whole army was satiated but the food did not diminish.

According to another report, the Prophet called for a few dates and drew
his blessed hand over them. Then he signaled the people to eat from
them. The whole army ate and filled their vessels but there was no
decrease in the original quantity.

**Fifty-third miracle:** Rawandi, Ibn Shahr Ashob and other tradition
scholars have narrated through reliable chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says: I was with the Prophet in an
expedition and we reached a place where no water was available and
people were thirsty. The Messenger of Allah (S) called for a vessel
containing a little water and dipped his hand in it and a sufficient
quantity boiled up between his fingers to supply twelve thousand horses,
twelve thousand camels, the same number of horses, and thirty thousand
men.

He turned a salty well at Mecca sweet, by casting some of his saliva
into it. According to another report, he covered it with a sheet and
placed his hand over it. He placed some water on his hand and water
issued from his miraculous fingers. This traditional report is recorded
through various channels and is among the continuously narrated miracles
of the Prophet.

**Fifty-fourth miracle:** It is among the continuous miracles narrated
by Shia and Sunni that when the Messenger of Allah (S) escaped the
idolater of Quraish and fled to Medina and on the way reached the
encampment of Umm Mabad, Abu Bakr, Umar, Amir bin Fahera and Abdullah
Ibn Arihat were with him. Umm Mabad was sitting outside her tent when
the Prophet approached her to sell some dates and meat. She said nothing
was available.

The Prophet saw a goat tied in a corner and asked what was wrong with
her. She said because of weakness she could not accompany the flock. The
Prophet asked if it produced milk? She replied that she has not produced
any milk since so many years. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Allow me to
milk her.” She said, “May my parents be sacrificed on you, you may take
anything that is in her udders. The Prophet drew his hand over the
udders and prayed: “O Allah, give her barakat (increase),” and
immediately milk flowed from her.

The Prophet called for a vessel which could satiate many persons and
began to milk her till the vessel was full. He gave it to Umm Mabad who
drank it to satiation, then he gave to his companions, who also became
satiated and after all had drunk, he himself took some of it, remarking:
“The leader must come last.”

Then he milked her again till the vessel was full and the people drank
from it again and left Umm Mabad the rest. When her husband, Abu Mabad
returned home, he asked from where that milk had come, Umm Mabad
narrated the whole incident. Abu Mabad said: “He must be the same
Prophet who has appeared in Mecca.”

**Fifty-fifth miracle:** Tabarsi, Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have
narrated that some people complained to the Prophet about shortage and
salinity of the water in their wells. The Prophet accompanied them to
the location and dropped his saliva into it. The water boiled up the
well and turned extremely sweet.

Even today that well is known is Assila and is a matter of pride for its
owners. When followers of Musaylima Kazzab heard about this they asked
him also to show a similar miracle. He came to a well which was well
supplied and sweet and he dropped his impure spit into it and its water
turned brackish and then dried up and it is still present in Yemen.

**Fifty-sixth miracle:** Shia and Sunni scholars have reported that
Salman Farsi was enslaved to a Jew who had offered to release him in
exchange of planting a date orchard for him. The Prophet prepared the
orchard in a single day and gave it to the Jew and freed Salman, as will
be narrated in the biography of Salman Farsi.

**Fifty-seventh miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated that Salman was
deeply in debts. The Messenger of Allah (S) gave him a little quantity
of gold which was just a fraction of his debts but through the miracle
of the Prophet, all his debts were cleared.

**Fifty-eighth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Anas that once he
went to the market with the Messenger of Allah (S) and at that time he
was having ten dirhams. The Prophet wanted to purchase a robe. A slave
girl was sitting on the road and weeping.

He asked her about it and she said that she had lost two dirhams in the
crowd and she feared returning home as her master will be enraged
because of it. The Prophet told me to give her two dirhams. When we
reached the market, we purchased a robe worth ten dirhams and the
Prophet told me to pay ten dirhams. When I opened the bag there were ten
dirhams in it.

**Fifty-ninth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated that
one day Abu Huraira came with a handful of dates and asked the Prophet
to pray to Allah for barakat (increase) which the Prophet did and then
told him to keep them in a bag. Whenever you want you may take out
handfuls but do not empty the bag fully.

Abu Huraira used it for years till Amirul Momineen (a.s.) adjured him to
testify, which he declined as a result of this he lost the barakat. Then
he repented and asked Ali (a.s.) to return the barakat which was done.
When Abu Huraira joined Muawiyah, the barakat (increase) disappeared
forever.

**Sixtieth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(S) used to go to the Masjid three times every night and sometimes he
returned at the end of the night. Some poor men used to sleep near the
pulpit. Once the Holy Prophet (S) told his slave girl if any leftovers
were there at home.

She brought an earthen pot containing some food. The Holy Prophet (S)
woke up ten poor men and said: Eat in the name of Allah. All ate to
satiation. Then he awoke another group of ten poor men and they also ate
to satiation and there was no decrease in the food. Then he said: Go and
feed the women from this.

**Sixty-first miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) used to visit Lady Fatima and
insert his saliva into the mouths of her infants and say: Now don’t feed
them as they don’t need to be fed.

**Sixty-second miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that Salman says: I
fasted for three days continuously and could not get anything for Iftar
except water. I told the Messenger of Allah (S) about it who said: Come
with me. We set out from there and on the way saw a she-goat, and the
Prophet asked the owner to bring it to him.

He said she did not have any milk but the Prophet insisted. When he
brought it, the Prophet drew his hands over her udders and immediately
they filled up with milk. He said: Bring a bowl. He milked the goat and
when the bowl was full he gave it to the owner who drank it at once.
Then he milked her again and when it was full, he gave it to me and I
drank it. The third time he milked the goat and drank the milk himself.

**Sixty-third miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated that on a certain
journey the camel of a certain companion tired out and refused to get
up. The Holy Prophet (S) called for water, performed ablution and
gargled and put the water on the head and mouth of the camel. He
immediately got up and began to move faster than other beasts.

**Sixty-fourth miracle:** Rawandi and other Shia and Sunni tradition
scholars have narrated that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says: I bought a
dirham worth of flour and a dirham worth of mutton and gave to Fatima
who cooked the food and remarked: It would have been better if you had
called the Prophet also for dinner. I came to him and found him lying on
a side and saying: I seek refuge of Allah from lying hungry.

I said: Food is ready at home. Please come. The Holy Prophet (S) arose
and came home leaning on me. Upon reaching there he called: Fatima bring
the food. She brought the bread and curry and the Prophet covered it
with a cloth and then said: “Fatima, send a share to Umm Salma, a share
to Ayesha and so on. In this way a loaf of bread and some mutton was
sent to all the wives. Then he said: Keep aside a share for your father
and your husband. Then he sent to the neighbors. Even after that so much
was left that it lasted us many days.

**Sixty-fifth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated
that when the Holy Prophet (S) returned from Hudaibiyah, on the way they
reached a valley called, Al-Mashqaq where water was scarce and only
enough for one or two persons. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “No one should
drink till I don’t come.”

On reaching there, he called for a bowl and dropped his saliva in it.
According to another report, taking water in that bowl he dipped his
blessed hand in it. Water began to boil out from it like a spring and it
emitted a loud noise. The whole army drank from it. People filled up
their skins, pots and vessels etc.; they performed ablution also. The
Holy Prophet (S) said: “You will hear in future that this water has
caused all its surroundings to become verdant,” and the same thing
happened.

**Sixty-sixth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated that
the daughter of Abdullah bin Rawaha passed before the Prophet when the
trench was being dug out and the Prophet asked her whom she was seeking.
She said that she was looking for her father as she had brought some
dates for him.

The Holy Prophet (S) took the dates from her and ordered them to spread
out the sheets and made a public announcement that dinner was served.
All the members of army arrived and ate to satiation and as much as they
wished they took it with them. The rest was returned to that girl. It is
reported that 3000 persons had eaten that day.

**Sixty-seventh miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated from Jabir Ansari
that: My father was martyred in the Battle of Uhud at the age of 200
years. He was deeply in debts. One day the Prophet asked me what has
happened to my father’s debts? I said they were still outstanding. He
asked: Who is the creditor? I replied: A certain Jew.

He asked when was the payment due. I said: In the season of drying of
dates. He said: When that time arrives, you must let me know and don’t
spend anything from it. And separate different qualities of dates. So I
informed the Prophet and he came with me to the orchard and handled each
type of date. Then he called for the Jew and said: You may recover your
loan from any type of dates.

He said: All these dates will be insufficient to clear my loan. The Holy
Prophet (S) said: Start taking whichever type you want. The Jew pointed
to the Saihani dates and the Prophet said: Bismillah, measure and take.
The man began to take them according to his measure till he had taken
the amount he owed but there was no decrease in it.

Then the Prophet asked Jabir if he owed any other debt to which he
replied in the negative. The Prophet told him to take the remaining
dates home and may Allah give him barakat. Jabir says: They lasted us a
whole year. I sold a lot and gifted many people and presented to others
and they did not finish till the next season.

**Sixty-eighth miracle:** Ali bin Ibrahim, Ibn Shahr Ashob and Qutub
Rawandi (r.a.), Shia and Sunni tradition scholars have narrated from
Jabir: During the siege of Khandaq, I saw the Prophet lying down with a
stone on his stomach to mitigate the pain of hunger. I went home and
told my wife to prepare a dinner for the Prophet, as we had only one
sheep and one saa of barley. She told me first to go and invite him to
be our guest. “Shall I come alone,” asked the Prophet, “or bring with me
whom I please?”

“Invite whom you like,” said Jabir, supposing he would bring Ali with
him. I came home and told my wife to bake the bread and I will slaughter
the sheep. When the dinner was ready, I came to the Prophet and invited
him. The Prophet arose and called out from the edge of the trench to
come to Jabir’s for dinner. On the way he invited everyone he met to
accept the invitation of Jabir. According to different reports 700 or
800 or 1000 persons came to eat. Jabir ran and told his wife, who asked
him if he had informed the Prophet what provision he had prepared.

“Yes,” said he. “Then it is his business,” added the woman, “and he
knows better than ourselves what to do.” The Prophet directed all the
people to sit outside the house and himself entered the house with
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and according to another report took all of them
inside then gestured to the wall to retire as successive groups came in.
He then cast saliva into the oven, and ordered Jabir to uncover the pot,
and his wife to take out the bread, loaf by loaf. He passed them to Imam
Ali (a.s.) who broke them in bowls.

Three times he called for the shoulder, and the fourth time Jabir said,
“a sheep has but two shoulders, and I have already produced three.” “If
you had been silent,” remarked the Prophet, “the whole company had been
feasted on shoulders.” The people ate in parties of ten from the same
dish, and when all were satisfied, the Prophet, Ali and Jabir ate; still
the food was undiminished, and lasted the family many days.

**Sixty-ninth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Ziyad bin Harth
Saidani that the Messenger of Allah (S) sent an army against my people.
Ziyad said: “Recall the forces, I guarantee that my people will embrace
Islam.” The Prophet recalled the army and I wrote a letter to them and
they sent some representatives to the Prophet who informed of their
conversion.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “You are the leader of your community.” I
said, “The Almighty Allah guided them to Islam.” Thus the Prophet wrote
a letter to them appointing me as their leader. I requested him to give
a share from their religious payments. The Prophet fixed my share. This
incident occurred during a journey. On another station the natives
arrived and complained of their ruler. The Prophet said: There is no
benefit for a believer in becoming a leader. Another man came and asked
the Prophet for some alms.

The Prophet said: When a rich man takes to begging it causes pain in his
head and stomach. Again he asked for alms. The Prophet said: Allah, has
himself distributed alms and categorized eight types of recipients which
cannot be tampered by the prophet or anyone else. If you are from one of
these categories, I am prepared to give your share. Saidani says that
when I heard these statements about leadership and Sadaqah, I began to
despise them both. I returned the letter of my appointment and said
please excuse me.

The Prophet said: “Is there anyone eligible for it?” I named one from
the group that had to meet the Prophet and then said: “There is a well
in our locality whose water suffices us during winter but is short due
summer and we have to go to other localities. Since we have embraced
Islam, people in our surrounding areas will be jealous of us and would
not allow us to draw water from their areas.

So please pray that there is no decrease in the water of our well and it
should not be that we have to approach other areas for water. The Holy
Prophet (S) picked up seven pebbles and rubbed them while reciting a
supplication. Then he gave them to me and said: Put one of these in the
well after mentioning the name of Allah.

Ziyad says: I obeyed the instructions of the Prophet and after that
there was such an increase that we never could reach to its bottom.
According to a report, a desert Arab came to the Holy Prophet (S) and
complained of water shortage. The Messenger of Allah (S) took up a
pebble and rubbed his finger upon it saying: Put it in that well. When
it was cast into the well, water rose upto its brim  
 .  
**Seventieth miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Sharh Ashob have narrated from
Anas that he says: Abu Talha felt that the Messenger of Allah (S) was
hungry. He sent me to the Prophet and invited him to dinner. The Holy
Prophet (S) saw me and asked: Has Abu Talha sent you to summon me?
“Yes,” I said. The Prophet arose and called all who were with him to
accompany him.

Abu Talha told Umm Salim: The Messenger of Allah (S) has come with many
people and I don’t have enough to feed them all. The Prophet said: “O
Umm Salim, bring whatever you have.” She brought some loaves of barley
bread and all that she had in a vessel. The Prophet crushed the bread
and poured oil over them and then placed his hand over them. He called
companions in groups of ten each and fed them after which each group
departed. In this way, all ate to satiation and it is said that they
were in all 70 or 80 persons who ate that day.

**Seventy-first miracle:** It is narrated that a woman named Umm Sharik
brought a skinful of oil for the Prophet and he emptied the skin and
returned it to her. When she reached home she found that the skin was
full as before. She and her family used it for a long period of time and
there was no diminishing in it.

According to another report, the Prophet entered the tent of Umm Sharik
and she made great efforts to entertain him. She brought a skin that she
thought contained oil, but which was in fact empty. The Prophet took the
skin and shook it, and it was filled with oil. Then the Prophet and his
companions fed to satiation. Umm Sharik and her sons continued to eat
from it for a long time. The Prophet told her not to tie up the mouth of
the bag.

**Seventy-second miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that the Holy
Prophet (S) gave a cup of honey to a woman from which she ate for years
but there was no decrease in it. One day she removed it and kept it in
another vessel. It immediately disappeared. She came to the Prophet and
narrated the incident. The Prophet said that if she had not transferred
it to another vessel she would have eaten from it forever.

**Seventy-third miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Jabir that
a man came to the Prophet and asked for food. The Prophet gave him 60
Saa of wheat. He continued to use it for years and there was no
decrease. One day he decided to measure the remaining grain. When he
filled the measure it was over. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “If he had
not measured it, it would have lasted him forever.”

**Seventy-fourth miracle:** Shia and Sunni scholars have narrated
through many chains that the Holy Prophet (S) was camping in Hudaibiyah
with 1500 companions and the climate was very hot. People complained to
him that flowing water was finished and there was no water in the well
and the Quraish have taken possession of wells that contain water. The
Prophet called for a bucket of water.

He performed the ablution and taking some water in his mouth, dropped it
back into the bucket. Then he told them to put that in the well.
Immediately the well became full of water. According to another report,
he removed an arrow from his quiver and put it in the well and according
to yet another report, gave an arrow point to Nahiya binte Amr or Binte
Baraa bin Azib and told them to put it in a well of Hudaibiyah.

After which water surged up from below. When idolater saw that they
said: It is not unexpected from the sorcery of Muhammad. When the
Prophet departed from there he told his men remove the arrow from the
well. When this was done the water also disappeared as if there was no
water ever. According to another report, people complained of water
scarcity during the Battle of Tabuk. The Holy Prophet (S) gave an arrow
to a man and said: Put it in the well and water filled to the brim and
30000 persons with their animals used that water.

**Seventy-fifth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Jabir bin
Abdullah Ansari that: Once I was ill and I became unconscious. The Holy
Prophet (S) came to visit me and he washed his hand and sprinkled the
water on me. I regained consciousness and was cured.

**Seventy-sixth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that Tufayl
Aamiri and according to another report Hassan bin Thabit suffered from
leprosy and they asked the Prophet to pray for their cure. The Prophet
called for water in a vessel and dropped his saliva in it. Then he told
them to bathe with it and were cured.

**Seventy-seventh miracle:** It is narrated that Qays Najmi suffered
from white patches and the Prophet applied his saliva and he was cured.

**Seventy-eighth miracle:** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Khatib
that: During my childhood once water was being boiled in a big pot which
fell on my arm. My mother brought me to the Prophet who took water in
his mouth and gave it in my mouth and applied it to my arm and recited
the following supplication:

“Take away the hardship, O Lord of men. And cure us since You are the
curer and there is no curer other than You. A curer who does not allow
any illness to remain.” I was immediately cured.

**Seventy-ninth miracle:** It is narrated that Qatada bin Rabi and
according to another report Qatada bin Noman lost an eye in the Battle
of Uhud and the Prophet placed it back in the socket and it healed
perfectly. Though the undamaged eye was sometime afflicted but this eye
never developed any problem. According to a report, Abdullah bin Anis
also faced such an eventuality. The Prophet passed his hands over him
and he was cured.

**Eightieth miracle:** It is narrated that Muhammad bin Muslima’s leg
was fractured at the thigh on the day Kaab al-Ashraf was killed. The
Messenger of Allah (S) drew his blessed hand over it and it was cured.

**Eighty-first miracle:** It is narrated from Urwah bin Zubair that
there was a woman named Zohra in Mecca and she embraced Islam and after
that she lost her vision. Idolaters claimed that Laat and Uzza have made
her blind. The Prophet drew his holy hand over her eyes and she regained
her vision. The idolaters said: If Islam had been better, Zohra wouldn’t
have embraced Islam before us? At that juncture, the following verse was
revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَوْ كَانَ خَيْرًا مَا
سَبَقُونَا إِلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who disbelieve say concerning those who believe: If it had
been a good, they would not have gone ahead of us therein.”***[^154]  
**Eighty-second miracle:** It is narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S)
sent Abdullah bin Atik to kill Abu Rafe the Jew, who was hiding in his
castle, on the return journey, Abdullah had a fracture in his leg. When
he came to the Prophet, he told him to stretch his leg and drew his hand
over it and it was immediately cured.

**Eighty-third miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated that one
day the Prophet slept about noon one day under a thorn-tree in the
desert, when he awoke, he called for water, performed ablutions, and
rinsed his mouth, pouring the water at the foot of the tree. The next
day the tree had become immensely great, laden with very large fruits,
fragrance of amber, and the taste of honey.

This fruit satisfied alike the hungry and thirsty, and the sick
partaking of it were healed. Animals that fed on its leaves yielded
abundant milk. Inhabitants of that area came and carried away its leaves
to heal the sick, and the whole tribe around the tree, in consequence of
its virtues, increased in children and wealth. In process of time, they
saw one morning that the tree had cast its fruit, and its leaves had
become yellow and small.

A few days after this event, news arrived that the Prophet has departed
from the world. It subsequently yielded fruit, but smaller, less
fragrant and delightful, than at first. It continued thirty years in
this state, at the lapse of which period its fruit again fell and little
of its verdure was left. Soon information arrived that Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) was martyred.

After this, it yielded no more fruit, but its leaves were still used for
healing the sick. It continued a long time in this state, till one day
it became perfectly dry; fresh blood sprung up under it, and bloody
water distilled from its leaves, like water after washing of meat. A
short time later news arrived that on that day, Imam Husain (a.s.) was
martyred.

**Eighty-fourth miracle:** Shaykh Tusi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated
from Zaid bin Arqam that one day the Prophet was very hungry in the
morning. He came to Fatima and saw Hasan and Husain (a.s.) crying of
hunger. He gave made them taste his saliva and they became satiated and
went to sleep. The Holy Prophet (S) went with Imam Ali (a.s.) to the
house of Abul Hasheem who accorded them a warm welcome and said: “It is
really regretful for me that you and your companions should visit my
place but that I don’t have anything to serve you.

I gave to the neighbors whatever I had.” The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“Jibraeel used to emphasize so much about the rights of neighbors that I
thought they would be allotted a share in inheritance.” Then the Prophet
decried a date tree in the courtyard. The owner said that it was a male
and if the Prophet so desired he may go to it but it never fructified.
The Prophet went to the tree and said: O Ali, bring a bowl of water.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) brought it, he took it in his mouth and gargled
on that tree and it immediately filled with bunches of date fruits.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “First send them to the neighbor. After that
we ate to satiation and then drank iced water. The Holy Prophet (S)
said: O Ali, it is among the bounties regarding which the Almighty Allah
says that they would be asked about on Judgment Day. Then he said: “Also
take some dates for those who are not present, like Fatima and her
sons.”

After this incident, the tree continued to produce fruits and we enjoyed
its fruits and we use to call it Nakhlatul Jiran. So much so that during
the plunder of Medina, Yazid ordered destruction of the people of Medina
and that tree was also cut down in the riots.

**Eighty-fifth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that Aamir bin
Kuraiz on the day of the conquest of Mecca brought his son, Abdullah to
the Prophet and at that time he was five months old. The Prophet gave
him his saliva and he sucked it happily. The Prophet prayed: “O Allah,
give water in his sustenance.” Due to the Prophet’s prayer, wherever he
went, there used to be abundance of water in the fields and his farms
and wells are famous.

### Miracles averting the harm of enemies

**First miracle:** Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of
narrators from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that one day Abu Lahab came to the
Prophet and threatened him, but the Prophet said: “You cannot harm me in
anyway. If you do that, I will be a liar.” This was also among the
miracles of the Prophet.

**Second miracle:** Shaykh Mufeed and Rawandi etc. have narrated from
Jabir that Hakam bin Abil Aas, Uthman’s uncle, used to mimic the Prophet
and make faces at him; he also parodied Imam Ali (a.s.). The Messenger
of Allah (S) cursed him and he became insane for two months. One day the
Prophet was walking on the road and he was following him, waving his
hand to ridicule the Prophet.

The Prophet said: “He will be in that condition only.” He contracted
some malady and his hands became twisted and finally the Prophet exiled
him from Medina and ordered that no one should allow him back. During
his reign, Uthman recalled that accursed one to Medina.

**Third miracle:** Ali bin Ibrahim, Rawandi and Ibn Ashob etc. have
narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S)
was praying near the Kaaba one day. Abu Jahl had taken an oath that when
he sees the Prophet praying, he would eliminate him. When he saw the
Prophet, he picked a huge stone and approached him. But when he raised
his hand, it was caught up in his neck.

He returned to his associates in this way and dropped the stone. And
according to another report, he beseeched the Prophet and when he prayed
for him, the stone separated from his hand. Another man volunteered to
slay the Prophet; but when he came to the Prophet, he began to tremble
with fear and returned from there saying: There was a huge serpent
between me and him, thrashing its tail. According to another report, Abu
Jahl had come to trample on the neck of the Prophet, but when he
returned immediately and people asked him about it, he said, “Between me
and him was a trench full of fire and I saw some winged angels.” When
the Prophet heard this, he remarked: “If he had come near me, the angels
would have cut him into pieces.”

**Fourth miracle:** Ali bin Ibrahim, Ibn Babawayh, Ibn Shahr Ashob and
Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have mentioned in the interpretation of the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا كَفَيْنَاكَ الْمُسْتَهْزِئِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We will suffice you against the scoffers…”***[^155]

…that after the Holy Prophet (S) assumed prophethood, the first to
believe in him was Ali bin Abi Talib, and the next was Khadija. One day
His Eminence, Abu Talib and Ja’far Tayyar arrived and saw the Prophet
praying and Ali was also standing in prayers besides him.

His Eminence, Abu Talib told Ja’far: “You also pray with your cousin.”
When he stood to the left of the Prophet, the latter moved ahead of him.
After this, Zaid bin Haritha believed, and these five persons continued
to perform prayers till the Almighty Allah ordered them to express their
faith and not to care about the idolaters.

***“Surely We will suffice you against the scoffers…”***[^156]

And they (scoffers) were five persons: Walid bin Mughira, Aas bin Wail,
Aswad bin Muttalib, Aswad bin Abde Ghus and Harith bin Talatala; and
some have mentioned them to be six and included Harith bin Qays.
Jibraeel arrived and stood by the Prophet. Walid passed from there and
Jibraeel asked: “Is this Walid bin Mughira, one of your scoffers?”

“Yes,” replied the Prophet. Jibraeel gestured to him and he went away
from there and reached a blacksmith who was sharpening an arrow. Mughira
stepped on a sharp point and it pierced his foot, causing excessive
bleeding. But due to pride he did not bend down to remove it. Jibraeel
had also gestured about the place where the arrow was being sharpened.
On returning home, Walid lied down on a sofa and his daughter was lying
on the floor.

His foot was bleeding so heavily that it flowed to the girl’s carpet and
she awoke due to it and told the slave girl: “Perhaps you left the water
skin untied and water is seeping out of it till here.” Walid said: “This
is the blood of your father and not water. Call my sons and nephews, as
I will not survive. Let me make out my will.” When they were summoned,
he said to Abdullah bin Rabiah: “Ammara bin Walid is in Habasha, take a
letter from Muhammad and send it to Najjashi so that he may send him
back to Mecca.”

Then he told his youngest son, Hasham: “Son, I make five bequests to you
which you must remember. The first is that you must eliminate Abu
Dhamdosi even if you have to pay three blood monies for that, and don’t
leave him because he forcibly took away my wife who was his daughter. If
he had allowed her to remain with me, I would have got a son like you
from her also.

The next bequest is the revenge of blood that I want to take from Khaza,
which you must not forget. Also take the compensation of the blood I
have to take from Khuzaimah bin Aamir. Fourthly, you must collect some
blood monies that are payable by the Thaqif tribe. Lastly, I owe the
Bishop of Najran, 200 dinars, which you must repay him.” After saying
this the man departed for Hell.

After that Aas bin Wail passed by the Prophet. Jibraeel gestured to his
foot and a pointed piece of wood pierced it and came out from the back,
killing him. According to another report, a thorn pierced him and he got
such a terrible itch that he scratched himself to death.

When Aswad bin Muttalib passed by the Messenger, Jibraeel gestured to
his eye and he became blind. He knocked his head against the wall and
departed for Hell. According to another report, Jibraeel pointed to his
stomach and he suffered from severe thirst and drank so much of water
that his stomach burst and he died.

Aswad bin Abde Ghus had been cursed by the Prophet that he should become
blind and suffer the loss of his son; Jibraeel also hit him with a green
leaf and he lived to fulfill the prayer of the Prophet. At last his son
was killed in Badr and he died in his grief.

Jibraeel gestured to the head of Harith bin Talatala and a fatal sore
developed therein. Some say that he died of snake bite. Some also say
that poisonous wind affected him which blackened his complexion and he
became so unrecognizable that when he came home, his family members
didn’t recognize him and beat him so severely that he died. Harith bin
Qays consumed a poisonous fish and drank water in such excess that he
died.[^157]

**Fifth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that a Jew woman attempting to
injure the Prophet by the power of sorcery, had tied several knots of
spell for this purpose and cast them into a well. Jibraeel informed
Muhammad of the fact; the knots were taken out of the well, and no harm
followed.

**Sixth miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated from Ibn Masud that when
the Prophet was in prostration one day before the Kaaba, Abu Jahl
ordered the entrails of a camel he had slaughtered to be thrown on the
Prophet’s back. Fatima removed the uncleanness.

When the Prophet finished his devotions, he said, “O Lord, take revenge
from these infidels,” and named Abu Jahl, Atba, Shaibah, Walid, Umayyah
and Ibn Abi Muit and some others, who were killed at Badr.

**Seventh miracle:** Shia tradition scholars have narrated from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and Sunni scholars have narrated through various
channels that Atba, son of Abu Lahab said: “I deny the God of Najam,”
and spat towards the Prophet. The Prophet asked him if he didn’t fear
being torn up by a beast. According to another report he said: “O Allah,
hand him over one of Your dogs.” After that he traveled to Yemen in a
caravan and according to another report, he went to Shaam.

He used to say: “Muhammad’s curse will surely cause my death. Abu Lahab
told the people to take care of him and not leave him alone, lest
Muhammad’s curse be fulfilled.” So they gathered their belongings and
made him camp at a high place and the people slept around him. A lion
appeared in the dead of the night and after smelling at all of them at
last leapt upon Atba and ripped him apart.

**Eighth miracle:** It is narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) used
to pray near the Kaaba, the Almighty Allah used to make him invisible to
the idolaters.

**Ninth miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that Abdullah bin Umayyah told the Prophet: “I will not believe
in you till the Almighty Allah and all His angels do not testify to your
veracity or you go up to the sky and bring a book and even if you are
able to all this, I can’t guarantee that I will become faithful. The
Prophet was aggrieved at this and he returned home.

Abu Jahl said: “If he comes to the mosque next day, I will crush his
head with a stone.” When the Messenger of Allah (S) entered the mosque
next day and began to pray, Abu Jahl took a huge stone and moved towards
him. But when he came near, he began to tremble and went away from
there. When people asked him about it, he said, “I saw some men as tall
as mountains gilded with iron, surrounding Muhammad; if I had made any
move, they would have killed me.”

**Tenth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated through authentic chains of
narrators from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that when the Holy Prophet (S)
once recited Surah Lahab in prayers, people told Umm Jamil, sister of
Abu Sufyan and wife of Abu Lahab that “Muhammad has cursed you in his
prayers and he condemns you.” She was enraged at this and she came out
looking for the Prophet and said: “If I see him, I will abuse him,” (I
seek refuge of Allah) she made inquiries about the whereabouts of the
Prophet.

At last she entered the mosque when Abu Bakr was seated with him and he
asked the Prophet to hide as Umm Jamil was looking for him and perhaps
she would abuse the Prophet. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “She would not
be able to see me.” And when Umm Jamil came near him she could not see
him.

She asked Abu Bakr if he had seen Muhammad and when he denied, she went
back home. Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: The Almighty Allah placed a
yellow veil between her and the Prophet and she and all infidels used to
address the Prophet as Muzammam, that is one who is condemned too much.

The Messenger of Allah (S) used to say: “The Almighty Allah has erased
my name from their memories. They condemn Muzammam which is not my
name.” Shaykh Tabarsi, Ibn Shahr Ashob and all Shia and Sunni tradition
scholars have narrated this incident from Asma binte Abu Bakr etc. and
it is narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) recited the following verse
when she came to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْآنَ جَعَلْنَا بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَ الَّذِينَ لَا
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ حِجَابًا مَسْتُورًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when you recite the Qur’an, We place between you and those who
do not believe in the hereafter a hidden barrier…”***[^158]

When she could not see the Prophet she told Abu Bakr: “I have heard that
your companion has condemned me.” Abu Bakr said: “By the Lord of the
Kaaba, His Eminence, has not condemned you.”

**Eleventh miracle:** Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have narrated that Abu Jahl
and Walid bin Mughira along with some men of Bani Makhzum intended to
slay the Messenger of Allah (S) when he comes to the Masjid. When the
next day, he came to pray, all of them sent Walid to eliminate the
Prophet but when he came there, he could hear his voice but was not able
to see him. He returned and narrated that but they did not believe him.

All came to the Prophet and hearing a voice headed in a certain
direction, advanced to that place; when they heard it in another
direction, and were thus bewildered, seeing him not and finding him not.
At last they returned from there and the Almighty Allah revealed the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا مِنْ بَيْنِ أَيْدِيهِمْ سَدًّا وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ سَدًّا
فَأَغْشَيْنَاهُمْ فَهُمْ لَا يُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have made before them a barrier and a barrier behind them,
then We have covered them over so that they do not see.”***[^159]

**Twelfth miracle:** Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that when the Jews of
Medina signed a no-war pact and agreed to help in payment of blood
monies, the Holy Prophet (S) went to Bani Nuzayr and asked for their
cooperation.

They told him to be seated while they collected the funds, while they
conspired to eliminate the Prophet secretly. Jibraeel came down and
informed the Prophet of their intention and the Prophet came out of
their house exposing their true colors.

**Thirteenth miracle:** Shaykh Tabarsi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated
that His Eminence set out to fight a group of Arabs and reached a
village, which was called Zi-amar. The natives fled to the mountains on
seeing the army. The Holy Prophet (S) stood at a place from where he
could watch them and then came out to relieve himself. It began to rain
and he was soaked to the skin. He removed his clothes and hung them on a
tree. Then he lay down under the tree.

The villagers were watching the Prophet and their leader, Dathur bin
Harith came to him and pulling out his sword said: “Who can save you
from me?” The Prophet calmly replied: “God.” Jibraeel clapped his chest
and his fell down dropping the sword. The Prophet picked the sword and
asked him: “Now who can save you from me?”

“No one,” said he and embraced Islam. Then he invited the people of his
community to faith. According to another report, when he wanted to
attack the Prophet, he began to tremble and dropped the weapon.
According to the report of Abu Hamza Thumali, Dathur says that “a man
dressed in white clapped my chest and I realized that he was an angel.”

**Fourteenth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Ibn Abbas that
the idolaters of Quraish gathered at Hajre Ismail and took a collective
oath that if they see Muhammad in the mosque, they would eliminate him
together. Fatima learnt about this and she came to the Prophet weeping
and narrated their plot. He asked for water to perform ablution and
after that came to the mosque.

When they saw him, the Almighty Allah put the Prophet’s awe into their
hearts and all bowed down their heads in humiliation. The Messenger of
Allah (S) picked a handful of dust and said: “Humiliate them.” Whoever
was hit with that dust was killed in the Battle of Badr.

**Fifteenth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that one day, the
Messenger of Allah (S) was walking in Abtah when Abu Lahab the accursed
threw a stone at the Prophet and it continued to be suspended in the air
for seven days. People used to wonder who has made it suspended and the
Prophet said that it was the one who has held up the sky without
pillars.

**Sixteenth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob and most tradition scholars and
historians have narrated that during the Battle of Hunain, Shaibah bin
Uthman decided to eliminate the Prophet. When he came behind to launch
an attack, he saw between himself and the Prophet a huge flame. The
Prophet learnt of his intention and said: “O Shaibah, come to me.”

When he came the Prophet said: “O Allah, take away the Satan from his
heart.” Shaibah says: “With this prayer, the Holy Prophet (S) became so
beloved to me that I loved him more than myself.

After that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “Now fight the idolaters.” After
the battle was over, the Prophet told him whatever he had intended and
whatever he had seen. And he said: “Whatever Allah had intended for you
is better than that which you want from yourself.”

**Seventeenth miracle:** Sayyid Ibn Tawus, Ibn Shahr Ashob and other
tradition scholars have narrated that Aamir bin Tufayl and Arbad bin
Qays came to assassinate the Prophet. When they entered the mosque,
Aamir came to him and asked: “O Muhammad, what will I get if I become a
Muslim?” He replied: “You will have the same rights and obligations as
all other Muslims.” He said, “I want you to make me your Caliph after
you.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said, “It is beyond the capacity of me and you and
only Allah has that discretion.” He said, “Make me the governor of
forests and you remain the ruler of cities.” The Holy Prophet (S) said
that it was also not possible. He asked, “Then what have you decided for
me?” He replied: “Mount the horse and fight Jihad.” He said, “Okay, for
the time being I accept that. Come with me, I want to say something in
private.”

He arose and walked with him to a corner. At that moment he gestured to
his cousin, Arbad to pull the sword and slay the Messenger. He tried to
pull out the sword and but with all his efforts, he could not draw it
more than a span out of the scabbard. It is mentioned in another report
that Arbad said: A wall came between me and the Prophet and when I tried
it the second time I found that Aamir was between us.

Thus when the Holy Prophet (S) saw that Arbad was trying to draw his
sword, he said: “O Allah, save me.” People crowded around the Prophet
and the two potential killers fled from there, but they failed to reach
their destination.

Arbad was killed by lightning while Aamir came to a woman of Saluliya
tribe and he developed a boil of plague on his finger and she said:
“Your finger is swelling, will you die in the house of Saluliya?” Even
though they considered it a matter of shame to stay at this place. Aamir
mounted and left the place, but he had traveled only some distance when
he died.

**Eighteenth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated from Ibn
Abbas that during the expedition of Hudaibiyah, eighty persons from
Mecca planned to slay the Prophet and for this purpose descended from
the mountain of Taneem. The Messenger of Allah (S) invoked curse on them
and all became blind. Companions of the Prophet took them in custody. At
last the Prophet did a favor on them and released them. At that
juncture, the Almighty Allah revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي كَفَّ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنْكُمْ وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ عَنْهُمْ
بِبَطْنِ مَكَّةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He it is Who held back their hands from you and your hands from
them in the valley of Mecca…”***[^160]

**Nineteenth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob and most tradition scholars have
narrated that after the Quraish were defeated at Badr, Abu Lahab
inquired the reason of it from Abu Sufyan. He replied that they fled at
the onset, seeing white horsemen in the air, mounted on pie-bald horses,
and whom none could withstand.

Abu Rafe told Ummul Fazl, a daughter of Abbas, that those white horsemen
were angels. This so enraged Abu Lahab that he dashed the person on the
ground, upon which Ummul Fazl struck him with a tent pole, and fractured
his skull.

Abu Lahab lingered for seven days, when God smote him with an eruption
which the Arabs avoided with horror, and he lay dead for three days in
his house; his own sons did not approach to bury him, till at last he
was pulled out of Mecca by rope and a great pile of stones thrown on
him.[^161]

**Twentieth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Ibn Abbas that
in the Battle of Ahzab, Abu Sufyan ordered a division of seven thousand
archers to discharge their arrows in a simultaneous volley at the
Prophet’s army. This order coming to the ears of the Muslim, caused much
terror and alarm among them, but the Prophet waved his victorious sleeve
in the air and prayed, and when the volley was discharged, Allah sent a
wind which drove each arrow back to pierce and wound its thrower.

**Twenty-first miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated that one
day the Messenger of Allah (S) along with the left vanguard departed to
a Jew fort to purchase bread and lentils etc. from them. A Jew said: “I
have what you want.” And he went to his house and told his wife to climb
the wall and wait in ambush and when Muhammad comes she must drop that
huge stone on him.

When the Prophet entered and the woman tried to drop the stone, Jibraeel
came down and thrashed the stone with his wings and it came swiftly
breaking through the wall and fell around the neck of the Jew like a
grind stone. The Jew fell down unconscious and when he regained
consciousness, he began to weep.

The Prophet asked him what he had intended that he was involved in such
trouble. He said that he did not want to sell anything, he had only
brought him inside to eliminate him. “There is no doubt that you the
source of mercy and the chief of Arabs and non-Arabs. So please forgive
me.” The Prophet had mercy on him and prayed for him. The stone came out
of his neck.

**Twenty-second miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Jabir and
Ibn Abbas that a man of Quraish swore that he would kill Muhammad but
his horse reared and he fell down breaking his neck.

**Twenty-third miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated from Ibn
Abbas that Muammar bin Yazid was a well known stalwart and the chief of
Bani Kanana. Quraish sought his help with regard to the Prophet and he
said that he would eliminate him as he was having 20000 men. “Bani
Hashim cannot face me in battle. If they ask for blood money, I am quite
capable of paying it.” He carried a sword, ten spans long and one span
wide.

One day the Prophet was praying in Hajar Ismail. Muammar picked up his
sword and moved forward, but he stumbled and was hurt. Again he arose
and ran upto Abtah and his mouth was bleeding. When people saw this,
they gathered around him; washed his wounds and asked him what the
matter was. He said: “Whoever listened to you was deceived. I have never
seen such a thing. When I reached him, I saw two serpents came out of
his head breathing fire and they attacked me.”

**Twenty-fourth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that Kalla bin
Asad threw a javelin on the Prophet between the house of Aqeel and Aqaal
which boomeranged on him and he fled in fear. People asked him what the
problem was and he said: “Woe be unto you, can’t you see the mad camel
chasing me?” They said: “We cannot see anything.” But he said that he
was seeing it and he went running upto Taif.

**Twenty-fifth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated that one
afternoon, the Messenger of Allah (S) came out of Mecca and reached upto
the road to Hajoon and Nazar bin Harith was following him with the
intention of killing him but when he reached near the Prophet, he began
to run.

Abu Jahl asked him from whence he was coming and he replied: “Today,
when Muhammad was alone, I followed him so that I can kill him but when
I reached near him, I saw lions that attacked me roaring. Abu Jahl the
accursed said: “It is his sorcery.”

**Twenty-sixth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated that a man
of Quraish saw the Holy Prophet (S) prostrating and he picked up stone
to hit him with, but when he raised his hand, the stone clung to his
hand and it became paralyzed.

**Twenty-seventh miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob and Ibn Abbas have narrated
that once the Messenger of Allah (S) was reciting the Qur’an in a loud
voice which was disliked by the Quraish. They came to apprehend the
Messenger but all of a sudden their hands stuck to their necks and all
of them became blind.

They came to the Prophet groping and pleading to him under oath. So the
Messenger prayed for them and their hands became free and they regained
their vision. At that juncture, the first verses of Surah Yasin were
revealed.

**Twenty-eighth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Abu Dharr
that once the Messenger of Allah (S) was in prostration when Abu Lahab,
the curse of Allah be upon him, picked up a stone to hit the Prophet,
but when he raised his hand it remained like that and he was not able to
bring it down.

He pleaded under oath that he would never trouble His Eminence; if he
saved him from this punishment. The Prophet prayed and he was cured. So
he said: “Indeed you are an expert magician!” At that juncture, Surah
Lahab was revealed.

**Twenty-ninth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that the
Messenger of Allah (S) once went to Bani Shajiya and invited them to
Islam but they refused and sent 500 riders to purse the Messenger. When
the riders caught up with the Prophet, the latter prayed, a wind ensued
and all perished.

**Thirtieth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob and others have narrated that
during the Battle of Uhud, Ibn Qamia threw a stone aimed at the Prophet
and it hit his leg. He said: “May Allah degrade you.” When he returned
from Uhud, he was sleeping on the way when a mountain goat pierced its
horns into his stomach and he began to shout: “Woe be to degradation!”
The goat pierced his stomach with the horn upto his neck.

**Thirty-first miracle:** It is among the continuous reports that in the
Battle of Khandaq, the Prophet prayed and the Almighty Allah sent a
swift and sharp wind which carried stone particles and in spite of the
scarcity of Muslims and their own majority, the infidels fled from
there.

**Thirty-second miracle:** In the Battle of Badr, the Messenger of Allah
(S) picked a handful of dust and said: “Degrade them!” The wind carried
the dust to their faces and whoever was hit was either killed or taken a
prisoner that day.

**Thirty-third miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Jabir that
when the Arnies killed the shepherd of the Prophet and carried away the
sheep, the Prophet invoked cursed on them that the Almighty Allah should
make them lose their way and consequently they lost their way and were
apprehended by the companions of the Prophet.

**Thirty-fourth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that the Holy
Prophet (S) proposed to a certain woman but a false excuse was made by
her father that she was leprous. “So be it,” said the Prophet; and she
became leprous.

**Thirty-fifth miracle:** When the Holy Prophet (S) saw Zuhair, the
poet, he prayed: “O Allah, protect me from the evil of this Satan.”
After that he was not able to compose a single verse to deride the
Prophet.

**Thirty-sixth miracle:** It is narrated that a man hearing Bilal
proclaiming the Azan, or call to prayers, when he said, “I testify that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah,” a hypocrite observed, “May one that
lies be burned.” That night, rising to light a lamp, his finger caught
fire, which could not be extinguished till his whole body was consumed
by the fire.

**Thirty-seventh miracle:** It is narrated from Ibn Abbas that Utbah bin
Muit and Ubayy bin Khalaf had formed a pact of brotherhood. Once Utbah
returned from a journey and entertained some guests and also invited the
Prophet along with the nobles of the community. The Messenger of Allah
(S) said: “I will not accept your invitation till you don’t embrace
Islam.” He recited the dual testimony of faith and the Prophet dined at
his place.

When Ubayy bin Khalaf returned from his journey, he came to know about
Utbah’s conversion to Islam and condemned him for that. He said, “I will
not talk with you till you don’t falsify and degrade Muhammad.”

That accursed man came to His Eminence, and spat upon him. But his
impure spit divided into two parts and turned back on him hitting both
his cheeks and searing them. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “You will remain
alive as long as you are in Mecca, and when you go out, you will be
killed by your own sword. Thus he was killed in Badr and Ubayy was
killed in Uhud.

**Thirty-eighth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated that Ubayy
bin Khalaf used to threaten the Prophet with death in Mecca and the
Prophet told him: “Insha Allah, I will kill you.” Thus in the Battle of
Badr, the Prophet tossed a stick to him which caused a sore in his neck.

He came out of the battlefield bleating like a calf. “You are bleating
only due to a simple wound?” remarked Abu Sufyan. He replied: “If this
sore hits the whole tribes of Rabia and Mudhir, all would have died. He
had promised to eliminate me. If he had merely spat on me, I would have
died of it.” Then he died the next day.

**Thirty-ninth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Tibbul Aaimma* and *Tafsir
Ayyashi*; rather in all reliable books that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said: Once the Messenger of Allah (S) was unwell. Jibraeel came to him
and said: “O Muhammad, a certain Jew has cast a spell on you in the
certain well. Therefore, send to it the most trustworthy of people in
your opinion and the most important of them before you and the equal of
you, so that he may bring you the spell.”

The Prophet sent Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) saying: “Go to the well of
Zarwan for in it is a spell with which the Jew, Labid bin Asam has
bewitched me, and bring it to me.” Imam Ali (a.s.) says: I set out at
the request of the Messenger of Allah (S).

I descended into it, and the water there was like the water of henna
because of the spell. I searched for it and at last brought it out.” The
Prophet said: “Open it.” I opened it and there was, in truth, a piece of
a palm branch, a comb, some teeth of comb and eleven knots were tied
upon it.

Jibraeel had brought down that day to the Prophet two Surahs of taking
refuge (Falaq and Naas). The Prophet said: “O Ali, then recite over the
string.” Whenever Amirul Momineen (a.s.) recited it, a knot opened,
until he finished with all of them and Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
removed the spell from His Prophet and restored him to health.”

According to another report, Jibraeel recited Surah Falaq and Mikaeel
recited Surah Naas for the protection of the Prophet. According to yet
another report Jibraeel recited Surah Falaq, Naas and Ikhlas and then
recited the following supplication:  
 “In the name of Allah, I invoke you. In the name of Allah, I cure you
of every illness that troubles you. In the name of Allah, and Allah is
your healer. In the name of Allah, take it and may it be good for
you.”[^162]

### Miracles of Prophet against demons and Jinns

**First miracle:** Shaykh Tabarsi and other tradition scholars have
narrated from Zuhri that after the death of His Eminence, Abu Talib,
when troubles increased, and the people of Mecca united to harass the
Messenger of Allah (S) he moved to Taif, hoping its inhabitants would be
more tractable than Quraish. He met three person who were the chiefs
there and were blood brothers of each other: they were Abdul Lail, Masud
and Habib, sons of Amr.

The Holy Prophet (S) invited them to Islam but one of them said: “I must
have stolen the covering of Kaaba; that is why God sent you to me.”
Another remarked: “Was God not able to send anyone better than you for
prophethood?”

The third said: “By Allah, I will not speak to you after this as you are
the Prophet of Allah and you command a great position for me to speak to
you. If you lie you are not worthy to be spoken to.” Thus all of them
began to make fun of him. The common people seeing this cast stones at
the Prophet, and wounded his feet.

From there he fled to one of their orchards to rest for sometime. He saw
Atba and Shaibah there and was more aggrieved because the Prophet was
aware of their enmity. When they saw the Prophet, they sent to him some
grapes through their Christian slave. The Holy Prophet (S) asked him of
his native place and he said that he was from Nainawa. The Holy Prophet
(S) asked: “Are you from the place of a righteous man like Yunus bin
Mata?” He said: “What do you know who Yunus was?”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I am the Prophet of Allah and God has
informed me about Yunus.” Adas immediately fell down in prostration and
kissed his feet although they were bleeding. When Atba and Shaibah
learnt of this, they were shocked. When the slave returned to them they
asked: “Why did you prostrate to Muhammad and kiss his feet? You have
never done this for us even though we are your masters.”

He replied: “This person is deserving and he told me about Prophet
Yunus.” Upon this the duo laughed and warned him from his deceit because
(we seek refuge of Allah) he was a great cheater! They said: “Don’t
forgo your faith.” The Prophet despaired of making them Muslims and came
back to Mecca. When he reached Nakhla, the night fell and he began to
offer his prayers. A caravan of Jinns was passing from there to Nasibain
which was an area of Yemen. The Prophet prayed there the whole night and
after the Morning Prayer was reciting the Qur’an.

When those Jinns heard the verses of Qur’an, they accepted faith and
returned to their community and invited their people to Islam. According
to another report, the Prophet was now commanded to proclaim his mission
to the Jinns, summon them to embrace Islam, and to recite the Qur’an to
them. The Almighty Allah having sent a party of Jinns of the family of
Nasibain to the Prophet, he said to his companions, “I am commanded to
read the Qur’an tonight to the Jinns, who of you will go with me?”

Abdullah bin Masud accepted the invitation, and he reports: When we
arrived at the heights beyond Mecca, the Prophet entered the defile of
Hajoon, and drew a circle round me, ordering me not to leave it till his
return. He then went and engaged in prayer, and began to recite the
Qur’an. Presently I saw a great number of black creatures crowding
around him, quite intercepting my sight of him and the sound of his
voice. After a time, most of them dispersed like fragments of cloud, but
a company still remained.

When he had performed the Morning Prayer, he came back to me, and
inquired if I saw anything. I replied that I saw black people clothed in
white garments. He said, “These were Jinns of Nasibain.” According to
the report of Ibn Abbas, they were 70 in all. The Holy Prophet (S)
appointed them as his ambassadors to their people. Some say that they
were nine. It is narrated from Jabir that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said: “I recited Surah Rahman before them. Whatever they replied is
better than your replies.” That is when I recited:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?”***[^163]

They said: “No, our Lord, we do not deny any of Your bounties.”  
 It is narrated from Ibn Abbas that when the Prophet was given the
office of prophethood and angels prevented the satans from climbing to
the heavens and they drove them away with shooting stars, they said:
“Definitely something extraordinary has occurred on the earth and we
must find out what it is.

That is why we are prevented from scaling the heavens.” All dispersed to
the east and west of the earth. A group of them which descended in Mecca
passed the Prophet when he was praying the Morning Prayer in Nakhla with
his companions. The satans were going to the Ukaz market. When they
heard the Prophet reciting Qur’an they remarked: “This is why we are
prevented to scale the heavens.”

They returned to their community and conveyed the information: “We have
heard a strange Qur’an which guides to truth, so we accepted faith and
we don’t associate anyone with our Lord.” So the Almighty Allah revealed
Surah Jinn. It is narrated from Abu Hamza Thumali that they were from
Bani Shaiban (Jinns).

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) came out of
Mecca with Zaid bin Haritha and reached the Ukaz market to call the
people to Islam. No one accepted his invitation and he returned to
Mecca. When he reached the Majna valley, he began to pray the Midnight
Prayer and after that he began to recite the Qur’an.

A party of Jinns was passing by and when they heard the verses of
Qur’an, they said among themselves: “Silence!” and they began to listen
attentively to the Prophet’s recitation. When the Messenger of Allah (S)
concluded, the Jinns came to their folks and said: “We have heard such a
book that was revealed after the scriptures of Musa (a.s.) and it
testifies the past matters and guides to truth and the straight path.

O folks, harken to the caller to the Almighty Allah so that He may
forgive your sins and save you from a painful chastisement. Then they
returned to the Prophet and embraced faith. The Holy Prophet (S)
conveyed the teachings of Islam to them and the Almighty Allah revealed
Surah Jinn. The Messenger of Allah (S) appointed one of them as their
leader.

They were constantly present with the Prophet and the Messenger of Allah
(S) commanded Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to teach them the rules of
religion. Among them are believers, infidels, Ahlul Bayt haters, Jews,
Magians and Christians.

**Second miracle:** Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains
of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that a female Jinn named Afra
was in the habit of coming to hear Muhammad, and brought a number of her
tribe to embrace the faith. She did not come for several days and the
Prophet inquired the cause of Jibraeel, who said that she had gone to
visit one of her sister converts, whom she likes for the sake of the
pleasure of Allah.

The Prophet replied, “Paradise is for those who love one another for the
Lord’s sake.” Indeed the Almighty Allah has made a pillar of red ruby in
Paradise on which He has made 70000 palaces and each palace has 70000
rooms. It is for those who love each other for the sake of Allah and who
meet and visit each other. Later when Afra visited the Prophet, he
asked: “What extraordinary things did you observe during the journey?”
She replied: “Many things.” The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “Narrate to
us the most extraordinary thing you saw.”

He said: “I saw Iblis sitting on a white stone in the Akhzar Sea. He was
praying with raised hands: “O Allah, when You have sworn to put me in
Hell, I ask you in the name of Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain
to save me from Hell and raise me with them.” I asked him: “O Harith,
what are these names through whom you are praying to the Lord?”

He replied: “These are names I saw written on the empyrean 70000 years
before the creation of Adam. That is why I thought that they are most
beloved to the Almighty Allah so I prayed through them.” The Holy
Prophet (S) said: “By Allah, if all the people of the earth implore the
Almighty Allah through these names, He would definitely accept them.”

**Third miracle:** Ali bin Ibrahim relates that all Jinns are offspring
of Jaan, and that they belong to any of the religions. He says that the
devils are all the offspring of Iblis, among all of whom there is but
one believer, namely, Awham bin Heem, the son of Laqis, the son of
Iblis. Awham, in the form of a gigantic man of terrible appearance, came
to the Prophet, who asked him who he was. He replied, “I am Awham bin
Heem bin Laqis bin Iblis.

I was a boy, several years old, when Qabeel slew Habeel, and I forbade
men to abandon sin and commanded them to eat unlawful things.” “You were
a bad boy,” said the Prophet, “and are now a bad old man.” He replied, O
Messenger of Allah (S), I repented in the presence of Nuh, was with him
in the Ark, and rebuked him for cursing his people. I was with Ibrahim
when they cast him into the fire, which Allah made cool and safe to him.
I was with Musa when Allah drowned Firon and delivered Bani Israel.

I was with Hud when he cursed his people, and I said to him, “Why did
you curse them?” I was with Salih who cursed his people, and I reproved
him for it. I have read all the sacred books, each of which announces
your advent, and the prophets have sent their salutations to you,
declaring you the best and dearest of them all. Instruct me then in the
knowledge of what God has revealed to you.

The Holy Prophet (S) commanded Ali (a.s.) to give the desired
instruction, when Awham remarked, “I will obey none but a Prophet, or a
successor of a Prophet, and who is this you have assigned to teach me?”

Muhammad replied, “He is my brother and successor, my vizier and heir,
Ali bin Abi Talib.” “Yes,” said Awham, “I have seen his name in the
sacred books, where he is called Eliya.” Ali then instructed him in the
Qur’an and rules of faith. He was present with the Imam during the night
of Harir of the Battle of Siffeen.

**Fourth miracle:** Shaykh Mufeed, Shaykh Tabarsi and all tradition
scholars have narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) set out for the
Battle of Bani Mustaliq and camped at the valley of Chuli, Jibraeel came
down in the last part of the night and informed that a group of
unbeliever Jinns lives in this valley and intends to harm his
companions.

The Messenger of Allah (S) summoned Imam Ali (a.s.) and said: “There is
a group of denier Jinns in this valley, chase them away with the power
of knowledge that the Almighty Allah has specialized you with. Then he
sent a hundred men to accompany him directing them to remain with Ali
(a.s.) and to do what he says.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) set out for that valley and on reaching there
instructed his men to halt at a place and not to move from here until
the Imam tells them and marched forward, seeking the refuge of Allah for
the mischief of enemies. He recited the great names of Allah and entered
the valley. As soon as he entered, a terrible storm ensued and the
Imam’s men were about to fall down.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) shouted: “I am Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), legatee
and cousin of the Messenger of Allah (S); if you have any courage, you
should confront me.” The Jinns assumed visible forms and they appeared
to be dark and black skinned, carrying blazing flames. They crowded into
valley and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was moving forward reciting the Holy
Qur’an slashing his sword to his right and left.

When they reached to them they disappeared like smoke. Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) recited the Takbir and came out of the valley and then stood with
his forces. When their signs disappeared, companions asked what he had
seen. “We were about to die of fright and we were also worried about
you.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “When the Jinns appeared, I challenged them
in the name of Allah and they became degraded and weak.

I attacked them without any restraint. If they had stuck to their
stance, I would have killed all of them. The Almighty Allah saved the
Muslims from their mischief. Those who had survived the attack came to
the Messenger of Allah (S) and embraced faith and prayed for security.
When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) returned to the Messenger of Allah (S), His
Eminence said: “Those Jinns came here before you, in whose hearts the
Almighty Allah had created your fear. And they have become Muslims and I
have accepted their Islam.”

**Fifth miracle:** It is narrated through authentic chains from Salman
Farsi that one day when the Prophet was sitting in Abtah, with a number
of his companions, suddenly a whirlwind was seen, and swept on till it
approached the Prophet. In the midst of the whirlwind a person appeared,
who said, “O Prophet of Allah, my people have sent me to secure for us
refuge from the violence and oppression with which we are treated by a
part of our own tribe. Send a person with me to judge between us
according to the law of God.

We engage to return tomorrow morning whomsoever you may send, unless
circumstances shall occur to render the fulfillment to this engagement
impossible.” The Prophet inquired, “Who are you, and who are your
people?” He replied, “I am Arfatah, son of Shamrakh, of the tribe of
Bani Najah. We were in the habit of ascending the heavens to listen to
the reports of the angels, but were prevented from making those visits
when you were invested with prophethood. Part of our tribe believes in
you, and part remains on their infidelity.

A dissension has consequently arisen, and since the infidels are
superior to us in number and power, they have deprived us of water and
pasturage, and in other ways injure us and our quadrupeds. We entreat
you to send to us a person to judge us equitably.” “Unveil,” said the
Prophet, “so that we may see you in your natural form.” The disclosure
showed him to be a hairy person, high head, and prominent eyes, the lids
of which opened laterally.

His eye-sockets were small, and his teeth like those of a beast of prey.
Having taken his pledge that whoever should be sent with him should be
safely returned the next day, the Prophet turned to Abu Bakr and ordered
him to go with Arfatah, help him and arrange matters in his tribe.
“Where are they?” asked Abu Bakr. “Underground,” was the reply. But
demanded Abu Bakr, “How can I go underground, and how can I judge among
them, especially when I am ignorant of their language?”

The Holy Prophet (S) then in succession ordered Umar and Uthman to go on
this expedition, but they also refused on the same grounds that Abu Bakr
had done. At last the Prophet called Ali and said, “O Ali, go with
Arfatah, help them and give judgment among his tribe.” Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) immediately rose, took his sword and set off with the Jinn.
Salman added, “I also sadly went with them till they reached the centre
of the valley of Safa, where Ali invoked divine reward for me and
ordered me to return.

The ground opened and they descended, after which I went back, very
anxious for the fate of Ali. The next day, after Morning Prayers, the
Prophet and his companions went and seated themselves on Mount Safa, and
conversation turned on Ali. The hypocrites made an uproar and exulted at
his supposed death, and said, “Praise be to Allah! God has delivered us
from Abu Turab and Muhammad boast on account of his brother is
destroyed.

After Noon prayers, the Prophet reseated himself and continued his
sacred instructions to the people, who now despaired of Ali’s return.
Afternoon prayers were performed, and the Prophet’s concern for Ali
increased, as did likewise the clamor of the hypocrites, who exulted at
his supposed fate.

As the sun was setting, suddenly Mount Safa opened, and Amirul Momineen
(a.s.), like another bright sun, appeared with blood dripping from his
sword, and Arfatah was with him. The Prophet rose and embraced Ali,
kissed him on his forehead, and asked, “Why have you taken so long and
left us to the clamor of scoffers?”

He replied, “O Messenger of Allah (S), I found a great many infidel
Jinns, who were the oppressors of Arfatah’s party. I offered them three
conditions: To believe in Allah and your prophethood; to pay tribute; or
to make peace with Arfatah and his family, and allow them an equitable
share of the water and pasturage.

As they rejected all these terms, I drew my sword, pronounced the name
of God, attacked them and slew eighty thousand infidels. This forced the
rest to call for refuge, upon which peace was ratified by their becoming
Muslims. Arfatah said: “May Allah give you and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) a
good reward,” after which he took leave and returned.

**Sixth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Mahasin Barqi* and other reliable
books that one day an old man passed the Prophet and saluted him. The
Prophet asked Ali if he knew who it was, and on his answering in the
negative, told him it was Iblis, the cursed.

“Had I known that, replied Ali, I would have given him such a blow that
he never would have troubled your community again.” Satan returned and
said, “O Abul Hasan, why do you reproach me? My seed never mingles with
that of your friends, but in the case of your enemies, my seed always
reaches the wombs of their mothers through the loins of their fathers.”

**Seventh miracle:** Himyari has narrated through authentic chains from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Almighty Allah granted kingdom and
power to the Messenger of Allah (S) which were not given to any other
Prophet.

One day the Holy Prophet (S) pressed the neck of the accursed Iblis to
the pillar of the mosque in such a way that his tongue protruded and
reached into the hand of the Prophet. The Prophet said: If His Eminence,
Sulaiman had not prayed that: “Grant such a kingdom to me as will not be
for anyone after me,” I would have shown the Satan to all of you.

**Eighth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that during the
expedition of Hunain, at a certain place, the standard bearers
retreated, saying the way was obstructed by a serpent as huge as a
mountain. The Prophet advanced towards the monster that raised its head
and said, “Peace be on you, O Messenger of Allah (S)! I am Hashim bin
Lamba bin Iblis.

I have embraced your faith, and come with ten thousand persons of my
household to aid you against infidels.” “Open the way and advance on our
right, said the Prophet,” which was done, and the Muslim army proceeded
on its march.

**Ninth miracle:** It is mentioned in *Kitab Ikhtisas* from Asbagh bin
Nubatah that on one Friday, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was sitting in the
Kufa Masjid after Asr Prayers, when a tall gigantic man arrived and
greeted the Imam. “What happened to the Jinn who used to visit you?”
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) asked.

He replied: “He still visits me.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “Narrate to the
audience about him.” He began: “Before the proclamation of the Prophet I
was sleeping one night in Yemen, when in the middle of the night a Jinn
came and kicked me on my head saying: Get up! I arose frightened. He
said: Listen and he recited some couplets which said: “I am surprised at
the Jinns and their mounting the camel who are going to Mecca seeking
guidance even though you are ignorant of it.

Get up, and you also prepare for the journey and head to Mecca to the
best of the descendants of Hashim and witness his glory and greatness.”
When he concluded, this I said to myself: “By Allah, something
extraordinary has occurred in Bani Hashim or is about to happen.” Then I
could not sleep the whole night.

Then I continued to contemplate the whole day. The next night I was
again kicked in the head and again the same type of poetry was recited.
The same events occurred on the third night as well. I asked: “Where is
the one about whom you inform?” He replied: “He has appeared in Mecca
and he invites the people to recite: There is no god except Allah, and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.” In the morning, I mounted the camel
and set out for Mecca. On reaching Mecca, the first to meet me was the
deviated old man, Abu Sufyan. I greeted and asked him how he was.

“All is well,” said he, “But the orphan of Abu Talib has invalidated our
religion.” I asked what his name was and he said: “Muhammad and Ahmad.”
I asked about his whereabouts and he said that he has married Khadija
binte Khuwailad and he lived at her place.

I turned my camel in that direction and on reaching there, dismounted
and after securing it, knocked at the door. Khadija asked: “Who is
there?” I asked: “Where is Muhammad?” She said: “You people don’t give
him a moment of rest. So much so that he had left the house and gone
somewhere.”

I said: “May Allah have mercy on you, I have come from Yemen, so that
perhaps the Almighty Allah favors me through him and bestows him with
guidance. Please don’t deprive me of meeting him.” I heard the Prophet
say: “Open the door.” Thus I entered and saw that radiance shone from
the face of His Eminence. When I looked on his back I noticed the seal
of prophethood and kissed it. Then I recited some couplets extolling His
Eminence.

In that poem I described the coming of that Jinn to convey the good news
of the proclamation of the Prophet. So I embraced Islam and the Holy
Prophet (S) was affectionate to me and after that I returned to Yemen.
Asbagh bin Nubatah says: His name was Sawad bin Qarib and he fought the
Battle of Siffeen on the side of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and met
martyrdom.

**Tenth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Mazan bin Usfur
that he says: In the initial part of the proclamation of the Prophet,
when I sacrificed a sheep for an idol, a voice came out of the idol: “A
messenger prophet has risen in the Mudhir tribe, so abandon the idols of
stone.” On the next day, I sacrificed another sheep and heard the same
voice that a prophet has risen with a heavenly Book.

**Eleventh miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that Tamim Darami
camped on one of the halts on the route to Shaam. When he was about to
sleep he said: “Tonight I am in refuge of the inhabitants of this
valley.” It was a custom of Jahiliyya period to seek refuge from the
Jinns of the valley.

He says: Suddenly I heard a voice: “seek refuge from Allah, Jinns do not
give refuge to anyone and whatever Allah wills, happens. Indeed a
prophet has appeared among you under whose leadership we have prayed in
Hajoon and the evils of satans were dispelled and Jinns were chased away
from the heavens by shooting stars. Go to Muhammad (S).”

**Twelfth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that there was an idol
of Bani Azra which was called Hammam. When the Prophet was invested with
prophethood, people heard some voices from the idols that it was
reciting some couplets which meant: O sons of Hind bin Qaran, the truth
has become manifest and the Hammam is destroyed and idolatry has been
destroyed by Islam.

After some days a person named Tarukh came to that idol to pay obeisance
to it but a voice came out from it: O Tarukh, the truthful Prophet has
appeared with talking revelation and the one who will manifest the truth
has arrived in Tahama. Peace be on his followers and regret is for those
who consider him lowly. Now I have said farewell to you.

You will not get to hear anything from me till Judgment Day. Then the
idol crashed headlong to the ground and was shattered. Zaid bin Rabiah
says that I narrated this incident to the Holy Prophet (S) and he said:
“This discourse belonged to the believer Jinns.” Then the Messenger of
Allah (S) invited me to Islam and I embraced the faith.

**Thirteenth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Khazim bin
Fatik Asadi that he says: I used to graze my camels till the valley of
Abraq and there I heard a proclaimer saying: Prophet of Allah, owner of
goodness has arrived with Surah Yasin and Ha Mim chapters. I asked him
who he was and he replied: I am Malik bin Malik, the Holy Prophet (S)
has sent me to the Najd tribe.

I said: If someone had minded my camels, I would have also gone to meet
the Prophet and embraced faith on his hands. He volunteered to mind the
animals and I set out from there to Medina on a camel, leaving the
remaining beasts there. When I reached the gates of Medina, it was the
time of Noon and the day of Friday. I waited for them to conclude the
prayer.

Then I made my camel sit down. A person arrived and said that the Holy
Prophet (S) was calling me. I entered Medina. When he saw me, he said:
“Where is that old man who had volunteered to mind your camels?” “I
don’t know” said I. He said, “He has conveyed your camels safe and sound
to your family members.” I said, “I testify that Allah is One and you
are His Messenger.”

**Fourteenth miracle:** It is narrated that one day a man passed Umar
and he remarked that he was a soothsayer and had contacts with Jinns. He
said: O Umar, the Almighty Allah has guided every ignorant through Islam
and dispelled every falsehood through truth and Muhammad has made the
poor rich and straightened every deviation through the Qur’an.

Umar asked: “Since when have you not met your Jinn companions?” “He had
come before I embraced Islam and said: O Salam, truth has become
manifest, this is not a dream and the slogan of Allahu Akbar was raised,
and that is why I accepted Islam.” After that he never came back to me.
Another person was present there. He said: I also faced similar
circumstances.

One day I was riding through a level plain, when I suddenly decried
another man galloping towards me and when he came near, he said: “O
Ahmad, O Ahmad, Allah is the Mightiest and the Highest. O Ahmad, the
Almighty Allah has given you all that He had promised from the good.”
Saying this he passed by us. Then an Ansari said: “I was traveling to
Shaam with two men. We camped at a lonely wilderness.

Another rider joined us and all of us were extremely hungry. Suddenly a
deer came galloping to us and I leaped and caught it. The newly arrived
person said: “Leave it, I have often passed this way I have found this
deer in the same place but no one has tried to catch it.” I paid no heed
and tied up that deer.

When a part of the night had passed, I heard someone say: O four riders,
leave this deer as her children are orphans. I released the gazelle and
we proceeded to Shaam. On the return journey we again halted at that
same place. We heard a voice from the rear which gave glad tidings of
the rising of the Holy Prophet (S).[^164]

The Prophet (S) reports about the Unseen
----------------------------------------

**First miracle:** Ibn Tawus has quoted from *Dalaile Himyari* a report
of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that some persons of Quraish came to the
Messenger of Allah (S) for some business. The Holy Prophet (S) told them
that it would rain the next day. The next day was extraordinarily windy.
When the sun arose, a noble of Quraish came and said: What did you gain
by making a claim which exposed your falsehood. You are not one to make
such predictions.

Suddenly a cloud appeared and there was such a heavy rain that the folks
of Medina began to wail and seek refuge, begging the Prophet to pray
that it stops raining. The Messenger of Allah (S) prayed: O Allah, let
it rain only on our surroundings and it stopped raining. Immediately the
prayers were effective.

**Second miracle:** Himyari has narrated through authentic chains of
narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S)
took the custody of the gold coins that Abbas had in his possession and
told him to pay the ransom. Abbas said: O Messenger of Allah (S), I have
nothing other than these gold coins. His Eminence said: “What happened
to the money you had concealed with Umm Fazl, your wife?”

Abbas said: “I witness to the oneness of Allah and your prophethood,
because when I kept those gold coins with my wife, there was no one
there except the Almighty Allah.” The Almighty Allah revealed to the
Prophet: O Prophet, from these prisoners, whoever are your friends, tell
them that if the Almighty Allah sees righteousness among you, He will
give better than that which is taken as a ransom from you.”

Thus in the end Abbas became so rich that twenty slaves traded on his
behalf, each with a minimum capital of 20000 dirhams. This miracle is
continuously narrated through various channels by Shia and Sunni
scholars.

**Third miracle:** Rawandi and Ibn Babawayh have narrated that one day
some people visited the Prophet and he said: “If you want, I can tell
what business you have come for.” “Please do so, O sir.” His Eminence,
said: “You have come to inquire to whom you should do a good turn.

Doing a good is appropriate with only one who is of a good family and is
religious and you want to inquire if Jihad is allowed for ladies. Jihad
of ladies is their good behavior to their husband and you want to ask
from where does sustenance comes. The Almighty Allah gives sustenance
from whence they least expect. Because man does not know from whence his
sustenance comes, that is why he prays for it in excess.

**Fourth miracle:** Ibn Babawayh and Rawandi have narrated that Abu Aqba
Ansari says: One I was sitting with the Prophet when came a party of
Jews to him and demanded that he should tell the object of their visit.
“You came to inquire about Zulqarnain,” said he. They assented that it
was true.

The Prophet continued, “He was a righteous servant of God, from the
people of Rum and the  
 Almighty Allah loved him. He became the emperor of the world, which he
traversed from the rising to the setting sun. At length he arrived at
Yajuj and Majuj, and built a wall to confine them within their limits.”
The Jews said this was true and it is written thus in the Taurat.

**Fifth miracle:** Ibn Babawayh and Rawandi have narrated from Ibn Abbas
that one day Abu Sufyan came to the Prophet and said that he wanted to
make some inquiries. The Prophet said: If you want I can tell you what
you want to ask.” He said: “Please do.” The Holy Prophet (S) declared
that he wanted to know how long the Prophet would live. “Yes, O
Messenger of Allah (S).” The Messenger of Allah (S) said that he would
live to the age of sixty-three years.

He said: “I testify that you have spoken the truth.” His Eminence said:
“Although you make a verbal claim, you don’t believe with sincerity.”
Ibn Abbas says: “By Allah, the Prophet was right, Abu Sufyan was indeed
a hypocrite. And its proof is that when he had become blind in his final
days, one day we were present in a gathering and Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
was also present. Azan was being recited.

When the caller said: “I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah,” Abu Sufyan asked: “Is there anyone who is to be accorded
respect?” A person said: “No one is there.” Abu Sufyan said: “Look at
that Hashemite man, where he has placed his name!” Imam Ali (a.s.) said:
“May Allah make your eyes weep, O Abu Sufyan the Almighty Allah has
exalted the name of the Messenger of Allah (S) as He himself says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَفَعْنَا لَكَ ذِكْرَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And exalted for you your esteem?”***[^165]

Abu Sufyan said: “May Allah make the eyes weep of one who said that no
one was present here who had to be respected and he has made fun of me.”

**Sixth miracle:** Ibn Babawayh and Rawandi etc. have narrated that Wail
bin Hajar says: When we got information about the prophethood of the
Messenger of Allah (S) I was the ruler of my community and all were
under my control. I left them all to choose the pleasure of the Almighty
Allah and I came to the Holy Prophet (S). When I arrived, the companions
said: “The Prophet had informed us of your arrival three days ago and
said that very soon Wail bin Hajar will arrive from the remote kingdom
of Hadhramaut.

He is inclined to Islam and obedience of Prophet and Allah. He is a
royal descendant. Wail says: I said: O Messenger of Allah (S), I got
information about our advent when I was a king in possession of dignity
and power. The Almighty Allah had mercy on me. I left everything and
adopted the obeisance of Allah and His Prophet and chose the religion of
Allah. I have come to embrace the faith. His Eminence said: “You are
right, may the Almighty Allah bless Wail, his sons and grandsons.

**Seventh miracle:** Ibn Babawayh and Rawandi have narrated through
correct chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that one day some prisoners
were brought to the Holy Prophet (S). Except for one, the Prophet
condemned all of them to death. The remaining person asked why he was
spared. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Jibraeel has informed me from
the Almighty Allah that you have five good qualities. You are extremely
dignified, generous, well mannered, truthful and brave.” He said: “That
is right,” and he embraced Islam.

**Eighth miracle:** Ibn Babawayh, Tabarsi and Rawandi have narrated
through trustworthy chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that in Tabuk,
the Prophet’s she-camel was lost, and the scoffers said, “He pretends to
tell us about secret things, yet he does not know where to find his
stray she-camel!” Jibraeel came and informed the Prophet about the talks
of hypocrites and that his camel was in such a defile and its the bridle
was caught by a tree. This was announced by the Prophet and found to be
true.

**Ninth miracle:** Saffar etc. have narrated through authentic chains of
narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when the Messenger of Allah
(S) hid in the cave of Thawr, Abu Bakr was with him and he was afraid of
the idolaters. At that time the Holy Prophet (S) comforted him that “I
can see the boat of Ja’far Tayyar caught in the storm at sea.”

Abu Bakr asked: “O Messenger of Allah (S), can you really see that?” He
replied: “Yes.” He said, “Is it possible to show me also?” He said:
“Come to me and drew his hand over his eyes and said: “Now see.” He saw
the boat as the Holy Prophet (S) had described it.

Then he said: “Look towards Medina.” When he looked there, he saw Ansar
assembled and talking to each other. A thought passed Abu Bakr: “Now I
am sure that he is a sorcerer.” The Holy Prophet (S) said mockingly:
“What type of a Siddiq are you?” That is you are an apostate and not a
Siddiq.

**Tenth miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (S) went to the Jews of Bani Nuzayr and one of them went to the
terrace to throw a rock on the Prophet. Jibraeel informed the Prophet
about it and he returned to Medina and informed about the intention of
those people. And the Almighty Allah instigated a relative of that man
to eliminate him.

**Eleventh miracle:** Shia and Sunni scholars have narrated continuously
that Hatib bin Balta informed the Meccans about the Prophet’s arrival to
besiege Mecca which was a well maintained secret. He disclosed this
information in a letter and gave it to a woman to take it to Mecca.
Jibraeel informed the Prophet about this.

He sent Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Zubair and Miqdad to the Khakh date
orchard where the woman was located and she was carrying the message of
Hatib. When they reached there, they found the woman there and Miqdad
and Zubair searched her but could not find the letter. And the woman
denied being a carrier.

They said: “She has no letter, lets us go back.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said:
“The Messenger of Allah (S) has said that she is carrying the letter and
you say that you cannot find it?” He pulled out the sword and moved to
her saying: “Give up the letter or I will eliminate you.” She took out
the letter from her waist or her hair and handed it to Imam Ali (a.s.).

When he came with it to the Holy Prophet (S), he asked Hatib why he had
taken that step. “You have prepared fuel for yourself in Hell. He said,
“O Messenger of Allah (S), I have not become a disbeliever but they have
some right on me. I wanted to be relieved of obligation to them.” Being
extremely forbearing, the Holy Prophet (S) accepted his excuse.

**Twelfth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(S) on a certain journey sent His Eminence, Ammar to bring water but the
accursed Satan came in the form of a black slave and stopped him. Ammar
threw him down three times and before he could come back to the Prophet,
His Eminence, informed the people that Satan had confronted Ammar and
the Almighty Allah had made him subdue that accursed one. When Ammar
returned, he narrated the incident just as the Holy Prophet (S) had
informed.

**Thirteenth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Abu Saeed Khudri that
they set out for a certain battle: And we nine persons were friends of
each other and we had distributed the errands among ourselves. One of us
used to work equal to three persons and we were highly pleased with him.

When we mentioned this to the Holy Prophet (S), he said that he was an
inmate of Hell. When we were involved in fighting the enemy, that man
removed an arrow and killed himself. When this information was conveyed
to the Prophet he said: “I witness that I am a servant of Allah and His
messenger and the news I have conveyed cannot be wrong.”

**Fourteenth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that during the Jahiliyya
period, Abu Darda used to worship an idol. When the Holy Prophet (S)
arose, Abdullah bin Rawaha and Muhammad bin Muslima entered his house
and shattered his idol. When he returned he asked his wife who has
committed such an act.

She said that she was unaware of it. She had only heard some sounds, but
when she entered the room she did not see anyone. Then she said: “If
this idol had any power, it would have protected itself.” Abu Darda
said: “You are right, where is my dress?” So he changed and set out to
meet the Prophet to embrace faith. But before he could reach the
Prophet, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: Abu Darda is coming to embrace
Islam.” He came and accepted the faith.

**Fifteenth miracle:** Shia scholars have narrated through multiple
chains that the Messenger of Allah (S) informed Abu Dharr about all the
tribulations that were to befall him from Uthman. And he asked: “How
will you be, when you will be exiled from your home?” He said: “I will
take refuge in the Masjidul Haraam.” He asked: “What if you driven out
from there also?” He said: “I will go to Shaam.”

He asked: “What if you are driven out from there also?” He said: “I will
pull out my sword and fight till the end of my life.” The Messenger of
Allah (S) said: “Do not take recourse to this step. Observe patience, as
you will have to live in loneliness and die in loneliness and a group
from Iraq will perform your last rites.” Many traditional reports will
be mentioned in the account of His Eminence, Abu Dharr, if Allah wills.

**Sixteenth miracle:** It is continuously narrated through Shia and
Sunni channels that the Messenger of Allah (S) told Lady Fatima (s.a.):
“You will be the first to join me from my Ahlul Bayt.” (Fatima will be
the first to pass away after the Prophet from Ahlul Bayt).

**Seventeenth miracle:** It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said to Zaid bin Sauhan: “Before you reach Paradise, a physical part of
yours will reach there.” Thus one of his hands was severed during the
Battle of Nahawand.

**Eighteenth miracle:** Rawandi etc. have narrated that Umm Waraqa
Ansaria used to be addressed as ‘a martyr lady’ by the Prophet. Thus
after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (S) her slave girl and
slave martyred her.

**Nineteenth miracle:** It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S)
had predicted the birth of Muhammad bin Hanfiyyah and said: “I have
presented him with my name and agnomen.”

**Twentieth miracle:** It is narrated that once the Messenger of Allah
(S) got himself cupped and gave the blood to Abdullah bin Zubair to
discard it. Abdullah came out and drank the blood. When he came back,
the Prophet asked him: “I think you have drank the blood?” to which he
agreed. The Prophet said: “You will become a ruler, and it is regretful
what you do to the people and what they do to you.”

**Twenty-first miracle:** It is continuously narrated through Shia and
Sunni chains that the Messenger of Allah (S) had predicted that one of
his wives will come out mounted on a hairy camel to confront his legatee
and the dogs of Hawwab will bark at her. When Ayesha mounted the same
type of camel and set out fight Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and reached
Hawwab, dogs began to bark.

**Twenty-second miracle:** It is narrated continuously from Shia and
Sunni channels from Umm Salma that His Eminence, Ammar was laying bricks
in the Prophet’s mosque when the Messenger of Allah (S) cleaned the dust
from his chest: “O Ammar, you will be killed by a rebellious group,
which would have staged an uprising against the Imam of its time. And
all members of this group will be oppressors. And your last sustenance
on the earth will be a drink of milk.” All this proved true.

**Twenty-third miracle:** It is continuously narrated from Shia and
Sunni channels that on many occasions, the Messenger of Allah (S)
informed about the martyrdom of Imam Ali (a.s.), the owner of Zulfiqar
and the brave one who never fled the battlefield. The Prophet also said
that his beard will be dyed in his blood. That is why Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) never used hair dye and was always waiting for the fulfillment of
this promise.

**Twenty-fourth miracle:** It is continuously narrated that the
Messenger of Allah (S) told Amirul Momineen (a.s.): O Ali, you will soon
fight three groups: the first is that group which will pledge allegiance
to you and then break the pledge; that is Talha and Zubair.

The second will stage an unjust uprising against you; that is Muawiyah
and his followers. The third group will be that of the Kharijis; who
will go out of the pale of Islam so fast like an arrow shot from the
bow. And he used to say time and again: “O Ali, after me, you will fight
for the interpretation of Qur’an like I fought for its revelation.”

**Twenty-fifth miracle:** It is among the continuously narrated reports
that the Messenger of Allah (S) many a times spoke about the martyrdom
of Imam Husain (a.s.) and his companions and also mentioned the place
and gave a handful of dust to Umm Salma saying that at the time of the
event, it will turn to blood.

**Twenty-sixth miracle:** Shia and Sunni scholars have narrated through
multiple channels that the Messenger of Allah (S) prophesied about the
martyrdom of Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) and said that he would be buried in
Khorasan.

**Twenty-seventh miracle:** It is narrated through many channels from
Abu Saeed Khudri etc. that once the Messenger of Allah (S) was
distributing war booty when a man of Tamim tribe said: “Be equitable.”
The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Woe be on you, if I am not just, who will
be?” A companion arose and said: “Allow me to cut off his head.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Let it be, indeed he must be having some
friends against whose prayers and fasting you will consider your worship
acts to be nothing. They will go out of the pale of faith like an arrow
leaves the bow.

They will be led by a man having huge eyes, dark complexion and have
udders like women.” Abu Saeed says: “I was present with Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) in Naharwan, when he was fighting the Kharijis. Among those he
had killed was one who possessed all the signs that the Prophet had
prophesied.”

**Twenty-eighth miracle:** It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(S) had predicted the foundation of the city of Baghdad.

**Twenty-ninth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that a person came to the
Prophet and said that he was hungry since the past two days. The Prophet
said: Go to the market. He returned the next day saying that he had gone
to the market but did not find anything and had to sleep hungry that
night. Again the Prophet told him to go the market.

He went and found a caravan that had brought a lot of goods. He made
some purchases and sold at a profit of one gold coin. He brought it home
and complained that he did not get anything. The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“You traded and earned one dinar, to which he agreed. The Prophet said:
“Why did you lie?” He said: “I wanted to see if you come to know about
the unseen or not. And that my faith should be strengthened about your
prophethood.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “One who becomes needless of others and who
does not make any demands, the Almighty Allah makes him self-sufficient.
And one who opens one door of asking, the Almighty Allah opens seventy
doors of depravity for him that no one can close.” After that the man
never asked for anything from anyone and he had a good life.

**Thirtieth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated through authentic chains of
narrators from Ja’far Jofi from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that once the
Messenger of Allah (S) was going on some business. On the way, he
decried Imam Ali (a.s.) and Zubair standing and talking among
themselves. The Holy Prophet (S) asked: “What are you saying to Ali? By
Allah, the first among Arabs to break allegiance to Ali will be you.”

**Thirty-first miracle:** It is narrated that when the Messenger of
Allah (S) sent a force to apprehend Akidar, he had said: “When you reach
there, he will be busy hunting a mountain cow.” Which proved to be true.

**Thirty-second miracle:** When the Messenger of Allah (S) sent Maaz bin
Jabal to Yemen, he said: “You will not meet me again,” and this is what
happened.

**Thirty-third miracle:** Rawandi has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that a severe storm arose during the expedition of Bani Mustaliq.
The Holy Prophet (S) said: It is because a hypocrite has died in Medina.
When they came back to Medina, they learnt that Rafa bin Zaid, one of
the prominent hypocrites, had died.

**Thirty-fourth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (S) wrote a letter to Qays Uraina Bajali and summoned him and the
latter arrived in the company of Khuwailad bin Harith Kalbi. When they
reached near Medina, Khuwailad was terrified of meeting the Prophet.

Qays told him to wait at the hill. If he feels that the Prophet does not
intend to harm him, he would make Khuwailad know about it. So he came to
Medina and entered the mosque he asked: “O Messenger of Allah (S) am I
secure?” The Prophet said: “Yes, I grant security to you and your
companions who is hiding on that hill.”

Qays said: “I testify to the oneness of God and your prophethood.” Then
he pledged allegiance to the Prophet and sent someone to summon
Khuwailad who also arrived and embraced Islam. The Prophet said: “If
your people oppose you, Allah and His Apostle will be sufficient for
you.”

**Thirty-fifth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob, Rawandi and Kulaini have
narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that once His Eminence, Abu Dharr
Ghiffari came to Messenger of Allah (S) and said: “I am fed up with
Medina, allow me to take my nephew and move to Aaba which is a village
of Hijaz.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “You can go if you like; but I fear that a
tribe will attack you and kill your nephew; and that you will return and
stand before me leaning on your staff. And say: My nephew has been
killed and my flock is seized.”

Thus Abu Dharr went to that place. Bani Fuzara looted him and seized his
flock and killed his nephew. He came back to the Prophet and leaning on
his walking stick stood before him. He had also suffered some wounds. He
said: “Allah and His Messenger had spoken the truth, it happened as you
had said.”

**Thirty-sixth miracle:** Rawandi has narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (S) saw a man named Asam of the Maharib tribe during the
expedition of Zatur Raqa and he asked if the Prophet was cognizant of
the Unseen. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “None but Allah, knows the
Unseen.” That accursed man said: “I like this camel more that your God.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “The Almighty has informed me through His
knowledge of Unseen that you will suffer a wound in the lower part of
your face whose infection will reach upto your brain and it will prove
fatal for you.” When he returned home, a wound developed on his chin and
the infection reached to the brain. He used to say: “That Quraishi was
right.” And at last he departed to Hell.

**Thirty-seventh miracle:** Shia and Sunni scholars have narrated that
the Messenger of Allah (S) told his uncle, Abbas: “What a pity that your
descendants will wreak great oppressions on my descendants.” Abbas said:
“O Messenger of Allah (S), if I want I can have myself castrated so that
I have no issue to lead to this eventuality.” The Messenger of Allah (S)
said: “It has already been destined.”

**Thirty-eighth miracle:** It is continuously narrated through Shia and
Sunni channels that the Messenger of Allah (S) informed that Bani
Umayyah will rule for a thousand months and he had also mentioned about
their infidelity and heresies.

**Thirty-ninth miracle:** It is continuously narrated through Shia and
Sunni channels that the Messenger of Allah (S) had predicted about the
document of his social boycott that hung to from the door of the Kaaba.
The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Except for the name of Allah, it is eaten up
by termites,” as will be explained later.

**Fortieth miracle:** Ibn Quluwayh, Rawandi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have
narrated through various channels that one say the Messenger of Allah
(S) was seated with Ali, Fatima and her sons. His Eminence, said: “You
will be buried on different locations.” Imam Husain (a.s.) asked: “Would
I die a natural death or I shall be killed?”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “My dear, you will be killed most unjustly
and so would your father and brother and your descendants will have to
bear severe oppressions.” Imam Husain (a.s.) asked: “Would anyone visit
our graves in far off places?” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “A group from
my Ummah will continue to visit you as a gesture of goodwill to us. And
on Judgment Day I will save them from the fear of Hell.”

**Forty-first miracle:** Ibn Tawus has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says: “I was in the company of the
Messenger of Allah (S) one day when he said: “Nine persons will arrive
from Hadhramaut, from whom six will embrace Islam.” Others present there
fell into doubt, but I said: “What Allah and His Prophet have said is
truth.

It will come about as you have stated.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “You
are Siddiq Akbar, king and leader of believers. You see what I see, you
know all that I know. The first to believe in me is you. The Almighty
Allah has created you as such. And kept away doubt and deviation from
you. Only you are the leader of people and my true Vizier. Imam Ali
(a.s.) says: “The next day the Prophet was seated in his usual assembly
and I was seated to his right.

Nine persons arrived and greeted the Messenger of Allah (S). They said:
“O Muhammad, tell us about Islam.” Thus six of them became Muslims and
three remained on their disbelief. The Holy Prophet (S) said to one of
them: “You will soon die of a bolt of lightning.” And to the other he
said: “You will die of snake bite.”

To the third, he said: “You will leave home to graze your camels and
some people will kill you.” After some days, those who had embraced
Islam came again and said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), they died as you
had predicted. And there is increase in our certainty that you are
truthful. And we have come to renew our faith. We testify that you are
Amin on the living and the dead.”

**Forty-second miracle:** Tabarsi etc. have narrated from Ayesha etc.
that the Messenger of Allah (S) had predicted the martyrdom of Hujr bin
Adi (r.a.) and his companions and prophesied that they will be killed by
Muawiyah.

**Forty-third miracle:** Tabari etc. and Shia and Sunni tradition
scholars have narrated from Abu Ayyub bin Bashir that once day the
Messenger of Allah (S) was standing on the heights of Medina and saying:
“Verily we belong to Allah, and to Him we shall return.” The companions
were shocked.

They thought a calamity was about to befall them. The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “My righteous companions will be martyred during the plunder of
Medina.” Yazid (l.a.) sent Muslim bin Aqba to plunder Medina in 63
Hijri. He killed thousands of companions in that attack and 700 of them
were reciters of Qur’an.

**Forty-fourth miracle:** Tabarsi etc. have narrated that the Messenger
of Allah (S) had prophesied about the blindness of Abdullah bin Abbas
and Zaid bin Arqam.

**Forty-fifth miracle:** Tabarsi etc. have narrated from Saeed bin
Musayyab that Umm Salma’s brother got a son and he named him Walid. His
Eminence, said: “You should not name your sons after your Firons. Indeed
a man will be born in my Ummah who would be named Walid and he will be
worse than Firon for my Ummah. Thus Walid bin Yazid was born and he
proved to be same as the Prophet had predicted.

**Forty-sixth miracle:** Shia and Sunni tradition scholars have narrated
from the Holy Prophet (S) that Jibraeel informed the Prophet when the
progeny of Abil Aas reaches to thirty, they will corrupt the religion of
Allah, enslave the people and usurp the property of Allah. And regarding
Marwan, he said that he would father four oppressors.

**Forty-seventh miracle:** Shia and Sunni tradition scholars have
narrated that Jibraeel informed the Messenger of Allah (S) about the
death of Najjashi, King of Abyssinia and the Prophet gathered people at
Baqi and recited his funeral prayer and saw his bier. After that news
arrived that he had passed away only on that particular day.

**Forty-eighth miracle:** It is narrated that on the day Aswad bin Isa
was killed in Yemen, the Holy Prophet (S) told the people about his
killing and his killer.

**Forty-ninth miracle:** It is narrated through various channels that
when the Messenger of Allah (S) sent Ja’far Tayyar for the Battle of
Tabuk,[^166] during the sermon he announced that Zaid bin Haritha was
martyred and Ja’far has taken up the standard.

After sometime, he said: “Now Ja’far’s hands are severed and he is also
martyred and the Almighty Allah has given him a pair of wings with which
he will glide in Paradise and now Abdullah bin Rawaha has taken the
standard and he is also martyred and now the standard is taken up by
Khalid. Now the enemy had fled. He arose and went to the house of
Ja’far, called their children and offered condolence to them.

**Fiftieth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated that one day
the Messenger of Allah (S) saw the hands of Sarakha bin Malik which were
thin and hairy. He said: “What will be your condition when you wear the
bangles of kings of Iran?” Thus during the reign of Umar, Madayan was
conquered and Umar called him and made him wear the bangles of king of
Iran.

Then the Prophet said: “When you conquer Madayan do not eliminate the
Copts, because Mariya, Ibrahim’s mother is from that stock.” Then he
said: “You will conquer Rum and when you do that you should convert the
church in east into a Masjid.”

**Fifty-first miracle:** Through Shia and Sunni channels, it is
continuously narrated that during the expedition of Khyber, the
Messenger of Allah (S) gave the standard to Abu Bakr and he returned
unsuccessful. Then he sent Umar and he also returned unsuccessful.

Now the Prophet said: “Tomorrow I will give the standard to one who
loves Allah and His Prophet and Allah and His Prophet love him. He will
attack in a daring manner and will not flee from the battle and the
Almighty Allah will give us victory through him. The next day, he gave
the standard to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and he conquered the fort.

**Fifty-second miracle:** It is continuously narrated that on the day
the Messenger of Allah (S) went for Ascension, he had informed about his
night journey and said that I saw a certain caravan of Quraish at so and
so place. Their camel had run away and he also mentioned some signs and
said that the caravan will reach here at sunrise. All this proved to be
true.

**Fifty-third miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob and other tradition scholars
have narrated that the tribe of Bani Hayyan took Habib bin Adi as a
prisoner and sold him to Meccans as a slave. When they crucified him, he
said: “Peace be upon you, O Messenger of Allah (S).” At that time the
Holy Prophet (S) was seated with his companions and he said: “And peace
be upon you,” and he wept and said: “Habib is saluting me in Mecca, the
Quraish have killed him.”

**Fifty-fourth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that a man came
to the Messenger of Allah (S) and made some request to him. The Prophet
told him to be seated and that his need would be fulfilled soon.
Meanwhile another person arrived and he brought a bag for the Prophet
saying: “This is an amount of 400 dirhams (silver coins), please
distribute it among the needy.”

The Prophet said to the first man: “Take these gold coins.” The one who
had brought them said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), they are not gold but
silver coins.” The Prophet said: “Don’t falsify me as the Almighty Allah
has made me truthful.”

So the bag was opened and 400 gold coins came out of it. The donor was
astonished. He said: “By Allah, I had placed silver coins in this bag.”
The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “You are right, but since I happened to
say: gold coins, the Almighty Allah made them as such.”

**Fifty-fifth miracle:** Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have narrated that Abu
Ayyub Ansari was seen in the Gulf of Constantine by the Islamic army and
asked if he needed anything. He said: I don’t need anything from your
world, I only want that when I die, if possible take my body to the
native place of disbelievers because I heard from the Messenger of Allah
(S) that: “A righteous companion of mine will be buried in Constantine.

I am hopeful that I would be that person.” Thus Abu Ayyub died and the
Islamic fighters were busy in the battle carrying his bier in front of
the army. The King Firang sent someone to inquire whose bier they were
carrying. They said that he was a senior companion of the Prophet who
made a bequest to be buried in this country.

The king said: “When you go away after burying him we will exhume the
body and feed it to the dogs.” They said: “If you do this we would
eliminate all the Christians who reside in the Arabian Gulf and demolish
all the churches. So they constructed a dome over the grave of Abu Ayyub
which is still present there and people visit it.

**Author’s discourse:** We have mentioned only one in a thousand
miracles of the Messenger of Allah (S) and the fact is that all the
words and deeds of the Prophet and all the practices and methods were
miracles. Especially the miracles that are related to the Unseen, which
were obvious from his miraculous words.

The hypocrites used to say: Don’t talk about Muhammad, because doors,
walls and even pebbles inform him what is going on.” Many miracles were
mentioned in the foregone and many will quoted in the coming pages. If a
sane person contemplates with justice every word and deed of the Prophet
and Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is nothing but a miracle and an extraordinary act.

Can anyone imagine a person to talk about a religious law without having
received any revelation or inspiration, which if followed to perfection
can make one successful in the world and the hereafter, and through
which one can close the channels of evil. All the mischief created in
the world are due to opposition to God-given law.

And no better option can be found with regard transactions, wars and
litigations, inheritance, relations of father and son, husband and wife,
etc. All that teachings of the religion of Islam that nothing better can
be devised and if the scholars think upon it, they would realize that
despite the fact that vested interests have altered many things, still
some of the points have reached to the people.

The truth of the Prophet is proved from the fact that he was brought up
in a society which was absolutely bereft of good morals and their world
depended on racial discrimination and jealousy and they used to circle
the Kaaba in a naked condition and used to call it worship. This shows
how their habits must have been. Even when more than a thousand years
have passed after the advent of the Prophet, if someone sees them in the
desert of Mecca, he thinks that they are worse than quadrupeds.

It was in such a society that the Prophet arrived with the choicest of
merits and when he obtained power over them, he was kind and merciful,
especially on Abu Sufyan who had harassed the Prophet, fought battles
with him and killed his relatives and companions but when the Messenger
of Allah (S) achieved control over him and also declared that whoever
enters his place will be granted amnesty and he also did not punish the
Jew woman who had administered poison to him.

He used to keep his family members hungry for days but fed others. He
used to glance at the killers of his descendants and remark that they
were the same who would slay his Ahlul Bayt and wreak oppressions on
them; but he used to keep them close and do favors to them and did not
discriminate against them. It is obvious that these manners cannot come
together except in a prophet or one who is superior to all the prophets.

Another proof of the veracity of the sacred Shariat of the Messenger of
Allah (S) is that common people in spite of the carnal desires abstain
from pleasure in seclusion and in spite of the harassment of tyrants
they do not care for its prohibition.

So deep is people’s devotion of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) that they sacrifice
their lives and wealth for these holy personalities and visit their
tombs and mausoleums with sincerity and as much the tyrants and
opponents oppress them, as much they are inclined for Ziarat.

[^1]: The author says: Each of these miracles will be described in
detail in the forthcoming pages.

[^2]: A unit of weight

[^3]: Surah Taha 20:1-2

[^4]: Surah Maidah 5:67

[^5]: The description of the race of Miqdad is mentioned in the 61st
chapter of this book, where one may refer for details. In short some
narrations show that he was a slave of Aswad bin Abde Yaghus. God alone
knows the truth- Tr.

[^6]: The author says: As prophets are sent by Allah to train and guide
people (masses who are like animals – ‘kal anaam’) the Lord Almighty
first entrusts to His prophets the task of grazing animals so that their
indecent or improper behavior may not be intolerable for them and they
may be able to bear pains and harassment.

[^7]: Surah Maidah 5:67

[^8]: Surah Taha 20:1-2

[^9]: Surah Bani Israel 17:29

[^10]: This and all such narrations seem to be from non-Shias. Therefore
it is not likely that he would say like that even while having anything
with him. The poor companions camping on the platform of the Masjid
Nabawi were asking throughout the year. How then it was possible that
the Holy Prophet (S) kept food for his consumption and withheld it from
such needy people? - Tr.

[^11]: Surah Qalam 68:4

[^12]: The author says: There are several narrations about eating wheat
bread also. Maybe the Holy Prophet (S) ate mostly barley bread and not
wheat loaves. Maybe he was not dining from his property or might not
have eaten wheat loaves before appointment to prophethood or after
Hijrat.

[^13]: Salvadora Persica

[^14]: The author says that the gentleness of manners and grace of the
noble character of the Holy Prophet (S) is beyond description. I suffice
with this as I have written more in Huliyatul Muttaqeen, Ainul Muttaqeen
and Ainul Hayat.

[^15]: Surah Hujurat 49:13

[^16]: Surah Ahzab 33:33

[^17]: Surah Kauthar 108:1

[^18]: Surah Maidah 5:96

[^19]: Surah Ahzab 33:56

[^20]: Surah Taubah 9:128

[^21]: Surah Nisa 4:84

[^22]: Surah Hujurat 49:3

[^23]: Surah Nisa 4:80

[^24]: Surah Taubah 9:128

[^25]: Surah Ahzab 33:6

[^26]: Surah Ahzab 33:66

[^27]: Surah Ahzab 33:7

[^28]: Surah Aale Imran 3:110

[^29]: Surah Ahzab 33:56

[^30]: Surah Ahzab 33:7

[^31]: Surah Aale Imran 3:80

[^32]: Surah Inshirah 94:4

[^33]: Surah Baqarah 2:285

[^34]: Surah Baqarah 2:285

[^35]: Surah Baqarah 2:285

[^36]: Surah Baqarah 2:186

[^37]: Surah Baqarah 2:186

[^38]: Surah Baqarah 2:286

[^39]: Surah Baqarah 2:286

[^40]: Surah Baqarah 2:286

[^41]: Surah Baqarah 2:286

[^42]: Surah Hijr 15:72

[^43]: Surah Aale Imran 3:110

[^44]: Surah Hud 11:114

[^45]: Surah Shoara 26:217-219

[^46]: The author says: The merits of the Holy Prophet (S) are beyond
computation. Insha Allah much will be mentioned in the chapters of the
excellence of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and much has been mentioned in the
chapters about the prophets. Since his status is more obvious than the
sun, we have remained content with this much. And since some of his
qualities were not proved, we have omitted them. And whatever is
narrated, from that also all are not proved as we have mentioned at
their respective places but since they are famous, we have also
mentioned it and did not think it necessary to undertake investigation
about them and their details are mentioned in Biharul Anwar.

[^47]: Surah Qalam 68:4

[^48]: Surah Hashr 59:7

[^49]: Surah Nisa 4:80

[^50]: Surah Nisa 4:69

[^51]: Surah Nur 24:62

[^52]: Surah Nur 24:62

[^53]: Surah Nur 24:62

[^54]: Surah Nur 24:62

[^55]: Surah Nur 24:62

[^56]: Surah Nur 24:63

[^57]: Surah Nur 24:63

[^58]: Surah Nur 24:63

[^59]: Surah Ahzab 33:53

[^60]: Surah Ahzab 33:53

[^61]: Surah Ahzab 33:56

[^62]: Surah Ahzab 33:57

[^63]: Surah Ahzab 33:69

[^64]: Surah Hujurat 49:1

[^65]: Surah Hujurat 49:2

[^66]: Surah Hujurat 49:3

[^67]: Surah Hujurat 49:4

[^68]: Surah Hujurat 49:5

[^69]: Surah Mujadila 58:8

[^70]: Surah Mujadila 58:8

[^71]: Surah Mujadila 58:9

[^72]: Surah Mujadila 58:10

[^73]: Surah Mujadila 58:11

[^74]: Surah Mujadila 58:12

[^75]: Surah Mujadila 58:13

[^76]: The author says: Maintaining the honor of the Prophet and Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) is obligatory during their lifetimes and after they have
passed away as proved from numerous traditions. Therefore one should
enter and leave their tombs with utmost respect. One should neither turn
the back to the sarcophagus, neither should one stretch the legs to it
or make noise. During Ziarat, one should stand with respect and recite
the Ziarat softly and observe all rules of respect. One must observe
respect in writing and reading their names and invoke blessings on
hearing them. Utmost honor must be given to their sayings and their
progeny and to pay respect to the narrators of their traditions for
their sake. To accord respect to them is to accord respect to the
Almighty Allah.

[^77]: Surah Hijr 15:75

[^78]: Surah Maidah 5:44

[^79]: The author says: Different reports prove that heirloom of the
past prophets reached the Holy Prophet (S) through different and many
channels. Tablets of Musa (a.s.) from the source mentioned in the
tradition. Heirloom of Musa and Isa (a.s.) and other prophets; some came
through Burda and some through Ubayy without the mediation of Salman or
through his mediation. Or on the basis of different reports, through
both the channels. And the bequests of Prophet Ibrahim and Prophet
Ismail came through the descendants and successors of Ismail which came
till Abdul Muttalib and after him came to Abu Talib; and through Abu
Talib they reached the Messenger of Allah (S) as understood from some
reports. The successors of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) had two branches: One
is that of the prophets of Bani Israel. And the second is the
descendants of Prophet Ismail (a.s.) who include the ancestors of the
Holy Prophet (S) who followed the religion of Ibrahim and who had
preserved his code of law. The prophets of Bani Israel were sent to them
as was mentioned previously and will again be mentioned in the coming
pages. The shirt of Yusuf (a.s.) was originally sent for Ibrahim (a.s.)
when he was being cast into the inferno. And the staff and the stone of
Musa (a.s.) and the ring of Sulaiman and the tray of sacrifice and the
casket of tranquility etc. which comprised the heritage of divine
prophets reached upto the Messenger of Allah (S) and from them they came
into the possession of Imams (a.s.).

[^80]: Surah Taubah 9:105

[^81]: Surah Anaam 6:75

[^82]: The author says: There are many traditions about the knowledge of
the Prophet which will be mentioned in the coming chapters. But we
should know that all the knowledge of the Messenger of Allah (S) is from
the Almighty Allah. The Messenger of Allah (S) never resorted to
conjecture and personal opinion and exertion as the Almighty Allah has
said: “Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that
is revealed…” (Surah Najm 53:3-4) All the words and deeds of the Prophet
were approved by the Almighty Allah and same was the case of the Holy
Imams (a.s.). Whatever they possessed, was through the Holy Prophet (S)
and they also never resorted to personal exertion, as will be explained
in future.

[^83]: The original book does not mention other two heretics and its
details are as follows: The four were: Abul Awja, Abu Shakir Disani, Ibn
Abi Maqna and Abdul Malik Basri. Abul Awja said that he was bewildered
by the verse: “Then when they despaired of him, they retired, conferring
privately together…”; Ibn Abi Maqna was shocked by the verse of: “O
earth, swallow down your water, and O cloud, clear away; and the water
was made to abate and the affair was decided…” Abdul Malik Basri was
pondering on the verse: “Surely those whom you call upon besides Allah
cannot create a fly, though they should all gather for it…” Abu Shakir
Disani said that he was amazed by the verse of: “If there had been in
them any gods except Allah, they would both have certainly been in a
state of disorder…” Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) was informed about this
miraculously and he passed from them reciting the verse of: “Say: If men
and jinn should combine together to bring the like of this Qur’an, they
could not bring the like of it, though some of them were aiders of
others.” (Preface to the translation of Maulana Sayyid Rahat Husain
Bhopalpuri, entitled, Anwarul Qur’an, page. 34-35)

[^84]: Surah Hud 11:44

[^85]: Surah Yusuf 12:80

[^86]: Surah Isra 17:88

[^87]: Surah Hud 11:44

[^88]: Surah Fussilat 41:13

[^89]: Surah Nahl 16:90

[^90]: Surah Nisa 4:82

[^91]: Surah Aale Imran 3:93

[^92]: Surah Maidah 5:15

[^93]: Surah Baqarah 2:76

[^94]: Surah Baqarah 2:187

[^95]: Surah Aale Imran 3:72

[^96]: Surah Aale Imran 3:119

[^97]: Surah Nisa 4:81

[^98]: Surah Nisa 4:108

[^99]: Surah Maidah 5:61

[^100]: Surah Taubah 9:74

[^101]: Surah Taubah 9:94

[^102]: Surah Taubah 9:107

[^103]: Surah Hijr 15:24

[^104]: Surah Aale Imran 3:167

[^105]: Surah Yasin 36:10

[^106]: Surah Baqarah 2:24

[^107]: Surah Aale Imran 3:111-112

[^108]: Surah Maidah 5:64

[^109]: Surah Aale Imran 3:12

[^110]: Surah Baqarah 2:94-95

[^111]: Surah Aale Imran 3:26

[^112]: Surah Maidah 5:52

[^113]: Surah Maidah 5:54

[^114]: Surah Anfal 8:7

[^115]: Surah Anfal 8:36

[^116]: Surah Taubah 9:32-33

[^117]: Surah Maidah 5:67

[^118]: Surah Taubah 9:83

[^119]: Surah Qasas 28:85

[^120]: Surah Rum 30:1-6

[^121]: Surah Qamar 54:45

[^122]: Surah Fath 48:27

[^123]: Surah Kauthar 108:1-3

[^124]: Surah Quraish 106:3-4

[^125]: Surah Fath 48:2

[^126]: Surah Inshirah 94:2

[^127]: Surah Ahzab 33:9

[^128]: Surah Yasin 36:9

[^129]: Surah Isra 17:45

[^130]: Surah Yasin 36:8

[^131]: It is mentioned in Sahih Bukhari that he was administered poison
in his last illness.

[^132]: Surah Fath 48:27

[^133]: Surah Hijr 15:95

[^134]: Surah Hijr 15:94

[^135]: Surah Hijr 15:95

[^136]: Surah Shoara 26:61

[^137]: Surah Ahqaf 46:29

[^138]: Surah Baqarah 2:201

[^139]: Surah Qalam 68:4

[^140]: Surah Baqarah 2:6

[^141]: Surah Alaq 96:1-5

[^142]: Surah Aale Imran 3:28

[^143]: Surah Qamar 54:1-2

[^144]: Surah Furqan 25:54

[^145]: The author says: There are many traditions with regard to the
descent of Maidah as will be narrated in chapters about Amirul Momineen
(a.s.), Fatima and Imams Hasan and Husain (a.s.).

[^146]: Surah Raad 13:13

[^147]: Surah Baqarah 2:74

[^148]: Surah Furqan 25:45

[^149]: Surah Hashr 59:7

[^150]: Surah Hashr 59:6

[^151]: Surah Taubah 9:33

[^152]: Surah Bani Israel 17:81

[^153]: A disease in which the patient suffers extreme thirst and his
stomach gets bloated by the day.

[^154]: Surah Ahqaf 46:11

[^155]: Surah Hijr 15:95

[^156]: Surah Hijr 15:95

[^157]: The author says: The number of scoffers and their accounts
differ. I have described the accounts of some of them and some were
mentioned previously.

[^158]: Surah Isra 17:45

[^159]: Surah Yasin 36:9

[^160]: Surah Fath 48:24

[^161]: Today it is situated on the road of Umrah. Everyone who passes
the road casts a stone on it and it has become a huge heap. We should
see how the opposition of Allah and the Prophet degrades those of noble
lineage and how the obedience of Allah exalts a person irrespective of
his lineage and includes him or her among the family members of respect.
(like in the case of Salman Farsi who was included by the Prophet in his
Ahlul Bayt).

[^162]: The author says: It is well known among Shia scholars that magic
cannot affect the prophets and Imams (a.s.) and the pain the Prophet
suffered was not due to the spell; but the Almighty Allah exposed the
sorcery of those infidels to prove the veracity of the Messenger of
Allah (S) and these Surahs were revealed to ward off the effect of magic
from others.

[^163]: Surah Rahman 55:13

[^164]: The author says: There are numerous reports about the Jinns
informing about the truth of the Prophet and about his advent. I have
mentioned some in Biharul Anwar and we will discuss about the Jinns and
satans being under the control of the Prophet in the chapters related to
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the Holy Imams (a.s.).

[^165]: Surah Inshirah 94:4

[^166]: It is perhaps mistakenly mentioned as Tabuk because Ja’far was
martyred during the Battle of Mutah which occurred in 8 A.H. and the
Battle of Tabuk was fought in 9 A.H. in which the Prophet was present in
person as will mentioned in the section of battles.


