The Holy Prophet (S) assumes the prophetical office
===================================================

It is generally agreed by Shia scholars that the Prophet’s assumption of
the prophetical office took place on the twenty seventh day of the
blessed month of Rajab. This is supported by the authority of traditions
derived from the holy Imams.

Sunnis, however not only differ from Shias, but contradict each other in
dating the assumption, some of them declaring it was on the seventeenth
day of the blessed month of Ramadan, and others that it was on the
eighteenth of that month; others say that it was on the twenty fourth of
Ramadan, and others again affirm that it was on the twelfth of Rabiul
Awwal. There are still some other accounts of the date of that year, but
truth is with the first statement.

According to authentic accounts, at that time the Prophet was of forty
years of age. Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) relates in authentic traditional
reports that Jibraeel descended to the Prophet on the day of Nauruz. But
it is evident from undoubted traditions that the Prophet was always a
Prophet, as he himself said, “I was a Prophet when Adam was yet clay and
water, or uncreated.”

The compiler is of opinion that before his assumption, the Prophet
conducted himself according to his own law, and received divine
communications, and was aided by the Ruhul Qudus, and that after
completing forty years, he first publicly appeared as a Prophet. In
*Nahjul Balagha*, it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that the
Prophet from his birth was attended by an angel, who was commissioned by
the Almighty Allah to preserve in him the most perfect manners and best
disposition.

In reliable traditions, it is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that before the Messenger of Allah (S) was appointed to prophethood, he
used to hear the angels till Jibraeel came with prophethood and he used
to see Jibraeel in his true form.

It is narrated through Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) in another report that
there is a Ruh greater than Jibraeel and Mikaeel, which always remained
with the Prophet and made him follow good morals and straight path and
the same Ruh accompanies the Holy Imams (a.s.) which keeps them informed
of the Unseen knowledge and during their childhood it trains and helps
them. There are many traditions in this regard, which shall be mentioned
in the book of Imamate.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in reliable traditions that
when Jibraeel waited upon the Prophet, he sat in the manner of a servant
before the Prophet, and that he did not enter the Prophet’s house till
invited to do so. He stood at a place which is today known as Maqam
Jibraeel. It is mentioned in other traditions that sometimes when the
Messenger of Allah (S) used to be with the companions he suddenly
swooned and fell into a profuse perspiration.

This was a sign of descent of divine revelation This, according to Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.), was occasioned by his awe at the words of God, and
at the majesty and glory of the Eternal one. This state did not occur on
Jibraeel’s visiting him, but only when he received a direct
communication from the Almighty Allah.

It is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that divine communications
are made to prophets in different ways; sometimes through angels, and
sometimes directly from Allah. The Prophet asked Jibraeel how he
received divine communications. He replied, “From Israfeel.” “And where
does Israfeel get them?” “It falls into his heart,” said Jibraeel.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that
Jibraeel said to the Messenger of Allah (S) that Israfeel is the porter
of the Lord, and of all creatures, nearest to the place from where
divine communications proceed. There is a tablet of ruby between his
eyes, which on a communication being given touches his forehead. At this
signal he looks at the tablet, and imparts the communication to us, and
we transmit it through the heavens and earth.

The same Imam relates that as the inhabitants of heaven had heard no
communication from the time of Prophet Isa (a.s.) till the assumption of
the prophetical office by the Prophet, they swooned with terror at the
thunder of a voice, like the sound of iron on a hard rock, communicating
the Qur’an.

When the communication was ended, Jibraeel came down through the heavens
and quelled the fears of the inhabitants. And Ayyashi has narrated from
Imam Ali (a.s.) that when the Prophet received Surah Maidah, as he was
riding his Mule called Shahba, and such was the weight, that the mule
stopped and bent under the burden till its stomach nearly touched the
ground. The Messenger of Allah (S) swooned and his hand was on the head
of Mamba bin Wahab.

When the condition normalized, he recited Surah Maidah. Ibn Tawus has
narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that Uthman bin Mazun has
stated that I was passing the door of the Prophet in Mecca and I saw him
sitting at the door and I also sat down with him and began to converse
with him.

Suddenly I saw that his eyes were raised to the sky and for some time
the Messenger of Allah (S) turned his eyes to the right and continued to
nod his head like a person listening to the talk of a person. After
sometime he continued to look at the sky for along time. Then he look to
the right and then to me. Sweat was dripping from his holy face. I said:
“O Messenger of Allah (S), I never saw you in this condition?” He
replied: “Have you seen it now?” “Yes, O Messenger of Allah (S).” The
Prophet said: “Jibraeel had come with the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالْإِحْسَانِ وَإِيتَاءِ ذِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ وَيَنْهَىٰ عَنِ الْفَحْشَاءِ وَالْمُنْكَرِ وَالْبَغْيِ ۚ
يَعِظُكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good (to
others) and the giving to the kindred, and He forbids indecency and evil
and rebellion; He admonishes you that you may be mindful.”***[^1]

Uthman says: “I arose from there and came to His Eminence, Abu Talib and
narrated the verse to him. He said: “O Ghalib, obey Muhammad, so that
you may be guided and be successful. By Allah, he is inviting you to a
perfect code of ethics.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Ibn
Abbas that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) used to attend the Prophet every
morning and the latter also liked his visits most. He came one day and
saw that the Holy Prophet (S) was sleeping in the courtyard and his holy
head was in the lap of Dahiya Kalbi. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “Peace be
upon you, how is the Holy Prophet (S)?”

Dahiya said: “O brother of the Messenger, he is well.” Imam Ali (a.s.)
said: “May Allah, give you a good reward.” Dahiya said: “I like you and
I have brought a gift for you. You are the chief of believers and one
who will take your followers to Paradise. After the Prophet you are the
best of the creatures. On Judgment Day, Liwaul Hamd will be carried by
you. You and your Shias will be the first to enter Paradise with the
Prophet.

One who is devoted to you has obtained deliverance. And deprived of
deliverance is one who denies your Wilayat. Whoever loved, loved
Muhammad (S) and whoever hates you is in fact inimical to you because of
his enmity to the Prophet and he is deprived of the intercession of the
Prophet. Come near me, because you are deserving of this.” and he gave
the Prophet’s head into his lap and went away.

When the Messenger of Allah (S) awoke, he asked: “Who was it that you
were speaking to?” Imam Ali (a.s.) replied: “It was Dahiya Kalbi.” He
said: “No, he was Jibraeel and he called you by the title that the
Almighty Allah has given you. It is the Almighty Allah who has
inculcated the hearts of believers with your love and your awe is put
into the infidels.

Himyari has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that when divine revelation was stopped for some
days, people asked the Prophet about it and he said: “How can it come,
when you don’t cut your nails and carry foul smell.”

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the accursed Iblis pleaded four times: One
when he was driven out from the court of the Almighty. Second when he
was sent to the earth. Third when the Messenger of Allah (S) was
invested with the office of prophethood. Fourth when the Surah Hamd was
revealed.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when the Almighty Allah constituted the
Holy Prophet as a Prophet, He commanded Jibraeel to dig the earth with a
stroke of his wing, and left it for the Prophet and the Prophet was
enabled to see every place as distinctly as a person sees his own hands.

He surveyed the world from east to west, and addressed every people in
their own tongue, summoning them to embrace his faith; and by divine
power the whole world saw the Prophet, heard his words, and understood
his mission.

Ali bin Ibrahim, Ibn Shahr Ashob and Shaykh Tabarsi, rather all
tradition scholars and exegetes have narrated that before his assumption
of the prophetical office, the Prophet retired from his people and lived
alone on Mount Hira, in devotion to Allah. There the Almighty Allah
imparted to him religious guidance, by the aid of the Holy Spirit, with
true dreams, the voices of angels, and just meditations. Meanwhile he
advanced in the degrees of divine love and knowledge, and was adorned
with all that is praiseworthy and excellent.

No one understood all this except Ali and Khadija. When thirty seven
years of his life had elapsed, he dreamed that an angel addressed him by
the title Rasoolullah, Messenger of Allah (S). One day when pasturing
the sheep of Abu Talib among the mountains of Mecca, a person approached
and addressed him by the same epithet. On inquiring who the stranger
was, he replied, “I am Jibraeel, whom God has sent to invest you with
the prophetical office.”

Having brought water from heaven for the purpose, or, as another
tradition declares, having thrust his foot down into the ground caused a
fountain to spring up, Jibraeel performed ablutions and prayers,
teaching the Prophet these acts, in which he instructed Ali at noon.
When he came home, he performed with Khadija evening prayers the same
day.

After some days His Eminence, Abu Talib came with Ja’far and saw that
the Prophet was praying with Ali and Khadija. Abu Talib said to Ja’far:
“You also pray with your cousin.” And he also joined the worshippers. It
is mentioned in authentic traditions from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I was sleeping in Abtah with my hand
under my head.

Ali was sleeping on my right, Ja’far Tayyar, on my left, and Hamza at my
feet. Suddenly terror came upon me at the sound of the wings of
Jibraeel, Mikaeel, and Israfeel, and I heard Israfeel inquire of
Jibraeel, “To which of these are we sent?” Jibraeel pointed to me and
said, “To this one, whose name is Muhammad, and who is the best of the
prophets. The one on his right is his brother and successor, the best of
all who have possessed that office.

On his left is Ja’far, the son of Abu Talib, who will hereafter fly in
Paradise with two splendid wings; the other is Hamza, the chief of
martyrs on Judgment Day.” According to another tradition, Jibraeel sat
at the head of the Prophet and Mikaeel at his feet and they did not
waken him due to good manners. When he himself awoke, Jibraeel conveyed
the message of Allah. When he arose and was about to leave, the
Messenger of Allah (S) clung to the tail of his robe and asked: “Who are
you?” He replied: “I am Jibraeel.”

It is narrated from Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) that when the Prophet
reached to the age of forty years the Almighty Allah made him absolutely
humble and sincere and found him to be most obedient to Him. So He
created a light in his eyes and when He issued the command, the doors of
the heavens were opened up.

Angels arrived in groups to the earth to see the Prophet and the
Almighty Allah joined His mercy from the leg of the Arsh to His
Eminence. Jibraeel came down encompassing the earth and the sky and
holding the arm of the Prophet said: “O Muhammad, read.” He asked: “What
should I read?”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْرَأْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ. خَلَقَ الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ
عَلَقٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Read in the name of your Lord Who created. He created man from a
clot.”***[^2]

Then he conveyed divine revelation to him. According to another
tradition Jibraeel descended again attended by seventy thousand angels,
and Mikaeel by the same number, and that they brought a majestic throne
for the Prophet, and placed the crown of prophecy on his head, put the
banner of praise (Liwa Hamd) in his hand, and directed him to ascend the
throne and praise the Lord.

According to another report that throne was made of ruby and its feet of
emeralds and pearl. When the angels returned to heaven, the Prophet
descended from Mount Hira, and such glory beamed from him that no one
could endure the light. Every tree and herb and stone he passed, bowed
down before His Eminence, and saluted him with the epithet of Messenger
of Allah (S), saying in fluent language: Peace be upon you, O Prophet of
Allah. Peace be upon you, O Messenger of Allah (S).

On entering his house was illuminated by his effulgence and Khadija
asked, “What light is this?” He replied, “This is the effulgence of
prophecy: Say, There is no god but Allah; Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah (S).” Khadija replied, “I have known for years that you were a
Prophet.” She then repeated the creed and professed the faith. He then
said to her, “I am cold, cover me with another garment,” and laying down
he received a divine communication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الْمُدَّثِّرُ. قُمْ فَأَنْذِرْ. وَرَبَّكَ فَكَبِّرْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who are clothed! Arise and warn, and your Lord do
magnify.”***[^3]

The Holy Prophet (S) arose and raising his hands to his ears, said:
Allah is the greatest (*Allahu Akbar*). Whoever heard the voice attested
to his veracity. It is mentioned in *Nahjul Balagha* that at that time,
except for the house of the Prophet, Islam had not entered any other
house. I and Khadija used to witness the effulgence of divine revelation
and prophethood and smell the fragrance of prophethood.

And we heard the wails of Satan when revelation descended on the
Prophet. I asked: “What wail is it?” He replied: “It is Satan and he has
despaired that people will ever worship him now. O Ali, I also hear
whatever you hear and see what you see, but you are not a prophet, you
are my legatee and you shall have a good end.

Tabarsi etc. have narrated that during that time a terrible famine
struck Mecca and Abu Talib had many children. The Holy Prophet (S) told
Abbas: “Your brother, Abu Talib is having many issues and the times are
very hard. Let us distribute his burden.” The Holy Prophet (S) took Imam
Ali (a.s.) under his care and he always accompanied the Prophet. So much
so that he declared his prophethood and the first to profess faith in
him was Imam Ali (a.s.).

Through many authentic chains, it is narrated from Afif that he said: I
was a trader and I reached Mina during the Hajj season and came to Abbas
to sell some goods to him. Suddenly I saw a person emerge from the tent
and he began to look at the sky. Seeing that the sun has begun its
decline from the zenith, he stood up to pray.

Then a boy came out and stood besides him. Then a lady came and stood
behind them and they all prayed the ritual prayer. I asked Abbas what
religion these people were following and that I have seen nothing like
it. He said: “This is Muhammad bin Abdullah, and he claims that the
Almighty Allah has invested him with prophethood and he says that the
treasures of Kaiser and Kisra will be obtained by him in booty.

And that lady is his wife, Khadija and that boy is the son of his uncle
who has professed faith in him. Except these, no one else has professed
faith in him. Afif used to regret that he didn’t profess faith that day.
In another report, it is mentioned that Lady Khadija asked Waraqa bin
Naufal, her cousin who followed the Christian religion and was well
versed in heavenly scriptures, and was a very old man who had lost his
vision: “Who is Jibraeel?” Waraqa replied: “Quddus, Quddus.

How did you learn about him in a town where God is not worshipped?”
Khadija said: “Muhammad bin Abdullah says that Jibraeel came to him.”
“He is right, I have read about his distinctive qualities in divine
books. Jibraeel is that great angel of God who came to Prophet Musa and
Prophet Isa (a.s.).

I have read in Taurat and Injeel that the Almighty God will send a
Prophet who would be an orphan. God will afford refuge to him. That he
would be poor but the Almighty God will make him needless of the people.
He would walk on water and speak to the dead and stones and trees will
salute him and testify to his prophethood.”

Then Waraqa said: “I have dreamed for three consecutive nights that
Almighty God has sent a prophet towards Mecca. I don’t find anyone else
more deserving of the office of prophet.” Then Khadija went to the Jew
monk named Adas. He was so old that his eyebrows hung upon his eyes.
Khadija said: “Tell me about Jibraeel.” Adas immediately fell down in
prostration exclaiming: “Quddus Quddus.

How did you hear the name of Jibraeel in a town where people do not
worship God?” Khadija adjured him not to disclose this to anyone and
told him that Muhammad claims that Jibraeel visits him. Adas said:
“Jibraeel is that great angel of God who came to Prophet Musa and
Prophet Isa (a.s.). Sometimes Satan also comes in the form of angel.
Take this amulet of mine to him.

If it is Satan or Jinn it will leave him alone and if this is really a
divine matter, no harm will come to him.” Lady Khadija returned from
there to find the Holy Prophet (S) seated and Jibraeel was reciting the
following verses to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ن ۚ وَالْقَلَمِ وَمَا يَسْطُرُونَ. مَا أَنْتَ بِنِعْمَةِ رَبِّكَ
بِمَجْنُونٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Noon. I swear by the pen and what the angels write, By the grace of
your Lord you are not mad.”***[^4]

Khadija was pleased to hear these verses. Then Adas came to the Prophet
and witnessed the signs he had read in the books. He said: “Please show
me the seal of prophethood.” When he saw the seal of prophethood, he
fell down in prostration exclaiming: “Quddus, Quddus! By Allah, you are
the prophet whose glad tidings Prophet Musa and Isa (a.s.) gave.”

Then he said to Lady Khadija: “The great affair and profound news will
be seen from him.” And he asked the Prophet if he had also been
commanded Jihad to which the Prophet replied in negative. Adas said:
“You will be driven out of this town. You will be commanded Jihad and if
I survive till that time, I will fight with the infidels.” It is
narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Jibraeel had descended on
the Prophet on the day of Nauroz.

Shaykh Tabarsi, Ibn Tawus, Ibn Shahr Ashob and all Shia and Sunni
scholars have narrated through multiple channels that after the
communication of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And warn your nearest relations…”***[^5]

And according to the recitation of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), along with this
was revealed the following also:

***“And warn nearest relations and sincere people…”***

“…the Holy Prophet (S) called Ali and directed him to make one saa of
wheat into bread, cook one leg of mutton, provide one cup of milk, and
invite the sons of Abdul Muttalib to the entertainment at the defile of
Abu Talib. Imam Ali (a.s.) called them and they were forty persons and
according to some thirty and according to some ten. One of the invitees,
Abu Lahab observed, after receiving the invitation, “Does the Prophet
think he can satisfy us? Each of us would eat a whole sheep, and drink a
great vessel of milk, and not have enough.”

The next morning all the uncles of the Prophet, including Abbas, Hamza,
Abu Talib and Abu Lahab assembled, and on entering made their
salutations according to the idolatrous custom, which the Prophet
returned according to the rules of Islam, which was disconcerting to
them. Ali broke the bread into the mutton curry, and placed the dish
with the cup of milk before the guests; the Prophet first putting his
hand on the food and pronouncing Bismillah, said: “Eat in the name of
Allah.”

This likewise displeased them but as they were very hungry they began to
eat without raising any objection, and continued till they were all
satisfied, when it appeared that the provisions were not in the least
diminished. Nor was the milk lessened after all had freely eaten of it.
As the Prophet was about to address them, Abu Lahab preceded him, saying
to the company, “Your host has shown a famous magic trick in satisfying
you with so little provision which still remains as it was.”

And they all dispersed from there. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “That man
anticipated me today, so I didn’t say anything. Make the same
preparations again, and assemble them tomorrow that I may announce to
them my prophetical mission.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says that he made
the same preparations the next day and when all had eaten, the Prophet
said: “O sons of Abdul Muttalib, I think no one among the Arabs can have
bestowed on his relatives a greater benefit than I have brought you.

Verily, I offer you the good of this world, and of that to come. If I
should forewarn you that your enemies would attack you in the morning,
or in the evening, would you not believe? They replied in the
affirmative, adding that they esteemed him to be a teller of truth. He
replied, “Know that a well-wisher will not deceive.

Verily the Almighty Allah has sent me as a Prophet to the universe, and
has commanded me to summon first to His worship my relatives and
friends, and warn them with future punishment. You are my near kindred,
and this food of which you have eaten, and witnessed my miracle, is like
the table spread for the Bani Israel in the wilderness.

Whoever after partaking of this food does not believe in me, Allah will
punish him more severely than He has yet punished any one of mankind.
Know you sons of Abdul Muttalib; Allah has sent no Prophet for whom He
has not appointed, of his own people, one to be his vizier, successor
and heir. Now whoever of you first believes in me, shall be my brother,
vizier and Caliph among my community, and sustain the same rank towards
me that Harun did to Musa.

Who then will take precedence in obeying me, and be my brother, my
helper against opponents, and become my successor; be my Caliph after
me, and cancel all my obligations? If you do not choose this office,
another will, to whom its advantages will accrue.” The Prophet ceased,
but all were silent. Ali then rose and said, “I will render you
obedience on your own conditions, and will obey whatever you command.”

The Prophet directed him to take his seat, saying, “Perhaps some who are
your seniors may arise.” He then repeated his proposals, but all still
were silent, and again Ali arose and pledged his faith. This was
repeated three times, when the Prophet approved Ali’s acceptance of the
offer, dropped saliva from his own blessed mouth into the mouth of Ali,
and cast it between his shoulders and breasts.

Abu Lahab sneeringly said, “You have given your cousin a fine reward for
accepting your offer, by filling his mouth with your spittle!” “No,”
said the Prophet, “I have filled him with knowledge, gentleness and
understanding.” The party then rose and went away laughing, and observed
to Abu Talib, “Muhammad will order you to obey your own son.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that when revelations began to descend on the Prophet, he remained in
Mecca for 13 years. And for three years and according to another report
for five years remained concealed and was fearful of the idolaters of
Quraish. Except for Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and Lady Khadija no one
supported him, till the Almighty Allah revealed the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore declare openly what you are bidden and turn aside from the
polytheists.”***[^6]

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that at first only Ali
and Khadija believed in the Prophet, who remained three years concealed
in Mecca in constant apprehension from the infidels, and expecting to be
compelled to flee. At length he was commanded publicly to proclaim his
message.

He then came to the Masjid, and standing by the rock of Ismail, cried
with a loud voice, O you Quraish and Arab tribes, I call on you to
testify to the unity of God, and to believe in me as a Prophet. I
command you to renounce idolatry and obey the faith to which I summon
you, that you may be sovereign of the Arabs and crowds of non-Arab obey
you, and you be kings in Paradise. The Quraish derided this message, and
Abu Lahab said, “Destruction to you! Was it for this you invited us to a
feast?” At that juncture, the following Surah was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَّتْ يَدَا أَبِي لَهَبٍ وَتَبَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Perdition overtake both hands of Abu Lahab, and he will
perish.”***[^7]

The infidels of Quraish said that Muhammad was deranged, and heaped upon
him all sorts of verbal abuse, but fear of Abu Talib prevented them from
physical violence.

After many had embraced faith, the Quraish infidels met Abu Talib and
said, “Your nephew befools the people, reviles our gods, corrupts our
youths, and causes divisions among us. If poverty compels him to take
such a course, we will make a collection for him and enrich him above
any of the Quraish, and give him in marriage any woman of the tribe whom
he desires, and constitute him our chief, on condition that he ceases to
assail our gods.”

Abu Talib asked the Prophet what doctrine it was that raised such an
uproar among his people. He replied, “Uncle, it is a faith which God
approves, and of which He has constituted me a messenger.” Abu Talib
then told him what offers his people had made. “If,” said the Prophet,
“they put sun in my right hand, and moon in my left, and give me in
possession the whole face of the earth, I would not disobey my Lord.

I want one word of them, which if they utter, they shall become
sovereigns of the Arabs and non-Arabs, and be kings hereafter in
Paradise.” “What word is that?” he inquired. “That they testify to the
unity of God, and to my prophetical office.” They asked, “Shall we
forsake three hundred and sixty gods, to worship one? This is a strange
requirement indeed.” Again the Quraish visited Abu Talib, and proposed
to give him Ammara bin Walid, a person of the highest rank, very
handsome and accomplished, in exchange for Muhammad, that they might put
him to death. “You do me great injustice,” said Abu Talib, “in making
such a proposition. Shall I give my son to be slain, and bring up your
son?”

Ayyashi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that when idolaters passed the Prophet, they used
to hide their faces behind their garments lest he sees them. At that
juncture, the following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَا إِنَّهُمْ يَثْنُونَ صُدُورَهُمْ لِيَسْتَخْفُوا مِنْهُ ۚ أَلَا
حِينَ يَسْتَغْشُونَ ثِيَابَهُمْ يَعْلَمُ مَا يُسِرُّونَ وَمَا
يُعْلِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Now surely they fold up their breasts that they may conceal (their
enmity) from Him; now surely, when they use their garments as a
covering, He knows what they conceal and what they make public…”***[^8]

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that Abu Jahl the accursed came to Abu Talib along
with a group of Quraish: “Your nephew has harassed us and our gods. Tell
him not to talk ill of them.” His Eminence, Abu Talib called the
Messenger of Allah (S) and when he arrived he saw the infidels and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّلَامُ عَلٰى مَنِ اتَّبَعَ الْهُدٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and peace is on him who follows the guidance…”***[^9]

Then he took his seat. Abu Talib said: “These people are have certain
complaints.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Is it possible from them to say
something that is better, which an make them the most exalted and
powerful over all the Arabs?” Abu Jahl said, “Yes, it is possible, what
is it?”

He said: “Say: there is no god except Allah.” When they heard this, they
plugged their ears and make a hasty exit from there and ran away saying:
“We have heard that there is no good of the hereafter in this religion.
It is only a calumny.” At that juncture, the Almighty Allah revealed the
initial verses of Surah Saad.

Furat Ibn Ibrahim narrates from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the
Prophet recited the Qur’an in a more melodious and delightful manner
than any other person. Indeed his recitation were so enchanting that
when he rose at night to perform prayer, Abu Jahl and other idolaters
often came to listen to his recitations of Qur’an, but put their fingers
in their ears when he repeated the introductory formula: In the name of
Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful.

And then they ran away from there to return again. Abu Jahl observed,
“Muhammad repeats the name of his God a great deal, and verily loves
Him.” “Abu Jahl in this told the truth,” remarks Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.), “although that cursed one was a notorious liar.” Then the
Almighty Allah revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا ذَكَرْتَ رَبَّكَ فِي الْقُرْآنِ وَحْدَهُ وَلَّوْا عَلٰى
أَدْبَارِهِمْ نُفُورًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and when you mention your Lord alone in the Qur’an they turn their
backs in aversion.”***[^10]

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said that when the Messenger of Allah (S) used
to recite, “In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful”, they
used to run away showing their backs. In another reliable tradition, it
is narrated from the same Imam that the idolaters proposed to the
Prophet that one year he should worship their gods and the next year
they would worship Allah. So the Almighty Allah revealed Surah Kafiroon
and they despaired that the Holy Prophet (S) would ever be inclined to
their gods.

Kulaini has through good chains of narrators, narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that one day the Prophet having arrayed himself in a new
set of clothes, and being engaged in prayer in the place of devotion,
the idolaters threw camel’s entrails on his back and defiled his
garments.

He complained of this outrage to Abu Talib, who, inflamed with passion,
seized his arms, mounted his camel, and attended by Hamza and the
Prophet, went to the Masjid where he found the Quraish, who terrified at
his wrathful countenance, did not venture to move. He then ordered Hamza
to rub the bloody, filthy entrails on the infidels, which Hamza did.

When this satisfaction was taken, Abu Talib turned to the Prophet,
saying, “Your rank among us demands such retaliation.” According to Ibn
Shahr Ashob and Rawandi it is mentioned that on the directions of Abu
Jahl, Aqba bin Abi Muit brought entrails of camel and put them on the
Prophet’s back when he was praying.

The Holy Prophet (S) threw away the entrails from his back and
protested: “My Lord, only You can rid me of Quraish, Abu Jahl, Shaibah
and Umayyah.” Abbas says: “By Allah, whoever was named by the Prophet
that day, was killed in Badr.” Thus when this blatant act of Aqba was
reported to Hamza he was infuriated and he came to the mosque and found
Abu Jahl there. He snatched his bow and hit with it on his head and he
picked that cursed one and threw him on the ground.

People gathered and saved the cursed one from His Eminence, Hamza and
said: “It seems that you have also professed the faith of Muhammad.”
“Yes,” he replied in anger and repeated the dual formula of faith. Then
he came to the Prophet who recited verses of Qur’an to prove his
veracity. Hamza repeated the formula again and became strongly attached
to the religion of Islam. Abu Talib was highly pleased and recited some
couplets in praise of His Eminence, Hamza.

Ayyashi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of
Allah (S) suffered much harassment from his people. One day while he was
prostrating, the idolaters threw sheep entrails on him. Lady Fatima
arrived when the Prophet was in prostration, and she cleaned the filth
from him.

At last, what the Prophet wished was fulfilled by the Almighty Allah. In
the Battle of Badr, the Messenger of Allah (S) did not even have a
single horse to ride, but on the day of the conquest of Mecca he was
surrounded by 12000 mounted men and Abu Sufyan and other idolaters were
praying for his forgiveness.

After the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (S), Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) had to bear the tortures at the hands of the hypocrites because
he had no support among the people. Hamza was martyred in Uhud and
Ja’far in the Battle of Mutah.

Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have narrated that once the Messenger of Allah (S)
was seated in front of the Kaaba when a man complained to him of the
injury he had received from the Quraish, and asked him if he would not
pray for their deliverance.

The Prophet was shocked and he said, “Of those who were believers in
former times, some were raked to pieces with iron combs, and others sawn
asunder, yet they patiently endured, and did not forsake their religion.
Do you then endure patiently, for verily, God will so completely
establish this faith that a single horseman who believes, may go alone
from Mount Safa to Hadhramaut, and fear nothing but God.”

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The Almighty
Allah has ordered me to be cheerful and nice to the people and to pray
the obligatory prayer. And he said in another reliable tradition that
Jibraeel came to the Prophet and said that the merciful and kind Lord
has sent greetings to him and told him to be kind and affectionate to
the people.

Through trustworthy chains of narrators, it is narrated from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when people
falsified the Messenger of Allah (S), the Almighty Allah wanted to
destroy all the people of the world except Amirul Momineen (a.s.). He
revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ فَمَا أَنتَ بِمَلُومٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then turn your back upon them for you are not to blame.”***[^11]

After that the Almighty Allah had mercy on the believers and addressed
the Prophet as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَذَكِّرْ فَإِنَّ الذِّكْرَى تَنفَعُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And continue to remind, for surely the reminder profits the
believers.”***[^12]

It is mentioned in reliable tradition from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
the Almighty Allah commanded the Messenger of Allah (S) to express Islam
but when the Prophet considered the paucity of Muslims and excess of
idolaters, he became much aggrieved. The Almighty Allah sent Jibraeel
with a leaf of Sidratul Muntaha and said that the Prophet should wash
his head with it. The Messenger of Allah (S) fulfilled the directions
and his grief was dispelled.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The
Almighty Allah has sent me to eliminate all the kings of falsehood and
to reserve rulership and kingdom for you, O Muslims.” Abu Jahl said due
to his jealousy and enmity of the Prophet: “O God, if Muhammad is right,
rain upon us stones or send a painful chastisement.”

Then he said: “We and Bani Hashim were like two horses who galloped
together and were equal to each other. Now we cannot bear to see him
claiming prophethood and that there should be a prophet among them and
none in Bani Makhzum. Then he prayed for divine forgiveness. The
Almighty Allah revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ اللَّهُ لِيُعَذِّبَهُمْ وَأَنْتَ فِيهِمْ ۚ وَمَا كَانَ
اللَّهُ مُعَذِّبَهُمْ وَهُمْ يَسْتَغْفِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But Allah was not going to chastise them while you were among them,
nor is Allah going to chastise them while yet they ask for
forgiveness.”***[^13]

When they began to harass the Prophet and forced him to leave Mecca, the
following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا لَهُمْ أَلَّا يُعَذِّبَهُمُ اللَّهُ وَهُمْ يَصُدُّونَ عَنِ
الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ وَمَا كَانُوا أَوْلِيَاءَهُ ۚ إِنْ
أَوْلِيَاؤُهُ إِلَّا الْمُتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And what (excuse) have they that Allah should not chastise them
while they hinder (men) from the Sacred Mosque and they are not (fit to
be) guardians of it; its guardians are only those who guard (against
evil)…”***[^14]

And they are the Messenger of Allah (S) and his companions. At last, the
Almighty Allah sent chastisement on them in the Battle of Badr and they
were killed.

Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated from Kathir bin Aamir that one day a rider
came to Mecca from the direction of Abtah, followed by 17 camels loaded
with silken garments. One each camel rode a black slave and he was
inquiring about the Prophet. When people asked him what he wanted from
the Prophet, he said: “My father had willed that I should hand over
these camels and slaves to him.”

Abul Bakhtar signaled to Abu Jahl and said: “That is the one you are
looking for.” He came to Abu Jahl and could not find the signs he had
been told about and he said: “You are not the one.” And he began to roam
about in Mecca till he reached the Prophet and identified him by those
signs. He kissed the hands and feet of the Prophet and the Messenger
asked: “Are you Naji bin Manzar?”

“Yes, O Messenger of Allah (S),” he replied. He asked, “Where are those
17 camels on each of which rides a black slave dressed in silk and
gold?” Then His Eminence mentioned each of their names. He said, “Yes, O
Messenger of Allah (S), they are at your service.” The Prophet said:
“Hand over the goods to me, I am Muhammad.”

When he handed over the camels and goods to the Prophet, Abu Jahl
screamed, “O, Aale Ghalib, if you don’t help me against Muhammad, I will
stab myself to death.” All this wealth belongs to the Kaaba and Muhammad
wants all of it to be under his discretion.” Then he mounted and drawing
out the sword roamed the streets of Mecca till he had mobilized
thousands.

When Bani Hashim learnt about this, Abu Talib called all the descendants
of Abdul Muttalib and gathered around the Prophet. Then he went to them
and asked what they wanted from Muhammad. Abu Jahl said: “Your nephew
had been very dishonest with us and when people brought some gifts for
the Kaaba that boy (Muhammad) deceived them and admitted them in his
religion and took all the gifts they had brought for the Kaaba.”

Abu Talib said, “Wait, I will go and ask Muhammad, what the matter is.”
Then he came to the Prophet and told me to give all the goods to Abu
Jahl but he said: “I will not give him anything from it.” Abu Talib
suggested, “You keep ten camels and give him the rest.” But the Holy
Prophet (S) refused saying, “I will take these gifts with camels to him
and we will ask the camels to adjudicate between us.”

Abu Talib came to Abu Jahl and informed him about his decision and
remarked that Muhammad has done justice to you and he has said that you
all should gather tomorrow at sunrise in the mosque and the camels will
be brought with all the goods and asked to judge the matter.

They returned home and the next day, the accursed Abu Jahl came to the
Kaaba, paid obeisance to Hubal and mentioned everything asking Hubal to
make the camels speak up in his favor so that Muhammad may not get a
chance to be victorious over them, as he (Abu Jahl) is worshipping Hubal
for forty years and so far has not asked for anything from it.

“If you fulfill my wishes today, I will get a robe of white pearls for
you. And gold bangles for both of your hands and silver sticks. And
crown of gems.” Meanwhile the Holy Prophet (S) also arrived and the
camels were brought along with their load. Abu Jahl was asked to
question the camels. He tried in every way but there was no response
from the camels.

After that His Eminence asked the camels and they began to speak up with
the command of Allah; they testified to his prophethood and said that
all these goods belong to the Prophet. The Messenger of Allah (S) again
told Abu Jahl to question the camels, but yet there was no response from
them. Again the Prophet asked them and again they testified and this
went on for seven times. At last the Prophet took the goods and camels
in his custody and Abu Jahl was badly humiliated.

It is mentioned in some books that when the Almighty Allah ordered the
Messenger of Allah (S) to openly invite the Quraish to Islam, the Holy
Prophet (S) proclaimed his mission at a time when pilgrims were
assembled at Mecca, stood for the purpose on Mount Safa, and cried with
a loud voice, “O people, I am the Messenger of the Lord of the
universe.” The people looked at him in wonder, but were silent.

He then ascended Marwah, and three times repeated the same announcement.
The accursed Abu Jahl on hearing this hurled a stone at him, which
wounded his luminous forehead. The rest of the idolaters then picked up
stones and pursued him. He ascended Mount Abu Qubais, and reclined in a
spot which is now called Muttaka (the reclining place), the infidels
meanwhile seeking him in all directions.

A person went and told Ali that the Prophet was slain, upon which he ran
weeping to Khadija, saying, “It is reported that the idolaters have
stoned the Prophet, and it is certain he is nowhere to be found. Give me
water, and do you take food, and let us make haste to find and offer him
refreshment.” Imam Ali (a.s.) told her to go by the valley and that he
was going to ascend the mountains, he wept and cried, “O Prophet, O
Messenger of Allah (S), may my life be your sacrifice! In what valley
are you hungry and thirsty and have not taken me with you?”

Khadija cried, “Show me the way to the chosen Prophet, the vernal
beauty, the sufferer for God’s sake.” In this state of things, Jibraeel
descended to the Prophet, who wept at meeting the angel, and said, “See
what my people have done to me; they have charged me with falsehood, and
wounded me with stones of oppression.” “Give me your hand,” said
Jibraeel, and he seated the Prophet on the mountain top.

He had brought under his wing a carpet of Paradise which was woven of
pearls and rubies; this he spread in the air, and it covered all the
mountains of Mecca, and again taking the hand of the Prophet seated him
on it, and said to him, “Do you wish to know in what estimation you are
held by the Almighty Allah?” He replied in the affirmative. “Then call
that tree to you,” said Jibraeel.

Immediately it obeyed the summons and made a prostration before the
Prophet, and on his ordering it to return, it promptly obeyed. The angel
Ismail, regent of the first heaven, now descended, and saluting the
Prophet said, “My Lord has commanded me to obey you implicitly in
everything. If you order, I will pour the stars upon your enemies and
burn them.

The angel of the sun appeared and offered to consume the Prophet’s
enemies by bringing the sun upon their heads; the angel of the earth
proposed to have them swallowed up by the opening ground; the angel of
the mountains wished to hurl all the mountains on them; the angel of the
ocean asked permission to drown them beneath the might of the sea.

Having first demanded of these angels if they were all commanded to aid
him, and receiving an affirmative answer, he raised his blessed face
toward heaven and said, “O my Lord, I am not sent to dispense
chastisement, but am enjoined to be the mercy of the universe. Leave me
to my people, for they are ignorant, and this is the reason of their
treating me thus.”

Jibraeel observed Khadija weeping in her search for the Prophet through
the valley, pointed her out to him saying, “The angels of the heavens
also weep with her. Call her to you, give her my salutation, and tell
her she has a house in Paradise built of pearl and adorned with gold,
where there is no sound creating fear.” He called Ali and Khadija, blood
continuing to drop from his forehead, but he did not permit it to fall
on the earth, lest the Almighty Allah should take vengeance on all its
inhabitants.

At night Ali and Khadija brought the Prophet back to his house, and
placed a large flat stone over the place where he sat, to protect him
from stones descending in that quarter, while before him stood Ali and
Khadija, shielding him with their own bodies, for the idolaters having
heard of his return, came and assaulted the house with missiles.

At length Khadija exclaimed, “Are you not ashamed, you Quraish, to be
hurling stones at the house of a woman who is of the highest rank among
you? If you do not fear God, yet for honor’s sake desist.” At this
rebuke the idolaters went away. The next day the Prophet went to the
Masjid to perform his devotions, and the Almighty Allah inspired his
enemies with such fear that they did not harass him anymore.

It is recorded that in the fifth year of his prophetical office,
Sumayyah, the mother of Ammar bin Yasir, was martyred. She was of those
who were tortured by the idolaters to compel them to forsake Islam. Abu
Jahl the accursed, passed by her and thrust a spear into her heart.

Ascension of the Holy Prophet (S)
---------------------------------

With regard to Meraj or Ascension, the reader should know that it is
related in the Qur’an, and in the most authentic and continuous
traditions. At night, the Prophet was carried from sacred Mecca to the
Masjid at Jerusalem and thence was transported through the heavens to
Sidratul Muntaha, and to the high empyrean.

The wonders of heaven were shown him, secret mysteries and boundless
knowledge was imparted to him, and in Baitul Mamoor, and at the throne
of the divine empyrean, he worshipped the Almighty Allah and met the
spirits of the Prophet. He entered Paradise and surveyed its abodes.
Both Shia and Sunni traditions declare that the ascension was physical
(bodily), and not merely in (bodiless) spirit; in the state of
wakefulness, not of sleep.

Regarding this, there was no disagreement among the ancient Shia
scholars. Thus Ibn Babawayh and Shaykh Tabarsi (r.a.) etc. have
clarified the doubts which some have entertained whether the ascension
was bodily, or only in the spirit, have arisen from want of examining
the subject, or from disbelief of its divine attestations, and listening
to people who are without faith themselves.

For how can one who possesses faith in the declarations of Allah and His
Prophet, and in the Imams of the truth, the verses of the Qur’an, and
thousands of traditions which relate in various ways and the clearest
manner to a bodily ascension, deny or explain away the whole? In almost
every book of Shia and Sunni traditions there is allusion to ascension,
and were I to collect all that is said on this subject, the mass would
make a volume like this volume.

I shall merely give some specimens of the whole. So that
religious-minded friends may gain knowledge about them. We should know
that is agreed by Shias and Sunnis that the ascension was before the
Hijrat, or flight from Mecca. It is probable that the ascension was
afterwards repeated. But that which occurred before the Hijrat,
according to some authorities, happened on Friday night, the seventeenth
of the blessed month of Ramadan, or on Saturday the twenty-first of this
month, and six months before the Hijrat, Some say it was in the month of
Rabiul Awwal, two years after the Prophet’s assumption of the
prophetical office.

Others maintain that the ascension occurred on the twenty-seventh of the
month of Rajab, in the second year of Hijrat. There are differences
respecting the place whence the ascension was performed: some say it was
from the house of Ali’s sister, Umm Hani, some from the defile of Abu
Talib, and others from the Holy mosque of Kaaba.

It is not agreed whether the ascension was repeated, but respectable
traditions will be adduced to show that it was repeated many times, and
all the disagreement about the ascension may have arisen from this
reason: that one account relates to one ascension and another statement
to certain other ascension.  
 Of the verses relating to the Meraj, this is the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي أَسْرٰى بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلًا مِنَ الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ إِلَى الْمَسْجِدِ الْأَقْصَى الَّذِي بَارَكْنَا حَوْلَهُ
لِنُرِيَهُ مِنْ آيَاتِنَا ۚ إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Glory be to Him Who made His servant to go on a night from the
Sacred Mosque to the remote mosque of which We have blessed the
precincts, so that We may show to him some of Our signs; surely He is
the Hearing, the Seeing.”***[^15]

Some maintain that the phrase, ‘sacred Masjid’ refers to the city of
Mecca, as the whole city is a place for prayer and is held sacred; and
that the remote Masjid means the one famous in Shaam. But from many
respectable traditions, it appears that the remote Masjid is one in the
fourth heaven, and the most remote of all the Masjids. Ali bin Ibrahim
has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he was once asked by a man what people said about this
verse.

He replied, “They say the Prophet went from the Kaaba to Baitul Maqdas,
that is not the meaning,” said the Imam, “but the Prophet went from the
mosque on earth to the Baitul Mamoor, which stands perpendicularly over
the Kaaba. And the whole space between it and the Kaaba is a holy
protected sanctuary.

And Ayyashi has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he was also
asked which were the most sacred and honorable Masjids, to which he
replied, “The remote Masjid mentioned by Allah is in the heavens and the
Kufa Masjid is better than the one in Shaam.[^16]  
 In another instance the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالنَّجْمِ إِذَا هَوٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I swear by the star when it goes down.”***[^17]

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that ‘Najm’ denotes the
Messenger of Allah (S) and the above statement means:  
 “By the star when he went for Meraj or came down from it.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا ضَلَّ صَاحِبُكُمْ وَمَا غَوٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your companion does not err, nor does he go astray…”***[^18]

It is mentioned in many traditional reports that it implies that
Muhammad (S) has not erred about the Caliphate of Ali (a.s.) and neither
does he lie about it. Whatever you mentioned in his excellence is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَنْطِقُ عَنِ الْهَوٰى. إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا وَحْيٌ يُوحٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed…”***[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَّمَهُ شَدِيدُ الْقُوٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Lord of Mighty Power has taught him…”***[^20]

That is Jibraeel has told him about it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذُو مِرَّةٍ فَاسْتَوٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Lord of Strength; so he attained completion…”***[^21]

That is, he stood for two nights in the form created by the Almighty
Allah with absolute greatness and majesty.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ بِالْأُفُقِ الْأَعْلَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And he is in the highest part of the horizon.”***[^22]

…when the Messenger of Allah (S) saw him in his form.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ دَنَا فَتَدَلَّى فَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then he drew near, then he bowed. So he was the measure of two bows
or closer still.”***[^23]

Then he came close to the Prophet to tell him the divine secret. Thus
there was less than a distance of two bows between them. Some say that
Muhammad (S) reached the ideal point of proximity of the Almighty Allah,
a position higher than which is not possible.

At that time, the Merciful and the Beneficent Lord, made him close to
His blessings and gifts as if two persons are very close to each other.
It is narrated through authentic chains from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that the Holy Prophet (S) reached to the spot from where divine
revelations descend and at that place, the ears of the Prophet were less
then a bow length from it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَوْحَى إِلَى عَبْدِهِ مَا أَوْحٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He revealed to His servant what He revealed.”***[^24]

It is mentioned in many reliable traditions that the Almighty Allah
revealed about the Imamate, exalted status and glory of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَذَبَ الْفُؤَادُ مَا رَأٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The heart was not untrue in (making him see) what he saw.”***[^25]

Thus whatever extraordinary things that the Prophet witnessed were not
denied by his heart. He accepted everything with the radiance of
certainty.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَتُمَارُونَهُ عَلَى مَا يَرٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What! do you then dispute with him as to what he saw?”***[^26]

O people, do you doubt about that which Muhammad (S) saw on the night of
Meraj?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ رَآهُ نَزْلَةً أُخْرٰى. عِنْدَ سِدْرَةِ الْمُنْتَهٰى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly he saw him in another descent, at the farthest
lote-tree…”***[^27]

Then the Messenger of Allah (S) saw Jibraeel in his true form near the
Sidratul Muntaha. That tree is located at the seventh heaven which is
the last point of the flight of the angels and the deeds of human
beings.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِندَهَا جَنَّةُ الْمَأْوٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Near which is the garden, the place to be resorted to.”***[^28]

And near is the Paradise that is the abode of the pious.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ يَغْشَى السِّدْرَةَ مَا يَغْشٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When that which covers covered the lote-tree…”***[^29]

At the time, it had covered the Sidra, that which had covered it, that
is it was covered by the angels and spirits and the majesty of the Lord
of the worlds.  
 It is narrated that an angel stood at each leaf of the Sidratul Muntaha
praising the Lord.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا زَاغَ الْبَصَرُ وَمَا طَغٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The eye did not turn aside, nor did it exceed the limit.”***[^30]

That is the eyes of the Prophet did not see to the right and left, they
were only focused on what was to be seen. That is the Messenger of Allah
(S) was standing with utmost respect to the Almighty Allah and was not
attentive to anything except the Almighty Allah. He heard whatever he
was told with absolute concentration and saw what he was shown without
doubting anything.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ رَأَى مِنْ آيَاتِ رَبِّهِ الْكُبْرٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly he saw of the greatest signs of his Lord.”***[^31]

The Almighty Allah has mentioned that the Messenger of Allah (S) saw the
great signs of His Lord to protect from misunderstanding those who think
that the Messenger of Allah (S) saw the Almighty Allah Himself and that
people should know that God cannot be seen through the physical eyes as
the Holy Prophet (S) himself says: “That night I saw the Almighty Allah
with the eyes of my heart.” It is mentioned that of all those signs was
that the Messenger of Allah (S) saw Jibraeel in his true form and his
six hundred wings had surrounded the whole sky.[^32]

Ibn Babawayh has through authentic traditions narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he declares: “He is not a true Shia who denies one of
these four doctrines: the Prophet’s ascension to heaven; angels
questioning the dead in the grave; the existence of Paradise and Hell;
and the intercession of the Prophet at the judgment.”

It is narrated from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that one who does not have
faith in Meraj, has denied the Messenger of Allah (S). In another
trustworthy traditions it is mentioned that the true Shia is one who
believes in: The Meraj of the Prophet, Intercession, Hauze Kauthar,
angels questioning the dead in the grave; the existence of Paradise and
Hell; Sirat Bridge and Mizan (balance of deeds), accounting, Judgment
Day and resurrection.

Ibn Babawayh and Saffar etc. have narrated through authentic chains of
narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: The Almighty Allah
transported the Prophet to heaven a hundred and twenty times. And each
time he emphasized Wilayat and Imamate of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
regarding all the purified Imams more than He emphasized on other
religious commands.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated through good chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that on the night of ascension, Jibraeel, Mikaeel
and Israfeel brought the creature, Burraq for the Prophet. One held the
bridle, another the stirrup, and the third arranged the clothes of the
Prophet as he mounted.

Burraq being silent, Jibraeel gave him a blow asking it why it was
silent, for he was never mounted by a more worthy rider. As Burraq flew
on his way, Jibraeel showed the Prophet the wonders of earth and the
heavens. The Messenger of Allah (S) says: As we proceeded, a voice came
on my right, which I disregarded. Then I heard another voice on my left,
but to this I paid no attention.

Next I saw a woman before me with bare arms and adorned with all the
ornaments of the world: she cried, “Look at me O Muhammad, and let me
speak to you,” but I paid no notice to her and was proceeding, when
suddenly such a frightful noise assailed my ears as filled me with
terror. Jibraeel now directed me to alight and perform prayers, saying,
“this is the sacred place, Medina, to which you will flee.” Having
mounted and gone some distance he again directed me to alight and pray,
observing, “This is mount Sina where the Almighty Allah spoke with
Musa.”

After mounting and proceeding a little, he again told me to alight and
pray, saying “This is Bait-e-Najam (Bethlehem), where Isa was born.” He
then took me to Baitul Maqdas and bound Burraq with a chain to which the
ancient prophets tied their animals, and I entered the Masjid with
Jibraeel on my right. There I saw Ibrahim, Musa and Isa, with a
multitude of prophets who were assembled on my account.

Jibraeel pronounced the Azan, stationed me in advance of the rest, and
all the prophets in a rank performed prayers behind me. The treasurer of
Baitul Maqdas brought me three vessels: one of milk, one of wine and one
of water. I heard a voice say, “If he takes the water, he and his
community will be drowned; if he takes the wine, they will wander from
the right way; but if he takes the milk, he and his community will find
religious direction.”

I took the bowl of milk and drank it. “You have found guidance,” said
Jibraeel, “and your community also.” “But what did you notice on the
way?” he inquired. On telling him he remarked that the voice I heard on
my right was of a seducing Jew, whom if I had answered, my community
would have become Jews.

The voice on my left was a Christian lure, a reply to which would have
made my community Christians and the woman that strove in vain to
fascinate me, was the world: if I had spoken to her, my community would
have preferred this world to the future. Jibraeel said moreover, that
the terrific noise I heard was the sound of a rock I hurled from the
verge of Hell, seventy years before, and which struck the bottom of the
abyss that night. After this dreadful indication of the depth of future
woe, the Prophet never laughed.

“Jibraeel now conducted me,” said the Prophet, “to the first heaven.
There I saw Ismail, the angelic regent of that place, and lord of the
meteors with which every Satan is repelled from the celestial mansions
as the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا مَنْ خَطِفَ الْخَطْفَةَ فَأَتْبَعَهُ شِهَابٌ ثَاقِبٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Except him who snatches off but once, then there follows him a
brightly shining flame.”***[^33]

Under the orders of Ismail are seventy thousand angelic officers, each
of whom commands a division of seventy thousand angels. “Who is this
with you?” asked Ismail to Jibraeel. “The Prophet,” replied my
conductor. “Has he appeared?” “Yes,” said my guide. Ismail then opened
the gate of heaven, and we exchanged salutations, and mutually implored
divine blessings on each other, and he said, “Hail and welcome! my
worthy brother, and worthy Prophet.”

The angels advanced to meet me, and all that saw me laughed for joy. And
I entered the first heaven. At length I met an angel more gigantic than
I had ever seen before, with an ugly look and signs of wrath in his
countenance. He like the rest prayed for my benediction, but did not
smile like them. I inquired of Jibraeel who he was, for I was afraid of
him. “You have cause to fear him,” replied my conductor “we all stand in
awe of him.

He is the overseer of Hell, and has never smiled since the omnipotent
Lord made him ruler of that dreadful world. His wrath against the
enemies of God, and against sinners violating the divine law, is
continually increasing; and by him Allah will take vengeance on them. If
he has smiled on any one it had been on you, but he never smiles.”
However I exchanged salutations with him and he congratulated me about
Paradise.

As Jibraeel was the ruler of the angels, I asked him if he would not
command this angel, Malik, to show me Hell. Accordingly he removed a
curtain and opened a door of Hell, when suddenly a flame blazed forth
which I feared would envelop me, and I asked Jibraeel to order him to
quell the flame and shut the door. Malik ordered it to return to Hell
and it obeyed his command.

Passing from there, I saw a very large man, of a wheaten complexion, and
inquiring who he was, Jibraeel said, “This is your father, Adam.”
Suddenly I saw this his sons were brought to him. They used to say that
they are nice flowers and they are fragrant breeze that has ensued from
a better body. His Eminence, recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْأَبْرَارِ لَفِي عِلِّيِّينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! Most surely the record of the righteous shall be in the
Iliyin.”***[^34]

We exchanged salutations and implored blessings on each other, and he
bade me hail and welcome, as a worthy son and Prophet sent in a worthy
time. Proceeding on, I came to an angel seated in a company of angels.
He held the world between his knees, and a tablet of light in his hand.
Something was written on the tablet, on which he looked with steady gaze
of a melancholy man.

On inquiring who he was, Jibraeel said, “This is the angel of death; he
is incessantly occupied in taking away life.” After being introduced by
my conductor as the Prophet of mercy, I exchanged salutations with him,
and he bade me hail and welcome, saying that my community was good. I
replied by expressing thanks to Allah.

Jibraeel now remarked, “This angel’s work is greater and more severe
than that of any other angel.” I inquired if he alone took away the
spirit of all. “Yes,” said Jibraeel. I then asked the angel of death if
he saw and approached every individual. “Yes,” he replied, the world
over which Allah has given me an office is no more in my hand than a
dirham.

There is not a house whose inmates I do not observe one by one five
times a day. When relatives weep the departure of a friend, I say to
them, weep not for him, for I must visit you again and again till none
of you are left. I remarked, “Death is enough to cause grief and
overwhelming sorrow.” “That which follows death, added Jibraeel, is far
more dreadful than dying.”

Passing from there, I came to a company seated at tables laden with the
daintiest viands, and with the most putrid flesh, which they devoured
without tasting that which was delicious. “Who are these?” I inquired.
“They are those of your community,” said Jibraeel, “that eat forbidden
things in preference to that which is lawful.”

Next I saw an angel whom Allah had created of immense size. Half his
body was fire, and half was snow: the fire did not melt the snow, nor
the snow quench fire. He cried with a loud voice, “I ascribe holiness to
the Lord, who preserves the entire conflicting elements of my being: O
Lord, who has united snow to fire, impart unity to the hearts of those
that believe in You.”

On inquiring who he has, Jibraeel said, “This is the most benevolent
angel of Allah towards true believers, and from the day of his creation
till now he has uttered this prayer for the objects of his good will.” I
saw two other angels, one of whom cried, “O Lord, whoever gives in your
cause, do you reward him;” and the other cried, “O Lord, whoever is
misery and gives not in your cause, do You destroy his property.”

Proceeding from there, I saw several companies that had lips like a
camel; and angels cut the flesh off their sides with scissors and threw
it in their mouths, forcing them to eat it. At my inquiry, Jibraeel
said, “These derided believers, and sought out their faults.” Next I saw
a party beating their heads with stones. “These,” said my conductor,
“went to sleep without performing the prayers.”

Next I saw a company into whose mouths angels were pouring fire, which
passed the natural way through their bodies. They had unrighteously
devoured the property of orphans, and it is declared in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ أَمْوَالَ الْيَتَامَىٰ ظُلْمًا إِنَّمَا
يَأْكُلُونَ فِي بُطُونِهِمْ نَارًا ۖ وَسَيَصْلَوْنَ سَعِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(As for) those who swallow the property of the orphans unjustly,
surely they only swallow fire into their bellies and they shall enter
burning fire.”***[^35]

Then I passed a crowd of people who could not rise on account of their
huge stomachs. These were usurers, that in the Qur’an are compared to
the people of Firon, dreading the wrath to come: “They shall be exposed
to the fire of Hell morning and evening; and the day whereon the hour of
judgment shall come, it shall be said unto them, Enter, O people of
Firon, into a most severe torment.”

Passing from there, I saw a party of women suspended by their breasts.
These had committed adultery, and attributed their illicit offspring
upon their husbands, and secured them an inheritance in their husbands’
property. At this the Prophet remarked, “Terrible is the wrath of Allah
against the woman guilty of such crimes.”

I then beheld a number of angels, whom the Lord of the universe had
formed as it had pleased Him, and placed their faces in whatever
position He chose. All their members uttered praises to the Almighty
Allah, in all manner of voices, and they wept through fear of God. Said
Jibraeel, “These were created in the form you see, and since their
creation they have not spoken to each other, nor raised their heads, nor
looked under their feet, such is their awe, humility and fear of the
Holy and Divine.”

They returned my salutation only by a sign. Jibraeel then informed them
that I was Muhammad, the Prophet of mercy, the last and best of the
prophets, and inquired if they would not speak to me. They then saluted
and honored me, and congratulated me on the goodness bestowed on me and
my community.

Jibraeel now conducted me to the second heaven, where I saw two persons
much resembling each other. “Who are these?” I inquired, Jibraeel
replied, “They are two cousins, Yahya and Isa.” We exchanged salutations
and mutually implored blessings on each other, and they bade me hail and
welcome, worthy brother and Prophet! In this heaven I saw angels
inspired with awe, whose faces were turned in the direction God had
commanded, and they looked to no other quarter.

In various voices they uttered praise and ascribed holiness to the
Almighty Allah. I now ascended the third heaven, and saw there a man
exceeding all others in beauty as much as the full moon excels the
stars. Jibraeel said to me, “This is your brother, Yusuf.” We saluted
each other, mutually invoking blessings.

Here again I saw angels filled with awe, like those I had seen in the
heaven below. And Jibraeel told them the same thing about me that he had
said to the angels on the lower heaven and they also replied in the same
way. On ascending the fourth heaven, I met a man who, Jibraeel informed
me, was Idris whom God transported on high, according to a declaration
in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَفَعْنَاهُ مَكَانًا عَلِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We raised him high in Heaven.”***[^36]

We saluted each other, mutually imploring blessings. Here too were
angels inspired with awe, who pronounced congratulations on me and my
community. In this heaven, I saw an archangel seated on a throne, under
whose orders were seventy thousand angelic officers, each commanding a
company of seventy thousand angels. I thought there was no angel greater
than this. Presently Jibraeel bade him rise, which he did, and he will
remain standing till Judgment Day.

Ascending the fifth heaven, I saw an old man with large eyes, greater
than whom I had not seen. I marveled at the multitude of his community
that were around him. “This,” said Jibraeel, “is the Prophet whose
community loved him – Danial. Then I saw another person and asked who he
was. I was told that he was Harun, the son of Imran.

I saluted him also. Here, likewise were angels of awe. Proceeding up to
the sixth heaven, I saw a tall man of wheaten complexion and very long
hair. I heard him say, “the Bani Israel think me the dearest with the
Almighty Allah, but this man, - meaning myself, - is dearer than I am.”
Being informed he was Musa, the son of Imran, we exchanged salutations
and the imploring of blessings.

In this heaven also were angels of awe. When I ascended the seventh
heaven and every angel I passed said to me, “Practice cupping (blood
letting), and command your community to do the same.” Presently I saw a
man whose hair and beard were white, and he was seated on a throne. I
inquired, who is this in the seventh heaven, in the neighborhood of the
divine presence, at the door of Baitul Mamoor? “This” replied Jibraeel,
is your father, “Ibrahim, and this is the region for the pure of your
community.” In relating this, the Prophet here recited the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ لَلَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ وَهٰذَا
النَّبِيُّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ۗ وَاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely the nearest of people to Ibrahim are those who followed
him and this Prophet and those who believe and Allah is the guardian of
the believers.”***[^37]

We exchanged salutations, and he hailed me a worthy son and Prophet.
There I saw angels of awe, as in the other havens, who pronounced
congratulations upon me and my community. In the seventh heaven, I saw
seas of glittering light whose effulgence dazzled the eyes; I also saw
seas of darkness, and seas of snow.

When overcome by fear at the sight of these sublime wonders, Jibraeel
bade me rejoice and render thanks to Allah, Who held me so dear as to
confer on me such favors. The Almighty Allah then imparted to me power
to survey those wonders, and understand those mysteries. While lost in
admiration, Jibraeel said to me, “Are these things wonderful in your
eyes? the greatness of your Lord, beyond compare, exceeds all you
behold.

Verily, between the Almighty Allah and His intelligent creation are
ninety thousand curtains, or material divisions, which separate Him from
the place whence divine communications proceed. Myself and Israfeel
enjoy the nearest approach, and between us are four divisions, one of
light, another of darkness, the third of cloud, and the fourth of
water.”

Among the number of divine wonders that met my eyes was a cock that
stood on the foundation of the seventh or lowest earth, and his head
reached the empyrean. He had two wings, which when expanded,
outstretched the limits of the east and west, and his note of praise was
“Holy is my lord, ineffably exalted.” Every morning this cock expands
and beats his wings and calls aloud in praise, proclaiming, “Holy is the
King of Holiness; holy is the Lord of greatness and bounty; there is no
God but the Living and Eternal.”

When this morning call resounds, all the cocks on earth clap their wings
and utter praises to the Almighty Allah; and when their angelic leader
is silent, they become quiet. The wings of that empyrean cock are white,
the feathers under his wings are green, and the beautiful effect of
these colors is indescribable.

Attended by Jibraeel, I now entered Baitul Mamoor, and performed two
rakats of prayer. There I beheld a company of my followers clothed in
white garments, and a crowd clothed in old soiled garments. Those
beautifully arrayed were admitted into the mosque, but the others were
inhibited. On coming out, I saw two rivers, one called Kauthar, and the
other named the river of mercy.

I drank from the water of Kauthar and bathed in the stream of mercy. The
road to Paradise led me along these rivers, on whose banks I saw palaces
for myself and family, and for my pure women. The soil of Paradise is
musk. Seeing a girl swimming in the rivers of Paradise, I inquired who
she was. She replied, “I am the daughter of Zaid bin Haritha.” On
returning to earth, I congratulated Zaid on his future bliss with that
celestial nymph.

In that happy region, I beheld birds equaling in size the largest camel,
whose beaks were as large as a great bucket. I saw a tree in Paradise so
immense that a bird could not fly around its trunk in seven hundred
years, and its branches extended to every house in that blissful abode.
“What tree is this?” I inquired. Jibraeel replied, “This is Tuba,
concerning which Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوبٰى لَهُمْ وَحُسْنُ مَآبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Tuba shall be theirs and a goodly return.”***[^38]  
 The Messenger of Allah (S) says: After entering Paradise, my fear was
dispelled and I inquired of Jibraeel what those seas were I had seen in
the seventh heaven. He replied, “They are curtains stopping the light of
the empyrean or it would burn everything under it.” I passed on to
Sidratul Muntaha, every leaf of which could shade a great community.
From this point, I advanced within a bow’s length, or nearer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So he was the measure of two bows or closer still.”***[^39]  
 …the divine presence of my Lord, Who addressed me, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ رَبِّهٖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The apostle believed what was sent him from his Lord.”*** [^40]  
 I answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ ۚ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ
وَرُسُلِهِ لَا نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِنْ رُسُلِهٖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and (so do) the believers; they all believe in Allah and His angels
and His books and His apostles; We make no difference between any of His
apostles…”***[^41]

I then added:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا سَمِعْنَا وَأَطَعْنَا ۖ غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ
الْمَصِيرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“and they say: We hear and obey, our Lord! Thy forgiveness (do we
crave), and to Thee is the eventual course.”***  
[^42]  
 The Almighty Allah said:

لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا

 ۚ

لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ

 

***“Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent of its
ability; for it is (the benefit of) what it has earned and upon it (the
evil of) what it has wrought:”***[^43]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا لَا تُؤَاخِذْنَا إِنْ نَسِينَا أَوْ أَخْطَأْنَا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord! Do not punish us if we forget or make a mistake…”***[^44]

So the Almighty Allah said that He would not account us of mistakes.
Then I said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَلَا تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَا إِصْرًا كَمَا حَمَلْتَهُ عَلَى
الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِنَا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord! do not lay on us a burden as You didst lay on those before
us…”***[^45]

The Lord accepted that also. Then I said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَلَا تُحَمِّلْنَا مَا لَا طَاقَةَ لَنَا بِهِ ۖ وَاعْفُ
عَنَّا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا ۚ أَنْتَ مَوْلَانَا فَانْصُرْنَا
عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord do not impose upon us that which we have not the strength
to bear; and pardon us and grant us protection and have mercy on us, You
are our Patron, so help us against the unbelieving people.”***[^46]

The Almighty Allah replied, I grant all your requests on behalf of
yourself and community. Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says: The Almighty
Allah did not honor and exalt any prophet as He honored the Messenger of
Allah (S) and the Holy Prophet (S) said: O Lord, You didst impart
peculiar excellencies to your prophets, therefore bestow such a favor on
me.

The Almighty Allah answered: Of the things I grant you are these two
expressions from my empyrean treasury, namely, ‘There is no power and
strength except by Allah’, and ‘there no refuge for except Him’. The
Messenger of Allah (S) says: The carriers of the divine empyrean taught
me a supplication which I recite every morning and night and it is as
follows:

“O Allah, my injustice is in the refuge of Your forgiveness. And my sin
is in the refuge of Your clemency and my degradation is in the refuge of
Your honor. And my poverty is in the refuge of Your needlessness. And my
condition and lowliness is in the refuge of Your power which is eternal,
having no end.”

His Eminence, said: I now heard an angel, who never before had been
seen, proclaiming the Azan. After he had twice recited, Allah is the
greatest! The Almighty Allah said: My faithful servant declares truly
that I am greater than created minds can comprehend. When he said: I
testify that there is no god but Allah, the Almighty Allah said: My
servant speaks truth in the declaration, there is no Lord but Me.

When he had twice said: I testify that Muhammad is Messenger of Allah
(S), the Almighty Allah added: True says my angel, Muhammad is My
servant and messenger; I have sent him and chosen him. When the crier
pronounced: Hasten to prayers, the Almighty Allah declared: True says My
servant; he calls men to a religious duty, and whoever from earnest
desire endeavors to be present and to please Me, this is an atonement
for his sins.

When the angel cried: Hasten to prosperity, the omnipotent Lord said:
Prayer is the means of worthiness and prosperity and salvation. I then
performed prayers, standing in advance of the angels, who were arrayed
behind me as the prophets had been at Baitul Maqdas. When prayers were
finished, the effulgence of the love of Allah encompassed me and I fell
in adoration.

The Almighty Allah called to me and said: I made fifty prayers daily
obligatory on every community before you, and enjoin the same number on
you and your followers. On my return through the heavens, Ibrahim and
the other prophets made no inquiry of me concerning this matter, but
when I came to Musa (a.s.), at his inquiry, I told him: The Almighty
Allah had made fifty prayers obligatory on me and my community.

He replied: “The Lord has no need of your religious services; your
community is the last and weakest of all, and unable to perform fifty
prayers a day: return to your Lord, and implore Him to lighten the
burden of your community.” Accordingly, I returned to Sidratul Muntaha,
where I fell in adoration and said: O Lord, you have made fifty prayers
obligatory on me and my community; the duty is hard for us to perform;
for the sake of your own exaltation, lighten the burden.

The Almighty Allah then remitted ten prayers, but on meeting Musa (a.s.)
again he sent me back to intercede that Allah would still farther
diminish the number, when another ten were cancelled; but Musa (a.s.),
not yet content, sent me back again, to beseech more abatement, and thus
the number of obligatory prayers was at last reduced to five.

Musa not satisfied even now, told me to return and implore a still
further discount, but I replied that I was ashamed to intercede for
another discount, for we could well endure the burden of five daily
prayers. Immediately a voice from the Almighty Allah announced: Since
you are patient in the performance of five prayers, I will grant you the
benefit of the whole fifty, and will accept one prayer as equivalent to
ten.

Whoever of your community performs a good act, I will give him credit
for ten, and if he purposes to do it, and fails, I will still write for
him a single reward due to such an act. Whoever, on the other hand,
resolves to commit a sin and does it not, I will record nothing against
him; and if he is guilty of the act, I will only write against him the
single sin itself. Regarding this, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) adds: May
Allah give Musa bin Imran (a.s.) a good reward for this interest in the
Muslims in lightening their burdens.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators that
Zaid, a son of Imam Zainul Abideen, asked his father why his illustrious
ancestor, the Prophet, in his ascension did not himself beseech
reduction of the fifty prayers enjoined on him by the Almighty Allah.
The Imam replied that the Prophet thought it against courtesy to decline
what Allah commanded, but when a prophet of Musa’s exalted rank advised
him to return and request for a discount, one could not in civility
refuse.

“But if Musa was not satisfied when the number of prayers was reduced to
five; why did not the Prophet go back again and entreat for further
discount?” “Because,” said the Imam, “while he wished to ease his
community, he was anxious not to lessen their reward, desirous that they
should still enjoy the benefit of fifty prayers, which benefit they
would have lost had the prayers been reduced to a lesser number, for the
Almighty Allah declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن جَاء بِالْحَسَنَةِ فَلَهٗ عَشْرُ أَمْثَالِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever brings a good deed, he shall have ten like it…”***[^47]

Thus when the Messenger of Allah (S) returned to the earth, Jibraeel
appeared and said: O Prophet, the Creator of the Universe greets you and
says that these five prayers are like fifty. Neither I change My
statements nor am unjust to the people.”

Through authentic chains of narrators, it is narrated that Abu Hamza
asked Imam Zainul Abideen: “Can Allah be said to have a place, and has
He a local residence?” The Imam replied, “Allah is too exalted and holy
to be restricted to place.” “Why” then replied Abu Hamza, “did He
transport His Prophet to heaven?” “To show him the wonders of the
heavens,” answered the Imam, “and to unfold to his view the marvels of
His works and the mysteries of His creation.” “What then,” continued the
inquirer, “is the meaning of the passage which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ دَنَا فَتَدَلّٰى فَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then he drew near, then he bowed. So he was the measure of two bows
or closer still.”***[^48]

“The Prophet,” said the Imam, “was thus near the curtains of divine
light, whence he surveyed the kingdom of the heavens, and suspended
over, looked down on earth, seeing the whole kingdom of this world so
distinctly that he thought himself to be at a distance of less than the
two ends of the bows or less.”

It is narrated through correct chains that Yunus asked Imam Musa Kazim
(a.s.) why the Almighty Allah transported His Prophet to heaven, thence
to Sidratul Muntaha, and thence to the curtains of light, and revealed
mysteries to him, when He had no peculiar place, he replied, “The Lord
of the universe has no local residence: to His presence all places are
the same, and time has neither past or future.

But he willed, by the visit of the Prophet, to ennoble the angels and
inhabitants of heaven by their beholding the incomparable perfection of
that star of the constellation of glory, and to show him the wonders of
His own divine greatness, some parts of which the Prophet might relate
to men on his return to earth for the increase of their faith. The
reason of his being borne to heaven was not that Allah is only present
there, as the doubters say.

Ibn Babawayh and Ahmad bin Abi Talib Tabarsi have related through
reliable chains from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) and Ibn Abbas that the Prophet
declared: Allah made Burraq obedient to me, which is better than the
possession of the world. Burraq is an animal of Paradise, of medium
height, with a human face, and hooves like horses, and a tail like an
ox, and is in size larger than an ass, and smaller than a mule.

Its saddle is ruby, with stirrups of pearl, and he has seventy thousand
gold bridles. Its pair of wings are set with jewels, and adorned with
pearls, rubies, emeralds and various other precious gems. On its
forehead is inscribed: There is no god but Allah, who has no associate,
and Muhammad is Messenger of Allah (S). His color is the most beautiful
of all animals, and if Allah permitted him, he would circuit this world
and the next in one step.

Another tradition from Ibn Babawayh says that the Prophet declared: I
shall be mounted on Burraq at Judgment Day. His face is human, his form
like that of a horse. His mane is of pearls, his ears are emeralds, his
eyes sparkle like Venus, and his body is radiant like the sun; from his
breast, pearls are exuded in perspiration, its limbs are long and he is
possessed of reason like mortals. And it is narrated from Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) that Burraq is Abu Hilal and Kulaini has narrated
through authentic chains of narrators from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that Jibraeel brought the Burraq for the Holy Prophet (S) which was
bigger than a donkey and smaller than a mule.

Its ears were in constant motion and it covered the distance within its
sight in one step. When it climbed the mountain its forelimbs reduced in
size and its legs lengthened and when it descended to lower altitude,
its legs reduced in size and the forelimbs prolonged. It was having long
and thick hair that hung to its right. It had a pair of wings behind the
head.

Kulaini and Ibn Babawayh have narrated through authentic chains from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when the Almighty Allah took the Messenger
of Allah (S) to the seven heavens, in the first heaven, the Almighty
Allah sent a blessing on the Prophet, and in the second heaven taught
him all things obligatory, and in the third heaven sent for him a litter
of forty different colored lights which surround the divine empyrean,
and whose effulgence eyes cannot sustain.

One of their lights is yellow which is the source of all yellow colors;
one is crimson, which is the source of all crimson and one is white, the
source of all whites. In the same way are other lights. That litter had
silver chains. The Prophet was seated in it and taken to heavens when
angels saw they fell in adoration, and uttered praises:

*Subboohun Quddoos. Rabbona wa rabbul malaikate war rooh.*  
*Glorified be the Holy One. Our Lord and the Lord of the angels and
spirit.*

How similar is this effulgence to the effulgence of the empyrean of the
Lord. Jibraeel said: Allahu Akbar. Allahu Akbar. The angels fell silent
and the gates of heavens opened till on Jibraeel’s announcing the
Prophet to them, they flew with the utmost alacrity to salute him. They
asked how his brother, Ali was to which he replied that he was in
health. Angels said: When you meet him, convey our greetings to him.

The Holy Prophet (S) asked: “Do you know him?” “How can we not know him,
when the Almighty Allah has taken confession of your prophethood and his
Imamate. We always continue to invoke blessings on you and him. The
Almighty Allah decorated the litter further with more lights on the
first heaven and none of these resembles the previous lights. And He
also added to them many more links.

From there the Holy Prophet (S) was taken to the second heaven. When he
reached the door, the angels flew away and fell in adoration reciting
the same recitation of: *Subboohun Quddoos. Rabbona wa rabbul malaikate
war rooh.* Whereas Jibraeel said: I testify that there is no god except
Allah, twice. The angels heard him and they opened the gates of heavens
and asked him who this gentleman is.

Jibraeel said that he is Muhammad (S). They asked if he has appeared to
which he replied in the affirmative. The angels saluted me and said:
“Convey our greetings to your, brother, Ali also.” I asked: “Do you know
him?” “How can we not know him when the Almighty Allah has taken the
covenant of love for him and his followers (Shia) till Judgment Day.

And all of us everyday ask of the well being of his Shia and we see them
five times a day, that is at the time of prayers. After that the
Almighty Allah added forty types of radiances to the previous ones that
were different from the former ones and He increased the rings and
links. The Holy Prophet (S) says that when I was taken to the sixth
heaven, the angels of that place flew to the seventh heaven. And said:
*Subboohun Quddoos. Rabbona wa rabbul malaikate war rooh.*

Whereas Jibraeel said: I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah. When the angels heard this testimony, they came running to me and
opened the gates of the heavens and said: Welcome, O the first Prophet
whom the Lord created and whom He decreed to be the greatest. And the
Prophet of the last period of time whom the Almighty Allah sent after
all the prophets and the Hashir (account taking) Prophet in whose time,
Judgment Day will be held and Nashir Prophet who will spread knowledge,
good deeds and perfections among the creatures.

That is he is the seal of the prophets. And Hail Ali who is the best of
the legatees. After that the angels greeted me and inquired about the
well being of Ali (a.s.). I said: I have left him as my representative
on the earth. Do you know him? They said: Once a year we go for the Hajj
of Baitul Mamoor and in it is written your name and that of Ali and
Hasan and Husain and the Imams from his progeny and the names of all the
Shia who will appear till Judgment Day.

We always draw our hand on that documents in order to seek blessings
from it. After that the Almighty Allah added forty types of radiances to
the previous ones that were different from the former ones and He
increased the rings and links. And I was taken to the fourth heaven. I
heard muffled sound of angels as if their voices were caught in their
chests. The gates of the heavens were promptly opened and angels
gathered around me.

Jibraeel said: Hasten to prayers twice and Hasten to deliverance twice.
Angels remarked: Two voices are joined together. Through Muhammad (S) we
will pray and through Ali (a.s.) would we obtain deliverance. Then
Jibraeel (a.s.) said: The prayer is established. The angels said: It is
for the followers (Shia) of Ali as they will continue to establish
prayer till Judgment Day as it deserves to be established.

Then the angels asked me where and in what condition have I left Ali
(a.s.). I asked them: Do you know him? “Why not? There is a book in
Baitul Mamoor in which are mentioned the names of Muhammad, Ali and
Hasan and Husain and their Shia, in which not a single name will be
added or subtracted. And it is a covenant that is taken from us. It is
recited to us every Friday. I prostrated in thankfulness and I was
addressed by the Almighty Allah: Look beneath your feet. I saw that the
Holy Kaaba was below Baitul Mamoor.

If I had dropped anything, it would have fallen in Kaaba. Then a voice
came: O Muhammad, this is a Holy sanctuary and you are the Holy Prophet
and whatever is present in the earth has a facsimile in heaven. The Lord
then commanded me to open my hand, and take of the water flowing from
the right pillar of the empyrean, which I did; and for this reason it
became meritorious to take up the water for ablution with the right
hand.

A voice then commanded: Wash your face with this water, that you may
become pure to behold the light of My majesty and glory; then wash your
hands to the elbow, for you will take my word, and draw your wet hands
over your feet to the ankles, and over your head, which last act
signifies that I will draw the hand of mercy over your head, and send
down my blessing on you. Drawing the hand over the foot is because I
will carry you up through several regions where foot has never trod, nor
will again after you.

Thus was the mode of prayer and ablution established. The Almighty Allah
then commanded: O Muhammad, turn to the black stone which is before you,
and extol Me according to the number of curtains by saying, Allah is the
greatest! And on this account, seven repetitions of this exclamation
were ordained for prayer, because the curtains were seven. Each time he
passed a curtain, he said, Allah is the greatest! After passing three
curtains he came to the oceans of light of the Lord of forgiveness, and
on repeating the Takbir he passed two more curtains, and came to another
sea of light.

When the last two Takbirs were pronounced, he passed the sixth and seven
curtains, and came to still other oceans of light. Therefore it was
ordained that three consecutive Takbirs should be pronounced, after
which a prayer should be recited, then two more Takbirs and another
prayer, next the last two Takbirs, closing with a prayer of steadfast
looking to Allah after the example of the Prophet.

He passed the seven heavens and seven curtains of exaltation and glory,
and arrived near the place of communion with the merciful Lord of glory;
and prayer is the celestial ascent (Meraj) of the believer. When the
perfect believer thus ascends and recites the seven Takbirs, the
curtains of darkness, which on account of errors of worldly inclination
come between him and the Almighty Allah, are removed and he approaches
near the Lord of Lords.

The Lord then commanded the Prophet, Now you have arrived at this place
of near intercourse with me, pronounce My name. Accordingly the Prophet
said, In the name of God the compassionate, the merciful! For which
reason this phrase was established to commence chapters and writings.
Being commanded to offer praise, he said, Thanks to Allah the Lord of
the universe, and proceeded in this manner till he recited the whole
Surah commencing with, “Praise be to God, the Lord of creatures.”

A voice then commanded him to recite the Surah on divine unity, saying:
That Surah is a description of my praise and attributes. What likeness
can exist between me and my creatures? After I had recited this Surah,
“Say, God is one God; he begets not, neither is he begotten; and there
is not any like unto him.” the voice said, Bow before My exaltation, and
put your hands on your knees and look towards My empyrean.

On doing this, light from the effulgence of the glory of Allah
overpowered me, and I fell into a swoon and by divine inspiration said:
Praise and thanksgiving to the God of glory. In purity I name the Lord
of exaltation, and am employed in His praise. After repeating this I
soon recovered and the terror of my spirit subsided when by divine
inspiration I had seven times pronounced this ascription of praise.

On this account, it was ordained that this expression of praise should,
in the performance of prayer, be recited in the bowing (Ruku) position.
I was then commanded me to raise my head and stand erect, on which I
heard the voices of the angels uttering praises and ascribing unity and
thanksgiving to Allah.

I said: Allah hears everyone that utters His praises. I looked up and
saw a light more intense than that which before caused me to swoon, and
this made the bird of my reason fly away, and my terror was greater than
in the former instance. From awe, I fell prostrate before the king, the
Lord of glory, and placed my face in the dust of humility, and on
account of the exaltation I witnessed, seven times repeated, by divine
inspiration, Glory and praise to the exalted Lord.

At each repetition of this ascription, my terror diminished, till I
recovered from that state of overwhelming awe, and attained to perfect
knowledge of God. I then raised my head from prostration, and sat till
relieved from the condition of amazement into which I had fallen. By
divine inspiration, I again looked upward, and saw light more
overpowering still than I had before witnessed, and again fell
involuntarily in prostration before the Lord of vengeance, and seven
times more repeated. Glory and praise to God.

Becoming thereby more worthy to behold the divine lights, I again raised
my head, and sat for a little time, and looked towards them. For this
reason two prostrations in prayer were established, and sitting a short
time after them became meritorious (Sunnat). I then arose and stood like
a servant before my Lord, when He commanded me to recite again the Surah
Hamd, and afterwards Surah Qadr.

Again I stooped with my hands on my knees, and prostrated myself with my
head on the ground, as at first, and as I was about to rise, the
Almighty Allah commanded, mention My favors to you and pronounce My
name. By divine inspiration, I said in the name of Allah and by him:
there is no god but Allah, and all perfect names belong to Allah. When I
had repeated the two testimonies commanded, pronounce blessings on
yourself and your family.

I prayed, O Lord, impart mercy to me and to my family; which was
answered with blessings from the Almighty Allah. On looking around I
beheld the angels and spirits of the prophets arrayed in ranks behind
me, and the Almighty Allah commanding me to salute them, I said peace be
upon you and the mercy and blessing of God.

The Almighty Allah then addressed me, saying, I am your peace, mercy and
blessing, and of the Imams after you. As the prayer of Meraj consisted
of two rakats, there should be no doubt in regard to the number now;
that it was the first two units of Noon prayer and the first obligatory
prayer on the Prophet.

Shaykh Karajili has related that the Prophet declared that on the night
of ascension the Almighty Allah commanded me to inquire of the past
prophets for what were they commanded, and they all testified, we were
raised up to confess to your prophetical office, and the imamate of Ali
bin Abi Talib, and of the Imams of your posterity A divine voice then
commanded, look on the right side of the empyrean.

I looked and saw the similitude of Ali, Hasan, Husain, Ali Ibnul Husain,
Muhammad Baqir, Ja’far Sadiq, Musa Kazim, Ali bin Musa Reza, Muhammad
Taqi, Ali Naqi, Hasan Askari and Mahdi, all performing prayers in a sea
of light. “These” said the Almighty Allah, “are My proofs, vicegerents
and friends, and the last of them, Mahdi, will take vengeance on My
enemies.”

It is narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Ibn Abbas that
the Prophet stated that when he went to Meraj, the angels inquired so
particularly about Ali that he began to conclude Ali was better known in
heaven than himself, “when I arrived,” he continued “at the fourth
heaven, I saw the angel of death, who said that it was his office to
take the soul of every creature except mine and Ali’s;” “Your spirits,”
said he, “the Almighty Allah will Himself take away, by the hand of His
power.”

When I came under the empyrean, I saw Ali bin Abi Talib standing there,
and said to him, “O Ali, have you got here before me?” “Whom are you
addressing?” said Jibraeel. “My brother Ali,” said I, but Jibraeel said:
“O Muhammad, this is not Ali, it is an angel of the merciful God, whom
He created in the likeness of Ali; and when those of us privileged to
approach near the Deity wish to behold Ali, we visit this angel.”

Shaykh Hasan bin Sulaiman has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said: When I went to Meraj and reached the levels of ‘two bow lengths or
lesser’ I saw the facsimile of Ali. The Almighty Allah asked me if I
recognized that face and I said: “It is the face of Ali.” The Almighty
Allah revealed to me: “Give the hand of Fatima in marriage to Ali and
appoint him as your Caliph.”

In Ibn Babawayh’s *Meraj* it is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.), that when the Holy Prophet (S) performed ascension, he was
seated on a throne of ruby, inlaid with emerald figures. Angels
transported the throne to heaven where Jibraeel directed the Prophet to
recite the Azan, which he did, the angels repeating it after him.

They then inquired after his successor Ali. “I left him,” said the
Prophet, “in my own place among my people.” They replied, “You have left
a good Caliph. Verily, Allah has made it obligatory on us to obey him.”
The Prophet was then carried up through the heavens, the angels of each
of those blessed abodes making the same inquiries and receiving the same
answers as those of the first heaven.

In the seventh heaven he met Isa, who saluted him and inquired about
Ali. “I have put him,” said the Prophet, “in my own place among my
community.” Isa replied: “You have chosen a good Caliph, obedience to
whom Allah has made obligatory on the angels.” He then met Musa and all
the prophets, all of whom repeated the inquiries after Ali. “I then,”
said the Prophet, “asked the angels where my father Ibrahim was.”

They answered, “He is with the infant of Shias of Ali.” On entering
Paradise, I saw Ibrahim seated under a tree, which had fruits like
udders, and each of the infants had a teat in its mouth. Whenever a teat
fell out of the mouth of an infant, Ibrahim arose and replaced it.

I exchanged salutations with Ibrahim, who likewise inquired after the
health of Ali bin Abi Talib, and repeated that the obedience of the
angels was due him. Ibrahim said that he had besought the Lord to give
him the office he enjoyed of training up the infant Shias, and that
every taste from those droughts imparted to them the flavor of all the
fruits and rivers of Paradise.

In the same way, in the same book it is narrated from Jabir bin Abdullah
Ansari that when on night of Meraj I was taken to the seventh heaven, I
found inscribed on every door: There is no god except Allah, Muhammad is
the messenger of Allah, Ali Ibn Abi Talib is Amirul Momineen. When I
reached to the curtains of light, I found the same formula inscribed on
each curtain and when I reached to the empyrean, I found the same
inscribed on that also.

In that same book, it is quoted from Amash that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: When during Meraj I reached
the fifth heaven, I saw the face of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). I asked
Jibraeel about it and he said that angels had expressed a desire to see
the face of Ali (a.s.) so they prayed: O Lord, everyday human beings
look at Ali, the Caliph and successor of Prophet Muhammad, so please
grant the same opportunity to us also.

So the Almighty Allah created a similitude of Ali in the heavens by His
divine light. Then Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: When Ali was martyred
by Ibn Muljim, his celestial likeness appeared wounded also, wherefore
the angels visiting that similitude morning and evening, curse the
assassin.

When the Imam Husain (a.s.) was martyred, the angels carried him to the
fifth heaven, where all passing upward and downward beheld him stained
with blood, and poured their imprecations on Yazid and Ibn Ziyad, and
all the murderers of that Imam and this will continue till Qiyamat.
Amash says that this tradition is from the secret sciences, so do not
mention it to anyone except one who is deserving of it.

It is mentioned in the same book that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:
When I went up to Meraj I did not hear any discourse better than that of
my Lord. I said: O Lord, You made Ibrahim (a.s.) Your Khalil and spoke
to him; raised Idris (a.s.) to a high position; bestowed Dawood (a.s.)
with Zabur; bestowed a kingdom to Sulaiman which is not deserved by
anyone; what will You bestow me?

The Almighty Allah said: O Muhammad, I have taken you as My beloved,
like I made Ibrahim (a.s.) as my Khalil (confidant) and I spoke to you
like I spoke to Musa; and I gave you the opening of the book and Surah
Baqarah to you which I did not bestow to any prophet; and appointed you
as a prophet for people of every stock and also on the Jinn kingdom; I
made the earth pure and a place of adoration for you and the people of
your Ummah, and legalized war booty for you and your Ummah and helped
you with such an awe which I put into the hearts of your enemies that
they tremble to a distance of two months’ journey; and I gave you the
best Book, which will testify all the heavenly scriptures and it is the
first and last collection. And I raised your name with My name in such a
way that wherever My name is uttered, your name is also recalled.

In the same book it is mentioned from Salman Farsi (r.a.) that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said: When I was taken up to the heavens during
Meraj on the first heaven I saw a silver palace in which two angels were
posted. I asked to whom that palace belonged and they told me that it
belonged to a youth of Bani Hashim.

Then I ascended the second heaven and there I saw a palace of gold which
was better than the first palace and two angels were posted here also. I
asked Jibraeel and he asked whose palace it was and we were told that it
belonged to a young man of Bani Hashim. On the third heaven I saw a
palace of red ruby which was again manned by a couple of angels. I asked
Jibraeel and we were told that it also belonged to a young man of Bani
Hashim.

On the fifth heaven, I saw a palace of yellow pearls guarded by a pair
of angels. On inquiring about it we were informed that it was owned by a
Bani Hashim youth. On the sixth heaven again we witnessed a palace of
green emeralds with a pair of angels acting as sentries and we were told
that it belonged to a young man of Bani Hashim.

I reached the seventh heaven and saw a palace of divine light. A couple
of angels stood at its gate and we were told that it belonged to a young
man of Bani Hashim. From there we ascended further and traversing oceans
of light and darkness reached till the Sidratul Muntaha. Jibraeel
stopped there leaving me to move on further.

I said: “You are leaving me alone at such a crucial point?” He replied:
“By the One Who has sent you with truth, the point crossed by you has
not been crossed by any messenger prophet or any privileged one and no
one has ever reached this point. I don’t have the power to go beyond it.
I entrust you to the Kind and Merciful Lord.

Thus I moved forward and oceans of lights and waves of divine majesty
continued to submerge me from light to darkness and from darkness to
light. Till the Beneficent Lord brought me to His celestial kingdom
where He wanted me to bring. A call ensued for me: O Ahmad, stand up in
My court.

When I heard the call of the Lord I began to tremble and lost control.
Then a voice came: The Powerful Lord sends you His greetings. I said:
Only He is safety and the safety is from Him and safety turns back to
Him only. Another voice same: O Ahmad! I said: Here I am my Lord and
master. I was told:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِن رَّبِّهٖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The apostle believes in what has been revealed to him from his
Lord…”***[^49]

I said to the divine inspiration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ ۚ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ
وَرُسُلِهِ ...غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and (so do) the believers; they all believe in Allah and His angels
and His books and His apostles…Thy forgiveness (do we crave), and to
Thee is the eventual course.”*** [^50]

The Almighty Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا ۚ لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ
وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent of its
ability; for it is (the benefit of) what it has earned and upon it (the
evil of) what it has wrought…”***[^51]

I said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا لَا تُؤَاخِذْنَا إِنْ نَسِينَا أَوْ أَخْطَأْنَا ۚ رَبَّنَا
وَلَا تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَا إِصْرًا كَمَا حَمَلْتَهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلِنَا ۚ رَبَّنَا وَلَا تُحَمِّلْنَا مَا لَا طَاقَةَ لَنَا بِهِ ۖ
وَاعْفُ عَنَّا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا ۚ أَنْتَ مَوْلَانَا
فَانْصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord! do not punish us if we forget or make a mistake; Our Lord!
do not lay on us a burden as Thou didst lay on those before us, Our Lord
do not impose upon us that which we have not the strength to bear; and
pardon us and grant us protection and have mercy on us, Thou art our
Patron, so help us against the unbelieving people.”*** [^52]

So the Almighty Allah said: I have given you and your Ummah whatever you
have asked. When I concluded this whispered conversation with the
Almighty Allah, I was asked whom I had appointed as my successor on the
earth. I said: I have appointed my cousin as my successor. Then for
seven times a voice came from celestial kingdom: O Ahmad, behave nicely
with Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and protect his sanctity.

Then I was told to look at the right side of the Arsh. I saw inscribed
on the right leg of the Arsh: There is no god except Me and I have no
associate and Muhammad (S) is My Messenger. And I have helped him
through Ali. O Ahmad, I have derived your name from My name. I am Mahmud
and Hamid and you are Muhammad.

And the name of your cousin is also derived from My name: I am Ali and
friend of Ali. O Abul Qasim, O the guiding one and the guided. Go back.
May your heavenly visit be blessed and what to say of you and one who
believes in you and testifies for you. Then I fell down in the ocean of
light and its waves brought me down. When I returned to Jibraeel at
Sidratul Muntaha, Jibraeel said: O my friend, may your heavenly sojourn
be blessed.

What did you say and what did you hear? I told him what was worth and
concealed whatever was worth concealing. Jibraeel asked: What was the
last call made to you? I said: I was told: O Abul Qasim, O guiding one
and guided. Jibraeel asked: Did you inquire why you were called by the
epithet of Abul Qasim? “No, O spirit of Allah.”

Suddenly a voice came from the High Celestial kingdom: “No, O Ahmad, I
have given you the Kunniyat of Abul Qasim because you will distribute My
favors among My creatures on Judgment Day. Jibraeel said: O my beloved,
good cheers of this gift from your Lord. By the one who sent you with
prophethood, the honor bestowed on you was not received by anyone else
before you. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: Then with Jibraeel (a.s.) I
came to the palace. Jibraeel told me ask who that Hashemite youth is.
“Your cousin, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.),” said the angels at every stage.

Kulaini (r.a.) has narrated through good chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when the Messenger of Allah (S) was taken by
Jibraeel to the point where he himself had to stop, and told the Holy
Prophet (S) to move on. Jibraeel stopped there leaving me to move on
further. I said: “You are leaving me alone at such a crucial point?”

He replied: “By the One Who has sent you with truth, the point crossed
by you has not been crossed by any messenger prophet or any privileged
one and no one has ever reached this point. In another traditional
report it is narrated from the same Imam that people asked him how many
times did Meraj occur and the Prophet declared that he performed the
ascension twice.

Jibraeel brought the Holy Prophet (S) to that elevated place and said:
No messenger prophet or any privileged angel one has ever reached this
point. And indeed your Lord send you His benedictions and says: I am
absolutely sacred and pure. I am the Lord of the angels and spirits. My
mercy precedes My wrath.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: O Lord, I seek Your forgiveness and
blessings. Then the Messenger of Allah (S) went to the point of ‘two
bows length’ and reached a luminous curtain of light made of green
emeralds and pin point light appeared along with a voice: O Muhammad,
whom have you chosen as your legatee on your Ummah. I said: The Almighty
Allah knows better.

It was said: Ali Ibn Abi Talib Amirul Momineen (a.s.) leader of Muslims
and leader of the bright-faced ones. Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says: The
Imamate of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is divinely ordained, and the
Almighty Allah directly without intervention of any angel told His
Prophet about it.[^53]

Through correct chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam Ali Reza
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: On the night of Meraj I was
taken to the celestial world. It was revealed to me from the curtain, in
such way that there was no angel in between. Among the revelations was:
One who degrades my Wali and my friend is like one who has made war on
me. And I also make war on one who makes war on me. I asked: “O Lord,
who is Your Wali?” He replied: “One who believes in the Imams from your
successors.”

Through authentic chains of narrators it is narrated that Nafe said to
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.): I want to ask you about something which none
can reply except a Prophet or his successor. “What is it?” asked the
Imam. He said: “Please tell me what was the period between Isa and
Muhammad?” “Five hundred years, and according to your statement, it was
300 years.” He said: “Please explain the following statement of the
Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْأَلْ مَنْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رُسُلِنَا أَجَعَلْنَا
مِنْ دُونِ الرَّحْمٰنِ آلِهَةً يُعْبَدُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And ask those of Our apostles whom We sent before you: Did We ever
appoint gods to be worshipped besides the Beneficent God?”***[^54]

Nafe said: “When you say that there was a difference of 500 years
between Muhammad (S) and prophets. How did Allah ask them to ask the
prophets?” Imam (a.s.) replied: When the Almighty Allah called His
Prophet for Meraj and among the signs that He showed to him was that He
gathered all the souls of the prophets in Baitul Maqdas and then
commanded Jibraeel to recite the Azan and Iqamah and recited: Hasten to
the best of deeds in Azan.

The Messenger of Allah (S) fell down in adoration and then all the
prophets prayed with him. When he concluded, he asked them by the
command of Allah: “What do you testify and whom do you worship?” The
prophets said: “We conclude that except for One there is no God and
there is no associate of His in creation or lordship and we testify that
you are His prophet. And it was on this point that covenant was taken
from us.” Nafe said: “O Abu Ja’far, you are right.”

Through good chains of narrators it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that on the night of Meraj, Jibraeel brought the Burraq for the
Holy Prophet (S). He mounted and traveled to Baitul Maqdas where he met
his brothers and prophets. Upon his return, he told his companions: I
went on Meraj last night and entered the Baitul Maqdas. The proof of my
veracity is that on the way I saw the caravan of Abu Sufyan returning
from Shaam and that it had halted at a certain place.

A red camel of theirs is lost and they were looking for it. That caravan
will reach Mecca at sunrise tomorrow and that lost camel will be ahead
of the caravan. Some infidels of Quraish said in ridicule: What a fast
rider he is that he went to Shaam and back within a night. There are
present some people who have been to Shaam.

If this man is right he should describe Baitul Maqdas. Ask him about its
lanterns, pillars and the description of the market of Shaam so that his
falsehood is proved. So people asked him: and Jibraeel showed the scene
of Shaam to him. Whatever they used to ask, the Holy Prophet (S) used to
look at it and reply to them. Till he told them everything, but except
for a few no one believed in him. So the Almighty Allah revealed the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا تُغْنِي الْآيَاتُ وَالنُّذُرُ عَنْ قَوْمٍ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and signs and warners do not avail a people who would not
believe.”***[^55]

Kulaini, Tabarsi and Ibn Babawayh have narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that when on the night of Meraj, the Messenger of Allah (S)
reached before Masjid Kufa, Jibraeel said: This is the Masjid of your
forefather, His Eminence, Ibrahim (a.s.) and it is the place of prayers
of the prophets. So the Messenger of Allah (S) prayed two units of
prayers there and then went to the heavens.

It is mentioned in *Ikhtisas* from Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said: “During Meraj, when I reached the fourth
sky, I saw such a dome that I had never seen a dome better than it. It
had four pillars and four doors of green mica. I said: O Jibraeel, what
dome is it? Jibraeel said: It is blue print of a city called Qom.
Believing servants of Allah will gather here and wait for Judgment Day
for the intercession of the Messenger of Allah (S) and they will suffer
many sorrows.

The narrator asked: “When will they get relief from these trials?” He
was told: “When water will appear from underground.” Ibn Babawayh has
narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “On the night I went to
Meraj, Jibraeel made me sit on his right shoulder and on the way I was
taken to a red-colored land which was brighter than saffron and more
fragrant than musk.

I saw an old man there wearing a tall cap. I asked Jibraeel what land
was it. He said: It is a land where your and Ali’s devotees will gather.
I asked who that man is and I was told that it was the accursed Iblis
who wants to restrain them from love and Wilayat of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and to encourage them transgression.

I asked to alight there and Jibraeel took me there as fast as lightning.
I said: “Stand up (Qom!) O accursed, and mix with the women, children
and wealth of his enemies, you will not have power to deviate the Shias
of Ali.” From that day, the city was called Qom. Sayyid Ibn Tawus has
narrated through authentic chains of narrators from the Messenger of
Allah (S) that he said: One night I was sleeping in Hajare Ismail when
suddenly Jibraeel pressed my feet.

I awoke but did not see anyone. He pressed my feet again and I didn’t
see anyone. Then he took my hand and seated me on a chair and I reached
another place in the blink of an eye. Jibraeel asked if I had any idea
where I was and I replied in negative. Jibraeel said: You are in Baitul
Maqdas where all the creatures will be gathered. Then he raised the
finger of his right hand and recited the Azan along with the phrase of
‘Hasten to the best of deeds,’.

Then he recited the Iqamah also in the same way and at last he said:
“Indeed the prayer has been established.” After that a light flashed
from the heavens by which the graves of the prophets opened and they
emerged from them saying: Labbaik and gathered in Baitul Maqdas. They
were 4414 in number and they stood in array.

Jibraeel caught my arm and moved me forward saying: “O Muhammad, pray
with the prophets; they are your brothers and you will end their series.
Then I looked to the right and saw my father, Ibrahim wearing two green
garments. Two angels stood on each of his sides. I glanced to the left
and saw my brother, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) standing there wearing two
robes and he was also straddled by two angels.

I was elated on seeing Ali (a.s.) and after the prayer went to His
Eminence, Ibrahim (a.s.) and he shook hands with me and held my hand in
his and said: “Hail, O the chosen Prophet and the one sent in the best
of times. Then Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) arrived and His Eminence,
Ibrahim (a.s.) shook hands with him also saying: “Hail, the chosen son
and the legatee of the chosen Prophet.” In the morning, I and Ali were
in Batha and we did not feel any tiredness.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from the
Messenger of Allah (S) that he said: When Jibraeel took me to the
heavens, he took my hand and made me enter Paradise and made me seated
on a sofa and gave me a quince, which opened, and a Hourie came out of
it with very black eyelashes.

The Prophet greeted her, saying, “Who are you? God be gracious to you!”
She replied, “I am Contentment. The upper part of my person is composed
of camphor, the next of amber, and the last of musk, I was kneaded in
the waters of life. Allah said to me, Be, and I came into being for your
brother and legatee, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).”

Through authentic chains of narrators, it is narrated that one night
Jibraeel brought a quadruped for the Holy Prophet (S) which was smaller
than a mule and bigger than an ass. Its legs were longer than its legs
and it covered the distance visible to the eye in one step. When the
Holy Prophet (S) wanted to mount, it stopped him. Jibraeel said: “This
is Muhammad (S).” When it heard the name of the Prophet, it became so
humble that it lowered itself to the ground and the Holy Prophet (S)
mounted it.

When it climbed altitudes its forelegs reduced and hind legs increased
in size and when it came down the incline its forelegs prolonged and the
hind legs reduced in size. In this way the Prophet passed a company
carrying trading goods of Abu Sufyan. Their camels ran on the sound of
the wings of Burraq. Some camels stumbled scattering their wares and the
leg of the camel was fractured. The Holy Prophet (S) moved on and
reached Bulgar.

He said: O Jibraeel, I am thirsty. He brought a bowl of water which the
Prophet consumed. They moved on from there and saw a company suspended
by their feet on hooks of fire, because when the Almighty Allah had made
them rich in lawful things, they coveted what was unlawful. Another
company were having their mouths sewed up with needles and threads of
fire because they had deflowered virgins through fornication.

Moving forward he saw a man trying to lift a bundle of sticks but he
could not lift it and more sticks were loaded on it. On asking he was
told: He is a debtor who did not repay his debts but continued to take
loans. From there they reached to the east mountain of Baitul Maqdas.
The Prophet found the climate very hot there and he heard a horrific
sound. He was told that they belonged to Hell.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: I seek the refuge of Allah from Hell. Then a
fragrant breeze came from his right and a nice sound was heard. He was
told that it belonged to Paradise. He said: I beg the Almighty for
Paradise. They set out from there and reached the gates of the city of
Baitul Maqdas. A Christian was present there who was entrusted with the
keys of the shrine.

That night no matter how much they tried, the door could not be closed.
People came and told him that the door cannot be closed. He suggested
them to appoint a nice guard for it. When the Holy Prophet (S) entered,
Jibraeel raised the stone of Baitul Maqdas and took out three bowls from
under it: one of milk, one of wine and one of water.

When he was offered wine he said that he was satiated. Jibraeel said if
you had taken it, your whole community would have deviated and separated
for you.” Then the Holy Prophet (S) prayed in Baitul Maqdas and a group
of prophets followed him. That night with Jibraeel had come an angel,
who had never before descended to earth, who met the Prophet and offered
him the keys of worldly treasure, saying, “If you please, be the Prophet
of servants, or, if you prefer it, take these keys and be the Prophet of
kings.”

Jibraeel signaled to Prophet to be humble, and he said, “I prefer to be
a humble servant of Allah and I don’t desire the sovereignty of earth.”
From there they moved to the heavens and on reaching there Jibraeel told
them to open the door. Angels asked: “Who is accompanying you?” He said:
“Muhammad (S).” “Welcome,” said the angels and they opened the door.

The Prophet says: “Whichever group of angels I passed used to greet me
and invoke blessings on me in welcome. We passed an old man seated below
a tree surrounded by many children and the Prophet asked who he was and
whose children they were. Jibraeel said: This is your father Ibrahim,
and these are children of believers.

His Eminence, takes care of them in Paradise.” Then we saw another old
man seated on a chair, who, when he looked on his right hand, laughed
and rejoiced, but when he looked on his left, mourned and wept. “This,”
said Jibraeel, is your father Adam; when he beholds those of his
children who will enter Paradise, he rejoices and is merry, but when he
sees those of his posterity doomed to Hell, he is afflicted and weeps.

On moving ahead we saw an angel seated on a chair and he saluted me but
there was no smile on his face and when I asked Jibraeel about it he
said: This is Malik the caretaker of Hell. He was more cheerful than
other angels, till the Almighty Allah kept him as the caretaker of Hell,
and he saw the punishments that the Almighty Allah has fixed for those
who are disobedient to Him, and that is why he is so scared.

Then the Prophet passed from there till he reached the position of
whispering to the Lord of Might. The Almighty Allah made fifty prayers
obligatory on his Ummah and through the request of Musa (a.s.) were
reduced to five. On his return, he passed by His Eminence, Ibrahim
(a.s.) and His Eminence, said: O Muhammad (S), convey my salutations to
your Ummah, give them glad tidings of Paradise whose water is sweet,
sand is fragrant and land is plain; its trees are created through the
recitation of: Glory be to Allah, and praise be to Allah, and there is
no god except Allah and Allah is the greatest and there is no might or
strength except by Allah.

So order your community to mention this often so that there may be many
trees for them in Paradise. His Eminence set out from there and on the
way reached to a caravan of Quraish, and dismounting, he told the people
of Mecca of his ascent to heaven, and in proof of it, that he passed the
caravan of Abu Sufyan in such a place, and that a camel there started,
threw its load, and broke its foreleg, and that the caravan would enter
Mecca about sunrise, all of which circumstances were found to be true.

Ibn Babawayh and Ali bin Ibrahim have narrated through trustworthy
traditions from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said: One night I was asleep in Abtah. Ali was to my right, Ja’far to my
left and Hamza near me. Suddenly I heard the sound of the wings of
angels and someone was saying: Who have we come for? Jibraeel pointed at
me and said: This is the best of the humans, and to his right is his
legatee, cousin and son-in-law and the other is his uncle, the chief of
the martyrs.

And that one is his cousin, Ja’far, whom the Almighty Allah will give a
pair of colored wings to glide in Paradise with the angels. Keep quiet
as his eyes sleep but his ears and heart are aware. Their example is of
that king who makes a house and spreads various types of dishes in it
and calls his slave for dinner. In reality the king is the Almighty
Allah and that house is the world and the palace is the Paradise of the
Almighty Allah. And the one invited by the Almighty Allah is the Holy
Prophet (S).

Then Jibraeel mounted the Holy Prophet (S) on Burraq and took him to
Baitul Maqdas and made him halt in the prayer niches of the prophets.
The Holy Prophet (S) prayed there and returned. On the return, he passed
a caravan of Quraish which was camping at a place and it had lost a
camel and they were searching for it. There was a vessel filled with
water in the caravan. The Holy Prophet (S) drank from it and threw away
the rest.

When he returned to Mecca, he narrated that last night he had gone to
Baitul Maqdas where he saw relics and positions of the prophets. On my
return I saw the caravan of Quraish which had camped at a particular
place and they had lost a camel. I drank water from their vessel and
threw away the rest. Abu Jahl said: “Ask him how many pillars are there
in Baitul Maqdas and how many chandeliers are there.

The Almighty Allah brought the Baitul Maqdas before the view of the
Prophet and he could reply each of their queries. Then people said: Let
us see when the caravan arrives. He said: “The caravan will reach at
sunrise and the red haired camel will be in lead.” Next day the Meccans
gathered at Aqba to check the veracity of the Messenger of Allah (S).
When the sun arose, the caravan appeared according to what the Prophet
had predicted. The members of the caravan reported what the Prophet had
mentioned about them, but after witnessing this miracle their rebellion
and deviation increased.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Ibn
Abbas that the Messenger of Allah (S) told Amirul Momineen (a.s.): O
Ali, when I was taken to the seventh heaven the place where there is
Sidratul Muntaha and from there to the holy curtains, the Almighty Allah
honored me with a confidential conversation and informed me of many
mysteries and also said: O Muhammad, know that Ali is the Imam of my
friends and he is a light for one who obeys Me. He is that word that I
have made obligatory for the pious.

Whoever obeyed him, obeyed Me. Whoever disobeyed him, disobeyed Me. So
convey glad tidings to Ali. When the Holy Prophet (S) came to the earth
he gave the glad tidings to Ali (a.s.) that the Almighty Allah had sent.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), has my honor
scaled to his level that my name should be mentioned at such a lofty
place?” “Yes Ali,” said the Prophet “You should thank your Lord for
that.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) fell down in adoration as thanksgiving for
that bounty. At last the Holy Prophet (S) said: “O Ali, raise your head
as the Almighty Allah boasts to His angels about you.”  
 From another channel it is narrated from Ibn Abbas that when the
Messenger of Allah (S) was taken to the heavens, Jibraeel took him to a
river of light as mentioned in Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَ الظُّلُمَاتِ وَالنُّورَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and made the darkness and the light…”***[^56]

…and Jibraeel directed him to cross, adding it had never yet been passed
by angel or prophet, Jibraeel said that he bathed in it everyday, and
washed his wings, and that the Almighty Allah, of every drop which fell
from his wings, created an exalted angel having twenty thousand faces
and forty thousand tongues, each of which speaks a distinct language
unintelligible to the rest.

Passing that river, the Prophet arrived at the curtains or partitions,
which are five hundred in number, and between every two of which is the
immense space of five hundred years’ journey. Jibraeel directed the
Prophet to proceed alone, saying that he could advance no further,
Another tradition says that the angel declared, if he should go the
length of a finger joint further, he should be consumed.

The Prophet now proceeded alone as far as Allah willed, where He
proclaimed: I am Mahmud and you are the Prophet; I derived your name
from My own. Whoever unites with you in love and obedience, I will come
near him in favor and mercy; and whoever separates from you, I will cut
him off from My regard. Go down to My servants and inform them what
honor I have conferred upon you. I have given a vizier to every Prophet
I have sent; you are My apostle, and Ali is your vizier.

Through authentic chains of narrators, it is narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that on the night of Meraj, the Almighty Allah said: O
Muhammad, your prophethood is about to end and these are your last days,
have you appointed anyone as your successor? The Holy Prophet (S) said:
I examined your creatures and did not find anyone as obedient to You as
Ali.”

The Almighty Allah said: “You are right, inform him that he is an ensign
of the path of My guidance and the leader of My friends; and he is a
light.” The Holy Prophet (S) says that he returned from there and seated
on an arm of an angel, I passed the Sidratul Muntaha and reached to the
Arsh and clung to the leg of the Arsh. A call came: I am God, and there
is no god or deity except Me. I am pure of every defect.

I afford security from My chastisement to the believers. I am the
caretaker and witness of the creatures. I am powerful, dominant and
strong. Greatness is restricted to Me. I am kind and merciful to My
creatures. The Holy Prophet (S) says: I saw the Almighty Allah through
the eyes of the heart and not through the physical eyes.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: When I was
taken to the heaven and I entered Paradise, I saw a palace of red ruby
and it was so transparent that the light of interior was visible from
outside. It had ten domes of pearls and emerald.

I asked about it and was told that it was for one who spoke the good
word, who is generous in feeding others, who fasts much by day and prays
when others are asleep. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says: I asked the Holy
Prophet (S) who in his Ummah could have such a nature. The Prophet (S)
said: “Good word is: *Glory be to Allah, and praise be to Allah, and
there is no god except Allah, and Allah is the greatest.*

And fasting all the time means fasting during the month of Ramadan. And
feeding too much means that he earns livelihood for his family members
so that they are not in need of others. And being busy in nights is that
he should pray the Midnight prayers, when Jews, Christians and all
disbelievers sleep.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through multiple channels from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “On the night of
Meraj, the Almighty Allah said to me: O Muhammad, know that Ali is the
leader of the pious, ruler of believers and chief of the bright faced
ones that is one who will take the Shias to Paradise.

And from another reliable tradition, it is narrated from the same Imam
that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “On the night of Meraj, the
Almighty Allah spoke to me saying: O Muhammad, after you, Ali is My
proof on the creatures and he is the leader of those who obey me.
Whoever obeyed his command, obeyed My command, whoever disobeyed him,
disobeyed Me. So appoint him as the ruler on your Ummah so that My
servants may be guided through him after you.

And it is narrated through many authentic traditional reports that on
the night of Meraj, the Almighty Allah told the Messenger of Allah (S):
“O Muhammad, whom have you appointed as your legatee on your Ummah?” His
Eminence, said: “My Lord, You only appoint him.” It was told: “After you
I have appointed your beloved, Ali (a.s.).”

And through other reliable chains it is narrated from Ibn Abbas that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said: “When I was taken from the seventh heaven
to Sidratul Muntaha and from there I reached to the curtains of light,
the Almighty Allah said to me: “O Muhammad, you are My servant and I am
your Lord. So be humble for Me.

Worship Me and rely on Me. Do not rely on anyone other than Me, because
I have chosen you as My favorite, messenger and prophet and chosen your
brother, Ali to be My Caliph and the one to have preference in My court.
Therefore he is My proof on My servants and the leader of My creatures.
Only through him would my friends and enemies be recognized. Only
through him would the army of Satan be distinguished from My army.

Only through him would my religion be established and My limits shall be
protected and My laws will be enforced. And O my beloved, I shall be
merciful on My servants and slave girls through your and their
descendants who will be Imams. And through your Qaim will inhabit My
earth with My glorification and praise. And through him would I clean My
earth from My enemies and shall make My friends inherit it.

And through him would I degrade the word of disbelievers and exalt My
word. And through him would I enliven My servants and populate My cities
and with My will, reveal My treasures. And I will make him aware of My
secrets. And help him through My angels who shall help him in enforcing
My laws. He is My Wali and the one who will guide the servants with
truth.

It is narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam Ali Reza
(a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said: “The Almighty Allah has not created anyone more excellent to me.”
I asked: “O Messenger of Allah (S), are you superior to Jibraeel?” The
Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O Ali, indeed the Almighty Allah has given
precedence to messenger prophets over the privileged angels and given me
superiority over all prophets.

After that you and the Imams after you are given precedence. Indeed the
angels are our servants. O Ali, the carriers of the Arsh and the angels
surrounding them praise and glorify the Lord. And they seek forgiveness
for those who bring faith in your Wilayat. O Ali, if we had not been
there, the Almighty Allah would have created neither Adam nor Hawwa,
neither Paradise nor Hell, neither sky nor the earth.

And why should we not be superior to angels when we have preceded them
in glorification of the Lord, because our souls were created first of
all by the Almighty Allah. And after that He made us speak with His
praise and then created the angels. When they beheld the souls with a
light, and witnessed the greatness of our Noor, they considered our
lights to be extremely great.

I said: Glory be to Allah, so that the angels may know that we are
creatures of Allah. And the Almighty Allah is pure of all the qualities
of creatures. Angels learnt the manner of divine glorification through
us and they considered the Almighty Allah to be pure of all qualities.
And when they witnessed our greatness and majesty, we said: There is no
god except Allah, so that the angels may know that we are the creatures
of Allah and that we have no partnership in His divinity and except for
Him no one is deserving to be worshipped.

When the angels realized our greatness, we said: Allah is the greatest,
so that they may know that Allah is greater than the greatest in the
world, and all greatness and power belong only to the Almighty Allah.
Then we said: There is no power and might except by Allah. So the angels
understood that the Almighty Allah has made our obedience obligatory on
all the creatures and we said: Praise to be to Allah.

So the angels were guided through our merits and they understood the
praise and glorification of the Almighty Allah. Then the Almighty Allah
created Adam (a.s.) and placed our Noor in his loins and commanded the
angels to prostrate for our respect and honor. Their prostration was in
obedience of Allah and was due to the respect of Adam, because we were
present in his loins. So why we cannot be superior to the angels because
they prostrated before Adam.

And when I was taken to the heavens Jibraeel recited the Azan and Iqamah
and said to me twice: “O Muhammad, go ahead and lead the prayers.” I
asked: “O Jibraeel shall I take precedence over you?” He replied: “Yes,
because the Almighty Allah has given precedence to all prophets over
angels and given you precedence on all creatures.”

So I stood in front of him and led the prayer. But I don’t say this in
pride. From there I reached to the curtains of light and Jibraeel said:
“O Messenger of Allah (S), go ahead.” And he stopped there. I said: “Are
you leaving me alone at this juncture?” He said: “O Messenger of Allah
(S), it is the last point I have access to, if I go ahead, my wings will
burn out.”

So I was immersed in the ocean of light and I began to swim in the
divine lights till I reached the point that the Almighty Allah wanted me
to reach. Then a call from the high said: “O Muhammad, You are My
servant and I am your Lord. Worship Me and rely on Me. Indeed you are My
Noor among My servants, My Prophet among My creatures, My proof among My
servants; and I have created Paradise for those who obey you and created
Hellfire for those who disobey you and for your legatees, I have made my
bestowals and miracles obligatory.

And for their Shias I have made divine rewards compulsory. I said: “O
Lord, show my legatees to me.” He said: “Your legatees are those whose
names are inscribed on the leg of My Throne.” When I looked, I saw
twelve lights on the leg of Arsh and in each Noor I saw a green line in
which the name of each legatee was mentioned. The first of them was Ali
and the last, Mahdi. I asked: “My Lord, would they be my legatees after
me?”

“Yes, O Muhammad, after you they shall be My friends, legatees and proof
on the creatures. And they are your legatees and successors. And after
you they are the best of the creatures. By my honor and majesty, I shall
express My religion through them and exalt my Word through them. And
through their last purify the earth of My enemies. And give the whole
world into his control.

Give the wind under his control and make the hard cloud obedient to him
so that he may ride it anywhere he likes in the sky and the earth. Help
him through my armies and strengthen him through My angels. So much so
that My call should be raised and all the creatures gather on my
Oneness. And after My friends one after the other I will make as the
leader of My faith. So his rulership will continue till Judgment Day.”

Through authentic chains it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
and Ibn Abbas that one day when the Messenger of Allah (S) was showering
affection on Fatima by kissing her, Ayesha arrived there and said: “Why
are you kissing such a grown up girl and why are you so affectionate to
her?” The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O Ayesha, when I went to the
fourth sky during Meraj, Jibraeel recited the Azan and Iqamah and then
all the folks of the sky prayed in my leadership.

Then I looked to my right saw Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) in a garden of
Paradise surrounded by angels. When I reached the sixth sky, a call
came: “O Muhammad, what a nice ancestor is Ibrahim for you and what a
nice brother is Ali.” Then I reached to the curtains of greatness and
majesty. Jibraeel took my hand admitted me to Paradise.

There I saw a tree of Noor, under which two angels were folding robes
and jewelry. I asked to whom the tree belonged. They said: “It belongs
to your brother, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and these two angels are
folding robes and jewelry for him; they shall continue to do so till
Judgment Day.” I moved forward and some dates, softer than butter were
brought for me, more fragrant than musk and sweeter than honey.

I tasted one date and it became a sperm in my back. When I returned to
the earth, I joined with Khadija and she became pregnant with Fatima.
Thus Fatima is a Hourie of Paradise in the human form. When I become
eager of Paradise, I kiss Fatima, because she is the fragrance of
Paradise. According to another report he said: When I perceive the
fragrance of tree of Tuba.

In the same way, through reliable chains it is narrated from Imam Zada
Abdul Azim from Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
and his wife, Fatima, one day visited the Prophet and found him weeping
profusely. May my parents be your sacrifice! said Ali; what is the cause
of your grief, O Messenger of Allah (S)? He replied, On the night I was
carried to heaven I saw a number of the women of my community in great
torment, and it is for them I weep.

I saw a woman suspended by her hair, and her brain was boiling from
excessive heat. Another was suspended by her tongue, and liquid from the
fountain of melted copper in Hell was poured down her throat; and
another was hung up by her breasts. I saw a woman eating the flesh of
her own body, which fell from her, and fire meanwhile was flaming under
her.

I saw a woman bound hand and foot, and assailed on all sides by serpents
and scorpions. Another, blind, deaf and dumb, was encased in a coffin of
fire, and her brain was dropping out at her nostrils, and her body was
falling to pieces from gangrene and leprosy. I saw a woman suspended by
her feet in a furnace of fire; the flesh of another was being cut off on
all sides with scissors of fire.

I saw a woman whose face and hands were burning, and who ate her own
entrails. I saw a woman with the head of a hog and the body of an ass,
tormented in a million different ways. I saw a woman in the form of a
dog, and fire was poured through her body, issuing at her mouth, and the
angels were beating her with maces of iron.

Fatima exclaimed, O beloved of my soul, and light of my eyes, tell me
what they had done and what they had been that the Almighty Allah
inflicted on them such horrible torments. The Prophet replied, “Dearest
daughter, the woman suspended by her hair, did not conceal it from the
view of men. The one suspended by her tongue, tormented her husband with
that member.

The one hung up by her breasts would not acknowledge her husband’s
conjugal rights. She suspended by her feet, was in the habit of going
out without her husband’s consent. The one that ate her own flesh,
adorned her person for the view of those who had no right to see her.
The woman bound hand and foot, neglected to wash herself and cleanse her
garments. She did not perform the necessary and obligatory ablutions,
and held prayer of light account.

The one blind, deaf and dumb, bore children from adulterous intercourse,
and caused her husband to bear the burden of their support. She whose
flesh was cut off with fiery scissors, showed herself to incite men to
desire her. The woman who was burning and ate her own entrails, was a
procuress, and brought together wicked men and women.

She with the head of a hog was slanderer and liar; and the one in the
form of a dog was a professed singer, and mourner, and envier, whose
practice was to excite discontent under the providence of God. Woe, said
the Prophet, to the woman that angers her husband, and happy is she that
contents him. Through authentic chains it is narrated from Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.) that one day Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) asked about a
companion of his and it was said that he was unwell.

The Imam went to visit him and he was in his last moments. Imam (a.s.)
said: “Have good expectation from your Lord.” He said: “I do have a good
expectation, but I am aggrieved on account of my daughters.” The Imam
said: “Just as you hope to increase your good deeds and wipe off your
sins, in the same way you should hope in the well being of your
daughters.

Perhaps you have not heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say: “When on
Meraj, I reached to Sidratul Muntaha, some of its branches were hanging
like teats from some of which flowed milk, honey from some, oil from
some and white flour from some. Some clothes and some fruits like
berries. I asked to myself for whose use all these are?

Since Jibraeel was not with me I could not ask him; as he had stopped at
his stage and I had climbed further. So the Almighty Allah said: O
Messenger of Allah (S), all these are food for your children, so tell
the fathers of girls that they should not worry about their daughters as
like We have created them in the same way We will provide sustenance to
them.”

Through reliable chains of narrators it is narrated from Imam Ali Reza
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: On the third heaven on the
night of Meraj, I saw a man seated there, one of his legs was in the
east and the other in the west and he was looking at a slate and shaking
his head. I asked: “O Jibraeel, Who is this?” Jibraeel replied: “He is
the angel of death.”

Through reliable chains of narrators, it is narrated from Imam Husain
(a.s.) that he said: I heard my grandfather, the Holy Prophet (S) say:
On the night of Meraj, I saw an angel, who was carrying a sword of Noor
that he was slashing like the Amirul Momineen (a.s.) slashed Zulfiqar in
the battlefield. I said: “O Lord, is he my brother, Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.)?”

A voice from Allah said: “O Muhammad, he is an angel that I have created
in the form of Ali so that he may worship Me before the Arsh and the
reward of that worship is dedicated to Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) till
Judgment Day.

Through reliable chains of narrators, it is narrated that Habib
Naqshbani asked about the interpretation of the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ دَنَا فَتَدَلَّى فَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then he drew near, then he bowed. So he was the measure of two bows
or closer still.”***[^57]

Imam (a.s.) said: “O Habib, this verse means that the Holy Prophet (S)
at the ideal proximity became very near to the court of the Almighty; he
was very near to it, till he was only at a distance of half a bow or
less than that. At that time the Almighty Allah revealed to him what He
wanted. When the Messenger of Allah (S) conquered Mecca, he used to
prostrate much to thank for that bounty. One day Imam Ali (a.s.) was
with him.

The Holy Prophet (S) performed excessive Tawaf of Kaaba. When darkness
spread, both of them went to Safa to perform the Sayy. Then they came
down and turned their attention to Marwah. At that point a Noor came
down from the sky which covered them. All the mountains were illuminated
and all the eyes were dazzled by it. And a great awe overtook them.

When they went to Mount Marwah, the Holy Prophet (S) looked at the sky
and beheld two pomegranates near his head. He stretched his hands and a
voice came: O Muhammad, these are the fruits of Paradise, none can
consume them except you and your legatee Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). From
there the Holy Prophet (S) was taken to the heavens till he reached
Sidratul Muntaha.

Jibraeel stopped there and told the Holy Prophet (S) to go ahead,
because he could not go beyond that. Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says:
The tree is called Sidratul Muntaha because as the angels take the deeds
of people till there and note them down on the heavy slates. The Holy
Prophet (S) beheld each branch of Sidratul Muntaha that it has reached
to below the Arsh and is surrounding it.

Then a ray of the greatness and majesty fell on the Messenger of Allah
(S) due to its dazzle, his eyes closed and he began to tremble. The
Almighty Allah strengthened his heart and bestowed strength to his eyes.
And He gave another Noor to him with which he saw the signs of his Lord,
which he saw. And he heard the discourses of his Lord, that he heard.
When he returned to Sidratul Muntaha, he saw Jibraeel again as the
Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ رَآهُ نَزْلَةً أُخْرٰى. عِنْدَ سِدْرَةِ الْمُنْتَهٰى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly he saw him in another descent. At the farthest
lote-tree…”***[^58]

Which means that: He saw Jibraeel in the form as Ahle Sunnat say: And
saw Allah through the vision of his heart. And saw through his physical
eyes. He saw His great signs which neither any creature has seen or will
ever see. Imam (a.s.) says: The circumference of the tree, Sidratul
Muntaha, is a hundred years’ journey as time is reckoned on earth; and
that one of its leaves would cover all the people in the world. There
are certain angels who are the protectors of trees, otherwise wild
beasts would destroy all the fruit. The Prophet forbid certain natural
acts under fruit trees, because the angels were there.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that people asked him why
Maghribain and Morning Prayers are recited aloud and other prayers
recited softly. Imam (a.s.) said: When the Holy Prophet (S) was taken to
heavens, the first prayer that the Almighty Allah made obligatory on the
Prophet was Zuhr prayer on Friday. Angels were commanded to follow the
Prophet and He told the Holy Prophet (S) to recite the prayer aloud so
that his excellence may become known to the angels. Then Asr prayer was
made obligatory and none of the angels were ordered to follow him.

The Holy Prophet (S) was told to recite it softly as no one was
following him. Then Maghrib and Isha prayer was made obligatory and the
angels were commanded to follow him and he was asked to recite loudly so
that angels may hear him. When he returned to the earth at dawn, Morning
Prayer was made obligatory and he was commanded to pray with the people
so that his excellence is known to the people as it was known to the
angels.

People asked them why in the last two rakats, is there more excellence
in reciting Tashbihat Arba instead of Surah Hamd? He replied: “During
the last two rakats rays of light fell on the Prophet, which made the
Prophet fearful so he recited: “Glory be to Allah, and praise be to
Allah and there is no god, except Allah, and Allah is the greatest.”
That is why it is more rewarding to recite these recitations than Surah
Hamd.

It is also narrated through reliable chains that people asked Imam Musa
Kazim (a.s.): “Why one Ruku and two sajdahs were made obligatory in each
rakat of prayer?” Imam (a.s.) said: “The first prayer that the Holy
Prophet (S) performed was in front of the Divine Throne. Because on the
night of Meraj, the Messenger of Allah (S) was carried to the heavens
and when he reached below the Arsh, the Almighty Allah said to him: “O
Muhammad, wash your face and hands at the stream of Saad and pray for
your Lord.

The Holy Prophet (S) went to that spring and performed the complete
ablution, and stood up to pray. The Almighty Allah commanded him to
initiate the prayer and the Holy Prophet (S) recited the Takbir. He was
told to recite from In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful
to the end of Surah Hamd. Then recite Surah Tauheed.

The Messenger of Allah (S) after these recitations said: “As my Lord
is”. He was ordered to perform ruku and he obliged and the Almighty
Allah told him to recite: Glory be to my Lord who is most great and
praise be to Him. Which the Prophet said thrice and then he was told to
raise his head. The Holy Prophet (S) stood erect.

He was then told to prostrate to his Lord. When he prostrated he was
ordered to recite: Glory be to my Lord who is most High and praise be to
Him. The Messenger of Allah (S) recited it thrice and the Almighty Allah
said: O Muhammad, now sit up straight. His Eminence, sat up and
mentioned the greatness and majesty of his Lord and then by the order of
the Lord of the Lords went into prostration again and recited the Tasbih
thrice.

Then he was told to stand and recite the chapters of Qur’an. Again he
was ordered to perform Ruku and Sajdah. When he performed the first
Sajdah, he mentioned about the majesty of his Lord and then performed
the second Sajdah. The Almighty Allah said: Raise your head from the
Sajdah, the Almighty Allah will exalt you. Now recite the Tashahud. When
the Prophet concluded the Tashahud he was told to recite salutation to
his Lord.

The Almighty Allah said in reply: And peace be upon you. O Muhammad, you
have received the bounty of worshipping Me along with the other
bounties. I have bestowed you with prophethood with My infallibility and
made you My beloved. Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) says: In each rakat, the
Almighty Allah commanded one Ruku and one Sajdah, the Holy Prophet (S)
because of the imagination of the greatness of Allah, added another
Sajdah and the Almighty Allah made that also obligatory.

People asked the Imam what Saad is? He replied: It is a spring that
flows from a pillar of Divine Throne which is also called as the ‘nectar
of life’ as the Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ص وَالْقُرْآنِ ذِي الذِّكْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Suad, I swear by the Qur’an, full of admonition.”***[^59]

It is narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam Musa
Kazim (a.s.) that people asked him: “Why seven Takbir were appointed
before prayers and why in ruku are we supposed to recite: Glory be to my
Lord the most great and praise be to Him and why we say Glory be to my
Lord the most High and praise be to Him in Sajdah? Imam (a.s.) said: The
Almighty Allah has created seven heavens seven levels of earth and seven
curtains.

When the Messenger of Allah (S) went up to Meraj, he reached Qaba
Qausain three times and from the seven curtains of Paradise one curtain
was removed for the Prophet so he recited ‘Allahu Akbar’ (God is the
Greatest), on removal of each curtain, he said: ‘Allahu Akbar’ (God is
the Greatest); since prayer is the Meraj of believers, that is why it
became recommended to recite seven Takbirs in the beginning.

So that the curtains that lie because of distance may be lifted from
him. When after the removal of curtains from the heart of the Messenger
of Allah (S) lights of greatness and majesty of Allah became illuminated
for him, the Holy Prophet (S) began to tremble due to awe and he bowed
down in Ruku and said: Glory be to my Lord the most great and praise be
to Him, three times.

When he straightened, a Noor of that greatness shone on him and he fell
down in prostration and recited seven times: Glory be to my Lord the
most High and praise be to Him, and the awe that had come upon him was
dispelled. That is why these recitations were made a part of Ruku and
Sajdahs.  
 Through reliable chains, it is narrated that people asked Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) why the Messenger of Allah (S) tied Ihram for Hajj in the
Masjid Shajarah and not at some other place?

Imam (a.s.) said: On the night the Messenger of Allah (S) was taken up
for Meraj, when he reached perpendicular to Masjid Shajarah, the
Almighty Allah said: O Muhammad, did I not find you in grief and
accorded space to you? And did I not find you lost and showed you the
path? The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “Indeed the praise and bounty is
only for You. You have no associate. Here I am my Lord!” That is why he
used to wear Ihram from Masjid Shajarah.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through reliable chains from Ibn Abbas that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said: The Almighty Allah has given me five merits
and given five to Ali. He gave me the comprehensive word and gave
comprehensive knowledge to Ali. He gave me prophethood and made me my
legatee. He gave me Kauthar and gave Salsabeel to him. He honored me
with divine revelation and gave direct inspiration (Ilham) to him.

They took me to the heavens and for him the doors of the heavens were
opened so that he could observe me and I could observe him. Then the
Holy Prophet (S) began to weep. I asked: “O Messenger of Allah (S), May
my parents be sacrificed on you, why are you weeping? The Messenger of
Allah (S) replied: “O Ibn Abbas, the first thing that the Almighty Allah
said to me was: O Muhammad! I raised my head and saw that the curtains
have been raised and the doors of the heavens are opened and Ali has
raised his head and he was seeing me.

Then Ali and I spoke to each other and the Almighty Allah spoke to me.”
I asked: “What did He say to you?” He replied: “The Almighty Allah said:
I have appointed Ali as your legatee, Vizier and your Caliph after you.
Tell him to listen to your statements properly and from that place sent
the divine message to Ali and he replied: I have heard and obeyed.”

The Almighty Allah commanded angels to send greetings to Ali and all
greeted him and he replied to the greetings. I saw that the angels were
highly pleased at the reply of Ali (a.s.) and I didn’t pass any group of
angels but that they wished me about the Caliphate of Ali (a.s.) and
said: “By the one who sent you with truth, angels are highly pleased
because the Almighty Allah has appointed your brother, Ali as the
Caliph.”

And I saw the upholders of the Arsh that they were looking to the earth.
I asked: “O Jibraeel, why are the upholders of the Arsh looking to the
earth?” Jibraeel said: “At this moment there is no angel who is not
looking at Ali (a.s.) with pleasure, except for the upholders of the
earth who have been permitted to look at you.” When I came back to the
earth, Ali (a.s.) narrated to me whatever I had seen. At that time I
realized that curtains were removed for Ali (a.s.) from all the places
that I had visited.

Ayyashi has narrated through reliable chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) performed Isha prayer on the
earth and went up to Meraj and came back before the morning and prayed
the Morning Prayer on the earth.

It is narrated through reliable chains from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: On the night of Meraj, when I came
back to the earth, I asked Jibraeel if he had any wish. He said: My wish
is that you convey my and Allah’s greetings to Khadija. When the
Messenger of Allah (S) conveyed it to Khadija she said: “My God is
security and all safety is from Him only and all safeties turn to Him
only.

It is mentioned in reliable books of Ahle Sunnat that the Messenger of
Allah (S) said: On the night I went for Meraj, I saw on the fourth
heaven an angel sitting on a pulpit of light surrounded by many angels.
I asked Jibraeel about him and was told to approach him and greet him. I
went to him and greeted him and saw that he was my brother, Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.).

I said: “O Jibraeel, has Ali preceded me to the heavens?” He replied: “O
Messenger of Allah (S), angels petitioned the Almighty Allah that they
should be allowed to see Ali (a.s.), so the Almighty Allah created with
Noor this angel in the form of Ali and angels every Friday eve perform
his Ziarat a thousand times and glorify and praise the Almighty Allah
and gift that reward to the followers of Ali (a.s.).

*Manaqib Khwarizmi* has narrated through many reliable chains that the
Messenger of Allah (S) was asked by the people: In what language did the
Almighty Allah speak to you during Meraj? He replied: “He addressed me
in the language or style of Ali and He inspired me.” I asked: “O Lord,
are you speaking to me or it is Ali?” Voice came: “I don’t resemble
anything and neither anything resembles Me. I cannot be compared with
anything or anyone. I am speaking to you in the language and style of
Ali so that you may feel comfortable.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated through good chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: When on the
night of ascension, I entered Paradise, I beheld a white plain where a
number of angels were building palaces of gold and silver bricks. Now
they plied their work, and then they stood idle.

I asked them why their labors were thus interrupted? They replied, “We
wait to have expenses paid.” “What expenses?” I asked. They answered,
“The recital on earth by believers of such ascriptions as: Glory be to
Allah, and praise be to Allah, and there is no god except Allah, and
Allah is the greatest. Whenever they pronounce these ascriptions, we
build; but when they cease, our work also ceases.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said to Imam Ali (a.s.): On the night I was taken
up for Meraj, I was welcomed on each heaven by the angels and they gave
many glad tidings till Jibraeel introduced me to many groups of angels.
All said: If the people of your community had united on the love of Ali
(a.s.), the Almighty Allah would not have created Hell.

O Ali, the Almighty Allah presented you for me on seven occasions so I
derived your company and comfort: (1) When I reached to the heavens
Jibraeel asked: Where is your brother, Ali (a.s.)? I said: “I have left
him on the earth. Jibraeel told me to pray to Allah to bring him there
for me. I prayed and saw your facsimile and then saw some angels in
array. I asked: “Who are these?”

Jibraeel replied: “They are some groups through whom the Almighty Allah
will be proud about you on Judgment Day.” I went to them and spoke with
them about the past and future events till Judgment Day. (2) When I was
taken to the Arsh for the second time, Jibraeel asked: O Muhammad, where
is your brother, Ali (a.s.)?

I said: “I have left him on the earth. Jibraeel told me to pray to Allah
to bring him there for me. I prayed and saw your image and all the
curtains of the seven heavens were removed from my eyes. I saw the
inhabitants of the celestial kingdom and saw every person who was in the
sky at any place and you also saw him. (3) When I was sent for the
Jinns, Jibraeel asked: O Muhammad, where is your brother, Ali (a.s.)?

I said: “I have left him in my place, but whatever I said to the Jinns
and whatever they said to me was heard and memorized by you. (4) The
Almighty Allah specialized me with the Night of Power (Lailatul Qadr)
but you share it with me. (5) When I whispered in secret to the Almighty
Allah at the highest heaven, you were with me.

And each time I prayed to the Almighty Allah for you and He gave
everything to you except prophethood, because there will no prophet
after me. (6) When I circled Baitul Mamoor, I saw you with me and when
the prophets prayed behind me your facsimile was behind me. (7) During
the period of Rajat (return) when I will eliminate the groups of
infidels, you will be there with me.

O Ali, the Almighty Allah has given me excellence over all the people of
the world and gave you excellence over them after me. And gave
excellence to Fatima over all the ladies of the world and gave
excellence to Hasan and Husain and Imams from the progeny of Husain
(a.s.) over all the people after me and you.

O Ali, I found your name joined to my name and on some occasions this
afforded me peace and comfort. First of all, on the night of Meraj when
I reached Baitul Maqdas, I found written on the arch of Baitul Maqdas:
“There is no god, except Allah. Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. I
have strengthened Muhammad through his vizier and helped him through
him.” I asked Jibraeel: “Who is my vizier?” “Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).”

Secondly when I reached Sidratul Muntaha I found written there: “There
is no god except Me and Muhammad is My chosen one from My creatures. I
have strengthened him through his vizier and brother and helped him
through him.” Thirdly, when I passed Sidratul Muntaha, and reached to
Divine Throne, I found it inscribed on the pillar of Arsh: “I am Allah,
the One and Muhammad is My beloved and My chosen one from My creatures.

I have strengthened him through his vizier and brother and helped him
through him.” I asked Jibraeel: “Who is my Vizier?” “Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.),” said he. Sayyid Ibn Tawus has narrated through reliable chains
from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “One
night I was sleeping in Hijre Ismail when all of a sudden Jibraeel
arrived and woke me up gently and said: “O Muhammad, come mount this, as
your Lord has summoned you.”

And he had brought a quadruped which was smaller than a mule and bigger
than an ass. Its steps were in proportion to its body. It had wings of
gems and it was named Burraq. I mounted it and when I reached to Aqba I
found a person standing there and his hair were lying on his hands. When
he saw me, he said: Peace be upon you, O the first. Peace be upon you, O
the last one. Peace be upon you, O the gatherer (Hashir). Jibraeel said:
“Reply to his greetings.”

So I said: “And peace be upon you and the mercy of Allah and His
blessings.” When I reached in between the Aqba I saw a white haired
person who also greeted me like the first person and without Jibraeel
urging I replied to his salutation. He said thrice: Protect the dignity
of your legatee, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) because he is the privileged
servant of the Creator. When I reached Baitul Maqdas, I saw there an
extremely handsome man who also saluted me in the same manner, and I
replied to him as Jibraeel signaled.

He said thrice: O Muhammad, protect the sanctity of your legatee, Ali
Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) because he is the privileged one of the Almighty
Allah and the trustee of Hauze Kauthar and the intercessor of Paradise.”
Then I dismounted and Jibraeel held my hand to enter Baitul Maqdas. The
mosque was full of people I could not recognize. Jibraeel took me ahead
of the rows of people and suddenly a voice came from the heavens: O
Muhammad, come forward to lead the prayer. Jibraeel made me stand ahead
and I prayed with all of them.

A staircase of pearls was fixed to the first heaven. Jibraeel held my
hand and took me to the sky. When we reached near the sky I beheld
guards and arrows of fire. Jibraeel knocked at the door; angels asked
who it was. “I am Jibraeel.” “Who is with you?” “Muhammad (S).” Angels
asked: “Has he been raised?” “Yes.”

They opened the gate and said: “Welcome O brother of a high rank and
Caliph of the Lord of the lords and chosen one of the powerful God. You
are the last of the prophets, and there will be no prophet after you.
Then a staircase of ruby was fixed, which was adorned with green
emerald. Through it I reached to the second heaven.

Jibraeel knocked at the door; angels asked like the angels of the first
heaven. When the door was opened, I was welcomed in the same manner and
then from there a staircase was fixed to the third sky. This was
surrounded my many types of lights. Jibraeel said: O Messenger of Allah
(S), remain firm footed and the Almighty Allah will guide you.

In this way I crossed all the heavens and reached the seventh heaven,
where I heard a great sound and was told that it belonged to the Tree of
Tuba and it produced that sound in my eagerness. I was struck with
terror. Jibraeel said: O Messenger of Allah (S) you have reached the
point not reached by any creature. Go near your Lord.

If the merit of your companionship had not been there even I would not
have been able to reach till here and my wings and feathers would have
burnt up in divine effulgence. Then due to the Taufeeq of the Almighty
Allah I crossed the stations of majesty and honor and seventy veils were
removed from my eyes.

Then a voice came from the Lord: “O Muhammad.” When I heard this, I fell
in prostration saying: “Labbaik, O Lord of power.” “O Muhammad, rise up
and ask whatever you like. I will give it to you. Indeed you are My
beloved, My chosen one, My prophet on My creatures and My trustee on My
servants. When you have come in My vicinity, whom have you appointed as
your successor?”

I said: “O my Lord, I have appointed one whom you know better than me.
He is my brother, son of my uncle.” The Almighty Allah said: “I swear by
My might and honor, I will not accept the faith of anyone in My being
and on your prophethood if it is not accompanied with faith in his
Imamate and Wilayat. O Muhammad, do you want to see him in the celestial
kingdom?” “Yes,” said I. “Raise your head.”

I raised my head and saw Ali (a.s.) along with the privileged angels on
the high heavens and I was elated to see him and I said: “O Lord, my
eyes have become illuminated.” I was told: “O Muhammad, I make a
covenant about Ali (a.s.), Ali is the ensign of the path of My guidance,
chief of the righteous ones, eliminator of infidels and leader of the
obedient ones. He is word that I have made compulsory for the pious.

And gave My knowledge and understanding in his inheritance. Therefore
whoever loved me has loved Me. And whoever has been inimical to him has
been inimical to Me. I will test the people through him. O Muhammad give
him these glad tidings.” Jibraeel came to me and said: O Messenger of
Allah (S), go on further.

When I moved ahead, I reached a stream whose banks were having domes of
gems and rubies. And the water of that stream was whiter than snow,
sweeter than honey and more fragrant than musk. Then Jibraeel came to me
and I asked him about it. He said: “This is Kauthar, which the Almighty
Allah has presented to you as He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَعْطَيْنَاكَ الْكَوْثَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We have given you Kauthar.”***[^60]

I saw some people in the act of being cast into Hell, and on inquiring
who they were, was told they were Kharijis, Nasibi and Bani Umayyah, and
those that are inimical to the Imams of your the Prophet’s progeny and
your sons, and these five groups have nothing to do with Islam. Are you
happy? I said: I thank that God, Who made Ibrahim (a.s.) as his Khalil,
spoke to Musa (a.s.), bestowed the great kingdom to Sulaiman (a.s.) and
spoke to me and made me His beloved and gave me a great matter with
regard to Ali (a.s.).

O Jibraeel, tell me who were those whom I saw in the first Aqba and they
saluted me. He said that he was his brother, Musa who had said: Peace be
upon you, O the last one, because you are the last prophet. And his
saying: Peace be upon you, O the gatherer (Hashir), it is so because all
the communities will be raised during your prophethood.

Then I asked: Who were those seen in between the Aqba. Jibraeel (a.s.)
said: He was your brother, Isa (a.s.), who advised you about your
brother, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). I asked: “Who were those in Baitul
Maqdas?” He said: “He was your respected father, Adam (a.s.) and he told
you about Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) that he is the king of the
believers.”

I asked: “Who were the ones who had prayed behind me in Baitul Maqdas.
He said: They were prophets and angels whom the Almighty Allah had
presented for your dignity. So that they may pray behind you. Thus when
the Messenger of Allah (S) returned that night from Meraj, he called for
Ali (a.s.) and said: “O Ali, let me narrate to you that Musa and Isa and
your father Adam (a.s.) have sent greetings to you and all have
recommended about you.”

Ali (a.s.) began to weep in joy and he said: “I praise the God Who made
me known among His prophets.” Then he said: “O Ali, I give you another
good news, that when I reached to the Arsh of my creator, I saw your
image over there and the Almighty Allah took promise from me about you.
O Ali, all the inhabitants of the high heavens pray for you and the
chosen persons of the lofty heavens pray to Allah for permission to
visit you and you will intercede for communities on Judgment Day when
they will stand besides Hell.

It is narrated through reliable chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that one day a person came to Imam Ali (a.s.) in Kufa Masjid and
inquired about the interpretation of the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْأَلْ مَنْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ مِن رُّسُلِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And ask those of Our apostles whom We sent before you…”***[^61]

He said: “When the Almighty Allah took His beloved on the night of Meraj
from Masjidul Haraam to Masjidul Aqsa (and it is Baitul Mamoor which is
in the heavens). There Jibraeel took him to a stream and said: “O
Prophet, perform ablution from this stream.” Then Jibraeel recited the
Azan and Iqamah and sent the Prophet ahead to lead the prayers of a
group of prophets and messengers whose number is only known to Allah.

In the first row will be Adam, Nuh, Hud, Ibrahim, Musa and Isa (a.s.)
and all the prophets who were sent to the world since the time of Adam
(a.s.) to the Holy Prophet (S). The Prophet led the prayers and all
followed him. When he concluded the prayer, the Almighty Allah revealed
to him: O Muhammad, ask them if they used to worship anyone else other
than the One God.

So the Prophet posed this question: “To what do you testify?” they said:
“We testify that there is no deity except Allah and He has no partner
and we testify that you are the Messenger of Allah and the best of the
prophets and Ali is the best of the successors and the Almighty Allah
has taken covenant from all of them regarding you and Ali (a.s.). And
all have chosen you and Ali from all the world.

In another reliable traditional report, it is narrated from Imam Musa
Kazim (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: On the night of
Meraj, I was taken to a tree and it was so tall and beautiful that I had
not seen anything better. An angel was appointed at each of its branch
and leaf and the tree was surrounded by divine light.

Jibraeel said: “This is Sidratul Muntaha. Before you, no prophet has
gone further than this point. The Almighty Allah will carry you from
here to Behisht to show you His great signs. So remain assured and
steadfast with Allah’s support so that the light of divine miracle is
perfected for you. You move towards the proximity of the Almighty
Allah.” So with the help of the Almighty Allah I moved to the higher
level till I reached Arsh.

A green curtain was drawn before me whose brilliance and beauty I cannot
describe. When I clung to it, it was pulled up till I entered the holy
court and I glided through the loftiness of my position and reached a
point where even the sound of an angel cannot reach. I became oblivious
of myself and all fear was dispelled. I thought that all the creatures
had died. Then the Almighty Allah gave me some respite so that I may
regain my consciousness and my fear may be dispelled, and I closed my
eyes by the Taufeeq of Allah and I opened the eyes of my heart and saw
the celestial and the earthly world as the Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا زَاغَ الْبَصَرُ وَمَا طَغٰى. لَقَدْ رَأٰى مِنْ آيَاتِ رَبِّهِ
الْكُبْرٰى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The eye did not turn aside, nor did it exceed the limit. Certainly
he saw of the greatest signs of his Lord.”***[^62]

Then the Almighty Allah called out to me: “O Muhammad, have you seen
your status and greatness in My view?” I replied: “Yes, my master.” The
Almighty Allah said: “Have you recognized the status of your successors
in My view?” I replied: “Yes, my Lord.” He said: “O Muhammad, what do
the inhabitants of My high heavens say about the grades and heaven and
the rewards of good deeds?

And do you know what they are?” I said: O my Master, You know better.”
He said: “Performing complete ablution in winter time and to struggle
for prayers for you and your descendants and to wait for prayer after
one prayer, to feed the people and to pray at nights when the people
sleep. Then my Lord made bestowals to me and presented gifts to my
Ummah.

And then He said: I ask you, even though I know better than you, tell me
who have you appointed as your representative on the earth?” I replied:
“My cousin, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) who has helped Your religion.” You
are right, O Muhammad, I chose you with prophethood and raised you with
messengership and tested Ali for conveying your messages to your Ummah
and appointed him as My Proof on the earth, with you and after you.

He is the light of my friends and the Wali of those obedient to Me. I
gave Fatima in marriage to him and made him your Wasi, inheritor of your
knowledge and helper of your religion. He will be killed because of his
relation with religion and for being related to Me and you. The vilest
man of this Ummah will slay him.” The Messenger of Allah (S) says: “Then
my Lord, commanded me for certain things which he did not permit me to
disclose.

Then I was conveyed below through the curtain of honor, till I came to
Jibraeel. And when they took me below Sidratul Muntaha, I saw my and
Ali’s dwellings. Jibraeel was speaking to me. Suddenly a ray of divine
light fell upon me and I glanced at it like a point of a needle; it was
also like the Noor I had seen near the Divine Throne.

After that the call of truth reached my ears: “O Muhammad, My mercy
precedes My anger for you and your progeny. You are my privileged one
among My creatures. Only you are my trustworthy and My prophet. I swear
by My might, if My creatures come to Me with all types of worship acts,
but having doubts in your prophethood, or has enmity to My chosen Imams
from your progeny, I will throw all of them into Hell and care less
about it.

O Muhammad, Ali is the chief of believers, leader of the Muslims and who
will lead the Shias to Paradise, and who will be martyred unjustly.”
After that the Almighty Allah encouraged me for prayers and other things
that He wanted. Through reliable chains, it is narrated from Ibn Abbas
that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “When I taken to the heavens, at
each level angels inquired about the well being of Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.) and said: O Messenger of Allah (S), when you return to the earth,
convey our greetings to Ali and his Shia.

When I reached the seventh heaven and moved ahead from there, all angels
and Jibraeel separated from me. I reached the curtains only through
Taufeeq of the Almighty Allah and entered the holy court from one
curtain to another. Veil of honor, veil of power, veil of light, veil of
miracles, veil of greatness, veil of highness, veil of Noor, veil of
dignity, veil of perfection; till the Taufeeq of the Almighty Allah
enabled me to cross seventy thousand curtains.

After that through the wings of acceptance, I flew up the divine
sanctuary and reached to the curtain of majesty and stood on the legs of
servitude in a special chamber and whispered to my Lord. Whatever the
Almighty Allah liked, He revealed to me and whatever I asked for myself
and Ali (a.s.), was granted by Allah. And He promised me intercession
for the Shia of Ali.

Then the Almighty Allah called out: “O Muhammad, whom do you like best
in My creatures?” I said: “I like one whom You like.” I was told: “Hold
Ali dear, as I hold him dear. I also hold dear one who holds him dear.”
I fell down in prostration and praised and thanked the Almighty Allah.”
Then a voice came: “O Muhammad, Ali is my Wali, My chosen one among My
creatures.

I have chosen him after you so that he may be your brother, successor,
Vizier, chosen one and your legatee and that he may be your helper in
the heavens. O Muhammad, I swear by My might, I will surely destroy the
tyrant that harbors enmity against Ali (a.s.) and I will surely defeat
and kill the enemy that confronts Ali (a.s.). O Muhammad, I know what My
servants hold and found Ali (a.s.) most obedient to you, therefore you
should consider him as your brother, successor and Caliph and give your
daughter, Fatima Zahra in marriage to him.

I will bestow him with two sons, who are pure and righteous. By My self,
I have made it compulsory that one who loves Ali, his wife and Imams
from his sons more than others, I will doubtlessly raise him to the
Divine Throne and admit him to Paradise and make him drink the water of
the holy fountain. I will deprive their enemies from all these bounties
and take them away from the courtyard of My mercy and increase My
chastisement and curse for them.

O Muhammad, indeed you are My messenger to all My creatures. And Ali is
My Wali and the leader of believers. It was on this belief that I have
taken covenant from all My creatures when they were in the form of
spirits before I created the heavens and the earth due to the love I
have for you, Ali and the Shia. And I have created your Shia from your
essence.”

I said: “O my Lord, please unite my whole community on his Imamate.” It
was said: “They are examiners and others are examined through them.
Through them will I put to test in the heavens and the earth so that I
may complete their rewards who obey Me about you. And curse be on those
who disobey Me about your rights and through you I will separate the
evil doers from the righteous. O My beloved, I swear by My might, if I
had not created you, I would not have created Adam.

And if I had not created Ali, I would not have created Paradise. Because
through you, I will punish and reward My servants on Judgment Day and
through Ali and his sons, I will take revenge from My enemies. Thus all
their return is to Paradise on Judgment Day. After that I will appoint
you and Ali as the rulers over Paradise.

Your enemies will not enter Paradise and your friends will not enter
Hell and I have sworn by My sacred being that I will do this only.” Thus
when I returned from there and came out of the curtains, I heard a voice
from behind: “O Muhammad, endear Ali, O Muhammad, honor Ali. O Muhammad,
give precedence to Ali, O Muhammad, appoint Ali as your brother,
successor and Caliph.

O Muhammad, endear one who endears Ali. O Muhammad, I advise you about
Ali and his Shia. When I reached the angels, I was congratulated in the
heavens: “O the Messenger of Allah (S), good cheers for you and Ali
(a.s.) for this exaltation.”  
 Through reliable chains, it is narrated from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that
the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “When I entered Paradise, I saw a tree
on which, instead of fruits, there were robes and jewelry. There were
Houries between it and below it were piebald horses. And that tree was
shaded by the pleasure of the Almighty Allah.

I asked: “O Jibraeel, for whom this tree is?” He replied: “It is for
your cousin, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). When the Almighty Allah commands
that people should be admitted into Paradise, Shia of Ali will be
brought below this tree and they will wear the robes and jewelry and
mount those horses. Then the caller will call out: These are the
followers of Ali (a.s.) who bore the troubles of the world with patience
and today they are bestowed with these bounties.

Through reliable chains, it is narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S)
that he said: “When I was taken to the heavens during Meraj, I reached a
palace of pearls which was gilded with gold water and it shone bright. I
came to know that the Almighty Allah had prepared that palace for Ali
and Abbas.”

Through reliable chains, it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that: “One night the Messenger of Allah (S) was in Abtah. Suddenly
Jibraeel appeared with Burraq upon which were tied a thousand saddles.
Burraq prevented him from mounting, so Jibraeel gave her a slap such
that it began to perspire and he said: “Keep straight, this is Muhammad
(S).” So I mounted and the Burraq flew to Sidratul Muntaha.

When we reached the first heaven, the sound of the wings of Burraq and
the brilliance of its Noor caused the angels to fly away in fear.
Jibraeel said: “God is the greatest, God is the greatest.” Then the
angels understood that it was some creature of Allah and they returned
to Jibraeel and asked: “Who is this?” He replied: “It is Muhammad, the
angels saluted him and then Burraq flew up to the second heaven. The
angels of that place also dispersed in fear. Jibraeel said: “I testify
that there is no god, except Allah.” Angels said: “It is a creature of
Allah.”

And they came back to Jibraeel and asked what the matter was. When they
recognized the Holy Prophet (S), they greeted him. This was repeated at
every level and Jibraeel recited a part of Azan at every juncture. When
they reached the seventh heaven the Azan was complete. There the Holy
Prophet (S) led the prophets and angels in prayers. Then Jibraeel took
him to a place where he stood and said: “You go ahead from here, I can’t
move forward beyond this point.”

From there the Almighty Allah took him up by His limitless power till
the point He wanted to take him. And He opened the doors of knowledge
and recognition as much as He wished. Then He said: O Muhammad, who have
you appointed for the guidance of your Ummah. He said: “Allah knows
better.” The Almighty Allah said: “Ali is the chief of the believers.”

Through reliable chains, it is narrated by Ali bin Ibrahim from the
Messenger of Allah (S) that he said: “When I entered Paradise, I saw the
tree Tuba, whose root is in Ali’s celestial palace, and its branches
shaded all the houses of Paradise. On the tree were pails filled with
garments of brocade and satin of Paradise. A million pails were allotted
to every believer, each pail contained different colored garments, all
of different colors and fashions.

The shadow of Tuba is so extended, that a horseman could not gallop
across it in a hundred years. The fruit of that tree is the food of the
inhabitants of Paradise. Every branch in the palaces of believers,
produces a hundred thousand different colored fruits, such as you have
seen on earth, with a vast variety never found there. The place of fruit
plucked from this tree, is immediately supplied by fresh fruit. As the
Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّا مَقْطُوعَةٍ وَلَا مَمْنُوعَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Neither intercepted nor forbidden…”***[^63]

Beneath that tree is a river having four branches: one of clear water,
one of milk, another of wine, and the fourth of honey. Ibn Babawayh has
narrated through authentic chains that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:
“When I reached the seventh heaven during the night of Meraj, my sweat
dropped on the ground through which a red flower grew up.

That flower fell into the sea and a fish tried to catch it and an Amus
(a worm having a broad head and a thin tail and which appears in dirt)
also wanted to snatch it. The Almighty Allah sent an angel who
distributed it equally to both of them. Due to this green leaves that
are present in petals are half thin like the tail of Amus and do not
have petals on some sides and on one side they have petals and one side
is missing. Thus that flower is half like a fish and half like the Amus.
Iranians have versified this subject also.

Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that when the Messenger of Allah (S) went
for Meraj and His Eminence, Abu Talib did not find him in his bed, he
was much worried, and he gathered Bani Hashim and said: “Be prepared, if
Muhammad is not found till the morning, I will take up the sword and
kill whomsoever from the enemies of Muhammad that I may find. He was in
this turmoil when the Holy Prophet (S) came down to the house of Umm
Hani, sister of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

Abu Talib was pleased to see him return and taking his hand brought him
to Masjid Haraam and said to Bani Hashim: “Remove your swords.” And to
the Quraish he said: “If he had not returned tonight, by Allah I would
not have spared anyone of you.”

In the same way it is narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) six
months before Hijrat, on Saturday 17th Ramadan, on the basis of
different reports, he was in the house of Umm Hani or in the house of
Lady Khadija or in the defile of Abu Talib or Masjidul Haraam. And
according to another report, two years after Besat it was the month of
Rabiul Awwal, when Jibraeel and Mikaeel came down each with a thousand
angels.

All greeted the Prophet and congratulated him. They had a quadruped with
them which has a human face, legs like camels and arms like that of
horses and the tail of a cow. It had a pair of wings on its thigh. Its
bridle was made of red ruby and it was attached to its head. When the
Prophet mounted it, it flew towards the heavens. It flew from one heaven
to the other and angels were saluting the Prophet and giving him glad
tidings.

The Holy Prophet (S) could see the prophets on the heavens and also
heard glad tidings from them. So much so that he passed the heavens and
reached to the curtains of light. At this point the Holy Prophet (S)
heard that the angels of curtains were reciting Surah Noor and when he
reached till Kursi, the angels were seen reciting Ayatul Kursi. When he
reached the Arsh, the upholders of the Arsh were reciting Surah Momin.

There it was told a thousand times: Come near. And each time a big wish
of the Prophet was fulfilled. Till he reached to the level of Qaba
Qausain (two bows) and he was told to mention his need. The Holy Prophet
(S) said: “You have made Ibrahim as the Khalil, made Musa as the one
spoken to, Sulaiman got the great kingdom; what did You bestow me with?”

The Almighty Allah said: “If I made Ibrahim as my Khalil, I made you as
my Habib (beloved). If I spoke to Musa at Mount Tur, I spoke with you at
the mat of Noor. If I gave the great kingdom to Sulaiman, I gave you the
everlasting kingdom of the hereafter and gave Paradise in your charge
and also gave you intercession.”[^64]

Migration to Habasha
--------------------

Shaykh Tusi, Ali bin Ibrahim and other tradition scholars have narrated
that when the call of the Messenger of Allah (S) gained strength and
some people joined the religion of the Prophet, the infidels of Quraish
united to harass those who had converted to Islam, so that perhaps they
may recant their faith. So people of every clan decided to harass those
of their clans who had accepted Islam.

And since the Holy Prophet (S) had not been commanded to perform Jihad
against the infidels; in the 5th year of Besat, by the order of Allah, a
group of Muslims was ordered to migrate to Habasha, whose King, Najjashi
also named as Ashama was a nice king who neither oppressed nor agreed to
oppression.

The Muslims were ordered to migrate to Habasha and remain there in his
refuge, till the Almighty Allah gives relief to the Muslims. There were
exigencies in their migration. They helped in conversion of Najjashi and
people of Habasha and their acceptance of Islam strengthened the
Muslims. Thus eleven men and four women secretly left Mecca and set out
for Habasha.

Uthman was also among them as was his wife, an adopted daughter of the
Prophet. Zubair, Abdullah bin Masud, Abdur Rahman bin Auf, Abu Huzaifa
and his wife, Sahla, Musab bin Umair, Abu Salam bin Abdul Asad and his
wife, Umm Salma binte Abu Umayyah, Uthman bin Mazun, Aamir bin Rabia and
his wife Laila binte Abu Khathima, Khatib bin Amr and Suhaili bin Baiza.

All of them set out individually in a secret manner. When they reached
the sea side a boat of traders was present there. They boarded and set
out for Habasha. When the infidels of Quraish came to know about it,
they set out in their pursuit but they could not apprehend them. They
remained in the country of Najjashi during the months of Shaban and
Ramadan.

And they returned in the month of Shawwal and each of them entered into
the security of a Meccan, except for Ibn Masud and he went back to
Habasha. Due to this Hijrat, idolaters of Mecca increased their
atrocities on the Muslims. Then next time the Holy Prophet (S) permitted
them by the command of Allah and they migrated to Habasha and according
to the report of Ali bin Ibrahim, this time His Eminence, Ja’far bin Abi
Talib went to Habasha with seventy-two Muslims.

According to others they were eighty-two, other than women and children.
In one report it is mentioned that eleven ladies accompanied them. This
time the idolater of Quraish sent Amr bin Aas and Ammara bin Walid with
gifts and presents to Najjashi so that he may get them back to Mecca.
There was enmity between Amr bin Aas and Ammara, which Quraish had
reconciled. Ammara was a handsome young man.

Amr bin Aas had also taken his wife along. When they boarded the ship,
they had wine and Ammara told Amr to tell his wife to kiss him. “How is
it possible?” asked Amr. When Amr was also intoxicated and was sitting
on the edge of the ship, Ammar slapped him and threw him into the sea.
Amr held at the ship and some people pulled him aboard. This created
further enmity between them. When they came to Najjashi, they prostrated
before him and presented the gifts. Then he said: “Some of our people
have opposed us in our religion and they abuse our gods and they have
fled our country and taken refuge over here.

We request you to send them back.” Najjashi called for Ja’far. Ibn Masud
says: “When we went to Najjashi, Ja’far told us to remain quiet and that
he would speak to the king. Thus when we entered Najjashi’s court, the
officers told us to prostrate before Najjashi. Ja’far said: “We don’t
prostrate before anyone other than Allah.” Najjashi told them about the
claims of Quraish and His Eminence, Ja’far said: “O King, ask them if we
are their slaves?” Amr Aas said: “No, they are free and they belong to
the noble class.”

His Eminence, Ja’far said: “Ask them if we are indebted to them?” Amr
Aas said: “No, we are not owed anything by them.” His Eminence, Ja’far
said: “Ask them if we have committed any murder for which they want to
punish us.” Amr Aas said: “No.” His Eminence, Ja’far said: “Then what do
you want from us? You have harassed us too much and we left your
country.” Amr Aas said: “They oppose us on our religion and they abuse
our gods and disaffect our youth from our religion, and create discord
in our unity. Give them back to us so that we may settle the matter.”

His Eminence, Ja’far said: “O King, our opposition with them is based on
the fact that the Almighty Allah has raised a Prophet among us and he
commands us not to attribute any partner to Allah. And not to worship
anyone except the One God, not to gamble, to pray, pay Zakat, deal with
justice and favor, do a good turn to the relatives, and he restrains
from evil, oppression, unjust bloodshed, adultery, usury, offal and
blood.

And he is the prophet whose arrival was predicted by Isa (a.s.) and his
name is Ahmad.” Najjashi said: “The Almighty Allah has sent His
Eminence, Isa (a.s.) also with the same code of law. Najjashi was
pleased by Ja’far’s discourse. Amr here exclaimed, “O king, these people
contradict your assertions respecting Isa. “What says your Prophet of
that matter?” demanded Najjashi. Ja’far replied, “He says of Isa what
God has declared concerning Him, that He is the Spirit and Word of God
who caused Him to be brought forth of a virgin.”

Najjashi, turning to his scholars, observed, “More than this cannot be
claimed for Isa;” then addressing Ja’far, he inquired, “Do you remember
any communications which your Prophet has received from God?” Ja’far
replied in the affirmative, and began to recite Surah Maryam, and when
he came to the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُزِّي إِلَيْكِ بِجِذْعِ النَّخْلَةِ تُسَاقِطْ عَلَيْكِ رُطَبًا
جَنِيًّا. فَكُلِي وَاشْرَبِي وَقَرِّي عَيْنًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And shake towards you the trunk of the palm tree, it will drop on
you fresh ripe dates: So eat and drink and refresh the eye.”***[^65]

…Najjashi and the Christian scholars, who were in the assembly, began to
weep excessively, and the king said to Ja’far, “Prosperity be to you and
to him from whom you come! I testify that he is a Messenger of Allah
(S), the one on whom Isa bin Maryam pronounced blessings. If my royalty
did not hinder me, verily, I would go and assume the office of bearing
his shoes. You have leave to retire, and no one shall molest you.”

At the same time he ordered them to be furnished with provisions and
clothing, and whatever was necessary. Amr complained, saying, “O king,
this is contrary to our religion; deliver Ja’far to us.” At this
Najjashi struck Amr on the face, bidding him be silent, and swearing if
he said anything ill of Ja’far, he would put him (Amr) to death. The
king then ordered the gifts which Amr had brought, to be returned to
him, and the wretch left the assembly with blood dripping from his face.
He was saying: “If you say, we will not criticize him.”

During this audience, a maid that stood behind Najjashi fanning him,
fell in love with the handsome Ammarah, and as Amr had met with such
severe rebuke, in order to involve his companion in trouble from the
motive of their old enmity, he said to him, “The king’s maid was much
smitten with you; send someone to foster her passion. Ammarah was stupid
enough to engage in the intrigue, and receiving a favorable answer from
the maid, next took Amr’s insidious advice to send to her for some of
the king’s perfume.

When it was brought, Amr, instigated by the old hatred, took it from the
wretched fool Ammarah and carried it to Najjashi, saying, “I am under
the greatest obligations to preserve the king’s honor, and serve him, as
I am in his territory and enjoy his protection, and must not, therefore,
act a false and dishonest part towards him. My colleague has beguiled
your maid, who has sent him some of the royal perfume.

Being duty bound, I have informed the king of this matter, and here
return the stolen perfumes.” This tale, attested as it was by the
perfume, threw Najjashi into a rage, and at first he resolved to put
Ammarah to death; but on reflection, concluded that was inexpedient, as
the young man had entered his dominions under his own royal protection.

However he summoned his magicians and ordered them to inflict on Ammarah
a punishment worse than death. Accordingly they apprehended him, and
inserted mercury in his sexual organ which made him insane, and he ran
mad into the wilderness and associated with wild men. The Quraish,
hearing of his condition, sent a party after him, who, concealing
themselves by a spring where he came with the wild men for water, caught
him, but he yelled and struggled in their hands till death relieved his
sufferings.

Amr despairing of obtaining the restoration of the refugees, returned to
the Quraish, and reported his failure. Ja’far and his companions
continued to enjoy the favor of Najjashi till the Prophet fled to Medina
and made peace with the Quraish. After this event, the Muslim party in
Habasha started for Medina, and met the Prophet on the day of the
conquest of Khyber. Abdullah bin Ja’far was born through Asma binte
Umais in Habasha. While Ja’far was in Habasha, a son was born to the
king, whom he named Muhammad.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that Umm Habib binte Abu Sufyan was the
wife of Abdullah bin Jahash. Abdullah died in Habasha and the Messenger
of Allah (S) sent message to Najjashi to marry her to him (the Prophet).
Najjashi performed the marriage and gave 400 gold coins as dower on
behalf of the Prophet and sent her a nice dress and perfumes.

Then he prepared for her journey to the Holy Prophet (S). She was
accompanied by Mariya the Copt, mother of Ibrahim, also with a lot of
garments and horses. And he sent thirty Christian scholars to study and
ascertain in what manner he spoke, ate, drank, sat, prayed, and other
particulars of his habits and customs. When they reached Medina, the
Holy Prophet (S) invited them to Islam and recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ اللَّهُ يَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ اذْكُرْ نِعْمَتِي
عَلَيْكَ وَعَلَىٰ وَالِدَتِكَ إِذْ أَيَّدْتُكَ بِرُوحِ الْقُدُسِ
تُكَلِّمُ النَّاسَ فِي الْمَهْدِ وَكَهْلًا ۖ وَإِذْ عَلَّمْتُكَ
الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَالتَّوْرَاةَ وَالْإِنْجِيلَ ۖ وَإِذْ
تَخْلُقُ مِنَ الطِّينِ كَهَيْئَةِ الطَّيْرِ بِإِذْنِي فَتَنْفُخُ
فِيهَا فَتَكُونُ طَيْرًا بِإِذْنِي ۖ وَتُبْرِئُ الْأَكْمَهَ
وَالْأَبْرَصَ بِإِذْنِي ۖ وَإِذْ تُخْرِجُ الْمَوْتٰى بِإِذْنِي ۖ
وَإِذْ كَفَفْتُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ عَنْكَ إِذْ جِئْتَهُمْ
بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْهُمْ إِنْ هٰذَا إِلَّا
سِحْرٌ مُبِينٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When Allah will say: O Isa son of Maryam! Remember My favor on you
and on your mother, when I strengthened you with the holy Spirit, you
spoke to the people in the cradle and when of old age, and when I taught
you the Book and the wisdom and the Taurat and the Injeel; and when you
determined out of clay a thing like the form of a bird by My permission,
then you breathed into it and it became a bird by My permission, and you
healed the blind and the leprous by My permission; and when you brought
forth the dead by My permission; and when I withheld the children of
Israel from you when you came to them with clear arguments, but those
who disbelieved among them said: This is nothing but clear
enchantment.”***[^66]

On hearing this passage, they wept and believed and returning to
Najjashi extolled the agreeable manners of the Prophet and repeated
verses to him at which the king and all his scholars wept. The king
became a Muslim, but did not disclose his faith to the people of Habasha
through fear they would kill him. He left his kingdom with the intention
of attending on the Prophet, but after his embarkation, died. On this
event, the Almighty Allah revealed this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَتَجِدَنَّ أَشَدَّ النَّاسِ عَدَاوَةً لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الْيَهُودَ
وَالَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا ۖ وَلَتَجِدَنَّ أَقْرَبَهُمْ مَوَدَّةً
لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ قَالُوا إِنَّا نَصَارٰى ۚ ذٰلِكَ بِأَنَّ
مِنْهُمْ قِسِّيسِينَ وَرُهْبَانًا وَأَنَّهُمْ لَا
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ.وَإِذَا سَمِعُوا مَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ تَرٰى
أَعْيُنَهُمْ تَفِيضُ مِنَ الدَّمْعِ مِمَّا عَرَفُوا مِنَ الْحَقِّ ۖ
يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا آمَنَّا فَاكْتُبْنَا مَعَ الشَّاهِدِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly you will find the most violent of people in enmity for
those who believe (to be) the Jews and those who are polytheists, and
you will certainly find the nearest in friendship to those who believe
(to be) those who say: We are Christians; this is because there are
priests and monks among them and because they do not behave proudly. And
when they hear what has been revealed to the apostle you will see their
eyes overflowing with tears on account of the truth that they recognize;
they say: Our Lord! we believe, so write us down with the witnesses (of
truth).”***[^67]

Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have narrated through authentic chains of narrators
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that one day Najjashi called Ja’far with
his companions and when they came, they saw that Najjashi was seated on
the ground wearing old clothes. Ja’far says: When we saw this, we were
shocked and when he noticed our apprehension, he said: “I thank the
Almighty Allah who helped Muhammad and lighted my eyes with his help.

Would you like to hear the good news? “Yes,” I said. He said: “Right now
my spy has told me that the Almighty Allah helped his Prophet and killed
many of his enemies. So and so was killed and so and so were taken
captive. Their battle took place in a valley called Badr. As if I can
see that valley in which I used to graze the sheep of my master which
was situated in Bani Zumra.”

Ja’far asked: “O good king, why are you seated on the ground and why
have you donned old clothes?” He replied: “O Ja’far, we have read in
Injeel that when the Almighty Allah, the generous one, bestows some
favor to the servant, the servant is duty bound to offer thanks at that
moment and it is mentioned in that same Injeel that in the view of Allah
no thankfulness is better than humility. Thus I have adopted this
humility to thank for the victory of the Prophet.”

When the Messenger of Allah (S) heard this he said to his companions:
“Sadaqah increases the wealth of the giver, so you must also pay Sadaqah
so that the Almighty Allah is more merciful to you humility results in
honor, so you must also adopt humility; so that the Almighty Allah also
raises your grades and forgiveness increases respect. So forgive the
mistakes of others so that the Almighty Allah may hold you respectable.

Shaykh Tabarsi and Qutub Rawandi etc. have narrated that the Messenger
of Allah (S) wrote a letter to Najjashi respecting Ja’far and his
companions and sent it through Amr bin Umayyah Zumri, the purport of
which was this: In the name of Allah the Compassionate, the Merciful.
This is a letter from Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah (S), to Najjashi,
king of Habasha. Peace be on you! I render thanks to Allah, the Holy
King and faithful Protector.

I testify that Isa the son of Maryam is the Spirit and Word of Allah.
The Almighty Allah bestowed that one chosen and created by Himself, on
Maryam, a virgin, who had been kept separate from men, who was pure and
holy, and who was unstained by fornication or carnal intercourse. She
conceived Isa by the breath of the Holy Spirit, and Allah breathed into
Him His own chosen Spirit, as by His own power He created Adam of clay,
and breathed into Him His own chosen Spirit.

I call you to the acknowledgment and worship of the sole God Who has no
associate. I enjoin you to be the friend of man, in obedience to Allah.
I summon you to follow and believe in me and in that which has been
revealed to me. Verily, I am a Prophet sent by Allah. I have sent to you
my cousin, Ja’far bin Abu Talib, with a company of Muslims. On their
arrival, entertain them and be not haughty.

I summon you and your army to the cause of God. And now the divine
message with which I am charged concerning you is executed. I have laid
before you the conditions of future good. Receive my counsel, and the
peace of God be on him who follows the path of religious instruction.

In reply to the Prophet’s letter, the king wrote as follows: In the name
of Allah the Compassionate, the Merciful; this is a letter to Muhammad,
the Messenger of Allah (S), from Najjashi, the son of As-ha. Peace be to
you from Allah, O apostle of Allah and of mercy and blessing be to you
from Allah besides Whom there is no Lord. He has guided me into the
faith of Islam. Verily, your letter has reached me, O Messenger of Allah
(S).

I swear by the Lord of heaven and earth, that what you say concerning
Isa is true, and that he is no more than you have described him to be. I
have fully understood the rest of your reverenced epistle, and have
honored your cousin and his companions. I testify that you are the
Messenger of Allah (S), truth-speaking, and witnessed to be true. I have
believed in you, and have pledged myself to your cousin, and by his
instrumentality have become a Muslim, a true believer in the Lord of the
universe. I have sent to you, apostle of Allah, my son.

I have no power to make any one a Muslim but myself. If you command it,
I will wait upon you in person. I testify that all your commands are
according to truth. Najjashi accompanied his letter with presents, and
sent Mariya the Copt, who became the mother of the Prophet’s son
Ibrahim, along with a group of persons who embraced Islam at his hands
and then returned.

It is related that His Eminence, Abu Talib wrote a letter to Najjashi
asking him to help and support the Messenger of Allah (S) and had also
mentioned some couplets therein as follows:  
 O king of Habasha, you should know that Muhammad (S) is a prophet like
Musa and Masih bin Maryam (a.s.) and he also brought the divine
teachings like the previous prophets had brought. And you read about the
veracity and qualities of the Messenger of Allah (S) in your books. So
do not associate anyone with the Almighty Allah and accept Islam which
is the true path and which is an illuminated and a clear path. It is not
dark and concealed.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) that when Jibraeel (a.s.) informed the Holy
Prophet (S) about the passing away of Najjashi, King of Habasha, the
Messenger of Allah (S) wept in grief and remarked: “Your brother,
As-hama has departed from his holy abode today.”

Then the Holy Prophet (S) came out of the Baqi cemetery and the Almighty
Allah lowered all the highlands till the Holy Prophet (S) saw his bier
in Habasha and recited his funeral prayers with seven Takbirs. The same
report Shaykh Tabarsi has quoted from Jabir Ansari and Ibn Abbas etc. in
which it is also mentioned that when the Messenger of Allah (S) recited
the funeral prayer of Najjashi, the hypocrites commented: He is reciting
the funeral prayer of a Christian of Habasha whom he has never seen. At
that juncture, the following verse was revealed in their refutation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ لَمَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ وَمَا
أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكُمْ وَمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْهِمْ خَاشِعِينَ لِلَّهِ لَا
يَشْتَرُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ ثَمَنًا قَلِيلًا ۗأُولٰئِكَ لَهُمْ
أَجْرُهُمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most surely of the followers of the Book there are those who
believe in Allah and (in) that which has been revealed to you and (in)
that which has been revealed to them, being lowly before Allah; they do
not take a small price for the communications of Allah; these it is***
***that have their reward with their Lord; surely Allah is quick in
reckoning.”(***[^68]***)(***[^69]***)***

Kulaini, Ibn Babawayh and Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have narrated through
authentic chains of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that His
Eminence, Ja’far returned from Habasha and reached the Prophet on the
day of the conquest of Khyber. The Messenger of Allah (S) was highly
elated and he said: “I can’t say on which to express more happiness: on
the conquest of Khyber or the return of Ja’far.”

When Ja’far arrived, the Prophet embraced him and accorded him a warm
welcome and asked: “Do you want me to bestow you something?” “Yes, O
Messenger of Allah (S).” People thought that the Holy Prophet (S) would
give him a lot of wealth from the booty of Khyber and they craned their
necks to see what he was giving. The Holy Prophet (S) said to Ja’far: I
give you something and teach you an act which if you perform everyday,
it will be better than everything in the world.

Or even if you perform it once a month or once a year, all sins
committed during this time will be forgiven.” Then the Messenger of
Allah (S) taught him a prayer called Prayer of Ja’far at-Tayyar. Shaykh
Tabarsi has narrated that His Eminence, Ja’far returned to the Holy
Prophet (S) on the day of the conquest of Khyber along with sixty-two
persons of Habasha and eighty people from Shaam including Bahira, the
monk.

The Messenger of Allah (S) recited Surah Yasin before them and they wept
a great deal and said: How similar is this discourse to the one revealed
on Prophet Isa (a.s.)!

Confinement in Shebe Abu Talib – events leading to migration to Medina
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Tabarsi and Qutub Rawandi have narrated that in the eighth year
of the Prophet’s prophetical office, when the Quraish infidels and
idolaters of Mecca saw that Hamza had become a Muslim, and heard that
Najjashi had protected the Muslim refugees, and had himself become a
believer, and when they witnessed the resolution with which Abu Talib
and most of the Bani Hashim defended the Prophet, and that Islam was
spreading among most Arab tribes, and the truth of the Prophet’s claims
manifested to multitudes – in view of all these things, they were
greatly perplexed, and the fire of hatred and of idolatry blazed afresh
in their bosoms.

Under the influence of these feelings, they assembled in Darul Nadwa, a
noted place, and carried their hostile resolutions so far that they
pledged themselves to each other by oath, and signed a covenant, that
they would not eat, nor speak, nor trade, nor intermarry with the Bani
Hashim, till they were forced to deliver the Prophet to them so that
they can put him to death.

They resolved, moreover, that Muhammad should be put to death whenever
an opportunity offered. On being informed of these resolutions of
Quraish, Abu Talib assembled the whole company of Bani Hashim, who were
in all forty men, and swore by the Kaaba, that if, by means of an enemy,
a thorn pierced the foot of the Prophet, he would kill them all.

He then took the Prophet, and with the company of Bani Hashim, retired
to a defile, called, in consequence, the defile of Abu Talib. He
stationed guards day and night at the passes leading to his retreat, in
order to protect the Prophet from all harm. Sword in hand, while the
Prophet slept at night, he guarded him with the greatest vigilance, and
as a moth circles a candle, so he continued to march around that lamp of
prophecy.

He used the additional precaution of having the Prophet sleep part of
the night in one place, and part in another, and moreover caused Ali,
the dearest of his sons, to sleep with the Prophet during the first part
of the night, so that if an enemy at that hour had observed the Prophet,
and afterwards attempted his life, the stroke might fall on Ali and the
Prophet escape. In this arrangement, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) most
cordially acquiesced, cheerfully exposing his life on behalf of the
Prophet. The same vigilant guard was kept up during the day, Abu Talib
making his sons and nephews responsible for the Prophet’s safety.

The party in the defile were at length reduced to great straits; no Arab
coming to Mecca ventured to sell anything to Bani Hashim, for if he did,
his property was plundered by the Quraish. Abu Jahl, Aas bin Wail, Nazar
bin Harith and Aqba bin Muit was particularly active in intimidating
caravans and preventing them from relieving the Bani Hashim.

Khadija spent the greater part of her large fortune in support of her
husband and his party when they were in the defile. All the Quraish
chiefs had signed the agreement against the Bani Hashim, except Motam
bin Adi, who declared it was a tyrannical proceeding, and he would have
nothing to do with it.

Forty Quraish chiefs, among whom was Abu Lahab, set their seals to the
covenant, which was wrapped and hung up in the Kaaba. At the seasons of
pilgrimage, sacred from war and violence, the Prophet left the defile,
and, mingling with the pilgrim Arabs, said, “I am sent as a Prophet from
Allah, and call on you to embrace my faith, enter the pale of my
religion, and protect me from the designs of my enemies, and I will be
surety that you shall enjoy Paradise.” Abu Lahab followed the Prophet,
saying to the people, “Do not listen to what this fellow says; although
he is my nephew, he is liar and a sorcerer.”

The Prophet and his protectors remained in the defile for four years,
only venturing to leave their asylum at the seasons of Hajj, of which
there were annually two, one called Umrah, in the month of Rajab, and
the other the great pilgrimage, in the month of Zilhajj. During these
seasons, the Bani Hashim left their valley, traded and returned, and
however much hunger and other necessities pressed them, through fear of
the Quraish they did not venture out again till another pilgrim season.

During this period, the Quraish sent a message to Abu Talib, promising
to make him their king on the condition that he would deliver up to them
Muhammad to be put to death. The brave chieftain answered in an
extemporaneous ode in which he extolled the Prophet in the highest
degree, manifested his own faith in him, and declared he would defend
him as long as he lived. This ode from Abu Talib threw the Quraish into
despair.

Abu Laith bin Rabia, a son-in-law of the Prophet, brought his camels
laden with wheat and dates to the entrance of the defile, and shouted
after them till they had gone in, when he returned. Goods were unloaded
and the camels came out again. On this generous act the Prophet said,
“Abu Laith had done nobly by us, fulfilling the obligation of a
son-in-law.”

The distress of the Bani Hashim at last reached that pitch that the
cries of their children for food prevented the people of Mecca from
sleeping. Most of the Quraish now began to repent of the agreement into
which they had entered, but having signed the covenant they could not
act contrary to it. When they met at the Kaaba in the morning, and
inquired for each other’s health, some would say they could not sleep
the past night on account of the crying children of the Bani Hashim from
hunger. This indeed caused the most malignant to exult, but some of the
Quraish were troubled by it.[^70]

It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)* that when Quraish
forced Bani Hashim to take refuge in the defile of Abu Talib, the
Quraish appointed some persons to guard the entrances so that they may
prevent rations from them. Companions of the Prophet were reduced to the
greatest distress; they were miraculously relieved by the Prophet, Allah
sending them better supplies than the manna and quails provided for the
Bani Israel.

And all got what they so desired. They once complained about their
confinement in the defile and the Holy Prophet (S) signaled to the walls
of the defile to move further and a huge field appeared in the defile.
Then the Holy Prophet (S) signaled with his hands to the desert to throw
up miraculous vegetation and streams of water etc. Then Bani Hashim
complained to the Prophet that their clothes had become old and soiled.

He commanded them to breathe on them, draw their hands over them in
putting them on, and pronounce blessings on him and his sacred family,
by which means their garments were rendered white, clean, and becoming,
and their grief and trouble were removed, and their persons moreover
were thus perfectly cleansed.

They exclaimed, “How wonderful it is that by pronouncing blessings on
you and your family, our garments and persons should become so pure!” He
replied, “This likewise purifies your hearts from hypocrisy, enmity, and
everything bad, and washes out the record of your sins more entirely
than the soiling of your garments.”

It is related in previous reports that after Bani Hashim had lived four
years, by another account three years, and by another still two years in
the defile, the Almighty Allah sent termites against that cursed scroll
of Quraish, which they had placed in the Kaaba, and utterly cleared the
parchment of every word except the name of Allah, which was written on
it. Jibraeel revealed this to the Prophet, who reported it to Abu Talib.

At these glad tidings, the chieftain dressed and started for Kaaba,
where he found the Quraish chiefs assembled. On seeing Abu Talib, they
said to one another, “He is now forced to surrender the Prophet to us.”
At his approach, they rose and treated him with the greatest deference
and respect, and said, “We perceive you have come to unite your counsels
with ours and deliver your nephew to us.”

“No, indeed!” said Abu Talib, “I come for no such purpose; but my
nephew, who never lies, has assured me that the Almighty Allah has sent
termites that have totally effaced your cursed agreement, and
obliterated the tyrannical and unjust compact into which you entered,
and that nothing remains on the parchment, but the name of Allah.
Produce it now: if the Prophet’s declarations herein prove true, then
fear God, and turn, from your oppressive and unmerciful doings: if what
he has asserted is false, I will deliver him to you, and if you please,
put him to death.”

They agreed that this was an equitable proposition, and bringing the
parchment from the Kaaba, they found the seals perfect, but when they
opened the instrument, it appeared in just the state the Prophet had
described. The Quraish hung their heads, while Abu Talib warmly exhorted
them to fear God and leave off their tyranny. Several of them like Motam
bin Adi, Abul Bakhtari bin Hisham and Zubair bin Umayyah now rose and
declared they were heartily sick of the embargo, and it was agreed to
tear the sheet on which it had been written, notwithstanding Abu Jahl’s
efforts to have it re-established.

The Bani Hashim now left the defile, and returned to their houses, and
two months after this event, Abu Talib fell sick. When the Prophet
visited him and saw that he was soon to depart, he said, “O my uncle,
you brought me up in infancy, assisted me in manhood, and supplied my
wants in my orphan state. May God, on my account, grant you the best
rewards.

I ask one word from you that my eyes may be enlightened.” The object of
the Prophet in this was, that it might be publicly known that Abu Talib
was a Muslim, though he had not openly professed Islam, that he might
more effectually serve the Prophet. Abu Talib now repeated the creed,
declared his faith in Islam, and after committing to the Prophet the
relics of the prophets, and the covenant of Ibrahim, departed to the
eternal God.[^71]

The Prophet consigned his remains to the tomb, and wept, saying, “O my
uncle, your kindred kindness has been unceasing, may Allah give you a
good reward!” It is well known that Abu Talib’s death occurred in the
tenth year of the Prophet’s prophetical mission. Thirty-five days after
that melancholy event, or according to some, three days afterwards,
Khadija departed to the holy world.

By these calamities, one speedily following the other, the Prophet was
grievously afflicted. Both of these individuals had been his viziers,
assistants, and helpers in promoting Islam, and were his companions in
most pressing adversities.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated from, Ibn Abbas that the death of Abu Talib
occurred on the twenty-sixth of the month of Rajab, in the last part of
the tenth year of the prophetical mission of the Prophet, and Khadija
dying three days afterwards, the Prophet named that the year of grief
(*Aamul Huzn*). Ibn Babawayh has narrated that when Khadija was near her
departure to the eternal world, the Prophet visited her and said, “To me
it is a heavy burden to see you thus, but when you reach your place in
Paradise give your companions my salutation.”

“Who are they?” she inquired. He replied, “Maryam, daughter of Imran,
Kulthum, sister of Musa, Asiya wife of Firon, all of whom, with
yourself, will be my wives in Paradise.” “May the union be blessed,”
added Khadija. It is well known that Khadija was sixty-five years old
when she died. The Prophet buried her at Hajoon. He entered the grave
himself to lay her in it.

Kulaini his through good chains narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that after the death of Abu Talib, Jibraeel descended and directed the
Prophet to depart from Mecca, for no one was left able to defend him
from Quraish, who were becoming more, exasperated against him.
Accordingly he left the city, and went to a mountain near Mecca, called
Hajoon.

Ayyashi has also narrated from the same Imam that the Messenger of Allah
(S) after Besat remained in concealment for three years from the
idolaters of Quraish and there was no one with him except Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and Khadija. Till the Almighty Allah commanded him to
disclose his faith and not to care about the idolaters.

At that time the Prophet declared his faith to the Arab tribes and
sought their help, but they used to deny him and drive him away. And
Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated that after the death of Abu Talib when the
harassment of Quraish increased he went to Taif in order to call the
people towards the true religion.

He met the three chiefs of Thaqif tribe who were brothers; Abde Bil
Lail, Habib and Masud bin Amr. The Holy Prophet (S) invited them to
embrace Islam and complained about the harassment of his people and
sought their help in this regard. They replied in the nastiest way and
instigated their own people to harass the Prophet and the wretched
people stood in his way. Wherever the Prophet went, he was welcomed with
stones, till his feet were injured and bleeding. At last he took shelter
under a tree in an orchard.

He met Atba and Shaibah and since he was aware of their enmity, he was
aggrieved to see them. One of their slaves, Adas was from the Nainawa
area and the two of them sent him to the Prophet with a tray of grapes.
When Adad came to the Prophet, the latter asked him to which place he
belonged. Adas said that he was from Nainawa. The Holy Prophet (S) said:
“You are from the righteous servant of Allah, Yunus bin Mata. Then he
narrated to him the story about Prophet Yunus (a.s.) and invited him to
Islam.

The Holy Prophet (S) did not consider anyone too lowly to be invited to
embrace Islam; he considered all equal in this regard. Since Adas was a
learned man and had studied the past books, when he came to know about
the perfections and good qualities of the Prophet, he accepted Islam and
fell down at the bleeding feet of the Messenger of Allah (S). He kissed
the feet of the Prophet and rubbed his eyes against him.

Then he returned to that accursed duo who asked him why he had
prostrated to Muhammad while even though they were his masters, he had
never prostrated to them. He said it was because I became aware of his
greatness and majesty and I got his recognition, and I found my heart
brimming with his love.

The due laughed and said: “Do not be deceived by him, he is a sorcerer.”
And Ibn Shahr Ashob has narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) reached
Taif, he saw the accursed duo seated on chairs and seeing the Prophet,
they remarked: “He is coming, now he will stand before us.” But when the
Prophet came near, their chairs bowed down in obeisance and the duo fell
down. So they said: “When your magic did not work on Meccans, you have
come to Taif?”

According to one report it is mentioned that the Holy Prophet (S) went
to Taif with Zaid bin Haritha in the 10th year of prophethood in the end
of the month of Shawwal. And he stayed there for 10 or 50 days. After
that he set out for Mecca. On the way, he halted at a grapevine and
supplicated the Almighty:  
 “O Allah, I complain to You for the weakening of my strength and lack
of my determination and dependence to people. You are the most merciful
of the merciful ones. Lord of the deprived ones. And You are the Lord;
to whom do you entrust me to? To the people who do not obey me or to any
enemy” Who has the control of all my affairs.

If there is no anger from you, I don’t care. But Your forgiveness is
most vast for me. I seek refuge from the light of Your face which
dispels all the darknesses. And due to which all the affairs of the
world and hereafter were reformed, that Your anger should come upon me
or Your chastisement should fall on me. All the prayers are from you
till are not pleased…”

This supplication is proved effective in removal of hardships. When the
Holy Prophet (S) reached Nakhla, the Almighty Allah sent a group of
Jinns to him, which embraced the faith.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that when the Holy Prophet (S) returned
from Taif, he donned the Ihram for Umrah and tried to enter Mecca. He
sent a man from Quraish who had secretly believed in the Prophet to
Akhnas bin Shareek and said that Muhammad wants to enter Mecca and
perform Umrah and Sayy under his guarantee, and the Prophet himself hid
in Hira cave along with Zaid. When this message was delivered he said: I
am not from Quraish, I am their Caliph.

I doubt if they would accept my guarantee and this would be humiliating
for me. Then the Holy Prophet (S) sent him to Suhail bin Amr seeking his
guarantee but he also declined. Then Motam bin Adi was contacted and he
said: “I have given guarantee to you, you may come to Mecca and do
whatever you like.”

And he told his sons and sons-in-law and his brother, Taima to arm
themselves and publicly declared that he has stood as a surety for
Muhammad. “Keep circling the Kaaba and grant him protection, so that he
may perform the Tawaf and Sayy.” They were ten persons in all. When the
Prophet entered Mecca, the accursed Abu Jahl said: “O Quraish, Muhammad
has come alone, his protector and helper is dead. You can do whatever
you like with him.”

Taima heard this and said: “Shut up, my brother has stood as surety for
him.” The accursed Abu Jahl came to Motam and asked: “Have you all
become a member of Muhammad’s religion?” “No,” said he, “but I have
stood as a surety for him.” When the Messenger of Allah (S) concluded
the Tawaf and Sayy, he came to Motam and said: “O Abu Wahab, you stood
as a surety for me and did a favor on me. Now I am leaving your
protection.” He asked: “Why don’t you continue in my protection? Quraish
will cause no harm to you.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “I don’t want to stay in the protection of an
idolater for more than a day.” Motam called out: “Muhammad has gone out
of my protection.” The Messenger of Allah (S) used to invite the Arab
tribes to accept faith in every season and he used to visit their homes
and propagate Islam. That year he married Ayesha, the daughter of Abu
Bakr, and Saudah, the daughter of Rabia.[^72]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that Asad bin Zurarah, and Zakwan bin Abde
Qays, of the tribe of Khazraj, had visited Mecca in one of the Umrah
seasons in the month of Rajab. Between the Khazraj and the tribe of Aws
the fire of war had been blazing for years, and about the time just
mentioned, the Battle of Baas was fought, in which the tribe of Aws were
victors.

Asad and Zakwan came therefore to Mecca to negotiate an alliance with
the Quraish, to enable their tribe to repulse the victorious enemy. Asad
being acquainted with a Quraish chief, named Atba bin Rabiah, on
arriving at Mecca, alighted at his house and declare the object of his
visit. Atba replied, “Our country is distant from yours, and we have now
special business on our hands, which will prevent us from meddling with
others’ affairs.”

“What important matter may this be?” inquired Asad, as you dwell in the
sacred and secure city. “A man has arisen among us,” replied Atba, “who
claims to be the Messenger of Allah (S), talks nonsense on the subject
of religion, reviles our gods, and beguiles our youth.” “Is he one of
yourselves, replied the other, or a stranger?” “He is one of us,” said
Atba, “and of the best class of us, the son of Abdullah bin Abdul
Muttalib, and is the most noble, excellent, and illustrious among us.”

As the tribes of Aws and Khazraj had often been told by the neighboring
Jews of the tribes of Bani Quraiza, Bani Nuzayr, and Bani Qinqaa, that a
Prophet was to arise at Mecca, flee to Medina, and slay a great many
Arabs, Asad, on hearing Atba’s account, thought that this man must be
that same Prophet described by the Jews, and therefore inquired where he
was. Atba replied, “You will now find him seated by Hajar Ismail, but he
and his party are shut up in a defile, except at the season of
pilgrimage.

But say you nothing to him, nor listen to his words, for he is a
magician, and by the sorcery of his words, robs people of their hearts.”
This conversation, it will be observed, happened during the period the
Bani Hashim were besieged in the defile of Abu Talib. Asad replied, “I
have come on a pilgrimage, and of course must go to the Masjid to
perform the religious circuits.” “Fill your ears with cotton,” then said
Atba, “that you may not hear what he says.”

Asad followed the advice he had received, and entering the place of
devotion, beheld the Prophet, with a party of Bani Hashim, seated at
Hajar Ismail. The visitor began his circuits, and passed before the
Prophet, who looked at him and smiled. In the second circuit, Asad said
to himself, “How silly I am to return to Medina without finding out the
truth of this matter which is agitating Mecca.”

He then took the cotton out of his ears, and approaching the Prophet,
saluted him with, “Good morning,” which was the customary form of
salutation. The Prophet, raising his head, said, “Allah has given me a
better salutation, even than that of the inhabitants of Paradise,
namely, peace be on you!” “To what do you call us?” asked Asad. He
replied, “I call you to testify to the unity of God and to my
prophethood.

Ascribe no associate to Allah; do good to your father and mother; do not
kill your children through fear of poverty: abandon open and secret
sins; put no one to death unjustly; touch not the property of orphans
except to improve it; let your weight and measures be perfect; speak
accordingly to justice and truth; incline not to one side to favor a
kinsman, and fulfill your covenant with God. This is the message God
sends you, perhaps you will remember it.”

On hearing these words the light of faith entered Asad’s heart, and
eternal felicity made him her own. He exclaimed, “I testify that there
is no God but Allah, and I testify that you, O Messenger of Allah (S),
are His apostle. May my father and mother be your sacrifice! I am of
Medina, of the tribe of Khazraj. Between us and the tribe of Aws the
bonds of friendship are broken. If God should reunite them by your
means, and restore peace between us, none would be more esteemed among
us than yourself.

I have colleagues here of my own tribe; if they should embrace this
faith, I am hopeful our matters will be arranged by your good offices.
Verily, I have heard of you from the Jews, who congratulate us on your
future coming to Medina, and give us descriptions of your character, and
I hope our region will be honored by your removal there, for which the
Jews have assured us.

I thank God for the favor of having seen you; verily, I came to sign a
treaty with Quraish, and God has imparted to me something better than I
sought.” Then Zakwan arrived and Asad told him that he had found
Muhammad respecting whom the Jews had congratulated them, and described
his character to his colleague, who also believed.

They then implored the Prophet to send a person with them to teach the
Qur’an and call their people to the faith of Islam. He accordingly sent
with them Musab bin Umair, who was still a mere youth. He had been very
tenderly brought up, was the darling of his father and mother, who
watched over him so affectionately that he had never been out of Mecca
before he became a Muslim. His parents then treated him very cruelly,
and banished him from their presence.

He took refuge with the Prophet in the defile, and his personal
appearance was much altered, because it was difficult for him to endure
hardships. He had treasured up in his memory very much of the Qur’an,
and of the divine precepts. Asad and Zakwan, with their Muslim teacher,
Musab, now departed for Medina, and on rejoining their people, related
the story of the Prophet, and narrated his perfections.

One or two persons of every tribe at Medina directly became Muslims.
Musab lodged in the house of Asad, and went daily among the parties of
Khazraj, calling on them to embrace Islam, and he won the youth over to
faith. At that time Abdullah bin Ubayy was chief of the Khazraj, with
who the Aws came into an agreement to make him chief over both tribes,
on account of his noble rank and generosity.

A crown was being prepared for him, its completion being delayed for
want of gems to be set in it. The Aws, notwithstanding because he did
not aid the Khazraj at the Battle of Baas, declaring the war unjust on
their part. The spread of Islam at Medina caused the royal power of
Abdullah to totter, for which reason he endeavored to put a stop to the
new schism among his people. Asad now said to Musab, “My maternal uncle,
Saad bin Maaz, is one of the chiefs of Aws.

He is a noble and intelligent man, of the greatest influence in the clan
of Amr bin Auf. If he should become a Muslim, our affairs would be
complete. Let us, then, visit their quarter.” So they arrived there, and
seating themselves by a well, a party of young people came around them,
to whom Musab began to recite the Qur’an.

The news soon reached Saad bin Maaz, who called a chief named Usaid bin
Khuzayr, and said to him, “I hear that Asad, with a Quraish man, has
come to our quarter, and is corrupting our youth. You go and put a stop
to their doings.” When Usaid appeared, Asad observed to his companion,
“This is a great and noble man, if he should join our party, I am
hopeful our object would be accomplished.”

Usaid, on approaching, said to Asad, “Your maternal uncle sends you this
message: Come not into our assemblies, corrupt not our youth, and fear
the Aws.” “Sit down,” replied Musab, “and give us leave to explain: if
our doctrine pleases you, accept it; if not, at your wish we will leave
your district.”

Usaid complied, and Musab had no sooner recited a chapter of the Qur’an
to him than the light of Islam illumined his heart, and he inquired,
“What must one do who embraces this faith?” Musab replied, “He must
bathe, put on two clean garments, pronounce the two testimonies, and
pray at the Kaaba.” Usaid immediately threw himself into the well, came
out, wrung his clothes, and said, “Tell me the testimonies.”

He then repeated the creed: There is no god but Allah; Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah (S); and performed two rakats of prayer.” Now, said
Usaid to Asad, “I will go, and by one device or another will send your
uncle to you.” As this fortunate man was approaching, Saad swore he was
coming back with a new face on him.

Usaid put his stratagems in operation and succeeded in sending Saad to
Musab, who had no sooner recited to him the chapter entitled, Ha Mim
than the light of faith illumined his mind. After sending home for two
clean garments, he bathed, pronounced the creed, and performed two
rakats of prayers. He then took the hand of Musab, brought him to his
house, and said, “Proclaim your religion and fear no one.”

Saad went himself to the tribe of Amr bin Auf, and proclaimed with a
loud voice, “O you children of Amr bin Auf let neither man nor woman,
boy nor girl, remain, but all come out, for this is not a day for any
one to stay behind the curtain.” When all were assembled, he demanded
what rank and reputation he held among them.

They replied, “You are our chief, and whatever you command we will do,
rejecting no order whatever.” Saad replied, “It is unlawful for any of
you to speak to me till you testify to the unity of God and the
prophethood of the Prophet. I praise God for the great favor conferred
on me. This is the same Prophet of whom the Jews have given us
information.” The whole tribe became Muslim that day.

Islam now prevailed among the Khazraj and Aws, their chiefs having
embraced the faith. This conversion was readily accomplished because the
Jews had given such description of the character of the Prophet. Musab
reported his success to the Prophet, who thereupon gave permission to
all Muslim suffering oppression for their faith, to remove to Medina,
which they did one by one. On arriving at that city the tribes of
Khazraj and Aws took the refugees to their houses, and treated them with
the greatest hospitality and respect.

It is differently related by some, that in the eleventh year of his
prophethood, after coming out of the defile of Abu Talib, the Prophet
met six men of Khazraj tribe, who were: Asad bin Zurarah, Aun bin Harth,
Rafe bin Malik, Qatba bin Aamir, Aqba bin Aamir and Jabir bin Abdullah.
The Messenger of Allah (S) asked them who they were and they said that
they were from Khazraj tribe. The Prophet asked them to grant him some
audience and they obliged him.

The Prophet invited them to Islam and recited the verses of Qur’an. When
they witnessed the veracity of the Prophet, they remarked that he was
the same Prophet about whom the Jews used to narrate. “So we should take
precedence in accepting faith.” So they embraced Islam and on their
return to Medina they brought their people to embrace Islam. In the
twelfth year of prophethood, twelve persons of Ansars came to the
Prophet and paid allegiance to him at Aqbah, which is the first
allegiance of Aqbah.

According to this report, this year the Messenger of Allah (S) sent
Musab bin Umair with them to instruct them in the faith. And call them
to Islam and Qur’an. At the next season of pilgrimage, in the thirteenth
year of prophethood, many from the tribes of Aws and Khazraj, both
Muslims and infidels, came to Mecca to see the Prophet. He asked them,
“Will you defend me that I may read you the book of God, and will you
become Muslim and receive your reward in Paradise?”

“Yes,” they replied, “and will grant you whatever covenant you desire in
respect to yourself and your God.” The Prophet appointed the twelfth
night of Rajab to form the league, the place to be the summit of Mount
Mina, where the Ansaris, after performing the ceremonies of the
pilgrimage, arrived. A great number had become Muslims, but the majority
of them were yet idolaters, among whom was Abdullah bin Ubayy.

On eleventh Rajab, the Prophet directed the Ansaris to assemble by night
at the house of Abdul Muttalib, at Aqbah, but to come singly and awake
no one from sleep. He himself went to the appointed place, with Ali,
Hamza, and Abbas. Seventy, or by another account, seventy-three men and
two women of Aws and Khazraj assembled there.

The Prophet called on them to embrace Islam, declaring it the pledge of
Paradise. Asad bin Zurarah, Barra bin Marror, Abdullah bin Kharam
replied, “O Messenger of Allah (S), make such conditions with us as you
please in respect to yourself and your God.” He answered, “I make it a
condition that you protect me as your own lives, and my family as your
own.” “What shall we receive for doing this?” they asked. He replied,
“Paradise will be yours, and on earth you will be kings of Arabs, and
non-Arabs will obey you.”

To which they replied that they were satisfied. Abbas bin Zilah, of the
tribe of Aws, now arose and said, “People of Aws and Khazraj, do you
know what you are doing? You are plunging into war with both Arab and
non-Arab, and arraying yourselves in hostility against all the kings in
the world, or whenever an injury befalls the Prophet, you must abandon
him, as you will do.

Deceive him not then, let him remain in his own country; for although
his kindred opposes him, he is still noble and great among them, and no
one has power to injure him.” The speaker was now interrupted by
Abdullah bin Kharam, Asad bin Zurarah, Abul Hasheem bin Taihan demanded
what business he had to talk in that manner; then addressing the
Prophet, they said, “O Messenger of Allah (S), be our blood the
sacrifice for yours, and our life the ransom of your own.

Make what conditions with us you please for your Lord and for yourself.
The Prophet now said to the Ansaris, “Appoint twelve persons of your
number who shall be your sureties and agents, in like manner as Musa
established twelve chiefs among the Bani Israel.” They said to him, “You
may choose whom you please.” Jibraeel indicated the proper persons, and
the Prophet chose nine men of Khazraj: namely, Asad bin Zurarah, Buraa
bin Maroor, Abdullah bin Kharam, the father of Jabir, Rafe bin Malik,
Saad bin Ubadah, Manzar bin Amr, Abdullah bin Rawaha, Saad bin Rabi, and
Ubadah bin Samit.

Similarly, he chose three men of Aws: Abul Hasheem bin Taihan, Usaid bin
Khuzayr, and Saad bin Khatheema. Just as these men had pledged
themselves to the Prophet, Iblis shouted near Aqbah, “O you Quraish and
other Arabs, the Prophet is here with the Aws and Khazraj, who are
leaguing with him to fight against you.” At this announcement, the
Quraish became tumultuous, and seizing their weapons advanced on Aqbah.

The Prophet ordered the Ansaris to disperse, but they said, “If you
command, we will draw our swords and fight them.” He replied, “Allah has
not yet given me permission to fight.” “Will you come away with us?”
they asked. He answered, “I wait for the command of Allah.” When the
Quraish advanced with their whole force, Hamza and Ali drew their swords
and met them at the entrance of Aqbah.

Addressing Hamza, the Quraish demanded, “What business is this for which
you are assembled?” “There is no assembly here,” said Hamza, adding with
an oath that if any of them ventured to advance, he would cut of their
heads.

The Quraish returned, and the next day meeting Abdullah bin Ubayy, they
said to him: “We understand your people have leagued with the Prophet to
fight against us.” But as he knew nothing of the meeting the last night,
he swore it was not so, and the Quraish believed him. The Ansaris
returned to Medina and were in high expectation of the coming of their
illustrious guests.[^73]

Migration to Medina
-------------------

Ali bin Ibrahim, Shaykh Tusi, Shaykh Tabarsi, Ibn Shahr Ashob etc. have
narrated through reliable chains about the migration of the Messenger of
Allah (S) that when the Quraish infidels saw that the cause of the
Prophet gained ground daily, and that all their plots to overthrow it
availed nothing, and when they were informed of the Prophet’s league
with the Ansaris, they assembled at Darul Nadwa to deliberate what was
to be done.

They had an old custom of assembling at this place for consultation
whenever any calamity befell them, and no one under forty years of age
was admitted into the council of Darul Nadwa. Here forty of the old
Quraish chiefs now met, and Satan, the accursed in the form of an old
man, attempted to enter. The door keeper stopped him, and demanded who
he was. He replied that he was an old man of Najd tribe, and added, “You
have need of my experience; on hearing that you were assembling to
overthrow this man, I came to give my advice on the subject.”

The door-keeper told him to enter. Ayyashi etc. have narrated through
authentic chains of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Quraish
summoned a man from each tribe and they moved to Darul Nadwa so that
they may think of some solution against the Messenger of Allah (S). When
they reached there they found an old man standing there and he requested
them to allow him to join them. People asked: “Who are you?”

He replied: “I am an old man of Mudhir tribe. I have a very good
suggestion on the topic of your discussion.” They admitted him also. It
is narrated in reliable traditions that Satan four times assumed a human
shape, and one was this occasion of Darul Nadwa consultation. Thus they
gathered at Darul Nadwa and began to deliberate. Abu Jahl introduced the
business saying, “O Quraish, among all the Arab tribes there are no one
nobler than ourselves.

We are the people of the house of God, and twice a year, men come to us
on pilgrimage from the utmost bounds of the earth, and they all honor
us. We are in the house, and no one can molest or injure us. Such has
always been our state, till Muhammad bin Abdullah took birth and grew up
among us. We called him Amin, for His probity, calmness and truth, but
when he arrived at maturity, and was in great esteem among us, he
proclaimed himself the Messenger of Allah, and claims that he was a
Prophet and he receives communications from heaven.

Next he imputed to us stupidity, reviled and degraded our gods,
corrupted our youths, and sowed division among our people. He declares
that our departed ancestors are in Hell and all this is very troublesome
to us. In reference to him I have a suggestion.” “What is it?” inquired
the council. Abu Jahl continued, “Let us send a man to kill him
secretly, and if the Bani Hashim demand the price of blood, we will pay
the ransom tenfold.”

“This is a miserable plan,” said Satan. “Why?” they inquired. “Because,”
he resumed, “whoever slays Muhammad will certainly be put to death, and
who of you will consent to be killed on this account? When Muhammad is
slain, the Bani Hashim and their patrons of the tribe of Khuzah, will
retaliate and never consent that the slayer of Muhammad should walk the
earth. From this cause, in the sacred place there will be fighting among
you till you all kill one another.”

Aas bin Wail, Umayyah bin Khalaf and Ubayy bin Khalaf proposed to build
a prison in such a manner that no one could approach the Prophet, who
should be shut up in it, and food thrown in to him through an aperture
till he died like Zuhair, Nabaqa and Imrul Qays. “This plan,” said
Satan, “is worse than the other, for the Bani Hashim will never consent
to such a thing, at the season of pilgrimage they will appeal to the
assembled Arab tribes, and procure his release.

Have you another plan?” concluded Satan. Atba, Shaibah and Abu Sufyan
answered, “We will expel him from our country and attend to the worship
of our own gods in peace.” Another tradition says that they proposed to
bind the Prophet on a furious camel, and enrage the animal by piercing
him with spears, that he might rush away and tear his rider to pieces
among the mountains. “This project is worse than either of the others,”
said Satan.

“If Muhammad leaves your country alive, as he is more beautiful and
eloquent than any other man, by the sweetness of his tongue, and the
plausibility of his address, he will deceive all the Arab tribes, and
bringing against you such armies of horse and foot as you cannot
withstand, will annihilate you.” Being now at their wit’s end, they said
to Satan, “O Shaykh, what is your advice in this matter?”

“My scheme,” said he, “is that from every tribe agreeing in your object,
you select one or more persons, and bring over one man of the Bani
Hashim to join you, and let the whole company thus appointed to take
their weapons and all at once put him to death, that his blood may be so
widely diffused that the Bani Hashim will be utterly unable to demand
penalty for it, because they cannot oppose all the tribes.

Should they require the price of blood, then pay them the ransom
three-fold.” “We will give ten ransoms,” replied the council; adding the
Shaykh of Najd has proposed the right plan. Shaykh Tusi says Abu Jahl
offered this scheme, and that it was approved by Satan; whichever way it
was, this plan was agreed on, and the council broke up. Of the Bani
Hashim, Abu Lahab was brought into this plot. The Almighty Allah then
revealed this verse, warning the Prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ يَمْكُرُ بِكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِيُثْبِتُوكَ أَوْ يَقْتُلُوكَ
أَوْ يُخْرِجُوكَ ۚ وَيَمْكُرُونَ وَيَمْكُرُ اللَّهُ ۖ وَاللَّهُ خَيْرُ
الْمَاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when those who disbelieved devised plans against you that they
might confine you or slay you or drive you away; and they devised plans
and Allah too had arranged a plan; and Allah is the best of
planners.”***[^74]

Having made the arrangement to rush into the Prophet’s house at night
and kill him, they came to the sacred Masjid, and whistled and clapped
their hands and jumped about the Kaaba. As the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ صَلَاتُهُمْ عِنْدَ الْبَيْتِ إِلَّا مُكَاءً وَتَصْدِيَةً 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And their prayer before the House is nothing but whistling and
clapping of hands…”***[^75]

At night the party came to assassinate the Prophet, but Abu Lahab would
not consent to their entering till the next morning, saying, “There are
women and children here, and they must not be harmed. Guard Muhammad the
whole night and we will enter the house in the morning.”

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from
Hind bin Abi Hala and Ammar Yasir etc. that when the Quraish had
completed their plot for killing the Prophet, Jibraeel descended and
gave him information of the matter, and revealed to him the divine
command to flee to Medina. The Prophet called Ali, and imparted to him
the tidings of Jibraeel, and added, “The Almighty Allah commands me
tonight to escape to Medina.

Tonight I will camp in the cave of Thawr; sleep in my place, so that it
may not be known I have gone. Do you have any suggestion?” Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) inquired, “O Prophet of Allah (S), will your safety be
secured by my sleeping in your place?” On being answered in the
affirmative, Ali was happy and he thanked Allah for the privilege of
exposing his own life to save that of the Prophet, and fell in
adoration, and this was the first prostration of thanksgiving that was
made in Islam.

Ali laid the side of his face on the ground, and when he raised his
head, he said, “Go wherever Allah has commanded you; let me be your
sacrifice. Order what you please, and on my life I will do it, and in
this and in ever other matter I supplicate for Taufeeq of my Lord.” The
Prophet replied, “Allah will make you resemble me: then sleep on my
carpet, and put my Khizarmi sheet over you. Know that the Almighty Allah
tries his friends in proportion to their faith and their rank, therefore
the trials and calamities of prophets are greater than all others, and
those most like them receive the next degree of trial.

O brother, Allah has tried you, and he tries me on your account, as He
tried Ibrahim, the friend, and his son Ismail. It is more grievous to me
thus to expose you to the daggers of my enemies, than it was for Ibrahim
to lay down Ismail to slay him. Your perfect readiness to be exposed is
greater than Ismail’s voluntary submissiveness to the knife of his
affectionate father. Endure faithfully, O brother, for the mercy of God
is close to those that do well.”

Saying this, the Prophet embraced Ali, with flowing tears both parted,
and Jibraeel led the Prophet out of the house which the Quraish had
already surrounded. The Prophet recited this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا مِنْ بَيْنِ أَيْدِيهِمْ سَدًّا وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ سَدًّا
فَأَغْشَيْنَاهُمْ فَهُمْ لَا يُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have made before them a barrier and a barrier behind them,
then We have covered them over so that they do not see.”***[^76]

The Almighty Allah had sent a sleep upon them, so they did not perceive
the Prophet’s departure; and he cast a handful of dust at them, saying:
“Ugly be your faces! Doing thus by your own Prophet.” One tradition says
they were awake, and Allah covered their eyes that they did not see.
Jibraeel now directed the Prophet to go to mount Thawr, and conceal
himself in the cave. Meanwhile Ali was lying in the Prophet’s place and
cover.

In that period the houses of Mecca were without doors, and the walls
were low. The Quraish infidels therefore saw Ali, and mistaking him for
the Prophet, threw stones at him. Both Shias and Sunnis relate that the
following verse was revealed in commendation of Ali on the night he
exposed his life to save that of the Prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَشْرِي نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِ اللَّهِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of
Allah…”***[^77]

According to continuous Shia and Sunni reports, this verse was revealed
in the honor of Imam Ali (a.s.), because he had sacrificed his life for
the Messenger of Allah (S). Thalabi and Ahmad bin Hanbal, and Ghazzali
in *Ihya* and other Shia and Sunni traditions scholars and exegetes
declared that: On that night when Imam Ali (a.s.) slept in the bed of
the Messenger of Allah (S), the Almighty Allah revealed to Jibraeel and
Mikaeel that He has made them as brothers of each other. And your ages
are greater than each other.

Which of you will dedicate his life to the other? None of them agreed to
it. The Almighty Allah revealed to them: “Why can’t you be like Ali Ibn
Abi Talib (a.s.)? I made him the brother of Muhammad and he is sleeping
in his bed after dedicating his life to him. So go to the earth and
protect Ali from his enemies. So they came down and Jibraeel sat at
Ali’s head and Mikaeel at his foot and said: “Good cheers for you of
son, Abu Talib, who can be like you? That the Almighty Allah boasts
about you to the angels?

Then the Almighty Allah revealed the above verse in honor of Imam Ali
(a.s.). Akhtab Khwarizmi who is a Sunni tradition scholar has narrated
that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The morning next after I was in
the cave, Jibraeel came to me overjoyed and I asked him what has made
him happy? He replied: “Why I should not be happy when the Almighty
Allah honored your brother, successor and the Imam of the Ummah last
night, and He was proud of him and He said: O angels, look at My proof
after My Prophet how he is risking his life for the Prophet.

Then Jibraeel says: I prostrated in thanksgiving and I testify O Allah,
that he is the chief of Your creatures and the Master of all Your
creation. Thus when the Prophet was departing for the cave of Thawr, he
met Abu Bakr and took him along, through fear of exposure of the secret,
or for some other reason.

Hind Abi Hala also went with the Prophet, who on arriving at the cave,
retained Abu Bakr and sent back Hind on some business. Another tradition
is, that Abu Bakr saw the Prophet departing, and pursued him, who,
apprehending it was one of the Quraish, hastened on, but struck his
blessed foot against a stone and bruised it. He was much troubled at
being pursued, till at length Abu Bakr came up and the Prophet took him
along from sheer necessity.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated from Umm Hani, sister of Imam Ali (a.s.) that
when the Almighty Allah commanded his Messenger to migrate, His
Eminence, made Amirul Momineen (a.s.) sleep on his bed and himself
recited the first verses of Surah Yasin and left his house throwing a
handful of dust on the idolaters so that they might not see him.

Umm Hani says: The Holy Prophet (S) came to my place and in the morning
said: “O Umm Hani, Jibraeel has informed me that the Almighty Allah has
protected Ali (a.s.) from the enemies. The Prophet departed for the Cave
of Thawr in the darkness of dawn, remained there for three days and on
the fourth day departed for Medina.

It is mentioned in the previous narrations that when morning dawned, the
Quraish infidels drew their swords and ran upon Amirul Momineen (a.s.),
Khalid bin Walid being in advance of the rest. That lion of God, Ali,
leaped up, and seizing Khalid by the arm, wrung it so that he bellowed
like a camel.

He then caught the sword of Khalid, and presented so bold a front to his
assailants, that they all fled. When he had driven them out and they
knew it was Ali, they said to him, “We have nothing to do, with you,
where is Muhammad?” He replied, “Did you entrust him to me? You wished
to expel him, and he has gone away himself.”

Qutub Rawandi has narrated that Ibn Kawwa, the Khariji, once asked
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) where he was when Abu Bakr was in the Cave of
Thawr. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “I was sleeping in the bed of the Messenger
of Allah (S) after having dedicated my life on him. When the Quraish
came with drawn swords, and did not see the Prophet, they were
infuriated and they began to penalize me.

Tied me up in chains and cast me in a room and then they locked the
house. After that they appointed a woman to guard me and departed in
pursuit of the Holy Prophet (S). I heard a voice: “O Ali.” At once all
the discomfort disappeared. Again a voice said: “O Ali.” All the chains
fell away at this voice. Again a voice said: “O Ali.” All the doors
opened and I came out.

It is mentioned in *Tafsir Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)* that Allah sent His
revelation to His Eminence (S): O Muhammad, after Durood and salaam,
Allah says that Abu Jahl and Quraish have planned to kill you and I
command you, make Ali sleep on your bed. And He said: Ali’s status is
like that of Ibrahim Khalillullaah and Ismail Zabihullaah.

He will sacrifice himself on you and make his soul a shield of your
soul. And Allah orders you to take Abu Bakr with you. If he is friendly
with you and helps you and remains firms on his covenant, he will be
your friend in the hereafter. Thus His Eminence (S) asked Ali: Ali, do
you agree that if they search for me and I am not found and they find
you, the ignorant people may attack and kill you. Ali (a.s.) replied:
Allah’s Messenger, I accept it gladly that my soul should be a shield of
your soul and it be sacrificed for your brother, a close relative or an
animal, if it will be beneficial to you.

I like to spend my life only for your service and for your help and to
fight your enemies. If it is not so, I don’t want to be alive for a
moment in the world. Hearing Ali’s words, His Eminence (S) said: O Abul
Hasan, angels of the divine tablets have told me about your argument and
informed that such a reward has been prepared for you that no eye has
seen and no ear has heard and no one has imagined it.

After that His Eminence (S) asked Abu Bakr, do you agree to stay with me
and suppose the enemies search for me and also search for you and come
to know that you have only encouraged me in the claim of Prophethood and
because of me, you have to suffer?

He said: O Prophet, if I get a long life and always remain in severe
difficulties and not get peaceful death and any kind of peace, and all
this happens because of your love, I prefer it very much than if I were
to get rulership to go against you and spend my life in pleasure;
Allah’s Messenger, my family and children be sacrificed on you.

His Eminence (S) said: If Allah finds your heart as your tongue, He will
make you to me just as ears, eyes and head are for the body, and just as
soul is necessary for the body; in the same way as Ali is for me. And
Ali (a.s.) is more than this, due to his excellence.

O Abu Bakr, one who makes a covenant with Allah and does not break it
and does not make any changes in it and is not jealous to one whose
excellence Allah has mentioned; that person will be in Paradise with me.
And when you follow the way that Allah likes and do not adopt the wrong
way with which He is displeased; when Allah raises you in Qiyamat, you
will be considered eligible for Allah’s Wilayat and earn our
companionship in Paradise.

Then he said: Abu Bakr, look up. When he looked at the sky, he saw
angels of fire riding fire horse with spears in their hands and one of
them says: O Muhammad, allow us to cut your enemies into pieces. His
Eminence (S) said: Abu Bakr, now put your ear on the ground. When he put
his ears on the ground, he heard that the earth was calling: O Muhammad,
allow me to attack your enemies. Then said: Now look at the mountain and
listen.

When he did so, he heard the mountain saying: O Muhammad, allow us to
destroy your enemies. Then His Eminence (S) said: Now listen to the sea;
and the waves came before him saying: O Muhammad, allow us to destroy
your enemies, we shall obey you. After that he heard the sky and the
earth and the seas all calling out aloud: Your Lord did not command you
to hide in the cave because you are unable to fight your enemies, but
because Allah wants to test your patience and toleration so that He can
distinguish between your pure men and women.

O Muhammad, those who fulfill your covenants, will be your neighbor in
Paradise and those who break them, shall be companions of Iblis in the
lowest stage of Hell. After that His Eminence (S) asked Ali (a.s.): O
Ali, you are for me like ears, eyes and head for the body and soul of
the body. You are as beloved to me as a person suffering from the
disease of thirst loves cold water. Then said: O Abul Hasan, cover
yourself with my sheet. When disbelievers come to you, Allah will send
His help and on account of this, you will escape from their hands.

At last when Abu Jahl and other infidels came with their swords drawn,
Abu Jahl said: Don’t kill a sleeping person. First throw a stone and
awaken him and then kill him. They started throwing big stones taking
aim. When these infidels did thus, Ali (a.s.) lifted the sheet from his
head and asked: What are you doing?

When these accursed saw him, they came to know that he was Ali. Seeing
this, Abu Jahl said to his companions: Did you see that Muhammad made
him sleep in his place and fled from here, so that we remain busy and he
can escape. Don’t say anything to Ali (a.s.), because he is deceived by
him so that he himself may be killed and Muhammad be saved. If it is not
so, why didn’t he sleep in his own place?

When Allah was the helper according to his thinking, Ali (a.s.) said to
him: O Abu Jahl, are you talking about me? It is not so, because Allah
gave me so much sense that if it is to be given to all the senseless
people of the world, they will all become intelligent. And Allah has
given me so much strength that if it is distributed among all weak
people of the world, they all would become brave and strong.

And Allah has given me such tolerance that if it is distributed among
all the foolish people of the world, they all would become magnanimous.
If the Prophet had not commanded me that I should not make any fight
till I meet him, indeed there would have been a great fight between you
and me and I would have killed you. O Abu Jahl, shame on you.

When the sky, the earth, seas and mountains asked permission from His
Eminence (S) to destroy you, he did not allow them and continued to be
kind and hospitable to you so that all of you who are destined to bring
faith may do so. Believers are born from loins and wombs of infidel men
and women and by eliminating you, Allah doesn’t like to deprive them
from His mercy and blessings. If this had not been kept in view, Allah
would have destroyed you all, because Allah is great and you are
helpless.

Allah does not make you helpless and then forces you to believe, but
whatever He commands you, He also gives strength to you and ends your
excuses too. Hearing the discourse of Ali (a.s.), Abul Batri bin Hassham
became furious and pulled out the sword to attack him. Suddenly he saw
the mountain move towards him and the earth split to crush him.

He saw waves of the sea coming to drown him in the sea and the sky came
down to crash upon him. Seeing this, his sword fell from his hand and he
became unconscious. The people carried him away. Abu Jahl consoled them
and to cast aspersion on the incident said: He was having cholera, that
is why he becomes unconscious; and nothing else.

When Ali (a.s.) came to the Holy Prophet (S), His Eminence (S) said: O
Ali (a.s.) when you argued with Abu Jahl that night, Allah raised your
voice and sent it to Paradise. The treasurers and Houries of heaven
asked: Who is he, that he is so obedient to Muhammad (S) at this time?
The people of Mecca falsified him and drove him away.

They were told: He is his deputy and he slept in his place to make his
soul a shield to save him and sacrificed his soul for him. The treasurer
of Paradise requested: O Allah, make me his treasurer. The Houries of
Paradise said: O Allah make us his wives. Allah said: “You are for him,
his chosen friends and devotees, and he shall divide you by My command
among those whose well being he knows very well. Do you agree?” They
said: “Yes, our Lord and Master, we are happy.”

It is mentioned in reliable traditions that when the Quraish realized
that the Prophet had escaped, they sent people in all direction to seek
him out and the accursed Abu Jahl ordered them to have it announced in
the surroundings of Mecca that one who apprehends Muhammad and brings
him to them or informs of his whereabouts will be rewarded with a
hundred camels. Then he summoned Abu Bakr Zakhzai who was an expert in
reading spoors and he said: “This is the day of proving your expertise.

If you can do this today, we shall be obliged to you forever. Detect the
footprints of Muhammad and follow them so that we can pursue him.” When
Abu Bakr saw the prints he at once recognized them to belong to
Muhammad. He said: “They are like the facsimiles of the prints that are
present at Maqam Ibrahim. And the other set of footprints belong to Abi
Qahafa or his son.” So they followed the footprints till the entrance of
the cave.

They saw that it was barred by a cobweb and pair of pigeons had built a
nest. According to another report, a pair of partridge had built a nest
and laid eggs in it. The guide said: “They have come till here but not
entered the cave. If they had done so, the cobweb would have been broken
and the birds have flown away. Either they went up to the sky or sunk
into the earth.” The Almighty Allah sent an angel who stood guard at the
entrance of the cave.

He said that there was no one there and they must look for him in the
mountain passes. According to yet another report, when the Messenger of
Allah (S) entered the cave, he called for a tree and it stood at the
entrance of the cave and the Almighty Allah sent the pigeons and spider
to build their dwellings. According to the report of Ibn Shahr Ashob,
when the Prophet reached the cave, its entrance was so narrow that no
one could enter it.

But by the power of Allah it became so wide that the Holy Prophet (S)
entered it mounted on a camel. Then it narrowed down once again and at
that time a tree grew up by the command of Allah at the entrance of the
cave. Ahle Sunnat have narrated that Abu Bakr was very much worried of
the Quraish and the Messenger of Allah (S) continued to comfort him as
the Almighty Allah has mentioned it in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا تَنْصُرُوهُ فَقَدْ نَصَرَهُ اللَّهُ إِذْ أَخْرَجَهُ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا ثَانِيَ اثْنَيْنِ إِذْ هُمَا فِي الْغَارِ إِذْ يَقُولُ
لِصَاحِبِهِ لَا تَحْزَنْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَنَا ۖ فَأَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ
سَكِينَتَهُ عَلَيْهِ وَأَيَّدَهُ بِجُنُودٍ لَمْ تَرَوْهَا وَجَعَلَ
كَلِمَةَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا السُّفْلَىٰ ۗ وَكَلِمَةُ اللَّهِ هِيَ
الْعُلْيَا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you will not aid him, Allah certainly aided him when those who
disbelieved expelled him, he being the second of the two, when they were
both in the cave, when he said to his companion: Grieve not, surely
Allah is with us. So Allah sent down His tranquility upon him and
strengthened him with hosts which you did not see, and made lowest the
word of those who disbelieved; and the word of Allah, that is the
highest…”***[^78]

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that ‘word of the
infidels’ implies the atheistic statement of a person who has no
relation with Faith. The Almighty Allah only sent down tranquility on
the Prophet and wherever tranquility is mentioned in Qur’an, the
Almighty Allah has also included the believers in it. But since here
there was no believer with the Prophet, that is why tranquility is
restricted to the Prophet.[^79]

It is mentioned in *Basairud Darajat* from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that when the idolaters set out in pursuit of the Prophet, Imam Ali
(a.s.) feared lest they harm the Prophet in some way, Imam Ali (a.s.)
climbed Mount Thabir while the Holy Prophet (S) was on Mount Hira.

The Holy Prophet (S) saw him asked: “O Ali, what is the problem?” He
replied: “May my parents be sacrificed on you, I feared lest the
idolaters cause harm to you, so I followed you.” The Holy Prophet (S)
said: “Hold my hand.” Mount Thabir joined mount Hira due to the miracle
of the Prophet. Imam Ali (a.s.) stepped on mount Hira and Thabir
returned to its position.

Ayyashi has narrated from Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) that Lady Khadija
passed away a year before migration and Abu Talib passed away after a
year. When the two supporters of the Prophet passed away, it became
difficult to remain in Mecca. The Messenger of Allah (S) complained to
Jibraeel about his travails.

The Almighty Allah revealed to the Prophet: Leave this place as the
people here are oppressors and go to Medina since you have no supporter
in Mecca now and fight Jihad with the idolaters. At that time the
Messenger of Allah (S) migrated to Medina. And Shaykh Tusi and Shaykh
Tabarsi have narrated through authentic chains of narrators that the
Holy Prophet (S) stayed in the cave for three days and Imam Ali (a.s.)
used to bring him food and water.

And he arranged for three camels for the Holy Prophet (S), Abu Bakr and
Ajir, the guide. The Holy Prophet (S) left Imam Ali (a.s.) in Mecca to
restore the trusts of people, because the Quraish during the period of
Jahiliyya used to consider the Holy Prophet (S) honest and trustworthy,
referring to him as Muhammad the Amin.

In the same way, whoever visited Mecca during Hajj kept his belongings
with the Prophet and after the declaration of prophethood also they
considered him honest and trustworthy. The Messenger of Allah (S) told
Amirul Momineen (a.s.): Every morning and night announce in public that
whoever has any trust with the Prophet should come and take it.

And return the trusts to them openly. “And O Ali, I appoint you as my
representative for my daughter and entrust both of you to Allah. And
prepare camels for myself and Fatima Zahra and my mother Fatima binte
Asad and those from Bani Hashim, who want to migrate.” Along with this
he made many recommendations and said: “When you are free from all this,
prepare to migrate to Allah and His Messenger and when you receive my
communication you must depart without any delay.”

After that the Messenger of Allah (S) turned his attention to Medina.
When Abdullah bin Ariqat came near the cave to steal sheep, the Holy
Prophet (S) asked him: “Will you take care of me if I entrust my life to
you and take us to Medina from an unknown route?” Ibn Ariqat said:
“Seeing the cobweb and nest of pigeons I realized that you are the
Messenger of Allah and I believed in you. I will protect you and I will
accompany you wherever you go.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “I want to go to Medina.” He said: “I will
take you there most readily through such a route that no one will see
you.” So they set out for Medina. And Shaykh Tusi has narrated that the
Holy Prophet (S) migrated to the cave on the thirteenth year of Besat in
the thirteenth night of Thursday, in the month of Rabiul Awwal. And
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) slept in his bed the same night. And he set out
to Medina on the night of the fourteenth. On the way, many miracles
occurred at his hands which were mentioned in the chapters of miracles.

And Kulaini has narrated through good chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that when the Prophet set out from the cave to go to Medina,
Quraish announced a reward of a hundred camels on his head. Surakha bin
Malik bin Jatham came out in his search. When he came near, the Holy
Prophet (S) prayed: “O Allah, save me from the mischief of Surakha in
any way you like.” Surakha’s horse sunk in the ground and he leaped from
the beast to save himself.

He came running to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: “O Muhammad, I
understood that this calamity has come from your side. Please pray that
the Almighty Allah saves my horse. I swear by my life that if I cannot
give you any benefit I will cause you no harm also.” The Prophet prayed
and his horse was saved. But again he wished to act against the Prophet
and again the horse sunk and this happened thrice. After the third time,
he said: “You can take my camels and slaves.

I will now return and will not allow anyone to follow you.” The Holy
Prophet (S) said: “I have no need of your things.”According to Qutub
Rawandi, when the Messenger of Allah (S) escaped the idolaters of
Quraish and fled to Medina and on the way reached the encampment of Umm
Mabad, Abu Bakr, Umar, Amir bin Fahera and Abdullah Ibn Arihat were with
him.

Umm Mabad was sitting outside her tent when the Prophet approached her
to sell some dates and meat. She said nothing was available. The Prophet
saw a goat tied in a corner and asked what was wrong with her. She said
because of weakness she could not accompany the flock. The Prophet asked
if it produced milk? She replied that she has not produced any milk
since so many years.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Allow me to milk her.” She said, “May my
parents be sacrificed on you, you may take anything that is in her
udders. The Prophet drew his hand over the udders and prayed: “O Allah,
give her barakat (increase),” and immediately milk flowed from her. The
Prophet called for a vessel, which could satiate many persons and began
to milk her till the vessel was full.

He gave it to Umm Mabad who drank it to satiation, then he gave to his
companions, who also became satiated and after all had drunk, he himself
took some of it remarking: “The leader must come last.” Then he milked
her again till the vessel was full and the people drank from it again
and left Mabad the rest.

When her husband, Abu Mabad returned home, he asked from where that milk
had come, Umm Mabad narrated the whole incident. Abu Mabad said: “He
must be the same Prophet who has appeared in Mecca.” He came to Medina
with his family and became a Muslim.

Shaykh Tusi has narrated through authentic chains that when the
Messenger of Allah (S) came to Medina, first he halted at Quba with the
tribe of Amr bin Auf. Abu Bakr said: “O Prophet, please proceed to
Medina as the people are waiting for you.” The Prophet replied: “I will
not enter Medina till my brother, Ali and my daughter, Fatima do not
arrive.”

As much Abu Bakr insisted as much the Prophet declined. At last Abu Bakr
left the Prophet in Quba and proceeded to Medina. The Holy Prophet (S)
sent a communication to Imam Ali (a.s.) through Abu Waqid Lubni to join
him as soon as possible. When Imam Ali (a.s.) received this
communication, he prepared to migrate and told the weak believers to
leave Mecca quietly with minimum luggage and gather at Zituwa at night.

And he took with him Fatima Zahra, his mother, Fatima binte Asad and
Fatima binte Zubair bin Abdul Muttalib and set out from Mecca. Some have
narrated that the daughter of Zubair named Ziya-a and Ayman son of Umm
Ayman, a freed slave of the Holy Prophet (S) and Abu Waqid set out with
Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

Abu Waqid began to drive the camels of the ladies fast. Imam Ali (a.s.)
said: “O Abu Waqid, be gentle to the ladies and drive their camels
slowly as ladies are delicate and weak.” Abu Waqid said: “I fear that
the idolaters of Mecca may come out in our pursuit. The Imam said:
“Don’t worry, because the Holy Prophet (S) has told me that they will
cause me no harm.” Thus Abu Waqid drove the ladies’ camels and Imam Ali
(a.s.) was reciting a war poem:

***Other than Allah there is no deity and helper.***  
***So don’t worry about anyone else.***  
***Because the Almighty Allah is caretaker of all your affairs.***

When Imam Ali (a.s.) reached near the desert, ten armed riders of
Quraish came to him and one of them was Jina, slave of Harith bin
Umayyah. He was very daring. When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) saw him, he
told Ayman and Abu Waqid to make the camels sit and make the ladies
alight from the camels. Then he pulled out the sword and turned to the
idolaters.

They said: “Do you think you will be able to take the women? Bring them
back.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “What will you do if I don’t?” They said:
“We will break your head.” Saying this, they moved to the ladies’ camel.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) scolded them and Jina attacked him. The Imam
deflected his blow and attacked him on his shoulder and he fell down
dead. Then Imam Ali (a.s.) sat on the horse and leaped on the group like
a hungry lion, reciting the following war poem:

***Give way to one who fights Jihad in the way of Allah.***  
***By Allah, I am not frightened of anyone else, except for One God.***

At last the idolater turned saying: “O son of Abu Talib, let us go, we
have no concern with you.” Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “Now I go to Medina
openly to meet my brother, the Messenger of Allah (S). One who wants to
irrigate the earth with his blood should come near to me.”

Then he said to Ayman and Abu Waqid to drive the camels and he set out
from there with a great dignity and camped in the desert. He halted
there for a night and all night remained busy in prayers, standing
sitting and lying down. Next morning he prepared to traverse the second
stage of the journey and in this way reached the illuminated Medina.
Before that the Almighty Allah revealed the following verses in his
praise:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلَافِ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ لَآيَاتٍ لِأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ ﴿١٩٠﴾ الَّذِينَ
يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىٰ جُنُوبِهِمْ
وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ رَبَّنَا مَا
خَلَقْتَ هَٰذَا بَاطِلًا سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ ﴿١٩١﴾
رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ مَنْ تُدْخِلِ النَّارَ فَقَدْ أَخْزَيْتَهُ ۖ وَمَا
لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ أَنْصَارٍ ﴿١٩٢﴾ رَبَّنَا إِنَّنَا سَمِعْنَا
مُنَادِيًا يُنَادِي لِلْإِيمَانِ أَنْ آمِنُوا بِرَبِّكُمْ فَآمَنَّا ۚ
رَبَّنَا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا وَكَفِّرْ عَنَّا سَيِّئَاتِنَا
وَتَوَفَّنَا مَعَ الْأَبْرَارِ ﴿١٩٣﴾ رَبَّنَا وَآتِنَا مَا وَعَدْتَنَا
عَلَىٰ رُسُلِكَ وَلَا تُخْزِنَا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ۗ إِنَّكَ لَا
تُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ ﴿١٩٤﴾ فَاسْتَجَابَ لَهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ أَنِّي لَا
أُضِيعُ عَمَلَ عَامِلٍ مِنْكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْثَىٰ ۖ بَعْضُكُمْ
مِنْ بَعْضٍ ۖ فَالَّذِينَ هَاجَرُوا وَأُخْرِجُوا مِنْ دِيَارِهِمْ
وَأُوذُوا فِي سَبِيلِي وَقَاتَلُوا وَقُتِلُوا لَأُكَفِّرَنَّ عَنْهُمْ
سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ وَلَأُدْخِلَنَّهُمْ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا
الْأَنْهَارُ ثَوَابًا مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ ۗ وَاللَّهُ عِنْدَهُ حُسْنُ
الثَّوَابِ ﴿١٩٥﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day there are signs for men who
understand. Those who remember Allah standing and sitting and lying on
their sides and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth:
Our Lord! Thou hast not created this in vain! Glory be to Thee; save us
then from the chastisement of the fire: Our Lord! surely whomsoever Thou
makest enter the fire, him Thou hast indeed brought to disgrace, and
there shall be no helpers for the unjust: Our Lord! surely we have heard
a preacher calling to the faith, saying: Believe in your Lord, so we did
believe; Our Lord! forgive us therefore our faults, and cover our evil
deeds and make us die with the righteous. Our Lord! and grant us what
Thou hast promised us by Thy apostles; and disgrace us not on the day of
resurrection; surely Thou dost not fail to perform the promise. So their
Lord accepted their prayer: That I will not waste the work of a worker
among you, whether male or female, the one of you being from the other;
they, therefore, who fled and were turned out of their homes and
persecuted in My way and who fought and were slain, I will most
certainly cover their evil deeds, and I will most certainly make them
enter gardens beneath which rivers flow; a reward from Allah, and with
Allah is yet better reward.”***[^80]

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that when the Messenger of Allah
(S) migrated to Medina, the poor Muslims who were harassed by the
idolaters of Mecca, they fled one by one and joined the Prophet. But
defenseless Muslims were bitterly persecuted by the infidels of Mecca;
some being put to death, and others compelled to say blasphemous things
against the Prophet.

Among were Ammar, and his father Yasir, and his mother, Sumayyah, and
Suhaib, and Bilal, and Khabab, who had attempted to flee, but fell into
the hands of the idolaters, and were compelled to revile the Prophet.
Ammar, knowing if he did not do this, he should certainly be killed,
said what they bade him in religious dissimulation, but faith remained
firm in his heart.

His father and mother, refusing to blaspheme the Prophet, were martyred
by the most cruel tortures, and were, it is said, the first martyrs to
Islam. When tidings of this reached Medina, some said that Ammar had
become an infidel, but the Prophet denied the report, and declared that
Ammar from head to foot was full of faith, and that faith was mingled
with his very flesh and blood.

When at length Ammar escaped to the Prophet, he wept, and said, “O
Messenger of Allah (S), I have suffered the greatest trials; they would
not withdraw their hands from me, till I spoke unworthy things of you
and praised their idols.” The Prophet wiped away Ammar’s tears with his
hand, saying, “No fault is attached to you; if you should be in such
circumstances again, repeat what you have said.”

And Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains of narrators from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Meccans forced Ammar to utter the word of
infidelity even though his heart was faithful. So the Almighty Allah
revealed the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَفَرَ بِاللَّهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ إِيمَانِهِ إِلَّا مَنْ أُكْرِهَ
وَقَلْبُهُ مُطْمَئِنٌّ بِالْإِيمَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He who disbelieves in Allah after his having believed, not he who is
compelled while his heart is at rest on account of faith…”***[^81]

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “O Ammar, if the idolaters force you again,
you may repeat what you said, as the Almighty Allah exempted you from
it.”

Prophet’s arrival in Medina
---------------------------

Shaykh Tabarsi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated that three months after
the allegiance of Aqbah, the Prophet fled to Medina, which he entered on
Monday, the twelfth of Rabiul Awwal. Before his arrival, the Ansaris,
used to go out everyday and gaze on the road in expectation of his
arrival. The day he came, a party had been out with this view, most of
whom, after waiting some time in vain returned home.

At length he arrived at the site of the Masjid Shajarah, and inquired
the way from the tribe of Bani Amr bin Auf and followed that road. A
Jew, from the walls of his fort, saw three riders going in the direction
of Bani Amr, and shouted, “O you Muslims, the man you desire has come,
bringing great fortunes to you.”

This announcement was echoed through Medina, and men, women and
children, filled with joy, ran out to meet the Prophet, who, by divine
direction, proceeded to Quba, where he dismounted and was soon
surrounded by the tribe of Bani Amr bin Auf. He became the guest of
Kulthum, a worthy man.

The tribe of Aws all met him, but as the fire of war and carnage still
blazed between them and the Khazraj, the latter tribe, through fear,
were to a man prevented from meeting him. As night came on, Abu Bakr
left the Prophet and entered the city, but he remained at Quba, in the
house of Kulthum. After the Prophet had performed evening and night
prayers, Asad bin Zurarah, clad in armor, came in, and excused himself
for not appearing sooner to pay his respects, on account of the
hostility raging between his tribe and that of Aws.

The Prophet then addressed the chiefs of Aws tribe, inquiring who of
them would guarantee Asad’s safety. They replied, “O Messenger of Allah
(S), our own safety is in your keeping, do you then be his security.”
“No,” he replied, “one of you must give him protection.” Awim bin Saidah
and Saad bin Khathima agreed to give protection. So they began to visit
the Prophet and sit in his audience till the Prophet entered Medina.

Ibn Shahr Ashob narrates that fifty-three years of the Prophet’s life
had passed when he fled to Medina; he remained three days in the cave,
or, as one tradition says, six days, and that on Monday, the twelfth,
or, by another account, the eleventh of Rabiul Awwal, he entered Medina.
This was the first year of the Hijrat but its era is dated from the
month Mohurrum.

First the Holy Prophet (S) stayed in the house of Kulthum bin Hadam,
then he shifted to Khathima, of the Aws tribe. Three days, or, according
to some reports, twelve days later, on Ali’s arrival, he entered Medina.
During his stay at Quba, he built a Masjid there. People of Medina used
to visit him. When somewhat more than a month of the Hijrat had passed,
the length of prayers was increased. Eight months after the Hijrat, the
Prophet constituted brotherhood between believers; and in this first
year of Hijrat, Azan was established.

Kulaini has narrated through authentic chains of narrators that Saad bin
Musayyab asked Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.): “What was the age of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) when he embraced Islam?” Imam (a.s.) said: “Keep quiet,
he was never a disbeliever? Ali was ten years old when the Prophet
assumed the prophetical office, and at that day also he was not a
disbeliever but apparently he preceded others by three years in
believing and praying.

And the first prayer he performed with the Prophet was two rakats, at
noon. Which was only two rakats in the first ten years and the Muslims
performed only two rakats in every prayer, which law continued till the
Hijrat. The Prophet left Mecca on the first day of Rabiul Awwal, leaving
Imam Ali (a.s.) in Mecca to complete some errands, which none but he
could perform, and he left Mecca on Thursday, 1st Rabiul Awwal in the
thirteenth year of Besat and arrived at Medina on Monday, the twelfth of
the month after meridian (Zawal) and halted at Quba and performed two
rakats each of the Zuhr and Asr prayers.

The Prophet remained, for more than ten days and according to one
account, fifteen days with Bani Amr bin Auf, who offered to build him a
Masjid if he would dwell with them, but he refused, saying, “I only wait
here the arrival of Ali bin Abi Talib. I have told him to join me at the
soonest. And I will not decide about my permanent stay till he does not
arrive.

And if Allah wills, he will soon be here.” When Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
arrived the Holy Prophet (S) was staying in house of Amr bin Auf. As
soon as Imam Ali (a.s.) arrived, the Holy Prophet (S) took him and came
to Bani Auf and that day was Friday and the Sun was just rising. The
Prophet marked a spot for a Masjid for them and fixed the prayer
direction.

He prayed two rakats of Friday prayer there and then entered Medina.
When he came with him, and mounted on the same she-camel he had rode
from Mecca, the Prophet entered Medina on Friday, having started at
sunrise, and stopped with Bani Salim bin Auf till afternoon prayers.
Every clan of the Ansaris came out and besought him to become their
guest, but he replied, “Open a way for my camel; she is under divine
guidance, and will go to the place Allah has appointed for me.”

At the same time he threw down the reins, and let the camel take her own
course. “Here she stopped,” said Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.), pointing to
the door of the Prophet’s Masjid, where prayers over the dead are
recited. The camel lay down and the Prophet dismounted. Abu Ayyub
Ansari, anticipating the rest, seized and carried the Prophet’s things
to his house, and had the Prophet for his guest till houses were built
for him and Ali (a.s.).

The narrator asked the Imam, “Was Abu Bakr also with the Prophet when he
entered Medina, if not, where he had separated from the Prophet?” Imam
(a.s.) explained that when the Holy Prophet (S) was waiting for Ali at
Quba Abu Bakr wanted to go ahead and not wait for Ali. Hence Abu Bakr
was angry that the Prophet waited for Ali before entering Medina, and
conceived great jealousy for him. This was the first enmity that was
expressed against Ali (a.s.) and this was the first opposition to the
Prophet that Abu Bakr expressed.

The Holy Prophet (S) remained in Quba waiting for Amirul Momineen
(a.s.). So he left the Messenger of Allah (S) and came to Medina. The
narrator asked: “When did the Holy Prophet (S) marry Fatima to Ali
(a.s.).” “Ali married Fatima the year after Hijrat, when she was nine
years old. She was the Prophet’s only child by Khadija, after his
assumption of the prophetical office. Khadija passed away one year
before Hijrat and Abu Talib expired a year later.

When both these personalities left the world, the Holy Prophet (S) was
much aggrieved and he found it dangerous to remain in Mecca. When he
complained to Jibraeel, the Almighty Allah commanded him to leave the
place and go to Medina and after that he can take up arms against the
idolaters. It was then that he performed the Hijrat.” The narrator asked
since when the daily prayers became obligatory as they are recited this
day.

Imam (a.s.) said: When Islam gained strength in Medina, the Almighty
Allah made Jihad obligatory on Muslims and the Holy Prophet (S) by the
command of Allah added seven rakats to daily prayers. Two rakats each
were added to Zuhr, Asr and Isha prayers and one rakat was added to
Maghrib prayer. And the Morning Prayer remained as it was. This was so,
because the angels of the day and the night both used to be present with
the Prophet, so the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُرْآنَ الْفَجْرِ إِنَّ قُرْآنَ الْفَجْرِ كَانَ مَشْهُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and the morning recitation; surely the morning recitation is
witnessed.”***[^82]

Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) said: It means that at the time of Morning
Prayer, angels who note down the deeds of the night as well the angels
who note down the deeds of the day, both are present there.

According to another report, it is mentioned that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said: “Recite more prayers in Masjid Quba, because it is the
first Masjid in which the Prophet first prayed on his way to Medina. And
it is mentioned in another good tradition that the Almighty Allah says:
it is the Masjid whose foundation is laid on piety since the first day.
And in another correct report it is said that: The Holy Prophet (S)
reached Medina and drew a line with his foot around the city and said:
“O Allah, don’t bless those who sell the houses of Medina.”

Shaykh Tabarsi etc. have narrated that Aws and Khazraj tribes had
numerous idols before accepting Islam, which they used to worship and
each of their nobles had an idol at home, to which they applied
fragrance, sacrificed animals and prostrated. When twelve persons from
Ansars paid allegiance to the Prophet and returned to Medina, they threw
out the idols and those who obeyed them, all threw away the idols from
their homes.

And when seventy persons paid allegiance and came to Medina, and after
the Prophet’s arrival among them, the faith spread to that degree that
Saad bin Rabiah and Abdullah bin Rawaha went about and broke all the
idols that remained in the tribe of Khazraj. Prophet entered Medina one
or two days after the coming of Ali (a.s.) on a Friday.

The tribe of Amr bin Auf gathered and collectively prayed to him to
lodge with them as they possessed glory and honor. “We will support you
with our lives and wealth.” The Prophet said: “Leave my she-camel, it
will halt at the place the Almighty Allah has commanded her.” When Aws
and Khazraj learnt of the Prophet’s arrival in Medina, they armed
themselves and rushed out to welcome him and collected around the
she-camel of the Prophet.

Wherever the Prophet went, people welcomed him and pleaded him to lodge
with them, but the Holy Prophet (S) said to them: The she-camel is
pre-ordered by the Almighty Allah.” When the Messenger of Allah (S)
reached Bani Salim tribe, it was the time of decline of the sun from its
meridian. They had constructed a Masjid before the Prophet’s arrival.

They also asked him to stay with them but when the she-camel halted at
the gate of the Masjid, the Holy Prophet (S) alighted and entered it.
Recited the sermon and performed the prayer with a hundred followers.
Then he came out again and mounted the camel, leaving the rein free. The
she-camel was moving according to the command of Allah. When the
Messenger of Allah (S) passed Abdullah bin Ubayy, he did not ask the
Prophet to stay with him; rather he placed a cloth on his nose as a lot
of dust arose by the crowd of Ansaris.

He said: “Don’t stay here. Go to those who are involved in your help and
who have called you here.” So the Almighty Allah as a miracle of the
Holy Prophet (S) sent ants on the people of Abdullah’s tribe that
destroyed their homes and they had to flee the area. Saad bin Ubadah
said: “O Messenger of Allah (S), don’t pay any heed to this accursed
man, because before your arrival, we had decided to appoint him as our
ruler; but since we cancelled that decision he is talking this nonsense
due to jealousy. O Prophet, please stay with us.

We will provide you with army, wealth and glory and anything that you
may need.” The Holy Prophet (S) did not incline to anyone. His she-camel
continued to move on and lay down at a place where presently the
Prophet’s mosque stands. In that time there was only a compound wall
which belonged to two orphans of Khazraj tribe under the guardianship of
Asad bin Zurarah. The she-camel halted at the door of Abu Ayyub, whose
name was Khalid bin Zaid.

The Prophet alighted and the people surrounded him, each of whom wanted
him to stay in his place. But Ayyub’s mother took the Prophet’s luggage
inside and the matter was decided. When people insisted, the Holy
Prophet (S) said: “A man is with his luggage,” and he entered the house
of Abu Ayyub.

And Asad bin Zurarah took the Prophet’s camel to his house. Ibn Shahr
Ashob has narrated from Salman what when the Messenger of Allah (S)
reached Medina, people clung to the rein of his camel to take him to
their homes. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Leave the she-camel as she is
ordered by the Almighty Allah and wherever she halts, I will stay at
that place.”

Since she halted at the door of Abu Ayyub, he called his mother to open
the door, for the Prophet had come to them. She being blind, lamented
the loss of her sight that she could not see him. The Prophet drew his
hand over her eyes and her sight was restored. This was his first
miracle in Medina.

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that three tribes of Jews lived in Medina.
These tribes were the Bani Quraiza, Bani Nuzayr and Bani Qinqaa. When
the Messenger of Allah (S) came to Medina, they approached him and
asked: “To what do you invite?” He replied: “Testify to the Oneness of
Allah and my prophethood.

I am the one who is described in Taurat and the scholars have informed
you that I will migrate from Mecca to this terrain. And a Rabbi from
Shaam had told you that he has abandoned wine and other pleasures and
all luxuries are destroyed because a prophet will be raised in this
area. He will emerge from Mecca and migrate to this city. He will be the
last prophet and the best of them. He will be riding a mule, donn old
garments and feel satiated on dry loaves of bread.

There will be redness in his eyes and the seal of prophethood will be
engraved between his shoulders. He will undertake armed resistance
without caring for anyone. He will be extremely of good nature. His
kingdom will stretch to every accessible place.” Jews said: “We know all
this and that is why we have come here to make peace with you on the
condition that neither we will support nor oppose you.

And we promise that we will not support your enemies and not harass your
supporters. You will, in return, not oppose our supporters till we can
see how your mission progresses.” The Holy Prophet (S) accepted these
conditions and a document was prepared with these stipulations. It was
also mentioned that if they violated any of the terms, it would be
lawful to shed their blood, captivate their women and children and seize
their property.

Huyy bin Akhtab signed this on behalf of Bani Nuzayr. When he returned
home, his brothers asked how he found Muhammad. He replied: “He is the
same whose descriptions we have seen in the scriptures and heard from
the scholars. But I will remain his perpetual enemy, because prophethood
is transferred from the progeny of Ishaq to the progeny of Ismail due to
him and we can never render obedience to the progeny of Ismail.

Kaab bin Asad signed on behalf of Bani Quraiza and Mukhairiq on behalf
of Bani Qinqaa. The latter was the wealthiest of all. He asked: “Do you
know that he is the same Prophet? Come let us go and embrace faith on
his hands and gain from Taurat as well as Qur’an.” But his followers did
not agree.

The Prophet performed prayers a number of times in the house of Abu
Ayyub. He then directed Asad bin Zurarah to buy a certain plot of land
for him. Asad went to negotiate the business with the two orphans that
owned it, and who immediately declared it a present to the Prophet. He
refused to receive it without paying its value, and the bargain was at
length closed by the payment of ten gold coins.

The Prophet ordered bricks to be made on the ground, and stones were
brought to lay the foundation of a Masjid, he toiling with the rest in
this laborious work. Usaid bin Khuzayr seeing him carrying a heavy
stone, said to him, “Let me carry it, O Messenger of Allah (S).” “No,”
he replied, “You go and bring another.” When the foundation was brought
up to the level of the ground, they then built walls of sun-dried brick.

Kulaini has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the walls were
at first the thickness of a single brick’s width, but on the increase of
the Muslims, the Masjid was enlarged, the walls being made a brick and a
half in thickness. On a further increase of members, they besought the
Prophet to allow another enlargement of their place of worship, when he
ordered the walls to be built two bricks thick, in that style in which
the joints of one layer are covered by the bricks of the next course.

As the heat became oppressive, the Muslims petitioned for a roof to the
Masjid. The Prophet ordered date-posts to be set up to support
date-rafters, and a thatch of date-leaves and grass. When the rainy
season commenced, the Muslims proposed to protect themselves by a clay
roof, but the Prophet ordered the roof to be of wood, bound together
like that Musa made, adding, “more than this, I cannot do for the
Masjid;” and it remained in that state till he left the world.

The walls, before the roof was put on, were the height of a man. When
the shadow of the wall extended one cubit noon prayers were performed,
and on the further extension of a cubit, the afternoon prayers were
offered. Shaykh Tabarsi and other tradition scholars have narrated that
after the erection of the Masjid, the Prophet ordered houses to be built
around it for himself and Ali and the rest of the Muhajireen; and they
all had their doors open towards the Masjid.

A house was marked for His Eminence, Hamza also and its door opened in
the Masjid. People used to come into the mosque from their homes.
Jibraeel now descended and said to the Prophet, “Allah commands you to
order all the doors opening towards the Masjid to be closed up, except
your own and that of Ali.”

Companions were unhappy due to this and Hamza was also angry at this
order, and said, “Ali is younger than myself, and is my nephew.” The
Prophet replied, “Do not be vexed, my uncle, for it is not my doing, but
the Almighty Allah has commanded it.” “I am satisfied,” replied Hamza,
“and commit myself to Allah and the Prophet.”

It is related in *Tafsir Majmaul Bayan*, that when Islam was spreading
in Medina, before the Hijrat, the Ansaris said among themselves, “The
Jews have a day, Saturday, on which they assemble weekly for worship,
and the Christian, also have a day for the same purpose, namely, Sunday.
Let us likewise have a fixed day for assembling to worship, and
rendering thanksgiving to Allah.”

Accordingly the Holy Prophet (S) appointed Friday, which, in those
times, was called Uruya, which day received the name Friday, from its
being the day for religious convocation. At this period, Asad bin
Zurarah led the prayers of the Muslims, gave them a discourse and
exhortation, and sacrificed a sheep for them, which served the party for
breakfast and dinner, as they were but few in number.

Subsequently, the Almighty Allah sent the verse relating to Friday. But
the first Friday kept by the Muslims was that of Asad, and the first
observed by the Prophet was after his arrival at Medina. He came to Quba
on Monday, where he laid the foundation of a Masjid and remained till
Friday, when he started for Medina and performed the Friday prayers at
the Masjid of Bani Salim, which is in the midst of the valley.

It is mentioned in reliable books that among the events of the first
year of Hijrat is the incident of the wolf that testified to the
prophethood of the Prophet as was mentioned previously. The same year
the Holy Prophet (S) sent Zaid bin Harith and Abu Rafe to Mecca to bring
Saudah binte Rabiah, wife of the Prophet and his daughters. He married
Ayesha the same year. There was addition to units in daily prayers.

The Messenger of Allah (S) also established brotherhood between the
believers and himself adopted the brotherhood of Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.). It is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that when the
Messenger of Allah (S) established brotherhood between believers and
Muhajireen, people did not inherit on the basis of their relations, they
used to inherit on the basis of their brotherhood. When Islam became
strong, the Almighty Allah revealed the verse of inheritance and the
previous command stood cancelled.

And it is narrated that in that time, the fast of Ashur of Mohurrum
became obligatory. Salman, the Farsi, in this year became a Muslim, as
will be explained in the coming pages. As did Abdullah bin Salam, a
Rabbi, who having proposed a number of questions to the Prophet, and
receiving convincing answers, embraced faith. Abdullah admitted that
Jews were a pack of liars and “if they come to know that I have embraced
Islam they will make allegations against me also.

“Conceal me, therefore,” said he; “call them here and ask them what my
reputation is among them.” They testified that Abdullah was of the very
highest respectability, as was his father before him, both for virtue
and wisdom. “If he becomes a Muslim,” inquired the Prophet, “will you
also embrace Islam?” “May God keep him from that?” exclaimed the Jews.

“Come forth, Abdullah,” said the Prophet. He did so, saying, “I testify
that there is no god but Allah; I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger
of Allah (S).” Immediately the Jews denounced him and his father as the
most wicked and stupid of their tribe. Azan was formulated the same
year. During this year, Bara bin Maroor a chief of Medina, Asad bin
Zurarah and Kulthum bin Hadam passed away, while two of the Meccan
infidels, Aws bin Wail and Walid bin Mughira, went to Hell.

[^1]: Surah Nahl 16:90

[^2]: Surah Alaq 96:1-2

[^3]: Surah Muddaththir 74:1-3

[^4]: Surah Qalam 68:1-3

[^5]: Surah Shuara 26:214

[^6]: Surah Hijr 15:94

[^7]: Surah Lahab 111:1

[^8]: Surah Hud 11:5

[^9]: Surah Taha 20:47

[^10]: Surah Isra 17:46

[^11]: Surah Zariyat 51:54

[^12]: Surah Zariyat 51:55

[^13]: Surah Anfal 8:33

[^14]: Surah Anfal 8:34

[^15]: Surah Isra 17:1

[^16]: The author says: The phrase - remote Masjid - may refer to the
shrine in heaven, without contradicting the fact that the Prophet was
carried to the Masjid of Baitul Maqdas, which a great many traditions
prove to have been the case, although it is probable that in some of his
ascensions, he did not visit that Masjid.

[^17]: Surah Najm 53:1

[^18]: Surah Najm 53:2

[^19]: Surah Najm 53:3-4

[^20]: Surah Najm 53:5

[^21]: Surah Najm 53:6

[^22]: Surah Najm 53:7

[^23]: Surah Najm 53:8-9

[^24]: Surah Najm 53:10

[^25]: Surah Najm 53:11

[^26]: Surah Najm 53:12

[^27]: Surah Najm 53:13-14

[^28]: Surah Najm 53:15

[^29]: Surah Najm 53:16

[^30]: Surah Najm 53:17

[^31]: Surah Najm 53:18

[^32]: The author says: The interpretation of all these verses will be
mentioned under the traditional reports that prove Meraj.

[^33]: Surah Saffat 37:10

[^34]: Surah Mutaffifeen 83:18

[^35]: Surah Nisa 4:10

[^36]: Surah Maryam 19:57

[^37]: Surah Aale Imran 3:68

[^38]: Surah Raad 13:29

[^39]: Surah Najm 53:9

[^40]: Surah Baqarah 2:285

[^41]: Surah Baqarah 2:285

[^42]: Surah Baqarah 2:285

[^43]: Surah Baqarah 2:286

[^44]: Surah Baqarah 2:286

[^45]: Surah Baqarah 2:286

[^46]: Surah Baqarah 2:286

[^47]: Surah Anaam 6:160

[^48]: Surah Najm 53:8-9

[^49]: Surah Baqarah 2:285

[^50]: Surah Baqarah 2:285

[^51]: Surah Baqarah 2:286

[^52]: Surah Baqarah 2:286

[^53]: The author says: The Prophet may have made the ascension twice
from Mecca, and one hundred and eighteen times from Medina; or have made
it twice to the empyrean, and on other occasions, to the heavens only;
or have done it twice bodily, and in the remaining instances spiritually
– Allah knows best.

[^54]: Surah Zukhruf 43:45

[^55]: Surah Yunus 10:101

[^56]: Surah Anaam 6:1

[^57]: Surah Najm 53:8-9

[^58]: Surah Najm 53:13-14

[^59]: Surah Saad 38:1

[^60]: Surah Kauthar 108:1

[^61]: Surah Zukhruf 43:45

[^62]: Surah Najm 53:17-18

[^63]: Surah Waqiya 56:33

[^64]: The author says: Other traditions of Meraj will be mentioned in
the coming chapters, Insha Allah.

[^65]: Surah Maryam 19:25-26

[^66]: Surah Maidah 5:110

[^67]: Surah Maidah 5:82-83

[^68]: Surah Aale Imran 3:199

[^69]: This report which says that Najjashi died in Habasha is more
clear and more famous.

[^70]: The daughter of Lady Khadija’s previous husband was married to
him. – Tr.

[^71]: It shows that Abu Talib was a Divine Proof and a successor of the
prophets.

[^72]: Actually it should be Zamaa. – Tr.

[^73]: The author says: What has been related from the traditions of Ali
bin Ibrahim, Shaykh Tabarsi, Qutub Rawandi, Ibn Shahr Ashob, and many
others, may be relied on, and is consistent as a whole.

[^74]: Surah Anfal 8:30

[^75]: Surah Anfal 8:35

[^76]: Surah Yasin 36:9

[^77]: Surah Baqarah 2:207

[^78]: Surah Taubah 9:40

[^79]: The author says: This verse is sufficient to prove his lack of
faith since he was fearful in spite of being in the company of the Holy
Prophet (S), and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) slept under the shade of swords
but didn’t worry. This was so disconcerting to the Prophet that the
Almighty Allah deprived him from tranquility, which is a necessary part
of faith as mentioned in Basairud Darajat etc. from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when Abu Bakr was terrified in
the cave, the Messenger of Allah (S) tried to comfort him and said: I
can see Ja’far and his companions in a ship that is sailing in the sea.
And I can see a group of Ansar sitting at home and making conversation.
He said: Please show them to me also. The Holy Prophet (S) drew his hand
over his eyes and he saw as the Prophet had said and he said to himself:
“Now I testify that you are a magician!” And Qutub Rawandi has narrated
that when the infidels of Quraish reached outside the cave, Abu Bakr
became very restless and he wanted to come out and join them as he was
secretly in league with them. Meanwhile a Quraishite sat down to urinate
in the direction of the cave. Abu Bakr said: This man has seen us. The
Holy Prophet (S) will never allow him to see. If he had seen us, he
would not have opened his fly in front of us. And don’t worry, Allah is
with us. They can render no harm to us. When he was not assured with
this also and he tried to come out from there, the Holy Prophet (S)
kicked the other side of the cave and a door opened. There was a sea
nearby in which a ship was ready. The Holy Prophet (S) said: Now keep
quiet. If they enter from this entrance, we will escape from the other
side and board the ship. He was thus compelled to keep quiet.

[^80]: Surah Aale Imran 3:190-195

[^81]: Surah Nahl 16:106

[^82]: Surah Isra 17:78


