Skirmishes and incidents between Badr and Uhud
==============================================

Shaykh Tabarsi and Ali bin Ibrahim have narrated that when the Messenger
of Allah (S) returned from the Battle of Badr to Medina, he gathered
Jews in the bazar of Bani Qinqaa and said: “O Jews, fear Allah for the
matter that He sent on Quraish in the Battle of Badr and embrace Islam
before divine chastisement overtakes you.

And know that I am a Messenger Prophet and you have seen my attributes
mentioned in your books. Jews said: “O Muhammad, you should not be
deceived by the fact that you had to confront those who were ignorant of
techniques of warfare and thus you gained victory on them. By Allah, if
you confront us, you will come to know that we are the stalwarts of the
battlefield.” At that juncture, the Almighty Allah revealed the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا سَتُغْلَبُونَ وَتُحْشَرُونَ إِلَىٰ
جَهَنَّمَ ۚ وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say to those who disbelieve: You shall be vanquished, and driven
together to hell; and evil is the resting-place.”***[^1]

After that the Holy Prophet (S) laid siege to Bani Qinqaa for six days.
It is mentioned that it was from the 15th of Shawwal in the 20th month
of Hijra, on Saturday and the Jews prayed for peace after six days and
they came to him and accepted that the Prophet may issue any command
against them. At that time, Abdullah bin Ubayy stood up and said: “O
Messenger of Allah (S), they are our friends and confederates and they
have always supported us.

Three hundred of them are in coats of mail and four hundred unarmed. Do
you want to kill them, even though they are confederates of Khazraj
tribe and have no treaty with the Aws tribe?” Thus he exaggerated so
much in pleading their case that the Holy Prophet (S) was bound to
forgive them and gave up the intention of having them eliminated. They
left the residence of Medina and went and settled at the rural area of
Shaam. The Almighty Allah revealed the following verse about Abdullah
bin Ubayy and some persons of Khazraj who had advocated the case of
Jews:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الْيَهُودَ
وَالنَّصَارَىٰ أَوْلِيَاءَ ۘ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۚ وَمَنْ
يَتَوَلَّهُمْ مِنْكُمْ فَإِنَّهُ مِنْهُمْ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! do not take the Jews and the Christians for
friends; they are friends of each other; and whoever amongst you takes
them for a friend, then surely he is one of them; surely Allah does not
guide the unjust people.”***[^2]

Shaykh Tabarsi and Ibn Shahr Ashob have narrated that when the Messenger
of Allah (S) returned to Medina from the Battle of Badr, he turned his
attention after seven days to the tribe of Bani Sulaym, because he had
received information that they had gathered at the well of Kedar. The
Holy Prophet (S) camped there for three days and no confrontation took
place, but he was able to gain many sheep as booty.

Then the remaining days of Shawwal and the whole month of Zilqad was
spent in Medina during which ransom was taken from the prisoners and
they were released. After that he set out for the expedition of Suwaiq,
because the accursed Abu Sufyan had vowed that till he had not fought
Muhammad, he would not touch women, and he set out from Mecca with a
hundred riders and camped near Bani Nuzayr at a distance of four
farsakhs from Medina, who were a group of Jews of Medina.

He knocked at the door of Huyy bin Akhtab, their leader, but he didn’t
open the door. From there he went to Salam bin Maskan, a noble of Bani
Nuzayr and called him a number of times; after that he came back to his
companions and sent a group of Quraish to Medina who came till the
outskirts of Areez, killed two persons from Ansar and returned.

When the Messenger of Allah (S) learnt about this, he came out in their
pursuit and reached till Qarqaratal Kadr. When Abu Sufyan came to know
about this, he ran from there and since they had to flee from there in a
hurry, they left their rations behind, which contained parched barley
meal. Muslims seized it all and as a result of this it became famous as
the Battle of Suwaiq.

In that same journey, companions of the Prophet passed Arab markets and
traded profitably in it. When they returned, they said: “O Messenger of
Allah (S), we made only profit in this journey and there was no
hardship. Did we get the reward for Jihad? “Yes,” said the Messenger. It
is narrated that in that same year during the month of Zilhajj, Uthman
bin Mazun, a most pious companion and a ward of the Prophet departed for
the eternal abode and was buried in Baqi cemetery. His biography will be
mentioned in the coming pages.

When the Holy Prophet (S) returned from the expedition of Suwaiq, he
passed the remaining days of Zilhajj and full month of Mohurrum in
Medina. Meanwhile information was received that Bani Ghitfan intend to
attack Medina in unison under the leadership of Dasur bin Harith. So the
Holy Prophet (S) set out from Medina with 450 men and when he caught up
with them, they fled to the mountains. The Holy Prophet (S) camped in
the Zawamir valley.

It was raining heavily and the Prophet separated from his army, passed
the valley alone and went to the other side. He removed his clothes and
hung them on a tree to dry and lay down under the shade of that tree.
Enemies saw the Holy Prophet (S) from the hill and said to Dasur, their
leader, that Muhammad was alone and it was a good opportunity to slay
him.

If he calls for his companions they will not reach there in time to save
him. And according to a report there was a flood in the valley and the
companions, were unable to cross that valley. Thus Dasur took his sword
and went to the Prophet. He said: “Who can save you today?” “Allah,”
said the Prophet. Jibraeel slapped his chest and he dropped the sword.

The Holy Prophet (S) picked up the sword and asked: “Now tell me who can
save you?” “No one,” he replied, “I testify to the oneness of God and
that you are His messenger and I swear that I will never mobilize an
army against you.” The Messenger of Allah (S) returned his sword and
freed him. Dasur said, “You have done a favor to me and you are better
than me.

Who is more deserving to do a favor?” When Dasur returned to his men
they asked him why he did not kill him when he was asleep?” He replied:
“I saw a tall man clad in white, who slapped me on the chest I fell down
on my back and I understood that he was an angel; so I recited the
Kalimah and embraced Islam. And I swore that I would never ever fight
against the Prophet. After that he invited his people to Islam. The
Almighty Allah revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ
إِذْ هَمَّ قَوْمٌ أَنْ يَبْسُطُوا إِلَيْكُمْ أَيْدِيَهُمْ فَكَفَّ
أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنْكُمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe, remember Allah’s favor on you when a people had
determined to stretch forth their hands towards you, but He withheld
their hands from you…”***[^3]  
 After that occurred the Battle of Qarda and its story is that six
months after the Battle of Badr, the Prophet came to know that a caravan
of Quraish under Abu Sufyan and according to a report, under Safwan bin
Umayyah was traveling to Shaam through the Iraq route as after the
incident of Badr, due to the fear of Prophet, they avoided traveling to
Shaam through the Hijaz route.

And it was learnt that they were carrying a huge quantity of silver. The
Holy Prophet (S) sent a hundred riders under the command of Zaid bin
Haritha; when they reached the caravan, all the leaders and chiefs of
the caravan ran away and the Muslims seized the caravan along with the
remaining prisoners.

The Holy Prophet (S) separated one-fifth (Khums) which according to one
report, amounted to 20000 dirhams and the rest was distributed among the
people who has taken part in the expedition. Two chiefs of the caravan
were also apprehended, one of them being Furat bin Hayyan who accepted
Islam and was released and another was executed.

It is mentioned in reliable books that in the 2nd year of Hijra,
occurred the expedition of Umair bin Adi. Its story is that there was a
Jewess named Asma binte Marwan, who used to condemn the Muslims a great
deal and also mimicked the Prophet. The Holy Prophet (S) sent Umair who
entered her place at night, eliminated her and returned to pray the
Morning Prayer with the Prophet. Some have said that this occurred in
the 3rd year of Hijrat as will be described after this.

Kaab bin Ashraf, a noble and a poet of Jews, was killed that same year
and he always mimicked the Muslims and the Prophet and he used to harass
them. When he came to know about the Muslim victory of Badr, he was
shocked and he came to Mecca and asked the infidels of Quraish about it
and wept a great deal. He instigated them to take up arms against the
Holy Prophet (S).

When he returned and the Prophet came to know about it, he cursed him in
the following words: “O Allah, suffice us from Ibn Ashraf in the way You
like best.” Muhammad bin Muslima said: “If you permit, I can finish him
off.” The Holy Prophet (S) accorded the permission to him and he
discussed this matter with Saad bin Maaz and sent Abu Naila to procure
wheat on loan from Kaab.

Kaab was a foster brother of Kaab. Since Abu Naila was a close friend of
Kaab, he said: “I have come to you with a request, and I hope you will
not reveal this secret. O Kaab, the coming of that person (Muhammad) to
Medina is a great trouble for us, because all Arabs have become inimical
to us and are prepared to fight us. There is no commercial or social
ties with them.”

Kaab said: “I warned you about it much before.” Abu Naila said: “Some
people of our tribe support this stand. Right now I want some wheat on
loan and I can pawn anything you like against it.” Kaab said: “Pawn your
women with me.” “I will do that,” agreed Naila, “But you are a handsome
young Arab and our women will be attracted to you.” He said, “Then pawn
your sons with me.”

Abu Naila made excuses saying that it would be a matter of shame and
that he was prepared to pledge his weapons. “I will bring them in the
dead of the night so that no one can know.” Thus Abu Naila came back and
reported his conversation to the Holy Prophet (S) and in the dead of the
night, he set out with Muhammad bin Muslima, Salkan bin Salama, Harith
bin Aus and Abu Ais bin Jubair.

The Holy Prophet (S) accompanied him till Baqi and prayed from him. It
was the 14th of that month. They came to the gate of his mansion and
called him. He was in the company of his wife and was newly married.
When he heard them he arose and his wife asked where he was going at
night. He said that his brother, Naila has arrived and he a going to
meet him.

She said: “Don’t go, because I hear a sound through which blood seems to
drip.” Thus she restrained him much but he did not desist and he came
down to them. Muhammad bin Muslima said to his men, “When he comes, I
will catch his head and smell it. When you see that I have caught his
hair firmly you must strike off his head.

When Kaab came out of his courtyard, they brought him away on the
pretext of talking with him in the moonlight. Then Muhammad bin Muslima,
and according to another report, Naila said: “What a nice perfume you
are wearing. Can I smell your hair?” and saying this he began to smell
them taking hold of them firmly. Then he said: “Kill the enemy of God.”

He was attacked but none of the hits proved effective. So Muhammad bin
Muslima stabbed him with a dagger and slashed below his navel. He
screamed aloud and all the residents of the fort heard it and they lit a
fire. Harith bin Aus was injured by mistake by his own people and people
carried him on their shoulders.

They decapitated Kaab and brought the severed head of Kaab to the
Prophet. He prayed for them, applied his saliva on Harith’s wounds and
he was instantly cured. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “You may slay any of
the Jews that you like.” This occurred on the 14th of Rabiul Awwal.

The Khazraj tribe said: “We must also kill all those who are like Kaab.”
So that this honor does not remain restricted to them. At last it was
decided to eliminate Abu Rafe who was known as Salam bin Abil Haqiq. It
was so, because the Muslims were harassed much on account of him and he
used to support the idolaters. He was a brother of Kanana, husband of
Safiya.

He had a fort on the outskirts of Khyber. Thus Abdullah bin Ateek,
Abdullah bin Anees, Abdullah bin Atba and Qatada and one more person
sought the Prophet’s permission and set out for Khyber. The Messenger of
Allah (S) appointed Abdullah bin Ateek as their commander. When they
reached the fort of Abu Rafe, the sun was setting and their goats and
sheep were returning from the pasture and entering the fort.

Abdullah bin Ateek said to his companions: “Stop here, I will go and try
to enter the fort by some trick.” So he came to the gate and entered the
fort and no one recognized him. He hid in a corner. Gate-keepers locked
the gate and hung the keys from a nail. When all had gone to sleep,
Ateek unlocked the gate and they climbed the stairs to Abu Rafe’s
chambers.

There was pitch dark in that place and they could know where he was
sleeping. So they called him and he replied. They attacked in the
direction of the voice and came out of the bedroom. After waiting for
sometime, they re-entered and said in a disguised voice: “What noise was
that?” Abu Rafe said: “Someone attacked me with a sword.”

They followed this voice and reached him and keeping the sword on his
belly give it a push in such a way that it came out of his back. Ateek
came out after that and descended the stairs fast, but he slipped and
broke his thighbone. So he tied it up with his turban and limped back to
his companions outside the fort. When he came back to the Prophet, he
drew his hand over his thigh and it was instantly cured.

It is narrated that in the 3rd year during the month of Shaban, the Holy
Prophet (S) married Hafasa binte Umar bin Khattab and in that same year
in the month of Ramadan, entered into wedlock with Zainab binte
Khuzaimah. That same year on 15th Ramadan, Imam Hasan (a.s.) was born.

[^1]: Surah Aale Imran 3:12

[^2]: Surah Maidah 5:51

[^3]: Surah Maidah 5:11


