Walayah
=======

The new thought and vision which is proposed by God through the Prophet
promises a new life. This can be achieved only if that thought can
establish its identity in the mind and action of an integrated
community.

For such a community which forms a solid and impenetrable front strongly
tries not to efface when confronting the opposite thoughts and actions.
This purpose require" the rejection of any dependence-if necessary or
possible even breaking off the ties of ordinary relationship-which
enfeebles the front of the believers. In the language of the Qur'an this
intellectual and practical stand from the point of view of thought and
action is called 'walayah[^1]'

Again when this integrated group, which is the cornerstone of Islamic
society and the principal basis of Islamic community , changes to a
strong nation and establishes an Islamic society , it needs to observe
the principle of walayah in order to preserve its unity and integrity
and avoid the penetration of its enemies.

The Quran points out these ideas in several verses as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي وَعَدُوَّكُمْ
أَوْلِيَاءَ تُلْقُونَ إِلَيْهِمْ بِالْمَوَدَّةِ وَقَدْ كَفَرُوا بِمَا
جَاءَكُمْ مِنَ الْحَقِّ يُخْرِجُونَ الرَّسُولَ وَإِيَّاكُمْ ۙ أَنْ
تُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ رَبِّكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ خَرَجْتُمْ جِهَادًا فِي
سَبِيلِي وَابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِي ۚ تُسِرُّونَ إِلَيْهِمْ
بِالْمَوَدَّةِ وَأَنَا أَعْلَمُ بِمَا أَخْفَيْتُمْ وَمَا أَعْلَنْتُمْ
ۚ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْهُ مِنْكُمْ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ إِنْ
يَثْقَفُوكُمْ يَكُونُوا لَكُمْ أَعْدَاءً وَيَبْسُطُوا إِلَيْكُمْ
أَيْدِيَهُمْ وَأَلْسِنَتَهُمْ بِالسُّوءِ وَوَدُّوا لَوْ تَكْفُرُونَ
لَنْ تَنْفَعَكُمْ أَرْحَامُكُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُكُمْ ۚ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ يَفْصِلُ بَيْنَكُمْ ۚ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ
قَدْ كَانَتْ لَكُمْ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ فِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَالَّذِينَ
مَعَهُ إِذْ قَالُوا لِقَوْمِهِمْ إِنَّا بُرَآءُ مِنْكُمْ وَمِمَّا
تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ كَفَرْنَا بِكُمْ وَبَدَا بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةُ وَالْبَغْضَاءُ أَبَدًا حَتَّىٰ تُؤْمِنُوا
بِاللَّهِ وَحْدَهُ إِلَّا قَوْلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لِأَبِيهِ
لَأَسْتَغْفِرَنَّ لَكَ وَمَا أَمْلِكُ لَكَ مِنَ اللَّهِ مِنْ شَيْءٍ ۖ
رَبَّنَا عَلَيْكَ تَوَكَّلْنَا وَإِلَيْكَ أَنَبْنَا وَإِلَيْكَ
الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***..O believers, take not My enemy and your enemy for friend; offering
them love, though they have disbelieved in the truth that has come to
you, expelling the Messenger and you because you believe in God your
Lord. If you go forth to struggle in My way and seek My good pleasure,
secretly loving them yet I know very well what you conceal and what you
publish ; and whosoever of you does that, has gone astray from the right
way. If they come on you, they will be enemies to you and stretch
against you their hands and their tongues, to do you evil. and they wish
that you might disbelieve. Neither your blood­ kindred nor your children
shall profit you upon the Day of Resurrection. He shall distinguish
between you. And God sees the things you do. You have had a good example
in Abraham, and those with him, when they said to their people, ·we are
quit of you and that you worship.***
***Apart from God. We disbelieve in you and between us and you enmity
has shown itself, and hatred for ever, until you believe in God alone.
'(60:1- 4)***

The Relations of Islamic Community
----------------------------------

After the establishment of the great 'community', the integrated group
which is the origin of the Islamic Nation. Expands to the extent of all
the true believers of the world. In such a community the principle of
'walayah' influences its civil and foreign affairs.

In civil affairs, all the units and wings of the nation are obliged to
carefully prepare all the force in one way and for one aim and strongly
avoid dispersion and disorder which cause the futility of some parts of
these forces.

In foreign affairs, they should abstain from any relation· ship and
friendship which endangers independence and authority of the world of
Islam.

It is quite obvious that taking care of the two aspects of 'walayah'
(integrity and coordination in internal affairs, freedom and
non-alliance in foreign affairs) requires a central and superior power
which is, in fact, the crystallization of all the constructive elements
of Islam (Imam'[^2]- the Islamic governor). It also requires a deep and
strong relationship between all the members of the Islamic community and
the Islamic governor (Imam). Here another aspect of 'walayah' is
manifested and that is the Imam's 'walayah' and the leader­ ship of the
Islamic world.

In the following verses the Qur'an has skillfully mentioned these subtle
facts.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الْيَهُودَ
وَالنَّصَارَىٰ أَوْلِيَاءَ ۘ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۚ وَمَنْ
يَتَوَلَّهُمْ مِنْكُمْ فَإِنَّهُ مِنْهُمْ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ فَتَرَى الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ
يُسَارِعُونَ فِيهِمْ يَقُولُونَ نَخْشَىٰ أَنْ تُصِيبَنَا دَائِرَةٌ ۚ
فَعَسَى اللَّهُ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ بِالْفَتْحِ أَوْ أَمْرٍ مِنْ عِنْدِهِ
فَيُصْبِحُوا عَلَىٰ مَا أَسَرُّوا فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ نَادِمِينَ
وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَهَٰؤُلَاءِ الَّذِينَ أَقْسَمُوا
بِاللَّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ ۙ إِنَّهُمْ لَمَعَكُمْ ۚ حَبِطَتْ
أَعْمَالُهُمْ فَأَصْبَحُوا خَاسِرِينَ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
مَنْ يَرْتَدَّ مِنْكُمْ عَنْ دِينِهِ فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِي اللَّهُ بِقَوْمٍ
يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ أَذِلَّةٍ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَعِزَّةٍ
عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ يُجَاهِدُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلَا يَخَافُونَ
لَوْمَةَ لَائِمٍ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ
وَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ
الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O believers, take not Jews and Christians as friends; they are
friends of each other. Who so of you makes them his friends is one of
them. God guides not the people of the evil-doer. Yet thou sees those in
whose hearts is sickness vying with one another to come to them, saying,
'We fear lest a turn of fortune should smite us. But it may be that God
will bring the victory, or some commandment from Him, and then they will
find themselves, for that they kept secret within them. Remorseful, and
the believers will say, what, are these the ones who swore by God most
earnest oaths that they were with you?***

***Their works have failed; now they are losers. ' O believers,
whosoever of you turns from his religion , God will assuredly bring a
people He loves, and who Love Him, humble towards the believers,
disdainful towards the unbelievers, men who struggle in the path of God,
not fearing the reproach of any reproacher. That is God's bounty; He
bestow; His favors upon whomever He wills And God is All-embracing,
All-knowing. Only your friend is God, and His Messenger and the believer
who perform the prayer and pay the poor-due (zakat), while bowing down
(in prayer)." (5:51-55)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ تُقَاتِهِ وَلَا
تَمُوتُنَّ إِلَّا وَأَنْتُمْ مُسْلِمُونَ وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِحَبْلِ
اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا وَلَا تَفَرَّقُوا ۚ وَاذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ
عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ كُنْتُمْ أَعْدَاءً فَأَلَّفَ بَيْنَ قُلُوبِكُمْ
فَأَصْبَحْتُمْ بِنِعْمَتِهِ إِخْوَانًا وَكُنْتُمْ عَلَىٰ شَفَا
حُفْرَةٍ مِنَ النَّارِ فَأَنْقَذَكُمْ مِنْهَا ۗ كَذَٰلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ
اللَّهُ لَكُمْ آيَاتِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O believers, fear God as He should be feared and do not die unless
you are Muslims. And you hold fast to God's bond, together and do not
scatter ... "(3:102- 103)***

The Paradise of Walayah
-----------------------

Only that society can enjoy having ‘walayah' in which the wali[^3] is
ascertained the one who is the authority and the inspirer of all the
liveliness and activities of life. And a person can enjoy having
'walayah' if he has a true understanding of the wali and if he is in a
constant struggle to connect himself with him , who is the manifestation
of God's walayah. So far as the wali is God's successor and the
manifestation of the Divine authority and justice on the earth. He uses
all the possibilities and talents, which are disposed in men's nature
for their evolution and exaltation and for their own benefit.

Furthermore, he would not let any of these talents he used against
humanity or he lost for if it happened, it would be a great damage. He
firmly fixes justice and security in the community which are necessary
for man's flourishing as are rich soil, water and good weather necessary
for the growth of a plant. He will stop the appearance of cruelty in any
form (polytheism. doing injustice to others or oneself. He leads all
towards God's servitude. He ripens man's knowledge and vision and leads
him to endeavor and initiation. His principal obligations are: keeping
up prayer for God’s remembrance (salat[^4]) just distribution of wealth
zakat[^5], spreading of goodness ( al-'amar bil-maruf[^6]) and
abolishment of wicked ness (al-nahy 'anal-munkar[^7]). In short he helps
man to approach the ultimate aim of creation.

Thinking about the following verses will show us the vast horizons of
walayah's paradise and will once more emphasize the fact that none of
the religious commandments is as important as walayah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لُعِنَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ عَلَىٰ لِسَانِ
دَاوُودَ وَعِيسَى ابْنِ مَرْيَمَ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ بِمَا عَصَوْا وَكَانُوا
يَعْتَدُونَ كَانُوا لَا يَتَنَاهَوْنَ عَنْ مُنْكَرٍ فَعَلُوهُ ۚ
لَبِئْسَ مَا كَانُوا يَفْعَلُونَ تَرَىٰ كَثِيرًا مِنْهُمْ
يَتَوَلَّوْنَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا ۚ لَبِئْسَ مَا قَدَّمَتْ لَهُمْ
أَنْفُسُهُمْ أَنْ سَخِطَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَفِي الْعَذَابِ هُمْ
خَالِدُونَ وَلَوْ كَانُوا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالنَّبِيِّ وَمَا
أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مَا اتَّخَذُوهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ وَلَٰكِنَّ كَثِيرًا
مِنْهُمْ فَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Cursed were the unbelievers of the Children of Israel by the tongue
of David .and Jesus. Mary's son; that for their rebelling and their
transgression. They forbade not one another any dishonor that they
committed; surely evil were the things they did. Thou seest many of them
making unbelievers their friends. Evil is that they have forwarded to
their account that God is angered against them and in the chastisement
they shall dwell forever. Yet had they believed in God and the Prophet
and what has been sent down to him they would not have taken them as
friends; but many of them are of evil conduct. (5:78- 81)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا
دِينَكُمْ هُزُوًا وَلَعِبًا مِنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِنْ
قَبْلِكُمْ وَالْكُفَّارَ أَوْلِيَاءَ ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنْ
كُنْتُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ وَإِذَا نَادَيْتُمْ إِلَى الصَّلَاةِ اتَّخَذُوهَا
هُزُوًا وَلَعِبًا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَوْمٌ لَا يَعْقِلُونَ قُلْ
يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ هَلْ تَنْقِمُونَ مِنَّا إِلَّا أَنْ آمَنَّا
بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنْزِلَ مِنْ قَبْلُ وَأَنَّ
أَكْثَرَكُمْ فَاسِقُونَ قُلْ هَلْ أُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِشَرٍّ مِنْ ذَٰلِكَ
مَثُوبَةً عِنْدَ اللَّهِ ۚ مَنْ لَعَنَهُ اللَّهُ وَغَضِبَ عَلَيْهِ
وَجَعَلَ مِنْهُمُ الْقِرَدَةَ وَالْخَنَازِيرَ وَعَبَدَ الطَّاغُوتَ ۚ
أُولَٰئِكَ شَرٌّ مَكَانًا وَأَضَلُّ عَنْ سَوَاءِ السَّبِيلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'"O believers, take not as your friends those of them, who were given
the Scripture before you and the unbelievers-who take your religion for
a jest and sport-and fear God, if you are believers-and when you call to
prayer, they take it for a jest and sport ; that is because they are a
people who have no understanding. Say: 'People of the Scripture. Do you
blame us for any other cause than at we believe in God, and what has
been sent down to us and what was sent down before and that most of you
are evil-livers?" Say: "Shall I tell you of a recompense with God worse
than that'.' Whomsoever God has cursed, and with whom He is worth and
made some of them apes and swine, and worshippers of idols-they are
worse situated and have gone further astray from the right way.'
(5:57-60)***

About Walayah (1)
-----------------

The principle of walayah, discussed in the Qur'an comprehensively can he
considered from many point of views. Sometimes each of them can be
regarded as a principle in itself in understanding Islam. If one think
attentively about the following verses some of these point of views can
be observed.

I. The wali of the Islamic society, that is the power which leads all
the mental and practical activities of the society, is God or whomever
God has assigned-either in name or by signs-for walayah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Your guardian wali is only God and His Messenger and the believers
who perform the prayer and pay the Zakat while bowing down (5:55)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُكُمْ أَنْ تُؤَدُّوا الْأَمَانَاتِ إِلَىٰ
أَهْلِهَا وَإِذَا حَكَمْتُمْ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ أَنْ تَحْكُمُوا
بِالْعَدْلِ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ نِعِمَّا يَعِظُكُمْ بِهِ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ
كَانَ سَمِيعًا بَصِيرًا يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا
اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ ۖ فَإِنْ
تَنَازَعْتُمْ فِي شَيْءٍ فَرُدُّوهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ إِنْ
كُنْتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ خَيْرٌ
وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"God commands you to deliver trusts back to their owners; and when
you judge between the people that you judge with justice. Good is the
admonition God gives you; God is All -hearing. All- seeing. O believers
obey God, and obey the Messenger and those in authority among you. It'
you have a dispute on anything, refer it to God and the Messenger, if
you believe in God and the Last Day; that is better and fairer in the
issue. (4:58-59)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ يُطِعِ الرَّسُولَ فَقَدْ أَطَاعَ اللَّهَ ۖ وَمَنْ تَوَلَّىٰ فَمَا
أَرْسَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَفِيظًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Whosoever obeys the Messenger, thereby obeys God; and whosoever
turns his back we have not sent thee to be a watcher over
them."(4:80)***

***..Hast thou not regarded those who assert that they believe in what
has been sent down to thee, and what was sent down before thee, desiring
to take their disputes to idols, yet they have been commanded to
disbelieve in them? But Satan desires to lead them astray into far
error."(4:60)***

God's walayah and its acceptance by the believers has a mental
foundation which has been taken into consideration in the Islamic world
view and is a natural phenomenon.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَهُ مَا سَكَنَ فِي اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ ۚ وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ
الْعَلِيمُ قُلْ أَغَيْرَ اللَّهِ أَتَّخِذُ وَلِيًّا فَاطِرِ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَهُوَ يُطْعِمُ وَلَا يُطْعَمُ ۗ قُلْ إِنِّي
أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ أَوَّلَ مَنْ أَسْلَمَ ۖ وَلَا تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ
الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And to Him belongs whatsoever in habit' the night and the day; and
He 1s the All­ hearing, the All-knowing, Say: 'Shall I take to myself a'
guardian other than God the Originator of the heaven' and of the earth,
He Who feed' and is not fed?' say: 'I have been commanded to be the
first of them that surrender: "Be not thou of the idolaters."'"(6:
13-14)***

About Walayah (2)
-----------------

Any walayah except the walayah of God and His viceroys is the walayah of
taghut and Satan. The acceptance of Satan’s walayah makes Satan dominant
over all the constructive and creative forces of man which he will use
in the way of his own lusts. As far as taghut does not consider any
essentiality for anything except his own benefits and due to his lack of
information about man's needs and his possibilities in Nature. His
leadership for human community is the origin of damage and loss of man’s
valuable energies. The very lack of information in the community under
the dominance of taghut's walayah deprives its people of the brightness
of knowledge. Humanity and God’s life-giving rules and confines them in
the darkness of ignorance, lusts selfishness and perverseness.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْآنَ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللَّهِ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
الرَّجِيمِ إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
وَعَلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ إِنَّمَا سُلْطَانُهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ
يَتَوَلَّوْنَهُ وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ بِهِ مُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***..When thou recites the Quran seek refuge in God from the accursed
Satan; he has no authority over those who believe and trust in their
Lord: his authority is over those who take him for their friend and
ascribe associates to God. ·· (16: 98-100)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا يُخْرِجُهُمْ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى
النُّورِ ۖ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَوْلِيَاؤُهُمُ الطَّاغُوتُ
يُخْرِجُونَهُمْ مِنَ النُّورِ إِلَى الظُّلُمَاتِ ۗ أُولَٰئِكَ
أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ ۖ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Brings them forth from the darkness into the light. And the
unbelievers-their patrons are idols, that bring them forth from the
light into the darkness; those are the inhabitants of the Fire, therein
dwelling forever. "(2:257)***

About Walayah (3) -Hijrah
-------------------------

Taghut's and Satan's walayah in a community makes the true believer
dependent on taghut's power in many different ways and encumbers him
with its invisible net: his freedom is taken away and he is
unconsciously let to the end which that system is doomed to. Such a
system prevent the true believer from spending his power in the way of
Islam.

This inevitable reality proposes the phenomenon of "hijrah[^8]". Hijrah
means escaping from taghut bondage and getting to the free environs of
Islam where everything guides man to the divine aim , where the natural
process of the society is leading towards exaltation , mental and
material evolution , where goodness prevails and no signs of malignity
can be seen that is, the Islamic community.

Therefore, according to the principle of walayah, hijrah, is an
essential and urgent obligation for the true believer. He is to transfer
from the taghut's environs to the Islamic community and step into the
environs of God walayah.

Thinking about the verses of" hijrah" in the Qur'an reveals many points
about this subject.

"They wish that you should disbelieve as they disbelieve, and then you
would be

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُشَاقِقِ الرَّسُولَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ الْهُدَىٰ
وَيَتَّبِعْ غَيْرَ سَبِيلِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ نُوَلِّهِ مَا تَوَلَّىٰ
وَنُصْلِهِ جَهَنَّمَ ۖ وَسَاءَتْ مَصِيرًا إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَغْفِرُ
أَنْ يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ
وَمَنْ يُشْرِكْ بِاللَّهِ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ ضَلَالًا بَعِيدًا إِنْ
يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ إِلَّا إِنَاثًا وَإِنْ يَدْعُونَ إِلَّا
شَيْطَانًا مَرِيدًا لَعَنَهُ اللَّهُ ۘ وَقَالَ لَأَتَّخِذَنَّ مِنْ
عِبَادِكَ نَصِيبًا مَفْرُوضًا وَلَأُضِلَّنَّهُمْ وَلَأُمَنِّيَنَّهُمْ
وَلَآمُرَنَّهُمْ فَلَيُبَتِّكُنَّ آذَانَ الْأَنْعَامِ وَلَآمُرَنَّهُمْ
فَلَيُغَيِّرُنَّ خَلْقَ اللَّهِ ۚ وَمَنْ يَتَّخِذِ الشَّيْطَانَ
وَلِيًّا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ فَقَدْ خَسِرَ خُسْرَانًا مُبِينًا
يَعِدُهُمْ وَيُمَنِّيهِمْ ۖ وَمَا يَعِدُهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ إِلَّا
غُرُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"But whoso makes a breach with the Messenger after the guidance has
become clear to him and follows a way other than the believers. Him We
shall turn him over to what he himself has turned to and We shall roast
him in Gehenna-an evil homecoming. God forgives not that aught should be
with Him associated; less than that He forgives to whomsoever He wills.
Whoso associates with God anything, has gone astray into far error.
Instead of Him, they pray not except to female beings; they pray not
except to a rebel Satan accursed by God. He said, 'Assuredly I will take
unto myself a portion appointed of Thy servants, and I will lead them
astray, and fill them with fancies, and I will command them and they
will cut off the cattle's ears; I will command them and they will alter
God's creation.' Who so takes Satan to him for a friend, instead of God,
has surely suffered a manifest loss. He promises them and fills them
with fancies but there is nothing Satan promises them except delusion.
"(4:115-120)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدُّوا لَوْ تَكْفُرُونَ كَمَا كَفَرُوا فَتَكُونُونَ سَوَاءً ۖ فَلَا
تَتَّخِذُوا مِنْهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ حَتَّىٰ يُهَاجِرُوا فِي سَبِيلِ
اللَّهِ ۚ فَإِنْ تَوَلَّوْا فَخُذُوهُمْ وَاقْتُلُوهُمْ حَيْثُ
وَجَدْتُمُوهُمْ ۖ وَلَا تَتَّخِذُوا مِنْهُمْ وَلِيًّا وَلَا نَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"God is the Guardian of the believers; He equal; therefore take not
to yourselves friends of them, until they emigrate in the way of God;
then, if they tum their backs, take them, and kill them wherever you
find them; take not to yourselves anyone of them as friend or helper"
(4:89)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَهَاجَرُوا وَجَاهَدُوا بِأَمْوَالِهِمْ
وَأَنْفُسِهِمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَالَّذِينَ آوَوْا وَنَصَرُوا
أُولَٰئِكَ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۚ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَلَمْ
يُهَاجِرُوا مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ وَلَايَتِهِمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ حَتَّىٰ
يُهَاجِرُوا ۚ وَإِنِ اسْتَنْصَرُوكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ فَعَلَيْكُمُ
النَّصْرُ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ قَوْمٍ بَيْنَكُمْ وَبَيْنَهُمْ مِيثَاقٌ ۗ
وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بَعْضُهُمْ
أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۚ إِلَّا تَفْعَلُوهُ تَكُنْ فِتْنَةٌ فِي الْأَرْضِ
وَفَسَادٌ كَبِيرٌ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَهَاجَرُوا وَجَاهَدُوا فِي
سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَالَّذِينَ آوَوْا وَنَصَرُوا أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُؤْمِنُونَ حَقًّا ۚ لَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةٌ وَرِزْقٌ كَرِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Those who believe, and have emigrated and struggled with their
possessions and their selves in the way of God, and those who have given
refuge and help-those are friends one of another. And those who believe,
but have not emigrated-you have no duty of friendship towards them till
they emigrate; yet if they ask you for help, in religion's matter, it is
your duty to help them, except against a people between whom and you
there is a compact, and God sees the things you do. As for the
unbelievers, they are friends one of another. Unless you do this there
will be persecution in the land and great corruption. And those who
believe, and have emigrated and struggled in the way of God and those
who have given refuge and help those in truth are the believers. And
theirs shall be forgiveness and generous provision. "(8:72-74)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَوَفَّاهُمُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ ظَالِمِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ
قَالُوا فِيمَ كُنْتُمْ ۖ قَالُوا كُنَّا مُسْتَضْعَفِينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ
ۚ قَالُوا أَلَمْ تَكُنْ أَرْضُ اللَّهِ وَاسِعَةً فَتُهَاجِرُوا فِيهَا
ۚ فَأُولَٰئِكَ مَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ ۖ وَسَاءَتْ مَصِيرًا إِلَّا
الْمُسْتَضْعَفِينَ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ وَالنِّسَاءِ وَالْوِلْدَانِ لَا
يَسْتَطِيعُونَ حِيلَةً وَلَا يَهْتَدُونَ سَبِيلًا فَأُولَٰئِكَ عَسَى
اللَّهُ أَنْ يَعْفُوَ عَنْهُمْ ۚ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَفُوًّا غَفُورًا
وَمَنْ يُهَاجِرْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ يَجِدْ فِي الْأَرْضِ مُرَاغَمًا
كَثِيرًا وَسَعَةً ۚ وَمَنْ يَخْرُجْ مِنْ بَيْتِهِ مُهَاجِرًا إِلَى
اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ ثُمَّ يُدْرِكْهُ الْمَوْتُ فَقَدْ وَقَعَ أَجْرُهُ
عَلَى اللَّهِ ۗ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And those the angels take (in death), while still they are wronging
themselves­ the angels will ask, 'In what circumstances were you?' They
will say, 'We were oppressed in the earth.' The angels will say, 'But
was not God's earth wide, so that you might have emigrated in it?' For
such men, their refuge shall be Gehenna. and evil homecoming-except the
men, women, and children who, being oppressed , can devise nothing and
are not guided to a way; haply them God will yet pardon for God is
All-pardoning, All- forgiving. Whoso emigrates in tile way of God will
find in the earth many refuges and plenty; whoso goes forth from his
house an emigrant to God and His Messenger, and then death over takes
him, his reward is then incumbent on God; surely God is All- for­
giving. All-compassionate. (4-97-100).***

[^1]: Walayah: It means continuing or following without inter­mission,
friendship. Affection, patronage, clientage.

[^2]: Imam: It means one who stands before or is followed, a head.
Chief, leader especially in religious matters. Imam can be a person or a
book. As a book, it refers to the Qur'an. As a person it refers to the
innocent and just people whom God has appointed.

[^3]: Wali: It means administrator. It also means a sincere friend, a
helper or guardian. In Surah of "The Cow" verse 257, the Qur'an says:
"Allah is the Wali (the Guardian) of those who believe. He bringeth them
out of darkness into light."

[^4]: Salat: This word refers to prayers, those especially prescribed by
Islam which are recited five times a day. Salat is considered the
cornerstone of all other duties in Islam.

[^5]: Zakat: Generally it means the wealth which is given in the way of
God, by way of purifying or securing to the rest of one's possessions.
Zakat was meant to fill the gap between the rich and the poor in the
society.

[^6]: Al-'amr bil-ma'ruf: It means to command to do what is right,
lawful, or kind in the eyes of God and man.

[^7]: Al-nahy 'an al-munkar: It is the prohibition of what is wrong,
unlawful, hateful in the eyes of God and man. In the Surah of "The
Family of 'lmran' verse 104. the Qur'an says: "And there should spring
from you a nation who invite to goodness, and enjoin right conduct (al­
'amr bil-ma'ruf ) and forbid indecency (al-nahy 'an al-munkar)'.'

[^8]: Hijrah : It generally means departure from one’s country and
friends. In the tradition of the Qur'an it means leaving the region of
blasphemy and entering the region of faith. In particular it refers to
the Prophet's abandoning Mecca because of its mounting hostility, and
transferring himself and his followers to Yathrib. 200 miles north whose
people had invited him. He arrived on the 20th of September.622 A.D, and
the city proudly changed its name to "Medina tul Nabi­ the Prophet's
City".


