Lady Fatimah (as) Protests Against Abu Bakr's Actions
=====================================================

Fatimah (AS) felt grieved by Abu Bakr's actions, and was so displeased
with him that when she knew of his attempt to seize Fadak, she
accompanied a group of women to the mosque. There she sat down and
delivered the following speech:

Praise be to Allah for that which He bestowed (upon us); And thanks be
to Him for all that which He inspired; and commended in His Name for
that which He Provided: From prevalent favors which He created, And
abundant benefactions which He offered and perfect grants which He
presented; (such benefactions) that their number is much too plentiful
to compute; Bounties too vast to measure;

Their limit was too distant to realize; He recommended to them (His
creatures) to gain more (of His benefaction) by being grateful for their
continuity;

He ordained Himself praiseworthy by giving generously to His creatures;
I bear witness that there is no God but Allah Who is One with out
partner, a statement which sincere devotion is made to be its
interpretation; hearts guarantee its con- tinuation, and dominated in
the minds is its sensibility. He Who can not be perceived with vision;
neither be described with tongues; nor can imagination surround His
state.

He originated things but not from anything that existed be- fore them,
and created them with- out examples to follow. Rather, He created them
with His might and dispersed them according to His will; not for a need
did He create them; nor for a benefit for Him) did He shape them, But to
establish His wisdom, Bring attention to His obedi- ence,

manifest His might, lead His creatures to humbly vene- rate Hun, and to
exalt His decrees. He then made the reward for His obedience, And
punishment for his dis- obedience, so as to protect His creatures from
His Wrath and amass them into His Paradise.

I too bear witness that my Father, Muhammad, is His Slave and
Messenger, Whom He chose prior to sending him, named him before sending
him; when creatures were still concealed in that which was
transcendental, guarded from that which was appalling, and associated
with the termination and nonexistence.

For Allah the Exalted knew that which was to follow, comprehended that
which will come to pass, And realized the place of every event.

Allah has sent him (Muhammad) (p.b.u.h) as perfection for His commands,
a resolution to accomplish His rode, and an implementation of the
decrees of His Mercy. So he found the nations to vary in their faiths;
Obsessed by their fires, Worshipping their idols, And denying Allah
despite their knowledge of Him.

Therefore, Allah illuminated their darkness with my Father, Muhammad,
(p.b.u.h) uncovered obscurity from their hearts, and cleared the clouds
from their insights He revealed guidance among the people; So he
delivered them from being led astray, led them away from misguidance,
guided them to the proper religion and called them to the straight
path.

Allah then chose to recall him back in mercy, love and pre- ference.
So, Muhammad (p.b.u.h) is in comfort from the burden of this world, he
is surrounded with devoted angels, the satisfaction of the Merciful
Lord, and the nearness of the powerful King.

So may the praise of Allah be upon my Father, His Prophet, Trusted one,
the chosen one from among His creatures, and His sincere friend, and may
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.

Fatimah then turned to the crowd and said:

Surely you are Allah 's slaves at His command Prohibition; You are the
bearers of His religion and revelation; You are Allah's trusted ones
with yourselves; and His messengers to the nations. Amongst you does He
have righteous authority; A covenant He brought unto you, and an heir He
left to guard you; That is The eloquent book of Allah; The truthful
Quran; The brilliant light; The shining beam; Its insights are indis-
putable; Its secrets are revealed; Its indications are manifest; and its
fol- lowers are blessed by it.

(The Quran) leads its adherents to good will; and Hearing it leads to
salvation; with it are the bright divine authorities achieved, His
manifest determination acquired, His prohibited decrees avoided; His
manifest evidence recognized; His satisfying proofs made apparent, His
permissions granted, and His laws written.

So Allah made belief to be a purification for you from poly- theism He
made: Prayer- An exaltation for you from conceit. Alms- A purification
for the soul and a (cause of) growth in subsistence. Fasting-An
implantation of devotion. Pilgrimage- A construction of religion.
Justice- A harmony of the hearts; Obeying us (Ahlul-Bayt)- Management of
the nation. Our leadership (Ahlul-Bayt): Safeguard from disunity.

Jihad (struggle) - A strengthening of Islam. Patience- A helping course
for deserving (divine) reward. Ordering goodness (Amr Bil Maruf)- Public
welfare. Kindness to the parents- A safeguard from wrath. Maintaining
close relations with one's kin- A cause for a longer life and
multiplying the number of descend- ants. Retaliation (Qesas)-For sparing
blood (souls).

Fulfillment of vows-subjecting oneself to mercy. Completion of weights
and measures- A cause for preventing the neglect of others' rights.
Forbiddance of drinking wine- An exaltation from atrocity. Avoiding
slander- A veil from curse. Abandoning theft- a reason for deserving
chastity. Allah has also prohibited polytheism so that one can devote
himself to His Lordship.

Therefore; Fear Allah as He should be feared and die not except in a
state of Islam, Obey Allah in that which He has commanded you to do and
that which He has forbidden, for surely those truly fear among His
servants, who have knowledge.

Lady Fatimah Zahra (AS) then added:

O People ! Be informed that I am Fatimah, and my father is Muhammad
(p.b.u.h) I say that repeatedly and initiate it continually; I say not
what I say mistakenly, nor do I do what I do aimlessly. Now hath come
unto you an Apostle from amongst yourselves It grieves him that you
should perish; Ardently anxious is he over you;;

To the believers he is most kind and merciful. Thus, if you identify
and recognize him, you shall realize that he is my father and not the
father of any of your women; the brother of my cousin (Ali (AS) ) rather
than any of your men. What an excellent identity he was, may the peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him and his descendants.

Thus, he propagated the Message, by coming out openly with the warning
and while inclined away from the path of the polytheists, (whom he)
struck their strength and seized their throats, while he invited (all)
to the way of his Lord with wisdom and beautiful preaching, He destroyed
idols, and defeated heroes, until their group fled and turned their
backs.

So night revealed its dawn; righteousness uncovered its genuineness;
the voice of the religious authority spoke out loud; the evil discords
were silenced; The crown of hypo- crisy was diminished;

the tightening of infidelity and desertion were untied, So you spoke
the statement of devotion amongst a band of starved ones; and you were
on the edge of a hole of fire; (you were) the drink of the thirsty one;
the opportunity of the desiring one; the fire brand of him who passes in
haste; the step for feet; you used to drink from the water gathered on
roads; eat jerked meat.

Lady Fatimah (AS) was stating their lowly situation before Islam

You were despised outcasts always in fear of abduction from those
around you. Yet, Allah rescued you through my father, Muhammad (p.b.u.h)
after much ado, and after he was confronted by mighty men, the Arab
beasts, and the demons of the people of the Book Who,

whenever they ignited the fire of war, Allah extinguished it; and
whenever the thorn of the devil appeared, or a mouth of the polytheists
opened wide in defiance, he (p.b.u.h) would strike its discords with his
brother (Ali (AS) ), who comes not back until he treads its wing with
the sole of his feet, and extinguishes its flames with his sword.

He is (Ali (AS) ) diligent in Allah's affair, near to the Messenger of
Allah, A master among Allah 's worshippers, setting to work briskly,
sincere in his advice, earnest and exerting himself (in service to
Islam); While you were calm, gay, and feeling safe in your comfort- able
lives, waiting for us to meet disasters, awaiting the spread of news,
you fell back during every baffle,

and took to your heels at times of fighting. Yet, When Allah chose His
Prophet from the dwell of His prophets, and the abode of His sincere
(servants); The thorns of hypocrisy appeared on you, the garment of
faith became worn out, The misguided ignorant(s) spoke out, the sluggish
ignorant came to the front and brayed.

The he camel of the vain wiggled his tail in your Courtyards and the
Devil stuck his head from its place of hiding and called upon you he
found you respon- sive to his invitation, and observing his deceits. He
then aroused you and found you quick (to answer him), and invited you to
wrath, therefore; you branded other than your camels and proceeded to
other than your drinking places.

Then while the era of the Prophet was still near, the gash was still
wide, the scar had not yet healed, and the Messenger was not yet buried.
A (quick) undertaking as you claimed, aimed at preventing discord
(trial), Surely, they have fallen into trial already! And indeed Hell
surrounds the unbelievers.

How preposterous! What an idea! What a falsehood! For Allah's Book is
still amongst you its affairs are apparent; its rules are manifest; its
signs are dazzling; its restrictions are visible, and its commands are
evident. Yet, indeed you have casted it behind your backs! What! Do you
detest it? Or according to something else you wish to rule?

Evil would be the exchange for the wrongdoers! And if anyone desires a
religion other than Islam (submission to Allah), it never will it be
accepted from him; And in the hereafter, he will be in the ranks of
those who have lost. Surely you have not waited until its stampede
seized, and it became obedient. You then started arousing its flames,

instigating its coal, compiling with the call of the misled devil,
quenching the light of the manifest reli- gion, and extinguished the
light of the sincere Prophet. You concealed sips on froth and proceeded
towards his (the Prophet) kin and children in swamps and forests
(meaning you plot against them in deceitful ways), but we are patient
with you as if we are being notched with knives and stung by spearheads
in our abdomens,

Yet-now you claim- that there is not inheritance for us! What! Do they
then seek after a judgment of (the Days of) ignorance ? But how, for a
people whose faith is assured, can give better judgment than Allah?
Don't you know? Yes, indeed it is obvious to you that I am his daughter.
O Muslims! Will my inheritance be usurped?

O son of Abu Quhafa! Where is it in the Book of Allah that you inherit
your father and I do not inherit mine? Surely you have come up with an
unprecedented thing. Do you intentionally abandon the Book of Allah and
cast it behind your back?

Do you not read where it says: And Sulaiman inherited Dawood ? And when
it narrates the story of Zakariya and says: 'So give me an heir as from
thyself (One that) will inherit ones and inherit the posterity of
Yaqoob'.

And; 'But kindred by hood have prior rights against each other in the
Book of Allah'

And: 'Allah (thus) directs you as regards your children's (inheritance)
to the male, a portion equal to that of two females'

And: '...If he leaves any goods, that he makes a bequest to parents and
next of kin, according to reasonable usage; this is due from the pious
ones.'
You claim that I have no share! And that I do not inherit my father!
What! Did Allah reveal a (Quranic) verse regarding you from which He
excluded my father? Or do you say:


'These (Fatimah and her father) are the people of two faiths, they do
not inherit each other? !' Are we not, me and my father, a people
adhering to one faith? Or is it that you have more knowledge about the
specifi- cations and generalizations of the Quran than my father and my
cousin (Imam Ali) ? So, here you are! Take it! (Ready with) its nose
rope and saddled! But if shall encounter you on the Day of Gathering,
(thus) what a wonder- ful judge is Allah, a claimant is Muhammad, and a
day is the Day of Rising.

At the time of the Hour shall the wrongdoers lose; and it shall not
benefit you to regret (your actions) then! For every Message, there is a
time limit; and soon shall ye know who will be inflicted with torture
that will humiliate him, and who will be confronted by an everlasting
punishment.

Fatimah then turned towards the Ansars and said:

O you people of intellect! The strong supporters of the nation! And
those who embraced Islam; What is this short-coming in defending my
right? And what is this slumber (while you see) injustice (being done
toward me)? Did not the Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h) my father, used to
say:

'A man is upheld (remembered) by his children ?!' O how quick have you
violated (his orders)! How soon have you plotted against us? But you
still are capable (of helping me in) my attempt, and powerful (to help
me) in that which I request and (in) my pursuit (of it).

Or do you say: "Muhammad (p.b.u.h) has perished;" Surely this is a
great calamity; Its damage is excessive its injury is great, Its wound
(is much too deep) to healed The Earth became darkened with his
departure;

the stars eclipsed for his calamity; hopes were seized; mountains
submitted; sanctity was violated, and holiness was encroached upon after
his death. Therefore, this, by Allah, is the great affliction, and the
grand calamity; there is not an affliction- which is the like of it; nor
will there be a sudden misfortune (as surprising as this).

The Book of Allah-excellent in praising him-announced in the courtyards
(of your houses) in the place where you spend your evenings and
mornings; A call, A cry, A recitation, and (verses) in order: It had
previously came upon His (Allah's) Prophets and Messengers,

(for it is) A decree final, and a pre- destination fulfilled: 'Muhammad
is not but an Apostle: Many were the apostles that passed away before
him. If he died or was slain, will ye then turn back on your heels If
any did turn back on his heels, not the least harm will he do to Allah;
but Allah (on the other hand) will swiftly reward those who (serve Him)
with gratitude.'

O you people of reflection; will I be usurped the inheritance of my
father while you hear and see me?! (And while) You are sitting and
gathered around me? You hear my call, and are included in the (news of
the) affair? (But) You are numerous and well equipped! (You have) the
means and the power, and the weapons and the shields.

Yet, the call reaches you but you do not answer; the cry comes to you
but you do not come to help? (This) While you are characterized by
struggle, known for goodness and welfare, the selected group (which was
chosen), and the best ones chosen by the Messenger (p.b.u.h) for us,
Ahlul-Bayt.

You fought the Arabs, bore with pain and exhaustion, struggled against
the nations, and resisted their heroes. We were still, so were you in
ordering you and you in obeying us. So that Islam became triumphant, the
accomplishment of the days came near, the fort of polytheism was
subjected, the outburst of fabrication subsided, the flames of
infidelity calmed down, and the system of religion was well-ordered.

Thus, (why have you) become con- fused after clearness? Conceal matters
after announcing them ? Turned on your heels after daring?

Associated (others with Allah) after believing? Will you not fight
people who violated their oaths? Plotted to expel the Apostle and became
aggressive by being the first (to assault) you? Do ye fear them?

Nay, it is Allah Whom ye should more justly fear, if you believe!
Nevertheless, I see that you are inclined to easy living; dismissed he
who is more worthy of guardianship (Ali (AS) ) You secluded yourselves
with meekness and dismissed that which you accepted.

Yet, if you show ingratitude, ye and all on earth together, yet, Allah
free of an wants, worthy of appraise. Surely I have said all that I have
said with full knowledge that you intent to forsake me, and knowing the
betrayal which your hearts sensed. But, it is the state of soul, the
effusion of fury, the dissemination of (what is) the chest and the
presentation of the proof Hence, Here it is! Bag it (leadership and) put
it on the back of an ill she-camel, which has a thin hump, with ever
lasting grace, marked with the wrath of Allah,

and the blame of ever (which leads to) the Fire of (the wrath of) Allah
kindled (to a blaze), that which doth mount (right) to the hearts; For,
Allah witnesses what you do, and soon will the unjust assailants know
what vicissitudes their affairs will take !! And I am the daughter of a
Warner (the Prophet p.b.u.h.) to you against a severe punishment. So,
act and so will we, and wait, and we shall wait. [The end of Lady
Fatimah's speech.]

It appears from recorded historical events, that Lady Fatimah (AS) was
successful at the beginning in persuading Abu Bakr to hand back Fadak to
her; listen to part of a speech he (according to some historians)
delivered after hearing Fatimah's speech. He said:

' O daughter of the Messenger of Allah. . . Surely the Prophet is your
father, not anyone else's, the brother of your husband, not any other
man's; he surely preferred him over all his friends and (Ali) supported
him in every important matter, no one loves you save the lucky and no
one hates you save tile wretched.

You are the blessed progeny of Allah's Messenger, the chosen ones, our
guides to goodness, our path to Paradise, and you-the best of women-and
the daughter of the best of prophets, truthful is your sayings,
excelling in reason. You shall not be driven back from your right...But
I surely heard your father saying: '

We the group of prophets do not inherit, nor are we inherited. ' Yet,
this is my situation and properly, it is yours (if you wish); it shall
not be concealed from you, nor will it be stored away from you. You are
the Mistress of your father's nation, and the blessed tree of your
descendants.

Your property shall not be usurped against your will, nor can your name
be defamed Your judgment shall be executed in all that which I possess.
This, do you think that I violate your father's (will) ? '

Fatimah then refuted Abu Bakr's claim that the Prophet (p.b.u.h) had
stated that prophets can not be inherited, and said:

Glory be to Allah ! Surely Allah's Messenger (p.b.u.h) did not abandon
Allah's Book nor did he violate His commands. Rather, he followed its
decrees and adhered to its chapters. So do you unite with treachery
justifying your fabrications?

Indeed this-after his departure-is similar to the disasters which were
plotted against him during his lifetime. But behold ! This is Allah's
Book, a just judge and a decisive speaker, saying One that will (truly)
inherit Me, and inherit the posterity of Yaqub, and Sulaiman inherited
Dawood.

Thus, He (Glory be to Him) made clear that which He made share of all
heirs, decreed from the amounts of inheritance, allowed for males and
females, and eradicated all doubts and ambiguities (pertaining to this
issue which existed with the) by gones.

Nay! But your minds have made up a tale (that may pass) with you, but
(for me) patience is most fitting against that which ye assert; it is
Allah (alone) whose help can be sought.

It is apparent that Abu Bakr chanced the mode with which he addressed
Lady Fatimah (AS) after delivering her speech. Listen to his following
speech; which is his reply to Fatimah's speech. Abu Bakr said:

Surely Allah and His Apostle are truthful, and so has as (the
Prophet's) daughter told the truth. Surely you are the source of wisdom,
the element of faith, and the sole authority. May Allah not refute your
righteous argument,

nor invalidate your decisive speech But these are the Muslims between
us-who have entrusted me with leadership and it was according to their
satisfaction that I received what I have. I am not being arrogant,
autocratic, or selfish, and they are my witnesses.

Upon hearing Abu Bakr speak of the people's support for him, Lady
Fatimah Zahra (AS) turned towards them and said:

O people, who rush towards uttering falsehood and are indifferent to
disgraceful and losing actions !

Do you not earnestly seek to reflect upon the Quran, or are your hearts
isolated with locks? But on your hearts is the stain of the evil which
you committed; it has seized your hearing and your sight, evil is that
which you justified, cursed is that which you reckoned, and wicked is
what you have taken for an exchange!

You shall, by Allah, find bearing it (to be a great) burden, and its
consequence disastrous. (That is) on the day when the cover is removed
and appears to you what is behind it of wrath. When you will be
confronted by Allah with that which you could never have expected, there
will perish, there and then, those who stood on falsehoods.

Although parts of Abu Bakr's speeches can not be verified with
authentic evidence, and despite the fact that we have already mentioned
part of the actual speech which Abu Bakr delivered after Lady Fatimah's
(AS) arguments, it appears certain that Abu Bakr was finally persuaded
to submit Fadak to her.

Nevertheless, when Fatimah (AS) was leaving Abu Bakr's house, Umar
suddenly appeared and exclaimed :

What is that you hold in your hand ?

Abu Bakr replied :

' A decree I have written for Fatimah (AS) in which I assigned Fadak
and her father's inheritance to her.

Umar then said :

With what will you spend on the Muslims if the Arabs decide to fight
you.

Umar then seized the decree and tore it up !!!

**Sunni references:**

- Seerah al Halabiyah, vol 3 p 391 -\> 400
- Fadak in History, Murtaza Muttaheri, p 85
- Fatimah the Gracious, Abu Muhammad Ordoni, 217 -\> 240


