More Facts On Fadak : Comments From Futuhul Buldan By Baladhuri's
=================================================================

Now we present with some comments, regarding Khums and Fa'y some
quotations from Baladhuri's Futuhul Buldan, Urdu translation, Jami'a
Uthmania, Hyderabad Deccan.

1. At last they sought peace on these terms - ' We shall go away from
your town, leaving our weapons and mail coats, shall take with us only
those articles which can be loaded on camels.

All other articles including weapons, mail coats, oases, and lands will
be the property of the Prophet of Allah. On this account the properties
of Bani Nazir became under the Holy Prophet's ownership. He used to get
the land with the palm-date trees cultivated, and from its income he
defrayed the expenses of his dependents for the whole year.'

(Vol. 1, page 25, Chapter The properties of Bani Nuzair).

\>From narration 1, it is established that the properties of Bani
Nuzair exclusively belonged to the Holy Prophet. He got these lands
cultivated for the subsistence of his dependents.

2. The narrator says that in this verse Allah has brought home to the
Muslims that these properties were exclusively of the Holy Prophet and
for no one else. (page 26).

\>From narration 2, it is established that since Muslims had not
exhausted their horses and camels against Bani Nuzair their properties
were meant exclusively for the Holy Prophet and for no one else.

3. Caliph Umar said ' The properties of Bani Nuzair were among those
properties which Allah had given to His Prophet without fighting and on
which the Muslims had not galloped their horses or camels.

On that account they were the Holy Prophet's exclusive property. From
them he used to defray the expenses of his dependents for the whole
year, and whatever was saved from it was spent in the way of Allah or
for horses and weapons. (page 28).

\>From narration 3, it is established that Caliph Umar used to say that
the properties of Bani Nuzair exclusively belonged to the Holy Prophet
and from them he used to defray the expenses for his dependents for the
whole year.

4. It is said on return from Khyber the Holy Prophet sent Mohayyasah
bin Mas'ud Ansari to the people of Fadak to invite them to Islam. At
that time their chief was a man from among themselves named Yusha' bin
Noon, the Jew. He offered to make peace with the Prophet by giving half
the land to him, and the Holy Prophet accepted it. Hence, Fadak became
exclusively the Prophet's property because the Muslims had not advanced
on it with their horses and camels. (page 45).

\>From narration 4, it is established that Fadak was granted by Allah
to His Prophet without fighting. Therefore it was exclusively meant for
the Holy Prophet.

5. Fatimah said to Caliph Abu Bakr, ' Give Fadak to me because the Holy
Prophet had reserved it for me' and presented Ali as her witness. He
(Abu Bakr) demanded another witness.

She produced Umme Aiman. He said, ' O daughter of the Prophet! You know
that evidence is not complete unless it is given by one man and two
women'. Hearing this she went away. (pp. 47- 48).

\>From narration 5, it is established that Fatimah said to Abu Bakr '
Give Fadak to me, since the Prophet of Allah had reserved it for me' .
In reply she was asked to produce witnesses who were afterwards
rejected.

6. Fatimah said to Caliph Abu Bakr ' Give Fadak to me because the Holy
Prophet had given it to me' . He deman- ded proof. She produced Umme
Aiman and Rubab, the freed slave-girl of the Prophet. Both gave
evidence. Abu Bakr said, ' In any case this evidence is not enough. The
evidence should be of one man and two women' . (page 48).

\>From narration 6, it is established that Fatimah said to Abu Bakr, '
Give Fadak to me because the Prophet of Allah had given it to me' ,
which means that Fadak was in the possession and control of Fatimah from
the days of the Holy Prophet and no one had the authority to deprive
Fatimah of it.

7. Fatimah went to Caliph Abu Bakr and inquired, ' When you- die who
will be your successor' ? He said, ' My issues' . Fatimah said, ' Then
how is it that despite our presence you have become the successor of the
Holy Prophet' .

He said, ' O daughter of the Prophet! By Allah I have not inherited
gold or silver or any other thing from your father' . She said, ' Khyber
is our share and Fadak is a gift to us' . He said, ' O daughter of the
Prophet! I have heard from the Holy Prophet, ' This source of living is
till my life. After me, it should be distributed among the Muslims' .
(page 48).

From narration 7, it is established that F Fatimah inquired from Abu
Bakr, ' When you die who will be your successor?' Abu Bakr said, ' My
issues '. Fatimah there-- upon said, 'and then how is it that despite
our presence yolk -have become the successor of the Holy Prophet ', and
in reply Abu Bakr said, ' I have heard the Holy Prophet saying, ' this
source of living is till my life; after me it should be distributed
among the Muslims' .

A few questions arise here. First, whether after the Holy Prophet the
economic necessities of Ale Muhammad would also come to an end?
Secondly, whether Allah excluded Ale Muhammad from the rule of
inheritance. Thirdly, is there any verse in the Holy Quran from which it
may be established that if Abu Bakr dies his issues should inherit him
and when Muhammad bin Abdullah dies, his issues should not inherit
him.

8. The verse ' Since you did not have to exhaust your horses and camels
(or even fight)' , pertains to Fadak and such other areas of Arabia,
which were exclusively reserved for the Holy Prophet. (page 49).

\>From narration 8, it is established that Fadak and some areas of
Arabia were exclusively reserved for the Holy Prophet.

9. After this in the year 210 A.H. Amirul Mo'minin, Mamun Abdullah bin
Harunur Rashid ordered restoration of Fadak to the descendants of
Fatimah and wrote about it to Qasim bin Ja'far who was his Governor in
Medina ' By virtue of his position in the religion and being a near
kinsman of the Holy Prophet,

Amirul Mo'minin is apt to abide by his Sunnah and enforce his commands,
and to give over anything that he might have bequeathed to anyone as
charity or gift. The succour and protection of Allah is in favour of
Amirul Mo'minin and by every act, he aims at His Pleasure.

' The Holy Prophet had gifted Fadak to his daughter Fatimah. This was
such a well-known matter that there was no difference about it among the
descendants of the Prophet. On this basis Fadak had been demanded from
Amirul Mo'minin. The disposal of this matter was very important for him
by virtue of his sincerity towards the Prophet.

Therefore, Amirul Mo'minin deems it proper to restore Fadak to the
descendants of Fatimah, and entrust it to them so as to secure Pleasure
of Allah by upholding right and justice and of the Prophet by enforcing
his command. Accordingly Amirul Mo'minin orders that this be entered in
his records and his officers be informed accordingly.

Since after the Prophet it was announced in every Haj that whoever had
been given any charity or gift or had been promised anything should come
and his statement would be accepted, and his share would be made over to
him, Fatimah was more entitled to it that her statement in respect of
what had been reserved for her should be taken as true.

Amirul Mo'minin has ordered his freed slave Mubarak Tabari that Fadak
in its original boundaries together with all the rights appertaining to
it now and also along with its working slaves, and its revenues,

should be handed over to the descendants of Fatimah i.e. Muhammad bin
Yahya bin Husayn bin Zayd bin Ali bin Husayn bin Ali bin Abi Talib,
because Amirul Mo'minin has made them trustees for the administration of
these matters.

So know that this is according to the view of Amirul Mo'minin and it
has been put in his mind by Allah because of the obedience and service
that he performs and of the determination that Allah gave him through
the nearness that he enjoys with Allah and His Prophet.

You should appraise Mubarak Tabari of this and deal with Muhammad bin
Yahya and Muhammad bin Abdullah whom Amirul Mo'minin has appointed
trustees in the same manner in which you had held dealing with Mubarak
Tabari, and co-operate with them in the matter in which, if Allah wills,
the development, improvement and prosperity of Fadak is involved, and
increase of its produce is aimed at. (page 50).

The edict has been written on Wednesday the 2nd day of Zi'qadah in the
year 210 A.H.

But when Mutawakkil became the caliph, he reversed the position of
Fadak.

From narration 9, an edict of Caliph Mamun has been given. He wrote to
his Governor at Medina, Qasim bin Ja'far to restore Fadak to- the
descendants of Fatimah. In it Mamun has clearly written that the Holy
Prophet had gifted Fadak to Fatimah.

He has also written that during the days of Haj it was announced that
if the Holy Prophet made any promise to someone he should say so, and
the words of those making such claims were accepted and no witnesses
were asked for.

As such, Fatimah argued that her claim should be accepted and she
should be given what had been reserved for her by the Holy Prophet. But
alas, it was not done. Everyone among the common people was given
according to his claim, without any witness as called for, but the
daughter of the Holy Prophet, for whose truthful- ness Allah revealed
the verse of Purification (Vide, al-Qur'an, 33 33) in the Holy Qur'an,
was made to produce witnesses, and on presentation of the witnesses
also, the claim was disallowed.


