The Tragedy of Thursday
=======================

On a Thursday, just three days before the demise of Prophet (PBUH&HF),
the Messenger of Allah asked for pen and paper in order to state his
last will and repeat the declaration/assignment of his successor for his
Ummah.

Major Sunni sources including Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim
mentioned that an opposition group among the companions whose leader was
Umar, accused prophet of talking non sense (May Allah protect us) in
order to prevent this writing. They questioned the rationality of
Prophet to discredit the his will. Below is some of the traditions
concerning this tragic episode:

It is narrated in Sahih Muslim that:

Ibn Abbas said: "Thursday! And how tragic that Thursday was!" Then Ibn
Abbas cried severely so that his tears flowed to his cheeks. Then he
added Prophet said: "Bring me a flat bone or a sheet and an ink so that
I could write (order to write) a statement that will prevent you people
to go astray after me." They said: "Verily the messenger of Allah is
talking no sense."

Reference: Sahih Muslim, Chapter of "Kitabul-Wasiyyah" in section
"Babut- Tarkil-Wasiyyah", 1980 Edition, Arabic version (Saudi Arabia),
v3, P1259, Tradition (\#1637/21).

Here is the original Arabic text of above Hadith given by Sahih
Muslim:

The other version is given by al-Bukhari and Muslim which indicates the
role of Umar in that catastrophe:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadiths: 9.468 and 7.573

Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:

When the time of the death of the Prophet approached while there were
some men in the house, and among them was 'Umar Ibn al-Khatttab, the
Prophet said: "Come near let me write for you a writing after which you
will never go astray." 'Umar said: "The Prophet is seriously ill, and
you have the Quran, so Allah's Book is sufficient for us."

The people in the house differed and disputed. Some of them said, "Come
near so that Allah's Apostle may write for you a writing after which you
will not go astray," while the others said what 'Umar said.

When they made much noise and quarreled greatly in front of the
Prophet, he said to them, "Go away and leave me." Ibn 'Abbas used to
say, "It was a great disaster that their quarrel and noise prevented
Allah's Apostle from writing a statement for them.

The above tradition can also be found in Sahih Muslim, Chapter of
"Kitabul- Wasiyyah" in section "Babut-Tarkil-Wasiyyah", 1980 Edition,
Arabic version (Saudi Arabia), v3, p1259, Tradition (\#1637/22).

As you see in the above traditions, the Prophet (PBUH&HF) was accused
of talking no sense by an opposition group among the companions whose
leader was Umar. In the above tradition, Ibn Abbas mentioned Umar and
his company PREVENTED Prophet from writing his will which could prevent
people from going astray after him.

So the conclusion from the above tradition is that the writing it did
NOT take place. In the following tradition, however, Sa'id Ibn Jubair
alleged that the Prophet said three things but he has forgotten the
third one which was beneficial for Muslims:

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 4.393

Narrated Said bin Jubair:

I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "Thursday! And you know not what Thursday
is? After that Ibn 'Abbas wept till the stones on the ground were soaked
with his tears. On that I asked Ibn 'Abbas, "What is (about) Thursday?"
He said, "When the condition (i.e. health) of Allah's Apostle
deteriorated, he said, 'Bring me a bone of scapula, so that I may write
something for you after which you will never go astray.'

The people differed in their opinions although it was improper to
differ in front of a prophet, They said, 'What is wrong with him? Do you
think he is talking no sense (delirious)? Ask him (to see if he is
talking no sense). The Prophet replied, 'Leave me, for I am in a better
state than what you are asking me.'

Then the Prophet ordered them to do three things saying: 'Turn out all
the pagans from the Arabian Peninsula, show respect to all foreign
delegates by giving them gifts as I used to do.' The third order was
something beneficial which either Ibn 'Abbas did not mention or he
mentioned but I forgot!

Sa'id Ibn Jubair claims that Prophet said three things but he has
forgotten the third one which was beneficial for Muslims. It is
interesting to see that the narrators who used to memorize thousands of
traditions, simply forgot the last will of Prophet (PBUH&HF). Now if you
look at the two things that the sub-narrator allegedly attributed to the
Prophet, i.e.,

1. Expelling pagans from Arabian Peninsula

2. respecting foreign delegates

One can see that these are not the things that if Muslim do, they will
NEVER go astray after Prophet. The matter should be much more important
that would Guarantee the salvation of Muslims, and it could be no less
important than the subject of leadership.

Moreover such claim contradicts the saying of Ibn Abbas (in the early
mentioned traditions) who claimed that the quarrel of the companions
prevented the prophet from stating his will. Here is the last tradition
I would like to mention in this regard.

Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith: 5.716

Narrated Ibn Abbas:

Thursday! And how tragic that Thursday was! The ailment of Allah's
Apostle became worse (on Thursday) and he said "Bring me something so
that I (order) to write for you something after which you will never go
astray." The people (present there) quarreled in this matter, and it was
not right to quarrel in front of prophet. They said, "What is wrong with
him? (Do you think) he is talking no sense (delirious)?"

Here is the original Arabic text of above Hadith (5.716) given by al-
Bukhari:

The above tradition is also in Sahih Muslim, Chapter of
"Kitabul-Wasiyyah" in section "Babut-Tarkil-Wasiyyah", 1980 Edition,
Arabic version, (Saudi Arabia), v3, pp 1257-58, Tradition (\#1637/20).

More addresses for similar traditions:

Sahih al-Bukhari, in the chapter named "The Book of Knowledge"
(Kitabul-Ilm), also in the chapter named "The Book of Medicine"
(Kitabut-Tib), also in the chapter named "Kitabul Itisam bil Kitab
was-Sunnah".

Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v1,pp 232,239,324f,336,355.

And much more...

Also as indicated above (Sahih al-Bukhari Hadiths: 9.468 and 7.573),
Umar said: "The Prophet is seriously ill, and you have the Quran, so
Allah's Book is sufficient for us." Umar and those who supported him
prevented prophet from writing (ordering to write) that statement, by
accusing him of talking no sense.

As I have mentioned in the discussion about "Quran and Ahlul-Bayt",
prophet clearly indicated that we should follow both Quran AND
Ahlul-Byte in order not to go astray. So Quran alone is not sufficient
as opposed to what Umar said above.

There is a bizarre commentary in the footnote of above traditions in
Sahih Muslim (1980 Edition, Arabic version). It says: The above incident
shows the high virtue of Umar, since he knew that people might not
follow what prophet would write, and as a result, people would go to
hell because of their disobedience of the order of prophet. So Umar
prevented Prophet from writing, in order to save people from going to
hell !

Also in the footnote of the same section of Sahih Muslim it is
mentioned that Prophet possibly wanted to assign a Caliph on that
Thursday, and the matter might have been the matter of successorship
which caused such dispute.

In fact, most of the people who where present there, understood the
intention of prophet, the same as what Umar did. Because prophet had
previously indicated the issue when he said several times that: "I shall
leave for you two precious Symbols: The book of Allah, and my progeny,

that is my family (Itrat & Ahlul-bayt). If you follow them, you will
never go astray after me." (Sahih al-Tirmidhi; a close version is also
given in Sahih Muslim), and also they were present in GHADIR KHUM where
prophet said: "Whoever I am his master, Ali is his master." (see Sahih
al-Tirmidhi; Sunan Ibn Maja; Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal; al-Mustadrak, by
al-Hakim; Khasa'is, by al-Nisa'i).

So when prophet during his illness said that "Let me write something
that you never go astray after me", those people who were present,
including Umar, quickly understood that prophet wants to repeat what he
had already mentioned, but this time in writing. A few Quranic verses
should also be mentioned here. Allah said in Quran:

"O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of prophet
... lest your deeds become null while you do not perceive." (Quran
49:2).

Allah also said:

"Nor does he (prophet) speak out of his desire. (What he says) is
nothing but revelation that is revealed." (Quran 53:3-4).

He, Exalted, also said:

"Whatever apostle tells you accept it, and from whatever he forbids
you, keep back." (Quran 59:7).

He, Exalted He is, also said:

But no by thy Lord! They can have no Faith until they make thee judge
in ALL disputes between them and find in their souls no resistance
against thy decisions but accept them with the fullest conviction.
(Quran 4:65)

So when such a prophet, three days before his death, wished to write a
document of his will to save the Muslims from going astray, he was
accused of talking no sense (paranoid)!

The reason that prophet did not repeat his request (if it is true) was
that he already was discredited by his companions and was accused of
talking no sense. So even if he would say something, those people would
not believe in him and would say such instruction has been given while
he was talking no sense (paranoid). So Umar made it easy, and by saying
that prophet is talking nonsense, ended it up.

There are few Sunni traditions which allege that prophet was confused
to assign which person as his successor and finally failed to assign any
body as his successor and left it to people to decide. Some even claim
that prophet was willing to assign Abu Bakr, but he left it to people.

If Umar have ever heard of such sayings (that prophet was willing to
assign Abu Bakr as his successor), he would never stop prophet from
stating his will, and would never accuse him of talking no sense.

Rather he would let prophet tell his will and assign Abu Bakr as his
successor. We all know, the main support in "Saqifah Bani Sa'idah" for
the secret nomination of Abu Bakr for Caliphate, was Umar.

So if Umar have not heard of such traditions (the tendency of Prophet
to assign Abu Bakr), there is a great possibility that those traditions
were fabricated later.

Also it contradicts several authentic Sunni traditions regarding the
assignment of Ali-Ibn-Abi-Talib as prophet's successor. As you know
there are a huge number of fabricated traditions which was created by
several pay- rolled scholars in support of some rulers, and mainly to
justify what happened.

Finally, I would like to bring to your attention the importance and
seriousness of the tragedy:

1- Notice that any person utters his most important wishes when he
wants to write the statement of his will at the end of his life.

2- Notice the importance of the person who wants to write the will, who
is the last Prophet of God, the best mankind ever. No human in the world
was more enthusiastic than him about his community. The person who Allah
has ordered us in Quran to follow him unconditionally.

3- Notice that prophet said this statement would be the key element in
the destiny of Muslims according to the above traditions. They will
never go astray if they abide it.

In such critical moment, people who claimed to be his sincere
companions, stopped/insulted him. Those companions are responsible for
misleading the Muslims throughout history and the generations to come.

**Side Comments**

Reading the article, a Sunni brother commented that: How could Umar
prevent the manifestation of a Divine Commandment? If writing the will
was the order of Allah to his Prophet, then how could be possible that
Allah fails to manifest His own wish?

This brother has confused two different issues. Umar was able to
prevent the manifestation of divine commandment since he was a human and
was gifted some free will. Yet, Umar or any other human can NEVER
prevent what Allah foreordained (Taqdir) and what Allah wills
(Mashiyyah).

Please take a note of this: There is a difference between the
commandment of Allah (which people can disobey) and the will of Allah
(which people have no ability to go against). It was the commandment of
Allah to write that statement, yet the Will of Allah was what
happened.

Another brother mentioned that Prophet Muhammad never wrote a single
commandment or teaching of his during his 23 years of ministry. Then how
could he order people to bring pen and paper to write somthing for
them?

Yes, the messenger of Allah did not write in public, because he used to
dictate writing. However, this does not mean that he did not know how to
write. It is also true that the Prophet was "Ummi", but this does not
necessarily mean he did not know how to read and write.

It rather means that Prophet did not have any human teacher to teach
him how to read and write since the time he was born to his mother
("Ummi" derived from "Umm" meaning mother). His only teacher was Allah.
And this is why Quran is a true miracle from a person who did not have a
teacher and he who did not go to school.

I would say, clearing doubt about the Quran as God's revelation was the
only reason that the Messenger of Allah was not ordered attempt to write
in public or claim as such.

Reading and writing not only in Arabic but also in all other languages,
as well as the knowledge of language of all other creatures are not a
lot to claim for the master of all messengers when we see in Quran that
Prophet Sulayman and David knew the language of the animals.

Again, all such knowledge could be released to the Prophet when he
really needed, by the permission of Allah. But to the time it is not
necessary, he would act as if he does not have such knowledge. It is
like having access to the database rather than having all the knowledge
within oneself.

About the Tragedy of Thursday, however, what the Prophet (PBUH&HF)
meant by "writing" was the common sense of "ordering to write", and
people were aware of it and was not the first time they have heard of
it. Based on the traditions no body even said at that time that how he
wants to write.

Moreover, even we suppose that Prophet wanted to write by himself and
people did not know about his ability to write, they could have given
him the benefit of doubt (!!) to see if he can do such miracle (!?)
beside all the miracles he has had already shown. Were they suspicious
to his miracles?

This is the same Prophet that God said about him "laa yantqu anil
Hawaa" (he does not talk of his own desires)? Never mind verses 33:36,
59:7, 4:80, 4:59, etc., and yet to justify a disobedience by some
companions can we accuse him of rave? Did God know that there would be a
time that His prophet could not stand to the above standard, and still
going ahead and revealing such verses in his honor?

Another brother mentioned that if the Prophet inteneded to appoint Ali
as the Imam, why did he not do so in the presence of the whole people
and not in his house few days before his demise?

The Prophet had already declared the appointment Imam Ali as Imam in
many occasions from his first open preach in Mecca (see al-Tabari
English, v6, pp 88-92; Ibn al-Athir, v2, p62; Ibn Asakir, v1, p85;
al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Suyuti, v5, p97) to his last open sermon in
Ghadir Khum (see Sahih Tirmidhi, v2, p298; Sunan Ibn Maja, v1, pp 12,43;
Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal; al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim; Khasa'is, by
al-Nisa'i). Note that it was not Prophet who appointed him on his own,
but it was rather Allah who appointed him.

What the messenger of Allah wanted to do in his last will was to write
(or order to write) what he has already said. But, as quoted earlier,
some people around him shamelessly reduced him to the level of insanity.
What happened on that thursday is a proof by itself that the Prophet
ALREADY assigned a successor, otherwise, there was no point of
disobedience!

Another person mentioned the verse "Today I have perfected your
religion and completed my bounty upon you, and I was satisfied that
Islam be your religion (Quran 5:3)" which was revealed 2 months before
the death of the Prophet shows that there was no new religious command
is going to come thereafter.

Otherwise, if that important statement the prophet was going to dictate
to his followers would have been somthing which was forgotten, would
make the verse untrue.

Perhaps the above brother would be surprized to know that many Sunni
commentators of Quran have confirmed that the above verse (5:3) was
revealed in Ghadir Khum AFTER the Messenger of Allah said: "Whoever I am
his leader, Ali is his leader. O' God, love those who love him, and be
hostile to those who are hostile to him." (See the ariticled titled
"Ghadir Khum" for extensive references). This means the perfection of
the religion was due announcing the successor of the Prophet
(PBUH&HF).

In fact what prophet wanted to do on that Thursday (three days before
his death) was just to repeat, to remind, and to emphasize the things
that has been revealed before. He didn't want to add any thing new.

No Muslim ever claimed that the position of prophethood has been taken
from Muhammad sometime before his death. We do not have such case about
other prophets either. Even let's suppose he was not prophet any more,
or he wanted to say something new.

Do you think you can find any man better or more enthusiastic than him
about the destiny of his community?! Do you think his last wish was
against the prosperity of his people?! How much should they have been
rude that even they didn't let him talk!!!


The Prophet (PBUH&HF) said:

"Have you not beeen there O' Ali, the believers would not have been
recognized after me."


