The Companions Among One Another
================================

In the previous articles we have seen how Allah (SWT) describes the
companions in the Quran; how the Prophet (PBUH&HF), before his (PBUH&HF)
death, foretells their behavior after his death; and now we will take a
look at what the companions thought of one another's actions and their
remarks concerning their own behavior.

It is narrated in Sahih al-Bukhari, v1, p122, under the chapter of
"al-Eidiyan -- The Two Eids (Muslim Festivals)" that the Prophet
(PBUH&HF) used to pray first, and then deliver the sermon (khutba).

That custom (sunnah) remained as such until Marwan, the Ruler (Amir) of
Medina during Muawiyah's reign, started to deliver the sermon (khutba)
before the prayer.

It should be noted that the Sunnis do exactly the same thing to this
day. This was NOT the sunnah (way or custom) of the Prophet (PBUH&HF).
Keep in mind that the Sunnis maintain that the actions of the companions
are enough to alter the custom of the Prophet (PBUH&HF)!!! The question
to the Sunnis is: If the companions' actions were enough to alter the
Prophet's (PBUH&HF) custom, why then do we need the Prophet's (PBUH&HF)
custom in the first place? Let's just follow any innovations the
companions may come up with!

You might wonder why the companions made the sermon before the prayer?
Dr. al-Samawi states that many people would not stay for the sermon
after they prayed. As such, the prayer and sermon times were switched.
Superficially, this is true, but this is not the real reason, he
continues.

During the days of Muawiyah, it was ordered, as I mentioned in other
posts, that whenever the name of al-Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (AS) was
mentioned, he (AS) should be cursed! Many of the believers at that time
loved Ali (AS) and would not tolerate such an action; as a result, they
were killed one after the other, until all the believers had to listen
to the curses and maintain their silence at the threat of the sword.

One way to escape the listening to the repeated cursing was to escape
the sermon. Muawiyah and his men didn't like that, so the sermon was
switched to precede the prayer in an effort to force the people to stay
through the whole sermon and listen to the cursing! Allahu Akbar (Allah
is Great)!

By Allah (SWT), do you still not see the conspiracy against the
Prophet's (PBUH&HF) family? Is this how al-Imam Ali (AS) is to be
treated? The Prophet (PBUH&HF) had said:

"To love Ali (AS) is a sign of Faith, and to hate him (AS) is a sign of
hypocrisy!!!"

This tradition is narrated in Sahih Muslim, v1, p61. Check for
yourself. In Sahih al-Bukhari, v2, p76; and Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, p300
narrate that the Prophet (PBUH&HF) said to Ali (AS):

"You are a part of me, and I a part of you."

Also, Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, p201 narrates that the Prophet (PBUH&HF)
said: "I am the city of knowledge, and Ali is it's door." Keep in mind
that you can only enter a city through its door; meaning that any
knowledge from the Prophet (PBUH&HF), since he (PBUH&HF) is the City of
Knowledge, can only be accessed through the door, his (PBUH&HF)
son-in-law Ali (AS). What's more, Musnad al-Imam Ibn Hanbal, v5, p25,
narrates that the Prophet (PBUH&HF) said:

"Ali is the master of every believer after me."

If ANY head of state, whether today or in times immemorial, ALWAYS has
a trusted vicegerent to take his place and manage his affairs in his
absence, would you then believe that the Prophet (PBUH&HF), who was sent
as the FINAL Messenger from He (SWT) Who created the universe, didn't
also have a vicegerent to manage his (PBUH&HF) affairs after his
(PBUH&HF) death?

A vicegerent that Allah (SWT) also trusts and loves? Would you believe
that Allah (SWT) would leave the affairs of the "...Best of Nations sent
forth to mankind...[3:110]" to random selection and ruling? No, by Allah
(SWT), a vicegerent was INDEED chosen by Allah (SWT) and His (SWT)
Messenger (PBUH&HF), and that vicegerent was al-Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(AS).

Again, Sahih Tirmidhi, v2, p298, narrates that the Prophet (PBUH&HF)
said:

"Whoever I was his Master, then Ali is his Master! O Allah, support
those who support him, and alienate those that alienate him!!!"

That is Ali (AS), the fearless warrior, and the defeater of the
champions of Quraish. May the Blessings and Peace of Allah (SWT) be
extended to the Prophet (PBUH&HF) and his (PBUH&HF) Family, Amen.

Now, ask yourself: If this is how the Prophet (PBUH&HF) praised Ali
(AS), then who are the companions, especially Muawiyah, to curse him
(AS)? Did you know that the Prophet (PBUH&HF) said, as narrated in
Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v6, p33:

"Whoever curses (or verbally abuses) Ali, then he has cursed me, and
whoever has cursed me, then he has cursed Allah (SWT), and whoever has
cursed Allah (SWT), then Allah (SWT) will throw him into the
hellfire."

That means that by cursing Ali (AS), the companions were cursing the
Prophet (PBUH&HF), and by cursing the Prophet (PBUH&HF), they were
cursing Allah (SWT), and by cursing Allah (SWT), they shall enter the
hellfire! By Allah (SWT), they will be asked to account for what they've
said! That is a promise by Allah (SWT), which He (SWT) shall not
break!

Dr. al-Tijani asserts that during his search for the truth, he tried
wholeheartedly to identify these heinous charges with the hypocrites and
the malevolent companions ONLY; but he soon discovered that there is NO
way of excluding the SO-CALLED righteous companions, in the sight of the
Sunnis, from these charges.

For we see that the first companion to threaten the burning down of
al-Imam Ali's (AS) house is none other than \`Umar Ibn al-Khatab
himself -- the man that the Sunnis claim is of such faith and courage
that he terrifies Satan himself! And the first to wage war against
al-Imam Ali (AS) were Talha, al-Zubayr, and none other than \`Aisha
herself, the wife of the Prophet (PBUH&HF) that is the most beloved
woman in the sight of the Sunnis. Note that \`Aisha is also the daughter
of Abu Bakr!

Others aggressors include, but are NOT limited to, Amr Ibn al-Aas,
Muawiyah, and many others that oppressed the family of the Prophet
(PBUH&HF). Are these not righteous companions in the sight of the
Sunnis? Do we need to say more?

As Dr. al-Samawi states: "If we wanted to provide all the occurrences
(sayings) of the Prophet's (PBUH&HF) praise of Ali (AS), we can easily
fill an entire book!"

The companions also changed the prayer rules, and the first to do so
was \`Uthman Ibn \`Afan, the third caliph. Sahih Bukhari narrates in v2,
page 154, that the Prophet (PBUH&HF) always prayed two (instead of four)
rak'at during travel, as is mandated by Allah (SWT) in the Quran.

Abu Bakr and \`Umar did the same, then came \`Uthman and prayed four
rak'at during travel instead of two! This tradition is also narrated in
Sahih Muslim, v1, p260. Who is \`Uthman to violate the orders of Allah
(SWT) and His (SWT) Prophet (PBUH&HF) with regards to the Salat
(Prayer)? Question and reflect, and may Allah (SWT) guide us all.

Let's see what \`Umar did: Sahih al-Bukhari narrates in v1, p54:

"Shaqiq Ibn Salamah said: I was with Abdullah and Abu Musa, so Abu Musa
told Abdullah: What should a man do if he was in a state of Janabah (the
biological state of sperm ejaculation after a dream or when a man has
sexual intercourse with his wife) and had no water to clean?" Abdullah
said: "He shall not pray until he finds water."

So Abu Musa said: "But didn't you hear the Prophet (PBUH&HF) tell
\`Amar Ibn Yasir (RA) that all he had to do was Tayamum?" Abdullah
replied: "Didn't you know that \`Umar (Ibn al-Khatab) didn't approve of
that?" So Abu Musa answered: But Allah (SWT) said in the Quran: "...Or
ye have been in contact with women, and ye find no water, then take for
yourselves clean sand (or earth), and rub therewith your faces and
hands...[Quran 4:43]" So Abdullah didn't know what to say, except:

"If we allow them that (meaning the Tayamum), then they will use it at
the slightest instance like when the water is too cold (to make
ablutions or bathe)." Abu Musa told Shaqiq: "Is that why Abdullah
disapproved of the matter?" Shaqiq said: "Yes."

NOTE: Tayamum is the pounding of the hands on sand, mud, or rock, and
then wiping the face and the hands; this is considered a full ablution
(Wudu') in the absence of water. Note that there are more details to the
process Tayamum which are not covered here.

As one can see, \`Umar violated the Quran, Allah's (SWT) DIRECT orders,
and the Prophet's (PBUH&HF) custom by his disapproval of the Tayamum! By
Allah (SWT), who is \`Umar to disapprove of what Allah (SWT) has
commanded? This is a sign for those who reflect!

The companions themselves have admitted that they changed the sunnah
(custom of the Prophet (PBUH&HF)) many times: Sahih al-Bukhari narrates
in v3, p32, under the category of "The Battle of Hudaiybiyah" that:

\`Ala Ibn al- Masib said: "I met al-Bara Ibn \`Azib, so I said may you
be happy all the time, for you were the companion of the Prophet
(PBUH&HF) and you have made a pact (bay'ah) with him (PBUH&HF) under the
tree." So al-Bara said: "O son of my brother, you know not of what we
have changed after his (PBUH&HF) death!!!"

This is a direct confession by a very close companion that they have
changed the religion of Allah (SWT) and violated His (SWT) orders.
Again, who are the companions to change the religion of Allah (SWT)?
This is the same reason that the Islamic Ummah (Nation) is still living
in deplorable conditions where the most basic of human rights is not
even granted. This is a sign for those who reflect.

It is also narrated in Sahih al-Bukhari, v2, p201, after a long
tradition that:

\`Umar, when he was stabbed and Ibn \`Abbas was offering some form of
consolation, said: ".......By Allah (SWT), if I had enough gold to fill
the entire earth, I would offer it to ransom myself from Allah's (SWT)
punishment before I see Him (SWT)."

If \`Umar was such a faithful companion, why would he wish to ransom
himself from Allah (SWT)? Could it be because he committed many
injustices and he will on the Day of Judgment be held accountable for
them? Question for yourself.

Abu Bakr was no different: It is narrated in "The History of al-Tabari
(Tarikh al-Tabari),", p41 that:

Abu Bakr said when he saw a bird on a tree: "How happy are you O bird!
You eat of the fruit and you lay on the tree, and there is no punishment
or reward for you! I wish I was a tree on the side of the road, so that
a camel might eat me and excrete me, and I was never a born human!!!"

Would you believe, by Allah (SWT), that if a man was of such spiritual
purity, as the Sunnis claim Abu Bakr to be, he would wish that he was
never born, let alone be a human? Indeed, Abu Bakr realized that his
time has come and all his actions will be scrolled before him in an open
book, and that is when his loss will be manifested; thus, he wished he
was never born a human! Allah (SWT) says in His (SWT) Holy Quran:

"Behold! Verily on the friends of Allah there is no fear, nor shall
they grieve; those who believe and (constantly) guard against evil;--
for them are Glad Tidings, in the life of the Present and in the
Hereafter: No change can there be in the Words of Allah. This is indeed
the supreme Triumph. [10:62-64]"

Also, Allah (SWT) says: "In the case of those who say, "Our Lord Is
Allah," and further, stand straight and steadfast, the angels descend on
them (from time to time):

"Fear ye not!" (they suggest), "Nor grieve! But receive the Glad
Tidings of the Garden (of Bliss), the which ye were promised! We are
your protectors in this life and in the Hereafter: Therein shall ye have
all that you shall desire; therein shall ye have all that ye ask for! --
A hospitable gift from One Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful! [41:30-32]"

The question is that if these Glad Tidings from Allah (SWT) are for ALL
of the believers of mankind, and that they should have "...no fear, nor
shall they grieve...," why then were Abu Bakr and \`Umar fearful? It
should be that they, if they were true believers, should be the least
fearful of us, for they were the companions of the Seal of Prophethood
(PBUH&HF) himself! But Allah (SWT) is the Most Truthful when He (SWT)
says:

"Every soul that hath sinned, if it possessed all that is on earth,
would fain give it in ransom: They would declare (their) repentance when
they see the Chastisement: But the judgment between them will be with
justice, and no wrong will be done unto them. [10:54]"

Again, Allah (SWT) says:

"Even if the wrong-doers had all that there is on earth, and as much
more, (in vain) would they offer it for ransom from the pain of the
Chastisement on the Day Of Judgment: but something will confront them
from Allah, which they could have never counted upon! For the evils of
their deeds will confront them and they will be (completely) encircled
by that which they used to mock at! [39:47-48]"

These are the so-called companions that the Sunnis strike as an example
of spiritual purity and guidance!!! By Allah (SWT), they shall answer
for their deception of the Muslims all these years, and their
concealment of the truth.

Again, you might wonder, if the companions were of such high honor and
spiritual elevation, why did they kill \`Uthman Ibn \`Afan, the third
Caliph that destroyed Islam? Keep in mind that \`Aisha, the wife of the
Prophet (PBUH&HF), herself called for the death of \`Uthman -- check The
History of al- Tabari (Tarikh al-Tabari), v4, p407.

Also check The History of Ibn Atheer (Tarikh Ibn Atheer), v3, p206. Did
you know also that the Muslims during the reign of \`Uthman were so
infuriated by him, that when he died, he was NOT buried in the same area
as the other companions? Nor was he washed or Islamically prepared for
burial! If this is a rightly guided caliph, I seriously question what is
a MISGUIDED Caliph then?

Then we hear of \`Aisha, the wife of the Prophet (PBUH&HF), who, along
with the other wives, was ordered by Allah (SWT) to:

"...stay quietly in your houses, and make not a dazzling display, like
that of the former times of Ignorance; and establish regular prayer, and
give Zakat and obey Allah and His Messenger ...[33:33]"

Why, then, if \`Aisha was ordered to stay in her home after the death
of the Prophet (PBUH&HF), did she go out and ride a camel and wage war
against al- Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (AS), whom she NEVER liked? (This is
known as \`The Battle of the Camel') This is a sign for those who
reflect.


**Side Comments: Responses to Sunni Brothers**

Some Sunni brothers, in response to my article when it was first
posted, have forwarded two contentions:

FIRST, they have defended the motives of Abu Bakr and \`Umar in the
traditions I quoted above, such the saying of Umar that: ".......By
Allah (SWT), if I had enough gold to fill the entire earth, I would
offer it to ransom myself from Allah's (SWT) punishment before I see Him
(SWT)." Or the saying of Abu Bakr that: "How happy are you O bird! You
eat of the fruit and you lay on the tree, and there is no punishment or
reward for you! I wish I was a tree on the side of the road, so that a
camel might eat me and excrete me, and I was never a born human!!!"

The Sunni brothers contended that it is the spiritual purity of a
believer to wish that he was never born, as Abu Bakr did; or that small
sins in the eyes of a true believer warrant that he wishes to ransom
himself with the treasures of the Earth from the flames of the hellfire,
as \`Umar did, to prove his sincerity and faith.

The Sunni brothers also asserted that the Prophet (PBUH&HF) asked
forgiveness for himself (PBUH&HF). The SECOND objection was that the
verses I quoted from the Book of Allah (SWT) are NOT addressing Abu Bakr
and \`Umar, and that those companions addressed are NOT to be equated
with the ranks of Abu Bakr and \`Umar.

My response to their FIRST contention was as follows:

As for the Prophet (PBUH&HF) asking forgiveness for himself, then that
doesn't mean that he wishes that he (PBUH&HF) was never born; and that
doesn't invalidate his (PBUH&HF) infallibility. His (PBUH&HF) asking for
forgiveness is a sign of piety and an admittance of infirmity (weakness)
before Allah (SWT).

It is not that he (PBUH&HF) has committed a grievous sin, and is now
asking for forgiveness; for if the Prophet (PBUH&HF) was a sinner, who
in the community will punish him (PBUH&HF)?

Or who is qualified to punish him (PBUH&HF)? -- for they are all
sinners, and a sinner cannot punish a sinner. Or if he (PBUH&HF) was a
sinner, what kind of idiot would follow him (PBUH&HF), and believe him
(PBUH&HF) to be a GUIDED Messenger (PBUH&HF) sent by He (SWT) Who
created the Universe?

Furthermore, if he (PBUH&HF) was a sinner, that would mean that Allah
(SWT), by sending a sinful Messenger, approves of sin! (May Allah (SWT)
Forbid Such A Ludicrous Contention!) And we know that Allah's (SWT)
JUSTICE and His (SWT) abhorrence of sin and evil are among the First and
Foremost articles in our faith.

As such, Allah (SWT) will NOT send a sinful Messenger. Purified be ALL
the Prophets and Messengers of Allah (SWT) from such claims that scratch
their character by claiming that they are sinners. Or have we become
like the Jews and the Christians, where the Bible states that the
Prophet Lot (AS) was drunk and lay naked before his (AS) children!? This
is a sign for those who reflect!!!

As for Abu Bakr and \`Umar, I render the following: To ask forgiveness
is one thing, and to wish that you were never born, or to wish to ransom
yourself with all the gold of the earth, is another matter altogether.
Indeed, to wish that you were never born is an insult to Allah (SWT),
because you are claiming that Allah's (SWT) Justice and Mercy are not
enough for you.

It is also an insult because there is an underlying implication that
your entry into hell is not really your fault; such an insinuation means
that your entry into hell is an act of injustice by Allah (SWT)! (May
Allah (SWT) Forbid Such A Ludicrous Contention!) If one truly believes,
he realizes that not the LEAST INJUSTICE will be done to him; and he
will NOT enter hell unless he TRULY DESERVES it.

Such is the Justice of Allah (SWT). Not like people who wish they were
never born to hide their OWN guilt and sins. A true believer submits to
Allah (SWT) in totality, and admits that he is weak and sinful; then he
asks for forgiveness. He doesn't insult Allah (SWT) by wishing that he
was never born.

Indeed, the concept of sin and repentance has always baffled me, until
Allah (SWT) guided me. Listen to what the Shia say about repentance
(tawbah): "al-Tawbah (Repentance) is the mechanism by which Allah (SWT)
regulates evil in society. By giving each person a chance to repent, the
sinner is assured that he is NOT COMPELLED to keep on sinning.

That regulatory mechanism ensures that the feelings of guilt that
usually accompany acts of sin, are not turned into feelings of
desperation and uselessness, thereby leading to more sin and the
destruction of society. It (tawbah -- repentance) is a great mercy from
Allah (SWT) indicating His (SWT) infinite wisdom."

I add, that sin itself is part of your own creation. Not that Allah
(SWT) has forced you to sin, and then punishes you for it; but, rather,
Allah (SWT) has made you an erring human being, then He (SWT) tests you
to see whether you will admit your error (sin), or claim that you didn't
commit any sin and it wasn't your fault, thereby fostering a level of
arrogance detested by Allah (SWT).

Indeed, to sin and admit your guilt SINCERELY with the true belief that
it was all your fault (when it really is), and then ask for forgiveness
from Allah (SWT) is much more favorable than insulting Allah (SWT) by
wishing that you were never born.

I would also add that erring is part and parcel of the learning
process, which is an innate feature of our composition and existence. If
we don't make mistakes, we will never learn, and if we never learn, we
will never evolve and grow. It is the arrogance that has polluted the
minds of many individuals that has precluded our growth -- for we err
and sin, yet we refuse to acknowledge our fault therein!

Enough is what al-Imam Zayn al-'Aabidin (AS), the son of al- Imam
al-Husain (AS), said in his (AS) supplication (dua'): "O Allah, for even
if I enter the hellfire, I will tell the people there of my love of
Thee!!!" What does this eloquent, beautiful, and striking statement
mean? It is by Allah (SWT), one of the most beautiful and touching
prayers I have ever heard! Here's what it means before you jump to
conclusions on your own:

al-Imam Zayn al-'Aabidin (AS) is saying: "O Allah, my belief in You is
such that I don't doubt Your Justice; for even if You throw me into
hell, it is because I deserve that and it is due to what I have done in
this earthly existence.

Nonetheless, even if I enter the hellfire, I will tell the people there
of my love to (and faith in) Thee, such that You haven't done ANY
injustice to me, and I love You for Your Justice, Mercy, and Greatness."
That is what a true believer says, EVEN if he's entering the
hellfire!!!

He doesn't wish he wasn't born! My response to their SECOND contention
is as follows: (The second contention, in case you forgot, was that the
verses I quoted from the Book of Allah (SWT) are NOT addressing Abu Bakr
and \`Umar, and that those companions addressed are NOT to be equated
with the ranks of Abu Bakr and \`Umar.)

ASSUMING that these verses are NOT addressing Abu Bakr and \`Umar (and
Allah (SWT) knows best who He (SWT) is addressing), they (the verses),
nonetheless, illustrate an important point: NOT ALL the companions are
considered equal in the sight of Allah (SWT). As such, my question is:
why do the Sunnis claim that ALL the companions were righteous?

Why, when Allah (SWT), Himself, has acknowledged that CERTAIN
companions are NOT righteous, do the Sunnis stubbornly object to the
Shia's view of the companions? It is indeed ironic that Allah (SWT), our
CREATOR Who (SWT) knows us BEST, makes a statement about His (SWT) Own
creatures, yet the Sunnis refuse to abide by that (statement), and claim
they know better!

At the expense of repetition, I reiterate my previous statement: If
Allah (SWT) has made a CLEAR distinction among the companions, why do
the Sunnis refuse to acknowledge that?

Furthermore, my Sunni brothers, by suggesting (themselves) that these
verses address companions other than Abu Bakr and \`Umar, have advocated
and strengthened the Shia's claim: NOT ALL the companions were
righteous; and, as such, there is a favoritism extended by Allah (SWT)
to some companions, but NOT to others. Similarly, as Allah (SWT) favors
CERTAIN companions, so do the Shia take the same stance.

Is it not closer to reason that we make distinctions among the
companions? Didn't the disciples of Jesus (AS) betray him (AS)? Didn't
the Jews betray Musa (AS)? And so on... Are the companions of the
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH&HF) any different? Are they not humans who may
err and sin? Do you not see a pattern of differentiation among all of
Allah's (SWT) creation?

Are all believers, whether today or in times past, of equal stature? Do
we not observe that some believers are sincere and others not? Why then
do the Sunnis refuse to accept this truism? Even if the Shia EXCLUDED
Abu Bakr and \`Umar from their direct attack, the Sunnis will STILL
REFUSE to acknowledge that some of the Prophet's (PBUH&HF) companions
were non- righteous, malicious individuals.

By Allah (SWT)! Didn't Allah (SWT) devote a WHOLE Surah (Chapter) in
His (SWT) Book about the hypocrites? And doesn't Allah (SWT) say:

"They are in varying grades in the sight of Allah, and Allah sees well
all that they do. [3:163]"

Another remark, which my Sunni brothers overlooked in defense of their
arguments, might be that the individuals addressed in the aforementioned
verses or the Hypocrites Chapter are NOT considered companions in the
sight of the Sunnis. If my Sunni brothers should ever forward such a
remark, my response would be:

The definition of the word "companions," according to the Sunnis, is:
ANY person who has seen the Prophet (PBUH&HF) is considered a companion.
The generation that appeared AFTER the Prophet's (PBUH&HF) death are
called "Tabi-'uoon -- The Followers." As such, the above contention
fails again.

Now, if my Sunni brothers suggest that the word "companions" ONLY
addresses those sincere believers that were close to the Prophet
(PBUH&HF) and memorized the Quran and the hadiths, and kept constant
prayer, then they have said EXACTLY what the Shia have been always
trying to say: NOT ALL THE COMPANIONS WERE RIGHTEOUS.

Nonetheless, EVEN under this assertion, the Shia will refuse to admit
Abu Bakr and \`Umar, among others, to be included among the ranks of the
righteous; not after what they have done to the family of the Prophet
(PBUH&HF).
Suffice it to conclude with what al-Zamakhshari, the great Sunni
scholar and poet, said:

Doubt and conflict have abounded,
each claims he is on the right path

I have chosen to hold tight to (the belief that)
"There Is No Deity, But Allah"
and my love for Ahmad (Muhammad) and Ali

A dog won a great reward
by loving the People of the Cave (Ahl al-Kahf),
how, then, can I lose anything
by loving the family of the Prophet (PBUH&HF)!?

In conclusion, I appeal to your sense of truth and honesty to
objectively study the arguments presented by the Shia. After all we say,
do you still believe that we are Kuffar? Are we asking you to blindly
accept our arguments, or are we supporting our belief with unimpeachable
proofs? Are we not using your OWN books as evidence? Question and ask
for the truth. May Allah (SWT) forgive us our sins, and guide us to that
which pleases Him (SWT).


**The Enemies of Islam as Depicted in Nahjul Balagha**

[ Here is a general description of the enemies of Islam, as well as its
true followers, and what happenned to them.]

"The sway of tyrants was long, so that their tyranny and oppression
could be fully exposed and their infamy and disgrace could be
disclosed.

They deserved the revolution which overtook them. They were destroyed
and annihilated, and the people were rescued from calamities and
destruction, were relieved of war, and bloodshed, which were brought
about by the tyrants.

"The pious people, who bravely passed through those days, patiently
bore the suffering and gave their lives for the cause of justice and
Islam. They humbled themselves, before God, they never for a moment
magnified their patience and bravery and never imagined that they were
obliging God and His religion.

Then God ordained that the times of trials and tribulations should come
to an end. They were given permission to defend their faith with the
help of their swords and they obeyed the orders of God according to the
teaching of the Holy Prophet(AS).

"Things continued like that until God called the Prophet back. Then
many became apostate, or turned to heathenism, they were damned by the
preversity of their minds and waywardness. They put faith in their
relatives, who were misguided, or in instigators who were heathens.

They discarded the medium (the progeny of the Prophet), whom they were
ordered to love, to respect and to follow, and who would have kept them
within the limits of the true religion. Thus, they undermined the
foundation of the true religion and tried to introduce heresy in Islam.
They adopted the ways of the Pharoahs and his people, were attached to
worldly power and pleasures, and drifted away from true religion."

**Khutba 153**

"O people! remember that the present time is the time when something
which has been promised will happen, and events which you do not know or
cannot forsee will take place.

During the days of trials and temptations, those who recognize the
significance and worth of the Ahlul-Bayt will, like a person walking in
the dark with a lamp in his hand, not only go safely through the times,
but will be of help to others and will act like pious people.

This will free the people from oppression and tyrrany , will educate
the ill-informed and ignorant, will introduce reforms into society, and
will cement the gaps which wickedness and impiety may have created in
the true teachings of Islam.

For some time, he (i.e. Imam Mahdi) will be hidden from the eyes of man
in such a way that the greates searcher of the day will not be able to
find a trace of him however he may try.

But when he will appear, he will educate mankind in such a way that
human vision will expand through the teachings of the Quran, men will be
able to acquire true wisdom, and their minds will be able to rise to
higher planes of science and philosophy."

I strongly urge Muslims to reject any false myths about our Islamic
heritage. Many of you already know the Sunni view of history. I stronly
urge you to read the Sunni works in history such as of al-Tabari, and
Syed Amir Ali, to understand the forces that shaped the Muslim world in
the 1st century AH. They are still alive and kicking today.


