Islam Vs Feminism
=================

Introduction
------------

Feminism has radically altered Western culture in the latter half of the
twentieth century. Perhaps no other social movement has wrought such
profound changes in social mores and attitudes. Sexual revolution and
liberation meant that sexual relations should be freed of the
constraints associated with traditional Christian virtue.

The gay rights movement extended the demand for freedom regarding sexual
relations to homosexuality. Moral censorship was relaxed in print media,
cinema and television, and pornography burgeoned. General standards of
taste in speech and behavior devolved in response to the dictates of
prints, films and broadcasts. Family ties were weakened and the divorce
rate soared. In Scandinavia it is estimated that roughly half of all
infants are born to unwed mothers.

It was a bewilderingly abrupt relaxation of the restraints of
centuries... The sudden sexual revolution was not just the lifting of
censorship. Landlords and hostelers, long forbidden by law to
accommodate unwed couples, could now be told not to ask personal
questions....The courts were left facing stubborn new problems regarding
marital or quasi-marital responsibilities and titles to property. Deeper
dislocations of a social kind are being wrought by the weakening of the
family.[^1]

At the same time, women became an increasingly visible force in the
workplace, the academy and the political arena, the most outspoken among
who have been feminists.

The changes mentioned are not solely the work of feminists. The
anti-establishment attitudes among the youth of the 1960's and the
popularity enjoyed by the left contributed to these changes and also to
support for feminism itself.

Nevertheless, feminist thought has been a major force in the social
upheaval in the West since the sixties that continues to exert its
influence, and among the explicit goals feminists have advocated have
been the abolition of the family and traditional gender roles, to which
ends they have championed homosexuality and promiscuity.

Feminists have managed to set standards for the use of 'non­sexist
language' in most universities and publishing houses, the most visible
result of which has been an explosion of the population of feminine
pronouns.

They have also managed to enforce their own preferences in areas as
diverse as script writing, advertising and public employment practices.
They have introduced a popular jargon in terms of which important social
issues are debated, and they have begun to export their ideology abroad.

Feminism began to establish itself in areas outside the West through is
use by colonial powers to undermine local culture in the areas under
their control, and although it has met with some resistance,
particularly among Muslims, there continues to be a great deal of
confusion about what feminism is, about its goals, history and branches.

In what follows a brief introduction to feminism and its history is
presented, with particular attention to philosophical and theological
issues relevant to Islam. There follows a comparison between feminist
and Islamic doctrines in which their utter incompatibility is
elucidated. Finally, some observations are drawn with regard to the
Islamic women's movement.

A Brief History Of Feminism
---------------------------

### Feminism Distinguished From Other Women's Movements

Women have been oppressed ever since the invention of human sin, and for
nearly as long they have been engaged in the attempt to free themselves
from oppression. The attempts made to end the injustices done to women,
particularly when these injustices are institutionalized, may be called
women's movements.

In this sense, Islam may be considered a women's movement, because it
includes a divinely ordained program for the eradication of injustice
done to women. Western women, however, usually fail to recognize Islam
as a women's movement, and they restrict the term 'women's movement' to
the products of Western culture designed to change the status of women
in society.

The industrial revolution of the nineteenth century and the gradual
process of urbanization brought women together in the labor force
outside the framework of the family, whereas in agrarian society, women
worked with family members. At the same time, women were excluded from
politics.

The rights of man proclaimed by the French Revolution were limited to
males. During the Enlightenment, women began to demand 'emancipation',
freedom from dependency on men, educational opportunity and political
rights.

Feminists would go on to make more radical claims, including among the
most prominent of these: legalized abortion on demand, free love or
sexual liberation, complete equality with men and the abolition of
differentiation of the roles of the sexes. Feminism is often defined as
a movement seeking full equality of rights with men, but it is important
to emphasize that the equality of rights sought by feminists goes far
beyond equality under the law.

Feminism aims at the eradication of any difference in social roles based
on gender difference, and this is what distinguishes it from other
women's movements.[^2] Nevertheless, the feminist movement includes
within its ranks writers and activists who differ on many fundamental
issues in philosophy, politics and morals.

What unites them is the social ideal of the elimination of traditional
gender roles. Feminism may thus be defined as a branch of the women's
movement that aims at the elimination of traditional gender roles.
However, confusion exists about the use of the term 'feminism', for
there are writers who fail to distinguish feminism from the more general
women's movement.

The focus of attention in what follows will be on feminist philosophy
(including political philosophy) and feminist theology, however, among
the important feminist writings there are also works on psychoanalysis,
jurisprudence and literary criticism.

### Feminism And Socialism

Perhaps the first use of the term 'feminism' was in the early nineteenth
century by the socialist, Charles Fourier (1772-­1837). The followers of
another early socialist, Henri de Saint-Simon (1760-1825), introduced
the androgyny principle, according to which there was a mixed male and
female being at the beginning of history.

(Muslims will find it amusing to learn that Saint-Simon's disciples went
to Turkey to seek the female savior after having lost hope of finding a
truly free woman in Europe!) Socialist feminists advocated the abolition
of any division of labor along sex specific lines, and called for quotas
whereby half of all the positions in every field of employment are to be
filled by women.

With the domination of Marxism among the various forms of socialism,
socialist feminism also came to be dominated by Marxist feminism, first
elaborated in 1844 by Engels in Der Ursprung der Familie (The Origen of
the Family).

In this work Engles demands the abolition of the family, uniform
integration of men and women into the labor force and the communal
raising of children in order to achieve equality among all people and an
end to the domination of one person over another.

Although socialism has lost popularity in recent years and Marxism, in
particular, seems on the verge of extinction, a political left continues
to survive, even in America, especially in academia. As the academic
left has also welcomed feminism, so too, Marxist ideas continue to find
expression in the writings of important feminist leaders.

Perhaps the most notable lesson feminists have learned from Marxists is
their polemical style. Articles on feminism, even those printed in such
reputable works as the Encyclopedia of Ethics and the Routledge
Encyclopedia of Philosophy do not merely describe the work of feminists;
they actively advocate the abolition of traditional gender roles for the
sake of the liberation of women.

Like Marxists, feminists have also adopted an ideologically charged
rhetoric with which to declaim their analyses and polemics. Often the
language used is directly inspired by Marxist terminology, even when
Marxism is itself explicitly rejected.

More orthodox Marxist and socialist feminists argue that the oppression
of women has its roots in the class system, and that the system must be
overturned in order to liberate women. Feminist critics of Marxist
feminism have argued that men exploit the labor of women through
housework regardless of the class system, so that the class analysis is
insufficient and must be supplemented by an analysis of exploitation
based on gender.

### Feminist Philosophy

Certainly the most famous of feminist philosophers of the twentieth
century was Simone de Beauvoir (1908-1986). In 1949 she published Le
Deuxieme Sexe (The Second Sex) in which she elaborated an
existentialist!

Marxist analysis of the relations between men and women. As
existentialist thought emphasizes the radical freedom of the individual
to arbitrarily choose his essence, de Beauvoir makes the dramatic claim
that one's gender is also a matter choice. To the extent that biology
would seem to indicate otherwise, she finds biology degrading.

Biology gives men a freedom from reproductive processes that women lack,
so she sees femininity as an obstacle to being truly human. Later
feminists have criticized de Beauvoir for her disparagement of female
anatomy and for advocating that women take men's roles in society.

Nevertheless, it is generally acknowledged that her work set out what
would become major themes of later feminist writing: the difference
between sex and gender (biological and social sexual characteristics),
concern with autobiography seen as a political statement, and the need
to draw upon various disciplines in the analysis of gender roles.

While de Beauvoir's feminism has much in common with the existentialism
of Jean-Paul Sartre, more recent feminists have drawn from the
philosophies of Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida to apply the methods
of genealogical analysis and deconstruction to issues pertaining to
gender, including women's roles in society, women's psychology, and the
political oppression of women.

Feminists, however, have not merely made use of philosophical trends for
their own purposes; they have also elaborated positions in virtually all
the major areas of philosophy. Hence, there are feminist readings of the
history of philosophy, feminist philosophy of science, feminist
epistemology, feminist social and political philosophy, feminist ethics
and even feminist ontology. The Society for Women in Philosophy was
founded in 1972 whose journal, Hypatia, publishes articles on feminist
philosophy.

In the history of philosophy, feminists have concerned themselves with
two major projects. First, a number of works have been written that aim
to disclose bias against women or gender stereotypes in the writings of
Western philosophers from Plato and Aristotle to John Rawls. Descartes
has been a particular target of these sorts of critique.[^3]  
 Second, there has been an attempt to emphasize the importance of women
philosophers throughout history. A major accomplishment in this program
was the publication of Mary Ellen Waith's three-volume A History of
Women Philosophers.[^4]

Feminist philosophy of science and epistemology has for the most part
sought to refute claims to the objectivity of science and knowledge, and
to identify gender bias in the works of scientists and philosophers.

Modeled on the Marxist idea that culture is a superstructure that
reflects class interests, feminist 'standpoint theories' advocates the
idea that a specifically feminine view of the world is possible when
science is practiced from a woman's perspective.[^5]

A current topic of debate in feminist philosophy of science and
epistemology is whether emphasis on the uniqueness of the female
perspective implies relativism or a denial of objective truth.

Feminist approaches to ethics place a strong emphasis on politics. They
are more concerned with power than goodness, and often provide criticism
of the ways in which traditional ethics contributes to the subordination
and oppression of women.

Allison Jagger, for example, suggests that feminist ethics should
provide guides to action that will subvert the subordination of
women.[^6]

Lesbian feminists have proposed a feminist ethics based onthe
proposition that women cannot enter a relationship with men without
becoming victims of subjugation, and that lesbian communities should
construct their own ethics on the basis of a quest for freedom and
self-identity rather than the good, and choice rather than duty.[^7]

Lesbians have played an important role in the feminist movement, and
although not all feminists are advocates of lesbianism, feminists
generally condone lesbianism as an implication of the attack on
traditional gender roles.[^8]

Feminists have also been critical of those who have proposed a
particularly feminine ethics. For example, the renowned moral
psychologist, Carol Gilligan, has proposed that an ethics of care is
more suitable to explain the moral development of girls than the ethics
of justice used by her mentor, Lawrence Kohlberg, to explain the moral
development of boys.[^9]

Feminists respond that Gilligan places too much emphasis on the virtue
of caring for women because this may serve to support rather than
undermine established gender differentiation.[^10] Likewise, feminists
reject the feminine ethics proposed by ethicists who focus on the moral
insights to be gained through an examination of maternal relationships.

Feminists argue that by giving primacy to women's roles as mothers,
feminine ethics fails to encourage women to gain the traits necessary to
overturn patriarchy and gender bias.

An important part of the feminist polemic is the insistence that
traditional gender roles based on sexual differences is wrong, that
patriarchy is a form of oppression and subjugation of women, that women
have been unjustly marginalized and ignored, that women's rights have
been violated.

So, there is a moral demand in feminism for the subversion of
patriarchal social arrangements, for the rewriting of history, for the
critique of every element of culture dominated by a male perspective,
including (to mention but a few) art, psychology, theology and ethics
itself.

### Feminist Political Theory

Feminist political thought begins with Marxism. According to Marx and
Engles, it is the class system that lies at the source of all
oppression, and the family is a social institution reflective of that
oppressive system. The call for the abolition of the family is
inseparable from the call for the abolition of the capitalist system and
its replacement by communism.

While some feminists have endorsed a more or less orthodox Marxist view
of the family, others have sought to place gender roles at the
foundation of their political thought. Instead of seeing the family as a
reflection of the underlying capitalist system of production, they view
capitalism as a result of the oppressive nature of patriarchy.

Kate Millet, an activist in the 'Women's Liberation Movement' of the
late 1960's, accordingly claimed that the most entrenched oppressive
structure in human society is not capitalism, but male dominance.

The development of feminism is often divided into three waves, each of
which is associated with a characteristic type of political demand. The
first wave is said to include the emancipation and socialist movements
of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

In addition to Engles' The Origin of the Family (1884) and Mill's The
Subjection of Women (1869), the writings and speeches of the Russian
born American anarchist, Emma Goldman (1869-1940), are included among
the major philosophical statements of feminist thought in this period,
which is sometimes extended to include de Beauvoir's work, as well.

Feminism is thus foremost a social and political movement, and it is not
surprising to find that its core philosophical expressions take the form
of social-political philosophy.

The feminism of the 1960's and 70's is called 'second wave'. It is
characterized by the radicalization of the movement. While first-wave
feminists called for an end to legal discriminations against women so
that there would be no legal difference between the status of men and
women, second-wave feminists came to view the concepts of male and
female social roles to be bound up with patriarchy and called for the
elimination of both.

The third-wave feminism of the 1980's and 90's is marked by a rejection
of any sort of essentialism. Earlier feminists had made general
pronouncements about women, their exploitation and how they should go
about liberation. Third-wave feminists argued that a natural implication
of the rejection of traditional ideas about gender is the realization of
the diversity of feminine types among women of different races, classes,
nationalities and sexual orientations.

Third-wave feminists promote a vision of liberation in which there is a
wide ranging plurality rather than any single ideal of the liberated
woman. Liberation is seen as diversity in the options available for
sexual relations and gender roles.

Another division of types of feminism is fourfold: liberal, radical,
socialist and postmodernist. Liberal feminism has its roots in the
writings of Mary Wollstonecraft (1757-1797) and John Stuart Mill
(1806-1873) who demanded equal rights for women.

In the 1960's liberal feminists in the United States fought for women's
rights to abortion on demand, support for working mothers, the universal
availability of childcare centers, and greater representation in
government, business and the academy.

This led to calls for 'affirmative action', legal measures to promote
the hiring of women and minorities in order to redress past injustices
done to them. While liberal feminists emphasize the common humanity of
men and women as a basis for equality of rights, radical feminists
celebrate the differences between the experiences of men and women.

They argue that women's experiences have been suppressed and that as a
result all aspects of culture, from literature and science to politics
and law, betray the biases of and in favor of male sensibilities.
Socialist feminism has been discussed already, and post-modernist
feminism seems to be another term for third wave feminism.

### Feminist Theology

Feminist theology began to establish itself in the 1970's.During that
decade the journal Concilium was launched to promote feminist theology,
the first conferences were held to discuss feminist theology in the
U.S., the World Council of Churches held a conference in Berlin on
sexism, and Mary Daly published Beyond God the Father.[^11]

Like liberation theology, to which it is closely linked both
historically and theoretically, feminist theology draws upon and
criticizes Marxist thought. Religion is interpreted in such a way that
its primary function is seen as liberation, liberation of the poor in
liberation theology and of women in feminist theology. Feminist theology
may be divided into moderate and radical tendencies.

The moderate tendencies advocate reinterpretations of the established
religions to purge them of what are considered sexist or androcentric
elements. The radical tendencies advocate a rejection of patriarchal
religious thought in favor of the worship of one or more goddesses or
even witchcraft.

One of the areas of scholarship to which moderate feminists have devoted
their attention is the history of the church. Feminists such as
Elisabeth Schlssler Fiorenza argue that the early Christians were
egalitarians, but that as the Church hierarchy developed, bias against
women became institutionalized, and infected many subsequent theological
discussions.[^12]

The method employed by Schlssler Fiorenza is broadly sociological, and
draws upon liberation theology. The conclusions reached are relatively
moderate: the feminist critique is to lead to Church reform.[^13]

Feminists who focus on psychoanalytic methods draw more radical
conclusions. Following C. G. Jung, feminists such as Christa Mulack hold
that the unconscious, which is associated with the feminine, is primary,
and that male dominated religion has suppressed the feminine in favor of
the male. On this view, the Hebrew prophets are seen as rebels against
"the Great Goddess".

Feminist theologians who concentrate on psychology tend to reject
equality feminism in favor of a feminism in which the feminine is
paramount, or gynocentric feminism. They also tend to reject
Christianity rather than call for its reform. While the majority of
feminist theologians appear to be comparatively moderate, the radicals
constitute a very influential minority.

The most famous feminist theologian, a radical advocate of gynocentric
feminism sometimes referred to as the 'foster mother of feminist
theology', is the former Catholic nun, Mary Daly. She was the first
American woman to earn a doctorate in Catholic theology at the
University of Fribourg (in 1963).

Her first major work, The Church and the Second Sex,[^14] echoes many of
the ideas of Simone de Beauvoir, but applies them to Church history and
theology. She calls for Church reform and a reinterpretation of
Christianity along the lines of equality feminism. Her most famous work,
however, is Beyond God the Father.[^15]

In this work Daly argues that the Christian concept of God is
irredeemably androcentric, and she coins the often-quoted slogan of
feminist theology, "If God is male, then the male is God."[^16] The male
dominance in Christian thought is further demanded by Trinitarian
doctrine, according to which the male Christ is 'God the Son', the
second person of the Trinity, and the first person of the Trinity is
'God the Father'.

Instead, Daly proposes that God be considered in a non-personal manner
as the ground of all being, as taught by Paul Tillich. Daly's next major
work, Gyn/Ecology,[^17] makes a complete break from Christianity with
the rejection of God in favor of the Goddess and the glorification of
witchcraft as the esoteric knowledge of an earlier matriarchal culture.
She also reasserts her advocacy of lesbianism and rejection of the
complementarity of the masculine and the feminine. This was followed by
the publication of an even more radical work, Pure Lust,[^18] in which
lust is turned into a virtue through which 'complete empowerment' is to
be achieved.

Perhaps the most famous French feminist who has written on theology is
Luce Irigaray. She writes from a postmodernist perspective critical of
equality feminism. Her ideal is not a society in which gender
differences are eliminated, but one in which a new femininity emerges
from the experiences of women freed from male domination.

Liberation has theological implications. Like Mary Daly, she opposes
Christianity for its masculine conception of God, particularly as
expressed in the concept of the Trinity. Although she argues that women
need religion and divinity, the idea of God presented in the revealed
religions is rejected.

Respect for God is possible as long as no one realizes that he is a mask
concealing the fact that men have taken sole possession of the divine,
of identity, and of kinship. Once we give this whole issue the attention
and serious consideration it deserves, however, it becomes obvious that
God is being used by men to oppress women and that; therefore, God must
be questioned and not simply neutered in the current pseudo liberal
way.[^19]

She claims that only a "God in the feminine gender" can maintain women's
freedom and fulfillment "as individuals and as members of a
community."[^20]

While most feminist theologians do not advocate the goddess theologies
suggested by Daly and Irigaray, they are moderate only in comparison to
extreme views such as these.So-called moderate feminist theologians
accept much of the general orientation of feminism: the rejection of
gender complementarity, the acceptance of 'non-traditional families'
consisting of homosexual partners with or without children and unwed
mothers with children, and a hermeneutic based on the attempt to uncover
gender bias.

They advocate the rewriting of religious texts in such a way that all
masculine references to God are replaced by neuter or masculine and
feminine references, so that where the Bible refers to God as "our
Father", the feminists replace this by "our Mother and Father".

While this may seem superficial, moderate feminist theologians tend to
interpret the basic message of Christianity as a call to struggle for
liberation, particularly, the liberation of women from male domination,
which entails the dismantling of the traditional family.

### The Islamic Opposition To Feminism

Although Islam and feminism are not completely without common ground,
the values and principles of Islam and feminism are generally contrary.
Both condemn the oppression of women. Both insist that women may own
their own property and dispose of it as they wish. In theology, both
reject the symbol of 'Father' for God.

However, the feminist view that patriarchy is equivalent to the
oppression of women is not compatible with Islam. The feminist idea that
traditional gender roles are to be eliminated is opposed by the Islamic
idea that the primary role of woman (after that of servant of God) is
that of wife and mother.

Theologically, while feminists view the divine as 'Mother and Father' or
as goddess, Islam considers the parent metaphor inappropriate for
divinity and categorically denies the existence of gods and goddesses.

### The Conflicting Ideals Of Islam And Feminism

While feminism rejects any sort of complementarity of the sexes, Islam
emphasizes it through the accentuation of different social roles for men
and women. Feminism is critical of the institution of marriage because
it leads to the subordination of women, while Islam strongly recommends
marriage for both men and women, and the marriage institution in Islam
is one in which husbands and wives have clearly distinct
responsibilities and duties. The leadership role for men is taken for
granted in Islam, while feminists consider it oppression.

Traditional Islamic thought has celebrated the hierarchical structure of
the universe as a pointer toward the divine, and has seen echoes of this
in the relationship of mind and body, spirit and psyche, king and
subject, master and slave, and man and woman. This does not mean that
Islam condones all such relationships as found in traditional societies,
but it does mean that relationships of subordination and hierarchy are
not for that very reason to be considered evil, as feminists hold they
are.

According to Elisabeth Moltmann-Wendel, the "crux of patriarchal
theology" is "the dominance implied in the relationship between mind and
body: will over the unconscious, history over nature, man over
woman."[^21]

Rosemary Reuther displays the same attitude: "Sexual symbolism is
foundational to the perception of order and relationship that has been
built up in cultures. The psychic organization of consciousness, the
dualistic view of the self and the world, the hierarchical concept of
society, the relation of humanity and nature, and of God and
creation-all these relationships have been modeled on sexual
dualism."[^22]

As Hauke points out, "The implicit supposition here is that
subordination and inferiority are identical and that they signify
'division' and 'rape'."[^23]

Islam is the obedient subordination of man to God. In his submission to
God, however, man is not oppressed by God, but perfected. While
feminists consider the condition of women to be better when they have
more choices, because they hold that the good is the free expression and
satisfaction of free ranging desire, the good in Islam is viewed as the
annihilation of the self with its desires in divinity.

This divine encounter is approached through the attainment of virtue and
the conquest of the illicit desires of the self.

Complementarity, the Family and Sexuality

Europeans have condemned Islam for its acceptance of human sexuality and
sensuality and for its repression of the same. When Victorian morals
dominated Europe, Islam was seen as a naughty religion offering its
believers promises of sensual delight in the afterlife.

When European morals changed and Freudian ideas had been popularized,
Islam was condemned for the limitations it places on sexual relations.
In feminist writing, both attitudes are expressed. To a certain extent,
this may be due to different ideas about sexuality current among
feminists.

Some feminists, for example, consider prostitution a legitimate form of
labor, and prefer the term 'sexual worker’, while other feminists
consider prostitution and the 'sex industry' as manifestations of the
degradation of women at the hands of the patriarchic system.

Some feminists call for changes in Islamic societies so that women may
be given more sexual license, while others call for greater restrictions
to be placed upon men.

Islam clearly recognizes and accepts human sexuality. Sexual pleasure in
itself is not considered evil, as it is in some Christian texts.
Nevertheless, Islam places strict constraints on sexual behavior. These
constraints differ for men and women. Men are permitted to have more
than one wife simultaneously, while women are not permitted to have more
than one husband at any one time.

It must be admitted that Muslim men sometimes abuse this and other
permissions granted them by Islamic law to do injustice to women.
Feminists conclude from this that Islamic law is oppressive to women.
However, in the context of the laws governing sexual relations in other
societies, whether liberal, communist or Christian, some men also take
advantage of the opportunities they find there to oppress women.

Should we then conclude that all laws governing sexual relations are
oppressive to women? Even if a society were constructed in which there
were absolutely no laws governing sexual relations, some men would still
oppress women, probably even more than they do in Muslim societies. The
problem would seem to reside not in the law, but in the morals of those
who would abuse it for selfish purposes.

With all the freedoms and rights granted to women in the US, the claim
that women are better off than they were earlier is dubious. Statistics
show that more women live in poverty than before. Divorce has been made
easy, and custody of children is normally awarded to mothers, while the
support that could be provided by other family members has been
undermined with the erosion of the family.

Islamic law functions to preserve the family structure through
patriarchal hierarchy in which a base line of duties toward women is
clearly drawn. Furthermore, there is considerable room for women to
maneuver within the framework of Islamic family law to prevent their
husbands from arbitrarily divorcing them or remarrying.

This seems far better for women than the Western customs in which the
average duration of marriage is five years and in which it is common for
men to keep mistresses.

### The Role Of Women In Islam

The most important and most emphasized role for women mentioned in
Islamic sources is that of wife and mother, but the role of woman in
Islam is by no means limited to this. Women may be entrepreneurs, as was
Khadijah, the first wife of Muhammad (s) and the first convert to Islam.

They may also take a strong political stand even leading to martyrdom,
as did Fatimah, the daughter of Muhammad (s), wife of Imam 'Ali and
mother of Imams Hasan and Husayn, peace be with all of them.

Some positions, however, such as leading prayers for men, are considered
inappropriate for women.

Westerners often assume that because social relations between men and
women are restricted in Islamic societies in ways that seem strange to
them, that Muslim women are not socially and politically active. The
following anecdote reported by W. Morgan Shuster regarding events in
Tehran in 1911provides some indication of how mistaken this assumption
is.

With the dark days when doubts came to be whispered as to whether the
Medjlis would stand firm [against Russian threats], the Persian women,
in their zeal for liberty and their ardent love for their country . . .
supplied the answer. Out from their walled courtyards and harems marched
three hundred of that weak sex, with the flush of undying determination
in their cheeks. They were clad in their plain black robes with the
white nets of their veils dropped over their faces. Many held pistols
under their skirts or in the folds of their sleeves. Straight to the
Medjlis they went, and, gathered there, demanded of the President that
he admit them all. What the grave deputies of the Land of the Lion and
the Sun may have thought at this strange visitation is not recorded. The
President consented to receive a delegation of them. In his
reception-hall they confronted him, and lest he and his colleagues
should doubt their meaning, these cloistered Persian mothers, wives and
daughters exhibited threateningly their revolvers, tore aside their
veils, and confessed their decision to kill their own husbands and sons,
and leave behind their own dead bodies, if the deputies wavered in their
duty to uphold the liberty and dignity of the Persian people and
nation.[^24]

This is not an isolated incident. Women in Muslim societies are and
always have been active in social and political affairs, even if they
have rarely taken publicly visible leadership roles. A careful reading
of the Qur'an shows that this is no historical accident.

God directly addresses women through the revelation of the Qur'an by
assuring them that their deeds will not go unrewarded and by offering as
exemplars women who have courageously taken positions in unfavorable
social conditions, not however, to secure their own rights or interests,
but in obedience to God.

Thus Mary, peace be with her, is rebuked by her people for having the
child Jesus out of wedlock. She agreed to have the child when visited by
the angel out of obedience to God. In response to the taunts directed
against her, Mary offers no excuses but points to the child prophet, who
miraculously speaks to them.[^25] The wife of Pharaoh refuses to obey
her husband and king in his idolatry because of her acceptance of the
message of the prophet Moses.[^26]

The primary roles accorded to women in Islam are those of wife and
mother, and it is precisely these roles with which feminists are most
uncomfortable. Feminists are concerned with 'liberating' women from
expectations that they should marry and have children.

They see progress for women in terms of employment opportunities,
income, opportunities to experiment with non-traditional sexual
relations and political power. Although Islam does not bar women from
wealth and power, it places greater emphasis on marriage and the family.

It seems that this accords with the interests of the vast majority of
the women of the world. Although they are not averse to wealth and
power, their primary concerns tend to center around marriage and the
family. Islam dignifies these primary concerns while feminism tends to
undermine them.

Of course, the most important role for woman in Islam is no different
that that assigned to men-servant of God. It is as servants of God that
Muslim women and men take on the roles of mothers and fathers and wives
and husbands, buyers and sellers, teachers and pupils, workers and
employers, etc.

### Islamic Opposition To Socialism

Socialism calls for the destruction of tradition and its replacement by
a radically egalitarian system.

The socialist distributive system is unIslamic because it ignores
differentiation arising as a result of contract and trade, but considers
only the pattern of distribution.

Socialist materialism is incompatible with the ant materialism of
Islamic ideology.

The idea that the means of production must be in the hands of the
masses, or the party that represents them, is contrary to the idea of
hierarchical rule found in Islam, which, though it may be for the
benefit of the people, does not give the people any right to the means
of production.

More specifically, with regard to feminism, where socialism opposes the
family as an expression of exploitative class relations, Islam seeks to
support and encourage the building and maintenance of families. Family
ties are exceedingly important in Islam. So Islam and socialism are
diametrically opposed on this point.

All forms of feminism with socialist leanings are in agreement with the
aim of ultimate destruction of the family. All reject any sort of gender
differentiation and complementarity. As such, they are fundamentally
opposed to Islam.

Many of the forms of feminism that reject socialism, nevertheless retain
the absolute egalitarian and anti-family principles of the socialists,
and so Islam will oppose them no less than it does more orthodox forms
of socialism.

### Islamic Opposition To The Philosophical Attitude Of Feminism

The moral values espoused by feminists, whether equality feminism or
gynocentric feminism, are not values supported by Islam. In feminism the
goal is absolute freedom to choose to live as one pleases without
interference of social customs or regulations assigning specified roles
to men and women. Justice in Islam means everything being in its proper
place, not absolute equality, let alone feminine superiority in all
areas.  
 The determination of justice in Islam requires the wisdom and insight
that result from study of and living according to the patterns set by
the Prophet (s) and Imams (as) .

Philosophical thought in Islam, like all the aspects of Islamic culture,
is a reflection of taw ld. All things are seen as having an underlying
unity as effects of God as ultimate cause, or as modes of His
self-disclosure.

Reason is championed as a vehicle for understanding taw ld. Feminist
philosophical thought, on the other hand, moves in the opposite
direction. Instead of searching for some underlying unity in being or
causation or appearance and reality, feminism is occupied with the
discovery of conflict; feminism sees hidden forms of subjugation lurking
beneath virtually every text, every theory, every social or cultural
phenomenon.

It displaces the idea of a harmony between the masculine and feminine
with outrage against the oppression of the female through gender
differentiation. Reason itself is considered a tool of oppression, and
reliance on reason is disparagingly called 'logo-centrism.'

The ideal of the philosopher in Islamic culture is of one who has gained
victory over the wiles of his base soul through the employment of the
intellect. The intellect dominates over the soul of the philosopher, who
thereby loses interest in what is considered desirable by worldly
standards.

The ideal of the feminist thinker one finds in feminist writing is of a
woman who is preoccupied with her own experiences and who uses those
experiences to uncover the roots of women's oppression in gender
differences which she overcomes through an effort of desire
unconstrained by patriarchy.

The ideal of Islam is nearness to God, and social relations are governed
by a spirit of obedience to God, in which justice is conceived as a
proper balance that satisfies the demands of moral conscience, social
custom, and the explicit commands of God.

In feminism, by contrast, all of theology is subordinated to its program
of liberation, in which the ideal is a social freedom that makes its own
absolute moral claims on behalf of equality and the abolition of gender
based differences in social role, that demands a revolution in social
customs, and that rejects the explicit commands of God.

### Islamic Opposition To Feminist Political Theory

Islamic political theory sees injustice in terms of rebellion against
God. It is because rulers usurp authority for the satisfaction of their
own desires instead of submitting to the divine will that they
perpetrate injustices on other people, their own subjects and their
neighbors. The sin against God is primary, and this is expressed in
injustice to others.

This political view is magnified in Shi'i theology. The dispute over the
caliphate arises because some were unwilling to submit to the choice of
God for leadership. All accept that 'Ali was designated for some sort of
leadership role, but the supporters of other choices for caliph refused
to accept this designation or its extension to the realm of politics.

With this refusal, for whatever reason, a spirit of something quite
foreign to the complete submission required by Islam is displayed. The
primary sin is that of disobedience to God. The injustices done in the
violent attempts to hold power are the natural consequence of this sin.

Feminist political theory, on the other hand, sees the primary sin in
the subjection of women to male authority. All other social injustice is
interpreted on the basis of this, and the elimination of any
subordination of women to men is seen as the key to the elimination of
all other forms of injustice.

Islam aims at bringing the human ever nearer to the divine. Thus, the
aim of the political order, in Islam, is the creation of an environment
conducive to the worship of and obedience to God through which proximity
to Him is gained.

This requires the establishment of a condition of social harmony and
balance in which each component of society, its institutions, practices,
cultural forms, discourse and individual members, each find their
fitting place to approach divinity in complete submission.

The aim of the political order in feminism, by contrast, never gets
beyond freedom to violate the constraints of traditional gender roles,
forming relationships and even communities without any form of
hierarchy, subordination, or gender differentiation such as is found in
the families of virtually all cultures.

### Islamic Opposition To Feminist Theology

Since there is no holy trinity in Islam, no God the Father nor God the
Son, the concept of God in Islam is not as gender specific as it is in
Christianity. In the Arabic of the Qur’an, masculine pronouns are used
to refer to God, but this provides little leverage for the development
of the sort of critique feminists have leveled against the Christian
concept of God.

Goddess feminism, on the other hand, is clearly incompatible with the
teachings of Islam. The God of Islam is not a woman, and He has no
daughters.

Theological discussions of the attributes of God indicate very clearly,
however, that there are feminine and masculine aspects of divinity and
even that the feminine has priority.[^27]

Now, as Wolfson has argued in his study of Islamic theology,[^28]
discussions of the names and attributes of God play a role in Islamic
theology comparable to discussions of the Trinity among Christian
theologians.

So, not only is the Islamic concept of the divinity free of the male
bias present in the concept of the Trinity, but the closest thing we can
find in Islam to the idea of relations internal to divinity discussed in
Christianity in terms of the Trinity is the idea of the divine names and
attributes in which not only is there an absence of bias against the
feminine, but the feminine is dignified as paramount. God's mercy
precedes His wrath.[^29]

### Feminism As Cultural Imperialism

Feminism has long been a favorite weapon in the arsenal of the
colonialist powers. The colonialists used feminism in order to berate
the cultures of the lands they governed, to win local support for
Europeanization, and to provide moral justification for
imperialism.[^30]

Europeans understood Islam very poorly prior to the twentieth century.
The misunderstandings had been entrenched since the crusades when a
disinformation campaign was employed to bolster the war effort. One of
the aspects of this campaign concerned gender in Islam.

Islam was condemned because of polygamy, sensuality, and the
imprisonment of women behind the veil. Even in the eighteenth century
many Europeans believed that Islam teaches that women have no souls.

During the nineteenth century, the European colonialist powers,
particularly the English, built upon these common misunderstandings to
justify a program for the eradication of Muslim culture. Victorian
anthropology contributed to the idea that the culmination of human
evolution was to be found in England, and that it was therefore natural
and fitting for the British to rule over other peoples.

At the same time, a vocal feminist movement was emerging in England
itself. The colonialists made use of the arguments of English feminists
in their own rhetoric to claim that because Muslims oppressed their
women, their mores had to be replaced by 'civilized' European mores.

Colonial feminism was thus used against other cultures in the service of
colonial rule, particularly against Muslim cultures, but in different
variations it was also used against local cultures in India and Africa.

The colonialists argued that the fundamental reason for the
comprehensive backwardness of Muslim societies was the prevalence of
Islamic customs pertaining to women. The veil became the symbol for the
degradation of women and chief target of colonialist propaganda.

In order for Muslim societies to progress toward civilization, the women
in these societies would have to learn to dress and behave like European
women.

Evelyn Baring, the 1st Earl of Cromer, was the British consul-general of
Egypt from 1882 to 1907, and he made frequent use of feminist arguments
in his attacks against Islam, claiming that Islam degraded women while
Christianity elevated them, yet in England Cromer were a founding member
and a president of the Men's League for Opposing Women's Suffrage!
Prominent in his statements about Egypt was that only by abandoning the
veil could Egypt reap the benefits of the introduction of Western
civilization brought by the colonialists.[^31]

Christian missionaries also focused on the role of women in Islamic
societies to justify claims of the superiority of the Christian religion
and the need for missionary activities in Muslim lands under the
protection, of course, of colonialist military prowess.

In addition to colonialist rulers and missionaries, Western feminists
also propagated the idea that Islamic precepts pertaining to women
should be abandoned. Leila Ahmed states:

Others besides officials and missionaries similarly promoted these
ideas, individuals resident in Egypt, for example. Well-meaning European
feminists, such as Eugenie Le Brun (who took the young Huda Sha'rawi
under her wing), earnestly inducted young Muslim women into the European
understanding of the meaning of the veil and the need to cast it off as
the essential first step in the struggle for female liberation.[^32]

The legacy of colonialist feminism persisted through the neo-colonialist
period to the present. Western feminists continue to criticize Muslim
societies with special attention given to the veil, which is still seen
by feminists as the symbol of the suppression of women by Islamic
patriarchy.

Members of the upper classes in Muslim societies who adopted Western
modes of dress, manners, home decor, and intellectual fashions also
accepted colonialist feminism. The first feminists from the indigenous
populations of colonialized countries were those of the upper classes
who were educated in Europe or European schools.

Nationalist leaders in Muslim countries, such as Ataturk and Reza Shah,
were the next to adopt the rhetoric of colonialist feminism as part of
their programs of modernization. They were in basic agreement with to
sort of values and worldview held by the colonialists.

They also agreed with the colonialists that their own cultures had to be
reformed to come up to the standards of European civilization. Their
only difference with the colonialists was that they wanted to direct the
program of modernization themselves. They would not allow Europeans to
govern their countries, but they themselves would govern their countries
as the Europeans would, or perhaps even more ruthlessly.

The values and fashions learned from the colonialists by the upper
classes were to be imposed on the society as a whole. The most striking
symbol of this was the attempt to outlaw traditional Islamic modes of
dress.

In 1936, Reza Shah declared the emancipation of women and made women's
Islamic covering illegal. In 1963, women were granted the right to vote,
and in the Family Protection Act, polygamy was made illegal and women
were given custody of their children in case of divorce.

The Family Protection Act was revoked after the victory of the Islamic
Revolution of Iran, when this law and many of the other measures
introduced by feminists were denounced along with the rest of the
colonialist legacy as contrary to the aims of Islam.

The connection between feminism and cultural imperialism is clearly
indicated by Sachiko Murata:

It seems to me that feminists who have criticized various aspects of
Islam or Islamic society base their positions upon a worldview radically
alien to the Islamic worldview. Their critique typically takes a moral
stance. They ask for reform, whether explicitly or implicitly. The
reform they have in view is of the standard modern Western type. Among
other things, this means that there is an abstract ideal, thought up by
us or by our leader, which has to be imposed by overthrowing the old
order. This reform is of the same lineage as the Western imperialism
that originally appeared in the East as Christian missionary activity.
The white man's burden gradually expanded its horizons-or reduced them,
depending on how you look at it. Salvation was no longer touted as
present in Christianity, but in science and progress.[^33]

Prof. Murata goes on to observe that the feminist critique takes a
decidedly moral stance for granted, and on the assumption that any sort
of subordination of women to men is wrong and oppressive, goes on to
denounce Islam, as well as most other traditional systems that contain
rules governing gender relationships.

It is here that Muslims have to stop and ask whether the moral
assumptions being used to condemn their religion are really acceptable.
Islam has its own morals and jurisprudence grounded in a metaphysics
that has been delineated through the course of centuries by Muslim
philosophers, Gnostics and theologians.

The point is not that there can be no injustice in Islamic societies,
but that Muslims will not be able to solve their social problems as
Muslim by acquiescence to the social and cultural hegemony of the West.

Both feminine and masculine are double-edged swords. Each has a negative
and a positive evaluation. If the rigidly "patriarchal" stress of some
contemporary Muslims is to be softened, this can happen only when they
place renewed stress on femininity as a positive quality and masculinity
as a negative quality.

And Muslims will be able to do things as Muslims-not as imitation
Westerners-only if they look once again at the spiritual and
intellectual dimensions of their own tradition.[^34]

### Conclusion:The Islamic Struggle Against Feminism

The brief points made above, though sketchy, should be sufficient to
show that the incompatibility of Islam with feminism is profound. It is
not just a disagreement about how Islamic law is to be interpreted or
what sort of rights should be accorded to women.

Islam and feminism have contradictory views on the most fundamental
issues in metaphysics, ethics, social and political philosophy and
theology.

Muslim women have also argued that feminism is an ideology relevant only
to the lives of Western affluent women, and that even for them it has
only resulted in making them into quasi men or sex objects. They have
also pointed out that while Muslim women see their own most important
roles to be mother and wife feminist ideology belittles the importance
of these roles in its combat against gender stereotypes.

The most obvious marker of the struggle against feminism by Muslim women
is Hijab (the canons of modesty in Islamic dress). While feminists have
taken the scarf to be a symbol of their subjugation to men in Muslim
societies, the faithful take it to be a symbol of respect and modesty.

### The Prohibition By Islam Of The Oppression Of Women

No prohibition is given greater emphasis in Islam than that against
injustice. In the Qur'an, particular attention is drawn to various areas
in which there is a potential for injustice against women, but in
general it is social acceptability and moral conscience to which appeal
is made in order to discern what is just from what is oppression.

The laws of Islam set outer limits, but that does not mean that whatever
falls within the perimeters is condoned. With respect to worship, for
example, the law specifies the outward conditions for correct prayer,
fasting and ritual purity, but one may offer formally correct prayer in
ways considered repugnant (makruh) even with respect to external form.
It is rather trite to mention, additionally, that validity of external
form is no guarantee of interior soundness (ihsan).

According to a hadith related by both Shi'i and Sunni sources, on his
last pilgrimage, the Prophet (s) said, "O people! Fear Allah regarding
women, for you have taken them in trust from Allah." Since what is taken
in trust must be properly cared for, some scholars have allowed that the
legal religious authorities may intervene even when there has been no
explicit violation of Islamic precepts in case of mistreatment of a wife
by her husband.[^35]

### The Misuse Of Islam For The Oppression Of Women

Islam has been and continues to be misused as an instrument for the
oppression of women. This happens in various ways. Sometimes men take
advantage of the position of women in Muslim societies to deny women
opportunities that should be protected were Islam properly practiced.
The dictates of Islam against injustice to women are simply ignored, and
Islam itself is falsely used as an excuse for this.

An example of this is the way the Taliban in Afghanistan misuse precepts
of sexual segregation to deny women educational opportunities and access
to health and other facilities. Another way women are oppressed in Islam
is when the letter of the law is observed but its spirit is violated.
Instances of this are too many to even begin giving examples. These are
issues that need to be addressed by men and women in Muslim societies
today.

Because of the abuses that exist, feminists argue that Islamic law
should be changed, but there are other ways to fight abuse. More
attention needs to be paid to the spirit of Islamic teaching. Islamic
law should not be seen as a framework within which one can get away with
whatever one likes with impunity.

Muslims need to be just as careful about the need to mold themselves
according to the ideals taught by Islam as they are careful about
conformity to its legal injunctions. The feminists seem to share the
same blindness as those who use Islamic law as a pretext to oppress
women, neither can see beyond the law to Islamic values and ideals.

The issue is addressed in some detail by Shahid Mutahhari who recognizes
the problem and describes it as follows:

These cruelties are the outcome and an offshoot of a wrong conception of
Islam, which, according to them, says: "A woman must bear such cruelties
like a terminal cancer patient." This has created an impression of Islam
that is more harmful than any of the evil propaganda against our
faith.[^36]

Shahid Mutahhari calls for the organization of Islamic women's movements
in order to oppose the injustices done to women in Muslim society:

In our country we are in need of a women's movement, but we need a pure
Islamic movement and not a dark and gloomy European movement.[^37]

### Muslim Women's Movements

Struggles for the elimination of oppression to women based on an
acceptance of Islam may be termed Islamic women's movements. In the
modern period, Islamic women's movements arose as a reaction against
feminism, although they concerned themselves primarily with the
improvement of the conditions of women in Muslim societies.

It is not always clear whether organizations and individuals base their
struggle for the improvement of the conditions of women on Islam or on a
feminist ideology disguised as acceptance of Islam. Nor is this a black
and white distinction.

It appears that a considerable number of Muslim women influenced by
feminist ideas sincerely believe that the proper interpretation of Islam
is one that calls for absolute equality (i.e., identity) of rights for
men and women and the elimination of all distinctions based on sex found
in Islamic law as traditionally interpreted.

On the other hand, other Muslim women may sincerely but incorrectly
believe that there are no valid arguments within Islamic jurisprudence
for reform of the traditional interpretation of the law. So, among
Muslim women's movements, as opposed to explicitly secularist feminist
movements, we will find some to be firmly grounded on an attempt to be
guided by God's final revelation as taught by His chosen Prophet,
Muhammad (s), while others will attempt to manipulate the teachings of
Islam for their own agendas, whether these are feminist or
traditionalist agendas, and there will be much gray area between pure
faith and hypocrisy, as there always is in matters of religion.

Feminists have taken note of the great popular support for Islam among
women in Muslim countries. Some have responded by calling the Muslim
women foolish or duped. This seems to be the attitude of Leila Ahmed.
She claims that women are attracted to the moral ideals of Islam and are
unaware that the legal ramifications of Islamic law put women at a
disadvantage. This is an incredible hypothesis, to say the least.

It is hard to imagine a Muslim woman who has not heard that Islam has
different rules of inheritance for sons and daughters, let alone one who
is unaware of sex based differences in the marriage laws.

Some feminists have admitted that the Islamic movement has actually
improved the status of women, regardless of whether improvement is
judged by feminist or other standards. Haleh Afshar admits that the
revival of Islam after the victory of the Islamic Revolution has been
"almost literally a God­send" in the context of which Iranian women have
fought "against their political, legal and economic
marginalization....Throughout, their arguments have been anchored in the
teachings of Islam, the Koranic laws and the traditions and practices of
the Prophet of Allah."[^38]

Afshar's attitude appears to be that if Islamic rhetoric can be used to
win feminist objectives, this can justify compromises with Islam. Ziba
Mir-Hosseini seems to agree:

I argue that, contrary to what the early literature contends, and what
remains implicit in the later wave, the impact of the revolution on
women has been emancipatory, in the sense that it has paved the way for
the emergence of a popular feminist consciousness.[^39]

Mir-Hosseini, like Afshar, seems to think that it may be worthwhile
making compromises with Islam in order to achieve feminist objectives.
She refers to all women's movements as feminist, regardless of whether
they are based on feminist ideology or Islam, although she offers the
following conclusion about the indigenous 'feminism' she sees emerging
in Iran:

This process has inadvertently been nurturing an indigenous 'feminism'
which is as much rooted in Iranian family structures as it is in the
interaction of Islamic and Western ideals of womanhood. It could emerge
only after challenging and rejecting the state-sponsored and
Western-inspired 'feminism' of the Pahlavis, as well as the
liberal-leftist feminism of 1970's women's liberation, and yet in the
process assimilating some of the features of both.[^40]

We can only pray that Muslim women's movements comprising both Muslim
women and Muslim men will continue to be advance in their struggle
against injustice and will continue to provide an alternative to
feminism so that the family is strengthened rather than undermined in
loving obedience to the Most Merciful of the Merciful.

[^1]: W. v. Quine, Quiddities (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1987), 207-208.

[^2]: The Duden German dictionary defines feminism as a "direction
within the women's movement that strives for a new self-understanding by
women and the abolition of the traditional separation of roles." Duden
1, 20th ed. (Mannheim: 1991), p. 267.Cited in and corroborated with
other references to leading feminists in Germany in Manfred Hauke, God
or Goddess? (San Francisco: 1995), p. 20-21. This article is deeply
indebted to Hauke's book,and all the references to German feminists as
well as much other material is taken from Hauke's citations or
summarized from his discussions.

[^3]: See A. Nye, Philosophy and Feminism: At the Border (New
York:1995).

[^4]: Mary Ellen Waith, A History of Women Philosophers 3
vols.(Dordrecht: 1987-1991).

[^5]: See Sandra Harding, Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Thingking from
Women's Lives (Ithaca: 1991).

[^6]: Allison Jagger, "Feminist Ethics", in L. Becker and C. Becker,
eds., The Encyclopedia of Ethics(New York: Garland, 1992)

[^7]: Sarah Lucia Hoagland, Lesbian Ethics (Palo Alto: Institute of
Lesbian Studies, 1988).

[^8]: See Christa Mulack, Natirlich Weiblich (Stuttgart: 1990).

[^9]: Carol Gilligan, In a Different voice: Psycological Theory and
Women's Development (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1982).

[^10]: Shiela Mullett, "Shifting Perspectives: A New Approach to
Ethics", in L. Code, S. Mullett, C. Overall, eds., Feminist
Perspectives: Philosophical Essays on Method and Morals (Toronto:
University of Toronto, 1988).

[^11]: Mary Daly, Beyond God the Father: Toward a Philosophy of Women's
Liberation (Boston: 1973).

[^12]: See Elisabeth Schlssler Fiorenza, In Memory of Her: A Feminist
Theological Reconstruction of Christian Origins (New York: 1983).

[^13]: Other moderate Christian feminists are Elisabeth Grossman,
Rosemary Reuther, Catharina Halkes and Elisabeth Moltman-Wendel.

[^14]: (New York: 1968).

[^15]: Mary Daly (1973).

[^16]: Daly (1973), 19.

[^17]: Mary Daly, GynIEcology: The Metaethics of Radical
Feminism(Boston: 1978).

[^18]: Mary Daly, Pure Lust: Elemental Feminist Philosophy (Boston:
1984).

[^19]: Luce Irigaray, Sexes and Genealogies, tr. Gillian C. Gill (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1993), v.

[^20]: Irigaray (1993), 72.

[^21]: Elisabeth Moltmann-Wendel, "Werkstatt Ohne Angst" Forum Religion
3!1987, 34. Cited in Hauke (1995), 95.

[^22]: Rosemary Reuther, New Woman-New Earth (New York: 1975), 3. Cited
in Hauke (1995), 96.

[^23]: Hauke (1995), 96.

[^24]: W. Morgan Shuster, The Strangling of Persia (Washington, D.C.:
Mage Publishers, 1987), 197-198.

[^25]: (19:27-30).

[^26]: (66:11).

[^27]: See Sachiko Murata, The Tao of Islam (Albany: SUNY Press, 1992),
especially part 2.

[^28]: H. A. Wolfson, The Philosophy of the Kaldm(Cambridge: Harvard,
1976).

[^29]: Murata (1992), 55, 203-222.

[^30]: This is explained in detail by Leila Ahmed in Women and Gender in
Islam (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), 150ff. Most of what
follows in this section is a summary of information presented in Ahmed's
work.

[^31]: See Cromer's Modern Egypt, 2 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1908),
cited in Ahmed (1992), 152-153

[^32]: Ahmed (1992), 154.

[^33]: Sachiko Murata, The Tao of Islam (Albany: SUNY Press, 1992), 4.

[^34]: Murata (1992), 323.

[^35]: Murtaza Mutahhari, The Rights of Women in Islam (Tehran: WOFIS,
1991), 314, 309-312.

[^36]: Mutahhari (1991), 306.

[^37]: Mutahhari (1991), 66.

[^38]: Haleh Afshar, "Women and the Politics of Fundamentalism in Iran,"
in Haleh Afshar, ed., Women and Politics in the Third World (London:
Routledge, 1996), 126.

[^39]: Ziba Mir-Hosseini, "Women and Politics in Post-Khomeini Iran," in
Afshar (1996), 143.

[^40]: Ziba Mir-Hosseini (1996), 163.


