The Nurture Of The Heart
========================

When modern Western science turned its attention to the human mind and
established the human science of psychology, it did so in the shadow of
earlier gains made in the empirical sciences, with the result that the
fathers of modern psychology focused their attention on those aspects of
mind which could be best studied in a manner modeled on that of the
physical sciences.

Freud, himself trained as a physician, saw psychology as an extension of
medicine. Inappropriate behavior was attributed to mental illnesses
analogous to the physical maladies that inhibit the proper function of
the organs. In many university texts used today, psychology is defined
as the science of human behavior, although there is a growing awareness,
especially among therapists, that the attempt to model psychology on the
physical sciences results in a woefully superficial understanding of the
person.

We are finally beginning to hear voices of protest from among those
professionally trained in psychology against the secularist
presuppositions which dominate the field. Although this protest has its
roots in the school of thought initiated by Carl Jung, it has developed
into what has been called 'soul-oriented psychology' by James Hillman,
and has recently found eloquent expression in Thomas Moore's Care of the
Soul.[^1]

Moore proposes that the flaw of the dominant approaches to psychology is
their failure to appreciate the importance of religion and the need to
make spirituality a serious part of everyday life. He draws upon his own
Catholic Christian tradition in order to articulate an understanding of
the human soul and how it is to be cared for.

Much of what Moore says about the inadequacies of secularism will strike
a resonant chord with Muslims, whose doctrine of tawhid, or Divine
unity, fosters attempts to understand all aspects of life in terms of
their relation to the One.

Many of the topics discussed by Moore, from jealousy and envy to the
sacred arts, are also the subjects of attention in the spiritual
tradition of Islam, where in addition to discussions of the progress of
the soul, one also finds special attention given to the nurture of the
heart.

After concurring with Moore's criticisms of modern psychology, we may
find ourselves better able to appreciate the wisdom expressed in the
Islamic tradition pertaining to the heart. From this perspective, care
of the soul may be seen as a preliminary to purification of the heart.

In the Introduction to Care of the Soul, Moore writes:

In the modern world we separate religion and psychology, spiritual
practice and therapy. There is considerable interest in healing the
split, but if it is going to be bridged, our very idea of what we are
doing in our psychology has to be radically re-imagined. Psychology and
spirituality need to be seen as one. In my view, this new paradigm
suggests the end of psychology as we have known it altogether because it
is essentially modern, secular, and ego-centered.[^2]

Precisely the same point could be made with regard to other modern
secular fields, such as politics, art, literature and philosophy. They
have come to presuppose the fundamental tenets of individualistic
secular modernism.

The greatest political protest that has ever been made against modernism
and in favor of traditional cultural values is the Islamic Revolution of
Iran. Muslims all over the world are now beginning to gain the
confidence to develop their own traditions, not only in politics, but in
the arts and sciences, as well.

On the other hand, although the Islamic Revolution may be considered
anti-modernist, in the sense that it represents a rejection of cultural
values seen as being imposed by the West, many commentators have been
shocked at how much of modernism has been accepted by revolutionary
Muslims. Muslims generally pursue technology, development, economic
expertise and the social sciences, including psychology, without much
thought to the ways in which these may be linked to more offensive
manifestations of Western culture in Muslim societies.

Those who continue to imagine that the way to progress and development
is through the blind imitation and importation of Western ideas and
methods would do well to ponder the fact that within the Western world
itself, an increasing number of thinkers are turning to tradition as a
source of inspiration. This does not mean that we are to simply replace
imitation of the West by imitation of tradition. The necessity for
critical thought is undeniable; what is at question is its orientation.

One of the greatest sources of traditional thought which has stimulated
religious thinkers in the East and West is the works of Plato, and Moore
draws upon Plato's idea of the "craft of life" in working out his own
understanding of care of the soul. He writes:

Another phrase Plato used was heautou epimeleisthai, "care of oneself";
this word for care also described honoring the gods and the dead.
Somehow we have to understand that we cannot solve our "emotional"
problems until we grasp this mystery that honoring the divine and the
departed is part of the basic care that as human beings we have to bring
to life.[^3]

Another insight Moore draws from the ancient Greeks is the need for
community. Plato discusses his ideal city, the Republic, as an organic
community whose sectors are analogous to the parts of a single human
soul.

The emphasis on community is also voiced by one of the most important
movements in current political philosophy critical of liberalism:
communitarianism. Moore recognizes that one of the strongest needs of
the soul is for community, and that in the modern world there are many
signs that we lack a sufficiently deep experience of community.[^4]  
 Sometimes the need for community and its lack in modern society are
manifested in deep feelings of loneliness, even to the point of causing
thoughts of suicide, which the therapist discovers in his practice.

Moore remarks that professional psychology has created a catalogue of
disorders, known as the DSM-III, and that he would like to add to the
list some of the disorders he has seen in his practice. He writes:

For example, I would want to include the diagnosis "psychological
modernism," an uncritical acceptance of the values of the modern world.
It includes blind faith in technology, inordinate attachment to material
gadgets and conveniences, uncritical acceptance of the march of
scientific progress, devotion to the electronic media, and a lifeÂ­style
dictated by advertising.[^5]

Moore suggests that the way out of the kinds of neuroses faced by modern
Western people is to learn from other cultures, from art and religion
and philosophy. He continues that modern psychology can be replaced by
care of the soul, and that then "we can begin building a culture that is
sensitive to matters of the heart."[^6]

Among Muslim traditions there is a great wealth of fascinating
discussions of matters of the heart, some of which has been collected in
Murata's The Tao of Islam. In general, the Muslim sages, like the sages
of other traditional societies, would diagnose the illness of
"psychological modernism" as due to a lack of inner harmony.

The particularly Islamic recipe requires the observance of the shari'ah.
The shari'ah orients the soul toward the heart: "The function of the
Sharia is to turn all the forces of the soul in directions that will
help the soul reach felicity."[^7]

Should we conclude that all that is needed to cure psychological
modernism is to establish an Islamic government that enforces the
shari'ah? Obviously this will not be sufficient, and if the enforcement
is carried out in an odious manner, the net result will probably be a
worsening of the disease rather than its cure. Islamic law can perform
its curative function only when it is observed willingly, because it
works by getting us to want and will what is appropriate.

'Abd al-Razzaq Kashani, commenting on the Qur'an, explains that God
sends down with the Qur'an the differentiations of the discerning
intellect, and that this differentiation "will then be a healing for the
illnesses of the hearts".[^8]

The illnesses to be healed are things like ignorance, doubt, hypocrisy,
blindness of heart, rancor and envy. The analytic distinctions set out
by Islamic law between the pure (tahir) and impure (najis), the correct
(sahih) and incorrect (batil), and the fivefold classification of acts
into those which are obligatory (wajib), recommended (mustahab), neutral
(mubah), disapproved (makruh) and prohibited (haram), all are needed for
the proper harmonious synthesis of the elements of the soul, which in
turn is required for the health of the heart.

The point is expressed by Mawlavi Jalal al-Din Rimi as follows:

*Sick, surely, and ill-savored is the heart that knows not*

*(Cannot distinguish) the taste of this and that.*

*When the heart becomes whole (is healed) of pain and*

*disease,*

*it will recognize the flavor of falsehood and truth.*

*When Adam's greed for the wheat [the forbidden fruit}*

*waxed great, it robbed Adam's heart of health.*[^9]

Perhaps some will object that this sufi purification of the heart of
worldly desires may be salutary for a heart afflicted by the traditional
vices, but can such a prescription cure the heart diseased by such
modern illnesses as psychological modernism, alienation, drug addiction,
loneliness, violence and boredom? The facile answer is that if you get
rid of all the traditional vices, the modern ones will also evaporate.

This, however, is to ignore the fact that the modern situation may be
such as to make the pursuit of virtue and eradication of vice seem
quaint and rather beside the point.

Modern theories, most of them with roots in nineteenth century Europe,
offer their own solutions to the modern maladies they describe.
Marxists, for example, used to think that state ownership of industry
and capital would bring about liberation from the modern maladies. No
one seems to believe that any more.

Liberalism does not really address itself to the modern maladies, but
would seem to imply that they are private matters, to be treated by
one's psychotherapist or pastor. The psychotherapist will suggest that a
cure is to be found in facing one's feelings of guilt, seeking
satisfying sexual relations, and many more sessions with the
psychotherapist. Perhaps psychotherapy deserves more than this sort of
snide put-down, if for no other reason than that it has attracted so
many believers.

But the point here is that it treats the modern diseases of heart, soul
and spirit as if they were private matters pertaining to one's childhood
relations with parents and adult enjoyment of sex. Moore is certainly to
be commended for seeking to move past this with his rejection of modern
psychology. Most psychotherapists today seem to rely more on
pharmaceuticals than the theories of Freud or Jung, anyway. Drugs are a
way to cope with mental disorders, but no one pretends that they offer a
cure.

People today are unhappy. Where there is wealth, there is wanton
consumption, and where there is not, there is envy. Both are primarily
stimulated by television. The religious solution offered in the context
of liberal capitalism is the consumption of mass marketed spirituality.

It does not really matter very much if it is mainstream Christianity,
New Age, or even sufism! What is offered is a private religion of
religious experience. Having the right sorts of experiences is supposed
to cure the troubles of the modern mind. Religion offers consolation. It
soothes. God loves you. You are saved, if you just believe with all your
heart. The wanton consumption continues and the envy. The TV is still
on.

Charles Taylor speaks of three major sources of the moral outlook of
modern Western people: theism, naturalism, and Romanticism and its
successors. He finds these sources have evolved in such a way that they
are not capable of solving the problems of the loss of meaning and
disenchantment.

What is needed, Taylor concludes, is insight into the importance of
human sympathy and commitment, of the inherent value in things and our
ability to recognize such values. While Taylor expresses doubts about
the ability of Christianity, or more generally of theism, to foster the
needed insights, he admits to sharing the hopes "implicit in
Judeo-Christian theism."[^10]

If the complex of psychological modernism is so deep, should we really
expect that Islam will do any better at solving it than the modern
approaches have? The science of the West would seem to place no hope in
anything remotely like Islam, after all, it contends, it was developed
to deal with an entirely different set of problems.

Second, Islam does not seem to offer anything all that much different
from Christianity; so, if Christianity has failed modern man, the
prospects for Islam will be dim as well. Third, if the roots of the
modern disorders of the mind lie in the social configuration of
societies in relation to industrialization and the sorts of life style
changes that accompany the development of industry, adaptation of
technology and media, religious affiliation would not seem very
important.

In Marxist terminology, this would be to expect a change in the mode of
production because of an alteration of the superstructure. For example,
it could be argued that in America and Europe marriage is weakening not
because so many people believe in a socialist or feminist utopia without
the constraints of marriage, but because men and women repeatedly find
themselves failing at marriage. It doesn't matter whether they are
Muslims, Christians or Buddhists.

They fail at marriage because of complex factors including the legal
system, media exploitation of sex for marketing purposes, availability
of sexual relations outside of marriage, lack of support for marriage
through extended familial relations, etc.

Fourth, the objector will ask us to look at the mess the societies of
the 'Islamic' nations, for example, the widespread corruption and
political repression that characterize most Muslim societies, the
ostentatious consumption of the rich alongside abject poverty, and the
envy of the middle classes for those who have more of the luxuries
imported from the West.

So, how can Islam help? First of all, it should be admitted that
acceptance of Islam by an individual or society is not sufficient for
salvation from psychological modernism. Nevertheless, there is reason to
have hope in Islam if for no other reason than that it is not rooted in
the modern ideas that have abetted the emergence of the modern maladies.

Of course, the same could be said for Christianity, but Christian
thought has itself undergone its own process of modernization in a
manner that makes it difficult to work effectively against the flaws in
modernism. Reliance on Islam offers us another chance. Maybe it is our
last chance. Maybe Islam is the last chance for humanity to throw off
its prejudices and conceits, to find social harmony and inward spiritual
harmony in humility before God.

It is true that Islam appeared in and addressed a society very different
from those of the world today, but there is a seductive whiff of hope
that in the process of finding the universal message of Islam and
applying that message to current situations at the very least we can
avoid the pitfalls into which various tendencies of Christian thought
have fallen.

Religious affiliation is not so important, but the practical application
of religious ideas in society can engender positive changes. For
example, if Muslim societies thrive, their media will not exploit sex
for marketing, the legal system will not encourage the breakdown of the
family, extended family relations will support the marriages of their
members who will find the inner moral strength in their faith to
maintain loyalty to spouses.

The tremendous problems of Muslim societies today are no cause to
despair over the ability of Islam to cope with modernism, because the
hope we seek from Islam requires the implementation of divine guidance,
not merely formal allegiance and enforcement of external precepts. The
world today needs a force that can stand in opposition to the dominion
of world consumerism and the values of market capitalism. Only Islam
seems capable of playing this role.

Of course, the opposition role is not sufficient. If the Islamic
movement is to be effective, it must offer more than a rejection of the
evils of modernized culture; it must promise something more rewarding,
and it must be able to present this promise in the form of a vision of
how humanity in its current conditions of distress can move toward the
path of divine guidance.

Certainly, in the intellectual traditions of the Muslims, especially
those pertaining to the inner life, 'irfan, there are sources enough on
which to draw for such vision, if they are interpreted with an astute
cognizance of current conditions and their historical contexts.

The final stages of the perfection of the heart are annihilation (fana')
and subsistence (baqi), destruction followed by a new life. The malaise
and avarice psychological modernism would also seem to require
destruction and new life.

Through participation in the renewal of Islamic community Muslims may
find a way to disillusionment with the glitter of the modern, and devote
themselves to the realization of the human perfection for which God has
created us. In line with this view of the heart, the perfect man is
frequently described as one who possesses a heart, as Mawlavi Jalal
al-Din Rumi writes:

*The owner of a heart becomes a six-faced mirror;*  
*through him God looks upon all the six directions.*[^11]

In another place Mawlavi explains that the spirit is simply awareness,
and that therefore, whoever has greater awareness has greater spirit.
The human spirit is greater than the animal spirit because of its
superior awareness. "Then the spirit of God's friends, the Possessors of
Hearts, is even greater.. That is why the angels prostrated themselves
to Adam: His spirit was greater than their existence."[^12]

Commenting on the cosmic marriage of soul and spirit, Murata writes, "If
the perfected rational soul is to be actualized, its parents-spirit and
soul-must marry, give birth to it, and nurture it."[^13] If the heart
may properly be understood as the 'perfected rational soul' perhaps the
cure for some of the maladies of which Thomas Moore speaks will turn out
to require more than care of the soul, but a way of looking at the soul
which is entirely different from what is typically found in the Western
tradition.

Instead of seeing the soul as containing two warring parts, reason and
passion, with art and religion being confined to the emotional, and
reason left with nothing to do but logic chopping and juggling numbers,
it might be salutary to submit to the more radical procedure of looking
at the human being in a way suggested by the tradition of Islam.
According to this tradition it is not the soul that contains the heart
and intellect, but rather the soul and reason in proper harmony give
rise to the heart.

In a passage from one of the earliest writers to discuss the marriage of
the soul and intellect and the birth of the heart, Shihab al-Din 'Umar
Suhrawardi[^14] describes the soul as the animal spirit in man.

This soul and the spirit are attracted to one another like Adam and Eve,
and love each other so much that each tastes death in absence from its
mate. The product of the union of soul and intellect or spirit is the
heart-not the lump of flesh, but the subtle heart.

Among the hearts of men, some are inclined toward the soul and some
toward the spirit. At this point in his explanation, Suhrawardi cites a
hadith attributed to the Prophet of Allah (s) according to which there
are four kinds of hearts: the heart within which is a shining lamp of
the person of faith, the black and inverted heart of the infidel, the
hypocrite's heart which is bound by attachments, and the layered heart
within which are both faith and hypocrisy.

Suhrawardi explains these types of heart in terms of their relation to
their parents. To the extent that the heart inclines toward the
intellect, it will gain felicity, and to the extent that it inclines
toward the animal spirit, the earthly soul, the heart is wretched.

An interpretation of a similar hadith which explicitly brings out its
moral significance is given by Imam Khomeini (quddisa sirruh).[^15] The
hadith on which Imam Khomeini comments is attributed to Imam Baqir , who
is reported to have said that there are four kinds of hearts: "the heart
that has faith and hypocrisy in it, the heart that is inverted and
upside down, the heart that has been sealed and is darkened, and the
heart that is clear and luminous."

Imam Khomeini warns that the theoretical discussion of the states of the
heart and that which relates to its health and sickness, reform and
corruption, must be recognized as being a mere preliminary to the
practical work of genuine reform.

The believer's heart is described as luminous because faith is a human
perfection, being a kind of knowledge, and perfections are completions
of existence, which is spoken of as light. Imam also explains that the
faithful, since they are followers of the Perfect Man and walk in his
footsteps, they journey by the light of his guidance and the lamp of his
knowledge.

The term "Perfect Man" is said to have been introduced by Ibn 'Arabi,
and is used for one of the most important concepts of 'irfan (gnosis).
Within the tradition in which Imam Khomeini writes, the term 'perfect
man' is used for the prophets, and the special friends of God, the
'awliya, among whom the most prominent are the twelve imams of the
Shi'ah.

Imam explains that the inversion of the heart results from neglect of
God and attention to worldly things; this conforms with the view of the
writers mentioned by Murata, who speak of the wretched heart as one that
attends to the desires of the soul and neglects the light it receives
from its father, the spirit or intellect. Here too, we see that the
proper function of the intellect is to come to know God.

One might object that attention to intellectual knowledge cannot cure
the sick heart, even if the knowledge is about theology. The objection
betrays an incorrect understanding of the knowledge of God sought by the
'drif. What is sought is no propositional judgment, no statement of
dogma nor philosophical proof, but the unveiling or tasting of divinity,
called the 'encounter with God', liqd Allah.

This is not mere intellectual knowledge in the modern sense, but a
knowledge with affective and practical dimensions. The heart may only be
cured when it is not cut off from the intellect; so, the intellect must
be able to speak to the heart.

Imam Khomeini concludes with a call to faith and to a harmony of the
exotic and esoteric, urging his readers to take care that the effects of
faith may be established in both our inner and outer being.

In the same way as we claim to possess faith in the heart, we should
make our outward being also subject to its authority, so that the roots
of faith become established in our hearts . . . so that this Divine
trust of a celestial and pure heart, fashioned with its Divine nature,
is returned to the Sacred Being unaffected and unsoiled by the workings
of Satan and the hands of treachery.[^16]

[^1]: Thomas Moore, Care of the Soul (New York: Harper Collins, 1994).

[^2]: Moore (1994), p. xv.

[^3]: Moore (1994), xvii

[^4]: Moore (1994), 92.

[^5]: Moore (1994), 206.

[^6]: Moore (1994), 284

[^7]: Murata (1992), 286.

[^8]: Murata (1992), 302.

[^9]: Mathnavi, II, 2737 ff. translated in W. C. Chittick, The Sufi
Doctrine of Rumi, p. 56, also see W. C. Chittick, The Sufi Path of Love:
The Spiritual Teachings of Rumi, (Albany: SUNY Press, 1983).

[^10]: Charles Taylor, Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern
Identity (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1989), 521.

[^11]: Mathnavi, v, 874. See Chittick, The Sufi Doctrine of Rumi, p. 61

[^12]: See Murata (1992), 305, who cites Mathnavi II, 3326-30, and
Chittickâs The Sufi Path of Love, pp. 31-32, 37, 39-40, 62, etc.

[^13]: Murata (1992) 305.

[^14]:

[^15]: See Forty Hadith: An Exposition, Part 34, by Imam Ruhullah
al-Musawi al-Khomeini, tr. by A. Q. Qara'i, Al-Tawhid, vol. XII, No. 1,
13-24.

[^16]: Ibid., 23-24.


