Who Can Enter Into The Dialogue Of Civilizations?
=================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُولُوا لِلنَّاسِ حُسْنًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

***And you shall speak to men good words***

***(2:83)***

Introduction
------------

In the *Theatetus*, Plato writes:

*Do not conduct your questioning unfairly. It is very unreasonable that
one who professes a concern for virtue should be constantly guilty of
unfairness in argument. Unfairness here consists in not observing the
distinction between a debate and a conversation. A debate need not be
taken seriously and one may trip up an opponent to the best of one's
power, but a conversation should be taken in earnest; one should help
out the other party and bring home to him only those slips and fallacies
that is due to himself or to his earlier instructors. If you follow this
rule, your associates will lay the blame for their confusions and
perplexities on themselves and not on you; they will like you and court
your society, and disgusted with themselves, will turn to philosophy,
hoping to escape from their former selves and become different men*.[^1]

To enter into dialogue, we, too, must be ready to become different men,
just as we must be ready to assist those with whom we engage in dialogue
to become different men.

If civilizations are to enter into dialogue, it would seem, by analogy,
that they should be ready to escape from their former selves and become
different civilizations. But is this analogy cogent? I think it is, but
I think it is also beneficial to reflect on the metaphor of
civilizations in dialogue.

Metaphor Vs Political Analysis
------------------------------

Samuel Huntington[^2] offers a political analysis of the contemporary
world as divided into several civilizations with different religions,
histories, identities and values. He describes the relations among these
cultural groups as the clash of civilizations because the differences in
values and other cultural factors give rise to conflict.  
 He also sees Islamic civilization as the main adversary of the modern
liberal West. He suggests that policy makers in the US should make a
more concerted effort to consciously defend and promote Western
civilization.

Huntington's book has attracted much attention and provoked considerable
criticism, as well. His division of the civilizations has been
criticized as being somewhat arbitrary. His analysis has also invited
the accusation that he is culturally, if not racially, prejudiced.

His view of history has been attacked as inaccurate. Finally, his policy
suggestions have been criticized as against US national interests. My
concern is not with the details of Huntington's views or whether he or
his critics are in the right about any particular point of issue.

One of the most interesting responses to the idea of a 'clash of
civilizations' has been articulated by the President of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Sayyid Muhammad Khatemi, who in his address to the
53rd General Assembly of the United Nations, 21 September 1998,
reiterated his call for a 'dialogue among civilizations' and proposed
that the year 2001 be designated as 'the year of dialogue among
civilizations'.

Although the expression 'clash of civilizations' and 'dialogue among
civilizations' seems naturally enough opposed, so that the suggestion of
President Khatemi appears to be a humane alternative to the clash, the
ideas are really so different that they belong in different categories.

The basic idea of the “clash of civilizations” is an explanation for
existing conflicts. It is a piece of political analysis.

The idea of a dialogue among civilizations, on the other hand, is not an
analysis at all; rather it is a proposal, in the form of a metaphor, for
a way in which we might encounter others.

It is as if Machiavelli were answered by Hafiz. One speaks of
Realpolitik and the other of love ('ishq). If President Khatemi's
proposal is to be any more than a lovely thought, we have to set about
trying to understand what is meant by the metaphor.

Cashing Out The Metaphor
------------------------

Civilizations have neither tongues nor ears. They cannot listen and they
cannot speak. People speak and listen and engage in conversations; but
civilizations are abstract entities posited by historians and political
theorists.

Therefore, dialogue among civilizations is impossible. Such is the sort
of response a very literally minded person might give to the proposal of
a dialogue among civilizations. Literally speaking, of course, the
literalist is right.

So, if we are to make any sense out of the idea of a dialogue among
civilizations we have to find some way to cash out the metaphor. But
there are obstacles to dialogue among civilizations beyond the fact that
civilizations lack the appropriate body parts, and these must also be
considered as we reflect on how to understand the idea of a dialogue
among civilizations.

Other And Self
--------------

To speak of dialogue is to speak of a means by which the gap between
other and self may be bridged. If the dialogue is to be effective for
the sort of transformation of which Plato speaks, it may be a useful
reminder to think of bridging the gap from other to self instead of the
more common phrase, 'self and other', because dialogue is not a means to
impose ourselves on others, but to welcome them.

Dialogue requires invitation, and for Muslims there is more than
sufficient instruction in Islam about the proper behavior (adab)
involved in offering an invitation and hosting guests.

In dialogue, however, we are both hosts and guests. The other invites us
to partake in the banquet of one’s own ideas, values and aspirations,
and we invite the stranger to ours. When we listen, we must observe the
manners of the guest, and when we speak, the manners of the host.

This is a very delicate business, for if good manners are breached by
either participant, dialogue breaks down.

If dialogue as such is difficult between two persons, the difficulties
are multiplied when we try to imagine a dialogue among civilizations. To
direct attention to another civilization is to consider the many
individual persons of that civilization as a mass in which particular
nuances are missed and a common set of socially determined values and
attitudes are lumped together.

The alien civilization resists our attempts to engage it in dialogue,
because it is incapable of respecting the rules of proper behavior. It
becomes what Robert Grudin calls 'The Mass Other':

“The Mass Other” becomes an incorporated giant, firm in its tastes and
unified in its intentions. To this extent, “The Mass Other” has identity
without soul, dominion without compassion.

It has dominion because it is a consolidation of social power; it has no
sympathy for others because it has no awareness of itself. It is a
monster, a cold smug staring face, the brazen image of a self­
protective system.

This image speaks but does not listen. Our relationship to it is
completely no dialogic, because its power lies in the denial of
dialogue. It harangues us with official discourse but shrinks and
vanishes at the threat of response.[^3]

In order for dialogue to take place, we will need to find another other.

Production And Imitation
------------------------

In a metaphorical sense, all of the products of a civilization may be
considered its speech. Civilizations speak through their arts and
technologies, through their literature and law, and through the
histories of their ideas.

Even if civilizations have no minds with which to think, the thoughts
arising among the people of a civilization and reflected in their labor
and its products may be attributed to the civilization itself.  
 So, there is a sense, after all, in which civilizations do have
tongues, for as the tongue of a man shows what he thinks, so too, the
products of a civilization reflect its thoughts.

If there is to be dialogue among civilizations, however, it is not
enough for them to speak. They must also listen. One person shows that
he has listened to another when the speech of the other elicits a
reaction, in deeds or in words.

If civilizations speak through their products, they may be said to
listen to another civilization when the products of the other elicit a
reaction, in historical events or in its own products. How can the
products of one civilization elicit a reaction in another? Certainly,
this is a constant occurrence.

Art critics point out how the arts and architecture of one culture often
influence those of another. Often it takes ages before the products of a
culture may be seen to influence those of another, as the styles of an
ancient civilization become fashionable in a modern one.

There are also cases of fairly rapid exchange, as Japanese technology
imitated that of the West, and was soon itself emulated in European and
American factories. Through imitation and modification, through montage
and even outright purchase, people, cultures, nations and civilizations
show that they are listening to one another.

If the products of a civilization are its speech, and its listening is
the reflection in those products of the products of others, it would
seem that the two essential elements for dialogue, speaking and
listening, are present in the metaphorical sense sketched, in
civilizations.

Here, we are using anthropological analogies to speak of dialogue among
civilizations. Let's call this interpretation of dialogue among
civilizations the anthropological analogy interpretation.

The elements we have identified in the anthropological analogy
interpretation are not sufficient for dialogue among civilizations, for
true dialogue requires more than mere speaking and listening. Even if
civilizations can be brought by metaphor to talk with one another, they
cannot be disabused of their lack of manners.

Dialogue requires observation of manners indicating a readiness to enter
the world of the alien and genuinely welcoming intentions. Civilizations
may produce and imitate, export and import, but they do not open their
hearts in dialogue.

The Representatives Of Civilizations
------------------------------------

Even if the metaphor discussed above is judged inadequate for
understanding the idea of a dialogue among civilizations, this is no
reason to give up on the idea altogether. Perhaps what is needed is a
change in the figure of speech.

Rhetoricians use the term synecdoche for the trope in which a part or
individual represents the whole or type, as well as the reverse. So, we
might say that a dialogue among civilizations takes place when
individuals belonging to different civilizations engage in dialogue.

Of course, more than this is needed if we are to achieve what is meant
by a dialogue of civilizations. Not every dialogue among members of
different civilizations will count as a dialogue among civilizations. If
a surgeon from China discusses surgical technique with a surgeon from
Tunis, the dialogue may take place entirely within the framework of
Western medicine.

In order for a dialogue among individuals to count as a dialogue among
civilizations, the individuals must be taken to represent different
civilizations. We could say that there was a dialogue among nations when
the representatives of those nations discuss a topic, for example, in
the meetings of the Islamic Conference Organization. We could say that
there was a dialogue among religions when the leaders of various
religious sects convened, e.g., the Pope and the Dalai Lama.

So, we can say that abstract social entities may engage in dialogue with
one another when they have recognized leaders who represent them.

We might call the interpretation of dialogue among civilizations as
dialogue among the representatives of civilizations the representational
model of dialogue among civilizations. The main problem with this
interpretation is that civilizations are not organizations with official
representatives and leaders.

Who could be said to represent Western civilization? Is it the president
of the European Union? Who represents Chinese civilization? Certainly,
not the current head of the Communist Party there. Even if there were
free and fair elections held in the lands in which the various
civilizations advance and decline, it is doubtful whether true
representatives of those civilizations would be elected.

The people who would be elected most likely would be political leaders,
but to represent a civilization it is not enough to be a shrewd
politician or very popular among the people of that civilization.

A civilization is not a political district. There is a difference
between the Chinese nation and Chinese civilization. In its primary
meaning, a civilization is not a community or collection of individuals,
but rather it is a highly advanced state of human society.

It seems, however, that the sense in which Prof. Huntington and
President Khatemi use the term is that according to which a civilization
is considered to consist of those people who have achieved such an
advanced state of human society.

Nevertheless, to represent the people as members of a civilization is
not the same as representing them politically, for to represent a
civilization, one must be able to represent the ideas, artistic tastes,
spiritual values, cultural attitudes, technology and literature of that
civilization.

One must be a historian of one's civilization to represent it, but being
a historian is not enough. One should also be an anthropologist,
sociologist, philosopher, linguist, political scientist, architect,
literary critic, film critic, and much more. It is obvious that it is
therefore impossible for any one person to represent a civilization.

Perhaps the representational model of dialogue among civilizations can
still be salvaged in order to understand very limited forms of dialogue,
dialogue among aspects of civilizations, but for anyone to imagine
himself as the representative of a civilization would seem to require
hubris of tremendous enormity, and perhaps worse.

The very idea that a person could represent a civilization would seem to
require identification with one's civilization that would seem to
require something bordering on a type of hysteria usually associated
with tribal loyalties.

To the long list of politically incorrect attitudes including racism,
nationalism and sexism, one might as well add civilizationism. A
civilizationist’s attitude is incompatible with the self-transformative
aims of dialogue.

When one imagines oneself as the representation of a civilization in
dialogue with the representatives of other civilizations, one will be on
the defense. Once one stops, defending one's civilization, doubts arise
as to whether one is really representing one's civilization. There can
be no meaningful dialogue when the participants are busy taking up
defensive postures.

At the same time that those who imagine themselves to be the
representatives of their civilizations confront one another, they
imagine the other to fit into the stereotype of “The Mass Other”,
described by Grudin above. It is possible that some sort of polemic will
ensue, but under these circumstances there can be no real dialogue.

The Person As Product
---------------------

The solution to the problem of how to understand dialogue among
civilizations I would like to suggest draws upon elements of both the
anthropological analogy model and the representational model.

The main problem with the anthropological analogy model was that
civilizations are not intentional beings capable of engaging in real
dialogue. Recognition of this flaw motivated the idea of finding real
human beings to represent civilizations.

The two main problems of the representational model, however, are (1)
particular individuals are not capable of representing the vastly
various aspects of civilizations, and (2) to imagine oneself the
representative of a civilization seems to require an arrogance
inconsistent with dialogue.

One solution to the problem would be to allow that civilizations may
enter into dialogue with one another through the dialogues among
individuals of different civilizations, but not where these individuals
fancy themselves to be the representatives of their civilizations,
rather, their dialogues may be seen as expressing the dialogue of
civilizations, just as war among the nations of different civilizations
may be said to express the clash of civilizations.

As in the representational metaphor, we may speak of individuals as
representing their civilizations, not in the sense that any individual
has the right or ability to speak for a civilization, but in the sense
that a civilization may speak through the words of individuals because
each person is a product of his civilization.

Persons may become vehicles for the dialogue among civilizations because
persons are products of their civilizations. As in the anthropomorphic
analogy, we may imagine civilizations to speak through their products,
but for dialogue to take place it is only the person as product who can
become the instrument of dialogue among civilizations.

Dialogue, History And Identity
------------------------------

When we think of dialogue among civilizations in the manner suggested
above, two important complications must be kept in mind. First, in the
modern world, people are not the products of a single civilization, nor
is it desirable that they should be.

Second, the dialogue among civilizations that takes place through
dialogues among persons of different civilizations is not only made up
of dialogues among many different thinkers discussing a wide variety of
topics, it is also a dialogue that is extended in time over generations.

It is a piecemeal process of relatively limited conversations that take
the shape of a dialogue among civilizations only when seen from a
distance.

Consider the second point first. Alasdair MacIntyre writes:

Conversations are extended in time. At later points someone may always
refer back to some earlier point with a variety of purposes: to evaluate
what has only emerged cumulatively, to examine the consistency or
inconsistency of what has been said, to put an old point in a new light
or vice versa. Crucial to polemical conversations therefore is how the
different and disagreeing participants understand the identity and
continuity of those with whom they speak, of how each stands in relation
to his or her past and future utterances in what he or she says or
writes now. Underlying the conflicts of polemical conversations are the
rival participants' presuppositions about continuing personal identity
through time. [^4]

MacIntyre continues with a discussion of personal identity in
Aristotelian/Augustinian traditions.

First, part of being a single person throughout one's physical life is
having one and the same body. Second, part of my identity derives from
my accountability before the communities of which I am a member for my
actions, attitudes, statements and beliefs.

An important psychological factor in understanding oneself to be a
Muslim, for example, is due to the fact that one's actions, attitudes,
statements and beliefs are considered by one to be liable to questioning
by other Muslims. For the Muslim, of course, (as well as for the
Augustinian) much more important is answerability before God, but this
lesser form of liability among community members plays an important role
in religious as well as non-religious communities.

The third point MacIntyre makes is also not foreign to Islamic thought:
life is seen as a quest whose object is the discovery of the truth,
including the truth about one's life as a whole. This quest is also
considered an indispensable element in a good life. MacIntyre admits
that this conception of personal identity is not unique to Thomism, but
is a common understanding in traditional societies.

To belong to a civilization is to see one's own personal identity as a
part of the identity of one's civilization. The civilization has a
physical existence in the temporally overlapping corporeal lives of its
members.

The civilization is bound together by common themes found in the
understanding of its members about how they are to justify their
actions, attitudes, statements and beliefs to one another. Thirdly, the
life of a civilization may also be seen as a quest or journey (sayr)
through history in which the individual quests of its members are
crucial.

With regard to the quest to discover the truth, MacIntyre asks:

Through what form of social engagement and learning can the errors which
may obstruct such discovery be brought to light? The first and basic
answers to these questions are those proposed by Socrates. It is only
insofar as someone satisfies the conditions for rendering him or herself
vulnerable to dialectical refutation that that person can come to know
whether and what he or she knows. It is only by belonging to a community
systematically engaged in a dialectical enterprise in which the
standards are sovereign over the contending parties that one can begin
to learn the truth, by first learning the truth about one's own error,
not error from this or that point of view but error as such, the shadow
cast by truth as such: contradiction in respect of utterance about the
virtues.[^5]

Much of this may be repeated with regard to dialogue among
civilizations. The quest for truth and self-transcendence found in
Plato's discussion of dialogue suggests that a person, as a bearer of a
civilization, must engage in the dialogue among civilizations in order
to discover the truth about himself as a member of that civilization
with which he identifies. It is through participation in dialogue that
one's errors may come to light.

To engage in dialogue one becomes accountable to the other. This reaches
a rather extreme form in dialogue among civilizations, for one becomes
accountable to another who is seen as representing attitudes, values and
traditions strange and alien from one's own.

To be accountable in a dialogue of civilizations is to be open to having
to give an account of what one has either said or done, or of the ideas
and practices of the civilization with which one identifies, and then to
be open to having to amplify, explain, defend, and if necessary, either
modify or abandon that account, and in this latter case to begin the
work of supplying a new one in terms the alien can understand, or be
taught to understand.[^6]

As dialogue unfolds, its participants must be ready to abandon the
account of some particular topic they had associated with the
civilization they represent, and accept the superiority of the account
given by representatives of another civilization.

When the dialogue continues, the participants will no longer be pure
representatives of their own civilizations. In fact, the idea that there
are any representatives of a single civilization, a single unspoiled
tradition, ought to be recognized as a potentially dangerous myth in the
modern world because it hinders genuine dialogue, promotes giving
excuses for the deficiencies in our own traditions, and blinds one to
the vision of other civilizations as potential sources for the
enrichment of one's own civilization.

This is especially important for Muslims. Islam came to place dedication
to the Truth (*haqq*) above tribal loyalties. We are not to continue in
established ways simply because we found our fathers doing so.

Like Christian tradition, Muslim traditions are never pure; they always
arise from an attempt to reform given cultures through the teachings of
God's appointed Messenger (SAW).

Similar points are made by the Christian theologian Miroslav volf about
Christianity.[^7] While MacIntyre emphasizes the importance of
tradition, Volf observes that Christianity does not call mankind to any
particular civilization or tradition, but to a series of interrelated
basic commitments-beliefs and practices.

These commitments can be developed into traditions, cultures and perhaps
even civilizations, as they interact with and reform the societies in
which these commitments are made. However, at every step of the way, we
can ask whether what has been wrought cannot be brought into better
accord with the faith. Much the same could be said with regard to Islam.

Our understanding of the dynamics of dialogue among civilizations will
be enhanced through reflection on the differences expressed by Volf and
MacIntyre. MacIntyre holds that a coherent moral stand, as well as
coherent standards of reason, can only be achieved within a tradition.

There is no neutral ground from which we can issue judgments about moral
worth or rational acceptability. MacIntyre expresses grave doubts about
the direction of modern society which seems to have cut itself off from
the traditions which have the most to offer it.

MacIntyre's discussions of the importance of tradition are relevant to
our considerations of dialogue among civilizations because civilization
itself is a social embodiment of one or more traditions.

Dialogue among civilizations is only possible when those who participate
in the dialogue understand their own identities and those of their
civilizations in relation to the traditions from which they emerge in
history.

The emphasis MacIntyre places on tradition leads to an assumption that
conversation with others will be polemical. We engage in conversation in
order to test our own views against those of others. The rivals whom
MacIntyre would speak are not alien civilizations, but the modernists
and postmodernists of Western civilization.

The complaint raised against MacIntyre by Volf is that the glorification
of tradition is both unrealistic and harmful. It is unrealistic because
our cultures and traditions "are not integrated wholes and cannot be
made to be such in contemporary societies... precisely, because we
cannot avoid living in overlapping and rapidly changing social spaces.

In contemporary societies it is impossible to pursue a coherent system
of goods. Instead, we must rest satisfied with holding onto basic
commitments."[^8] The ideal of the single coherent tradition is harmful,
according to Volf, because it would seem to require "an anti-modern and
anti-pluralistic social revolution." Volf comments that such a
revolution would most certainly not 'pay off'.

MacIntyre, however, agrees with Volf that traditions are hybrid, and he
has explicitly renounced the communitarian politics against which Volf
warns. Volf thinks that MacIntyre must want to eliminate the impurity,
the hybridity, of traditions in order to make them into the sort of
coherent systems from which moral and rational evaluations can be
issued.

Against MacIntyre, however, I have argued that a Christian theologian
will not necessarily want to get rid of the "hybridity"- she will be
much more interested in affirming basic Christian commitments in
culturally situated ways than in forging coherent traditions and we will
suspect that hybrid traditions will be more open than coherent
traditions not only to be shaped by these commitments but also to be
enriched by each other.[^9]

MacIntyre would no doubt respond that he has no aspiration to the
elimination of hybridity from traditions. Indeed, the tradition of which
he is most fond, the Thomistic, is admittedly a hybrid of Christian and
Aristotelian thought, with strong influences traceable to Muslim
thought.

Moreover, we should expect that MacIntyre would argue that the 'basic
commitments' Volf finds at the essence of Christianity will mean
different things to different people depending upon the traditions of
thought upon which they draw to interpret them.

This debate enhances our understanding of the dynamics of the dialogue
among civilizations because of the importance of hybridity and
tradition. We cannot understand ourselves or our civilizations without
understanding the traditions that inform them.

If we are to hope to understand other persons or civilizations, we must
inquire into the traditions of the other, as well. This is what we learn
from MacIntyre. What Volf rightly emphasizes, however, is that in order
to understand ourselves, our civilizations, our traditions, other
persons, other civilizations and other traditions, we have to recognize
that none of them are pure, in the sense that none of them represents a
single line of thought.

All are syntheses of various streams of thought and culture. Yet, it is
not mere chaos. There are main streams and there are secondary
influences. Within the mix it is still possible to distinguish
characteristic features of cultures, civilizations and traditions. Our
hybrid thoughts and practices express themselves in ways more or less
typical of a tradition or culture or civilization, with strands woven in
from other sources.

As we step back and look at our conversations we may be able to
recognize patterns in which participants from different civilizations
utilize the difference in perspective to which they are exposed to
transcend themselves in true dialogue.

The role of Islam in the dialogue among civilizations is rather
complicated. Perhaps more than the sources of any other religion, the
sources of Islam, the Qur'an and Sunnah, address themselves to others.
Usually the other is addressed in the form of an invitation to Islam,
and for various reasons, this may seem threatening to the outsider.

Nevertheless, in its essence the invitation can be read as the
initiation of dialogue. The Muslim ummah calls on others to join it, and
it thereby opens itself to the transformation of self brought on by the
inclusion of other peoples, other ways of thinking and living. The ummah
has undergone major historical transformations as a result of its
incorporation of non-Arab peoples.

At the same time, the invitation beckons the other to a self
transformation as well. Even if the other ultimately refuses to accept
Islam, the invitation sets up the fundamental grounds for dialogue. But
Islam itself is not a civilization. Although Islam is a religion, there
is the question of Islamic civilization. There is a nice discussion of
this question in the introduction to Marshall Hodgson's *The venture of
Islam*:

I plead that it has been all too common, in modern scholarship, to use
the terms 'Islam' and 'Islamic' too casually both for what we may call
religion and for the overall society and culture associated historically
with the religion.

I grant that it is not possible nor, perhaps, even desirable to draw too
sharp a line here, for (and not only in Islam) to separate out religion
from the rest of life is partly to falsify it. Nevertheless, the society
and culture called 'Islamic' in the second sense are not necessarily
'Islamic' in the first. Not only have the groups of people involved in
the two cases not always been co-extensive (the culture has not been
simply a 'Muslim culture', a culture of Muslims)-much of what even
Muslims have done as a part of the 'Islamic' civilization can only be
characterized as 'un-Islamic' in the first, religious sense of the word.

One can speak of 'Islamic literature', of 'Islamic art', of 'Islamic
philosophy', even of 'Islamic despotism', but in such a sequence one is
speaking less and less of something that expresses Islam as a
faith.[^10]

The solution suggested by Hodgson is that the term 'Islamic' be used for
that which pertains to the religion, and that 'Islamicate' be used to
describe the society and culture in which the Muslims and Islam are
recognized as prevalent or socially dominant in some sense.

To describe something as Islamicate is not to indicate the geographical
area of its origin, but to that which emerges from the complex of social
relations in which Islam was or is prevalent, particularly the lettered
traditions grounded in Arabic and Persian historically distinctive of
societies of Muslim peoples, societies which included, of course,
non-Muslims.

Thus, Maimonides may be called an Islamicate philosopher and a Jewish
philosopher, but not an Islamic philosopher.

The remarks in the previous sections about the dialogue among
civilizations were made under the assumption that among the
civilizations for which dialogue has been prescribed, are those of the
West and of Islam. When we speak of dialogue with the civilization of
Islam, we are not speaking of the ideal society prescribed by the
religion of Islam for man, but of what has actually evolved among Muslim
peoples.

So, it would be better to speak of Islamicate civilization, in Hodgson's
terminology, than of Islamic civilization. It is through dialogue among
civilizations that Muslims may hope to transform contemporary Islamicate
civilization into something more of an Islamic civilization,
insha'Allah!

In closing, consider the observation of Hodgson:

Muslims are assured in the Qur'an, 'You have become the best community
ever raised up for mankind, enjoining the right and forbidding the
wrong, and having faith in God' (III, 110).Earnest men have taken this
prophecy seriously to the point of trying to mould the history of the
whole world in accordance with it.. Muslims have yet to implement the
Qur'anic prophecy fully in all its implications. But they have
perennially renewed their hopes and efforts to live the godly life not
only as individuals but as a community. In every age, pious Muslims have
reasserted their faith, in the light of new circumstances that have
arisen out of the failures and also the successes of the past. The
vision has never vanished, the venture has never been abandoned; these
hopes and efforts are still vitally alive in the modern world. The
history of Islam as a faith, and of the culture of which it has formed
the core, derives its unity and its unique significance from that vision
and that venture.[^11]

[^1]: Plato, Theatetus, 167-168.

[^2]: Samuel P. Huntington, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking
of the World Order (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997).

[^3]: Robert Grudin, On Dialogue (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1996),
123­-124

[^4]: Alasdair MacIntyre, Three Rival versions of Moral Enquiry:
Encyclopedia, Genealogy and Tradition (Notre Dame: University of Notre
Dame Press, 1990), 196.

[^5]: MacIntyre (1990), 200.

[^6]: MacIntyre (1990), 201.

[^7]: See Miroslav Volf, Exclusion and Embrace: A Theological
Exploration of Identity, Otherness, and Reconciliation (Nashville:
Abingdon, 1996), 208.

[^8]: Volf (1996), 209-210.

[^9]: Volf (1996), 211, also see 52.

[^10]: Marshall G. S. Hodgson, The venture of Islam, vol. 1, (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1974), 57.

[^11]: Hodgson (1974), 71.


