Contemporary Problems Of Christian Theology In Islamic Thought
==============================================================

Theology begins with the question of God. This is true for all the major
theistic theological traditions: Jewish, Christian and Muslim.
Typically, the theologian assumes that his readers believe in the faith
he intends to systematize, defend, and elaborate. He assumes that they
know who God is, and believe in Him. His task is to rationalize this
faith, first be demonstrating God's existence.

In modern Christian theology, however, one finds much hesitation and
doubt about whether this first theological task is at all appropriate.
The particular arguments presented by Maimonides, Aquinas and Ibn Sina
have come under philosophical attack, and more fundamentally, the
methods of demonstration employed by them have been attacked.

Since the Reformation, there has been much doubt about the relevance of
Greek logic and metaphysics to the project of elaborating the Christian
faith.

Similar doubts have become widespread in the Muslim world. Even among
the Shi'ah, who continued to nurture a philosophical or theosophical
tradition, there are many who consider this tradition of thought
inappropriate as a ground of doctrine.

This sort of opposition to philosophy has a long history among the
Shi'ah, and has been mounted by some *'urafa, muhadithin, akhbariyyun,*
and most recently by the *maktab-e tafkik.*[^1] Muslim detractors of
philosophy, however, have not offered very much as an alternative to the
philosophical groundwork for faith, but have tended to assume an innate
acceptance of its basic elements.

The criticism of philosophy among Muslim thinkers is further complicated
by two factors. First, what is generally criticized is the specific
philosophical tradition in Islamic thought stemming from the works of
Ibn Sina, Sohravardi and Sadr al-Muta'alihin.

This leaves open the possibility of a philosophical systematization of
the faith along other lines. So, the second complication is the
readiness of many critics of philosophy to elaborate philosophical
theologies of their own.

The classic example of this movement is Ghazali's repudiation of
philosophy and his own philosophical elaboration of his creed, replete
with proofs for the existence of God, for His uniqueness, and for
various divine attributes.

Likewise, sufis in the tradition of Ibn 'Arabi have entered into a
philosophical dialogue with peripatetic philosophy in which they have
offered their own system of thought as a rational alternative to that of
the philosophers, while retaining the methods of demonstration and many
of the concepts employed by their opponents. Two brilliant examples of
this trend are 'Abd al-Rahman Jami's Al-Durrah al-Fakhirah and the
correspondence between Khwajah Nasir al-Din Tusi and Sadr al-Din Qinawi.

However, because of the ongoing and ever increasing confrontation with
Western thought and culture, doubts are raised about the entire
enterprise of rational systematic theology.

These doubts have a specific significance in the Western world due to
the historical movement from the Reformation, through the Enlightenment,
to modern and post-modern thought. In the world of Islam, on the other
hand, the significance of such doubts is radically altered by the fact
that they are a foreign import in many ways at odds with the entire
tradition of Islamic theology.

It is true that some Muslims have demanded reliance on the Qur'an and
ahadith without the interference of rational demonstration in ways
strikingly similar to the demands of Christian reformers, but the
evolution of the rejection of philosophical theology in Christian
thought has led to a style of Christian theology that has no counterpart
in Islam; and additionally, the philosophical grounds for rejecting any
form of rational theology in the West are to be found in schools of
thought as diverse as existentialism and scientific realism, all of
which enter discussions among Muslims as aliens.

Philosophical reflection, at least in a broad sense not limited to any
specific school, has seemed to most Muslim theologians to be encouraged
by the Qur'an and ahadith, especially as interpreted by the Shi'ah.

The Qur'an is replete with exhortations to reflect upon its signs
(*ayat*), such as  
 “***Behold! How repeatedly we display the signs that they may
understand...” (6:65)***,

And remonstrations against those who fail to reason, such as

***“Indeed, We have created for hell many of the jinn and the men; they
have hearts with which they do not understand...” (7:179).***

Because of the abundance of such verses,[^2] it becomes impossible to
justify a thorough anti-intellectualism on religious grounds in the
context of Islamic culture. Muslim thinkers have not only taken
encouragement from Islam to engage in intellectual pursuits, they have
understood such *ayat* as those mentioned above as a divine invitation
to employ philosophical reflection for the purpose of understanding the
Qur'an and ahadith.

Wisdom is prized by Muslims because the Qur'an itself proclaims,  
***“He grants wisdom to whomever He wills, and he who has been granted
wisdom has been given abundant good; and none shall mind it save those
endowed with wisdom…” (2:269).***

Muslims may differ over how the term *Hikmah* is to be interpreted in
this ayah, and even if most will agree that it does not refer to the
specific tradition of philosophical thought that has emerged through the
centuries in Islamic thought, few will deny that intellectual reflection
is accorded great religious value in Islam.

Likewise, there is a veritable ocean of narrations attributed to the
Prophet (SAW) and Imams (A) extolling the intellectual virtues of
wisdom, knowledge and reason. For example, it is reported that the
Prophet (SAW) said, "The virtue of knowledge is more beloved to Allah
than the virtue of worship."[^3]

As with the Qur'an, the narrations both encourage the use of the
intellect and pose problems for philosophical reflection. Muslim sages
have made use of philosophical terms for the rational investigation of
religion, and they have used terms drawn from the religious sources to
articulate their philosophical reflections.[^4] They have been inspired
by the Qur'an and ahadith to develop various philosophical ideas, and
they have used philosophical ideas drawn from a variety of sources as
aids to the understanding of scripture.

In the context of this sacred value placed on knowledge and the
intellect, there remains plenty of room for discussion about what kinds
of knowledge and wisdom are to be valued, what the intellect is and what
are its functions.

Muslim critics of philosophy may argue that philosophy has been used
inappropriately to interpret scripture, or that it is sorely limited and
must be supplemented by imagination to provide any understanding of
religious topics, or that its demonstrations serve only as allusions to
the divine. These sorts of points arise from within Islamic culture
where they have been and continue to be debated.

The Western critiques of natural theology have an entirely different
flavor. Islamic culture has not produced a concept of *iman* like that
of Christian faith as the latter is taken to stand independent of and
beyond reason and knowledge.

Islamic culture has not produced any sort of theological anti­realism of
the sort debated in Western circles. Islamic thought has not given rise
to the atheism and agnosticism that have emerged from Christian culture
and whose religious significance continues to be discussed by Christian
theologians and philosophers.

For these and many other reasons, Western theological concerns arrive on
the shores of the world of Islam as an invasion. The Muslim response
often seems as pointless as that of a person who argues with the
newscasters on television.

Despite all the talk about interfaith dialogue, the dynamics of the ways
in which the world of Islam confronts the West force Muslim
intellectuals to consider Western ideas very seriously, even if the
engagement is accompanied by anxiety and apprehension, while Western
thinkers are generally quite content to ignore what goes on in the
intellectual third world.

Islamic theological reflection is shunted off as a specialty item for
connoisseurs of esoterica. Dialogue is thus stifled, not because of ill
will per se, but because there is no demand and no pressing need for
Westerners to listen to Muslims, while Muslims cannot avoid listening to
the Western discussions with which the entire world seems to
reverberate.

One reaction this situation has provoked among some Muslims is a retreat
into tradition. The glories of the past are recounted and redoubled with
a firm intention to abandon the satanic modern world in favor of a
puritanical return to the pristine Islam of days gone by.

This reaction is resisted by Muslims who would prove that Islam is
perfectly well suited to serve as an ideology for the development of
modern societies. There can be no escape from the repetitive
counterpoint of these attitudes in social-religious thinking at least
until the impact of Western thought in the Islamic world is sufficiently
understood, accepted for what it is, and met by constructive critique
and synthesis in harmony with the evolution of contemporary Islamic
theology.  
 The heart and soul of the Muslim world is thoroughly imbued with
religion. If Muslims are not to lose heart and lose their souls, the
task of rational reflection on religion must be taken up again with full
awareness of all the currents of thought that wash across the
contemporary world of Islam.

The West must be understood not only as cultural invader, but as itself
tormented by the twists of modern and postmodern thought that have led
it to the verge of nihilism in more than one guise. In order for Muslims
to orient themselves in the contemporary world, religion must be seen
not as something to be merely defended, but as offering a way forward
with valuable guidance for all of humanity.

We cannot ourselves be saved unless we can invite the entire world to
salvation, and before we can offer anything inviting, we need to
understand the differences in our cultural and intellectual climates as
well as the common problems they face.

The invitation to salvation extended by Muslims need not take the form
of offering a choice between death and Islam; what I mean by this is
that we should not take the attitude that for the Muslim invitation to
salvation to be successful it must result in formal conversion to the
religion of Islam as ordained by Allah, subhana wa ta'ala, through His
final Prophet (SAW).

The Qur'an itself tells us to address the People of the Book in an
effort to come to a common word upon which we can agree.[^5] The common
word to which we invite the People of the Book must itself be understood
as a means of salvation, at least in the sense that it offers a way out
of the wretchedness faced by those who would deny it.

In order for us to be saved, we must be able to understand from what it
is we wish to be saved, and how religion may save us from it. From an
eschatological point of view, salvation means escape from the fire of
hell, but the power of this image should not cause us to neglect the
worldly failings which culminate in hell and are presaged in the
ugliness and cruelty the world too often manifests.

Despite all its secularism, the Western world is the inheritor of
Christendom. Its values are rooted in references to divinity. The United
States, for example, was built on foundations laid by those who had
attempted to convene theocracies in the new colonies.

So, the loss of certainty about God, let alone the idea of the death of
God, threatens to undermine the humanity of Western man, unless some
foundation for human values can be found to replace the theological
structures many would be happy to see left in ruins.

This is reason enough for some Christians to seek to preserve their
faith in God. But while it may provide sufficient motivation for the
attempt, it cannot by itself provide answers to the intellectual doubts
that pervade contemporary Western culture.

In addition to the doubts about God raised by philosophers primarily in
criticisms of the proofs for His existence, the doubts raised by social
critics have had a greater influence on the secularization of Western
culture.

While Voltaire (1694-­1778) accepted that the concept of God was needed
to maintain social order in his remark that if God did not exist it
would be necessary to create Him, the Russian anarchist Mikhail Bakunin
(1814-1876) exclaimed that if God did exist it would be necessary to
destroy Him, because so much oppression had been carried out in His
Name.  
 If Voltaire's remark suggests that God may be little more than a
convenient fiction, Bakunin suggests that the fiction may be quite
inconvenient. The Marxist critique of religion has also been accepted by
many who are skeptical of other aspects of Marxist doctrine.

Today some feminists object to the concept of God as a prop for
patriarchy, and homosexuals complain that prejudice against them is
maintained by reference to God. In general, such thinkers quite
correctly realize that an orientation toward God serves as a constraint
on the satisfaction of various human desires, and is incompatible with
what many consider to be of utmost value.

Western thought is caught between two competing claims to moral
allegiance. On the one hand, there is the transcendent God Who demands
absolute obedience as the ultimate authority. On the other hand, there
is a secular ethos based on the values of human freedom and
self-determination.

Western religious liberals attempt an awkward compromise that would
coerce the divine will to conform to humanistic values. Moral direction
is derived from the human, and then the transcendent God is called in
and would be forced into complicity. He is allowed to stand above the
world, but not to interfere with human judgments about what is right and
wrong. Deist theology is at least honest about this.

In Muslim culture, on the other hand, reference to God does not occur in
the context of the doubts and secular values that plague the West, or at
least not to the same extent. The major form in which secular values
come into conflict with Islam is in the form of nationalism.

Muslim intellectuals often see themselves as Arabs or Iranians or
Indonesians or whatever, and only then as Muslims. Sometimes Islam is
only accepted as an expression of national culture. They seek direction
in life in terms of the historical development of their people or
nation, and relegate religion to the private sphere of personal
spirituality and ceremonies, on the model of what they perceive to be
the role of religion in technologically advanced societies.

The conflict is between religious and secular ideology, which usually is
discussed in terms of the scope of religion, but there is little of the
direct confrontation with God common in the West. There is no death of
God theology among Muslims.

Muslim modernists may advance harsh criticisms of Islam as it has been
understood within their traditions, but they are not willing to extend
the criticism to God Himself. Western angst about God has not taken root
in the world of Islam, *alhamdu-lil-Allah*, and questions about how to
justify belief in God, which have figured so prominently in recent
Western philosophy of religion, appear curiously irrelevant to the
primary theological concerns of Muslims.

Nevertheless, Muslim theology must begin to consider seriously the
problems of Western philosophy of religion if Islam is to be presented
as a way of salvation for all people, including those of the West.

We can no longer rest content with the traditional proofs because the
standards of reason to which they appeal are no longer universally
accepted. This does not mean that traditional Islamic theology and
philosophy can or should be simply swept aside; rather the issues of
theology require a more fundamentally critical treatment than they are
usually given.

We need to begin by considering how the basic concepts of theology,
concepts of God, man and the world, are treated in Islam and in
Christian culture, and how rational reflection on these concepts and
their different treatments in the Islamic and Christian traditions can
help us to clear a path to theological understanding.

This means that our standards of rationality themselves must be subject
to critical review and evaluation. The roots of the most profound doubts
about religious reason lie in the success of the empirical sciences and
technology as they have developed in the West.

When it is observed that the standards of reasoning employed in the
sciences differ markedly from those used by theologians, it is natural
to wonder if the former cannot suffice for all human purposes.

The vindication of theological reasoning requires an explanation of how
the progress of the natural sciences can be justified in its own terms.
Theology can no longer afford to ignore the philosophy of science.
Religion declares that God is the creator of the natural world. So, the
methods that have been successfully used to unlock the secrets of the
natural world must be understood as revealing the workings of His
creation, at least on some level.

What is needed, as Seyyed Hossein Nasr puts it, is a sacred science.[^6]
Until a way is found to elaborate an understanding of the natural
sciences as sacred, as governed by standards of reasoning which are a
branch of the more encompassing methods of rational reflection that
apply to theology and philosophy as well as to mathematics, physics,
medicine and cognitive science, theology will remain susceptible to the
charge that its concerns are peripheral, or may be safely dismissed.

Furthermore, since theology must draw upon the imagination as well as
reason, it must show how its imaginative work can enlighten and deepen
the dry findings of empirical research and applied mathematics.

The elaboration of the sciences as sacred does not require an uncritical
acceptance of all that has been accomplished by secular science; to the
contrary, it is through critical appraisal that the call for sacred
science is to be vindicated.

The program, however, must aim at integration rather than isolation and
protection, for the strategy of isolating and protecting religion from
critical confrontation with other areas of human knowledge has been
largely responsible for the marginalization of religion in Western
societies.

Traditional formulations of theology, whether Jewish, Christian, Muslim
or Hindu, have not limited themselves to discussions of divinity; they
have included cosmology as well. The theological affirmation of sacred
cosmology must be regained in the encounter with modern science for
theology to remain sound, for classical theological cosmologies have
always freely made use of the current sciences of their times without
entering into the details of astronomical data.

Often, more than the basic outlines of religious cosmologies formulated
under the assumption of a geocentric universe can be revised to accord
with post-Copernican theories, because religious cosmologies are mostly
concerned with the world as the creation and sign of God, regardless of
its physical shape.

Nevertheless, the physical shape of the cosmos assumed in the past was
taken to have a symbolic value in harmony with the religious point of
view, and this has not yet been recovered.

The legacy of theology is no less one of anthropology than cosmology. If
the modern natural sciences have posed a challenge to theology's concern
with cosmology, the modern human sciences threaten its anthropology.
Indeed, anti-religious sentiments are much more prevalent among
psychologists and sociologists than among physical scientists.[^7]

Islam portrays man as a theomorphic being who due to negligence has
fallen astray from his divine aim, and who has accepted a covenant with
God by means of which he may obtain divine guidance to his own felicity
through the reminders sent by God with His prophets (may the peace and
benedictions of Allah be with Muhammad and his folk, and with them).

This religious anthropology is not merely descriptive; it has practical
implications for how we are to live, how we are to orient ourselves, how
we may truly serve God. Morals and politics thus become as central to
theology as its more theoretical claims about human and divine nature.

Here religion must confront the social critics mentioned earlier. If
they have raised doubts about God on the basis of secular human values,
the theologian must find a way to introduce religious values.

In Islam this introduction has two dimensions with infinite
ramifications: the exterior and the interior, *zahir* and *batin*, whose
first division is that of *shari'ah* and *tariqah. Shari'ah* is the
exterior way, which includes Islamic law.

The law itself is infused with values, for it tells us how we are to
conduct ourselves in worship and in our dealings with others.

It points toward an ideal of human flourishing in religious community
under divine covenant in which the individual aspires to the complete
submission of his or her own self in conformity with the law. Attention
to the detail of the law is not a cold legalism by which the right to
salvation is purchased, but a reflection of the pious heart seeking the
completeness of submission to God.

This means that the law itself is not to be understood as a mere canon
of regulations, but as infused with value as the outward realization of
the inner quest for the divine.

The inner quest itself is called *tariqah*, which, like *shari'ah* also
means way or path. The verbal synonymy of these two terms indicates the
inseparability of the inner and outward aspects of religion: it is
logically impossible to walk down one without treading upon the other,
for both are merely different names or aspects of divine guidance.

The inner quest cannot take shape except within the framework of the
outward precepts of religion; and the divine law becomes an empty
formalism unless its observance is the outward expression of *taqwa*,
the God-wariness described by Him, the Exalted, as the best provision
for spiritual wayfaring:

وَتَزَوَّدُوا فَإِنَّ خَيْرَ الزَّادِ التَّقْوَىٰ

***“And make provision, and verily the best provision is taqwa.”
(2:197)***

The inner way or *tariqah* is a quest with various stages along which
one must pass, and the arrival at each station requires acquisition of a
specific virtue. Here the world appears as the ground to be covered, the
battlefield for the greatest jihad, and the struggle against the self.

Man is understood not as a static essence, but as in a dynamic condition
of transformation, or, in the terminology of Sadr al-Muta'alihin,
substantial motion, whose human culmination is the perfected human
being, insan kamil, the polished mirror of God, for whom the world
itself is also transformed so that God is seen in all things.

The second division of exterior/interior involves the recognition that
*shari'ah* and *tariqah* themselves each have exterior and interior
aspects. For *shari'ah* there is the external form of the law and the
inward submission to it.

The inward submission to the law is perfected through *tariqah*, whose
outward expression takes the form of the spiritual instructions given by
the guide to the aspirant and whose inward form is the spiritual
wayfaring itself, the passing through stations and states and the
acquisition of virtue.

So, we find that Islam, like Judaism and Christianity, teaches of God
and man and the world. Its theology includes cosmology and anthropology.
The anthropological aspect has both theoretical and practical
dimensions, and the practical has both exterior and interior through
each of which, especially the latter, the concepts of God, the world and
humanity are informed and deepened.

It is through this circle of ever deepening insight that Islam presents
its own perspective on the most fundamental questions posed by man in
every age. The questions are answered by drawing the questioner into a
whirlpool of rational reflection, insight, value and practice.

On the social level, the drawing which gives unity to the Muslim
community is symbolized by the circumambulation of the Ka'abah during
Hajj. This is where the individual as well as the community focus
themselves. So too, theological work must begin with its orientation
toward God, circle about the related concepts of humanity and the world,
and end, finally, with reference to Him, glory be to Him!

Theology presents itself in two modes. First, theology is doctrinal. It
elaborates and systematizes creedal statements. Secondly, theology is
suggestive. It recommends the acceptance of its creedal statements.

We could put this in another way by contrasting descriptive theology
with prescriptive or normative theology. Descriptive or doctrinal
theology is comparatively straightforward. Here we are busy with the
attempt to understand the teachings of a religion, or the teachings of
various interpreters of the religion, its theologians, exegetes and
gnostic.

Normative theology is more difficult, because the standards of
assessment immediately come into question. Traditionally the normative
weight of theological reflection has been sought in the force of logical
necessity.

One must accept the claims of the theologian or suffer the eternal pain
of contradiction. Whoever fails to accept the results of theological
reasoning is threatened with the loss of his humanity, for humanity is
defined in terms of the reason upon which the theologian rests his case.

This sort of approach seems offensively authoritarian to modern
sensibilities, although why this should be so is seldom considered.
Mathematicians and philosophers often present their results as the
dictates of more or less pure reason, and no offense is taken, not even
by the most liberal of Christians.

So why should anyone be insulted or offended when the same sorts of
methods are applied to religion? The answer to this question will be
found when it is understood that the standards of reasoning employed by
traditional theology have become subject of dispute. The sorts of
arguments and the methods of reasoning about theological topics whose
validity has been considered obvious in the Islamic traditions of
theological reflection often fail to persuade those nurtured in modern
Western culture.

Insistence on the obviousness or self-evidence of our own standards of
reasoning provides no remedy to this impasse. Our theological writings
must offer those who do not share our views a way in, and we will not be
able to provide such a port of entry until we become familiar with the
intellectual geography of the points of embarkation of those whom we
would have enter into conversation with us.

If there is no common ground of sufficient breadth for meaningful
discussion to take place, such ground will have to be constructed. Our
language and the ways in which we use it to express our rational
reflections will have to be expanded to the point that we are able to
explain the views we oppose and why we oppose them, and at the same time
are able to recast the claims of our own traditions of Islamic thought
in forms accessible and attractive to others.

If we are to accomplish this task of constructing a normative Islamic
theology through which the world may be invited to salvation, even
though the world is largely intoxicated with modern or postmodern
secular Western culture, a good place for us to begin work is by looking
at the problems of Christian theology.

Christian theology has been attempting to respond to modern currents of
Western thought for a long time. We should be willing to learn from its
successes and failures. At the same time, many of the problems of
Christian theology are familiar to Muslims. How are we to explain divine
knowledge, evil, the creation of the world out of nothing, life after
death, and most of the other facets of our creed? For most of the topics
to be found in Islamic theology, discussions may be found among
Christian philosophers and theologians.

These common problems provide a point of contact. But in order to build
upon these common issues to the point that Muslim theologians can
address the concerns of those immersed in secular culture, the aim in
reading what modern Christians have to say about the traditional
problems of theology must be to try to see why the traditional arguments
from their own tradition have come to seem inadequate, and what steps
they deem appropriate to remedy these inadequacies.

It is of no use to come to the problems of Christian theology with the
smug confidence that they can all be solved by means of the resources of
the Islamic traditions of kalam, falsafah and ‘irfan.

Likewise, there is no guarantee that the nation in possession of the
most valuable natural resources will be able to effectively use those
resources in order to pursue its own political and economic objectives.

We must learn how to use our natural and intellectual resources
effectively in the contexts of the contemporary economic, political and
intellectual environments, and if we are to do this as Muslims,
efficiency is to be measured in units of accordance and submission to
the divine will. Neither economic power nor intellectual strength has
any value for the Muslim unless he is able to place them at His service.

Once we come to understand what is novel in modern Christian treatments
of traditional problems of theology, and why these novel elements have
been adopted, our own Islamic theology will be enriched, even if only to
the extent of incorporating a sufficient amount of new vocabulary to
refute the modern ideas we find unacceptable.

This is a risky business, and its risks need to be faced
conscientiously. If we are to be successful at it, we must remain
critical at every stage of the process. No doubt there will be some
unfortunate souls who, in the attempt to understand modern Christian
thought about contemporary theological issues, will be swept away in the
currents of thought that dominate the West.

The worst way to learn is through repetition of the mistakes of others.
Our learning of modern Western approaches to theological issues must be
one whereby we become conversant with the language of modern religious
concerns to the extent that we are able to express our own ideas in the
new language.

It is of no use to repeat the expressions of the language of modern
Christian theology with an Islamic accent. The language must be
mastered, and fluency in the language of modern Christian theology
requires an effort no less than that needed to master a new language.
The stage at which learning occurs through the repetition of stock
phrases has long since past.

In creative writing, the phrase finding one's voice is used for the
process of learning to master the techniques of writing to the point
that one is able to develop one's own style and themes. Muslim
theologians now have to find their own voices to express their concerns
and views. It is not enough even to master the language of modern
thought to the point of professional proficiency. The pen must be
wielded with a flourish and beauty.

However, as Muslims we have no desire to join the cacophonous choir of
so many modern writers who seek their own voices for the sake of
glorying in their own individualities. Our aim is to use our newly found
voices to echo the refrains of the eternal divine message, so that the
attention of our listeners turns from our voices to the message it
carries.

So, the first step is to find common problems. This is easy. Next, we
are to read contemporary Christian responses to these problems in order
to gain fluency in the language of modern religious thought in the
Western world. This is difficult.

After that (or simultaneously), we can try to begin to understand the
new topics and problems and approaches to them to be found among
contemporary Christian thinkers: environmental ethics, the social
gospel, feminism, various topics of pastoral theology, process theology,
reformed epistemology, anti-realist theology, and much more.

No matter how difficult this is, it is absolutely necessary for Muslims
to begin exploring these issues. We need to begin the task of trying to
formulate answers to the questions our children will soon be asking.

In order for those answers to have the degree of sophistication
necessary to satisfy young inquisitive minds, the urgency of these
questions in modern culture must be properly appreciated, the language
in which these questions are framed must be one in which we are fluent,
and we must be sufficiently well grounded in our own traditions so that
we are able to utilize that fluency to articulate answers to the new
questions grounded in the glorious Qur'an and the teachings of the
Ahl-al-Bayt (peace be with them), and we take refuge in Him, the
Exalted, to preserve us from error.

[^1]: This school of thought is current among a group of Shi'i scholars
who argue for the separation (tafqlq) of theology from philosophy.

[^2]: For a small sampling, see (2:219), (2:242), (2:266), (3:191),
(6:98), (7:176), (7:179), (9:81), (9:122), (10:24), (12:2), (13:3),
(16:11), (30:8), (39:42), (59:21).

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 1, p. 167.

[^4]: See Seyyed Hossein Nasr, "The Qur'an and ahadith as source and
inspiration of Islamic philosophy," in History of Islamic Philosophy (2
vols.), Seyyed Hossein Nasr and Oliver Leaman, eds., (London: Routledge,
1996), 27-39.

[^5]: (3:63).

[^6]: Seyyed Hossein Nasr, The Need for a Sacred Science (Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1993).

[^7]: See David M. Wulff, Psychology of Religion (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1991), 204f.


