The Relationship Between Philosophy And Theology In The Postmodern Age
======================================================================

When I was a student at a Catholic high school in Queens, New York, I
was taught that although philosophy is the mother of the sciences, she
is also the handmaid of theology. Sometimes the dialogue between
philosophy and theology may have seemed to have taken the form of orders
given by the theological mistress to her erudite but obedient maid, but
that was a long time ago, if ever it was at all.

The idea that philosophy should be in service to theology has been
rejected in the West by most philosophers, and many theologians, at
least since the Enlightenment period of European thought. But instead of
bringing about the emancipation of philosophy, the result has been to
place philosophy at the service of her children, the natural and human
sciences.

Scientific realists would determine being itself by the ultimate
dictates of science. So, where does this leave the relationship between
philosophy and theology? Many see it as forever broken off, and many
Christian theologians think that this is to the advantage of theology.
As they see it, philosophy was never a very good servant, for it was
always raising more problems than it solved.

Of course, this attitude is not unknown to Muslim scholars. It is easy
to find Muslims who are suspicious of philosophy, especially Islamic
philosophy; there are even those, like Ghazali, who would accuse
philosophy of blasphemy. Others would be satisfied if philosophy would
mind its own business and stay out of the way of theological doctrine.

Philosophy, however, refuses to be ignored. It has a way of making
itself noticed even by those theologians who wish it would just go away.
Philosophy accuses those who neglect her of lacking reason, and since it
proclaims that reason is the difference between man and the other
animals, this accusation amounts to the charge that those who neglect
her are subhuman.

So, after the rise and fall of positivism, after philosophy had been
declared to be a servant of the natural sciences, assigned to clean up
left over questions, philosophy arrives in the new dress of philosophy
of religion, coyly proffering her own questions for the theologian. On
the surface, most or many of the questions are those that have been
familiar to theologians for centuries: How can the existence of God be
proved? How can God know what free humans will do? Can God make a stone
so large that He Himself cannot lift it? How can the eternal God know
the temporal material world? And so forth.

While on the surface, these appear to be the same questions familiar to
theologians since reason was first applied to religion, once one becomes
familiar with the contemporary discussions of these questions it becomes
obvious that the philosophy of religion is not as innocent as she may
seem. Her questions are not those of a naive girl seeking to understand
her faith as best she can.

Philosophy has served the sciences for years, and its servitude to the
sciences has required countless compromises with humanism, materialism,
physicalism, naturalism, and other ideologies antagonistic to religion.

When it raises its questions for the theologians, the arguments of all
these ideologies are ready and waiting for whatever response the
theologians may offer. If the theologian responds by rehearsing the
standard discussions to be found in traditional texts, whether Christian
or Islamic, he will be accused of ignorance and irrelevance to
contemporary concerns.

The philosophy of religion is by no means merely another name for
rational theology as traditionally understood, for the very standards of
reason which are applied to theological issues have changed. If the
theologian is not to be caught off guard, he must be prepared to
question these standards, and thus, to adopt an unfamiliar hypercritical
stance toward the cannons of reason themselves.

The dialogue between philosophy and theology today is not simply an
affair between the questioning mind of the philosopher and the pious
spirit of the theologian. Every question comes with unspoken
expectations of what sort of answer will be considered suitable. Every
search for a reason presupposes a standard of explanation.

The expectations and presuppositions that inform the philosophy of
religion are deeply colored by the entire history of recent Western
thought. Since many of those who write and publish in the area of
philosophy of religion have been trained in analytic philosophy, the
standards of analytic philosophy, which are influenced to a great degree
by empiricism, positivism, pragmatism, and naturalism, play an important
but subtle role in this field.

The situation is complicated by the fact that many philosophers of
religion, and even more Christian theologians, are influenced more by
what is often called "continental philosophy" than by analytic
philosophy.

Most of the important continental philosophers have been from France or
Germany, while the majority of analytic philosophers have taught at
American or British universities. While philosophy in the U.S. has been
dominated by analytic thought throughout most of the twentieth century,
over the last ten or fifteen years, continental thought has come to play
a more prominent role in American philosophy.

What is emerging is a "world philosophy", but one from which the Islamic
world is largely excluded. The reason for this exclusion is not because
of some conspiracy to suppress Islamic thought, but because we Muslims
have not seriously attempted to enter the discussion. If we are to enter
the discussion, we must beware that it takes place in what is often
hostile territory, in the context of expectations, presuppositions and
standards of reasoning many of which are quite foreign to those found in
the Islamic sciences.

These issues must be kept in mind before the Muslim scholar attempts to
survey the questions contemporary philosophy of religion poses for
theology, where here, and in what follows, theology is to be understood
as including not merely kalam, but 'irfan nazari, religious ethics, and
even some discussions of fiqh and usul.

What appears to be a dialogue between a philosopher who relies on pure
reason alone and a theologian is in reality a complex discussion about
philosophy, the sciences, theology and the various ideologies which have
influenced these broad areas of intellectual endeavor.

Perhaps the attitude of the Muslim scholar to the complexity of the
situation will be one of dismissal; the Muslim theologian might come to
the conclusion that the philosophy of religion is the product of Western
intellectual attitudes toward science and religion and does not apply to
the Islamic world.

The conversation between philosophy and theology is really a
conversation between a Western philosopher and a Christian theologian.
However, we ignore the philosophy of religion at our own peril. The
ideas and attitudes that inform the philosophy of religion are not
confined within the walls of a few universities in distant foreign
lands.

They are part of the Western cultural atmosphere whose volume is so
large that it will find itself invading the Islamic world, or rather has
already started invading, whether anyone wants it to or not. The
international commerce in ideas-mostly Western ideas-cannot be slowed,
let alone stopped.

Faced with a trade imbalance, attempts may be made to preserve local
markets, but ultimately the only successful policy will be one in which
locally manufactured products of export quality are made widely
available. Since there are so many different kinds of Western
intellectual products on the market, we Muslims cannot hope to gain our
market share in all fields any time soon.

However, we can hope to compete aggressively in those areas in which
Islamic thought has demonstrated its strength in the past, and build on
this to expand into other areas. In order to compete in the
international market of ideas, Islamic thought must not only answer the
doubts raised by various Western thinkers, it must do so in a way that
is distinctively Islamic.

We cannot simply look at the answers Christians have given and then
search for an appropriate ahadith to make them seem Islamic. Serious
full time work has to be done to begin to formulate contemporary Islamic
theologies which are in harmony with the tradition of Islamic sciences,
especially kalam, falsafah, and 'irfan.

With these points in mind, we can turn to some examples of the sorts of
questions raised by the philosophy of religion for the theologian.

One of the deepest areas to be surveyed is that of epistemology. This is
also an area to which medieval thinkers devoted less attention than our
contemporaries. How do we know that God exists? The traditional answer
given by Christians as well as Muslims was that we can formulate sound
deductive proofs whose premises are self-evident and whose conclusions
state the existence of God.

The problem with this answer is that many of the premises that seemed
self-evident enough in the past have now come to be questioned.

Consider, for example, the role of the principle that an actual infinity
of causes is impossible. A number of Western philosophers, physicists
and mathematicians have come to doubt this principle. In defense of the
principle, an important book has been written in which some of the ideas
of Muslim philosophers are given attention: William Lane Craig's The
Kalam Cosmological Argument.[^1]

This is one of the rare cases in which ideas from the Islamic tradition
(particularly those of Abi Hamid Ghazali) have been the subject of
discussion in the contemporary philosophy of religion. The continued
discussion of this work in scholarly journals sixteen years after the
publication of the book is testimony to its significance.

The important point is that what has seemed for centuries to be a
self-evident principle is now the topic of vigorous debate. At first
glance it seems that what we have here is a case of a principle of
reason defended in Islamic philosophy and theology pitted against the
modern skeptics of the West.

If we look closer, however, we find that the principle has undergone its
own evolution within the tradition of Islamic philosophy. By the time we
get to Sadr al-Muta'allihin the principle is limited to series of actual
causes of existence occurring simultaneously.

The question that needs to be addressed here is how the unqualified
principle came to be qualified in Islamic philosophy, for the
unqualified principle was also taken by some (such as Ghazali) to be a
self-evident principle of reason, and the version of the principle still
defended by Craig is not subject to the qualification of simultaneity!

In any case, what we find here is rather typical of the philosophy of
religion. Philosophers impressed with the principles employed in the
natural sciences or mathematics raise doubts about what had been
considered to be self-evident or nearly self-evident principles which
had been used as premises of proofs for the existence of God.

The result is an epistemological problem. What was once claimed to be
known is now doubted. The doubts raised are not unanswerable, but the
formulation of answers requires a fair degree of sophistication,
including a certain amount of familiarity with current physics and
mathematics. William Lane Craig and Quentin Smith take up the debate
about the cosmological argument and the new physics in a more recent
book: Theism, Atheism and Big Bang Cosmology.[^2]

Debates about the traditional proofs for the existence of God have led
some to question whether proofs are really necessary at all for rational
religious belief. Alvin Plantinga has become famous among philosophers
of religion for his defense of what he calls "reformed
epistemology".[^3]

Plantinga claims that for the devout Christian, belief in the existence
of God is properly basic, that is, it doesn't need to be proved. He
claims that the founder of the Reformed Church, John Calvin, held a
similar view.[^4]

Calvin was skeptical about the abilities of sinful man to reason his way
to the existence of God, but Catholic philosophers, who have more faith
in human reason, have also been impressed with Plantinga's position. The
Catholic response to Plantinga is especially interesting because in the
Shi'i tradition there has been a similar respect for the powers of
reason.

I suspect that in the long run, the responses of Catholic and Muslim
philosophers and theologians will be similar in being diverse.[^5] Some
of the Catholic thinkers who have researched the issue have defended a
foundationalist epistemology, but the majority has sought to find some
common ground with the sort of view defended by Plantinga.

Another major figure who has defended the rationality of religious
belief without reliance on the traditional proofs for the existence of
God is William Alston.[^6] Alston turns the modern skepticism against
atheism, claiming that we have no more reason to trust sense experience
than we have to trust our religious intuitions.

Since the beliefs based on sense experience are considered to be
rational, the same must be granted of religious beliefs. Alston's work,
like Plantinga's, has generated volumes of criticism and responses, most
of which focus on such epistemological questions as the nature of
knowledge and rationality, faith and belief, or evidence and
justification.

Other defenders of the Christian faith have argued that the doubts
raised by Hume (1711-1776) and Kant (1724-1804) about the rationality of
religious belief can be answered through an examination of the standards
of reasoning employed in the natural sciences today, which are far from
what Hume and Kant imagined.[^7]

In these discussions it is the philosophy of science to which
theologians must turn in order to demonstrate to those who have faith in
science but not in religion that their bias is not dictated by their
fidelity to the rational standards of the empirical sciences.

In many of the discussions of the rationality of religious faith, the
concept of religious experience plays a pivotal role. This is especially
true of the writings of reformed epistemologists and of William Alston,
but of many others as well, including Gary Gutting,[^8] Richard
Swinburne[^9] and John Hick.[^10]

The concept of religious experience is one which is especially foreign
to Islamic thought, for it emerged in Europe and the United States in
the writings of Friedrich Schleiermacher and William James as a result
of the pressure religious thinkers felt exerted by the legacies of Hume
and Kant, romanticism and empiricism.

Even the very term "religious experience" is difficult to translate into
Farsi or Arabic. The most commonly accepted translation seems to be
tajrobeh-ye dini, but tajrobeh has the odor of the laboratory and a
sense of repetition, which is absent from the Western concept.

Other terms which might be suggested each have their own problems, for
example, idrak, shenakht, and ma'rifat each are appropriate only when
some reality is successfully apprehended, while the term "religious
experience" is supposed to be neutral as to whether it is illusory or
veridical.

It is to be understood on analogy with scientific data, and just as the
scientist uses reason to judge which of competing hypotheses can best
explain the available empirical data, Gary Gutting and Richard Swinburne
hold that the hypothesis of God's existence can best explain the data of
one's inner religious feelings and intuitions.

Alston and Plantinga, on the other hand, claim that for the believer,
the proposition that God exists is more analogous to the scientist's
presumption that there is a physical world to be investigated and about
which empirical data convey information.

They hold that religious feeling and intuitions, including mystical
visions, provide data that convey information about God and His relation
to the believer, information that presupposes the existence of God.

To say that according to Alston and Plantinga religious experience
presupposes the existence of God does not mean that for these
philosophers God's existence is a mere assumption, for they hold that
the assumption is warranted, and that its warrant can be demonstrated
through a rational examination of the relation between the assumption
and the sorts of religious experiences that are important to Christian
life.

The focus on religious experience has led some philosophers, such as
William Proudfoot,[^11] Steven Katz[^12] and Nelson Pike,[^13] to an
epistemological examination of the reports of the mystics. They ask such
questions as whether a meaningful distinction can be made between what
appears in the heart of the mystic and how he interprets this
appearance, whether mystical appearances must be analogous to sensory
appearances, whether mystics of various traditions all have the same
sorts of experiences, whether training determines the sort of experience
the mystic will have and whether the mystics themselves take these
experiences to have epistemological significance.

Here we find a number of issues about which the philosopher and the
theologian can be of mutual service. The theologian provides the
philosopher with the doctrinal setting in terms of which reports of
mystical experiences are understood, and the philosopher provides a
critical analysis of both doctrine and report in order to place mystical
experiences within the framework of a broader epistemological theory.

It is not only epistemology that serves as a source of the problems
posed in the philosophy of religion for theology, virtually all the
branches of philosophy have some bearing on the philosophy of religion,
and raise questions about theological doctrine.

One of the most distinguished areas of philosophy is metaphysics, and
metaphysics has long had an intimate relation to theology, especially to
Islamic theosophy (Al-Hikmah). Muslim, Christian and Jewish theologians
have often utilized metaphysical systems based on ancient Greek thought
in order to explain theological doctrines.

Many religious philosophers have come to prefer other systems of
metaphysics; as a result, they find themselves engaged in an attempt to
restate religious doctrine in a way that does not use the language of
the older metaphysics.

Sometimes, however, doctrine becomes so intertwined with the older
metaphysics that they are difficult to separate. For example, the
Christian doctrine of the Trinity was stated in terms of metaphysics of
substances, modes, persons and attributes drawn from Roman as well as
Greek philosophy.

Many contemporary Christian thinkers are now willing to concede that the
traditional statements of the doctrine of the Trinity in these terms
have not been successful. But rather than reject the claim that God is
to be understood as the Holy Trinity, they have claimed that the
doctrine is better explained without the claim that God is three persons
but one substance, or with an interpretation of this claim that would
have been unthinkable in past centuries.

Robert Cummings Neville, the Dean of the Boston Theological Seminary,
completely dismisses the claim, and defends the Trinity as three ways or
aspects of divinity understood with reference to the creation. God is
the source of creation; He is the end or tools of creation, and He is
the very activity of creation itself, according to Neville. Aside from
this, there is little left of the traditional doctrine of the Trinity in
Neville's theology.[^14]

A more traditional defense of the Trinity is to be found in the work of
a philosopher who teaches at Notre Dame University in Indiana, Thomas v.
Morris. Morris uses the methods developed by analytic philosophers to
defend a version of Social Trinitarianism from the heretical claim made
by some process theologians that God is in need of the world.

Process theology itself developed as a reaction against metaphysics of
substances inspired by Whitehead and Hartshorne's idea that the world
consists of essentially interrelated events.[^15]

Another contemporary metaphysical idea that has had an impact on
discussions of the doctrine of the Trinity is the theory of relative
identity. According to this idea the identity relation is always
governed by the category of its terms.

Defenders of the Trinity such as Peter Geach and Peter van Inwagen have
used the theory of relative identity to defend the proposition that
while the persons of the Trinity may be different persons, they may at
the same time be the same God.[^16]

Other areas to which philosophers of religion have applied ideas drawn
from contemporary logic and metaphysics include discussions of Anselm's
ontological argument for the existence of God, the many problems
pertaining to the divine attributes, the nature of divine activity,
God's foreknowledge and human responsibility, the nature of creation ex
nihilo and the problem of evil.

Older than epistemology and at least as ancient as metaphysics is
ethics. Philosophical reflections on good and evil, right and wrong and
virtue and vice have always mingled with religious thought, and today,
as well, philosophers whose primary concern is the nature of value and
morality are raising important questions for theologians to ponder.

All of the religions systematize moral thought to a certain extent, for
all religions issue imperatives disobedience to which is considered
morally as well as religiously wrong. Must moral theory conform to the
moral concepts embodied in religion? Can there be altruistic ideals that
go beyond the moral ideals of religion? Can religion issue orders which
nullify moral imperatives? Can a person be morally reprehensible without
violating any religious law? Can a rational ethics put constraints on an
acceptable interpretation of religion? How could God, who is perfectly
good, order Abraham to kill his son?

This last question was forcefully raised by Soren Kierkegaard
(1813-1885), and it is still a problem frequently discussed among
Christian philosophers and theologians. Kierkegaard's answer, of course,
was that religion issues orders with a force beyond anything found in
morality orders which from the point of view of reason, would be
considered wrong.

Philosophers and theologians who are not satisfied with this fideist
approach to religious commands must find a plausible reconciliation
between reason and moral intuition, on the one hand, and religious
rulings and actions of those considered faultless, on the other.

The question of the relation between divine commands and moral
imperatives has become the focus of considerable debate among
contemporary philosophers of religion largely as a result of the work of
Robert M. Adams.[^17]

In his articles on divine command theories of morality, Adams has sought
to reconcile the idea that actions are wrong or right because they are
forbidden or commanded by God with the idea that God's commands are not
arbitrary.

Adams is no Ash'arite, and will not accept the claim that if God were to
command cruelty and infidelity then torture and treason would be morally
praiseworthy. God's commands have moral force, according to Adams, only
because God is perfectly good, just and benevolent; but without God's
commands, Adams contends there would be no moral imperatives at all.

Other recent publications in which the relation between religion and
morality are discussed include J. L. Mackie's The Miracle of Theism[^18]
and many of the writings of Alasdair MacIntyre.[^19] Mackie argues as an
admitted atheist that the only ways to make sense of the relation
between fact and value is either through Hume's moral philosophy or
through a religious theory.

He even confesses that if no variation on Hume's theory is ultimately
defensible, we should be forced to seek a religious explanation to the
manner in which values seem to supervene on natural properties.
MacIntyre is also interested in the fact/value dichotomy, and he
explicitly seeks to refute Hume's approach to the problem, and to refute
most other modern theorists as well.

But MacIntyre is not satisfied with the notion that facts are related to
values by divine decree; instead he seeks to revive a version of an
Aristotelian teleological ethics, but one in which perfection is to be
understood by means of attention to the movement of tradition and
historical narrative, rather than though biology (as Aristotle sometimes
seemed to suggest).Religion becomes paramount in MacIntyre's thinking
because it is only religion that is able to support the sorts of
traditions and historical narratives that can provide a firm basis for
the moral life.

No discussion of the way religious narratives can contribute to our
understanding of, who we are and where we are headed would be complete
without some attention to the issue of religious language, and this
brings us to another area in which the philosopher may be seen as posing
questions for the theologian.

One of the areas of most intense activity in twentieth century Western
philosophy is that of the philosophy of language. The German
mathematician, logician and philosopher Gottlob Frege (1848-1925)
initiated a research program in the philosophy of language concerned
with such problems as sense and reference, the failure of substitution
of co-referential terms in various 'intensional' contexts (for example,
it may be true that S believes that a is F and true that a=b, although S
fails to believe that b is F), and the logical analysis of various sorts
of semantic functions commonly performed in ordinary language by
demonstratives, proper names, definite descriptions, and other kinds of
terms and expressions.

Frege's program was carried on by Russell (1872-1970), Wittgenstein
(1889-1951), Carnap(1891-1970), Quine (1908-) and Kripke (1940-), to
mention just a few of those whose ideas about the logical analysis of
language have provoked extended debate.

The program of logical analysis was soon extended to theological
statements. Philosophers of religion began to ask questions about the
logical analysis of such claims as "God is eternal"[^20] and "God is
omnipotent",[^21] and the ways in which we may succeed in referring to
God.[^22]

Although these discussions may be fruitfully compared to medieval
discussions of related issues in Islamic as well as Christian theology
and philosophy, many contemporary Christian theologians find the
attention to logical detail a bit boring, and irrelevant to their
primary concerns.

Many of these theologians have been more favorably impressed by
Wittgenstein's later writings, and his suggestion that religious
language may be compared to a game or a form of life significantly
different from scientific language to prevent the possibility of any
conflict between religion and science.[^23]

Wittgenstein's doctrine of language games also has attracted theologians
who sought a response to the positivists' charge that religious claims
were meaningless. Although the verificationist theory of meaning
advocated by the positivists has been generally rejected, the
Wittgensteinian slogan, "meaning is use", provided theologians with a
basis in the philosophy of language for turning their attention to
functionalist theories of religious language which seemed to dovetail
rather neatly with the anti-reductionism popular in Protestant
theological circles.

These theologians felt that any attempt to base religious claims on
theoretical reason (as in the traditional proofs for the existence of
God, called natural theology), or on practical reason (as in Kant's
theology), ought to be rejected as reductions of religious claims to
metaphysics or ethics, reductions which failed to appreciate the
fundamental originality of the religious view, what Schleiermacher
(1768­-1834) called the religious moment of experience.

These tendencies among many (although by no means all) of those who have
been attracted to functionalist explanations of religious language are
largely anti-philosophical tendencies, even when they turn to the
philosophy of the later Wittgenstein for support.

Although there are many disagreements among those who find themselves
supporting some variety of fideism, there is agreement among the
fideists that religion does not need any philosophical explanation or
justification.

So, after our tour through the philosophical territories bordering on
theology, we find ourselves back where we started, at epistemology and
the question of the rationality of religious belief, for functionalist
approaches to religious language, including theories according to which
religious language serves to express attitudes rather than to describe
reality, are often attempts to escape rational criticism of religious
beliefs.

No justification is needed, the fideist proclaims, because the language
of religion is independent of and irrelevant to the language of
justification.

Here the reformed epistemology of Alvin Plantinga, or the related ideas
of William Alston may be seen as a sort of compromise between those who
would justify religious claims by rational proof and those who deny that
any such justification is needed or desirable.

What Plantinga and Alston offer is a philosophical argument as to why
religious belief may be considered warranted and rational, even in the
absence of direct evidential support.

Today's Christian theologians, however, are often unimpressed by the
works of Christian philosophers such as those mentioned above. These
philosophers are primarily concerned with the issues of rationality and
the justification or warrant that can or cannot be provided for
assertions of the truth of various religious claims.

The theologians, on the other hand, often seem to be more interested in
the effects in the lives of believers that are associated with adhering
to various beliefs and participating in the Church. Religion is not a
collection of truths about God, they insist, but a way to salvation.

Religious symbols are important for many contemporary Christian
theologians not as they serve to disclose religious truths that might
not be expressible in non-symbolic language, but rather because they
present a framework within which meaning for human life is to be
found.[^24]

Another reason, Christian theologians have given for their antipathy
toward philosophy is related to the problem of religious pluralism. In
the past, Christian theologians claimed that the doctrines of
Christianity were true, and that all those doctrines inconsistent with
Christian dogma were false.

Among the dogmas of traditional Christianity is the claim that there is
only one way to salvation-for Catholics, the Church, and for
Protestants, participation in Christ's redemption of sin by faith. In
short, traditional Christianity would exclude Jews, Muslims, Hindus and
Buddhists from salvation and eternal felicity unless they would accept
Christianity on learning of its gospel.

As Christians are becoming increasingly aware that there are good
people, even saintly people, who follow a path other than that of
Christianity although they are familiar with the gospel, they are
finding it difficult to accept the traditional dogma that would bar the
non-Christian from paradise. A number of Christian theologians are even
beginning to take the view that Christian theology has been too
preoccupied with the truth of dogma altogether.

In reaction to the exclusivism of traditional Christianity, according to
which the acceptance of certain truth-claims is a necessary condition
for salvation, some have gone to the extreme of thinking that the truth
of religious doctrines is insignificant, and attempts to justify
religious beliefs or show them to be rational are irrelevant to the
issue of salvation.

Instead of occupying themselves with the central questions of
traditional theology, constructing proofs to support doctrines,
analyzing the logical structure of various religious concepts, and
defending their interpretation of doctrines against rivals, many if not
most contemporary Christian theologians have turned their attention to
questions about how religious concepts develop and change, how they
function in religious communities, how religious ideas inform religious
experience, and how Christian symbols, practices and institutions have
been used and abused by Christian communities in various historical and
social contexts.

When these theologians turn their attention to questions of ethics, they
are concerned about how to prevent the future abuse of Christian
symbols, practices and institutions and how to encourage what they
consider to be the positive and morally responsible development of the
various elements of Christian life, although there is often a lack of
critical reflection on the philosophical perspective which informs their
own moral standards.

Many believe that claims to have religious knowledge or certainty
reflect a sinful desire to gain intellectual control over what must
remain ultimately a mystery.

Today's Christian theologians are much more interested in postmodernist
thought than the work of Christian philosophers trained in the analytic
tradition. Postmodernism is a movement which has emerged from the ideas
of certain contemporary French writers such as Jean-Franbois
Lyotard,[^25] Jacques Derrida,[^26] Georges Bataille,[^27] and Michel
Foucault.[^28]

What these writers have in common is a generally cynical outlook,
skepticism about the transcendental claims characteristic of the modern
period of European philosophy from Descartes (1596­1650) through Kant
(1724-1804), the suspicion that rational argument is a screen hiding
desires for power, the idea that we cannot escape the cultural
presuppositions which largely determine our worldview, and an irreverent
style.

Many of the postmodernists look to Nietzsche (1844-1900) for
inspiration. Contemporary Christian theologians who are reluctant to
defend or try to justify Christian doctrine, some of whom even admit
agnosticism, find common cause with the postmodernists.[^29]
Postmodernist writings do not really offer the theologian a set of
philosophical questions of relevance to theology as we found with the
philosophy of religion.

Instead, the postmodernist offers consolation to the fideist theologian
for his reluctance to attempt to show that his beliefs are reasonable
and excuses for not engaging in the reasoned defense of the truth of his
beliefs.

Postmodernism is not a philosophy, but an intellectual movement against
philosophy as traditionally understood. Traditionally, the term
philosophy functions as an encomium-it is not merely descriptive, but
has a strong evaluative sense.

To imply that postmodernist thought is not philosophy, but
anti-philosophy, is to express allegiance to the traditional ideal of
philosophy as love of Sophia, as a quest for the truth which the
postmodernists find somewhat preposterous.

In castigating postmodernism as anti-philosophy, however, I do not mean
to be dismissive. Postmodernism is a very important trend that has had a
profound influence on many Christian theologians.[^30]

The philosophy of religion as practiced by Christian philosophers with
training in analytic philosophy may be understood as a movement that to
a large extent is diametrically opposed to postmodernism.

To the postmodernists, the Christian philosophers seem a bit naive-still
arguing about how to defend the rationality of asserting the truth of
various religious doctrines. To the philosopher, however, what room
remains for religion in the confines of postmodernism is little more
than a sentimental attachment to the symbols and rituals of religion
shorn of the metaphysical or transcendent significance which gives them
their power and is responsible for the strong emotional response they
provoke in the first place.

This is a claim. I suspect that most of my readers will agree with it,
and that we do not have to look very far to find arguments to back it
up. The claim is that the strength of the hold on the human imagination
exerted by religion as evidenced by phenomena as diverse as the Islamic
Revolution in Iran and allusions to religious themes in contemporary
American fiction depends on the fact that religions allege that they
contain truths that are absolute, truths that go beyond the
particularities of their expressions in various cultural contexts.

The questions of whether or not this allegation is correct, and whether
it is even rational to believe it, are central to contemporary
discussions of the philosophy of religion. For this reason alone, the
skepticism of the postmodernist is important and requires a response.

But aside from how this response is formulated, there is this other
question of whether postmodernism can provide a philosophical
perspective from which theology is more profoundly understood or whether
it undermines theology by denying that it has any real connection with
Ultimate Reality.

The Christian postmodernists and many, if not the majority, of
contemporary Christian theologians contend that the question of the
truth of religious doctrine can be dismissed without damage to religion,
at least without damage to Protestant Christianity, because the focus of
the evangelical's religion is salvation rather than gnosis (Ma’rifah).

This contention is dubious for several reasons. First, because the vast
majority of believers, past and present, of the world's religions have
understood their religions as making important claims about reality. Any
denial of the importance of religious truth is a distortion of religious
thought.

Second, in Islam and Christianity, the Ultimate Reality is known as God,
and the practical, symbolic and social dimensions of religious life are
directed toward obedience and worship of God as the means to salvation.

If claims that God exists are dismissed as naive, then the doubts
generated about the reality of the object of worship threaten to make
the meaningfulness of worship doubtful. Without God, worship is
pointless, and without meaningful worship, there is no salvation.

Third, the aura of the sacred and feelings of holiness generated by
religion seem to involve the idea that the sacred provides us with a
vehicle by means of which the mundane is to be transcended, the merely
perspectival is to be escaped.

In revealed religion, particular historical events are designated as
revelation, and with this designation Christians and Muslims cease to
see Jesus (AS) as a merely historical personality, and Muslims cease to
see the Qur'an al-Karim as a mere artifact of early medieval Arabian
culture, but as the Word of God.

This transformation of awareness from the mundane to the sacred is
accomplished by means of a recognition of an ontological status for the
Source of revelation, so that without the metaphysical dimension of
religion, the rest of it, including the salvific potency of its symbols,
the feelings of obligation to respect its commandments, the attachment
to participation in its rituals, all would weaken and wither.[^31]

The above discussion of postmodernism prepares the way for a return to
our original question about the relation of philosophy to theology.
Despite the fact that religious authorities might feel threatened from
time to time by questions that arise out of unfamiliar philosophical
discussions, many of whose participants are indeed hostile toward
religious authority, if not toward religion itself, ultimately the
theologian cannot escape an involvement with philosophy.

Perhaps the most persuasive reason we can offer to the theologian is
that the philosophical criticisms of religious ideas that plague the
minds of the young require a philosophical response if the young are to
be guided.

Even if no amount of merely philosophical expertise will be sufficient
to remove doubt, some philosophical wisdom is necessary in order to
engage the sincere seeker in the spiritual work of rising above the
widespread Satanic suspicions that religion is little more than a pack
of lies.

The presence of philosophical doubts in the minds of the young was also
the reason given to Ayatullah Burijirdi by 'Allamah Tabataba'i for
publicly teaching philosophy in Qom. Philosophy presents itself to
theology as a servant without whose help, the mess philosophy herself
has made cannot be cleaned up!

But there are other reasons for theology to graciously accept the
services offered by philosophy. Allah has graced the human mind with a
thirst for wisdom, and the wisdom sought includes knowledge of the
things of which religion speaks, as well as skill in practical
evaluations and the sort of precision in which logicians, mathematicians
and physicists take pride, and other things, such as history, as well.

The philosophical quest is one that propels the seeker to some degree of
understanding of all these areas and an attempt to fit them together.
From time to time philosophy might devote too much attention to a single
dimension of understanding, resulting in waves of logicism or empiricism
or historicism, but the structure of the human spirit ultimately cannot
be satisfied with a narrow slot from which to view reality.

I am told that Sohravardi Maqtil said that a person who is not able to
leave his body at will is not a real philosopher. I am not sure what
this means, but it suggests to me the philosophical need to escape the
confines of a physical perspective, the need to succumb to what some
have derided as "the transcendental temptation". [^32]

Theology, on the other hand, is much more limited than philosophy. The
business of theology is not to offer a comprehensive theory of reality,
but merely to show that there is a Supreme Reality and how this is
related to lesser things.

Without some attention to philosophy, the business of theology is not
likely to be very profitable, because we do not get a very clear picture
of God's relation to the world unless we pay some attention to what the
world is supposed to look like.

This does not mean that theology has to give an absolute stamp of
approval to some particular metaphysical speculation, but theologians
should not shy away from metaphysical issues either. Theology is well
served by philosophy if it interacts with philosophical ideas without
developing a dependency for a single philosophical way of doing things.

Philosophy, too, perhaps finds its true vocation in service to theology.
For, if philosophy is to fulfill its goal of providing an intelligible
comprehensive synthesis, it must make room for theological truth and
knowledge of that truth, that is, by providing for the needs of
theology. This becomes the worship of philosophy, to be at the service
of theology; and as in all things human, the highest degree of
perfection is to be approached through worship of Allah, recognizing
one's own faqr before al-Ghani.

[^1]: (New York: Harper & Row, 1979)

[^2]: (New York: Oxford, 1993).

[^3]: Plantinga's articles on this topic have not yet been collected in
the form of a book, but two anthologies in which there are articles by
him and discussions of his work are especially worth mentioning: Robert
Audi and William J. Wainwright, eds., Rationality, Religious Belief, and
Moral Commitment (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,1986), and Alvin
Plantinga and Nicholas Wolterstorff, eds., Faith and Rationality: Reason
and Belief in God (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1983).
His definitive statement of his position is to appear in the forthcoming
Warranted Christian Belief. Also worth mentioning is a book devoted to
criticisms of Plantinga's ideas and his responses: James E. Tomberlin
and Peter van Inwagen, Alvin Plantinga, Profiles volume 5 (Dordrecht: D.
Reidel, 1985).

[^4]: Plantinga's claim has been disputed by John Beversluis, who argues
that Calvin and the Reformed Church object to natural theology for
reason incompatible with the epistemological position advocated by
Plantinga. See John Beversluis, "Reforming the 'Reformed' Objection to
Natural Theology" Faith and Philosophy, 12:2, April 1995, 189-206.

[^5]: See Rational Faith: Catholic Responses to Reformed Epistemology,
edited by Linda Zagzebski (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press,
1993).

[^6]: His major work on this topic is, Perceiving God: The Epistemology
of Religious Experience (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1991).

[^7]: See Michael C. Banner, The Justification of Science and the
Rationality of Religious Belief (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992)
and Nancey Murphy, Theology in the Age of Scientific Reasoning (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1990).

[^8]: Gary Gutting, Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism (Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1982).

[^9]: Richard Swinburne, The Existence of God (London: Oxford University
Press, 1979).

[^10]: John Hick, An Interpretation of Religion (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1989).

[^11]: Wayne Proudfoot, Religious Experience (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1985).

[^12]: Steven Katz, ed., Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1978).

[^13]: Nelson Pike, Mystic Union: An Essay on the Phenomenology of
Mysticism (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992).

[^14]: Robert Cummings Neville, A Theology Primer (Albany: SUNY, 1991).

[^15]: See Thomas v. Morris, The Logic of God Incarnate (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1986).

[^16]: See Peter Geach, The virtues (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1977), and Peter van Inwagen, "And Yet They Are Not Three Gods
But One God", in Thomas v. Morris, ed., Philosophy and the Christian
Faith (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1988), pp. 241-278.

[^17]: Robert Adams, "A Modified Divine Command Theory of Ethical
Wrongness" in Louis Pojman, ed., Philosophy of Religion (Belmont:
Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1987), and y "Divine Command Metaethics
Modified Again" The Journal of Religious Ethics 1:7, 91-97.

[^18]: J. L. Mackie, The Miracle of Theism (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1982).

[^19]: MacIntyre's most important books are After virtue, 2nd ed. (Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1984), Whose Justice? Which
Rationality? (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1988), and
Three Rival versions of Moral Enquiry: Encyclopedia, Genealogy and
Tradition (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1990).
Translations of the first two of these works into Farsi are being
prepared, and a Farsi summary of After virtue may be found in the
journal Ma'rifat, Nos. 9-18, and continuing.

[^20]: See, for example, Eleonore Stump and Norman Kretzmann, "Eternity"
in Thomas v. Morris, ed., The Concept of God (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1987).

[^21]: See the articles in Linwood Urban and Douglas N. Walton, eds.,
The Power of God (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978).

[^22]: See William P. Alston's, "Referring to God", in his Divine Nature
and Human Language: Essays in Philosophical Theology (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1989).

[^23]: See D. Z. Phillips, Religion Without Explanation (Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1976) and Norman Malcolm, Wittgenstein: A Religious Point of
view? (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1994).

[^24]: See Gordon Kaufman, "Evidentialism: A Theologian's Response,"
Faith and Philosophy, 6:1 (January 1989), 35-46, and the response by
Eleonore Stump and Norman Kretzmann, "Theologically Unfashionable
Philosophy," Faith and Philosophy, 7:3 (July 1990), 329-339, and the
defense of Kaufman's position by James A. Keller, "On the Issues
Dividing Contemporary Christian Philosophers and Theologians," Faith and
Philosophy, 10:1 (January 1993), 68-78 and James A. Keller, "Should
Christian Theologians become Christian Philosophers?" Faith and
Philosophy, 12:2 (April 1995), 260-268.

[^25]: Jean-Franyois Lyotard, tr. G. Bennington and B. Massumi, The
Postmodern Condition (Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press, 1984).

[^26]: His major work is Of Grammatology, tr. G. Spivak (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974), but especially relevant to
contemporary Christian theology is Derrida and Negative Theology,ed.
Harold Coward and Toby Foshay (Albany: SUNY Press, 1992).

[^27]: Georges Bataille, Theory of Religion, tr. R. Hurley (New York:
Zone Books, 1989).

[^28]: Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, tr. A. M.
Sheridan-Smith (New York: Harper & Row, 1972), also see the biography,
James Miller, The Passion of Michel Foucault (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1993) in which the relation between Foucault's writings and
his sado-masochistic homosexuality is explored.

[^29]: For a collection of essays in which postmodernist thought is seen
as offering resources for Christian theology see Faith and Philosophy,
vol. 10, No. 4 (October 1993).

[^30]: Postmodernism is also starting to attract the attention of
students of Islamic thought. See Akbar S. Ahmed, Postmodernism and
Islam: Predicament and Promise (London: Routledge, 1992) and Ernest
Gellner, Postmodernism, Reason and Religion (London: Routledge, 1992).

[^31]: Worthy of attention is Huston Smith's defense of the religious
world view over the postmodern proclamation (issued by Richard Rorty)
that "There is no Big Picture": "Postmodernism and the World's
Religions" in The Truth about Truth, ed., Walter Truett Anderson (Los
Angeles: Jeremey P. Tarcher, 1995), an address originally delivered in
Kuala Lumpur for a symposium on "Islam and the Challenge of Modernity",
and later revised without references to Islam as "The Religious
Significance of Postmodernism: A Rejoinder" in Faith and Philosophy 12:3
(July 1995), 409-422.

[^32]: See the defense of atheistic skepticism by Paul Kurtz, The
Transcendental Temptation (New York: Prometheus, 1986).


