Empiricism And The Philosophy Of Islam
======================================

One of the most important topics of debate among Muslim intellectuals
and scholars today is about the scope of Islam. All Muslims affirm that
Islam is a complete way of life, and God Himself has revealed in the
Qur'an:  
***“On this day I have perfected for you your religion and I have
completed my blessing for you, and I have chosen for you al-Islam as a
religion…” (5:3).***

But does this mean that Islam contains orders pertaining to all the arts
and sciences, for example, regarding how to conduct research in
mechanical engineering and economics, or must Islam confine itself to
prescriptions for how to perform prayers, write a will, etc., with the
understanding that these matters of ritual observance are sufficient for
an entire life? Not only the learned, but the masses of Muslims are also
concerned with this sort of question, for the ordinary Muslim wants to
know how to submit to the will of Allah in all the aspects of his life.

We expect our religious scholars to tell us whether Islam forbids
contraception, the recreational use of drugs, lotteries, and a host of
other items about which there is controversy, and the scholars of Islam
answer our questions by formulating rulings based on the Qur'an and
authoritative narrations, but there are also broader questions about the
scope of Islamic thought: Is there any such thing as Islamic economics?
What about Islamic sociology, astrophysics, microbiology?

Within the intellectual history of the Muslims, there have been
traditions of study of various fields such as mathematics, astronomy and
philosophy, and often these traditions are called Islamic mathematics,
Islamic astronomy, and Islamic philosophy, respectively. The question
then arises as to whether these traditions have a normative or
prescriptive value.

It is fairly clear that it would be a mistake to think that Islam
contains rules for how to think about the stars and planets and that
these rules are systematized in Islamic astronomy, but when we turn from
astronomy to philosophy, the situation becomes a bit more confusing
because Islamic philosophy has been developed at least in part as an
attempt to provide a religiously satisfactory approach to the problems
of philosophy.

And even with regard to Islamic astronomy, the Islamic dimension is
arguably deeper than the fact that Muslims developed it, for it formed a
part of a coherent intellectual perspective that was integrated with
various other elements of Islamic thought and science.

The sorts of questions mentioned above pertaining to the scope of Islam
and its implications for the sciences and humanities, and particularly
for philosophy, may be said to comprise the subject matter of the
philosophy of Islam. The philosophy of Islam is clearly distinct from
Islamic philosophy, for while the latter term is used for the tradition
of philosophy developed by such Muslim thinkers as Ibn Sina, Sohravardi
and Sadr al-Muta'allihin, the philosophy of Islam is the study of the
philosophical scope and implications of the religion of Islam.

The philosophy of Islam is also distinct from 'ilm al-kalam, which
consists of the systematization of Islamic doctrine and its rational
defense. The philosophy of Islam is concerned not with doctrine and its
defense but with drawing out the philosophical ramifications of doctrine
and their limits.

It may be useful to compare the philosophy of Islam with the philosophy
of physics and the philosophy of religion. The philosophy of physics is
the study of the philosophical problems fundamental to physics, problems
related to physical theories, but for which solutions cannot be directly
obtained from experimental evidence, as with various problems pertaining
to the nature of time, space and motion.

Often a philosophical viewpoint seems to be presupposed in a given
physical theory, and the philosophy of physics concerns itself with the
elucidation of such views and their philosophical evaluation. When we
turn to Islam, we find that some of the philosophical problems
fundamental to it, such as the existence and attributes of God, are
shared by Judaism and Christianity.

These problems are thus allocated to the philosophy of religion. What
remains for the philosophy of Islam are such questions as what sort of
philosophical psychology can best account for the Qur'anic revelation,
the implications of the doctrine of wilayah for political philosophy,
and more generally, what sorts of views are consistent with, most
appropriate for, or implied by Islamic teachings.

Furthermore, since Islamic teachings themselves have been interpreted
and expounded in a variety of ways by *mutakalimin, Hukama'* and
*'urafa*, all of these questions about the philosophical ramifications
of Islamic teachings may be repeated with qualifications indicative of a
more particular interpretation.

So, for example, one may ask about which philosophical theory of
religious experience is most appropriate to the relevant discussions in
Ibn 'Arabi, or what sort of epistemological theory can best account for
the discussions of doubt and certainty found in the works of uwul
al-fiqh.

The philosophy of Islam may thus be seen as a broad field of
philosophical research pertaining to the guidance which Allah has
provided for mankind through His religion: ***“Inna al-dln 'inda Allah
al-Islam***”. [***“Verily, the religion of Allah is Islam.”(3:19).]***

A good example of the kind of study to be included in the philosophy of
Islam is an inquiry into the relation between Islam and empiricism. Is
Islam inconsistent with empiricism? Is there some form of empiricism
that is demanded by Islam? Is Islam more compatible with rationalist
than empiricist philosophies?

An examination of such questions is not only useful for embarking on
study of the philosophy of Islam, but it is worthwhile because
empiricist philosophies have had such influence on modern and
contemporary Western thought that a proper grasp of the relations
between Islam and empiricism is essential for an understanding of the
scope of Islam and its philosophical relations to Western sciences and
humanities. But before one can engage in such an inquiry it must be
known just what empiricism is.

After the Renaissance, when European thought was seeking to escape the
structures and strictures of scholasticism, two prominent modes of
philosophical thought began to take shape: rationalism and empiricism.

Both the rationalists and the empiricists actively sought to formulate
alternatives to the Aristotelian features of medieval philosophy. Both
the rationalists and the empiricists attacked the Aristotelian
understanding of reasoning and science. The rationalists did this by
proposing to limit the notion of rationality to its more calculative
aspects and by restricting the self-evident to the most subjective
certainties.

The empiricists, on the other hand, were less interested in reason as
such and emphasized the role of sensory experience in the acquisition of
knowledge. The leaders of rationalism in modern European philosophy were
all natives of the European continent: France, the Netherlands and
Germany were the homes of Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz during a period
which spanned the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

The most famous of the modern empiricists were all eighteenth century
British philosophers: Locke, Berkeley and Hume, although precedents can
be found for empiricist thought in Britain extending as far back as
Roger Bacon and William of Ockham.

Among more recent philosophers, empiricism continues to exert a strong
influence, so that William James referred to his version of pragmatism
as "radical empiricism", and Rudolf Carnap, after giving up on Logical
Positivism, called his philosophy "Logical Empiricism".

What all the various forms of empiricism have in common is an emphasis
on the importance of experience for human knowledge and a tendency to
doubt that which cannot be established on the basis of the evidence of
the senses.

Empiricist philosophies come in all shapes and sizes, religious as well
as atheistic, extreme and moderate. An extreme form of empiricism which
is also religious was espoused by the Bishop Berkeley who denied the
existence of a physical reality beyond the sensory appearances with
which we are directly acquainted.

Another extreme form of empiricism has been more recently advocated by
Bas van Fraassen who believes in the existence of physical objects such
as tables and chairs which can be seen with the naked eye, but who
denies the existence of such things postulated by modern physics as
electrons and photons of which we have no direct experience.[^1]

In one form or another, empiricism has had a tremendous influence on the
development of the sciences in the West. No history of the sciences from
physics and biology to psychology and economics would be complete
without mention of the influence of empiricist thought on the
advancement of these subjects.

The influence of empiricism is not limited to the sciences, however, but
also extends to ethics and politics. Empiricists have tended to analyze
the good in terms of the satisfaction of desires and practical reason in
terms of efficiency in obtaining the good so defined.

In politics they have inclined toward social contract theories or
utilitarianism, analyzing justice as that which accords with the
rational agreement of members of a society in pursuit of the maximal
satisfaction of their desires, or as the maximal satisfaction of the
desires of the greatest number of people.

Empiricism, however, is fundamentally neither an ethical nor a political
philosophy, but rather is often described as founded on two basic
principles: first that all ideas are derived from experience, and
second, that proper judgment must be supported by experience. Locke, as
well as Berkeley and Hume, held that we have two kinds of experience:
sensation, or external experience, and reflection, or internal
experience.

These two kinds of experience were held to provide the foundations of
all knowledge. Knowledge of necessary truths, such as the truths of
logic and mathematics, were held to derive from inner experience of the
relations among ideas, while empirical knowledge of contingent truths
was held to derive from the outer experience of the senses of vision,
hearing, smell, taste and touch.

What then does Islam have to say about empiricism? There are two
commonly given answers to this sort of question which are as superficial
as they are extreme. The first answer is that Islam and empiricism are
perfectly consistent because each is confined to a separate and
exclusive realm. The second answer is that Islam and empiricism are
diametrically opposed because each presents a view of man and the cosmos
contradictory to the other.

The first answer is that given by various proponents of an Islamic
modernism or Islamic reformation modeled on Christian Protestantism.
They would limit Islam to a few rituals and the personal relation
between the individual and God so as to make room for Western modes of
thought and institutions in politics, economics, philosophy, etc.

Nevertheless, the modernist answer regarding empiricism is not as easy
to dismiss as one might like to imagine. If we define empiricism as the
doctrine that all ideas and knowledge are derived from inner or outer
experience, it is difficult to see what is objectionable about this from
the point of view of Islam. Even the Prophet's (SAW) knowledge of
revelation could be explained as deriving from a kind of inner
experience.

The founder of empiricism, John Locke, was a Christian who believed in
divine revelations, authentic claims to which, he believed, were
supported by the empirical evidence of miracles. If there is an
incompatibility between Islam and empiricism, it must be found at a
deeper level than the bare statement of its fundamental principles.

As the influence of empiricism spread, it was the emphasis on outer
experience that won the allegiance of researchers and scientists.
Medieval science seemed to them to have been overrun with presumptions
that could not be established by sensory experience, nor proven by the
mathematical aspects of reason favored by the rationalists.

For example, it was held that since the planets were the most perfect of
bodies and circular motion is the most perfect kind of motion, the
orbits of the planets must be circular.

The rejection of this sort of argument was made possible by two sorts of
changes in thinking about science, both of which involved a shift in the
view of rationality itself. First, the Greek idea of rational intuition
or nous had to be dismissed and replaced by a much more limited notion
of rationality; and second, the value of the collection of precise
empirical data had to be elevated to a level that could overcome the
appeal of rational intuition.

These are the changes that were brought about by the combined efforts of
the rationalists and the empiricists. What remains of the notion of
rationality leaves no room for the religiously reflective intellect or
'aql.

The word 'aql, which is translated as 'intellect' or 'reason' occurs in
verbal forms forty-nine times in the Qur'an. If one inspects these ayat,
one finds that the operative notion of 'aql in the Qur'an is neither the
Greek nous nor the modern Western notion of rationality, although the
meaning of nous is certainly closer in meaning to the Qur'anic term than
the English rationality.

The Qur'an speaks of examples being given for people to think about, for
people who use their 'aql. The things of the earth and heavens, the
cycling of night and day, the coming to life of a dead land, all of
these are signs of Allah, and the failure to recognize them as such
indicates a lack of 'aql.

The faculty of being able to recognize the ultimate significance of
things cannot be glossed as syllogistic reasoning, nor as the evaluation
and formulation of modern scientific theories. While empiricism concerns
itself with the nature of appearances, 'aqlis concerned with seeing
through the appearances to the deeper reality behind them, with insight
and disclosure.

On the other hand, we do not find a direct contradiction between the
reasoning of the empiricist and the exercise of 'aql. The defenders of
traditional Islam often point to the differences between modern and
traditional concepts as if this were sufficient to establish that the
modern is deviant and to be rejected. However, an appreciation of the
methods and findings of the empirical sciences by no means need
undermine the value of religious reflection.

The approaches to the philosophy of Islam to be found in the writings of
both modernists and traditionalists are much too facile to comprehend
the complexity of the discord between Islam and empiricism.

The modernist ignores the discord because of the absence of outright
contradiction. The traditionalist ignores the possibility of
accommodation because of the disparity of outlooks, and because whenever
accommodation is mentioned with regard to Islam and modernity, it seems
to be accompanied by an expectation that Islam must be changed.

Liberals call for the "reform" of Islam in order to disguise their
desire for its disablement. Traditionalists respond with a glorification
of the past. Neither seems capable of imagining that the modern might be
reformed to come into accord with Islam.

Empiricism is flawed by its unduly restrictive view of rationality. If
this view is modified to allow for the rational appreciation of symbolic
signification, nothing of essential value in empiricism is thereby lost.

Empiricism, like the modern sciences whose development it influenced, is
at odds with Islam because it is informed by concepts which have been
used as replacements for those found in the Qur'an and ahadith.

The problem with the modern concept of rationality is just one example
of this. The solution is not a rejection of the new concepts, but a
rejection of claims that they supersede those of the Islamic traditions.
In the rejection of superficial modernism and traditionalism we may also
find a more satisfying approach to the fundamental problem of the
philosophy of Islam, identifying the scope of Islam and its implications
for the sciences and humanities, and particularly for philosophy.

Although Islam cannot be said to contain its own particular
microbiology, for example, and for the most part neither contradicts nor
implies particular theoretical claims in the natural and human sciences,
it does present man with various ideas and concepts which proponents of
the sciences or some new philosophy would supplant by those of their own
theories.

Here there is an opportunity to advance a new meaning for the idea of
Islamic reformation: it is not that Islam is to be reformed in the light
of modern theories, but the reverse. The exaggerations of human
importance and negligence of Allah which often accompany any form of
learning are to be purged by an Islamic reformation of such learning,
God willing.

[^1]: Bas C. van Fraassen, The Scientific Image (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1980).


