'Allamah Tabataba’i And Contemporary Philosophical Theology
===========================================================

'Philosophical Theology' is a term that has been employed in recent
years among philosophers and theologians in the West to designate a
specifically philosophical approach to theological issues. During much
of the twentieth century, philosophical theology has not been taken very
seriously either by philosophers or by theologians.

Philosophers have found fault with philosophical theology because of the
lack of philosophical sophistication of the writings in this area.
Theologians, on the other hand, have expressed little interest in
philosophical theology because of the irrelevance of the attempts at
analysis and careful argumentation to the living concerns of theologians
preoccupied with the integration of religious thought in contemporary
social life.

Over the course of the last twenty-five years, however, this situation
has changed. Philosophers whose technical expertise is widely recognized
have started writing works of philosophical merit on theological topics.

The Western rejection of religion took place for two kinds of reasons:
reasons having to do with the apparent opposition between religion and
science, and reasons having to do with social, political and moral
views. In recent years there has been a shift in attitude among
intellectuals in both these areas.

There is a greater appreciation now than there was in the heyday of
positivism that science need not be seen as antagonistic toward
religion, and epistemic theories are currently being advanced which
would allow for the rational justification of both scientific and
religious beliefs.

The social, political and moral attitudes that were prevalent prior to
the 1970's are being displaced by views that are critical of
liberal/leftist thought. The current resurgence of philosophical
theology benefits from both these kinds of attitudinal changes, even as
it indirectly encourages them.

At the same time as these developments have been taking place,
theologians have begun serious debate about the significance of
non-Christian theologies for Christian thought. Theologians such as John
Hick, W. Cantwell Smith and Hans Kung have argued vigorously that the
doctrine that salvation can be achieved exclusively through the
Christian tradition is not rationally defensible.

While maintaining their own allegiance to the Christian tradition, they
have suggested that the doctrines of the divinity of Christ and the
trinity should be reinterpreted, and they have been willing to concede
that there may be some sense in which the Qur'an may be admitted to be
the word of God.

Theologians discuss such questions under the rubric of religious
pluralism. Although in recent philosophical theology the issue of
religious pluralism has not been central, an increasing amount of
attention is being turned in this direction.[^1]

In this context we may well wonder what, if anything may be found in
recent Islamic thought which may be of relevance to Western
philosophical theology. Sometimes Western writers have been dismissive
of the prospects of finding anything of philosophical interest in recent
Islamic thought because their acquaintance has been limited to Muslim
writers who lack philosophical erudition or who are even hostile to
philosophy.

However, in the Shi'i philosophical and theological tradition we find
ample materials of significance to the questions raised in philosophical
theology by Christian philosophers. Certainly one of the best ways to
become familiar with Shi'i philosophical theology is through the works
of 'Allamah Tabataba'i.

His authoritative position in the Muslim world as an exegete of the
Qur'an, coupled with his philosophical expertise gives his work a
stature which demands greater notice than it has yet received by
students of comparative religion and philosophical theology.

Perhaps some of our Muslim readers will ask why Muslims should be
concerned about trying to address problems which arise in the context of
Western philosophical theology. There are several reasons.

First, by means of the formulation of a Muslim response to such issues,
a respect may be won for the Islamic tradition which, unfortunately, has
often suffered due to political enmity. Secondly, it provides the
opportunity to familiarize those who often restrict their view of
Islamic thought to the middle Ages with the living tradition of Islamic
philosophical theology.

Thirdly, such intellectual engagements contribute to the development of
depth of awareness of the complexity of the issues involved, and may
promote the further development of Muslim thought on a variety of
issues.

The recent increase in interest in philosophical theology in the West is
symptomatic of a sincerely felt need to take religion seriously once
again, after it had been discarded by many intellectuals as incompatible
with a modern scientific outlook. Many who had drifted away from the
churches are returning.

However, the problems that caused the original dissatisfaction with
religion have not been solved. In the West, the problems with
Christianity have been typically generalized and considered as problems
with religion per se.

Few, have considered the possibility that Islam may be immune from the
failings which led to their dissatisfaction with Christianity. For
example, one of the most important Christian doctrines is that of the
trinity.

Yet it has been generally conceded by theologians since the Middle Ages
that this is a doctrine which must be accepted as a matter of faith,
where faith is understood as a way of accepting that which cannot be
accepted according to the standards of reason. Modern theologians have
gone further to admit that this doctrine is a mystery incapable of
rational defense.

Various contemporary philosophers of religion, such as Peter van Inwagen
and Thomas v. Morris have attempted to provide a philosophical defense
of the rational coherence of the doctrine. This is a place where the
relevance of 'Allamah Tabataba'i's thought is immediately apparent.

Much of the philosophical discussion which is scattered throughout his
exegesis of the Qur'an, Al-Mizan, is designed to demonstrate the
incoherence of Trinitarian doctrine and to defend belief in a strict
divine unity.

Many of the relevant passages have been collected by the late Ayatollah
Husayni Tehrani in his volume, Mehr-e Taban. The inherent rationalism of
Islamic theology is clearly displayed in these discussions, and the
contrast with the irrationalism of tendency found in much modern
Christian theology to confuse mystery with incoherence is made readily
apparent.

On the other hand, 'Allamah Tabataba'i's writings on topics of Islamic
mysticism or 'irfdn display a sensitivity and deep appreciation of a
true mysticism which is rational even if it expresses itself in apparent
contradictions. Thus, the writings of 'Allamah Tabataba'i not only
presents us with an example of an Islamic theology, which is at once
contemporary and rational, but also a rational mysticism.

On the other hand, the student of Western philosophy who is used to
looking for the distinctive and original elements in a philosopher's
thought may miss the significance of 'Allamah Tabataba'i's works.

'Allamah is a defender of a school of thought originated by Mulla Sadra
and called transcendent wisdom. This philosophical outlook has an
influence on contemporary Shi'i theology somewhat analogous to the
influence of Aquinas on Catholic theology.

Much of what is of significance in 'Allamah's philosophical theology may
be found in the works of Mulla Sadra or Nasir al-Din Tusi, but rather
than detracting from its importance, this only serves to underscore the
consonance of 'Allamah's theology with the tradition in which it is
situated.

Like contemporary Western philosophical theology, 'Allamah's theology
makes use of careful definitions, deductive proofs, and fine
distinctions among rival positions. These are features which the broadly
analytic tradition in Anglo-American philosophical theology share with
the Shi'i tradition, which reflects the taste for logic in Ibn Sina
(Avicenna) and the tremendous influence this, has had on subsequent
Islamic philosophy.

However, the intuitions about what can be accepted without argument
differ widely between analytic philosophy and Islamic philosophy. The
Western student of Islamic philosophy must therefore learn to suppress
the tendency to dismiss arguments for being based on implausible
premises, and learn to seek beyond the stated premises for more
fundamental rational intuitions, which are often at odds with
contemporary Western presumptions.

The most striking difference between contemporary Christian and Muslim
theologies is that while Christians believe that God is a person,
Muslims worship a non-personal deity. Despite the importance of this
difference for a host of theological issues, it is a difference that has
gone largely unnoticed by Christians and Muslims alike.

Yet Christians everywhere will affirm that God is a person, while the
average Muslim will readily deny this. Theism is often defined by
philosophers of religion who work in the Christian tradition in such a
manner as to require the belief that God is a person.

Thus The Encyclopedia of Philosophy has it that, "THEISM signifies
belief in one God (theos) who is (a) personal, (b) worthy of adoration,
and (c) separate from the world but (d) continuously active in it."[^2]

John H. Hick admits that, "Theism ... is strictly belief in a deity, but
is generally used to mean belief in a personal deity."[^3] Richard
Swinburne states that a theist is one who believes that there is a God
who is a "person without a body ((i.e.) a spirit) who is eternal, free,
able to do anything, knows everything, is perfectly good, is the proper
object of human worship and obedience, the creator and sustainer of the
universe",[^4] and J. L. Mackie, while arguing the case of atheism,
endorses Swinburne's definition of theism.[^5]

One can surely find no better representative of contemporary Christian
philosophical theology than William P. Alston, whose works are a model
of analytic precision and reflective insight. He writes that God, as
construed in theistic religions, is "a supreme or ultimate personal
agent that acts in the light of knowledge, purposes, and
intentions."[^6]

The tendency of Alston, and the other writers mentioned, is to emphasize
the similarities between God and man. One reason for this is that it is
assumed that if God is treated as a being who, is excessively unlike
man, any claims made about God will become incoherent. The idea is that
in the case of human beings, we know what it means to make decisions, to
know various things, and to act.

So, if we want to know what it is we are talking about when we attribute
knowledge, decision and action to God, we should mean something closely
analogous to what we mean in the case of human beings. One of the most
extreme results of this tendency among Christian theologians is the
process theology of Charles Hartshorne.

Hartshorne held that the medieval concept of God was incoherent and
proposes that God be considered more like a person, such that God should
be considered to change, to improve Himself, to exist in time, to
increase His knowledge, etc.

Alston, who was a student of Hartshorne, rejects these claims, but he
tries to develop a theology which will preserve the claims of divine
transcendence associated with medieval theology while retaining as much
as possible of the personalistic view of God.

Another reason for the emphasis on the personal nature of God in modern
Christian theology is that this is seen as being more faithful to
scripture. Much of modern Christian theology has reacted to the
philosophical attacks on theology found in Hume and Kant by divorcing
itself from philosophy altogether.

It is held that medieval Christian theology went astray by employing
Greek philosophical concepts instead of working exclusively with the
concepts found in divine revelation. This view has been contested by
Robert Cummings Neville, who argues that Jewish thought had already been
Hellenized prior to the time of Christ, and that the opposition between
the perspectives of Athens and Jerusalem have been over emphasized.[^7]

In the Shi'i theological tradition there was also a period in which some
held an extremely anthropomorphic view of God, but this tendency was
thoroughly refuted and rejected as unorthodox at an early stage by
scholars such as Kulayni (d.329/941) and Shaykh Saduq (d. 381/991), who
gathered sufficient reports from the Prophet and Imams (Peace be with
them) to demonstrate decisively that the anthropological language used
to describe God must always be understood as figurative.

The thought of 'Allamah Tabataba'i must be understood as holding a
position in the long tradition of philosophical theology encouraged by
these early scholars. This is a tradition in which the key to the
resolution of apparent conflict between reason and religion is to be
sought in proper interpretation. Characteristic of proper interpretation
in the Shi'i tradition is authorization by reports attributed to the
Imams (peace be with them), rationality and frequent indication of a
depth of spirituality associated with Islamic mysticism.

A word of caution is appropriate regarding the attribution of
rationality to esoteric interpretation in the Shi'i tradition. What is
meant here is by no means the conception of rationality that informs the
empiricist or scientific philosophies of the West, rather, by claiming
that esoteric interpretations of scripture in the Shi'i tradition are
rational is meant that they contribute to a systematic theological
picture, a picture which is drawn with conscious attention to the
logical relations between the concepts and doctrines expounded.

So, we find two contrasting approaches to apparent conflicts between
religion and science. The approach of modern Christian theology, whether
liberal or neo-orthodox, has been to cut off the relations between
theological issues and the scientific or philosophical perspective from
which objections have been launched. The approach characteristic of
Muslim traditions, on the other hand, has been an attempt at synthesis
through interpretation.

Christian theologians have sought to assert their orthodoxy by claiming
that their doctrine of a personal deity is more faithful to the Biblical
picture of God than the abstract deity of medieval theologians. Perhaps,
however, the tendency to personalize the deity was always latent in the
Christian doctrine of the incarnation.

Muslim theologians, on the other hand, have found ample support for
their claims to orthodoxy in the Qur'an and ahadith. Those Muslim
thinkers who have found fault with philosophical theology have argued
against the interpretations offered by the theologians and philosophers,
but rather than offering an alternative theology, they for the most part
have abandoned theology altogether.

The sort of philosophical theology one finds in the works of 'Allamah
Tabataba'i is one in which God is not understood as being personal, in
the sense that it is held that terms which are normally attributed to
persons must be reinterpreted when they are applied to God because of
the fundamental ontological disparity between the Creator and His
creation.

Consider, for example, 'Allamah's philosophical discussion of the speech
of Allah (in the commentary to 2:253-254). 'Allamah writes that the
Knowledge of Allah is 'ilm al-huduri, that is, knowledge by presence.
Knowledge by presence is defined as a non-conceptual,
non-representational knowledge in which the known object is directly
present to the knower.

This sort of knowledge gained an important place in Islamic philosophy
with the works of Sohravardi, and was further elaborated by Mulla Sadra.
Examples given are of the knowledge one has of one's own consciousness
and of those states that are considered causally dependent on
consciousness, such as pain and hunger. In knowledge by presence, it is
held that the knower, the knowledge and the known are united.

'Allamah criticizes both the Ash'arites and the Mu'tazilites for
implicitly attributing to Allah 'ilm al-husuli, knowledge which is
acquired when ideas are produced in the mind. There is an ontological
distinction between the kinds of knowledge to be attributed to men and
to God and this distinction is based on the ontological distinction
between persons and God.

Another distinction in Islamic theology to which 'Allamah appeals, in
order to explain the knowledge of God, is between detailed knowledge
('ilm al-tafsili) and summary knowledge ('ilm al-ijmali). A subject has
detailed knowledge when he is aware of the specifics of and object, as,
for example, when he entertains specific propositions descriptive of
what is known.

A subject has summary knowledge when he does not entertain specific
propositions about the object of knowledge, but he is able to provide
specific information under the appropriate conditions. The distinction
is roughly equivalent to that between occurrent and dispositional
doxastic states discussed in contemporary Western philosophy.

'Allamah writes that since God is simple pure existence and is not
devoid of any perfection, all the details of creation exist in God in
their highest forms without distinction, "Hence they are known by Him
with summary knowledge which is at once capable of detailed
disclosure."[^8]

Contemporary Western philosophical theology has been grappling for a
number of years with the problem of how God can have knowledge of
temporary truths, such as that today is Saturday. The answer suggested
by Islamic theology is that God's omniscience is different from human
prepositional knowledge and must not be understood anthropomorphically
to mean the occurrent entertainment of all true propositions in the mind
of God.

All difference and change are to be understood in terms of limitations.
We can attribute to God the knowledge that today is Saturday because He
could reveal to someone that today is Saturday, but God never entertains
this proposition per se.

'Allamah writes that Allah (subhanah wa ta'ala) is too great to be
attributed with a mind with which He might perceive ideas and essences
which are to be found in the imaginations of perceivers. Otherwise, He
would become compound or composed and would be liable to transitory
phases; and even His speech could be potentially wrong.

Far greater is He than what they attribute to Him! In other words, the
glorification of God is seen as being more than worth the price of
interpreting scriptural claims of divine knowledge in such a way that
the emphasis is on the differences rather than the similarities between
divine knowledge and human knowledge.

The divine mystery and transcendence is also asserted in the claim that
God is not only not a person; He is not even a substance. Substances are
taken to be composed of essence and existence and this implies
limitation. God is unlimited, so He can have no qualitative properties,
no essence, and hence cannot be a substance.

While 'Allamah emphasizes that speech and knowledge for man and for God
are metaphysically distinct, he answers the charge which would be raised
by Alston that such a distinction renders such concepts as the knowledge
and speech of God unintelligible. 'Allamah Tabataba'i goes to some
trouble to distance himself from those who have held that the entire
universe is the speech of God.

Tabataba'i rejects this view because it would mean that any claim that
God communicates to his prophets would have to be interpreted as mere
allegory. On the contrary, Tabataba'i maintains that God's speech is
real communication. Divine revelation is real communication because it
is directed to specific individuals, and because through revelation a
message is conveyed.

However, when it is said that God communicates His message to the
prophets, this does not mean that He has thoughts, which are conveyed
from one person to another. When God is said to communicate with a man,
this means that He creates something that gives that man an inner
knowledge of a message.

It becomes clear that the laws which can guarantee the happiness of
human society cannot be perceived by reason. Since according to the
thesis of general guidance running throughout creation the existence of
an awareness of these laws in the human species is necessary, there must
be another power of apprehension within the human species which enables
man to understand the real duties of life and which places this
knowledge within the reach of everyone.

This consciousness and power of perception, which is other than reason
and sense, is called the prophetic consciousness, or the consciousness
of revelation.[^9]

'Allamah claims that although, we use the term 'communication' to
signify the exchange of ideas between human beings, the term can be used
to describe “revelation” because the effect or function is the same,
i.e., a message is obtained. In like manner, we use the term 'lamp' to
describe an electric light, even though it has none of the elements of
the lamps to which the term was first applied.

Thus, revelation may be considered in a real sense to be God's
communication to man, although this communication does not originate
from a mind or a person.[^10] Thus Tabataba'i illustrates one means by
which one may consistently hold that revelation is divine communication
without committing oneself to the view that God is a person.

In so doing, 'Allamah also demonstrates how religious language may be
given a rational interpretation without attributing to God the
metaphysical limitations which accord to man and other substances.

The rationalism of Islamic theology is also exhibited in 'Allamah's
discussions of other topics. In his discussion of miracles, for example,
he asserts that miracles should not be considered as violations of
natural laws.

He does not even require that miracles should have no natural
explanation. If there were some theory by which all the alleged cases of
miracles could be explained and even predicted this would not detract
from their miraculousness.

What makes an event a miracle is merely that it should be out of the
ordinary, good, and that it should be religiously significant in the
posing of a challenge, e.g., establishing the truth of a prophetic
claim.

In the tradition of transcendental wisdom from within which 'Allamah
writes, God is pure existence itself. While this claim can also be found
in Aquinas, it is more fully developed in the transcendental wisdom than
it is in Thomism, for it is in this identification of divinity and the
reality of being that transcendental wisdom is linked to Islamic
mysticism, and it is here that we may find the answer to the second sort
of objection raised by modern Christian theology to the sort of theology
advanced by 'Allamah.

Many Christian theologians and philosophers have claimed that God must
be understood to be personal because the alternative is to consider Him
as impersonal, as an It instead of a He. This dichotomy informs much of
Christian theology and Western religious studies, and yet it is a
dichotomy that has no place in Islamic thought.

The distinction between personal and non-personal conceptions of deity
is very important in the philosophy of mysticism, especially since R. C.
Zaehner proposed a basic dichotomy between theistic and monistic
mystical experiences.[^11] Those who favor the personal view of God
claim that in order for God to be a proper object of worship, He must be
something to which the worshipper can relate personally as loving.

The idea of God as pure existence is seen as one that makes God into a
cold and static abstraction, a  
 sort of cipher. The mercy of God is described by 'Allamah as God's
causal power. A thing is called merciful because it bestows that which
is needed by another. Since God provides all things, He is merciful. The
persona list theologian will object that to offer this sort of
impersonalistic analysis of divine mercy is to deprive it of warmth and
empathy.

The response to this sort of criticism is that the persona list confuses
the poetic and the philosophical approaches to the Real. The fact that
an impersonalistic theology is favored by reason in no way detracts from
the appropriateness of a persona list poetic response to the Real in
worship.

There is a famous story in the Mathnavi of Rumi about a shepherd who is
heard by Moses praying to God in extremely anthropomorphic terms, saying
that he wants to serve the Lord by picking the lice from His hair and
such things. Moses rebukes the shepherd and in turn Moses is rebuked by
God for interfering with the sincere worship of the shepherd.

The criticism of persona list theology to more abstract philosophical
theologies springs from the same sort of mistake, but in the other
direction. It is as if the shepherd were to find fault with the Mosaic
conception of God.

While 'Allamah defends a very strongly rationalist and impersonalistic
theology, this does not prevent him from using the shepherd's imagery in
his worship and in his imaginative relation to the divine, as is
evidenced in his own spiritual writings, such as the following poem:

*I Alone was Captured*

*The valorous heart and its religion have been captured by love of
beauties.*

*They were not captured by a rook, they were rooked by a pretty face.*

*Do not imagine that Majnun became mad of his own will.*

*He was caught and hauled in from the bottom of the sea up to the
heavens by Layld.*

*I did not find my way to the source of the sun by myself. I was a mote,
and your love raised me.*

*I am just some scum washed away in the flood. As it was passing it
carried me off to the heart of the sea.*

*Where was the goblet of red wine? From whose hand was it poured at this
banquet to capture the pining heart?*

*It was the curve of your eyebrow and the palm of your heavenly hand
that in a single disclosure-all at once-captured me.*

*From you yourself have I learned love, and by you am I burned. With
your blushing cheeks you have unsettled me.*

*My friends and I were at the head of your lane, but Your sad face saw
me, and I alone was captured.*

*We had all fallen in love and were anxious lest your sadness leave us
all behind, but I alone was captured.*

The anthropomorphic imagery found in 'Allamah's poetry in no way
conflicts with the abstract conception of divinity found in his
philosophical theology, because it is clear that each has its own place.
The relation between these two realms is maintained by the possibility
of rational interpretation and imaginative expression.

Mystical poetry may be seen as the imaginative expression of that which
is given the form of rational interpretation in philosophical theology.
The religious moment is not to be characterized as monistic or personal,
but as personal in its imaginative expression and non-personal in its
rational interpretation.

[^1]: See Muhammad Legenhausen, Islam and Religious Pluralism (London:
al-Hoda, 1999).

[^2]: H. P. Owen, 'Theism', The Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1972), vIII,
p. 97.

[^3]: John Hick, Philosophy of Religion, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1973), p. 5

[^4]: Richard Swinburne, The Coherence of Theism (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1977), p. 1.

[^5]: J. L. Mackie, Tjhe Miracle of Theism (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1982), p. 1

[^6]: William P. Alston, "The Perception of God," Philosophical Topics,
vol. 16, No. 2. Fall 1988, p. 25. Alston's principle works in
philosophical theology are collected in two volumes: Divine Nature and
Human Language (Ithaca: Cornell, 1989), and Perceiving God: The
Epistemology of Religious Experience (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
1991).

[^7]: Robert Cummings Neville, A Theology Primer (Albany: SUNY Press,
1991), p. 5-6.

[^8]: 'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i Biddyat al Hikmat: The
Elements of Muslim Metaphysics, Part 9, trans. 'Ali Quli Qara'i,
Al-Tawhid, vol. XI, No. 1-2 (Muharram -Jamad i II,1414/July -December
1994), p. 171.

[^9]: 'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i, Shi'ite Islam, trans.
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, (Houston: FILINC, 1979), p. 143.

[^10]: 'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i, Al-Mizan, trans.
Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi (Tehran: WOFIS, 1982), vol. 4, p. 133­-42.

[^11]: R. C. Zaehner, Mysticism: Sacred and Profane (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1961).


