On Islam And Ethics
===================

Various questions have been raised about the relationship between
religion and ethics, and more specifically, about Islam and ethics, to
which this article is a response.[^1] These questions arise from the
fact that both religion and ethics seem to have ascertain sort of
autonomy or independence.

Because religion is established through divine revelation, it seems to
some that moral considerations must be excluded from it. If the dictates
of religion and moral conscience coincide on various judgments, it would
appear to be a happy coincidence, for where there is conflict, religion
claims absolute authority.

On the other hand, moral conscience makes its own absolute claims,
independent of religion. Where the judgments of moral conscience are
clear and firm, if there is conflict with a religious teaching, the
moral conscience demands that the religious teaching be rejected. For
example, moral conscience demands us to reject any religion that
commands cannibalism.

The apparent independence and absolute character of both religious and
moral claims poses a difficulty for religious people. Religious people
believe that they should be moral, and that this is pleasing to God,
while they also must accept the absolute authority of revelation. In
what follows a rough attempt is made to chart the interpenetrating
currents of religion and ethics.

"Religion" is a notoriously difficult term to define. There is a
persistent controversy among scholars about the roots of the Latin word,
religion. From ancient times there were differences of opinion about the
derivation of the word, and contemporary scholars continue to express
contrary opinions.

Nevertheless, it seems that the fundamental meaning in Latin had to do
with the turning of one's attention to matters of worship, being
observant in the performance of rituals as opposed to being
negligent.[^2]

At the same time, many Latin authors and subsequent writers have
understood the word as signifying "binding" in the sense of being bound
through religion to the gods or God, and although this etymology is
considered dubious by modern scholars, it has had considerable influence
on the understanding of the concept of religion in the West.

If we turn to the Arabic word, *din*, we also find that there has been
some controversy about its etymology. It was used at the time of the
Prophet's (s) mission to signify submission to a law and a leader, and
was contrasted with *jahl*, indicating lack of discipline and savagery.
Sometimes the term din was used in contrast with dunya, where the latter
signified a life of safety and comfort, so that din came to be
associated with the courageous struggle under difficult conditions for
the lofty aims of the Prophet (s)[^3] .

The Arabic word *akhlaq* is the plural of *khulq* and signifies the
character traits of a person. It is related to *khalq* in the sense that
the character traits of a person result from the way that the person has
been formed or molded.

In contemporary usage, the word *akhlaq* is used to translate the
English ethics. The English word ethics is ambiguous, since it is used
both for that branch of philosophy that studies values, principles and
virtues and for these values, principles and virtues themselves. Here,
we shall be primarily concerned with ethics in the sense of morals or
*akhlaq*.

Among medieval Muslim scholars, the subject called 'ilm al-akhlaq
consisted mainly of classifications and discussions of the virtues and
vices in a manner influenced by Aristotle's Nichomachean Ethics, but
containing much original reflection in the light of the Qur'an and
ahadith.

Our concern is somewhat broader, for it is concerned with moral
principles, rules, values and aims, in addition to virtues, and the
contemporary Persian use of the word *akhlaq* often includes discussions
of these topics, although the Persian word continues to be used in some
contexts in the more restricted sense pertaining to traits.

By reviewing, even this briefly, the etymologies of ethics and religion,
several points of contact stand out. The submission to law and leader
and the courage to engage in jihad consequent to this submission require
noble character traits.

Religion demands ethics, and the ethical values of pre-Islamic society
were such as to admit to the ethical value of the acceptance of
religion, although the moral demands of Islam go far beyond the ethical
norms of the *jahiliyyah*.

These considerations provide a good introduction to the complexities of
the relation between religion and ethics. On the one hand, all religions
seem to have some moral teachings. They inform their followers about
what is right and wrong, hold up paragons of virtue, and declare what is
to be valued and what is to be held as vain. On the other hand,
religious ethical teachings do not fill a moral vacuum.

Instead, they appeal to the moral conscience of those to whom they are
addressed. Thus, religions both partially confirm and rectify morals.
Numerous examples of these two features can be found in the
prescriptions of the Qur'an. The Qur'an prescribes "enjoining the good"
(*amr bil-ma'ruf*), which appeals to what is generally known to be good.

It also informs us that some things are to be avoided, such as the use
of intoxicants, about which moral conscience does not offer a clear
universal judgment.

This relation of partial confirmation and reform is characteristic of
the relation between religion and many other areas. A similar
dialectical relationship may be found between religion and politics,
economics, history, anthropology and other fields. Reason itself stands
in a similar dialectical relation to religion. It is both partially
confirmed and rectified. Religion appeals to our rational and moral
sensibilities at the same time that it seeks to correct them.

Because of the dual aspect of the relationship between religion and
ethics, a dynamic process is generated in the believer. The believer is
invited by religion to reflect critically on his moral attitudes.

In large part, our understanding of whom we are and our relations to
others in community shapes our moral attitudes. So, the way in which
religion comes to influence our ethics operates on several dimensions,
for in addition to its direct appeal to and correction of our moral
ideas, religion confirms and rectifies our understanding of our selves
and of our societies.

Religion assumes that to some extent we know who we are,that we are
aware of our needs and aspirations. Religion deepens and rectifies this
understanding by teaching that man is party to a primordial covenant
with God:

وَإِذْ أَخَذَ رَبُّكَ مِنْ بَنِي آدَمَ مِنْ ظُهُورِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ
وَأَشْهَدَهُمْ عَلَىٰ

أَنْفُسِهِمْ أَلَسْتُ بِرَبِّكُمْ

ۖ

قَالُوا بَلَىٰ

ۛ

شَهِدْنَا

ۛ

***  
***

 “And when your Lord brought forth from the children of Adam, from their
backs, their descendants, and made them bear witness against their own
souls: Am I not your Lord? They said: Yes! we bear witness.” (7:172)

Furthermore, religion presents man with an ideal model or paragon of
human existence in the perfect man, as exemplified in the lives of the
prophets and imams (as). So, through the utilization of the two precious
things (*thaqalayn*) left to us by the Prophet(s), namely, the Glorious
Qur'an and his inerrant household (as), we may aspire to the
anthropological knowledge that serves as one of the sources of the moral
perspective of Islam.

Religion also assumes that to some extent we know how to organize
ourselves into societies. Once again, the Glorious Qur'an and the
inerrant Ahl al-Bayt of the Prophet(s) partly confirm and partly rectify
our social understanding.

Our communities are not to be based solely on the need for the material
advantages of social life; rather we are to build an ummah whose members
are connected by the fraternal ties of faith to win the pleasure of God.

In order to understand something of the mutual influences of ethics and
religion, it is important to see that in both cases, that of religious
anthropology and religious sociology, a spiraling process of interactive
moral and religious understanding is set up with the establishment of
religion. In the case of sociology, our moral concepts are largely
influenced, though not completely determined, by the nature of our
societies.

As religion prescribes a certain reform and reorganization of our
societies to conform to the divine law, the religiously informed social
arrangements can be expected to give rise to an alteration in the moral
concepts of those who are raised in them. These reformed moral concepts
will then be employed in the attempt to bring society into closer
agreement with the moral demands of religion, society will be changed
again, and moral concepts will be further refined.

The same sort of thing should happen with regard to anthropological
understanding. When we understand ourselves as parties to a divine
covenant, our moral concepts are altered. Through the process of the
perfection of our moral concepts, we come to a better appreciation of
the requirements of the divine covenant. The process is one that
endlessly leads us on through further refinements.

Many people who read the Qur'an daily have noticed that no matter how
many years they study it, they always find surprises. Perhaps the secret
of this phenomenon is to be discovered in the changes the Qur'an
produces in us. Since we are changed by our acquaintance with
revelation, when we read it again, we find things that did not occur to
us before. On the first reading, we did not yet have the capacity
provided by its completion.

The same can be said for the other forms of worship and religious study.
If we worship properly, it should change us. The change should affect
our understanding of what worship is? The new understanding will affect
our attitudes toward worship, and this will result in the ability of
worship to produce different changes in us, not least among them, moral
changes.

Changes in moral concepts are produced through the practice of religion
because religion directs us toward God. As a result of this orientation,
the believer finds that all the noble character traits belong truly to
God, and only metaphorically to anything else. God’s most beautiful
names often describe these noble traits of character.[^4] The
acquisition of virtue then comes to be seen as the assumption
(*takhalluq*) of the character traits of God.

The explanation sketched above of the mutual influences of moral
understanding and religious understanding enable us to answer the
ancient objection to the prophet(s) attributed to the Brahmins and
discussed by Muslim philosophers:[^5] if the moral teachings of the
prophets are in agreement with reason, reason has no need of them; but
if their teachings conflict with reason, they should be rejected.

The answer is to be found in understanding how reason may be in need of
teachings that are in agreement with it. In all learning of rational
matters, instruction is needed for the perfection of reason and for the
appreciation of what accords with it. The moral instruction of religion
takes the form of the successive stages of partial confirmation and
reform outlined above.

The complex character of the mutual influences of religious and moral
thought brings out a further ambiguity in the use of the word ethics
(*akhlaq*). We must be careful to be aware of when we are using the term
for the values, principles and virtues that should ultimately result
from the interactive encounter with religion, or an ideal ethics
associated with the perfected man (*insan kamil*), and when we are using
the term for the various values, principles and virtues and opinions
about them that happen to be instantiated in a given individual or
culture, or mores.

The fact that a moral rule exists in a given society does not imply that
the rule has any absolute authority.

From the point of view of ideal ethics, such a rule may even be
perverse.

The distinction between ideal ethics and mores may be of assistance in
understanding the nature of secular ethics. When we ask whether secular
ethics is possible, if what is meant is ethics in the sense of mores,
then the answer is obvious.

At least on the social level, we cannot find a single instance of a
community throughout human history that did not distinguish in some way
between what its members considered to be virtue and vice, good and bad,
right and wrong.

When we speak of secular ethics, we mean the ideals, values, moral
principles and concepts of the virtues dominant in the secular societies
of Western Europe, North America, Australia and New Zealand as well as
the former and currently communist nations. While no one can deny that
ethics is to be found in all of these societies, in the secular liberal
societies of the West, ethics has become weakened.

The weakness of secular ethics results from the fact that secular
society is divided into personal and organizational realms. In the
former values are arbitrary; in the latter they are given by the nature
of the organization. In neither case are they open to rational dispute.
The society is also divided politically between the proponents of
limitless individual liberty and the proponents of collectivism, the
champions of the personal and the organizational realms of social life.

When values are taken to be a matter of personal taste, there can be no
rational argument about what values are correct. When values are a
product of the structure of organizations whose aims (described in terms
of profit and efficiency) cannot be questioned, again rational
investigation and moral inquiry are stifled.

So, the dynamic process of partial confirmation and reform set up in
religious ethics (described earlier) does not take place in secular
societies, or takes place in very limited circumstances. Likewise, when
values are limited to being either personal or organizational, the
motivation for spiritual wayfaring is weakened.

It has no place in the organization, so it must be considered a leisure
time activity (*sargarmi*). There is no intellectual groundwork in
secular society to support the idea that virtue and moral insight are to
be won only through the hard work of the purification of the soul.

While it may be logically possible for an individual or society to
stumble upon the ideal ethics through its own good sense, moral
conscience and rational abilities, for the reasons mentioned above, this
is highly unlikely.

Where ancient civilizations appear to have approximated to an
understanding of ideal ethics despite the fact that they were unfamiliar
with prophetic teachings, as in ancient Greece and ancient China, there
was at least the idea that the right thing to do in a given set of
circumstances was determined by the natural end of man and the law
determined by reason, social harmony, or harmony with nature or the Tao,
none of which has any place in secular modern thought.

Indeed, it is not very farfetched to suppose that some form of divine
guidance was operative in these traditional cultures, even if not known
as such. As we shall see below, Mulla Muhsin Fayd Kashani goes so far as
to refer to the moral conscience as an interior prophet.

The existence of different mores in different cultures has given rise to
the idea that ethics are relative to culture and that where there is a
plurality of cultures or subcultures; we should also expect and accept a
plurality of moral visions.

Yet religion seems to make absolute claims binding on all people,
regardless of their nationality or culture. Religion seems to teach that
there is only one ideal ethics, and that there can be no compromise with
ethical relativism and ethical pluralism?

In order to understand these issues, we need to get a clear
understanding of what is meant by moral relativism and moral pluralism.
Different writers define these terms in different ways. It would not be
difficult to define them in ways that are not compatible with religious
teachings. It is much more interesting to investigate what forms of
moral relativism and moral pluralism may be compatible with religious
teachings.

Moral relativisms are often divided into three kinds: descriptive,
epistemological and normative.[^6] Descriptive relativism is merely the
claim that in different societies different moral codes are followed,
different conceptions of the virtues are found, and different ideals are
valued.

There is not much controversy about this, except for the question of the
extent of the differences. Could there be two different societies for
which there were no common elements of ethics at all? Does human nature
or the nature of human social life necessitate some basic features of
morality? Perhaps an argument could be made on the basis of the
universal moral appeal of religion that there must be some common
features of moral conscience.

Normative relativism is the claim that it is wrong to pass judgment
about the morals of others. Normative relativism in its most extreme
form is the claim that one should never pass judgment on the moral worth
of anyone's actions, beliefs, character or values.

Although this extreme form of normative relativism is quite implausible,
and very contemporary philosophers would be prepared to defend it,
something like it seems to be fairly popular among many young people in
the West, who often seem to make the mistake of thinking that it follows
from descriptive moral relativity.

This normative relativism is a dangerous tendency, because it is easily
turned into an excuse for neglecting the duty to oppose wrongdoing and
injustice. The view is logically self-defeating, because those who
accept it consider it wrong for people to pass judgment on others, while
considering something to be wrong is a form of passing judgment, and
therefore, to be consistent, they should consider themselves wrong.

The most extreme form of a denial of normative relativism would hold
that it is always proper to pass moral judgment on any group or
individual's actions, beliefs, ideals or character. Religion appears to
condemn this extreme position, because it holds that there are aspects
of a person's moral life known only to himself and God upon which moral
worth depends.

If both extreme positions about normative relativism are rejected, the
correct position must lie somewhere between them. In other words, the
correct position seems to be that it is appropriate to pass judgment on
others in some circumstances but not in others. Exactly what criterion
is to be used, if such a criterion can be formulated at all, is an issue
that requires more discussion and reflection than it can be given here.

Epistemological forms of moral relativism hold that moral truths are
relative to the epistemic states of agents, that is, that moral truths
are relative to the ways people think, what they believe, and what they
know. Sometimes this is confused with moral subjectivism.

According to moral subjectivism, there is no objective moral reality
that underlies claims to moral truth. This subjectivism may be
individual or social. The subjectivist holds that what is right or good
or virtuous is whatever the moral agent or society believes to be so.

While many epistemological relativists are subjectivists, one may reject
subjectivism while affirming epistemological relativism. One may hold,
for example, that good and bad are like right and left. What is to the
right depends upon one's position, but given one's position it is an
objective fact that an object is to one's right. Whether the object is
to the right or left is in no way dependent upon whether one believes
the object to be to the right or left.

Likewise, the religious believer may hold that there are differences in
the moral laws taught by different prophets (as) to their communities,
so that what is right or wrong is relative to one's being under the
command of a particular Prophet(s), and being under such command, in
turn, may be taken to depend upon one's epistemic state.

However, this does not mean that for anyone who believes that they
should follow the law of Abraham (as), it is correct for them to do so.
When the law brought by one prophet is superseded by the law brought by
the next prophet of God (as), it becomes obligatory to follow the
superseding law. So, here is an interesting type of epistemological
moral relativism that seems to be more than compatible with religious
belief.

A neat logical proof demonstrates another respect in which religious
belief is compatible with a form of epistemological relativism that
pertains to the importance of intention, *niyyah*. The intention of an
agent is an epistemic state. Whether an action is right or wrong for an
agent to perform depends upon the agent's intention, according to
religious principles.

Hence, according to religious principles, whether an action is right or
wrong for an agent to perform depends upon his epistemic state, and this
is the definition of epistemic relativism. What is interesting about
this aspect of moral relativism is that it is also compatible with a
form of moral absolutism, for one might hold that variance in intention
in a given situation can only be sufficient to change the judgment
applied to an action if the variance is due to relevant mistaken beliefs
or other moral failures. In that case, an action could be considered
absolutely right or wrong under the assumption that the agent who
performed it held no mistaken beliefs relative to the action.

There are many other varieties of epistemological moral relativism and
related positions about which interesting questions may be raised with
regard to their compatibility with religious teachings, but it would
take several pages to discuss them.

The important thing is to be aware of the differences. There are too
many writers who confuse issues by making views associated with
Protagoras the measure of all relativisms.[^7] While there are many
philosophers who defend some version of epistemological moral
relativism, I do not know of any philosopher today who would claim that
the proposition that x is good is equivalent to the proposition x is
believed to be good.

One of the most common fallacies that occur in discussions of relativism
is the confusion of the different types of relativism. The mistake
occurs on the part of both those who attack and those who defend some
sort of relativism. Conclusions reached on the basis of arguments
pertaining to one form of relativism are illegitimately applied to
others.

Aside from the differences among the positions mentioned, relativisms
may be divided according to the parties to which the thesis of moral
relativity is applied. The truth of moral claims may be held to depend
upon the beliefs and attitudes of groups or individuals, or the beliefs
and attitudes of groups fulfilling various conditions or certain classes
of individuals.

For example, it is sometimes held that moral truths are dependent upon
moral standards realized in moral language by those who use the
language. According to this sort of opinion, the epistemic states of
individuals are not sufficient to determine moral truth until those
individuals organize themselves into a linguistic community.

It is not uncommon to find religious people who hold some version of
moral relativism restricted to a specific individual or group of
individuals. For example, some hold that what is right is whatever is
pleasing to mawla (as).

This need not be a form of relativism, for it only states that what is
right is to be measured by what is pleasing to mawla; but a form of
relativism takes shape when it is held that rightness is dependent on
being pleasing to mawla.

Many mistakes in philosophy occur because of confusion between the way
of knowing that something is so and what it is that makes something so.
This example also indicates that much depends upon the relation between
the relevant epistemic states and the moral evaluation in question. One
might hold a form of relativism in which epistemic states do not
completely determine what is right and wrong, but in which they have
significant influence in the matter.

Another variable according to which types of relativism may be
distinguished pertains to the types of moral truth claimed to be
relative to epistemic states. For example, the Ash'arites is notorious
for their divine subjectivism in ethics according to which moral
judgments are entirely dependent on the will of God.

Such views are called divine command theories of ethics. Robert M. Adams
holds a divine command theory of a more restrictive sort. He claims that
moral statements about what ought to be done depend on the divine will,
but that moral judgments about what is good and just are not dependent
on the divine will.

The force of the moral ought, according to Adams, stems from the fact
that it indicates the command of a good and just God.[^8] The importance
of this sort of view as a form of relativism is brought out by
considering the fact that while a good and just God would not command
just anything, there may be some latitude with regard to what He could
command.

Maybe the independent moral facts of the matter are not sufficient to
determine everything needed for a moral code, so God fills in the gaps
needed for an effective morality through divine fiat. Since God is just,
He could not have commanded lying, but maybe He could have commanded the
use of the toothbrush, or forbidden marriage to the child of one's uncle
or aunt.

The points and examples indicated above indicate the extent to which
there can be a wide variety of types of epistemological moral
relativism, which may or may not be related to a more general position
of epistemological relativism in areas other than ethics.

One may hold that some moral truths are absolute and others relative to
the epistemic states of creatures or to the divine will. The nature of
the dependence of moral truths to epistemic states may vary from
complete determination to some weaker form of influence. Some moral
truths may be relative in different ways to the epistemic states of
different individuals or groups. It may well be that moral truth turns
out to be a quite complex matter.

Before leaving the topic of moral relativism, it is worth discussing a
very popular argument for relativism. It is often pointed out that there
is no neutral standpoint from which to evaluate competing claims to
moral truth.

Often this claim is made about all truths, whether moral or not. From
the alleged fact that all methods of evaluation are subjectively biased,
it is fallaciously inferred that there is no objective truth about
morality and that all moral propositions depend for their truth on the
epistemic states of those who evaluate them.

This sort of argument is invalid because it does not follow from the
fact that reality can only be viewed from a subjective perspective that
reality lacks objectivity. The in eliminability of subjectivity does not
imply that all subjectivities are equally reliable.

Likewise, no claim about length can be evaluated without measurement.
This does not imply that length depends on measurement, nor does it
imply that all methods of measurement are equally accurate.[^9]

As for pluralism in ethics, this is a topic that has received
considerable attention in recent years. As in the case of relativism,
there are a large variety of ethical pluralisms. Pluralism in ethics
must not be confused with the metaphysical pluralism defended by William
James or the religious pluralism advocated by John Hick.

In ethics, pluralism is usually associated with the claim that there is
a diversity of ideals one may legitimately pursue and that these ideals
cannot be reconciled, that is, it is only possible to pursue one at the
expense of others.

Sometimes this pluralism of values is stated in terms of a conflict
between moral and non-moral values, while others assert a plurality of
irreconcilable moral values. Sometimes moral pluralism is defined as the
view that there are different domains to which different moral
principles apply, or in which moral considerations have different
rankings.

Islam clearly affirms a limited ethical pluralism on the basis of
gender. Courage and modesty are virtues that should be developed by both
men and women, but for women modesty has priority over courage, and for
men, courage has priority over modesty.

Most contemporary defenders of ethical pluralism, however, advocate a
form of pluralism that goes beyond anything to be found in Islam. They
claim that there are radically different moral ideals none of which are
superior to the others.

The most notorious such view was defended by Susan Wolf in her article
"Moral Saints" in which she argues that the non-moral ideal of being an
expert wine connoisseur may justifiably require the neglect of moral
pursuits![^10]

So, attempts to prove that moral relativism and pluralism are absolutely
true or false are based on confusion and lack of precision. Rather than
address such broad issues in a general and vague manner, it would be
much more profitable to examine the claims of specific authors in
specific texts.

There are forms of relativism and pluralism that Islam appears to
require, and there are other forms that it strenuously must deny. The
study of philosophical ethics may be of assistance in distinguishing
them.

The major theories of contemporary Western ethics are often divided into
these three major types: deontological, teleological and virtue
oriented. Aristotelian ethics are virtue oriented, Kantian ethics are
deontological, and there are various forms of teleological ethics, or
consequentialist ethics, of which utilitarianism has had the most
influence in the West since the nineteenth century.

During the first two thirds of the twentieth century, Western ethics was
largely dominated by the debate between utilitarian’s and Kantians,
while in the last thirty years; there has been a revival of Aristotelian
virtue ethics.

Each camp has had proponents who have claimed that the moral life can be
completely described in terms of its own theory, but they have been more
successful in showing the deficiencies of their rivals than in
establishing their own claims.

Kantian and utilitarian theories are unsuccessful attempts to justify
the morality inherited from Christianity after the rules of morality had
been deprived of their teleological character through the rejection of
Aristotelian philosophies, and after they had been deprived of their
categorical character as expressions of divine law through the rise of
secular Protestantism.

In 1958, the English philosopher Elizabeth Anscombe initiated the
contemporary revival of virtue ethics as an attempt to provide an ethics
for societies in which religious belief had ceased to provide
orientation.

Her insight was that with the eclipse of religious belief, the moral
force of duty and obligation could not be sustained, whether by Kantian
claims on behalf of reason, or by utilitarian attempts to ground
morality in the psychological states that result from the satisfaction
of desires. She failed to see that the motivation to acquire virtue
would be no less weakened when removed from the context of religious
thought in which it had been nurtured in Christian Europe.

One is left with the impression that no system of ethics can be complete
unless it pays adequate attention to all three elements of ethics: the
moral law, the end of man, and virtue. Moreover, an ideal system of
ethics should not only pay heed to these three elements separately; it
should also integrate them.

This task seems so overwhelming that a number of recent moralists have
advanced the view that there can be no correct theory of ethics,
sometimes called "the no-theory theory".

(No doubt, there will be some controversy as to whether the ethical
guidance provided by religion should be considered a theory, and we will
return to this point after discussing whether religious ethics is more
appropriately considered deontological, teleological or virtue
oriented.)

Regardless of whether it is a theory or not, we fortunately do not need
to construct a theory of ethics in order to find integrated guidance
from religion in the three areas of ethics mentioned: precepts, aims and
virtues. God has revealed a moral law for man; He has described the
proper end of man; and He has shown us virtue in the lives of His
prophets and imams (as).

So, what we find in the ethics of Islam is a mixed view of the moral
life in which law, ends and virtue are integrated harmoniously, grounded
in conceptions of divine providence and the essence and end of man, and
motivated through a complex religious psychology of taqwa and love.

Of course, this does not mean that there is no work to be done in
religious ethics. To follow God's guidance and to understand how these
various elements are to be determined and related to one another
requires a thorough knowledge of various Islamic sciences. It is by
means of *fiqh* and *usul* that the law is known. An Islamic
anthropology is needed to understand the end of man, which, no less than
*fiqh* and *usul*, must rely upon the sciences of tafsir and hadith.

Finally, the virtues have been the particular subject of study by the
'urafa of Islam who have been especially concerned with the practical
course of *sayr va suluk* through which the virtues are acquired, which
has led to an entire genre of Islamic literature, an excellent example
of which is the book *Misbah al-Shariah*, which some attribute to the
sixth Imam, peace be with him.

As for the issue of theory, mentioned earlier, one may wonder whether a
system of ethics can be derived from the sacred texts of religion. Here
we should ask what is meant by a system. Sometimes what is meant by a
system of ethics is a philosophical theory of ethics.

The two, however, should not be confused. There are many systems that
are by no means philosophical, such as organic systems, economic
systems, digestive systems, mnemonic systems and galactic systems.
Philosophy can be used to develop theories of such systems, but the
existence of such systems does not imply that there are theories of
them.

A number of recent Western moral philosophers have advanced the position
that no philosophical theory can adequately explain and systematically
relate all the aspects of the moral life. Perhaps the most important
discussion of this topic is to be found in Bernard Williams' book,
Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy, but there are several other very
interesting books and articles on the subject.[^11]

Anti-theorists argue that while some aspects of morality can be codified
into a set of rules and principles, there will always be a residue that
escapes codification. For example, we should be courageous. On the basis
of this, the rule may be formulated that we should not flee from the
enemy in battle, unless to regroup or for some other strategic purpose.
But no set of rules can adequately capture courage to such an extent
that anyone who followed them could be said to display courage.
Different situations require different sorts of responses from the
courageous person in ways that cannot be foreseen.

Secondly, it is argued that many ethical norms and values are inherently
vague, and that because of this vagueness they cannot be completely
formulated in the form of a theory.

Another reason given for the impossibility of a comprehensive ethical
theory is the existence of moral dilemmas. It sometimes seems that moral
rules pull us in opposite directions. We ought not to offend others and
we ought not to lie, but sometimes it seems that there is no way to
avoid offense but by lying.

Here we need to evaluate which is more important. If the lie is
insignificant and the offense would be serious, morality will permit the
lie; but if the offense is not so serious or if the lie is sufficiently
important, morality will permit the offense.

There is no way to state an exact rule for measuring and comparing the
importance of various moral demands in specific situations. Thus, there
is an aspect of ethics that resists formulation into a theory.

If we restrict our attention to the topics of philosophical ethics
around which various theories have been constructed, we will find many
that are not discussed in the religious sources. Take,for example, the
issue of moral realism. Moral realists assert that a complete
description of reality must include moral facts.

Theories of religious ethics derived from the Qur'an and ahadith may be
formulated which accept any of various versions of moral realism, and
other theories derived from the same sources may be developed along
non-realist lines.

Rational reflection and evaluation may lead us to the conclusion that
one of these theories is more harmonious with religious claims than the
others, but this is not a matter of simple derivation from the religious
sources. Furthermore, religious theories of ethics may be developed
which do not address this topic at all.

On the other hand, even if it is not possible to formulate a complete
and comprehensive philosophical theory of religious ethics, this does
not imply that philosophical discussions of religious ethics are of no
benefit. Interesting questions are raised in the philosophical
discussions, and by attempting to answer them we can deepen our
understanding and insight.

Problems of philosophical ethics as developed in the West often have
analogues in various Islamic sciences. This demonstrates the relevance
of Western philosophical ethics to religious understanding, and it
provides fertile ground for comparative studies.

While Muslim scholars are beginning to engage in this sort of
comparative study, there are other traditions of philosophical
reflection on the problems of ethics to which Muslims have not yet begun
to turn their attention, such as the Chinese tradition, whose riches
continue to be ignored by Muslim scholars, despite the often quoted
hadith:

اطلبوا العلم ولو بالصين،

*"Seek knowledge, even unto China."*[^12]

The distinction between ideal ethics and mores, and our discussion of
secular ethics, relativism and pluralism must not lead us to imagine
that no correct ethical understanding is possible except by the special
friends of God.

Moral intuition or conscience seems to be present in all human beings,
even if it may be misinterpreted or neglected due to the influence of
deviant mores. Moral conscience calls the individual from within to
abstain from shameful acts and to seek nobility, and for this reason
Mulla Muhsin Fayd Kashani often speaks of it as an interior prophet.

The intellect ('aql) is reported to be an interior prophet in a
well-known hadith, and an important component of the intellect is the
moral conscience.[^13]

In opposition to the view of Fayd, the objection may be raised that
there is a fundamental difference between the function of the prophets
and that of the moral conscience. Kant is famous for his claim that when
one behaves morally, one must do what is right for its own sake, and not
because of any expected benefit.

The prophet(s), on the other hand, promise divine rewards for good works
and chastisement for evil. So, it may seem that religious motivation for
action actually precludes the possibility of real morality.

This is not a very difficult puzzle to solve. Imam 'Ali has explained it
very clearly in his saying that there are different grades of
worshippers.

**  
**
وقال عليه السلام : إِنَّ قَوْماً عَبَدُوا اللهَ رَغْبَةً فَتِلْكَ
عِبَادَةُ التُّجَّارِ، وَإِنَّ قَوْماً عَبَدُوا اللهَ رَهْبَةً فَتِلْكَ
عِبَادَةُ الْعَبِيدِ، وَإِنَّ قَوْماً عَبَدُوا اللهَ شُكْراً فَتِلْكَ
عِبَادَةُ الاْحْرَارِ.

And [Imam 'Ali], peace be with him, said: ".And there are people who
worship Allah out of desire; that is the worship of traders. And there
are people who worship Allah out of fear; that is the worship of slaves.
And there are people who worship Allah out of gratitude; that is the
worship of the free.[^14]

When children are taught right and wrong they are scolded and praised.
So they first learn to be moral out of fear of being scolded and desire
for praise. But if they are properly taught, they develop a moral
conscience that governs them more effectively than threats or promises.

Likewise, believers at the elementary stages obey God out of fear and
hope, while the mature believer obeys out of love for God. This is why
Rabi'ah 'Adawiyyah, May Allah be pleased with her, is said to have
carried a torch to burn heaven and a pail of water to put out the flames
of hell.

What she was really doing was encouraging believers to obey God out of
love for Him rather than because of threats and promises. She is
reported to have said:

*Your magnificence is such that I do not worship You from fear of Your
fire, nor from desire for Your paradise. Nay! But for the munificence of
Your most munificent face and the love in You.*[^15]

The mature believer never abandons certainty about divine rewards and
punishments, but he acts in accord with a higher motivation.

قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ
اللَّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ

ۗ

وَاللَّهُ

غَفُورٌ

رَحِيمٌ

 

*** “Say: If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you and
forgive you your faults, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful”*** (3:31)

Love of God calls forth obedience to Him and His Apostle(s). It is in
the context of this love that religious ethics is best understood. Just
as the promises and threats of the parents in the training of the child
are expressions of the love of the parents for the child, so too, divine
promises and threats are expressions of divine love. What the parents
command is for the benefit of the child, and what God commands is really
for the benefit of His servants.[^16]

إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ لِلنَّاسِ بِالْحَقِّ

ۖ

فَمَنِ اهْتَدَىٰ

فَلِنَفْسِهِ

ۖ

وَمَنْ ضَلَّ فَإِنَّمَا يَضِلُّ عَلَيْهَا

ۖ

وَمَا أَنْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِوَكِيلٍ 

***“Surely We have revealed to you the Book with the truth for the sake
of men; so whoever follows the right way, it is for his own soul and
whoever errs, he errs only to its detriment; and you are not a custodian
over them.”*** ***(39:41)***

The believer sees that what God has commanded is for his benefit, and
seeing this he comes to love God. The lover of God then obeys out of
love for Him, even in matters in which he does not understand how the
command can benefit him, but trusting in the divine love. If he seeks
that which is for his own benefit, it is because he knows that this is
what God wants for him. Where the command is clear, no attention is paid
to any benefit in this world or the next but nearness to the Beloved. As
Hafiz says:

*My heart is the canopy of His love.*

*My eye holds the reflection of His face.*

*My pride would stoop to naught here or above, yet*

*My neck bends to bear the weight of His grace.*

One of the problems I have noticed in religious societies stems from the
fact that it is mistakenly imagined that the sort of practical work
needed for a moral life is the exclusive business of the great *'urafa*
and scholars who have written fat books testifying to their great
learning, while in fact the process of purifying the soul ought to be
considered the business of all believers.

To have states in which one sees everything as a sign of God does not
require anything more than faith and attention, but to move beyond this
to the point that the effects of spiritual wayfaring become evident in
the acquisition of good morals requires participation in the *jihad
al-akbar*.

Participation in this warfare is open, even to the illiterate, provided
they have Iman, taqwa and tawassul to the divinely appointed guides, as
is indicated in our invocation of blessings upon the Prophet Muhammad
and his folk:

**اللّهُمّ صَلّ عَلَى مُحَمّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمّدٍ**

The desired ethical life of religion is displayed in the lives of the
prophets and imams (as). The rest of religious ethics, religious
ordinances, and spiritual wayfaring (*sayr va suluk)* elaborate
practical methods to achieve this sort of desired life.

Of course, we do not expect to reach this pinnacle of moral excellence
ourselves, but this is because of our own failings, not because the
instructions of religion are deficient. If the instructions given
through divine guidance were obeyed, character would most certainly
change.

Strength and *himmah* (resolution, aspiration) to submit in total
obedience despite the satanic temptations that constantly spring from
the base soul in different guises require divine aid. Reading the
religious instructions to be found in books, even the Qur'an and
ahadith, are not sufficient to bring about real change in character.

At some point we have to put the instructions we have learned from the
sacred sources into practice, and on our own we will never be successful
in this. We learn from the Ahl al-Bayt (as) that one of the best
practical methods for acquiring good morals is association with the
virtuous.

*Imam Sajjad, peace be with him, said, ".Sitting with the righteous is
an invitation to righteousness."*

In Shi'i teachings, we find that the practical means for the development
of morals, both in the individual and in the community, are inextricably
linked with the concept of *walayah*. Consider the lack of morals that
accompanies the rejection of *walayah* in the characters of Abu
Lahab,Mu'awiyyah and Yazid, and their followers. The traces of the
excellence of character and morals that are the results of *walayah* and
its acceptance, on the other hand, are found in the bloodstained field
of Karbala.

Another practice recommended for the development of morals is
contemplation of death, and there is no better death than that which
took place at Karbala.

When we contemplate this death, and we consider the fact that we, too,
are all in the process of dying, that is, when we come face to face with
the reality of our own impending deaths, and we compare this to the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (as), we see that the worldly pursuits that
occupy us are vain, and that what is of ultimate value is to be found by
giving up all the things in the world, even life itself, for Him.

When we see death's arms stretched out before us, and we consider how
those arms so lovingly embraced Husayn (as) , our interests in the
charms of money, power and worldly pleasure gradually are extinguished
and replaced by the light of the remembrance of Him.

In the life and martyrdom of Imam Husayn we observe how the remembrance
and contemplation of *Haqq ta'ala*, the pollution of the lower self is
wiped away to disclose the divine love that motivates true moral
excellence.

In a famous *hadith qudsi* it is reported that God says: *"Whoever seeks
Me, finds Me; whoever finds Me, knows Me; whoever knows Me, loves Me;
whoever loves Me, I love him; and whomever I love, I kill; and whomever
I kill, I Myself am his compensation (diah)."*

Finally, the objection may be raised that if religion and ethics are as
closely intertwined as I have suggested, then how is it that we find
examples of genuinely moral people who are philosophical materialists
and people who are apparently religious, yet morally ruthless.

The pre-Christian Roman poet and philosopher Lucretius (99-54 B.C.)
propounded a thoroughly materialist philosophy in his De *Rerum Natura*,
according to which all that exist are atoms and the void. Yet the way of
life he advocated was one in which moral ideals figure prominently.

More recently the Russian anarchist Peter Kropotkin (1842-1921) lived a
life of self-sacrifice and altruism, and even wrote an important book on
ethics which has been translated into several languages, although he
espoused a materialistic philosophy. Moral ideals had an important place
in the thought of even those who explicitly rejected morality, such as
Nietzsche and Marx.

While it is not difficult to find examples of exceptional individuals
who are philosophical materialists yet life according to strict ethical
principles, in a religious society where moral principles are bound up
with religious teachings, it is natural to view materialism as a
rejection of morality because of its denial of religious teachings.

This is why the idea that if there is no God, then everything is
permitted assumes such importance for the Russian novelist Dostoevsky
(1821-1881). This also explains why the fact that so many Americans
proclaim their religious faith while rejecting traditional religious
morals is met with such incomprehension by those who live in traditional
religious societies.

The source of the erosion of religious morality lies not in
philosophical materialism, but in the structure of modern liberal
secular society. Modern secular societies, in accord with liberal
political theory, have established a complex system of rights designed
for the purpose of protecting individual liberties, the result of which
has been the expansion of the sphere of anonymity in which its citizens
live.

Urbanization and mobility also contribute to this result. Religious
social mores are effective when one's actions are seen by others who
share one's religious values, so that the violation of religious or
moral precepts causes a sense of shame.

In modern urban societies, when one's actions are performed before
others who are strangers and about whom no assumptions can be made with
regard to moral approbation or condemnation, and who are presumed to
have no right to pass any sort of moral judgment because morals are
considered private and personal, the agent becomes anonymous.

Recall the story of the ring of Gyges told by Socrates in Book II of
Plato's Republic. Socrates asks, if one were in possession of a magic
ring that would make one invisible at will, who would refrain from
sleeping with his neighbor's wife?

Religion teaches that even if we are not seen by men, nothing can be
hidden from God. Even where there is no shame before one's fellows,
there is guilt before God. Nevertheless, where social anonymity
prevails, temptation will often prove too strong to be resisted, even by
those who consider themselves to be religious.

When anonymous sin becomes common, excuses and rationalizations soon
abound and the moral sense is gradually eroded. Then a process sets in
which are the reverse of that described in my answer to the first
question. The outward shell of religion and a false sense of
spirituality will be the last things abandoned as hypocrisy comes to rob
religion of its moral content. And this is much more harmful than
isolated cases of philosophical materialism and moral nihilism.

In order to understand the moral dangers facing modern Muslim societies,
it is necessary to become acquainted with the moral psychology of
hypocrisy. The greatest danger to the Muslim ummah has always come from
hypocrisy. All of the imams achieved martyrdom at the hands of Muslim
hypocrites.

The hands of hypocrites also carried out the terror by which so many
leaders of the Islamic Revolution of Iran achieved martyrdom. The new
form of treachery against the Muslim ummah is the attempt to erode
Islamic morals from within Islamic society.

In Western secular societies, the erosion of morals takes place through
the expansion of the sphere of anonymity, the ample provision of satanic
temptations, and the dominant social perspective that morals are a
private matter.

In modern Muslim societies, social anonymity also poses a danger,
although it has not reached the levels found in the West. Fortunately,
al-Hamdu li-Allah, the idea that morals are private has not won wide
acceptance in the Muslim world.

Hypocrisy enters the Islamic world with the mistaken perception that it
is "advanced" to disregard Islamic morals, especially with regard to
*hijab*, the relations between the sexes, and the gathering of wealth by
*haram* means.

Likewise, Mu'awiyyah thought that to be "advanced" Islamic government
had to follow the examples of imperial Rome and Iran. The hypocrites
seek to make use of Islam for the purposes of Satan and the base soul,
for gaining the things of this world, while the true believers are those
who seek to make use of everything they have, even their own lives, for
the purposes of Islam.

The danger posed to man by philosophical materialism is not serious,
especially since the collapse of the Soviet Union, and the rejection of
dialectical materialism that prevails in the world today. There are
other forms of materialism and related philosophical theories current
among philosophers in the West, but it seems unlikely that these would
ever gain wide public support.

Much more dangerous to man is the tendency to set one's moral standards
according to what are perceived to be the "advanced" ways of life
portrayed in Western cinema, which is really merely an instance of the
more general failure to engage in the moral orientation offered by
religion, and to follow worldly temptations instead.

Complaints about insufficient wealth to purchase desired consumer
products are heard too frequently among those who call themselves
Muslims. A man will gladly put in an extra twenty hours of work each
week to be able to purchase a beautiful automobile. How much time are we
willing to spend in the effort to obtain moral excellence? It is fitting
to conclude by reflecting on the prayer with which Imam Khomeini ends
his *Forty Hadiths.*

*O God, Who has illuminated the hearts of the awliya' with the light of
love and cleared the tongues of the lovers of Your beauty from the
taints of egoism, and has placed Your majesty beyond the reach of
self-seeking wretches! Awaken us from the intoxication of worldly
delusion and deliver us from the heavy slumber of nature, and remove
with Your gesture the thick curtains and obstructing veils of egotism
and self-seeking. Let us into the assembly of the holy ones of Your
threshold and into the holy company of the sincere God-seekers. Remove
from us these devilish, ugly, and coarse qualities of ours and our
pretensions and waywardness. Inform with sincerity and love our
movements and pauses, our actions and works, our beginning and end, and
our outward and inward being.*[^17]

[^1]: The questions have been specifically raised by the editorial staff
of the theological journal published in Qom,Naqd wa Nazar, in No. 13 of
which (1998) the substance of the present article is published (in
Persian) in question/answer format.

[^2]: See Wilfred Cantwell Smith, The Meaning and End of Religion (San
Francisco: Harper & Row, 1978), 204-205.

[^3]: See M. M. Bravmann, The Spiritual Background of Early Islam
(Leiden: Brill, 1972), 34-36.

[^4]: Cf. William C. Chittick, Imaginal Worlds (Albany: State University
of New York Press, 1994), 40.

[^5]: Cf., Fazlur Rahman, "Barahima" in the New Edition of the
Encyclopedia of Islam. A version of the argument mentioned is attributed
to Ibn Iazm and Shahrastani.

[^6]: See the article "Moral Relativism" by David Wong in The
Encyclopedia of Ethics.

[^7]: Protagoras was the ancient Greed sophist who is infamous for his
assertion, "Man is the measure of all things."

[^8]: Robert Adams: "Must God Create the Best?" Philosophical Review,
81, 3 (1972), 317-332, reprinted in Thomas Morris, ed., The Concept of
God (New York: Oxford University P1987), 91-106; "A Modified Divine
Command Theory of Ethical Wrongness" in Religion and Morality: A
Collection of Essaysed. Gene Outka and John P. Reeder, (New York:
Doubleday, 1973); "Divine Command Metaethics Modified Again" The Journal
of Religious Ethics, 7, 1 (1979).

[^9]: Cf. Alasdair MacIntyre, Whose Justice? Which Rationality? (Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1988), in which one finds a
thorough refutation of this sort of relativistic argument and others.

[^10]: Susan Wolf, "Moral Saints," The Journal of Philosophy 79
(1982),419-430, reprinted in Robert B. Kruschwitz and Robert C. Roberts,
eds., The virtues: Contemporary Essays on Moral Character (Belmont:
Wadsworth, 1987), 137-152.

[^11]: Bernard Williams, Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1985). Also see Edmund L. Pincoffs, Quandaries
and virtues (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1986) and a defense
of moral theory by Robert B. Louden, Morality and Moral Theory (New
York: Oxford, 1992).

[^12]: See Fayd Kashani, Mahajah al-Bayda, vol. 1 (Qom: Daftar
Intisharat Islami,1415),p 21

[^13]: See Fayd Kashani, 'Ilm al-Yaqin, vol. 2, (Qom: Bidar), p. 1054.

[^14]: Nahj al-Baldghah, hikmah 237.

[^15]: 'Abd al-Rahman Jami, Nafahat al-Uns min Hadarat al-Quds, ed. Dr.
Mahmud 'Abadi (Tehran: Intisharat Itila'at, 1370/1991), p. 544.

[^16]: Cf. (10:108), (17:15).

[^17]: Translated by 'Ali Quli Qara'i in Al-Tawhid, vol. 14, No. 3, p.
18.


