11) Hadith Al-Salat: The Family of Ibrahim And The Family Of Muhammad
=====================================================================

The family of Muhammad, sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi, in our Ummah mainly
mirrors the family of Ibrahim, ‘alaihi al-salam, in his Ummah. This
fundamental fact is explicitly mentioned in authentic Sunni ahadith.
Imam al-Bukhari (d. 256 H), for instance, records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا قيس بن حفص وموسى بن إسماعيل قالا حدثنا عبد الواحد بن زياد حدثنا
أبو قرة مسلم بن سالم الهمذاني قال حدثني عبد الله ابن عيسى سمع عبد
الرحمن بن أبي ليلى قال : لقيني كعب بن عجرة فقال ألا أهدي لك هدية
سمعتها من النبي صلى الله عليه و سل؟ فقلت بلى فأهدها لي فقال سألنا رسول
الله صلى الله عليه و سلم فقلنا يا رسول الله كيف الصلاة عليكم أهل البيت
فإن الله قد علمنا كيف نسلم عليكم؟ قال قولوا اللهم صل على محمد وعلى آل
محمد كما صليت على إبراهيم وعلى آل إبراهيم إنك حميد مجي اللهم بارك على
محمد وعلى آل محمد كما باركت على إبراهيم وعلى آل إبراهيم إنك حميد مجيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qays b. Hafs and Musa b. Isma’il – ‘Abd al-Wahid b. Ziyad – Abu Qurrah
Muslim b. Salim al-Hamdani – ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Isa – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi
Layli:

Ka’b b. ‘Ujrah met me and said, “Shall I not give you a present I got
from the Prophet, peace be upon him?” I said, “Yes, give it to me.” He
said, “We asked the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, and said, ‘O
Messenger of Allah! What is the manner of the salat upon you, Ahl
al-Bayt, for Allah has taught us how to send salam you (Ahl al-Bayt)?’
He replied, ‘Say: O Allah! Send salat upon Muhammad and upon the family
of Muhammad, in exactly the same manner as You sent salat upon Ibrahim
and upon the family of Ibrahim. You are the Most Praiseworthy, the Most
Glorious. O Allah! Bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, in exactly
the same manner as You blessed Ibrahim and the family of Ibrahim. You
are the Most Praiseworthy, the Most Glorious.’”[^1]

This is the mutawatir version of the hadith, as anyone who has done
research on this matter can easily confirm[^2]. There are a few shadh
reports which either removes or replaces the phrase “the family of
Muhammad”. However, such odd riwayat cannot in any way harm a mutawatir
hadith.

Al-Bukhari also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا آدم حدثنا شعبة حدثنا الحكم قال سمعت عبد الرحمن بن أبي ليلى قال :
لقيني كعب بن عجرة فقال ألا أهدي لك هدية؟ إن النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم
خرج علينا فقلنا يا رسول الله قد علمنا كيف نسلم عليك فكيف نصلي عليك؟
قال قولوا اللهم صل على محمد وعلى آل محمد كما صليت على آل إبراهيم إنك
حميد مجيد .اللهم بارك على محمد وعلى آل محمد كما باركت على آل إبراهيم
إنك حميد مجيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Adam – Shu’bah – al-Hakam – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Layli:

Ka’b b. ‘Ujrah met me and said, “Shall I not give you a present? Verily,
the Prophet, peace be upon him, came to us and we said, ‘O Messenger of
Allah, we already know how to make salam on you. But, how do we make
salat on you?’ He replied, ‘Say: O Allah! Send salat upon Muhammad and
upon the family of Muhammad, in exactly the same manner as You sent
salat upon the family of Ibrahim. You are the Most Praiseworthy, the
Most Glorious. O Allah! Bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, in
exactly the same manner as You blessed the family of Ibrahim. You are
the Most Praiseworthy, the Most Glorious.’”[^3]

He again records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني سعيد بن يحيى حدثنا أبي حدثنا مسعر عن الحكم عن ابن أبي ليلى عن
كعب بن عجرة رضي الله عنه قيل :يا رسول الله أما السلام عليك فقد عرفناه
فكيف الصلاة ؟ قال قولوا اللهم صل على محمد وعلى آل محمد كما صليت على
إبراهيم إنك حميد مجيد اللهم بارك على محمد وعلى آل محمد كما باركت على
إبراهيم إنك حميد مجيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sa’id b. Yahya – my father – Mas’ar – al-Hakam - Ibn Abi Layli – Ka’b b.
‘Ujrah, may Allah be pleased with him:

It was said, “O Messenger of Allah, we have already known how to make
salam on you. But, how do we make salat?’ He replied, ‘Say: O Allah!
Send salat upon Muhammad and upon the family of Muhammad, in exactly the
same manner as You sent salat upon Ibrahim. You are the Most
Praiseworthy, the Most Glorious. O Allah! Bless Muhammad and the family
of Muhammad, in exactly the same manner as You blessed Ibrahim. You are
the Most Praiseworthy, the Most Glorious.’”[^4]

Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) too documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا يحيى بن يحيى التميمي قال قرأت على مالك عن نعيم بن عبدالله المجمر
أن محمد بن عبدالله بن زيد الأنصاري (وعبدالله بن زيد هو الذي كان أري
النداء بالصلاة) أخبره عن أبي مسعود الأنصاري قال أتانا رسول الله صلى
الله عليه و سلم ونحن في مجلس سعد بن عبادة فقال له بشير بن سعد أمرنا
الله تعالى أن نصلي عليك يا رسول الله فكيف نصلي عليك ؟ قال فسكت رسول
الله صلى الله عليه و سلم حتى تمنينا أنه لم يسأله ثم قال رسول الله صلى
الله عليه و سلم قولوا اللهم صل على محمد وعلى آل محمد كما صليت على آل
إبراهيم وبارك على محمد وعلى آل محمد كما باركت على آل إبراهيم في
العالمين إنك حميد مجيد والسلام كما قد علمتم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yahya b. Yahya al-Tamimi – Malik – Na’im b. ‘Abd Allah al-Mujmar –
Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah b. Zayd al-Ansari – Abu Mas’ud al-Ansari:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, came to us while we were in
the assembly of Sa’d b. ‘Ubadah. So, Bashir b. Sa’d said, “Allah the
Most High ordered us to make salat upon you, O Messenger of Allah. So,
how do we make salat upon you?” The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him, kept silent so much we wished he had not asked him. Then, the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “Say: ‘O Allah! Send salat
upon Muhammad and upon the family of Muhammad, in exactly the same
manner as You sent salat upon the family of Ibrahim and bless Muhammad
and the family of Muhammad, in exactly the same manner as You blessed
the family of Ibrahim THROUGHOUT THE WORLDS. You are the Most
Praiseworthy, the Most Glorious.’ As for the salam, it is as you have
been taught.[^5]

Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) has this riwayah as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي حدثنا عثمان بن عمر انا مالك عن نعيم المجمر عن
محمد يعني بن عبد الله عن أبي مسعود قال قيل يا رسول الله كيف نصلي عليك
فقال قولوا اللهم صل على محمد وعلى آل محمد وبارك على محمد وعلى آل محمد
كما باركت على إبراهيم في العالمين انك حميد مجيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – ‘Uthman b. ‘Umar –
Malik – Na’im al-Mujmar – Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah – Abu Mas’ud:

It was said, “O Messenger of Allah, how do we make salat upon you?” So,
he replied, “Say: ‘O Allah! Send salat upon Muhammad and upon the family
of Muhammad and bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, in exactly
the same manner as You blessed Ibrahim THROUGHOUT THE WORLDS. You are
the Most Praiseworthy, the Most Glorious.’”[^6]

Shaykh al-Arnaut comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط مسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is sahih upon the standard of (Imam) Muslim.[^7]

There are a number of points that need to be highlighted here. First,
this was what Ka’b b. ‘Ujrah said to the Messenger of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا رسول الله كيف الصلاة عليكم أهل البيت فإن الله قد علمنا كيف نسلم
عليكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Messenger of Allah! What is the manner of the salat upon you, Ahl
al-Bayt, for Allah has taught us how to send salam upon you (Ahl
al-Bayt)?

We know from this that the Sahabah used to send salam upon members of
the Ahl al-Bayt. In fact, it was Allah Himself Who taught them to send
salam upon the Ahl al-Bayt. Sending salam upon a male member of the Ahl
al-Bayt, for instance, is to say “alaihi al-salam” (peace be upon him),
“salamullah ‘alaihi” (peace of Allah be upon him), or similar statements
containing “salam” (peace) after mentioning or writing his name.

The Sahabah used to do it, as Ka’b testified. Some of the early Sunnis –
from all fields of knowledge - also did it to a good extent. Examples
abound galore in their classical books. However, in order to conserve
space, we will be citing only a few, from Sahih al-Bukhari. Concerning
Amir al-Muminin, ‘alaihi al-salam, Imam al-Bukhari writes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال علي عليه السلام الذاريات الرياح
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali, ‘alaihi al-salam, said: “Al-Dhariyat are the winds”.[^8]  
 With regards to his wife, the blessed daughter of the Messenger of
Allah, ‘alaiha al-salam, al-Bukhari also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقالت فاطمة عليها السلام….
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fatimah, ‘alaiha al-salam, said….[^9]

About Imam al-Hasan, ‘alaihi al-salam, al-Bukhari is no different
either:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ووهب الحسن بن علي عليهما السلام لرجل دينه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Hasan b. ‘Ali, ‘alaihima al-salam, waived the debt of a man.[^10]

Imam al-Husayn, ‘alaihi al-salam, the martyr of Karbala, is treated
likewise by al-Bukhari:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسين بن علي عليهما السلام أخبره
  </p>
</blockquote>

Husayn b. ‘Ali, ‘alaihima al-salam, informed him[^11]

He also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتي عبيد الله بن زياد برأس الحسين بن علي عليه السلام
  </p>
</blockquote>

The head of al-Husayn b. ‘Ali, ‘alaihi al-salam, was brought to ‘Ubayd
Allah b. Ziyad[^12]

Even Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, ‘alaihi al-salam, is given
the same recognition by al-Bukhari:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال علي بن الحسين عليهما السلام….
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. al-Husayn, ‘alaihi al-salam, said….[^13]

This Sunnah, unfortunately, is resisted by a lot of modern Sunnis. It is
primarily the Shi’ah who still keep it alive. May Allah set our Ummah
aright.

Secondly, the salat upon the Prophet is also the salat upon his Ahl
al-Bayt. Note these words of the Sahabah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا رسول الله كيف الصلاة عليكم أهل البيت
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Messenger of Allah! What is the manner of the salat upon you, Ahl
al-Bayt?

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا رسول الله قد علمنا كيف نسلم عليك فكيف نصلي عليك
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Messenger of Allah, we already know how to make salam on you. But, how
do we make salat on you?

To both questions, he gave the same answer. Whether you want to make
salat on the Prophet or the Ahl al-Bayt, you must mention him together
with them. ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) confesses to this as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد علمت مما سبق أن صيغ الصلاة على النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم فيها كلها
الصلاة على أهل بيته صلى الله عليه وسلم وآله؛ ولذلك فلا ينبغي الاكتفاء
بالصلاة عليه صلى الله عليه وسلم وحده، بل لا بد من إضافة الآل إليه، بل
لا بد من إتمام الصيغة من أولها إلى آخرها؛ كما وردت؛ تقيُّداً بقوله صلى
الله عليه وسلم: "قولوا: اللهم! صل على محمد، وعلى آل محمد ... " إلخ،
حين سألوه عن كيفية الصلاة عليه صلى الله عليه وسلم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You have known from our previous discussions that in all the methods of
making salat upon the Prophet, peace be upon him, there is mention of
his Ahl al-Bayt and his family. This is why it is incorrect to make
salat upon him, peace be upon him, alone. Rather, one must attach the
family to him. In fact, one must mention the complete method from its
beginning to its end, as it has been narrated, bound by his statement,
peace be upon him “say: O Allah, send salat upon Muhammad and upon the
family of Muhammad….” when they asked him about the method of making
salat upon him, peace be upon him.[^14]

Interestingly, even our ‘Allamah does not conform with that same Sunnah
in his statements above![^15] This reflects how bad the situation has
become among the Ahl al-Sunnah wa al-Jama’ah. It is mainly the Shi’ah
who keep this Sunnah, while Sunnis invent and follow their own bid’ah in
this matter. Whenever Shi’is intend to send salat upon the Prophet –
especially in books, writings and speeches – they say “sallallahu
‘alaihi wa alihi” (“salat of Allah be upon him and his family” but often
translated as “peace be upon him and his family”).

Sunnis, by contrast, traditionally delete the phrase “and his family”
from their own salat! In fact, some of them go as far as actively
opposing the Sunnah in order to justify their bid’ah. ‘Allamah al-Albani
expresses his frustration on this matter too:

> وإن من غرائب هذا العصر أن يتجرأ بعض الناس على إنكار ما ثبت عنه صلى
> الله عليه وسلم من طرق مستفيضة صحيحة؛ ألا وهو الصلاة على النبي صلى الله
> عليه وسلم وعلى آله معاً، مع اطلاعه ووقوفه عليها في كتب السنة {عن جمع
> من الصحابة؛ منهم كعب بن عجرة، وأبو حميد الساعدي، وأبو سعيد الخدري،
> وأبو مسعود الأنصاري، وأبو هريرة، وطلحة ابن عبيد الله، وفي أحاديثهم
> أنهم سألوا النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: " كيف نصلي عليك؟"، فعلمهم صلى
> الله عليه وسلم هذه الصيغ}، ألا وهو: الأستاذ محمد إسعاف النشاشيبي في
> كتابه "الإسلام الصحيح" (ص 177 - 189)، وحجته في ذلك أن الآية: {يا أيها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذين آمنوا صلوا عليه وسلموا تسليما}؛ لم يُذكر فيها غيرَ النبي صلى
الله عليه وسلم أحدٌ. وبناء على ذلك رد الأحاديث الصحيحة كلها
  </p>
</blockquote>

One of the strange things of this time is how a person denies what is
authentically transmitted from him, peace be upon him, through several,
sahih chains – that is, the salat upon the Prophet, peace be upon him,
and his family together with him, despite having seen and read it in the
books of the Sunnah {from a number of the Sahabah, among them Ka’b b.
‘Ujrah, Abu Hamid al-Sa’di, Abu Sa’id al-Khudri, Abu Mas’ud al-Ansari,
Abu Hurayrah and Talhah b. ‘Ubayd Allah; and in their ahadith, they
asked the Prophet, peace be upon him, “How do we make salat upon you?”,
and he, peace be upon him, taught them this method}.

That person is Prof. Muhammad Is’af al-Nashashibi in his book al-Islam
al-Sahih (“The Correct Islam”), pp. 177-189, and his proof in that is
that the verse ***{O you who believe! Make salat upon him and send salam
upon him perfectly}*** does not mention anyone else apart from the
Prophet, peace be upon him. On this basis, he denies all the sahih
ahadith.[^16]

It is our humble contention that this ugly situation was created by the
extremely troubled history of Sunni Islam with the offspring of the
Prophet of Allah. We will have more to say on this, later in this book.

In the salat upon the Messenger, we pray Allah to do two things:

To send His salat upon Muhammad and his family in exactly the same
manner as He sent salat upon Ibrahim and his family.

To bless Muhammad and his family in exactly the same manner as He
blessed Ibrahim and his family.

So, what does it mean that Allah sends salat upon someone? Al-Hafiz Ibn
Kathir (d. 774 H) gives us the answer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال البخاري : قال أبو العالية : صلاة الله : ثناؤه عليه عند الملائكة ،
وصلاة الملائكة : الدعاء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Bukhari said: Abu al-‘Aliyah said: “The salat of Allah is His praise
of him among the angels, and the salat of the angels is al-du’a (the
supplication).”[^17]

In other words, we pray Allah to praise Muhammad and his family among
His angels in exactly the same manner as He praised Ibrahim and his
family among them. In that case, how did Allah praise Ibrahim and his
family among the angels? To avoid prolonging the research, we will
restrict ourselves to Ibrahim alone. The Qur’an has mentioned about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما كان إبراهيم يهوديا ولا نصرانيا ولكن كان حنيفا مسلما وما كان من
المشركين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Ibrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was an absolutely
pure Muslim monotheist, and he was not one of the polytheists.***[^18]

This is a praise of our dear Prophet, Ibrahim, for his unadulterated
Islamic faith. Allah also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن إبراهيم لحليم أواه منيب
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, Ibrahim was, without doubt, forbearing, used to invoke Allah
with humility, and was repentant.***[^19]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن إبراهيم كان أمة قانتا لله حنيفا ولم يك من المشركين شاكرا لأنعمه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, Ibrahim was (himself) an Ummah, obedient to Allah, an
absolutely pure monotheist, and he was not one of the polytheists. He
was thankful for His Graces.***[^20]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واذكر في الكتاب إبراهيم إنه كان صديقا نبيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And mention in the Book Ibrahim. Verily, he was a man of truth, a
prophet.***[^21]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واذكر عبادنا إبراهيم وإسحاق ويعقوب أولي الأيدي والأبصار إنا أخلصناهم
بخالصة ذكرى الدار وإنهم عندنا لمن المصطفين الأخيار
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And remember Our devout worshippers, Ibrahim, Ishaq and Ya’qub,
owners of strength and understanding. Verily, We chose them with the
remembrance of the Home (i.e. the Hereafter). And they are with Us,
verily, of the chosen and the best.***[^22]

And, finally:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإبراهيم الذي وفى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Ibrahim who thoroughly and faithfully fulfilled (the commandments
of his Lord).***[^23]

These, without doubt, were part of the praises of Allah for His noble
Prophet, Ibrahim, which He mentioned to His angels. We beseech Allah -
in our salat - to say these same things about Muhammad and his family
too. Of course, He never flatters. Therefore, He must first bestow these
noble qualities upon the Ahl al-Bayt, and must then assist them to
achieve the virtues. It is only after doing all this that He would
mention the praises of Muhammad and his family to the angels.

Billions of Muslims – since the time of Muhammad, and including Muhammad
himself and millions of pious awliya – have beseeched Allah for more
than 1400 years to praise Muhammad and his family in His heavens,
countless times everyday. Moreover, this massive du’a is based upon His
Own Command and Formula. Therefore, we have absolutely no doubt that our
Lord accepted the salat during the lifetime of His Prophet, and has
continued to honour it, and will never cease to do so till the Hour.

In other words, He granted all the qualities and virtues of Prophet
Ibrahim to Muhammad and his family, and helped them in reaching the best
acts and sacrifices, and then praised them throughout His heavens, among
His purified legions.

As part of our salat, we further pray Allah to bless Muhammad and his
family in exactly the same manner as He blessed Ibrahim and his family.
This is perhaps the most important aspect of the whole du’a. We ask our
Lord to grant the same blessings which He gave Ibrahim and his family to
Muhammad and his family as well. So, what were Allah’s blessings upon
Ibrahim and the family of Ibrahim? Well, one of them is mentioned in
this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الله اصطفى آدم ونوحا وآل إبراهيم وآل عمران على العالمين ذرية بعضها
من بعض والله سميع عليم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, Allah chose Adam, Nuh, the family of Ibrahim and the family
of Imran above the worlds.***[^24]

Therefore, Allah blessed Ibrahim and his family by choosing them above
all the worlds. They were superior to all other creatures of our Lord,
and none can be master over them except someone from amongst them. There
is no doubt that Allah has blessed Muhammad and his family in this same
way as too. He has chosen them above all the worlds, and none can be
their leader in anything except someone from amongst them.

Concerning the same family, Allah declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقد آتينا آل إبراهيم الكتاب والحكمة وآتيناهم ملكا عظيما
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We have granted the Book and the Hikmah to the family of Ibrahim, and
We gave them a great kingdom.***[^25]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أولئك الذين آتيناهم الكتاب والحكم والنبوة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are those whom We gave the Book, the authority, and
prophethood.***[^26]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولقد آتينا بني إسرائيل الكتاب والحكم والنبوة ورزقناهم من الطيبات
وفضلناهم على العالمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And indeed, We gave the offspring of Israil the Book, and authority
and prophethood, and We provided them with good things, AND WE MADE THEM
SUPERIOR ABOVE THE WORLDS.***[^27]

Our God fixed some five things within the family of Ibrahim:
prophethood, scriptures, authority, and kingdom. None could be a prophet
except someone from that blessed family. Moreover, none could receive
divine scripture except he was one of them. None could legally exercise
authority except a leader from their family; and – by extension - none
could be a legitimate king except he was from them.

Above all, members of their family were the best of Allah’s creation in
all their Ummahs. In the same manner, by virtue of Hadith al-Salat,
Allah has fixed the same five blessings within the family of Muhammad
too. Two of them – prophethood and the Book - got restricted to Muhammad
himself alone due to his Lord’s Decree. As for the remaining three,
however, they are in his family, and will continue among them only -
till the Hour.

[^1]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
3, p. 1233, \# 3190

[^2]: See al-Qadhi Abu Ishaq Isma’il b. Ishaq b. Isma’il b. Hammad b.
Zayd al-Azdi al-Basri al-Baghdadi al-Maliki al-Jahdhami, Fadhl Salat
‘ala al-Nabi (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 3rd edition, 1397 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], pp. 55-68. In this book,
al-Qadhi Abu Ishaq records several ahadith mentioning “the family of
Muhammad” with their chains from Ka’b b. ‘Ujrah, ‘Uqbah b. ‘Amr, ‘Abd
Allah, ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar or ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Amr, Abu Mas’ud al-Ansari,
Ibrahim, al-Hasan, Abu Sa’id al-Khudri, Talhah, Zayd b. Kharijah, ‘Abd
al-Rahman b. Bishr b. Mas’ud, and Fatimah bint al-Nabi Muhammad.
Moreover, Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah,
Ibn Asakir al-Shafi’i in his Tarikh Madinah Dimashq (Beirut: Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: ‘Ali Shiri] has also narrated it – with the chains
of transmission – from ‘Aishah (vol. 53, p. 309), Anas b. Malik (vol.
48, p. 316), al-Husayn b. ‘Ali (vol. 18, p. 87) and Umm Salamah (vol.
14, p. 141). This is far more than what is needed for absolute tawattur.
As for the shadh reports which expunge or replace “the family of
Muhammad”, they have no tawattur whatsoever and are not even close, and
therefore can neither harm nor replace the mutawatir hadith.

[^3]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
5, p. 2338, \# 5996

[^4]: Ibid, vol. 4, p. 1802, \# 4519

[^5]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 1, p. 305, \# 405 (65)

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 4, p. 118, \#
17108

[^7]: Ibid

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
4, p. 1836

[^9]: Ibid, vol. 4, p. 1619, \# 4193

[^10]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 918

[^11]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 1125, \# 2925 and vol. 6, p. 2716, \# 7027

[^12]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 1370, \# 3538

[^13]: Ibid, vol. 5, p. 1959

[^14]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, Asl Sifat al-Salat al-Nabi
(Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1427
H), vol. 3, p. 933

[^15]: A likely explanation for this inconsistency is that ‘Allamah
al-Albani is only referring to the mode of salat in the tashahhud during
the five daily prayers. He has written all those words within its
context. However, the ahadith which he has referenced are general in
nature. The Sahabah did not ask the Rasul about the method of salat
during the tashahhud only. Rather, they requested him to teach them the
mode of salat in all circumstances, with explicit reference to the Verse
of al-Salat which is also general in nature. If indeed the ‘Allamah had
truly understood from the questions of the Sahabah that they were only
asking about the mode of salat in the tashahhud, then he must really
have had extremely poor comprehension skills.

[^16]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 934

[^17]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurashi al-Dimashqi,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah], vol. 6, p. 457

[^18]: Qur’an 3:67

[^19]: Qur’an 11:75

[^20]: Qur’an 16:120-121

[^21]: Qur’an 19:41

[^22]: Qur’an 38:45-47

[^23]: Qur’an 53:37

[^24]: Qur’an 3:33

[^25]: Qur’an 4:54

[^26]: Qur’an 6:89

[^27]: Qur’an 45:16


