16) The Sahabah And The Ahl Al-Bayt: The Betrayal Was Predicted
===============================================================

The Prophet of Allah, sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi, named Amir al-Muminin
‘Ali b. Abi Talib, ‘alaihi al-salam, as the first khalifah after him. He
also indicated that all the other khalifahs will be from his offspring.
In particular, he declared that all the khalifahs after him will be
twelve in number, that they all would be royal Imams, and that their
reign would continue uninterrupted till the Day of al-Qiyamah.

He further declared them the guides of this Ummah after him till the
Hour, and that they never ever separate from the Qur’an - not even for
one second. However, he equally prophesied that the Ummah would betray
‘Ali (and, by extension, all the other khalifahs) once he was gone!
Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani (d. 852 H) copies:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا الفضل هو أبو نعيم ، ثنا فطر بن خليفة ، أخبرني حبيب بن أبي ثابت،
قال: سمعت ثعلبة بن يزيد، قال :سمعت عليا رضي الله عنه، يقول : والله إنه
لعهد النبي الأمي صلى الله عليه وسلم: سيغدرونك من بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Fadhl, Abu Na’im – Fitr b. Khalifah – Habib b. Abi Thabit – Tha’labah
b. Yazid:

I heard ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, saying: “I swear by Allah,
verily, the Ummi Prophet, peace be upon him, told me: “They will soon
betray you after me.”[^1]

The Salafi annotator, ‘Abd Allah al-Shahri, comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضعيف بهذا الإسناد لحال فطر بن خليفة، و ثعلبة بن يزيد فإنهما صدوقان
متشيعان، و هذا الحديث يُؤيد بدعتهما فهو ضعيف
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is dha’if with this chain, due to the status of Fitr b. Khalifah and
Tha’labah b. Yazid, for both of them were very truthful and Shi’is and
this hadith supports their bid’ah. Therefore, it is dha’if.[^2]

So, al-Shahri’s only problem with the sanad is the Shi’ism of Fitr and
Tha’labah. Even though both were “very truthful”, this hadith of theirs
cannot be accepted only because it supports their Shi’ism. A
“scientific” way of discrediting reports, isn’t it?! Before examining
the legitimacy of al-Shahri’s methodology, let us first look at the
narrators of hadith, in order to have a clearer view of the whole
picture.

As an initial observation, a key merit of this sanad is that it is
perfectly connected. There is no break whatsoever among its narrators,
and each of them explicitly declared that he literally heard the hadith
from the mouth of his shaykh. Moreover, all the narrators are completely
reliable without question.

Al-Hafiz states about the first narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الفضل بن دكين الكوفي واسم دكين عمرو بن حماد بن زهير التيمي مولاهم
الأحول أبو نعيم الملائي بضم الميم مشهور بكنيته ثقة ثبت
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Fadhl b. Dukayn al-Kufi - and the name of Dukayn was ‘Amr b. Hammad
b. Zuhayr - al-Tamimi, their freed slave, al-Ahwal, Abu Na’im al-Mulai,
well-known with his kunya: Thiqah (trustworthy), accurate.[^3]

Concerning the second narrator, he further declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فطر بن خليفة المخزومي مولاهم أبو بكر الحناط بالمهملة . والنون صدوق رمي
بالتشيع
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fitr b. Khalifah al-Makhzumi, their freed slave, Abu Bakr al-Hanat:
Saduq (very truthful), accused of Shi’ism.[^4]

What of the third narrator? Al-Hafiz says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حبيب بن أبي ثابت قيس ويقال هند بن دينار الأسدي مولاهم أبو يحيى الكوفي
ثقة فقيه جليل وكان كثير الإرسال والتدليس
  </p>
</blockquote>

Habib b. Abi Thabit Qays – and it is said Hind – b. Dinar al-Asadi,
their freed slave, al-Kufi: Thiqah (trustworthy), a meritorious jurist.
He used to do a lot of irsal and tadlis.[^5]

Meanwhile, he has narrated with explicit sima’ above. So, his irsal and
tadlis are inapplicable and inconsequential here.

Finally, this is what al-Hafiz states about the last narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثعلبة بن يزيد الحماني بكسر المهملة وتشديد الميم كوفي صدوق شيعي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tha’labah b. Yazid al-Himmani, a Kufan: Saduq (very truthful), a
Shi’i.[^6]

This chain, therefore, is absolutely hasan without a doubt! It is simply
faultless and unassailable.

As for al-Shahri’s rejection of the hadith on account of the Shi’ism of
two of its narrators, we will let another Salafi hadith scientist,
al-Mua’lami (d. 1386 H) reply him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد وثق أئمة الحديث جماعة من المبتدعة واحتجوا بأحاديثهم وأخرجوها في
الصحاح، ومن تتبع رواياتهم وجد فيها كثيراً مما يوافق ظاهرة بدعهم، وأهل
العلم يتأولون تلك الأحاديث غير طاعنين فيها ببدعة راويها ولا في راويها
بروايته لها
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Imams in the hadith sciences have declared as trustworthy a lot of
the heretics, and have taken their (i.e. the heretics’) ahadith as
hujjah, and have recorded them (i.e. those reports) in their Sahih
books. And whoever researches their (the heretics’) narrations finds
that a lot of them apparently agree with their heresies. The scholars
give alternative interpretations for those ahadith without attacking
them (i.e. the ahadith) on account of the heresy of their narrators, nor
do they attack the narrators for narrating them.[^7]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) too seconds him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإن قال قائل: راوي هذا الشاهد شيعي، وكذلك في سند المشهود له شيعي آخر،
وهو جعفر بن سليمان، أفلا يعتبر ذلك طعنا في الحديث وعلة فيه؟ !
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأقول: كلا لأن العبرة في رواية الحديث إنما هو الصدق والحفظ، وأما
المذهب فهو بينه وبين ربه، فهو حسيبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

If someone says: “The narrator of this corroborative hadith (i.e. that
of Ajlah) was a Shi’i, and also in the chain of the main hadith, there
is another Shi’i, and he is Ja’far b. Sulayman. Does this not justify
attack on the hadith and constitute a fault in it?”

So, I answer: “Not at all, because the requirements in the transmission
of hadith are ONLY truthfulness and sound memory. As for the madhhab (of
the narrator), that is between him and his Lord, and He is sufficient
for him.[^8]

A third Salafi hadith scientist, al-Turayfi, also traces the practice to
the Sunni Imams:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والأصل في رواية المبتدع إذا كان ضابطاً ثقة القبول، سواء روى فيما يوافق
بدعته أم لا، ما لم يكن قد كفر ببدعته، فحينئذ يرد لكفره، وعلى هذا
الأئمة الحفاظ، فهم يخرجون للمبتدع إذا كان ثقة ثبتاً، ويصححون خبره
  </p>
</blockquote>

The default position concerning the report of a heretic, if he was
accurate and trustworthy, is to accept it, regardless of whether he
narrated concerning what agrees with his bid’ah (heresy) or not, as long
as he had not apostatized through his heresy. In such a case, it will be
rejected due to his kufr (disbelief). This was the practice of the Imams
who were hadith scientists, for they used to narrate from the heretic if
he was trustworthy and accurate, and used to declare his report to be
sahih.[^9]

The bottomline is that al-Shahri’s methodology of weakening the hadith
is both unprofessional and crude.

Meanwhile, al-Hafiz copies a second, different chain for the hadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال الحارث: ثنا عبد الرحمن بن زياد مولى بني هاشم، ثنا هشيم، عن
إسماعيل بن سالم، عن أبي إدريس الأودي، عن علي، قال: قال رسول الله صلى
الله عليه وسلم :إن هذه الأمة ستغدر بك من بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Harith – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Ziyad, freed slave of Banu Hashim –
Hushaym – Isma’il b. Salim – Abu Idris al-Awdi – ‘Ali:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “Verily, this Ummah
will soon betray you after me.”[^10]

Al-Shahri again comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضعيف بهذا الإسناد لأن أبا إدريس الأودي مجهول الحال
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is dha’if with this chain because Abu Idris al-Awdi is majhul
al-hal.[^11]

This time, he is unable to accuse any of the narrators of Shi’ism, or to
find any other defect – real or imagined – in the chain other than Abu
Idris. But then, is Abu Idris really majhul al-hal? ‘Ali Shiri, in his
tahqiq of Tarikh Madinah Dimashq - while commenting under the above
riwayah – identifies who Abu Idris was for us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو أبو إدريس يزيد بن عبد الرحمن الأودي
  </p>
</blockquote>

He was Abu Idris Yazid b. ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Awdi.[^12]

Who then was he? Al-Hafiz has the answer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يزيد بن عبد الرحمن بن الأسود الأودي بواو ساكنة بعدها مهملة، أبو داود
مقبول
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yazid b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. al-Aswad al-Awdi, Abu Dawud: Maqbul (accepted
when seconded).[^13]

Obviously, he is NOT majhul al-hal, but maqbul. This means that whenever
he is seconded in his report, it is established from his shaykh.
However, if he is alone in narrating a riwayah, then it is dha’if. We
know already that he was seconded by Tha’labah b. Yazid. Therefore, this
second sanad of the hadith is also sahih or hasan.

Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) has included the report of al-Awdi in his
Mustadrak too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو حفص عمر بن أحمد الجمحي بمكة ثنا علي بن عبد العزيز ثنا عمرو
بن عون ثنا هشيم عن إسماعيل بن سالم عن أبي إدريس الأودي عن علي رضي الله
عنه قال إن مما عهد إلي النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم أن الأمة ستغدر بي بعده
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Hafs ‘Umar b. Ahmad al-Jamhi – ‘Ali b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz – ‘Amr b. ‘Awn
– Hushaym – Isma’il b. Salim – Abu Idris al-Awdi – ‘Ali, may Allah be
pleased with him:

“Verily, part of what the Prophet, peace be upon him, told me is that
the Ummah would soon betray me after him.”[^14]

Then, he declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This hadith has a sahih chain.[^15]

And Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sahih[^16]

Al-Hakim has documented a further shahid:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن حيان الأسدي سمعت عليا يقول قال لي رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم إن
الأمة ستغدر بك بعدي وأنت تعيش على ملتي وتقتل على سنتي من أحبك أحبني
ومن أبغضك أبغضني وإن هذه ستخضب من هذا يعني لحيته من رأسه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Narrated Hayyan al-Asadi:

I heard ‘Ali saying: The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said to
me: “Verily, the Ummah will soon betray you after me; and you will live
upon my religion, and you will be killed upon my Sunnah. Whoever loves
you loves me, and whoever hates you hates me. Verily, this will soon be
painted from this”, he meant: his beard (will be drained with blood)
from his head.[^17]

Al-Hakim declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sahih[^18]

Al-Dhahabi has the same verdict too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sahih[^19]

Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani has provided details of the sanad of
this riwayah in his Itihaf:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا أبو علي الحافظ ، ثنا الهيثم بن خلف، ثنا محمد بن عمر بن هياج، ثنا
يحيى بن عبد الرحمن، ثنا يونس بن أبي يعفور، عن أبيه، عنه ، به.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Ali al-Hafiz – al-Haytham b. Khalaf – Muhammad b. ‘Umar b. Hayyaj –
Yahya b. ‘Abd al-Rahman – Yunus b. Abi Yafur – his father – from him
(Hayyan al-Asadi) with it.[^20]

As we have seen, both al-Hakim and al-Dhahabi declared it sahih.
Obviously, it provides additional strength to the other chains of the
riwayah. It is our firm belief, anyway, that the combined force of the
three asanid leaves absolutely no doubt about the authenticity of the
report. Even al-Shahri, despite his extreme bias, is unable to escape
the fact in his final conclusion about the hadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و مع أن الحديث ضعيف بالنظر إلي كل طريق علي حدة لكن بالنظر إلي الطريقين
معا فالحديث حسن لغيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

That the hadith is dha’if by looking at each chain individually;
however, by looking at the two chains together (i.e. those of Tha’labah
b. Yazid and Abu Idris al-Awdi), then the hadith is hasan li
ghayrihi.[^21]

The Messenger of Allah prophesied that “the Ummah” would betray Amir
al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi Talib after him. The word “Ummah” was generalized
by him. So, he was referring to the generality of the Ummah, and not
just a small section of it. They would “betray” his chosen khalifah
after his death. Of course, as history confirms, the generality of the
Ummah – including the Sahabah - truly did betray Amir al-Muminin after
the death of the Rasul.

Despite that he had explicitly named ‘Ali as his khalifah after him,
they became traitors against the latter and installed a rebel leader in
his place. Interestingly, Imam ‘Ali identified both Abu Bakr and ‘Umar
as two among the traitors mentioned in the hadith of the Prophet of
Allah. Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) quotes ‘Umar saying to him and ‘Abbas:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلما توفي رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم قال أبو بكر أنا ولي رسول الله
صلى الله عليه و سلم .... فرأيتماه كاذبا آثما غادرا خائنا والله يعلم
إنه لصادق بار راشد تابع للحق ثم توفي أبو بكر وأنا ولي رسول الله صلى
الله عليه و سلم وولي أبا بكر فرأيتماني كاذبا آثما غادرا خائنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

When the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, died, Abu Bakr said: “I
am the wali of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him.”.... So both
of you (‘Ali and ‘Abbas) thought him (i.e. Abu Bakr) to be a liar,
sinful, A TRAITOR and dishonest. And Allah knows that he was really
truthful, pious, rightly-guided and a follower of the truth. Abu Bakr
died and I became the wali of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
and the wali of Abu Bakr. So both of you thought me to be a liar,
sinful, A TRAITOR and dishonest.[^22]

[^1]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliyah bi
Zawaid al-Masanid al-Thamaniyyah (Riyadh: Dar al-‘Asimah; 1st edition,
1420 H) [annotator: ‘Abd Allah b. Ẓafir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Shahri], vol.
16, p. 64, \# 3919

[^2]: Ibid

[^3]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 2, p. 11, \# 5418

[^4]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 16, \# 5458

[^5]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 183, \# 1087

[^6]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 149, \# 849

[^7]: ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yahya b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Mu’alami al-‘Atmi
al-Yamani, al-Tankil bi ma fi Ta-anib al-Kawthari min al-Abatil
(al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1406 H) [annotators: Muhammad Nasir
al-Din al-Albani, Zuhayr al-Shawish and ‘Abd al-Razzaq Hamzah], vol. 1,
p. 237

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 5, p. 262, \# 2223

[^9]: ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. Marzuq al-Turayfi, al-Tahjil fi Takhrij ma lam
Yukhraj min al-Ahadith wa al-Athar fi Irwa al-Ghalil (Riyadh: Maktabah
al-Rushd li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1422 H), p. 546

[^10]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliyah bi
Zawaid al-Masanid al-Thamaniyyah (Riyadh: Dar al-‘Asimah; 1st edition,
1420 H) [annotator: ‘Abd Allah b. Ẓafir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Shahri], vol.
16, p. 65, \# 3920

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn
Asakir al-Shafi’i, Tarikh Madinah Dimashq (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1st
edition, 1417 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 42, p. 447, footnote \# 7

[^13]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 2, p. 328, \# 7774

[^14]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
150, \# 4676

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Ibid

[^17]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 153, \# 4686

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Ibid

[^20]: Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Hajar
al-‘Asqalani, Itihaf al-Maharat (Madinah al-Munawwarah: Markaz Khidmah
al-Sunnah wa al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 11, p.
296, \# 14043. Al-Hafiz has cited Mustadrak of al-Hakim as his source
for the chain, immediately after quoting the hadith, verbatim as above.
In modern editions of Mustadrak, the sanad is missing. It is most likely
that al-Hafiz had access to a extinct manuscript of Mustadrak which
contained the full chain. Al-Hafiz too made a scribal error in copying
the name of Hayyan al-Asadi. He has misspelt his name as Aban al-Asadi.

[^21]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliyah bi
Zawaid al-Masanid al-Thamaniyyah (Riyadh: Dar al-‘Asimah; 1st edition,
1420 H) [annotator: ‘Abd Allah b. Ẓafir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Shahri], vol.
16, p. 67, \# 3921

[^22]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 3, p. 1376, \#1757


