18) The Sahabah And The Ahl Al-Bayt: Hadith Al-Hawdh (Part 2)
=============================================================

As expected, our ‘ulama from the Ahl al-Sunnah have offered various
explanations for Hadith al-Hawdh, some of them deliberately aimed at
saving certain famous Sahabah. Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H), for instance,
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال الخطابي لم يرتد من الصحابة أحد وانما ارتد قوم من جفاة الاعراب ممن
لا نصرة له في الدين وذلك لا يوجب قدحا في الصحابة المشهورين ويدل قوله
أصيحابي بالتصغير على قلة عددهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Khattabi said: “None of the Sahabah ever apostatized. It was only a
group from the Bedouin Arabs, among those who had no help in the
religion. Therefore, this does not constitute a blemish on the
well-known Sahabah; and his statement usayhabi (“my Sahabah”) with
tasghir points to their small number.[^1]

Imam al-Mubarakfuri (d. 1282 H) also submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال القاضي يريد بهم من ارتد من الأعراب الذين أسلموا في أيامه كأصحاب
مسيلمة والأسود وأضرابهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Qadhi said: “He intended by them those who apostatized among the
Bedouin Arabs who had accepted Islam during his lifetime, like the
companions of Musaylamah and al-Aswad and their likes.”[^2]

He further adds concerning the ahadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النووي هذا مما أختلف العلماء في المراد على أقوال
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحدها أن المراد به المنافقون والمرتدون ….
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والثاني أن المراد من كان في زمن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم ثم ارتد بعده
….
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والثالث أن المراد أصحاب المعاصي الكبائر الذين ماتوا على التوحيد وأصحاب
البدع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذين لم يخرجوا ببدعتهم عن الاسلام
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Nawawi said: “This is part of what the scholars dispute about its
meaning, submitting various opinions:

One of them is that those intended were the hypocrites and apostates....

The second opinion is that those intended were those who lived during
the lifetime of the Prophet, peace be upon him, and then apostatized
after him....

The third opinion is that those intended are the major sinners who die
upon al-tawhid (i.e. as true Muslims) and the heretics whose heresy does
not take them out of Islam.”[^3]

Therefore, the various Sunni explanations of the ahadith can be
summarized in this manner:

The “Sahabah” mentioned in the reports were the Bedouin Arabs who
renounced Islam during the rule of Abu Bakr. None of the Muhajirun,
Ansar or other major Sahabah were involved or included.

Or, rather, those “Sahabah” were the hypocrites and apostates during the
lifetime of the Prophet (and perhaps beyond).

Or, those “Sahabah” are actually the “major sinners” and minor heretics
of all times.

The affected “Sahabah” were “few” because the Messenger, sallallahu
‘alaihi wa alihi, in some ahadith, called them usayhabi with tasghir.

However, looking at the actual ahadith, one must conclude that none of
the Sunni interpretations is accurate. For instance, the reports
identify the Sahabah meant as those “who kept me company and saw me” and
“I will recognize them and they will recognize me”. This rules out the
claim that the “Sahabah” in the riwayat are all major sinners and minor
heretics.

None of such people in our times, for example, ever saw the Prophet or
kept him company! Yet, those descriptions do not match the Bedouin Arabs
either. They were nomadic people, who wandered in the desert, round
about the city of al-Madinah. Some of them might have seen the Messenger
of Allah. But, they certainly were not keeping him company in the city
and elsewhere. In fact, the Qur’an distinguishes between them and the
people of Madinah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وممن حولكم من الأعراب منافقون ومن أهل المدينة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And among the Bedouin Arabs round about you, some are hypocrites, and
so are some among the people of al-Madinah.***[^4]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما كان لأهل المدينة ومن حولهم من الأعراب أن يتخلفوا عن رسول الله ولا
يرغبوا بأنفسهم عن نفسه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It was not becoming of the people of al-Madinah and the Bedouin Arabs
round about them to remain behind the Messenger of Allah and to prefer
their own lives to his life.***[^5]

Therefore, the Bedouin Arabs lived outside al-Madinah. So, they were
unable to keep company of the Prophet. To do that, they must first
settle in the city, which they never did. Moreover, it was impossible
for the Messenger to have personally known many of them. They lived far
away from him. It was even possible that he never, for once, set his
eyes on a lot of them.

Yet, the ahadith are clear that he will recognize the affected Sahabah
in the Hereafter!

The bottom-line is that the Sahabah who will be driven into Hellfire for
their “innovations” were those who lived with the Rasul in al-Madinah,
kept him company, and were known personally to him.

Part of what supports our position are these words of Umm al-Muminin
‘Aishah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم يقول وهو بين ظهراني أصحابه إني على
الحوض أنتظر من يرد علي منكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

I heard the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, saying while he was
in front of his Sahabah: “I will be at the Lake-Fount, expecting
whosoever from amongst you will meet me.”

He was addressing his Sahabah. By default, this took place in
al-Madinah, as there is nothing to suggest otherwise. Then, he declared
that those who will be driven away from the Lake-Fount were from amongst
those same Sahabah “in front of” him. Moreover, al-Bukhari (d. 256 H)
documents for us the unmistakable interpretation of a senior Sahabi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني أحمد بن إشكاب حدثنا محمد بن فضيل عن العلاء بن المسيب عن أبيه
قال: لقيت البراء بن عازب رضي الله عنهما فقلت طوبى لك صحبت النبي صلى
الله عليه و سلم وبايعته تحت الشجرة فقال يا ابن أخي إنك لا تدري ما
أحدثنا بعده
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Ishkab – Muhammad b. Fudhayl – al-‘Ala b. al-Musayyab – his
father (al-Musayyab):

I met al-Bara b. ‘Azib, may Allah be pleased with them both, and I said,
“Congratulations to you! You kept company of the Prophet, peace be upon
him, and gave him ba’yah under the Tree”. As a result of this, he
replied, “O son of my brother, you do not know what WE HAVE INNOVATED
after him.”[^6]

This is important. It confirms that those Sahabah who kept company of
the Messenger of Allah and gave him ba’yah under the Tree became
innovators after him. The language of al-Bara was general. This shows
that the innovations were very widespread among this category of
Sahabah; and they were primarily Muhajirun and Ansar! This however does
not rule out the fact that some of them also never deviated from the
Qur’an and Sunnah.

So, the argument that the “Sahabah” in the Hadith al-Hawdh refers to the
Bedouin Arabs or to anyone in the post-Sahabah era simply cannot hold.
The innovators were from the inhabitants of al-Madinah and so were able
to keep company of the Prophet, and many of them also gave him ba’yah
under the Tree of al-Hudaybiyyah. They were people who saw him, and were
amongst the very Sahabah he was addressing with the ahadith during his
lifetime. A key point in the reports is highlighted in this riwayah of
Abu Sa’id al-Khudri:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم قال فأقول أصحابي أصحابي فقيل انك لا تدري
ما أحدثوا بعدك قال فأقول بعدا بعدا أو قال سحقا سحقا لمن بدل بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet, peace be upon him, said: “So, I will say, ‘My Sahabah! My
Sahabah!’ It will be said, ‘You do not know what they INNOVATED after
you.’ Then I will say, ‘Woe, woe to WHOEVER CHANGED after me.’”[^7]

These Sahabah were upon the upright religion throughout the lifetime of
the Messenger, but only “changed” after his death. This indicates that
they could not have been the hypocrites – who were never upon al-Haqq,
to begin with[^8]. This theme prevails throughout the riwayat; and
emphasis is laid upon the fact that these Sahabah will be in Hellfire
solely for what they innovated after the Prophet.

Their innovations constituted apostasy from Islam, as well. Certainly,
some bid’ahs are of such seriousness. In order to apostatize, one must
first be upon the true religion. The fact that these Sahabah became
apostates through their bid’ahs after the Messenger shows clearly that
they were within Islam before then. This obviously was not the condition
of the hypocrites.

Al-Khattabi attempts to downplay the significance of these revelations
about the Sahabah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويدل قوله أصيحابي بالتصغير على قلة عددهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

his statement usayhabi (“my Sahabah”) with tasghir points to their small
number

To him, these heretical “Sahabah” – whom he incorrectly identifies as
Bedouin Arabs – were only few in number. His proof is that the
Messenger, in some ahadith, called them usayhabi, which is truly a
reference to a small number of Sahabah. What al-Khattabi fails to
mention, however, is that the Prophet has also called them ashabi
(أصحابي) in most of the ahadith, as well as aqwam (أقوام), the plural of
qawm. Both ashabi (أصحابي) and aqwam (أقوام) are terms that can refer to
very large numbers of people. In fact, aqwam itself could mean entire
“nations” or “races”.[^9]

The most logical explanation for these different terminologies is that
the apostate Sahabah will be coming to the Messenger of the Lord in
groups of various sizes – some very small, some very big. This equally
justifies why the word aqwam (أقوام) [groups] has been used in some
riwayat. As for the small groups, the Prophet will call them usayhabi;
and he will identify the large groups as ashabi. Imam al-Bukhari
documents a report of Abu Hurayrah, which gives additional strength to
our submissions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني إبراهيم بن المنذر الحزامي حدثنا محمد بن فليح حدثنا أبي قال حدثني
هلال عن عطاء بن يسار عن أبي هريرة : عن النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم قال
بينا أنا نائم إذا زمرة حتى إذا عرفتهم خرج رجل من بيني وبينهم فقال هلم
فقلت أين؟ قال إلى النار والله قلت وما شأنهم؟ قال إنهم ارتدوا بعدك على
أدبارهم القهقرى .ثم إذا زمرة حتى إذا عرفتهم خرج رجل من بيني وينهم فقال
هلم قلت أين؟ قال إلى النار والله قلت ما شأنهم؟ قال إنهم ارتدوا بعدك
على أدبارهم القهقرى فلا أراه يخلصمنهم إلا مثل همل النعم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibrahim b. al-Mundhir al-Huzami – Muhammad b. Fulayh – my father – Hilal
– ‘Ata b. Yasar – Abu Hurayrah:

In my dream, a group of persons (zumrah) came. Once I recognized them, a
man came between me and them, saying (to them), “Let’s go”. I said, “To
where?” He replied, “To Hellfire, I swear by Allah!” I asked, “What is
their offence?” He said, “They apostatized after you!”

Then, another group came, and when I recognized them, a man came between
me and them, saying (to them), “Let’s go”. I said, “To where?” He
replied, “To Hellfire, I swear by Allah!” I asked, “What is their
offence?” He said, “They apostatized after you.”

I do not see any of them escaping except very few.[^10]

Commenting on the word used in the hadith, Dr. al-Bagha writes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
)زمرة (جماعة
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Zumrah) means a jama’ah.[^11]

Meanwhile, a jama’ah can refer to any group of two people or more. In
fact, a group of millions is still only a jama’ah! For instance, the
entire worldwide Sunni population of more than one billion people are a
single jama’ah. This hadith mentions two such groups. However, the use
of aqwam (أقوام) elsewhere confirms that they were more than two. The
above report has only cut short the long story. In any case, the terms
adopted by the Messenger of Allah suggest that the overall numbers of
apostate Sahabah were great. This seems to be the message of this part
of the hadith too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلا أراه يخلصمنهم إلا مثل همل النعم
  </p>
</blockquote>

I do not see any of them escaping except very few.

Was the Prophet saying “I did not see any of the apostates escaping
except a few”? Of course, he never could have said or meant that.
Apostates never escape Hellfire in the Hereafter. They enter it
inescapably and burn therein eternally[^12]. The most obvious meaning of
the phrase is that only very few from each group (zumrah, qawm) will be
free.

Most of each group of Sahabah – whom he knew personally – that will come
to the Lake-Fount will be thrown into Hellfire for blasphemous heresies;
and only a tiny number of each set will be acquitted. This, of course,
confirms absolutely that the overwhelming majority of the Sahabah became
first-grade innovators after the death of the Messenger.

[^1]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 11, p. 333

[^2]: Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H), vol. 9, p. 6

[^3]: Ibid, vol. 7, p. 93

[^4]: Qur’an 9:101

[^5]: Qur’an 9:120

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
4, p. 1529, \# 3937

[^7]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 3, p. 28, \#
11236

[^8]: See Qur’an 4:142, 9:67-68, and 48:6

[^9]: Hans Wehr, A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, ed. J. Milton
Cowan (Ithaca, New York: Spoken Languages Services; 3rd edition, 1976
CE), p. 800; see also Dr. Rohi Baalbaki, al-Mawrid: A Modern
Arabic-English Dictionary (Beirut: Dar al-‘Ilm li al-Malayin; 7th
edition, 1995 CE), p. 877

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
5, p. 2407, \# 6215

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: See Qur’an 2:39, 4:168-169 and 64:10


