Bibliography
============

1. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. ‘Abd Allah b. Baz, Majmu’ Fatawa al-‘Allamah ‘Abd
al-‘Aziz b. Baz

2. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. Marzuq al-Turayfi, al-Tahjil fi Takhrij ma lam
Yukhraj min al-Ahadith wa al-Athar fi Irwa al-Ghalil (Riyadh: Maktabah
al-Rushd li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1422 H)

3. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. Abi Shaybah Ibrahim b. ‘Uthman b. Abi Bakr
b. Abi Shaybah al-Kufi al-‘Ubsi, Musannaf Ibn Abi Shaybah fi al-Ahadith
wa al-Athar (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1409 H) [annotator: Prof. Sa’id
al-Laham]

4. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yahya b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Mu’alami al-‘Atmi
al-Yamani, al-Tankil bi ma fi Ta-anib al-Kawthari min al-Abatil
(al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1406 H) [annotators: Muhammad Nasir
al-Din al-Albani, Zuhayr al-Shawish and ‘Abd al-Razzaq Hamzah]

5. ‘Ali al-Namazi al-Shahrudi, Mustadrakat ‘Ilm Rijal al-Hadith (Tehran:
Haydari; 1st edition, 1414 H)

6. ‘Ali b. Husam al-Din al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal fi Sunan
al-Aqwal wa Af’al (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1989 H)

7. Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo: Muasassat
Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut]

8. Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Hanbal b. Hilal b. Asad
al-Shaybani, Musnad (Muasassat al-Risalah; 1st edition, 1421 H)
[annotators: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut, ‘Adil Murshid and others]

9. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata]

10. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Ansari al-Qurtubi, al-Jami’ li
Ahkam al-Qur’an (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1405 H)

11. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Mizan
al-I’tidal fi Naqd al-Rijal (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah) [annotator: ‘Ali
Muhammad al-Bajawi]

12. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Mukhtasar
al-’Uluw li al-‘Aliyy al-‘Azim (al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1412
H)[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

13. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah al-Bukhari
al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn Kathir; 3rd
edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha]

14. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, al-Mujtaba min
al-Sunan (Halab: Maktab al-Matbu’at al-Islamiyyah; 2nd edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

15. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani,
Al-Thamar al-Mustatab fi Fiqh al-Sunnah wa al-Kitab (Gharas li al-Nashr
wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1422 H)

16. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H)

17. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(Al-Maktab al-Islami)

18. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Manzilah al-Sunnah fi al-Islam (Kuwait: Dar
al-Salafiyyah; 4th edition, 1404 H)

19. Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih
Sunan al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

20. Abu ‘Ubayd al-Bakri, Fasl al-Maqal Sharh Kitab al-Amthal (Beirut:
Muasassat al-Risaalah; 1st edition, 1971 CE) [annotator: Ihsan ‘Abbas]

21. Abu ‘Ubayd al-Qasim b. Salam al-Harwi, Gharib al-Hadith (Haydarabad:
Majlis Dairah al-Ma’arif al-‘Uthmaniyyah; 1st edition, 1384 H)

22. Abu Ahmad ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Adi al-Jirjani, al-Kamil fi Dhu’afa
al-Rijal (Dar al-Fikr li al-Taba’at wa al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 3rd
edition, 1409 H)

23. Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani, Minhaj
al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim]

24. Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H)

25. Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H)

26. Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Hajar
al-‘Asqalani, Itihaf al-Maharat (Madinah al-Munawwarah: Markaz Khidmah
al-Sunnah wa al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H)

27. Abu al-Fadhl Jamal al-Din Muhammad b. Mukram b. Manzur al-Afriqi
al-Misri, Lisan al-‘Arab (Beirut: Dar Sadir; 1st edition)

28. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurashi al-Dimashqi,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah]

29. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah
(Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H) [annotator: ‘Ali
Shiri]

30. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir, Qisas al-Anbiya (Dar al-Kutub
al-Hadithah; 1st edition, 1388 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Wahid]

31. Abu al-Hasan Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah b. Salih al-‘Ijli al-Kufi, Ma’rifat
al-Thiqat (Madinah: Maktabah al-Dar; 1st edition, 1405 H)

32. Abu al-Husayn Ahmad b. Faris b. Zakariyyah, Mu’jam Maqayis al-Lughah
(Qum: Maktab al-A’lam al-Islami; 1404 H) [annotator: ‘Abd al-Salam
Muhammad Harun]

33. Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn
Asakir al-Shafi’i, Tarikh Madinah Dimashq (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1st
edition, 1417 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Shiri]

34. Abu al-Qasim al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. al-Mufadhdhal al-Raghib
al-Isfahani, Tafsir al-Raghib al-Isfahani wa Muqadimmatuh (Kulliyat
al-Adab, Jami’ah Tanta; 1st edition, 1412 H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad
‘Abd al-‘Aziz Basyuni]

35. Abu al-Qasim Jarullah Mahmud b. ‘Umar al-Zamakhshari, al-Kashaf
(Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1407 H)

36. Abu al-Qasim Sulayman b. Ahmad b. Ayub al-Tabarani, Mu’jam al-Kabir
(Mosul: Maktabah al-‘Ulum wa al-Hukm; 2nd edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Hamadi b. ‘Abd al-Majid al-Salafi]

37. Abu Bakr ‘Abd Allah b. Abi Shaybah, Musnad Ibn Abi Shaybah (Riyadh:
Dar al-Watan; 1st edition, 1418 H) [annotators: ‘Adil b. Yusuf al-‘Azazi
and Ahmad b. Farid al-Mazidi]

38. Abu Bakr Ahmad b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Musa al-Bayhaqi, Sunan
al-Kubra (Makkah: Maktabah Dar al-Baz; 1414 H) [annotator: Muhammad ‘Abd
al-Qadir ‘Ata]

39. Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ishaq b. Khuzaymah al-Salami al-Naysaburi,
Sahih (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 1390 H) [annotators: Muhammad Nasir
al-Din al-Albani and Dr. Muhammad Mustafa al-A’zami]

40. Abu Dawud Sulayman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijistani al-Azdi, Sunan (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

41. Abu Hafs ‘Umar b. Shahin, Tarikh Asma al-Thiqat (Dar al-Salafiyyah;
1st edition, 1404 H)

42. Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti, Kitab
al-Thiqat (Hyderabad: Majlis Dairat al-Ma’arif al-‘Uthmaniyyah; 1st
edition, 1398 H)

43. Abu Ja’far Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Salamah b. ‘Abd al-Malik b. Salmah
al-Azdi al-Hajari al-Masri al-Tahawi, Sharh Mushkil al-Athar (Muasassat
al-Risalah; 1st edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut]

44. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib al-Amuli
al-Tabari, Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an (Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: Sidqi Jamil al-‘Attar]

45. Abu Mansur Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Azhari, Tahdhib al-Lughah (Beirut:
Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 2001 CE)

46. Abu Sa’adat al-Mubarak b. Muhammad, Ibn al-Athir al-Jazari,
al-Nihayah fi Gharib al-Hadith wa al-Athar (Beirut: al-Maktabah
al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1399 AH) [annotator: Tahir Ahmad al-Zawi and Mahmud
Muhammad al-Tanahi]

47. Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, Musnad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad]

48. Abu Yusuf Ya’qub b. Sufyan al-Fasawi, al-Ma’rifah wa al-Tarikh
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah) [annotator: Khalil al-Mansur]

49. Abu Zakariyyah Yahya b. Sharaf al-Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim
(Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1407 H)

50. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Matalib al-‘Aliyah bi Zawaid
al-Masanid al-Thamaniyyah (Riyadh: Dar al-‘Asimah; 1st edition, 1420 H)
[annotator: ‘Abd Allah b. Ẓafir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Shahri]

51. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut: Dar
al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd
al-Qadir ‘Ata]

52. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani
al-Shafi’i, Hadi al-Sari Muqaddimah Fath al-Bari (Beirut: Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 4th edition, 1408 H)

53. Ahmad b. Abi Bakr b. Isma’il al-Busiri, Itihaf al-Khiyarah
al-Maharah bi Zawaid al-Masanid al-‘Ashra (Riyadh: Dar al-Watan; 1st
edition, 1420 H)

54. Al-Qadi Abu al-Fadhl ‘Iyad b. Musa b. ‘Iyad al-Yahsubi al-Sibti
al-Maliki, Mashariq al-Anwar ‘ala Sihah al-Athar (al-Maktabah al-‘Atiqah
and Dar al-Turath)

55. Al-Qadhi Abu Ishaq Isma’il b. Ishaq b. Isma’il b. Hammad b. Zayd
al-Azdi al-Basri al-Baghdadi al-Maliki al-Jahdhami, Fadhl Salat ‘ala
al-Nabi (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 3rd edition, 1397 H) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

56. Dr. Rohi Baalbaki, al-Mawrid: A Modern Arabic-English Dictionary
(Beirut: Dar al-‘Ilm li al-Malayin; 7th edition, 1995 CE)

57. Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, ‘Ismat al-Anbiya (1406 H)

58. Hans Wehr, A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, ed. J. Milton
Cowan (Ithaca, New York: Spoken Languages Services; 3rd edition, 1976
CE)

59. Hasan b. ‘Ali al-Saqqaf al-Qurashi al-Hashimi al-Husayni, Sahih
Sharh al-‘Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah (Amman: Dar Imam al-Nawawi; 1st edition,
1416 H)

60. Hasan b. ‘Ali al-Saqqaf al-Qurashi al-Hashimi al-Husayni, Sahih
Sharh al-‘Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah (Amman: Dar Imam al-Nawawi; 1st edition,
1416 H)

61. Ibn al-Athir, Abu Sa’adat al-Mubarak b. Muhammad al-Jazari,
al-Nihayah fi Gharib al-Hadith wa al-Athar (Qum: Muasassat Isma’iliyyan)
[annotator: Mahmud Muhammad al-Tanahi and Tahir Ahmad al-Zawi]

62. Jamal al-Din Abu al-Hajjaj Yusuf al-Mizzi, Tahdhib al-Kamal fi Asma
al-Rijal (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1413 H)

63. Muhammad al-Jawahiri, al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith (Qum:
Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H)

64. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Huffaz
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1419 H) [annotator:
Zakariyyah ‘Umayrat]

65. Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Wazir al-Yamani, al-‘Awasim wa al-Qawasim fi
al-Dhabb ‘an Sunnah Abi al-Qasim (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd
edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut]

66. Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Salihi al-Shami, Subul al-Huda al-Rashad fi
Sirah Khayr al-‘Ibad (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition,
1414 H) [annotators: ‘Adil Ahmad ‘Abd al-Mawjud and ‘Ali Muhammad Ma’ud]

67. Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, Asl Sifat al-Salat al-Nabi (Riyadh:
Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1427 H)

68. Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith
al-Dha’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi al-Ummah (Riyadh:
Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H)

69. Muhammad Taqi al-Tustari, Qamus al-Rijal (Qum: Muasassat al-Nashr
al-Islami; 1st edition, 1422 H)

70. Muhibb al-Din Abu Faydh Sayyid Muhammad Murtadha al-Husayni
al-Wasiti al-Zubaydi al-Hanafi, Taj al-‘Urus min Jawahir al-Qamus
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1414 H)

71. Mulla Huwaysh Al Ghazi ‘Abd al-Qadir, Bayan al-Ma’ani (Damascus:
Matbu’at al-Turki; 1382 H)

72. Muslim b. al-Hajjaj, al-Kuna wa al-Asma (Madinah al-Munawwarah:
al-Jami’ah al-Islamiyyah; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator: ‘Abd al-Rahim
Muhammad Ahmad al-Qushqari]

73. Nur al-Din ‘Ali b. Abi Bakr al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawaid (Beirut:
Dar al-Fikr; 1412 H)

74. Prof. Dr. Hikmat b. Bashir b. Yasin, Mawsu’at al-Sahih al-Masbur min
al-Tafsir bi al-Mathur (Madinah: Dar al-Mathar li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’
wa al-Taba’at; 1st edition, 1420 H)

75. Shams al-Din Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Dhahabi
al-Dimashqi, al-Kashif fi Ma’rifat Man Lahu Riwayat fi al-Kutub
al-Sittah (Jeddah: Dar al-Qiblah li al-Thaqafat al-Islamiyyah; 1st
edition, 1413 H)

76. Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 9th edition, 1413 H)

77. Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Tarikh
al-Islam wa Wafiyat al-Mashahir wa al-A’lam (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab
al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. ‘Umar ‘Abd al-Salam
Tadmuri]

78. Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition)


