Preface
=======

The Ahl al-Sunnah wa al-Jama’ah generally boycott the teachings of the
Twelve Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt, ‘alaihim al-salam. In fact, our Shaykh,
Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H), seems to be very proud about this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الرافضي و في الفقه الفقهاء يرجعون إليه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و الجواب أن هذا كذب بين فليس في الأئمة الأربعة و لا غيرهم من أئمة
الفقهاء من يرجع إليه في فقهه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما مالك فان علمه عن أهل المدينة و أهل المدينة لا يكادون يأخذون بقول
علي بل اخذوا فقههم عن الفقهاء السبعة عن زيد و عمر و ابن عمر و نحوهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما الشافعي فانه تفقه أولا على المكيين أصحاب ابن جريج كسعيد بن سالم
القداح و مسلم بن خالد الزنجي و ابن جريج اخذ ذلك عن أصحاب ابن عباس
كعطاء و غيره و ابن عباس كان مجتهدا مستقلا و كان إذا أفتى بقول الصحابة
أفتى بقول أبي بكر و عمر لا بقول علي و كان ينكر على علي أشياء ثم أن
الشافعي اخذ عن مالك ثم كتب كتب أهل العراق و اخذ مذاهب أهل الحديث و
اختار لنفسه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و أما أبو حنيفة فشيخه الذي اختص به حماد بن أبي سليمان و حماد عن
إبراهيم و إبراهيم عن علقمة و علقمة عن ابن مسعود و قد اخذ أبو حنيفة عن
عطاء و غيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و أما الإمام احمد فكان على مذهب أهل الحديث اخذ عن ابن عيينة و ابن
عيينة عن عمرو بن دينار عن ابن عباس و ابن عمر و اخذ عن هشام بن بشير و
هشام عن أصحاب الحسن و إبراهيم النخعي و اخذ عن عبد الرحمن بن مهدي و
وكيع بن الجراح و أمثالهما و جالس الشافعي و اخذ عن أبي يوسف و اختار
لنفسه قولا و كذلك إسحاق بن راهويه وابو عبيد ونحوهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و الاوزاعي و الليث اكثر فقههما عن أهل المدينة و أمثالهم لا عن الكوفيين
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Rafidhi said: “In fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence), the (Sunni) jurists
used to reference him (i.e. ‘Ali).”

The answer is that this is a plain lie. There was none among the four
Imams and others from the Imams of the jurists who referenced him (i.e.
‘Ali) in his fiqh.

As for Malik, his knowledge was from the people of al-Madinah, and the
people of al-Madinah barely took the words of ‘Ali. Rather, they took
their fiqh from the seven jurists: from Zayd, ‘Umar, Ibn ‘Umar, and
their likes.

As for al-Shafi’i, he learnt fiqh primarily came from the Makkans, the
companions of Ibn Jurayj, such as Sa’id b. Salim al-Qadah and Muslim b.
Khalid al-Zanji. Meanwhile, Ibn Jurayj took that from the companions of
Ibn ‘Abbas, like ‘Ata and others; and Ibn ‘Abbas was an independent
mujtahid who used to rely upon the words of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, and not
upon those of ‘Ali, whenever he passed fatwas with the words of the
Sahabah. Moreover, he (Ibn ‘Abbas) used to reject things from ‘Ali.
Besides, al-Shafi’i took from Malik, (and) then wrote the books of the
people of Iraq, and followed the schools of the Ahl al-Hadith, and chose
(them) for himself.

As for Abu Hanifah, his special shaykh was Hammad b. Abi Sulayman; and
Hammad learnt from Ibrahim; and Ibrahim learnt from ‘Alqamah; and
Alqamah learned from Ibn Mas’ud. Abu Hanifah also took from ‘Ata and
others.

As for Imam Ahmad, he followed the school of the Ahl al-Hadith. He took
from Ibn ‘Uyaynah; and Ibn ‘Uyaynah took from ‘Amr b. Dinar, who took
from Ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn ‘Umar. He (i.e. Ahmad) also took from Hisham b.
Bashir; and Hisham took from the companions of al-Hasan (al-Basri) and
Ibrahim al-Nakha’i. He (i.e. Ahmad) further took from ‘Abd al-Rahman b.
Mahdi, Waki’ b. al-Jarrah and similar people. He (i.e. Ahmad) equally
attended the assemblies of al-Shafi’i, and took from Abu Yusuf and
adopted a statement for himself, and also Ishaq b. Rahwayh, Abu ‘Ubayd
and others like them.

As for al-Awza’i and al-Layth, most of their fiqh was from the people of
al-Madinah and their likes, and not from the people of Kufah.[^1]

In simpler words, none of the Sunni schools of jurisprudence contains
the teachings of ‘Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and the other Imams from the
offspring of the Prophet, ‘alaihim al-salam ajma’in. The Sunni Imams
generally shunned their inputs and riwayat in al-fiqh.

But, the Sunni boycott was not limited to al-fiqh. Even in the reportage
of tafasir and ahadith, the Ahl al-Sunnah boycott the Ahl al-Bayt. Ibn
Taymiyyah confirms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذه كتب الحديث والتفسير مملوءة بالآثار عن الصحابة والتابعين والذي
فيها عن علي قليل جدا
  </p>
</blockquote>

These are books of hadith and tafsir, filled with reports from the
Sahabah and Tabi’in. What is recorded in them from ‘Ali is **very
little**.[^2]

He also submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الرافضي أما المالكية فاخذوا علمهم عنه و عن أولاده
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و الجواب أن هنا كذب ظاهر فهذا موطأ مالك ليس فيه عنه و لا عن أحد أولاده
إلا قليل جدا و جمهور ما فيه عن غيرهم فيه عن جعفر تسعة أحاديث و لم يرو
مالك عن أحد من ذريته إلا عن جعفر و كذلك الأحاديث التي في الصحاح و
السنن و المساند منها قليل عن ولده و جمهور ما فيها عن غيرهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Rafidhi said: “As for the Malikis, they took their knowledge from
him (i.e. ‘Ali) and from his (i.e. ‘Ali’s) offspring.”

The answer is that there is an apparent lie here. This is Muwatta of
Malik. What is recorded in it from him (i.e. ‘Ali) or any of his
offspring is **very little**. Most of what is in it is from other than
them. There are nine ahadith from Ja’far (al-Sadiq) in it, and Malik did
not record from ANY of his (i.e. ‘Ali’s) offspring except from Ja’far.
This is also the case with what is recorded in the Sahih books, the
Sunan books, and the Musnad books. What is recorded in them from his
(i.e. ‘Ali’s) offspring is little. The generality of what is recorded in
them is from others.[^3]

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah still has more words about the Ahl al-Bayt:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والمتقدمون منهم كعلى بن الحسين وابنه أبي جعفر وابنه جعفر بن محمد قد
نقل عنهم من العلم قطعة معروفة وأخذ عن غيرهم أكثر من ذلك بكثير كثير
وأما من بعدهم فالعلم المأخوذ عنهم قليل جدا
  </p>
</blockquote>

The early ones among them, such as ‘Ali b. al-Husayn (Zayn al-‘Abidin)
and his son, Abu Ja’far (al-Baqir), and his son, Ja’far b. Muhammad
(al-Sadiq), a known FRACTION of knowledge was transmitted from them.
However, what is recorded from other than them is far, far more than
that. As for those after them (from the Ahl al-Bayt), the knowledge that
was taken from them was **very little**.[^4]

It was indeed a very widespread, and very deep, boycott of the Ahl
al-Bayt by the Ahl al-Sunnah. Meanwhile, even if a Sunni today decided
to follow the Ahl al-Bayt, he would be unable to do so through the Sunni
books. There is “very little” of their teachings and narrations in the
books of the Ahl al-Sunnah.

The dilemma here gets even more serious when one considers that the
Messenger of Allah had ordered his whole Ummah – including all his
Sahabah, the Tabi’in, the Tabi’ al-Tabi’in - to take ‘Ali and his
offspring - his Ahl al-Bayt – as khalifahs after him, and to follow them
in absolutely everything, in order to remain truly upon the Kitab and
the Sunnah. But, how does a Sunni adhere to these Prophetic decrees
without abandoning the Sunni school? The answer seems impossible to
determine. Sunni Islam, apparently, feeds upon disobedience of the said
decrees. So, what does a Sunni do in this confusion?

The ‘ulama of the Ahl al-Sunnah have adopted four different attitudes to
the decrees – contained in Hadith al-Thaqalayn and its branch, Hadith
al-Khalifatayn. Some of them, such as our own Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah, have
taken the easy way by denying the authenticity of the ahadith in the
Sunni books. This seemingly saves them the trouble of dealing with the
consequences of the apparent Sunni boycott of the Ahl al-Bayt. Some
other Sunni ‘ulama however accept the authenticity of the riwayat but
prefer to rather re-interpret “hold fast to” in them as meaning to
simply “love” the Messenger’s offspring and to “be kind to” them!

The third category of Sunni scholars agree that the ahadith are sahih,
and that they really command the whole Ummah to obey and follow the
blessed offspring of Muhammad. But, they insist that the Ahl al-Sunnah
are actually followers and subjects of the Ahl al-Bayt! The fourth group
within the Sunni clergy, meanwhile, calmly ply the cheapest route: dead
silence on the ahadith. They simply never mention, talk or write about
Hadith al-Thaqalayn and Hadith al-Khalifatayn under any circumstance!
This obviously reduces the “threat” posed by the riwayat and keeps the
Sunni ride smooth and steady.

This research work of ours addresses all four Sunni positions on the
hadiths, with particular emphasis on the claims and submissions of Ibn
Taymiyyah. We prove, with abundant references, the existence and
authenticity of Hadith al-Thaqalayn and Hadith al-Khalifatayn, in the
most authentic Sunni books – including Sahih Muslim – with perfectly
authentic chains of narration! We thoroughly investigate the various
chains of the riwayat, and also quote certifications of their
authenticity by top Sunni hadithists like ‘Allamah al-Albani, Shaykh
al-Arnaut and others. We equally carefully analyze the texts of the two
hadiths, as well as those of relevant others, in order to determine
their true messages. Our aim, obviously, is to leave no one with any
excuse before Allah on the Day of al-Qiyamah.

We sincerely hope that this work will be highly beneficial to every
human being who is truthfully searching for the only correct Path to
Allah. In this book, we have used the same strict investigative and
transparent research methodology which we employed in our first, second
and third books. We implore Allah to forgive us all our mistakes, and to
accept this as a worthy act of ‘ibadah. And may Allah send His salawat
and barakat upon our master, Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah, and upon his
purified offspring.

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, pp. 529-531

[^2]: Ibid, vol. 8, p. 43

[^3]: Ibid, vol. 7, p. 531

[^4]: Ibid, vol. 4, p. 108


