1) Hadith Al-Thaqalayn: The Prophet At ‘Arafat (Part 1)
=======================================================

It was 10 H (632 CE), during the last Hajj of the Messenger of Allah,
sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi. Muslims from all corners of the then
Islamic world had gathered together at ‘Arafat for the prescribed
pilgrimage rites, under his leadership and guidance. It was here that
the Prophet delivered one of the most significant sermons in the entire
history of humankind. Imam al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H) records what happened:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا نصر بن عبد الرحمن الكوفي حدثنا زيد بن الحسن هو الأنماطي عن جعفر
بن محمد عن أبيه عن جابر بن عبد الله قال رأيت رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم في حجته يوم عرفة وهو على ناقته القصواء يخطب فسمعته يقول يا أيها
الناس إني قد تركت فيكم ما إن أخذتم به لن تضلوا كتاب الله وعترتي أهل
بيتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Nasr b. ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Kufi – Zayd b. al-Hasan al-Anmati – Ja’far b.
Muhammad – his father – Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah:

I saw the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, during his Hajj on the
Day of ‘Arafat while he was on his camel, al-Qaswa, delivering a sermon,
and I heard him saying: “O mankind! I have left behind over you[^1] that
which if you hold fast to it you will never go astray: the Book of Allah
and my offspring, my Ahl al-Bayt.”[^2]

Al-Tirmidhi says on the riwayah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذا حديث حسن غريب من هذا الوجه و زيد بن الحسن قد روى عنه سعيد بن
سليمان وغير واحد من أهل العلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

And this hadith is hasan gharib (i.e. has a hasan chain) from this
route. As for Zayd b. al-Hasan, Sa’id b. Sulayman and others from the
people of knowledge have narrated from him.[^3]

‘Allamah al-Albani also has a simple comment:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sahih[^4]

In his al-Sahihah, the ‘Allamah further states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يا أيها الناس! إني قد تركت فيكم ما إن أخذتم به لن تضلوا، كتاب الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعترتي أهل بيتي ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

> أخرجه الترمذي (2 / 308) والطبراني (2680) عن زيد بن الحسن الأنماطي عن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جعفر عن أبيه عن جابر بن عبد الله قال: " رأيت رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم في حجته يوم عرفة، وهو على ناقته القصواء يخطب، فسمعته يقول: "
فذكره، وقال: " حديث حسن غريب من هذا الوجه، وزيد بن الحسن قد روى عنه
سعيد بن سليمان وغير واحد من أهل العلم ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: قال أبو حاتم، منكر الحديث، وذكره ابن حبان في " الثقات ". وقال
الحافظ: " ضعيف ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: لكن الحديث صحيح، فإن له شاهدا من حديث زيد بن أرقم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O mankind! I have left behind over you that which if you hold fast to
it you will never go astray: the Book of Allah and my offspring, my Ahl
al-Bayt.”

Al-Tirmidhi (2/308) and al-Tabarani (2680) recorded it from Zayd b.
al-Hasan al-Anmati from Ja’far from his father from Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah,
who said: “I saw the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, during his
Hajj on the Day of ‘Arafat while he was on his camel, al-Qaswa,
delivering a sermon, and I heard him saying” Then he (al-Tirmidhi)
quoted it (i.e. the hadith), and said: “And this hadith is hasan gharib
(i.e. has a hasan chain) from this route. As for Zayd b. al-Hasan, Sa’id
b. Sulayman and others from the people of knowledge have narrated from
him.”

I (al-Albani) say: Abu Hatim said: “Munkar al-hadith” and Ibn Hibban
mentioned him in al-Thiqat (The Trustworthy Narrators). Al-Hafiz said:
“Dha’if”.

I (al-Albani) say: But the hadith is sahih, for – verily - it has a
witness (shahid) in the hadith of Zayd b. Arqam.[^5]

These words of al-Albani explain his methodology in grading the hadith
as sahih. Unlike al-Tirmidhi, he considers the chain of the report to be
dha’if (weak), due to Zayd b. al-Hasan al-Anmati. However, he believes
that the Messenger did truly utter those words – as evidenced by the
report of Zayd b. Arqam – at a location other than ‘Arafat.

The claim that the Prophet delivered the hadith at ‘Arafat, in addition
to other places, comes only through the sanad of al-Anmati. As such, if
his chain is dha’if, then it would be impossible to prove that those
words were ever uttered at ‘Arafat – even though there is no doubt that
he said them at another place. Meanwhile, Imam al-Tirmidhi believed that
the Messenger of Allah declared the hadith at ‘Arafat, and later at
Ghadir Khumm[^6]. ‘Allamah al-Albani explains how:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أقول: وجه ذلك أن جمع الترمذي بين لفظتي " غريب " و" حسن " إنما يعني في
اصطلاحه أنه حسن لذاته
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: The reason for that is whenever al-Tirmidhi says “hasan gharib”,
he only means in his terminologies that its chain is independently
hasan.[^7]

So, basically, al-Tirmidhi considers al-Anmati to be reliable, and his
sanad to be hasan.  
 We could then conclude the following from the research up to this
level:

Al-Tirmidhi considers the chain of al-Anmati to be independently hasan
while al-Albani grades the same sanad as dha’if.

It is only the sanad of al-Anmati which establishes that the hadith was
pronounced at ‘Arafat too, in addition to Ghadir Khumm. Therefore, if
the chain is dha’if, then there would be no evidence that the Prophet of
Allah ever said those words at ‘Arafat.

To al-Tirmidhi, the Messenger uttered delivered the hadith at ‘Arafat,
and later at Ghadir Khumm. However, in the opinion of al-Albani, it is
NOT established that the Prophet made the statement at ‘Arafat, even
though it is true that he said them later at Ghadir Khumm.

In rejecting the reliability of Zayd b. al-Hasan al-Anmati, ‘Allamah
al-Albani has only Abu Hatim (d. 277 H) as his principal authority:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وزيد بن الحسن قد روى عنه سعيد بن سليمان وغير واحد من أهل العلم ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: قال أبو حاتم، منكر الحديث، وذكره ابن حبان في " الثقات ". وقال
الحافظ: " ضعيف ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al-Tirmidhi said): “As for Zayd b. al-Hasan, Sa’id b. Sulayman and
others from the people of knowledge have narrated from him.”

I (al-Albani) say: Abu Hatim said: “Munkar al-hadith” and Ibn Hibban
mentioned him in al-Thiqat (The Trustworthy Narrators). Al-Hafiz said:
“Dha’if”.

We therefore know the following about al-Anmati:

Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H) considers him thiqah (trustworthy), and has
therefore included him in his al-Thiqat.

Imam al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H) accepts al-Anmati’s ahadith as being
independently hasan. This shows that he considers him reliable, most
probably saduq (very truthful) in status.

Imam Abu Hatim (d. 277 H) calls him munkar al-hadith, meaning that his
ahadith are “rejected”, very weak.

Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani (d. 852 H) also declares al-Anmati to be
dha’if.

Needless to say, Abu Hatim was the only classical scholar who deemed
al-Anmati to be unreliable. Therefore, al-Hafiz – a much later scholar –
apparently only adopted this negative rating.

As such, the primary, uncorroborated source of the criticism against
al-Anmati was Abu Hatim only.

Al-Hafiz relied upon the statements of the classical scholars to
classify narrators. Since Abu Hatim was the sole classical critic of
al-Anmati, then al-Hafiz had certainly relied only upon the former for
his “dha’if” grading.

All these point in one direction only: Abu Hatim is the sole,
unsupported primary critic of al-Anmati. We confirm absolutely too that
no other classical Sunni hadith scientist levelled any criticism against
al-Anmati apart from Abu Hatim. Therefore, if the criticism of Abu Hatim
falls, then everything against al-Anmati collapses with it. So, we ask:
what is the probative value of uncorroborated testimonies of Abu Hatim
concerning narrators? Imam al-Dhahabi provides the apposite answer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذا وثق أبو حاتم رجلا فتمسك بقوله، فإنه لا يوثق إلا رجلا صحيح الحديث،
وإذا لين رجلا، أو قال فيه: لا يحتج به. فتوقف حتى ترى ما قال غيره فيه،
فإن وثقه أحد، فلا تبن على تجريح أبي حاتم، فإنه متعنت في الرجال
  </p>
</blockquote>

When Abu Hatim declared a narrator to be thiqah (trustworthy), then hold
fast to his statement, because he never declared a narrator to be thiqah
except a narrator whose ahadith are sahih. When he weakened a narrator,
or said about him “he is not accepted as a hujjah”, then pause until you
have seen what others also said about him (i.e. that narrator). If there
was A SINGLE other person who declared him (i.e. the narrator) to be
thiqah (trustworthy), then do NOT adopt the criticism of Abu Hatim,
because he was pigheaded in rijal.[^8]

Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani also says about a narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي الميزان أن أبا حاتم قال لا يحتج به فينتظر في ذلك وأبو حاتم عنده
عنت وقد احتج به الجماعة
  </p>
</blockquote>

In al-Mizan, it is stated that Abu Hatim said “He is not accepted as a
hujjah”. But, watch that carefully. There was pigheadedness in Abu
Hatim. He (the narrator) has been accepted as a hujjah by the
majority.[^9]

This is self-explanatory and straightforward:

Whenever Abu Hatim was the only classical critic against a narrator,
then investigation must be conducted to find out if any other classical
hadithist contradicted him.

If there was a single classical hadith scientist who contradicted Abu
Hatim, then the latter’s criticism must be rejected.

Abu Hatim was the only classical critic of al-Anmati, and he was
contradicted by both al-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban.

As such, the criticism of Abu Hatim is worthless, and al-Anmati is
indeed reliable – whether thiqah (trustworthy) or saduq (very truthful)
– as indicated by Ibn Hibban and al-Tirmidhi.

With these findings, it is neatly established that the chain of
al-Anmati is sahih, or at least hasan, as declared by Imam al-Tirmidhi.
This in turn proves that the Prophet of Allah did truly deliver Hadith
al-Thaqalayn at ‘Arafat, among other places.

[^1]: The word used in the hadith is fikum. This author himself
previously translated it as “among you” or “amongst you”. However, upon
further research, he concluded that the main preposition used – fi - has
the following definitions in classical Arabic: “above”, “over”, “on”,
“among”, “amongst”, and “in”. For instance, ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420
H) has stated concerning the phrase “fi” in his al-Sahihah, vol. 2, p.
715, \# 925-12 (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1415 H): قوله
تعالى: {أأمنتم من في السماء}؛ أي: على السماء؛ أي: فوق العرش، وبذلك فسرها
علماء السلف والخلف -ومنهم ابن عبد البر في "التمهيد"، والبيهقي في كتابيه:
"الأسماء" و"الاعتقاد" The Statement of Allah the Most High: {Do you feel
secure that He Who is over [fi] the heaven} [67:16], meaning: over the
sky; meaning: above the Throne. This is how the scholars of the Salaf
and the Khalaf – among them Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr in al-Tamhid and al-Bayhaqi
in his books – al-Asma and al-I’tiqad - have interpreted it. Imam
al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) also writes in his Mukhtasar al-’Uluw li al-‘Aliyy
al-‘Azim (al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1412 H)[annotator: Muhammad
Nasir al-Din al-Albani], pp. 245-246, \#298: قال أبو عبد الله الحاكم:
قال الفقيه أبو بكر أحمد بن إسحاق الضبعي النيسابوري: قد تضع العرب "في"
موضع "على" قال الله تعالى: {فسيحوا في الأرض} وقال: {ولأصلبنكم في جذوع
النخل} ومعناه على الأرض وعلى النحل، فكذلك قوله: {من في السماء} أي من على
العرش، كما صحت الأخبار عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم. Abu ‘Abd Allah
al-Hakim said: The jurist, Abu Bakr Ahmad b. Ishaq al-Dhab’i
al-Naysaburi said: “The Arabs have used fi to mean ‘ala (above, over).
Allah the Most High says: {So travel freely [fi] over the earth} [9:2].
He also says: {I will surely crucify you [fi] above the trunks of
date-palms} [20:71]. Its meaning is ‘over the earth’ and ‘over the
date-palms’. This is also the case with His Statement {Who is over [fi]
the heaven}, meaning, Who is over the Throne, as sahih reports have
indicated from the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him.” The same term
has been used in Hadith al-Thaqalayn. We now believe that it means
“over” and “above” in the hadith because the Messenger of Allah was NOT
placing the Qur’an and his offspring on equal footing with us in it.
Rather, he was ordering us to “adhere” to them – thereby placing them
above us, making them our leaders.

[^2]: Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih
Sunan al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 5, p. 662 \# 3786

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 4, pp. 355-356, \# 1761

[^6]: We will later in this book present sahih Sunni reports – by Zayd
b. Arqam and others - of the pronouncement of the hadith at a place
called Ghadir Khumm.

[^7]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, Silsilah
al-Ahadith al-Dha’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi
al-Ummah (Riyadh: Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H), vol. 2, p. 185,
\# 764

[^8]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 9th edition, 1413 H), vol. 13,
p. 260, \# 129

[^9]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani
al-Shafi’i, Hadi al-Sari Muqaddimah Fath al-Bari (Beirut: Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 4th edition, 1408 H), p. 441


