5) Hadith Al-Thaqalayn: The Prophet At Ghadir Khumm (Part 3)
============================================================

The Prophet, sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi, conveyed Hadith al-Thaqalayn
in different words to absolutely ensure that the message was not lost on
his audiences. At ‘Arafat, he declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أيها الناس إني قد تركت فيكم ما إن أخذتم به لن تضلوا كتاب الله
وعترتي أهل بيتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

O mankind! I have left behind over you that which if you hold fast to it
you will never go astray: the Book of Allah and my offspring, my Ahl
al-Bayt.

Later, at Ghadir Khumm, he again statements:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنا تارك فيكم ثقلين أولهما كتاب الله فيه الهدى والنور من استمسك به
وأخذ به كان على الهدى ومن أخطأه ضل فخذوا بكتاب الله تعالى واستمسكوا به
وأهل بيتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

I am leaving behind over you Two Weighty Things (thaqalayn). The first
of them is the Book of Allah. In it there is guidance and light. Whoever
adheres to it and holds fast to it, he will be upon guidance; and
whosoever belittles it, he will go astray. So hold fast to the Book of
Allah the Most High and adhere to it and my Ahl al-Bayt.

Then, at that same Ghadir Khumm, he made some other pronouncements,
which were clearly intended to drive home the point more forcefully.
Al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H) affirms this in his Tafsir:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و في الصحيح: أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال في خطبته بغَدِير
خُمّ: "إني تارك فيكم الثقلين: كتاب الله وعترتي، وإنهما لم يفترقا حتى
يردا علي الحوض"
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the sahih report, it is recorded that the Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him, said in his sermon at Ghadir Khumm: “I am leaving behind
over you the Two Weighty Things (al-thaqalayn): the Book of Allah and my
offspring. Verily, both shall never separate from each other until they
meet me at the Lake-Fount.”[^1]

Meanwhile, Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) has equally recorded this riwayah
which identifies the main narrator of the hadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو بكر محمد بن الحسين بن مصلح الفقيه بالري ثنا محمد بن أيوب ثنا
يحيى بن المغيرة السعدي ثنا جرير بن عبد الحميد عن الحسن بن عبد الله
النخعي عن مسلم بن صبيح عن زيد بن أرقم رضي الله عنه قال قال رسول الله
صلى الله عليه وسلم إني تارك فيكم الثقلين كتاب الله وأهل بيتي وإنهما لن
يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. Musalih al-Faqih – Muhammad b. Ayub –
Yahya b. al-Mughirah al-Sa’di – Jarir b. ‘Abd al-Hamid – al-Hasan b.
‘Abd Allah al-Nakha’i – Muslim b. Subayh – Zayd b. Arqam, may Allah be
pleased with him:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “I am leaving behind
over you the Two Weighty Things (al-thaqalayn): the Book of Allah and my
Ahl al-Bayt. Verily, both shall never separate from each other until
they meet me at the Lake-Fount.”[^2]

Al-Hakim states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

This hadith has a sahih chain upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^3]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على شرط البخاري ومسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Upon the standard of al-Bukhari and Muslim[^4]

Imam al-Tabarani (d. 360 H) too has an additional sanad for the hadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا علي بن عبد العزيز ثنا عمرو بن عون الواسطي ثنا خالد بن عبد الله
عن الحسن بن عبيد الله عن أبي الضحى عن زيد بن أرقم قال قال رسول الله
صلى الله عليه و سلم : إني تارك فيكم الثقلين كتاب الله وعترتي أهل بيتي
وإنهما لن يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz – ‘Amr b. ‘Awn al-Wasiti – Khalid b. ‘Abd Allah –
al-Hasan b. ‘Ubayd Allah – Abu al-Dhuha – Zayd b. Arqam:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “I am leaving behind
over you the Two Weighty Things (al-thaqalayn): the Book of Allah and my
offspring, my Ahl al-Bayt. Verily, both shall never separate from each
other until they meet me at the Lake-Fount.”[^5]

Shaykh al-Arnaut says about this hadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is sahih[^6]

This is an authentication of all the parts of the hadith by our
typically reluctant Shaykh. This, of course, means a lot.

Meanwhile, there is no sin in independently verifying the authenticity
of the hadith. As such, al-Dhahabi says about the first narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن عبد العزيز ابن المرزبان ابن سابور: الامام، الحافظ، الصدوق، أبو
الحسن البغوي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. al-Marzaban b. Sabur: the Imam, the hafiz
(hadith scientist), the saduq (very truthful) narrator, Abu al-Hasan
al-Baghwi.[^7]

Elsewhere, he adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن عبد العزيز البغوي الحافظ المجاور بمكة. ثقة، لكنه يطلب على
التحديث، ويعتذر بأنه محتاج. قال الدارقطني: ثقة مأمون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Baghwi: the hafiz (hadith scientist), adjacent
to Makkah: Thiqah (trustworthy). However, he used to request (payments)
for narrating ahadith, and he is excused on the ground that he was
needy. Al-Daraqutni said: “He was thiqah (trustworthy) and totally
reliable.”[^8]

Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) states about the second narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عمرو بن عون بن أوس الواسطي أبو عثمان البزاز البصري ثقة ثبت
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Amr b. ‘Awn b. Aws al-Wasiti, Abu ‘Uthman al-Bazzaz al-Basri: Thiqah
(trustworthy), thabt (accurate).[^9]

Concerning the third narrator, al-Hafiz also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خالد بن عبد الله بن عبد الرحمن بن يزيد الطحان الواسطي المزني مولاهم
ثقة ثبت
  </p>
</blockquote>

Khalid b. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yazid al-Tahan al-Wasiti
al-Muzni, their freed slave: Thiqah (trustworthy), thabt
(accurate).[^10]

The fourth narrator is thiqah (trustworthy) too, as affirmed by
al-Hafiz:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسن بن عبيد الله بن عروة النخعي أبو عروة الكوفي ثقة فاضل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Hasan b. ‘Ubayd Allah b. ‘Urwah al-Nakha’i, Abu ‘Urwah al-Kufi:
Thiqah (trustworthy), fadhil (virtuous).[^11]

Finally, al-Hafiz proclaims about the last narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مسلم بن صبيح بالتصغير الهمداني أبو الضحى الكوفي العطار مشهور بكنيته
ثقة فاضل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muslim b. Subayh al-Hamdani, Abu al-Dhuha al-Kufi al-‘Attar, well-known
with his kunya: Thiqah (trustworthy), fadhil (virtuous).[^12]

Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) also states concerning him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو الضحى مسلم بن صبيح سمع ابن عباس والنعمان بن بشير وزيد بن أرقم روى
عنه الأعمش وحبيب بن أبي ثابت
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-Dhuha, Muslim b. Subayh: He heard (ahadith from) Ibn ‘Abbas,
al-Nu’man b. Bashir and Zayd b. Arqam. Al-A’mash and Habib b. Abi Thabit
narrated from him.[^13]

So, all the narrators are thiqah (trustworthy), and the sanad, of
course, is fully connected. As such, it is a perfectly sahih chain.

But, there is more! Imam al-Tabarani again documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا معاذ بن المثنى ثنا علي بن المديني ثنا جرير بن عبد الحميد عن
الحسن بن عبيد الله عن أبي الضحى عن زيد بن أرقم قال قال رسول الله : إني
تارك فيكم الثقلين كتاب الله وعترتي أهل بيتي وإنهما لن يتفرقا حتى يردا
علي الحوض
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mu’adh b. al-Muthanna – ‘Ali b. al-Madini – Jarir b. ‘Abd al-Hamid –
al-Hasan b. ‘Ubayd Allah – Abu al-Dhuha – Zayd b. Arqam:

The Messenger of Allah said: “I am leaving behind over you the Two
Weighty Things (al-thaqalayn): the Book of Allah and my offspring, my
Ahl al-Bayt. Verily, both shall never separate from each other until
they meet me at the Lake-Fount.”[^14]

There are only three new names in this chain.

Al-Dhahabi says about the first narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
معاذ بن المثنى أبو المثنى: ثقة، متقن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mu’adh b. al-Muthanna, Abu al-Muthanna: Thiqah (trustworthy), extremely
precise.[^15]

About the second narrator, al-Hafiz states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن عبد الله بن جعفر بن نجيح السعدي مولاهم أبو الحسن بن المديني
بصري ثقة ثبت إمام أعلم أهل عصره بالحديث وعلله
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. ‘Abd Allah b. Ja’far b. Najih al-Sa’di, their freed slave, Abu
al-Hasan b. al-Madini Basri: Thiqah (trustworthy), thabt (accurate), an
Imam, the most knowledgeable of his time in hadith and its ‘ilal.[^16]

The third narrator is like that too, as al-Hafiz submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جرير بن عبد الحميد بن قرط بضم القاف وسكون الراء بعدها طاء مهملة الضبي
الكوفي نزيل الري وقاضيها ثقة صحيح الكتاب قيل كان في آخر عمره يهم من
حفظه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jarir b. ‘Abd al-Hamid b. Qurt al-Dhabi al-Kufi, a resident of al-Rayy
and its judge: Thiqah (trustworthy), sahih al-kitab (i.e. whatever he
narrated from his books was sahih). It is said that he used to
hallucinate due to his memory during the last part of his lifetime.[^17]

Al-Hafiz refers to the criticism against Jarir with “it is said”, which
is a term employed to express doubt. In other words, al-Hafiz does NOT
confirm that Jarir really used to hallucinate during the last part of
his lifetime. Secondly, even if the allegation were accepted, it would
still not harm Jarir. The claim was that he hallucinated, but not “a
lot”. That shows that his memory problem was not serious, and therefore
would not affect his ahadith. In any case, there is a mutaba’ah for
Jarir by Khalid b. ‘Abd Allah. Therefore, this second chain is
impeccably sahih too, in any case.

[^1]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurashi al-Dimashqi,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah], vol. 7, p. 201

[^2]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
160, \# 4711

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Abu al-Qasim Sulayman b. Ahmad b. Ayub al-Tabarani, Mu’jam
al-Kabir (Mosul: Maktabah al-‘Ulum wa al-Hukm; 2nd edition, 1404 H)
[annotator: Hamadi b. ‘Abd al-Majid al-Salafi], vol. 5, p.169, \# 4980

[^6]: Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Wazir al-Yamani, al-‘Awasim wa al-Qawasim
fi al-Dhabb ‘an Sunnah Abi al-Qasim (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd
edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 1, p. 178,
footnote \# 1

[^7]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 9th edition, 1413 H)
[annotators: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut and ‘Ali Abu Zayd], vol. 13, p. 348, \#
164

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Mizan
al-I’tidal fi Naqd al-Rijal (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah) [annotator: ‘Ali
Muhammad al-Bajawi], vol. 3, p. 143, \# 5882

[^9]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 742, \# 5104

[^10]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 259, \# 1652

[^11]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 206, \# 1258

[^12]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 179, \# 6653

[^13]: Muslim b. al-Hajjaj, al-Kuna wa al-Asma (Madinah al-Munawwarah:
al-Jami’ah al-Islamiyyah; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator: ‘Abd al-Rahim
Muhammad Ahmad al-Qushqari], vol. 1, P. 455, 1722

[^14]: Abu al-Qasim Sulayman b. Ahmad b. Ayub al-Tabarani, Mu’jam
al-Kabir (Mosul: Maktabah al-‘Ulum wa al-Hukm; 2nd edition, 1404 H)
[annotator: Hamadi b. ‘Abd al-Majid al-Salafi], vol. 5, p.170, \# 4981

[^15]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 9th edition, 1413 H)
[annotators: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut and ‘Ali Abu Zayd], vol. 13, p. 527, \#
259

[^16]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 697, \# 4776

[^17]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 158, \# 918


