6) Hadith Al-Thaqalayn: The Prophet At Ghadir Khumm (Part 4)
============================================================

The Messenger of Allah, sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi, proclaimed at
Ghadir Khumm to all humanity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إني تارك فيكم الثقلين كتاب الله وعترتي أهل بيتي وإنهما لن يتفرقا حتى
يردا علي الحوض
  </p>
</blockquote>

I am leaving behind over you the Two Weighty Things (al-thaqalayn): the
Book of Allah and my offspring, my Ahl al-Bayt. Verily, both shall never
separate from each other until they meet me at the Lake-Fount.

The Qur’an and the offspring of the Prophet are referred to as “the Two
Weighty Things” (al-thaqalayn) in the ahadith. Both of them are “left
behind over” us by him, and are further described as being eternally
inseparable till the Day of al-Qiyamah. What exactly did the Rasul
intend with these statements?

When the leader of a nation or community tells his people “I will die
soon. But, I have left behind over you so-and-so”, what possibly could
he be telling them? It is clear, of course. The designated person –
“left behind over” his people - is to take his place and perform his
role among them. Hadith al-Thaqalayn, obviously, is in this sense too.
The Prophet was declaring the Qur’an and his offspring as his
substitutes over his Ummah after him. Shaykh al-Arnaut too has something
for us in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال السندي: قوله: "إني تارك فيكم"، أي: بعد موتي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الثًقلين: الثقل، بفتحتين: كل شيء نفيس مصون، ومنه هذا الحديث، كذا في
"القاموس".
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحدهما أكبر: هو الكتاب، لأنه إمام الكل: العترة، وغيرهم…
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعترتي: كأنه صلى الله عليه وسلم جعلهم قائمين مقامه، فكما كان في حياته
القرآن والنبي، كذلك بعده القرآن وأهل بيته، ولكن قيامهم مقامه في وجوب
المحبة والمراعاة والإحسان، لا في العمل بأقوالهم وآرائهم، بل المرجع في
العمل: الكتاب والسنة، والله تعالى أعلم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Sindi said: “His statement {I am leaving behind over you}: that is,
after me death.

{The Two Weighty Things}: every priceless treasure is called a ‘weighty
thing’, and this hadith is from it, as stated in al-Qamus.

{One of them is greater}: that is the Book, because it is the Imam for
everyone – whether the offspring (of the Prophet) or others…

{and my offspring}: it is like he, peace be upon him, appointed them TO
STAND IN HIS PLACE, such that just as it was the Qur’an and the Prophet
during his lifetime, it was the Qur’an and his Ahl al-Bayt after him.
However, their standing in his place is (only) with regards to the
(Ummah’s) obligation of love, kindness and care (to them), not in
adherence to their words and opinions. Rather, the reference for actions
are the Book and the Sunnah, and Allah the Most High knows best.”[^1]

This is further strengthened by the fact that he called them both “the
Two Weighty Things”, al-thaqalayn. Imam Ibn Manzur (d. 711 H), the
leading classical Sunni linguist, explains what this means:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وروي عن النبي، صلى الله عليه وسلم، أنه قال في آخر عمره: إني تارك فيكم
الثقلين: كتاب الله وعترتي، فجعلهما كتاب الله عز وجل وعترته، وقد تقدم
ذكر العترة. وقال ثعلب: سميا ثقلين لأن الأخذ بهما ثقيل والعمل بهما
ثقيل، قال: وأصل الثقل أن العرب تقول لكل شئ نفيس خطير مصون ثقل، فسماهما
ثقلين إعظاما لقدرهما وتفخيما لشأنهما
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated from the Prophet, peace be upon him, that he said during
the end of his lifetime: “I am leaving behind over you the Two Weighty
Things (al-thaqalayn): the Book of Allah and my offspring.” So, he
identified them both as the Book of Allah the Almighty and his
offspring. The word “itrah (offspring)” has already been explained.
Tha’lab said: “He named them thaqalayn because holding fast to them both
and following them both are weighty (responsibilities).” He said: “The
origin of (the word) thaqal is that Arabs referred to every priceless
weighty thing as a thaqal. Therefore, he named them thaqalayn to
highlight their significance and to extol their importance [^2]

Imam Ibn al-Athir (d. 606 H), an ace Sunni hadith linguist, has the same
submission:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
]إني تارك فيكم الثقلين : كتاب الله وعترت] سماهما ثقلين لأن الأخذ بهما
والعمل بهما ثقيل . ويقال لكك خطير نفيس ثقل فسماهما ثقلين إعظاما
لقدرهما وتفخيما لشأنهما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[I am leaving among you the Two Weighty Things: the Book of Allah and my
offspring], he named them both thaqalayn because holding fast to them
both and following them are weighty (responsibilities). And every
priceless weighty thing is called thaqal. Therefore, he named them
thaqalayn to highlight their significance and to extol their
importance.[^3]

Another leading Sunni linguist, al-Zubaydi (d. 1205 H), backs him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكذلك الحديث} إني تارك فيكم الثقلين، كتاب الله وعترتي {جعلهما ثقلين
إعظاما لقدرهما وتفخيما لهما. وقال ثعلب: سماهما ثقلين؛ لأن الأخذ بهما
والعمل بهما ثقيل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it is like that in the hadith: “I am leaving among you the Two
Weighty Things (al-thaqalayn): the Book of Allah and my offspring”. He
called them thaqalayn to highlight their significance and to extol them
both. Tha’lab said: “He named them thaqalayn because holding fast to
them both and following them both are weighty (responsibilities).”[^4]

Yet another leading Sunni linguist, Abu Mansur al-Azhari (d. 370 H),
confirms them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روي عن النبي (صلى الله عليه وسلم) أنَّه قال في مرضه الذي مات فيه: (إني
تارك فيكم الثقلين: كتابَ الله وعِتْرتي، ولن يفترقا حتى يردا علي
الحوض)، فسَّر النبي (صلى الله عليه وسلم) الثقلين فجعلهما كتاب الله جلّ
وعزّ وعِترته عليه السلام؛ وقد فسّرت العترة فيما تقدّم وهم جماعةُ
عشيرته الأدْنَوْن. وقال أبو العباس أحمد بن يحيى: سميا ثقلين لأن الأخذ
بهما ثقيل، والعمل بهما ثقيل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated from the Prophet, peace be upon him, that he said in his
fatal illness: (I am leaving behind over you the Two Weighty Things: the
Book of Allah and my offspring. Both shall never separate from each
other until they meet me at the Lake-Fount). The Prophet, peace be upon
him, explained the Two Weighty Things and identified them both as the
Book of Allah the Almighty and his offspring, peace be upon him. The
word “itrah (offspring)” has already been explained, and they are his
closest blood relatives. Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. Yahya said: “They are
named thaqalayn because holding fast to them both is a weighty
(responsibility), and following them both is also a weighty
(responsibility).”[^5]

Imam al-Nawawi (d. 676 H), the well-known hadith scientist, tables the
view of the classical Sunni scholars as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله صلى الله عليه وسلم) وانا تارك فيكم ثقلين (فذكر كتاب الله وأهل
بيته قال العلماء سميا ثقلين لعظمهما وكبير شأنهما وقيل العمل بهما
  </p>
</blockquote>

His statement, peace be upon him (I am leaving behind over you Two
Weighty Things) and he mentioned the Book of Allah and his Ahl al-Bayt.
The ‘ulama said: He named them thaqalayn due to their magnificence and
the greatness of their significance. It is also said: (they are named
thaqalayn due to the fact that) both are to be followed.[^6]

And Shaykh ‘Abd al-Baqi, in his annotation of Sahih Muslim, writes these
words under Hadith al-Thaqalayn:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(ثقلين) قال العلماء سميا ثقلين لعظمهما وكبير شأنهما وقيل لثقل العمل
بها
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Two Weighty Things [thaqalayn]): The ‘ulama said: He named them
thaqalayn due to their magnificence and the greatness of their
significance. It is also said: (they are named thaqalayn due to the fact
that) both are to be followed.[^7]

So, our Prophet indicated that he was leaving behind the Qur’an and his
offspring as his replacements over us after him. He equally very
strongly emphasized that we must “adhere to” and “follow” both the
Qur’an and his offspring after him, by naming them “the Two Weighty
Things” (al-thaqalayn). It is thus impossible to miss his message in any
circumstance: the offspring of the Messenger of Allah are his khalifahs
and the masters and guides over his Ummah after him.

Meanwhile, the Rasul also described his offspring as being eternally
inseparable from the Qur’an until the Day of Resurrection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وانهما لن يفترقا حتى يردا على الحوض
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, both shall NEVER separate from each other until they meet me at
the Lake-Fount.

What does this mean?

There is no doubt: the Messenger of Allah is the most eloquent of all of
his Lord’s creation. This is why he was able to convey some of his most
significant messages through that single statement. He absolutely ruled
out the possibility of any form of separation between the Qur’an and his
offspring at any moment in the lifetime of this earth. So, we ask:

Does sin cause a separation between us and the Qur’an in our sinful
acts? Of course, there is no doubt about this! This means then that the
offspring of the Prophet never commit sinful acts. Otherwise, they would
be separated from the Qur’an, at least for the duration of their sinful
acts.

Does heresy – whether in beliefs or actions – cause a separation between
us and the Qur’an? There is no doubt about this too. Heresies of all
sorts contradict the Qur’an, and whoever possesses any heresy is in
contradiction to the Book of Allah.

Therefore, whatsoever the offspring of the Prophet believe, say, do or
teach is the true, pure guidance from Allah and His Messenger. It is
absolutely impossible for the offspring to be heretical in absolutely
anything. Otherwise, they would be separated from the Qur’an, at least
for the duration of the heresy.

**Allah and His Messenger have joined together the Qur’an and the
offspring, and have made them eternally inseparable till the Day of
al-Qiyamah. This is also a command to every believer not to ever
separate them in any circumstance. If you love the Qur’an, you must love
the offspring too. If you respect the Qur’an, you must respect the
offspring too. If you follow the Qur’an, you must follow the offspring
too. If you obey the Qur’an, you must obey the offspring too. If you
consider the Qur’an to be your Imam, you must take the offspring too as
your Imams. If you consider the Qur’an to be your supreme guide in any
affair, you must take the offspring too as your supreme guides in all
your affairs.**

This last point is re-emphasized by ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) in
these words while writing about the Qur’an and Sunnah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بل يجب اعتبار الكتاب والسنة مصدرا واحدا لا فصل بينهما أبدا كما أشار
إلى ذلك قوله صلى الله عليه وسلم : " ألا إني أتيت القرآن ومثله معه "
يعني السنة وقوله: " لن يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض "
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rather, it is obligatory to consider the Book and the Sunnah as a single
source, with no difference between them both, AS INDICATED IN THE
STATEMENT of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him: “I have been
given the Qur’an and its likeness with it”, that is the Sunnah, AND HIS
STATEMENT, “Both shall never separate until they meet me at the
Lake-Fount.”[^8]

The ‘Allamah considers the phrase “both shall never separate from each
other” to be an order against discrimination between the two. Of course,
he has applied the phrase to the Sunnah, even though its only reliable
chains link with the offspring of the Prophet and nothing else. Yet, we
understand from al-Albani’s submission that it is “obligatory” to
consider the Qur’an and the offspring as a single source of guidance and
knowledge in Islam, with no difference between them both, as indicated
in the words of the Prophet: “both shall never separate from each
other”. As such, whosoever follows the Qur’an in all matters, but does
not obey the offspring in all matters, has defied the Order of Allah and
His Messenger, and has thereby become a plain heretic.

[^1]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Hanbal b. Hilal b. Asad
al-Shaybani, Musnad (Muasassat al-Risalah; 1st edition, 1421 H)
[annotators: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut, ‘Adil Murshid and others], vol. 17, pp.
174-175, \# 11104. Al-Sindi’s submission is indeed very weird. The Ahl
al-Bayt stand in the place of the Prophet in his Ummah after him. Yet,
none is obliged to follow them! Moreover, al-Sindi seems to think that
following the Ahl al-Bayt leads away from the Kitab and Sunnah! Alas,
they are actually the purest route to the Qur’an and the original
teachings of Muhammad.

[^2]: Abu al-Fadhl Jamal al-Din Muhammad b. Mukram b. Manzur al-Afriqi
al-Misri, Lisan al-‘Arab (Beirut: Dar Sadir; 1st edition), vol. 11, p.
85

[^3]: Abu Sa’adat al-Mubarak b. Muhammad, Ibn al-Athir al-Jazari,
al-Nihayah fi Gharib al-Hadith wa al-Athar (Beirut: al-Maktabah
al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1399 AH) [annotator: Tahir Ahmad al-Zawi and Mahmud
Muhammad al-Tanahi], vol. 1, p. 216

[^4]: Muhibb al-Din Abu Faydh Sayyid Muhammad Murtadha al-Husayni
al-Wasiti al-Zubaydi al-Hanafi, Taj al-‘Urus min Jawahir al-Qamus
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1414 H), vol. 14, p. 85

[^5]: Abu Mansur Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Azhari, Tahdhib al-Lughah (Beirut:
Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 2001 CE), vol. 9, p. 78

[^6]: Abu Zakariyyah Yahya b. Sharaf al-Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim
(Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1407 H) vol. 15, p. 180

[^7]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 4, p. 1873, \# 2408 (36)

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Manzilah al-Sunnah fi al-Islam (Kuwait:
Dar al-Salafiyyah; 4th edition, 1404 H), p. 22


