Prelude
=======

Definition of Social Relations
------------------------------

In Islam, the general system of social relations, along with the duties
and rights ensuing from it, is one of the crucial and basic pillars on
which human society relies.

The social relations system can be defined as a set of duties,
traditions, etiquette, rights, and obligations that organize the common
relations between people in general with individuals of the virtuous
community, and the correlation and behavior of the individuals of this
virtuous community with one another.

Of course, this social relations system is different from the systems
that organize the relations ensuing from special promises, covenants,
and contracts such as contracts of matrimony, sale, lease, allegiance,
and others. These naturally produce certain sorts of rights, duties, and
other obligations. Certain persons undertake other sorts of rights,
duties, and responsibilities because of certain positions and offices,
such as Imamate, religious authority, management, or surety.

In conclusion, the system of social relations is a set of regulations
that define man’s social life and his personal responsibility towards
the virtuous community. This system represents the foundation on which
the other systems, which ensue from private contracts and obligations,
rest so that these private systems may play their required roles in life
and contribute to the attainment of perfection, because the social
relations system deals with the root of social associations and human
ties.

Family and the Social Relations System
--------------------------------------

The historical root of the system of social relations is marriage and
the family unit. These expanded to form clans, tribes, and peoples, as
is maintained by the Holy Qur'an that reads:

> يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ
> وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ إِنَّ
> أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ
> خَبِيرٌ {13}

***O people! Surely, We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other. Surely, the
most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful of
his duty. Surely, Allah is Knowing, Aware. (49:13)***

> يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ
> نَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ وَخَلَقَ مِنْهَا زَوْجَهَا وَبَثَّ مِنْهُمَا رِجَالًا
> كَثِيرًا وَنِسَاءً {1}

***O people! Be careful of your duty to your Lord Who created you from a
single being and created its mate of the same kind and spread from these
two many men and women. (4:1)***

In the same fashion, family stands for the primary and fundamental brick
in the Islamic structure and the Ahl al-Bayt’s vision of a virtuous
human community. For that reason, Islam has taken much interest in
family, and established an exact, firm, and all-inclusive system to
organize all family relations and affairs in their most exact details
and various domains.

The Ahl al-Bayt’s concept about family and matrimonial relations has
particularities that enable it to face all social problems and coexist
with all social developments.

However, here we will deal with the topic of family for the following
two reasons:

**First**: This topic is of social and human importance. It is also so
comprehensive and broad that it is worth studying thoroughly and
meticulously, just like the economic system, the system of contracts and
transactions, the system of acts of worship, and the other systems whose
details require independent discussions.

**Second**: Because the main topic of this series of books is the
building of the virtuous community, our discussion will be dedicated to
the system of social relations of this community exclusively. Hence, we
will deal with the general aspects of the virtuous community without
discussions on the private relations that ensue from contracts and
pledges.

We will highlight the foundations and vital rules of this system, its
commitment to covenants, obligations, and reciprocal rights. We will
also touch upon the principle of private behavior in social relations.
This principle involves behavior arising from typical human situations,
such as fatherhood, brotherhood, old age; comprehension, self-strife or
self-purification; or contracts and obligations, such as matrimony.

Islam has conferred an advanced formula upon family through the many
laws in this respect and released it from its naïve and primitive state.
Constructing and firmly strengthening the family in virtue and
uprightness plays a significant role in strengthening and developing the
structure of general social relations.

Morality in Social Relations
----------------------------

It is true that the system of social relations is a set of laws,
legislations, obligations, rights, activities, regulations, manners, and
rituals; however, at the same time, it expresses a moral prospect of
social behavior and a doctrine-based understanding of the cosmos, life,
man, the beginning of creation, and the finale.

This is why books on ethics have discussed this aspect of the social
relations system. However, this system is more comprehensive and
involves commitments and obligations related to other important topics
in Islamic legislation.

Method of Research in Social Relations
--------------------------------------

We will only discuss the general concept of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) with
regard to some aspects of the Islamic concept of social relations, its
rules and general foundations, and some of its special items,
applications, and superstructure.

Through this discussion, we will discover the differences between the
common Islamic frames and the distinctive features of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) in the social construction of the virtuous community. Differences
are to be expected because the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) wanted the virtuous
community to act as an excellent example, pattern, and model for the
Muslims. In addition, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) depended upon the genuine and
perfect Islam that they had inherited and recognized from the Glorious
Qur'an and from their ancestor, the Holy Prophet—peace be upon him and
them.

From time to time, we will refer to such distinctive particularities and
features.

The discussion of this topic is divided into two chief parts; the first
deals with features and foundations of social relations in the light of
Islam, while the second deals with the superstructure and details of the
forms and components of these social relations.

The first part is divided into two chapters, the first of which deals
with the identification and definition of social relations in content,
objectives, and scope. The second deals with the rules and general
principles that identify these relations and control their progress and
activities.

The second part includes the superstructure of social relations, which
incorporates legislations dealing with the details of social relations
and identifies various sorts of behavior that accomplish the objectives,
embody the rules, and portray its numerous features.


