Chapter 1: Features Of The Islamic Concept Of Social Relations
==============================================================

**1.** **Openness** **and Social Accessibility**

**2. Reinforcement of Social Structure**

**3. Elements of Social Relations**

**4. Levels of Social Relations**

**5.** **Special TreatmentSpecial Treatment**

Openness in Social Relations
----------------------------

The Islamic concept of social relations—as taught by the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a)—highlights openness or social accessibility and expansion in
building social relations and associations as opposed to seclusion,
aloofness, and monasticism. It focuses on the naivety of human nature
and directs it towards perfection in this important aspect. Human nature
pushes man in the direction of associating with others, establishing
strong ties with them, seeking their help in needs, and getting to know
them more closely.

This natural inclination can be inferred from the Holy Qur'an in its
discussion regarding the creation of spouses:

> وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
> لِتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُمْ مَوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً ۚ
> إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ  {21}

***One of His signs is that He created mates for you from yourselves
that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love and
compassion. Most surely, there are signs in this for a people who
reflect. (30:21)***

More evidently, the Holy Qur'an has stated that the purpose behind
driving people into kinships and tribes was to create familiarity among
people and to establish social relations:

> يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ
> وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ إِنَّ
> أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ
> خَبِيرٌ {13}

***O humankind! We have surely created you of a male and a female and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other. Surely, the
most honorable among you with Allah is*** ***the one who is most careful
of his duty. Surely, Allah is Knowing, Aware. (49:13)***

Furthermore, there are many Qur'anic texts confirming the naïve nature
of human beings.

As for the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), reported instructions of the inclination
towards social relations has been confirmed by them through their
precepts and directives to their followers. For instance, according to a
validly reported tradition, Murazim has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكُمْ بِالصَّلاَةِ فِي الْمَسَاجِدِ وَحُسْنِ الْجِوَارِ لِلنَّاسِ
وَإقَامَةِ الشَّهَادَةِ وَحُضُورِ الْجَنَائِزِ. إنَّهُ لاَ بُدَّ
لَكُمْ مِنَ النَّاسِ. إنَّ أَحَداً لاَ يَسْتَغْنِي عَنِ النَّاسِ فِي
حَيَاتِهِ، وَالنَّاسُ لاَ بُدَّ لِبَعْضِهِمْ مِنْ بَعْضٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Always offer prayers in the mosques (of the non-Shi’ah Muslims) and
show good neighborliness to people. Testify for rightful parties and
attend their funeral ceremonies. Verily, you can never manage without
other people. No one can manage without others throughout life, since
people are in an indispensable need of each other.*[^1]

### Making brethren-in-faith

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), underscoring this trend in
social relations, directed their followers towards making as many
friendships and associations as possible.

In this respect, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنِ اسْتَفَادَ أَخاً فِي اللهِ اسْتَفَادَ بَيْتاً فِي الْجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever makes another their brother-in-faith has in fact won a house in
Paradise.*[^2]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَكْثِرُوا مِنَ الأََصْدِقَاءِ فِي الدُّنْيَا، فَإِنَّهُمْ يَنْفَعُونَ
فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ. أَمَّا فِي الدُّنْيَا، فَحَوَائِجُ
يَقُومُونَ بِهَا، وَأَمَّا فِي الآخِرَةِ فَإِنَّ أَهْلَ جَهَنَّمَ
قَالُوا: (مَا لَنَا مِنْ شَافِعِينَ. وَلاَ صَدِيقٍ حَمِيمٍ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Make friends with as many people as possible in this world, for they
shall benefit in this world and in the Hereafter. In this world, they
may set right your worldly needs. In the Hereafter, the inhabitants of
Hellfire shall say, “So now we have neither intercessors nor a true
friend. (26:100-101)”*[^3]

Confirming this instruction, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِسْتَكْثِرُوا مِنَ الإِخْوَانِ فَإِنَّ لِكُلِّ مُؤْمِنٍ دَعْوَةً
مُسْتَجَابَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Make brothers-in-faith with as many people as possible, for each
faithful believer has answered prayers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِسْتَكْثِرُوا مِنَ الإِخْوَانِ فَإِنَّ لِكُلِّ مُؤْمِنٍ شَفَاعَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Make brothers-in-faith with as many people as possible, for each
faithful believer will be granted [the] right to intercede.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَكْثِرُوا مِنْ مُؤَاخَاةِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ فَإِنَّ لَهُمْ عِنْدَ اللهِ
يَداً يُكَافِئُهُمْ بِهَا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Make brothers-in-faith with as many faithful people as possible, for
they will have some privilege with Almighty Allah by which He shall
reward them on the Day of Resurrection.*[^4]

Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), is reported to have
composed the following poetic lines:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكَ بِإِخْوَانِ الصَّفَاءِ فَإِنَّهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Try to win pure-hearted brothers, for they become

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِمَادٌ إِذَا اسْتَنْجَدْتَهُمْ وَظَهُورُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Your trust and support when you seek their aid

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيْسَ كَثِيراً أَلْفُ خِلٍّ وَصَاحِبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A thousand associates and friends are not many,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ عَدُوّاً وَاحِداً لَكَثِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*But a single enemy is much too many!*

### Warning against aloofness and hostility

With respect to the trend of building good social relations with people,
the Holy Imams (‘a) warned their followers against aloofness, incurring
the hostility of others, and disputing and arguing, as such things
damage social relations.

One of the Infallible Imams (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإنْقِبَاضُ عَنِ النَّاسِ مُكْسِبَةُ الْعَدَاوَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Detachment from people provokes hostility.*[^5]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have quoted Imam ‘Ali (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيَّاكُمْ وَالْمِرَاءَ وَالْخُصُومَةَ فَإِنَّهُمَا يُمْرِضَانِ
الْقُلُوبَ عَلَى الإِخْوَانِ وَيَنْبُتُ عَلَيْهِمَا النِّفَاقُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Beware of engaging yourselves in contention and dispute because these
two matters poison your hearts towards your friends and act as a fertile
source of hypocrisy.*[^6]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S)
as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ جَبْرَئِيلُ يَأْتِينِي إِلاَّ قَالَ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ، إِتَّقِ
شَحْنَاءَ الرِّجَالِ وَعَدَاوَتَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Every time (Archangel) Gabriel visited me, he would say to me, “O
Muhammad, beware of the* *hostility and animosity of others.”*[^7]

### Indulgence

Another indication of the trend of the Holy Imams towards building good
relations with others is that they instructed their followers to gratify
others by treating them leniently in matters of humor and disposition.
According to an authentic tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to
have quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَرَنِي رَبِّي بِمُدَارَاةِ النَّاسِ كَمَا أَمَرَنِي بِالْفَرَائِضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My Lord ordered me to accommodate people with the same fortitude that
He ordered me to have in obligatory (religious) duties.*[^8]

### Isolation and Monasticism

On the other hand, there are some traditions that can be taken to mean
that secluding oneself and steering clear of social activities and
associations with people could be the most preferred course one might
adopt.

In his book of *Rawdhat al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through
a valid chain of authority on the authority of Hafs ibn Ghiyath that
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) delivered the following instruction:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ قَدَرْتَ أَنْ لاَ تَخْرُجَ مِنْ بَيْتِكَ فَافْعَلْ، فَإِنَّ
عَلَيْكَ فِي خُرُوجِكَ أَنْ لاَ تَغْتَابَ وَلاَ تَكْذِبَ وَلاَ
تَحْسِدَ وَلاَ تُرَائِيَ وَلاَ تَتَصَنَّعَ وَلاَ تُدَاهِنَ... نِعْمَ
صَوْمَعَةُ الْمُسْلِمِ بَيْتُهُ، يَكُفُّ فِيهِ بَصَرَهُ وَلِسَانَهُ
وَنَفْسَهُ وَفَرْجَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If possible, you should never leave your house, because if you leave
your house, then you must stop backbiting, telling lies, envying others,
showing off, boasting, and sycophancy… How excellent a hermitage is a
Muslim’s house wherein he casts his sight down and controls his tongue,
his self, and his private parts…*[^9]

In the famous book of *tafsir* (i.e. exegesis of the Holy Qur'an) that
is ascribed to ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a), is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوبَى لِمَنْ لاَزَمَ بَيْتَهَ وَأَكَلَ كَسْرَتَهُ وَبَكَى عَلَى
خَطِيئَتِهِ وَكَانَ مِنْ نَفْسِهِ فِي تَعَبٍ وَالنَّاسُ مِنْهُ فِي
رَاحَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Blessed is he who confines himself to his house, eats the least food
possible, weeps for his sins, tires himself, and others are free of his
annoyance.*[^10]

Following the course of the author of *Wasa'il al-Shi’ah* who commented
on such traditions, we can interpretively say that these instructions
are restricted to exceptional situations when one finds oneself too weak
to resist the surrounding pressures and seductions; one can adopt
seclusion cautiously when it becomes too difficult to avoid the
disadvantages of association with others. As another interpretation, we
may also say that these instructions stand to educate and warn people
about the necessity to behave correctly when associating with others in
society.

Almighty Allah has created man to attain perfection by undertaking
responsibility and preferring right over wrong and good over evil within
his circumstances in the universe and the progress of society. Thus,
fleeing this divine trial and test—by fleeing from social life and
obligations—will never achieve such perfection.

Considering these two interpretations of the seemingly contradictory
traditions, it is unfeasible to adopt the second group (of traditions
mentioned) because the traditions of the first type (i.e. emphasizing
good social relations with others and playing active roles in social
life) are congruous with the instructions of the Holy Qur'an and the
Holy Sunnah. In addition, these traditions are considerably more in
number than the traditions of the second type, more reliable in chains
of authority, more familiar with the scholars of the virtuous community,
and more applicable to the deeds and manners of scholars and righteous
people.

Commenting on this point, ‘Allamah al-Tabrisi, in his famous (book of)
*tafsir* entitled *Majma’ al-Bayan* says:

*“Traditions warn against seclusion, detachment from people and
communities, monasticism, and aloofness.”*[^11]

Confirming this fact, the Holy Qur'an says:

> رَهْبَانِيَّةً ابْتَدَعُوهَا مَا كَتَبْنَاهَا عَلَيْهِمْ إِلَّا
> ابْتِغَاءَ رِضْوَانِ اللَّهِ فَمَا رَعَوْهَا حَقَّ رِعَايَتِهَا {27}

***The Monasticism, which they invented for themselves, We did not
prescribe for them. We prescribed only the seeking of the pleasure of
Allah, but that they did not foster, as they should have done.
(57:27)***

Monasticism—in the sense of fearing Almighty Allah and worshipping Him
in private—was prescribed only to save those mentioned in the verse from
being killed or from being forced to abandon the religion of Almighty
Allah, but they did not promote monasticism as it was meant to be.
Instead, they turned it into detachment from society, abstinence from
legitimate matrimonial union, forsaking obligations and
responsibilities, making it a profession in the end.[^12]

Reinforcing the Social Structure
--------------------------------

The second purpose behind social relations is to reinforce the
foundations of Muslim society and strengthen the social structure to
maintain continuous progress towards social perfection. Correct social
relations also help gain access to platforms of power, justice, welfare,
and reconciliation, and help Muslim society face and solve various
problems arising from social, political and economic practices. Social
relations also aid in spirituality and self-perfection within the
movement of humankind towards Almighty Allah.

Reinforcing the social structure depended on a number of essential
principles mentioned below.

### The Principle of Mutual Support and Aid

Muslims in general and faithful believers in particular are required to
support and aid each other. As has been previously cited, Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) is authentically reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُسْلِمُ أَخُو الْمُسْلِمِ؛ لاَ يَظْلِمُهُ وَلاَ يَخْذُلُهُ وَلاَ
يَخُونُهُ. وَيَحِقُّ عَلَى الْمُسْلِمِينَ الإجْتِهَادُ فِي
التَّوَاصُلِ وَالتَّعَاقُدِ عَلَى التَّعَاطُفِ وَالْمُوَاسَاةُ
لأَِهْلِ الْحَاجَةِ وَتَعَاطُفِ بَعْضِهِمْ عَلَى بَعْضٍ حَتَّى
تَكُونُوا كَمَا أَمَرَكُمُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، رُحَمَاءَ بَيْنَكُمْ
مُتَرَاحِمِينَ مُغْتَمِّينَ لِمَا غَابَ عَنْكُمْ مِنْ أَمْرِهِمْ عَلَى
مَا مَضَى عَلَيْهِ مَعْشَرُ الأَنْصَارِ عَلَى عَهْدِ رَسُولِ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muslims are brothers of each other. They neither wrong, nor disappoint,
nor betray each other. The duties that are incumbent on Muslims towards
each other are to exert effort in communication, agree on mutual
sympathy, treat the needy as they treat themselves, and empathize with
one another. If you abide by this, you will be exactly as Almighty Allah
has ordered you to be: compassionate towards each other, merciful
towards one another, regretful about missing any opportunity to help a
brethren-in-faith, just like the conduct of the Ansar during the
lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (S).*[^13]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S)
as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ سَمِعَ رَجُلاً يُنَادِي يَا لَلْمُسْلِمِينَ، فَلَمْ يُجِبْهُ،
فَلَيْسَ بِمُسْلِمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever hears someone calling for the help of Muslims but fails to
respond to him, is not actually a Muslim.*[^14]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لَمْ يَهْتَمَّ بِأُمُورِ الْمُسْلِمِينَ فَلَيْسَ بِمُسْلِمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who does not care about the affairs of Muslims is not Muslim.*[^15]

### Enjoining the Right and Forbidding the Wrong

In its capacity as one of the greatest divinely commissioned obligations
and the highest and most honorable duties, the principle of enjoining
the right and forbidding the wrong has been defined and introduced by
traditions as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَبِيلُ الأَنْبِيَاءِ وَمِنْهَاجُ الصُّلَحَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*…The course of prophets and the manner of the righteous.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرِيضَةٌ عَظِيمَةٌ بِهَا تُقَامُ الْفَرَائِضُ وَتَأْمَنُ الْمَذَاهِبُ
وَتُحَلُّ الْمَكَاسِبُ وَتُرَدُّ الْمَظَالِمُ وَتُعَمَّرُ الأَرْضُ
وَيُنْتَصَفُ مِنَ الأَعْدَاءِ وَيَسْتَقِيمُ الأَمْرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is a great duty through which other duties are carried out, routes
are secured, earnings are made legal, aggressions are warded off, lands
are nurtured, enemies are retaliated, and all* *affairs set
aright.*[^16]

### The Principle of Thinking Well Of Others

Another principle of social relations is having good thoughts about
others, assuming the best about the conduct of ones brethren-in-faith,
closing one’s eyes to their flaws, and concealing the defects of others
to bind the social structure and prevent any cracks from appearing in
it. On the authority of his infallible fathers, Imam al-Baqir (‘a) has
quoted Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضَعْ أَمْرَ أَخِيكَ عَلَى أَحْسَنِهِ حَتَّى يَأْتِيَكَ مِنْهُ مَا
يَغْلِبُكَ، وَلاَ تَظُنَّنَّ بِكَلِمَةٍ خَرَجَتْ مِنْ أَخِيكَ سُوءاً
وَأَنْتَ تَجِدُ لَهَا فِي الْخَيْرِ مَحْمَلاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Assume the best possible about the deed of your brother-in-faith unless
you see in him something that tears down your assumption. Never deem
evil any word uttered by your brother-in-faith as long as you can find
an acceptable excuse for it.*[^17]

Abu-Basir has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُفَتِّشِ النَّاسَ فَتَبْقَى بِلاَ صَدِيقٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not scrutinize people lest you remain friendless.*[^18]

Al-®ahhak ibn Mukhallad has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ مِنَ الإِنْصَافِ مُطَالَبَةُ الإِخْوَانِ بِالإِنْصَافِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is unfair to demand friends to be fair (with you).*[^19]

### The Principle of Consultation

Social relations in Islam are built up by seeking the counsel of other
Muslims and making use of their experience and opinions and by sharing
your experiences and affectionately advising them about performing
certain acts.

Abu-Hurayrah has reported that he heard the Holy Prophet (S) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِسْتَرْشِدُوا الْعَاقِلَ وَلاَ تَعْصُوهُ فَتَنْدَمُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Seek the guidance of the reasonable and do not disregard their advice,
lest you regret.*[^20]

Sulayman ibn Khalid has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِسْتَشِرِ الْعَاقِلَ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ الْوَرِعَ فَإِنَّهُ لاَ يَأْمُرُ
إِلاَّ بِخَيْرٍ، وَإِيَّاكَ وَالْخِلاَفَ فَإِنَّ مُخَالَفَةَ الْوَرِعِ
الْعَاقِلِ مَفْسَدَةٌ فِي الدِّينِ وَالدُّنْيَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Seek the advice of reasonable and pious men, because they order you
only towards good. Beware of defying them, because to defy reasonable
and pious men brings about corruption in religious and worldly
affairs.*[^21]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S)
as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُشَاوَرَةُ الْعَاقِلِ النَّاصِحِ رُشْدٌ وَيُمْنٌ وَتَوْفِيقٌ مِنَ
اللهِ، فَإِذَا أَشَارَ عَلَيْكَ النَّاصِحُ الْعَاقِلُ فَإِيَّاكَ
وَالْخِلاَفَ فَإِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ الْعَطَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Seeking the counsel of wise well-wishers is a sign of judiciousness,
blessing, and guidance to success by Almighty Allah, so if a wise
well-wisher gives you advice, beware of defiance lest you come upon
destruction.*[^22]

The qualifications of a true advisor specified by the Holy Legislator
are rationality, piety, confidentiality and soundness of character.

Al-Halabi has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمَشُورَةَ لاَ تَكُونُ إِلاَّ بِحُدُودِهَا، فَمَنْ عَرَفَهَا
بِحُدُودِهَا وَإِلاَّ كَانَتْ مَضَرَّتُهَا عَلَى الْمُسْتَشِيرِ
أَكْثَرَ مِنْ مَنْفَعَتِهَا لَهُ. فَأَوَّلُهَا أَنْ يَكُونَ الَّذِي
تُشَاوِرُهُ عَاقِلاً، وَالثَّانِيَةُ أَنْ يَكُونَ حُرّاً مُتَدَيِّناً،
وَالثَّالِثَةُ أَنْ يَكُونَ صَدِيقاً مُؤَاخِياً، وَالرَّابِعَةُ أَنْ
تُطْلِعَهُ عَلَى سِرِّكَ فَيَكُونُ عِلْمُهُ بِهِ كَعِلْمِكَ
بِنَفْسِكَ، ثُمَّ يُسِرُّ ذَلِكَ وَيَكْتُمُهُ. فَإِنَّهُ إِذَا كَانَ
عَاقِلاً إنْتَفَعْتَ بِمَشُورَتِهِ، وَإِذَا كَانَ حُرّاً مُتَدَيِّناً
جَهَدَ نَفْسَهُ فِي النَّصِيحَةِ لَكَ، وَإِذَا كَانَ صَدِيقاً
مُؤَاخِياً كَتَمَ سِرَّكَ إِذَا أَطْلَعْتَهُ عَلَيْهِ، وَإِذَا
أَطْلَعْتَهُ عَلَى سِرِّكَ فَكَانَ عِلْمُهُ بِهِ كَعِلْمِكَ بِهِ
تَمَّتِ الْمَشُورَةُ وَكَمُلَتِ النَّصِيحَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Surly, seeking of advice must be within limits; therefore, if one
ignores (or violates) these limits, the harm will be more than the
benefit. The first of these limits is that the consultant must be wise.
The second is that he must be honorable and devout. The third is that he
must be a brotherly friend. The fourth is that when you tell him about
your secret, he must understand it exactly as you have explained and
then he must keep it in confidence. If the advisor is wise, you will
then benefit from his advice. If he is honorable and devout, he will
make all possible efforts to give you the best advice. If he is your
brotherly friend, then he will conceal your secret after you reveal it
to him. If he understands your secret as you do, then he will give
perfect counsel and advice.*[^23]

Substance of Social Relations
-----------------------------

### Equality and Fraternity

The third aspect of social relations is that they must have sound
foundations based on reality and values on the one hand and be a
constituent of the social structure on the other.

Islam views as the best social relations based on equality. People are
originally equal and each one is the counterpart of the other;
therefore, no one can excel another in origin. Hence, the Holy Qur'an
declares:

> يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ
> وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا {13}

***O Mankind! Surely, We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other. (49:13)***

The Holy Prophet (S) has also declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّكُمْ لآِدَمَ وَآدَمُ مِنْ تُرَابٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All of you belong to Adam (equally), and Adam was created of
dust.*[^24]

However, differences and privileges arise due to extraordinary factors
that ensue from the movement of man, both individually and socially.
Some privileges are real—such as piety, knowledge, education, and
practice of virtues like patience and charity—while others are false and
unreal (having riches, many children, material wealth and influence). A
third category of privileges arises from talents divinely bestowed on
certain individuals or the divine selection of certain individuals.

The nature of social relationship must be Islam-based and faith-based,
which automatically becomes a relationship of equality among the
individuals of a society ruled by the doctrines of Islam.

As a result, Muslims are brothers of one another. They are equal and
comparable in spiritual values. Their ties and relations are similar to
those who have the same father and mother. Islam has placed social ties
and relations among people of the same faith on the same level and of
similar worth and significance as blood ties and relations.

According to many validly reported traditions, this concept is
corroborated by marriages performed at the time of the Holy Prophet (S).
For instance, Shaykh al-Kulayni, in his book, *al-Kafi*, has validly
reported the story of the marriage of Juwaybir to the daughter of one of
the chiefs of the Arab clans. Juwaybir—an ugly, short, dark skinned,
needy man from al-Yamamah—who embraced Islam devoutly, was ordered by
the Holy Prophet (S) to betroth the daughter of Ziyad, a chief of the
clans of al-Madinah. He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا جُوَيْبِرُ، إِنَّ اللهَ قَدْ وَضَعَ بِالإِسْلاَمِ مَنْ كَانَ فِي
الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ شَرِيفاً، وَشَرَّفَ بِالإِسْلاَمِ مَنْ كَانَ فِي
الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ وَضِيعاً، وَأَعَزَّ بِالإِسْلاَمِ مَنْ كَانَ فِي
الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ ذَلِيلاً، وَأَذْهَبَ بِالإِسْلاَمِ مَا كَانَ مِنْ
نَخْوَةِ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ وَتَفَاخُرِهَا بِعَشَائِرِهَا وَبَاسِقِ
أَنْسَابِهَا. فَالنَّاسُ الْيَوْمَ كُلُّهُمْ أَبْيَضُهُمْ
وَأَسْوَدُهُمْ وَقِرَشِيُّهُمْ وَعَرَبِيُّهُمْ وَعَجَمِيُّهُمْ مِنْ
آدَمَ، وَإِنَّ آدَمَ خَلَقَهُ اللهُ مِنْ طِينٍ. وَإِنَّ أَحَبَّ
النَّاسِ إِلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَطْوَعُهُمْ
لَهُ وَأَتْقَاهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Juwaybir, Almighty Allah, by means of Islam, has verily humbled men
who were esteemed in the Era of Ignorance (jahiliyyah) and, also by
means of Islam, has honored others who were lowly in that era. In
addition, by means of Islam, Almighty Allah has imparted nobility to men
who were humble in that era and, by means of Islam, He has eradicated
the baseless zeal of that era when people used to take pride in their
clans and their lineages. Today, all people; the white and the black,
the Qurayshite, the Arab, and the non-Arab, belong to Adam, and Adam
was* *created by Almighty Allah from clay. Verily, the dearest of people
to Almighty Allah on the Day of Resurrection shall be the most obedient
to Him and the most pious.*

To Ziyad, the father of the betrothed woman, the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا زِيَادُ، جُوَيْبِرُ مُؤْمِنٌ، وَالْمُؤْمِنُ كُفْؤُ الْمُؤْمِنَةِ
وَالْمُسْلِمُ كُفْؤُ الْمُسْلِمَةِ. فَزَوِّجْهُ يَا زِيَادُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Ziyad, Juwaybir is a faithful believer, and every faithful male is
the match of every faithful* *female and every Muslim male is the match
of every Muslim female. So, give him your daughter in marriage.*[^25]

### Respect of Man in General

Although Islam considers faith to be the basis of social relations among
Muslims, it does not dispense with the human side of these relations;
rather, it considers the human side in the totality of its theory. The
meaning becomes clear in Imam ‘Ali’s following words to Malik al-Ashtar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَشْعِرْ قَلْبَكَ الرَّحْمَةَ لِلرَّعِيَّةِ وَالْمَحَبَّةَ لَهُمْ
وَاللُّطْفَ بِهِمْ، وَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ عَلَيْهِمْ سَيْفاً ضَارِياً
تَغْتَنِمُ أُكُلَهُمْ، فَإِنَّهُمْ صِنْفَانِ: إِمَّا أَخٌ لَكَ فِي
الدِّينِ أَوْ نَظِيرٌ لَكَ فِي الْخَلْقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Develop in your heart the feeling of love for your people and let it be
the source of kindliness and blessing to them. Do not behave with them
like a barbarian, and do not appropriate to yourself that which belongs
to them. Remember that the citizens of the state are of two categories.
They are either your brethren in faith or your brethren in kind.*[^26]

This trend can also be distinctly seen in the traditions that encourage
courtesy in general with all people. Such traditions require preserving
good social relations with people at the human level unless exceptional
circumstances oblige one to disavow or rupture relations with certain
people.

Suma’ah has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُجَامَلَةُ النَّاسِ ثُلُثُ الْعَقْلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*To behave courteously with people is one-third of wisdom.*[^27]

Abu-Basir has reported Imam al-Baqir (or Imam al-Sadiq) to have narrated
that a Bedouin from the Banu-Tamim tribe came to the Holy Prophet (S)
and asked for an advice.

Giving his advice, the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَحَبَّبْ إِلَى النَّاسِ يُحِبُّوكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Try to endear yourself to people and they will certainly love
you.*[^28]

Another indication of this trend is the attitude of Islam towards
unbelievers, as confirmed by the Holy Qur'an. It makes a distinction
between the unbelievers and foes who adopted an aggressive political or
military attitude against Muslims and unbelievers who did not adopt
aggressive attitudes. As is mentioned in *Surah al-Mumtahanah* (Surah
60), the Holy Qur'an has warned against showing loyalty to and love for
the former but it has permitted treating the latter with charity and
fairness. Hence, it reads:

> لَا يَنْهَاكُمُ اللَّهُ عَنِ الَّذِينَ لَمْ يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ فِي
> الدِّينِ وَلَمْ يُخْرِجُوكُمْ مِنْ دِيَارِكُمْ أَنْ تَبَرُّوهُمْ
> وَتُقْسِطُوا إِلَيْهِمْ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ {8}
> إِنَّمَا يَنْهَاكُمُ اللَّهُ عَنِ الَّذِينَ قَاتَلُوكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ
> وَأَخْرَجُوكُمْ مِنْ دِيَارِكُمْ وَظَاهَرُوا عَلَىٰ إِخْرَاجِكُمْ أَنْ
> تَوَلَّوْهُمْ ۚ وَمَنْ يَتَوَلَّهُمْ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ
> الظَّالِمُونَ {9}

***Allah does not forbid you to show kindness and deal justly respecting
those who have not made war against you on account of your religion and
have not driven you forth from your homes. Surely, Allah loves the doers
of justice. Allah only forbids you to make friends with those who made
war upon you because of your religion, drove you forth from your homes
and backed up others in your expulsion. Whoever makes friends with them,
these are the unjust. (60:8-9)***

A third indication of this trend can be deduced from traditions
confirmed by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) on the significance of calling to the
“way” of Almighty Allah by means of conversations characterized by
rationality. They insisted on maintaining general social relations with
the non-believers and non-Muslims as well as all categories of people
without discriminating between Muslims and non-Muslims through wise and
excellent communication skills.

A fourth indication can also be observed in the texts of the Holy Qur'an
and the Holy Sunnah that warn against reviling unbelievers and
aggravating them with unconstructive attitudes because they would
naturally respond to such revilement with similar insults.

Islam has presented fraternity among Muslims as the content of social
relations within the Muslim community. Islam has lined itself up with
fraternity, which is a mixture of mutual loyalty, backing one another
up, and social rights characterized by shared love, affection,
humanitarian feelings and sentiments.

Levels of Social Relations
--------------------------

The fourth aspect of social relations is that Islam has not overlooked
the tangible realities that exist—despite the fact that it has adopted
the principle of equality for all human beings and the principle of
fraternity for the Muslim community—in the various extremes of social
relations.

Islam has defined two main levels arising from social realities and has
based relations on the mental, spiritual, and intellectual conditions of
the parties involved.

The first of these levels is the general relationship that is imposed by
the nature of man’s existence in society wherein man connects with the
individuals of his society and becomes part of it within the general
frame of social relations.

Islam views the unity of the Muslim community as the common factor among
all the extremes of this relationship.

Through this level of relationship, blood and property are saved from
being shed or confiscated and covenants and pledges are fulfilled. In
addition, public participation and contribution to social
responsibilities is maintained, such as enjoining the right and
forbidding the wrong, attending the common prayers and funeral
ceremonies, visiting the sick, and trying not to miss social ceremonies
like marriages and the like.

In an authentic narration, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported Mu’awiyah ibn
Wahab to have said that he once asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “What should
we do with respect to relations with our people and with others whom we
come in contact with?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُؤَدُّونَ الأَمَانَةَ إِلَيْهِمْ، وَتُقِيمُونَ الشَّهَادَةَ لَهُمْ
وَعَلَيْهِمْ، وَتَعُودُونَ مَرْضَاهُمْ، وَتَشْهَدُونَ جَنَائِزَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You must safeguard the trusts that they deposit with you, bear witness
for or against them, visit the sick among them, and attend their funeral
ceremonies.*[^29]

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) rarely put conditions regarding maintaining this
level of social relations, except for some general constraints, such as
avoiding relationships that bring ill repute and associations with
heretical people and those publicly known for corruption and deviation,
as well as those who work in forbidden occupations. Details of these
categories will be cited in the second part of this book.

Al-Faji’ al-’Aqili has reported that Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) instructed his son, al-Hasan (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيَّاكَ وَمَوَاطِنَ التَّهِمَةِ وَالْمَجْلِسَ الْمَظْنُونَ بِهِ
السُّوءَ، فَإِنَّ قَرِينَ السُّوءِ يَغُرُّ جَلِيسَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Beware of presenting yourself in situations that bring about ill
reputation and sessions known for evil, for a wicked friend may seduce
him who sits with him.*[^30]

‘Umar ibn Yazid has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَصْحَبُوا أَهْلَ الْبِدَعِ وَلاَ تُجَالِسُوهُمْ فَتَكُونُوا
عِنْدَ النَّاسِ كَوَاحِدٍ مِنْهُمْ. وَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ: الْمَرْءُ عَلَى دِينِ خَلِيلِهِ
وَقَرِينِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not keep company with heretical people and do not participate in
their sessions, lest you be equated with them in the eyes of people. The
Messenger of Allah (S) has said, “Man follows the religion of his friend
and companion.”*[^31]

Hammad ibn ‘Amr and Anas ibn Muhammad have reported on the authority of
Anas’s father that Ja’far ibn Muhammad (al-Sadiq) (‘a), on the authority
of his fathers, quoted that the Holy Prophet (S) instructed Imam ‘Ali
(‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَلِيُّ، مَنْ لَمْ تَنْتَفِعْ بِدِينِهِ وَلاَ دُنْيَاهُ فَلاَ
خَيْرَ لَكَ فِي مُجَالَسَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O ‘Ali, it is worthless to keep the company of one whom you will not
benefit either from his faith or his worldly affairs.*[^32]

A warning against associating with such categories of people means to
avoid befriending or sitting with them. However, if we consider this
warning general (i.e. to include all states of association), we can
understand the reason behind it is that such social relationships might
develop into friendships, even if at the minimal level, and it is better
to avoid falling into any situation of suspicion that might tarnish
one’s reputation.

The second level is that of private relationship, conventionally called
friendship (i.e. making friends with some people).

This level shares the general results, consequences, and commitments of
the first level of relations but differs from it in certain additional
conditions, rights, and duties, such as some financial and cultural
rights. Discussing, teaching, and learning about religious affairs as
well as some political affairs, like discussing general situations of
the community, especially when the issues are very controversial, are
permitted only among real friends.

Khaythamah has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) told him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبْلِغْ مَوَالِيَنَا السَّلاَمَ، وَأَوْصِهِمْ بِتَقْوَى اللهِ
وَالْعَمَلِ الصَّالِحِ، وَأَنْ يَعُودَ صَحِيحُهُمْ مَرِيضَهُمْ،
وَلْيَعُدْ غَنِيُّهُمْ عَلَى فَقِيرِهِمْ، وَأَنْ يَشْهَدَ حَيُّهُمْ
جَنَازَةَ مَيِّتِهِمْ، وَأَنْ يَتَلاَقَوْا فِي بُيُوتِهِمْ، وَأَنْ
يَتَفَاوَضُوا عِلْمَ الدِّينِ، فَإِنَّ ذَلِكَ حَيَاةً لأَِمْرِنَا،
رَحِمَ اللهُ عَبْداً أَحْيَا أَمْرَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Convey my compliments to my loyalists and advise them to show reverence
to Almighty Allah: the rich among them must help the poor, the powerful
must help the weak, the living must attend the funeral ceremonies of the
dead, and they must assemble at their homes and discuss issues of
religion, for such meetings keep our work alive. May Allah have mercy
upon a servant who keeps our work alive.*[^33]

Shaykh al-Kulayni, through a valid chain of authority, has reported
Maysir as saying:

*Imam Abu-Ja’far (al-Baqir) (‘a) once asked me, “Do you (Shi’ite groups)
often seclude yourselves in special meetings and exchange discourses and
freely say what you have in mind?”*

I answered, “Yes, I swear it by Allah. We often withdraw to exchange
discourses and say freely that which is on our minds.”

The Imam (‘a) commented:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا وَاللهِ لَوَدِدْتُ أَنِّي مَعَكُمْ فِي بَعْضِ تِلْكَ
الْمَوَاطِنِ. أَمَا وَاللهِ إِنِّي لأُحِبُّ رِيحَكُمْ وَأَرْوَاحَكُمْ،
وَإِنَّكُمْ عَلَى دِينِ اللهِ وَدِينِ مَلاَئِكَتِهِ، فَأَعِينُوا
بِوَرَعٍ وَاجْتِهَادٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Allah I swear, I do wish I were with you on some of these occasions.
By Allah I swear, I do* *love your fragrance and your souls. You are
verily following the very religion of Allah and the religion of His
angels. Follow (us) by means of piety and diligence.*[^34]

### Fraternity for Allah’s Sake

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) endeavored to develop such spiritual and
intellectual relations that people would soar to their highest levels
and exceed blood fraternity in human, social, and spiritual aspects. On
achieving this, love and affection would be purely for Almighty Allah’s
sake and the outcome would be that one would love for his
brother-in-faith whatever he loves for himself (i.e. equality in desires
and hopes) and even consider one’s brother-in-faith before himself.

A tradition reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) describes this perfective
sphere of relations among the individuals of the virtuous community.

In his book, *al-Majalis*, al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Tusi has reported
that, on the authority of his fathers, Imam al-Baqir (‘a) quoted the
Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا كَانَ يَوْمُ الْقِيَامَةِ يُنَادِي مُنَادٍ مِنَ الله عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ يُسْمِعُ آخِرَهُمْ كَمَا يُسْمِعُ أَوَّلَهُمْ فَيَقُولُ:
أَيْنَ جِيرَانُ اللهِ جَلَّ جَلاَلُهُ فِي دَارِهِ؟ فَيَقُومُ عُنُقٌ
مِنَ النَّاسِ فَتَسْتَقْبِلُهُمْ زُمْرَةٌ مِنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ،
فَيَقُولُونَ: مَا كَانَ عَمَلُكُمْ فِي دَارِ الدُّنْيَا فَصِرْتُمُ
الْيَوْمَ جِيرَانَ اللهِ تَعَالَى فِي دَارِهِ؟ فَيَقُولُونَ: كُنَّا
نَتَحَابُّ فِي اللهِ وَنَتَوَازَرُ فِي اللهِ تَعَالَى. قَالَ:
فَيُنَادِي مُنَادٍ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللهِ تَعَالَى: صَدَقَ عِبَادِي.
خَلُّوا سَبِيلَهُمْ. فَيَنْطَلِقُونَ إِلَى جِوَارِ اللهِ فِي
الْجَنَّةِ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the Day of Resurrection, a spokesangel will cry out with a call
heard by the last of the crowds in the same volume heard by the first.
He will call out, “Where are the neighbors of Allah, the Majestic, in
His abode?” Then, a group of people will stand up and will be received
by a group of angels. “What were your deeds in the worldly abode due to
which you are now the neighbors of Allah, the Exalted, in His abode?”
The angels will ask. “We used to love each other for Allah’s sake and
help one another for His sake, too,” they will answer. An angel will say
on behalf of Allah, “True are the words of My servants. Clear the way
for them.” Then they will walk into the neighborhood of Allah in
Paradise without (their deeds) being accounted.*

Commenting on this, Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَؤُلاَءِ جِيرَانُ اللهِ فِي دَارِهِ، يَخَافُ النَّاسُ وَلاَ
يَخَافُونَ، وَيُحَاسَبُ النَّاسُ وَلاَ يُحَاسَبُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*These are verily the neighbors of Allah in His abode. When people will
fear, these will not fear, and when people are stopped for settling
their accounts, these will not be faced with it.*[^35]

In his book of *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni, reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِتُّ خِصَالٍ مَنْ كُنَّ فِيهِ كَانَ بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
وَعَنْ يَمِينِ اللهِ… يُحِبُّ الْمَرْءُ الْمُسْلِمُ لأَِخِيهِ مَا
يُحِبُّ لأَِعَزِّ أَهْلِهِ، وَيَكْرَهُ الْمَرْءُ الْمُسْلِمُ لأَِخِيهِ
مَا يَكْرَهُ لأَِعَزِّ أَهْلِهِ، وَيُنَاصِحُهُ الْوِلاَيَةَ… إِذَا
كَانَ مِنْهُ بِتِلْكَ الْمَنْزِلَةِ بَثَّهُ هَمَّهُ فَفَرِحَ
لِفَرَحِهِ إِنْ هُوَ فَرِحَ، وَحَزِنَ لِحُزْنِهِ إِنْ هُوَ حَزِنَ،
وَإِنْ كَانَ عِنْدَهُ مَا يُفَرِّجُ عَنْهُ فَرَّجَ عَنْهُ، وِإِلاَّ
دَعَا لَهُ… قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
وَسَلَّمَ: إِنَّ للهِ خَلْقاً عَنْ يَمِينِ الْعَرْشِ بَيْنَ يَدَيِ
اللهِ وُجُوهُهُمْ أَبْيَضُ مِنَ الثَّلْجِ وَأَضْوَأُ مِنَ الشَّمْسِ
الضَّاحِيَةِ. يَسْأَلُ السَّائِلُ: مَا هَؤُلاَءِ؟ فَيُقَالُ: هَؤُلاَءِ
الَّذِينَ تَحَابُّوا فِي جَلاَلِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever has six features in his personality shall be in the presence of
Almighty Allah and to His right…A Muslim, who loves for his
brother-in-faith whatever he loves for the dearest of his family
members, dislikes for him whatever he dislikes for the dearest of his
family members, acts honestly with him in terms of friendship… If he
attains this rank with his brother-in-faith, when he passes his
grievances on to him, his brother-in-faith will then certainly rejoice
at his delight and feel sad on his grief. If he can do anything to
relieve his brother-in-faith, he will certainly do so or, at least, pray
for him…The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Almighty Allah has some
creatures who will be positioned to the right of the Divine Throne in
the presence of Almighty Allah. Their faces will be as white as snow and
as brilliant as sunlight at forenoon. When it is asked about them, the
answer will be that these are those who loved each other for the sake of
Almighty Allah’s majesty.”*[^36]

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) took into consideration the different levels of
this private relationship. It is therefore possible to classify such
private relations into general and special friendships. This
classification is based on the degree of commitment to the doctrines and
principles of Islam, and the profundity and firmness of religious values
and ideals in behavior and practice. On the strength of this
classification, faith and loyalty to the (divinely commissioned)
leadership of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) plays an important role in firming up
such relations from which result the kind of rights and duties
demonstrated by the previously cited traditions.

### False Friends and True Friends

Referring to another aspect in the variety of the levels of social
relations, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) differentiated between two categories of
people: false friends and true friends. In one’s association with the
earlier category, it may suffice to say one has to meet people in
society and associate with them because one’s existence is dependent on
their existence. Such a relationship is based on kind association,
mutual feelings, and sympathetic treatment, named by the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) as ‘courtesy’ with the meaning good behavior with people.

The second category, true friends, represents individuals who must be
chosen carefully as friends after observing their honesty, faithfulness,
and good manners. Only then is it correct to lean on such friends, put
one’s trust in them, and depend on them in one’s private affairs because
they are known to stand by their friends in good and bad times and to be
holders of their secrets and trusts.

Yunus ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman has reported the following on the authority of
Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (‘a):

In al-Basrah, a man stood up and asked Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) to define friends.

The Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإِخْوَانُ صِنْفَانِ: إِخْوَانُ الثِّقَةِ وَإِخْوَانُ الْمُكَاشَرَةِ.
فَأَمَّا إِخْوَانُ الثِّقَةِ فَهُمْ كَالْكَفِّ وَالْجَنَاحِ وَالأَهْلِ
وَالْمَالِ. فَإِذَا كُنْتَ مِنْ أَخِيكَ عَلَى ثِقَةٍ فَابْذِلْ لَهُ
مَالَكَ وَيَدَكَ، وَصَافِ مَنْ صَافَاهُ، وَعَادِ مَنْ عَادَاهُ،
وَاكْتِمْ سِرَّهُ، وَأَعِنْهُ وَأَظْهِرْ مِنْهُ الْحَسَنَ. وَاعْلَمْ
أَيُّهَا السَّائِلُ أَنَّهُمْ أَعَزُّ مِنَ الْكِبْرِيتِ الأَحْمَرِ.
وَأَمَّا إِخْوَانُ الْمُكَاشَرَةِ فَإِنَّكَ تُصِيبُ مِنْهُمْ
لَذَّتَكَ. فَلاَ تَقْطَعَنْ ذَلِكَ مِنْهُمْ، وَلاَ تَطْلُبَنْ مَا
وَرَاءَ ذَلِكَ مِنْ ضَمِيرِهِمْ، وَابْذِلْ لَهُمْ مَا بَذَلُوا لَكَ
مِنْ طَلاَقَةِ الْوَجْهِ وَحَلاَوَةِ اللِّسَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There are two kinds of friends—friends of confidence and friends of
grimace. The friends of confidence are the refuge, the wings, the family
and the wealth (of their friends). If you confide in a friend, you
should give your wealth and help to him. You should also befriend his
friend and antagonize his enemy. You should keep his secrets and defects
(in confidence) and proclaim his good conduct. You should know, O asker,
that the friends of confidence are as scanty as red sulfur. Regarding
the friends of grimace, you gain from them only your pleasure;
therefore, you should not deprive them of your pleasure. Do not ask them
for any further thing. Give them a happy mien and pleasant conversation
as long as they give you their happy mien and pleasant
conversation.*[^37]

Faith—in the sense of believing in the divinely commissioned leadership
of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and loyalty to them—is one of the basic
conditions in the process of choosing friends of confidence. The duties
of people towards their friends, confirmed by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), are
exclusively for this category of friends.

Referring to this classification and variety in the level of social
relations as well as the general and special conditions of these
relations, there is a set of traditions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) displaying other conditions and qualifications to be observed in
identifying the level of one’s social relations with others. Some
traditions have mentioned the positive characteristics that encourage
such relations, such as piety, devoutness, rationality, prudence,
nobility, and excellent morals, while other traditions have listed
negative traits that discourage building relations, such as idiocy,
corruption, fabrication, and stinginess.[^38]

More details will be cited in the second part of this book.

Special Treatment
-----------------

The fifth aspect of social relations is that there are certain
categories of people who must be treated in a special manner.

Although Islam, in its social concept, believes that all human beings
are equal and brothers of one another, we notice that the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) dedicated special treatment in the field of social relations to
certain groups of people because of various tangible reasons endorsed by
human nature or factual reason-based criteria founded on public
interest.

These reasons are humane, religious, and political, depending on the
various aspects of the Islamic concept of social relations in general or
social relations in particular, placing all affairs in their natural
position in the general structure of society and the categories of
social relations.

On many occasions, the Holy Qur'an has referred to such special
treatment, including the following:

> وَاعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَلَا تُشْرِكُوا بِهِ شَيْئًا وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ
> إِحْسَانًا وَبِذِي الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَالْجَارِ
> ذِي الْقُرْبَى وَالْجَارِ الْجُنُبِ وَالصَّاحِبِ بِالْجَنْبِ وَابْنِ
> السَّبِيلِ وَمَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ مَنْ
> كَانَ مُخْتَالًا فَخُورًا (36)

***Serve Allah and do not associate anything with Him and be good to
parents and to the near of kin and the orphans and the needy and the
neighbor from among (your) kin and the neighbor who is a stranger and
the companion on a journey and the wayfarer and those whom your right
hands possess. Surely, Allah does not love him who is proud, boastful.
(4:36)***

### Relatives

Relatives, especially next of kin and, more especially, parents, enjoy
special privileges as regards social treatment. It is thus obligatory to
sustain the root of social relations with relatives and it is
impermissible to cut off family ties. It is also obligatory to honor and
act piously towards one’s parents by means of acting obediently towards
them and complying with their orders, yet within the limits of the
religious laws.

Abu-Hamzah al-Thumali has reported that Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) delivered a speech in which he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَعُوذُ بِاللهِ مِنَ الذُّنُوبِ الَّتِي تُعَجِّلُ الْفَنَاءَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I seek Allah’s protection against the sins that hasten death.*

‘Abdullah ibn al-Kawwa' interrupted him, saying, “O Commander of the
Faithful! Are there sins that hasten one’s death?” The Imam (‘a)
answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَعَمْ! وَيْلَكَ، قَطِيعَةُ الرَّحِمِ. إِنَّ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
لَيَجْتَمِعُونَ وَيَتَواسَوْنَ وَهُمْ فَجَرَةٌ فَيَرْزُقُهُمُ اللهُ.
وَإِنَّ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ لَيَتَفَرَّقُونَ وَيَقْطَعُ بَعْضُهُمْ
بَعْضاً فَيَحْرِمُهُمُ اللهُ وَهُمْ أَتْقِيَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Yes, there are! Woe unto you! They are breach of family ties with one’s
relatives. Even if faithless, family members who gather and help each
other are provided sustenance by Almighty Allah. Some family members,
who are pious, separate from one another and cut off their ties; as a
result, Almighty Allah deprives them (of His sustenance despite their
piety).*[^39]

‘Anbasah al-’Abid (the worshipper) has reported that a man came to Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) and complained about his relatives. The Imam (‘a) advised
him saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِكْظُمْ غَيْظَكَ وَافْعَلْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Suppress your rage and treat them nicely.*

The man said, “They do such-and-such to me!”

The Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتُرِيدُ أَنْ تَكُونَ مِثْلَهُمْ فَلاَ يَنْظُرُ اللهُ إِلَيْكُمْ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do you want to be like them? Then, Almighty Allah shall never look at
you.*[^40]

In his famous Epistle on Rights, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا حَقُّ أُمِّكَ فَأَنْ تَعْلَمَ أَنَّهَا حَمَلَتكَ حَيْثُ لا
يَحْمِلُ أَحَدٌ أَحَدًا وَأَطْعَمَتكَ مِنْ ثَمَرَةِ قَلْبها مَا لا
يُطْعِمُ أَحَدٌ أَحَدًا، وَأَنَّهَا وَقَتكَ بسَمْعِهَا وبَصَرِهَا
ويَدِهَا وَرِجْلها وَشَعْرِهَا وبَشَرِهَا وَجَمِيعِ جَوَارِحِهَا
مُسْتَبشِرَةً بذَلِكَ، فَرِحَةً مُوَابلَةً، مُحْتَمِلَةً لِمَا فِيهِ
مَكْرُوهُها وأَلَمُها وثِقْلُها وَغَمُّهَا حَتَّى دَفَعَتهَا عَنْكَ
يَدُ القُدْرَةِ وَأَخرَجَتكَ إلَى الأَرضِ فَرَضِيَتْ أَنْ تَشْبَعَ
وتجوعُ هِيَ، وَتَكْسُوكَ وَتعْرَى، وَتُرْوِيكَ وَتَظْمَأُ، وَتُظِلُّكَ
وتَضْحَى، وَتُنَعِّمَكَ ببُؤْسِهَا، وَتُلَذِّذُكَ بالنَّوْمِ
بأَرَقِهَا، وَكَانَ بَطْنُهَا لَكَ وِعَاءً، وَحِجْرُهَا لَكَ حِوَاءً،
وثَدْيُهَا لَكَ سِقَاءً، ونَفْسُهَا لَكَ وِقَاءً، تُبَاشِرُ حَرَّ
الدُّنيَا وبَرْدِهَا لَكَ وَدُونَكَ، فَتَشْكُرَهَا عَلَى قَدْرِ ذَلِكَ
وَلا تَقْدِرُ عَلَيْهِ إلاّ بعَونِ اللَّهِ وَتَوفِيقِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمَّا حَقُّ أَبيكَ فَتَعْلَمَ أنَّهُ أَصْلُكَ، وَأنَّكَ فَرْعُهُ،
وَأَنَّكَ لَوْلاهُ لَمْ تَكُنْ. فَمَهْمَا رَأيْتَ فِي نفْسِكَ مِمَّا
يُعْجِبُكَ فَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ أَبَاكَ أَصْلُ النِّعْمَةِ عَلَيْكَ فِيهِ
وَاحْمَدِ اللَّهَ وَاشْكُرْهُ عَلَى قَدْرِ ذَلِكَ وَلا قُوَّةَ إلاّ
باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأمَّا حَقُّ وَلَدِكَ فَتَعْلَمَ أنَّهُ مِنْكَ وَمُضَافٌ إلَيكَ فِي
عَاجِلِ الدُنْيَا بخَيْرِهِ وَشَرِّهِ، وَأَنَّكَ مَسْئولٌ عَمَّا
ولِّيتَهُ مِنْ حُسْنِ الأَدَب وَالدّلالَةِ عَلَى رَبهِ وَالْمَعُونةِ
لَهُ عَلَى طَاعَتِهِ فِيكَ وَفِي نفْسِهِ، فَمُثابٌ عَلَى ذلِكَ
وَمُعَاقَبٌ، فَاعْمَلْ فِي أَمْرِهِ عَمَلَ الْمُتَزَيِّنِ بحُسْنِ
أَثرِهِ عَلَيْهِ فِي عَاجِلِ الدُّنْيَا، الْمُعْذِرِ إلَى رَبهِ فِيمَا
بَيْنَكَ وبَيْنَهُ بحُسْنِ الْقِيَامِ عَلَيْهِ وَالأَخذُ لَهُ مِنْهُ.
وَلا قُوَّةَ إلا باللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمّا حَقُّ أَخِيكَ فَتَعْلَمَ أَنّهُ يَدُكَ الَّتِي تَبسُطُهَا،
وَظَهْرُكَ الَّذِي تَلْتَجِئُ إلَيهِ، وَعِزُّكَ الَّذِي تَعْتَمِدُ
عَلَيهِ، وَقُوَّتُكَ الَّتِي تَصُولُ بهَا، فَلا تَتَّخِذْهُ سِلاحًا
علَى مَعصيةِ اللَّهِ ولا عُدَّةً لِلظُّلْمِ بحَقِّ اللَّهِ، ولا تَدَعْ
نُصْرتَهُ عَلَى نفْسِهِ وَمَعُونتِهِ عَلَى عَدُوِّهِ وَالْحَوْلَ
بَيْنَهُ وبَيْنَ شَيَاطينهِ وتَأْديَةِ النَّصِيحَةِ إلَيهِ والإقبَالِ
عَلَيْهِ فِي اللَّهِ فَإنْ انقَادَ لِرَبهِ وَأَحْسَنَ الإجَابَةَ لَهُ
وَإلاّ فَلْيَكُنِ اللهُ آثرَ عِنْدَكَ وَأَكْرَمَ عَلَيْكَ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The right of your mother is that you know that she carried you where no
one carries anyone, she gave to you the fruit of her heart which no one
gives to anyone, and she protected you with her hearing, sight, hands,
legs, hair, and skin as well as all her organs. She was highly
delighted, happy, eager, and enduring the harm, pain, heaviness, and
grief until the hand of power saved her from you and brought you out to
this earth.*

*She did not care if she went hungry as long as you ate, was naked as
long as you were clothed, was thirsty as long as you drank, was in the
sun as long as you were in the shade, was miserable as long as you were
happy, and was deprived of sleeping as long as you were resting. Her
abdomen was your container, her lap your seat, her breast your drink,
and her soul was your fort. She protected you from heat and cold. You
should thank her for all that. You will not be able to show her
gratitude except through Allah’s help and grace of thanksgiving.*

*The right of your father is that you know that he is your root and you
are his branch. Without him, you would not be. Whenever you see anything
in yourself that pleases you, know that your father is the origin of its
blessing upon you. Therefore, praise Allah and thank Him in that
measure. All power belongs to Allah.1*

*The right of your child is that you should know that he is from you and
will be ascribed to you, through both his good and his evil, in the
immediate affairs of this world. You are responsible for what has been
entrusted to you, such as educating him in good conduct, pointing him in
the direction of his Lord, and helping him to obey Him. So, act toward
him with the behavior of one who knows that he will be rewarded for
doing good and punished for doing evil. In his affairs, behave with the
actions of those who adorn their children with their good deeds and
those who are justified before their Lord because they did well in the
discipline and the custody of their sons. All power belongs to Allah.*

*The right of your brother is that you know that he is your hand that
you extend, your back from whom you seek refuge, your power upon which
you rely, and your might with which you move.* *Take him not as a weapon
with which to disobey Allah, nor as equipment with which to wrong
Allah’s creatures. Do not neglect to help him against his own ill
intentions and against his enemy, prevent him from joining villains,
give him good counsel, and associate with him for Allah’s sake. If he
obeys Allah and responds to Him properly, well and good, but if not, you
should prefer and honor Allah more than him.*[^41]

This special treatment with relatives involves the lineal tie, which
designates the extension of man’s existence and progress. It is
experienced as a natural feeling, and has an ethical aspect, especially
with reference to taking care of and acting piously towards parents,
which is a sort of gratitude, good turn, lenience, and mercy to the old
and the weak. Hence, the Holy Qur'an says:

> وَقَضَى رَبُّكَ أَلَّا تَعْبُدُوا إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ
> إِحْسَانًا إِمَّا يَبْلُغَنَّ عِنْدَكَ الْكِبَرَ أَحَدُهُمَا أَوْ
> كِلَاهُمَا فَلَا تَقُلْ لَهُمَا أُفٍّ وَلَا تَنْهَرْهُمَا وَقُلْ
> لَهُمَا قَوْلًا كَرِيمًا (23) وَاخْفِضْ لَهُمَا جَنَاحَ الذُّلِّ مِنَ
> الرَّحْمَةِ وَقُلْ رَبِّ ارْحَمْهُمَا كَمَا رَبَّيَانِي صَغِيرًا (24)

***Your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve any but Him, and be
good to your parents. If either or both of them reach old age with you,
say not to them so much as “Ugh” nor chide them, and speak to them a
generous word. And make yourself submissively gentle to them with
compassion, and say: O my Lord! Have compassion on them, as they brought
me up when I was little. (17:23-24)***

Furthermore, special treatment with relatives has a significant social
and organizational aspect related to Islam’s attitude towards the
general structure of society, on the supposition that family is the
primary and paramount brick on which the social structure stands.

### Scholars

Islam has imparted special social behavior towards scholars and people
of virtue and knowledge due to certain ethical, tangible, and social
considerations.

As for the ethical, tangible consideration, Islam looks upon knowledge
as having realistic worth that grants man a rank of perfection and
elevation. The Holy Qur'an thus says:

> يَرْفَعِ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ وَالَّذِينَ أُوتُوا
> الْعِلْمَ دَرَجَاتٍ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرٌ (11)

***Allah will exalt those of you who believe and those who are given
knowledge in high degrees. Allah is Aware of what you do. (58:11)***

> قُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الَّذِينَ يَعْلَمُونَ وَالَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
> إِنَّمَا يَتَذَكَّرُ أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ (9)

***Say: Are those who know and those who do not know alike? Only the men
of understanding are mindful. (39:9)***

As for the social consideration practically adopted by the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a), scholars occupy a distinguished social position represented in the
leadership of the Islamic revolution in Iran and its authority over the
Muslim nation.

As confirmed in their traditions, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have been the
worthiest to occupy this position and the only ones granted this
authority by Almighty Allah because they possessed knowledge of an
unmatched, unattainable degree.

Consequently, the leaders of Muslims must have full knowledge of Islam
and be proficient enough to deduce religious laws from their sources.

Treating scholars in special ways has been advised in authentic
traditions. Shaykh al-Saduq, in his book of *al-Khisal*, has reported
Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ حَقِّ الْعَالِمِ أَلاَّ تُكْثِرَ عَلَيْهِ السُّؤَالَ، وَلاَ
تَسْبِقَهُ فِي الْجَوَابِ، وَلاَ تُلِحَّ إِذَا أَعْرَضَ، وَلاَ
تَأْخُذَ بِثَوْبِهِ إِذَا كَسِلَ، وَلاَ تُشِيرَ إِلَيْهِ بِيَدِكَ،
وَلاَ تَغْمُزَ بِعَيْنِكَ، وَلاَ تُسَارَّهُ فِي مَجْلِسِهِ، وَلاَ
تَطْلُبَ عَوْرَاتِهِ، وَأَلاَّ تَقُولَ: قَالَ فُلاَنٌ خِلاَفَ
قَوْلِكَ، وَلاَ تُفْشِيَ لَهُ سِرّاً، وَلاَ تَغْتَابَ عِنْدَهُ
أَحَداً، وَأَنْ تَحْفَظَ لَهُ شَاهِداً وَغَائِباً، وَأَنْ تَعُمَّ
الْقَوْمَ بِالسَّلاَمِ وَتَخُصَّهُ بِالتَّحِيَّةِ، وَتَجْلِسَ بَيْنَ
يَدَيْهِ، وَإِنْ كَانَتْ لَهُ حَاجَةٌ سَبَقْتَ الْقَوْمَ إِلَى
خِدْمَتِهِ، وَلاَ تَمَلَّ مِنْ طُولِ صُحْبَتِهِ، فَإِنَّمَا هُوَ
مِثْلُ النَّخْلَةِ فَانْتَظِرْ مَتَى تَسْقُطُ عَلَيْكَ مِنْهُ
مَنْفَعَتُهُ. وَالْعَالِمُ بِمَنْزِلَةِ الصَّائِمِ الْقَائِمِ
الْمُجَاهِدِ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ، وَإِذَا مَاتَ الْعَالِمُ انْثَلَمَ فِي
الإِسْلاَمِ ثَلْمَةٌ لاَ تُسَدُّ إِلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ، وَإِنَّ
طَالِبَ الْعِلْمِ لَيُشَيِّعُهُ سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ مَلَكٍ مِنْ
مُقَرَّبِي السَّمَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Among your duties towards scholars are that you must not load them with
too many questions. You must not precede them in answering. You must not
insist when they avoid (answering a question). You must not impose upon
them when they are tired. You must not point at them by extending a
finger. You must not wink at them. You must not talk confidentially to
them during their sessions. You must not inspect their flaws. You must
not address them by stating opinions contradictory to theirs. You must
not reveal their secrets. You must not backbite in their presence. You
must support them in their presence and defend them when they are
absent.*

*You must salute a group of people generally but greet them singly, sit
in their presence, precede all others to meet their needs, and you must
not become weary of long companionship with them. Verily, scholars are
just like date-palm trees; therefore, you must be patient while waiting
for their benefit to descend upon you. A scholar occupies the same
standing of one who permanently fasts, performs acts of worship, and
strives for the sake of Almighty Allah. When a scholar passes away, an
irreparable crack occurs in Islam that continues up to the Day of
Resurrection. Verily, when a seeker of knowledge passes away seventy
thousand angels escort him and place him among the most favored
inhabitants of heaven.*[^42]

In the famous Treatise on Rights, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَحُقُوقُ أَئِمَّتِكَ ثَلاثَةٌ أَوْجَبُهَا عَلَيْكَ حَقُّ سَائِسِكَ
بالسُّلْطَانِ ثُمَّ سَائِسِكَ بالْعِلْمِ، ثُمَّ حَقُّ سَائِسِكَ
بالْمُلْكِ… وَحَقُّ سَائِسِكَ بِالْعِلْمِ التَّعْظِيمُ لَهُ،
وَالتَّوْقِيرُ لِمَجْلِسِهِ، وَحُسْنُ الإسْتِمَاعِ إِلَيْهِ،
وَالإِقْبَالُ عَلَيْهِ، وَأَلاَّ تَرْفَعَ عَلَيْهِ صَوْتَكَ، وَلاَ
تُجِيبَ أَحَداً يَسْأَلُهُ عَنْ شَيْءٍ حَتَّى يَكُونَ هُوَ الَّذِي
يُجِيبُ، وَلاَ تُحَدِّثَ فِي مَجْلِسِهِ أَحَداً، وَلاَ تَغْتَابَ
عِنْدَهُ أَحَداً، وَأَنْ تَدْفَعَ عَنْهُ إِذَا ذُكِرَ عِنْدَكَ
بِسُوءٍ، وَأَنْ تَسْتُرَ عُيُوبَهُ وَتُظْهِرَ مَنَاقِبَهُ، وَلاَ
تُجَالِسَ لَهُ عَدُوّاً، وَلاَ تُعَادِيَ لَهُ وَلِيّاً، فَإِذَا
فَعَلْتَ ذَلِكَ شَهِدَ لَكَ مَلاَئِكَةُ اللهِ بِأَنَّكَ قَصَدْتَهُ،
وَتَعَلَّمْتَ عِلْمَهُ للهِ جَلَّ اسْمُهُ لاَ لِلنَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The rights of your leaders are three: the most incumbent upon you is
the right of a person who trains you through authority, then of him who
trains you through knowledge, and then of him who trains you through
property. Each trainer is a leader… You must honor the right of the one
who trains you through knowledge, by magnifying him, respecting his
sessions,1 listening to him, and attending to him with devotion. You
must avoid raising your voice in his presence, avoid answering others by
letting him answer, and avoid talking to anybody during his sessions.
You must avoid backbiting in his presence, defend*

*him when something bad is attributed to him, cover up his defects,
demonstrate his good points, avoid sitting with his enemies, and avoid
incurring the hostility of one who is loyal to him. If you do these,
then the angels of Almighty Allah will bear witness that you have tended
to him adequately and have learnt his knowledge for the sake of Almighty
Allah, and not for the sake of people.*[^43]

### Neighbors

Neighbors are also worthy of exceptional treatment to bolster social
relations with others throughout the geographical area and establish a
sound and powerful local social structure. Emphasizing the significance
of this special treatment towards neighbors in his last will to his
sons, Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), referred to the Holy
Prophet’s instructions about neighbors.[^44]

Shaykh al-Saduq has reported another tradition carrying the same import
in his books *Man-la-Yahdhuruhul-Faqih* and *‘Iqab al-A’mal* on the
authority of Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) on the authority of his fathers (‘a) on
the authority of the Holy Prophet (S) who said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ آذَى جَارَهُ حَرَّمَ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ رِيحَ الْجَنَّةِ، وَمَأْوَاهُ
جَهَنَّمُ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ. وَمَنْ ضَيَّعَ حَقَّ جَارِهِ فَلَيْسَ
مِنَّا. وَمَا زَالَ جَبْرَئِيلُ يُوصِينِي بِالْجَارِ حَتَّى ظَنَنْتُ
أَنَّهُ سَيُوَرِّثُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever, harms his neighbor shall be deprived of the scent of Paradise
by Almighty Allah and Hell shall be his final abode. What an evil
destiny Hell is. (Archangel) Gabriel advised me in favor of neighbors so
insistently that I believed that a share of inheritance would be decided
for neighbors.*[^45]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have quoted his father (‘a)
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَرَأْتُ فِي كِتَابِ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ إِنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ كَتَبَ بَيْنَ الْمُهَاجِرِينَ
وَالأَنْصَارِ وَمَنْ لَحِقَ بِهِمْ مِنْ أَهْلِ يَثْرِبَ أَنَّ الْجَارَ
كَالنَّفْسِ غَيْرُ مُضَارٍّ وَلاَ آثِمٍ، وَحُرْمَةُ الْجَارِ عَلَى
الْجَارِ كَحُرْمَةِ أُمِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In the Book of (Imam)’Ali (‘a), I read that the Messenger of Allah (S)
wrote a paragraph in the covenant that he wrote between the Muhajirun
(Muslim emigrants of Makkah), the Ansar (Muslims of Yathrib), and the
inhabitants of Yathrib, who joined them. It ran thus: Treat your
neighbor as yourself; neither harm him nor attribute any sin to him. The
sanctity of one’s neighbor is the same as the sanctity of one’s
mother.*[^46]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِعْلَمُوا أَنَّهُ لَيْسَ مِنَّا مَنْ لَمْ يُحْسِنْ مُجَاوَرَةَ مَنْ
جَاوَرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Know that whoever does not act nobly concerning the rights of his
neighbor does not belong to our group.*[^47]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) reported the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا آمَنَ بِي مَنْ بَاتَ شَبْعَانَ وَجَارُهُ جَائِعٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever spends his night satiated while his neighbor is hungry has
never believed in me.*[^48]

Mu’awiyah ibn ‘Ammar has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) about
the area of one’s neighborhood.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرْبَعِينَ دَاراً مِنْ كُلِّ جَانِبٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Forty houses on each side are included in neighbors.*[^49]

### The Weak

According to Islam, weak people must also be treated in special ways,
including those whose weakness is due to the nature of their physical
structure—such as children, women, old people, handicapped and retarded
people. The human aspect in this special treatment is too clear to
require confirmation.

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَارْحَمُوا ضُعَفَاءَكُمْ، وَاطْلُبُوا الرَّحْمَةَ مِنَ اللهِ
بِالرَّحْمَةِ لَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Have mercy on the weak amongst you and pray that Almighty Allah has
mercy on you because of your showing mercy towards them.*[^50]

This distinctive treatment also includes the financially weak, such as
the poor, the destitute, the wayfarers, and other categories of needy
people.

Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) has quoted the Holy Prophet
(S) as saying in one of his sermons:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَصَدَّقُوا عَلَى فُقَرَاءِكُمْ وَمَسَاكِينِكُمْ، وَوَقِّرُوا
كِبَارَكُمْ وَارْحَمُوا صِغَارَكُمْ، وَصِلُوا أَرْحَامَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Give alms to the poor and the needy amongst you. Have a high regard for
the old amongst you. Have mercy on the young amongst you. Build good
relationships with your relatives.*[^51]

This special treatment also includes those deemed weak because of their
social conditions, such as orphans, slaves, and low-wage employees whose
social circumstances force them to be under the supervision and custody
of others.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported on the authority of his fathers (‘a)
that the Holy Prophet (S), in his instructions to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَلِيُّ، أَرْبَعٌ مَنْ كُنَّ فِيهِ بَنَى اللهُ لَهُ بَيْتاً فِي
الْجَنَّةِ: مَنْ آوَى الْيَتِيمَ، وَرَحِمَ الضَّعِيفَ، وَأَشْفَقَ
عَلَى وَالِدَيْهِ، وَرَفَقَ بِمَمْلُوكِهِ. يَا عَلِيُّ، مَنْ كَفَى
يَتِيماً فِي نَفَقَتِهِ بِمَالِهِ حَتَّى يَسْتَغْنِيَ وَجَبَتْ لَهُ
الْجَنَّةُ الْبَتَّةَ. يَا عَلِيُّ، مَنْ مَسَحَ يَدَهُ عَلَى رَأْسِ
يَتِيمٍ تَرَحُّماً لَهُ أَعْطَاهُ اللهُ بِكُلِّ شَعْرَةٍ نُوراً يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O ‘Ali, whoever carries out the following four acts, Almighty Allah
shall build for him a house in Paradise: (1) providing a shelter for an
orphan, (2) having mercy on the weak, (3) having compassion for parents,
and (4) treating servants leniently. O ‘Ali, Paradise shall be
unquestionably decided for the person who meets all the expenses of an
orphan from his own wealth such that he makes him financially
independent. O ‘Ali, whoever strokes the head of an orphan out of
sympathy for him, on the Day of Resurrection, Almighty Allah shall grant
him (a piece of) light for each single hair.*[^52]

### The Holy Prophet’s Pro7geny

Exceptional treatment has been confirmed for the Holy Prophet’s progeny
from the descendants of Imam ‘Ali and Lady Fatimah—peace be upon
them—due to their relationship to the Holy Prophet (S) in order to honor
him, acknowledge his right, and sanctify his standing.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُقَبَّلُ رَأْسُ أَحَدٍ وَلاَ يَدُهُ إِلاَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ أَوْ مَنْ أُرِيدَ بِهِ رَسُولُ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No one’s head or hand must be kissed except the Messenger of Allah’s or
one who is considered to represent him.*[^53]

Al-Husayn ibn Khalid reported Imam al-Ridha (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّظَرُ إِلَى ذُرِّيَّتِنَا عِبَادَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Looking at our progeny is (a kind of) worship.*

The reporter asked, “Does this mean the Imams from your progeny or all
of the Holy Prophet’s descendants?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلِ النَّظَرُ إِلَى جَمِيعِ ذُرِّيَّةِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ عِبَادَةٌ مَا لَمْ يُفَارِقُوا مِنْهَاجَهُ
وَلَمْ يَتَلَوَّثُوا بِالْمَعَاصِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It includes all the descendants of the Prophet (S) who neither violated
his course nor are polluted by acts of disobedience to Allah.*[^54]

[^1]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:399, S.1, H. 5.

[^2]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:407, H.1.

[^3]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:407, H.5.

[^4]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:408, H.1 & 567, H. 2.
Similar reports of can be found in Sections: 135 and 136 of the same
reference book.

[^5]: ‌- Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 10:52. The author
reports this tradition from Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a).

[^6]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:567, S. 135, H. 1. The
tradition following this one in this reference book reads that the Holy
Prophet (s) said: Whoever meets Almighty Allah enjoying the following
three traits will enter Paradise from any gate he chooses: (1) good
manners, (2) fear of God in public and private, and (3) forsaking
contention even when he is right.

[^7]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:408, H. 6, S. 7.

[^8]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:540, H. 1, S. 121.

[^9]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:283, H. 1. (The
completion of the tradition is found in the margin of this reference
book.)

[^10]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:284, H. 5. (Traditions
of the same meaning can be found in the same chapter of this reference
book.)

[^11]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:285, H. 7, S. 51.

[^12]: ‌- Refer to the exegesis of this holy verse in Majma’ al-Bayan by
‘Allamah al-Tabrisi where he cites the tradition of Ibn Mas’ud quoting
the Holy Prophet (s) as saying, “The monasticism of my nation is
emigration (i.e. hijrah), jihad, prayer, fasting, Hajj, and ‘Umrah.

[^13]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:542, H. 2.

[^14]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:108, S. 59, H. 1.

[^15]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:559, H. 1, S. 18.

[^16]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:595, H. 6, S. 1.

[^17]: ‌- Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:362, H. 3; Shaykh al-Saduq,
al-Amali, pp. 380, H. 483; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 75: 196,
H. 11 as quoted from the previous reference books.

[^18]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:458, H. 2, S. 56.

[^19]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:458, H. 3, S. 56.

[^20]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:409, H. 1, S. 9.

[^21]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:426, H. 5.

[^22]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:426, H. 6.

[^23]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:426-427, H. 8.

[^24]: ‌- ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 73:350, H. 13.

[^25]: ‌- Refer to this story in Shaykh al-Kulayni’s book al-Kafi
5:339-343. It actually holds wonderful lessons and wisdom. The same
lessons can also be inferred from the story of the marriage of Habib. In
the same chapter of this reference book, there are other issues
confirming this concept; therefore, it is recommended to have a look at
them.

[^26]: ‌- Nahj al-Balaghah, Letter No. 53.

[^27]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:434, S. 30, H. 1.

[^28]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:433, H. 1.

[^29]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:5, H. 1.

[^30]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:422, S. 19, H. 4.

[^31]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:430, S. 27, H. 1.

[^32]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:431, S. 28, H. 1.

[^33]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:21, H. 6.

[^34]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:567, H. 5.

[^35]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:434, S. 15, H. 15.

[^36]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:542, S. 122, H. 3.

[^37]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:404, S. 3, H. 1.

[^38]: ‌- Refer to al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:409-432, S.
8-9,11,15-18 and ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 74:173-220 where
you can find many traditions confirming that the Holy Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) specified certain points as conditions of choosing friends
of confidence and identifying friends of grimace. All are originally
connected to the principles to which we have previously referred.

[^39]: ‌- Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:347-348, H. 7.

[^40]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:593, S. 149, H. 3.

[^41]: ‌- Ibn Shu’bah al-Harrani, Tuhaf al-’Uqul, pp. 363.

[^42]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:551, S. 123, H. 2.

[^43]: Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:134, S. 3, H. 1.
Translator’s Note: According to Tuhaf al-’Uqul, this paragraph has been
mentioned in the following form: وَأَمَّا حَقُّ سَائِسِكَ بِالْعِلْمِ
فَالتَّعْظِيمُ لَهُ وَالتَّوْقِيرُ لِمَجْلِسِهِ وَحُسْنُ الإسْتِمَاعِ
إِلَيْهِ وَالإِقْبَالُ عَلَيْهِ وَالْمَعُونَةُ لَهُ عَلَى نَفْسِكَ فَي
مَا لاَ غِنَى بِكَ عَنْهُ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ بِأَنْ تُفْرِغَ لَهُ عَقْلَكَ
وَتُحْضِرَهُ فَهْمَكَ وَتُزَكِّيَ لَهُ قَلْبَكَ وَتُجْلِيَ لَهُ بَصَرَكَ
بِتَرْكِ اللَّذَّاتِ وَنَقْصِ الشَّهَوَاتِ وَأَنْ تَعْلَمَ أَنَّكَ فِي
مَا أَلْقَى إِلَيْكَ رَسُولُهُ إِلَى مَنْ لَقِيَكَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْجَهْلِ
فَلَزِمَكَ حُسْنُ التَّأْدِيَةِ عَنْهُ إِلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ تَخُنْهُ فِي
تَأْدِيَةِ رِسَالَتِهِ وَالْقِيَامِ بِهَا عَنْهُ إِذَا تَقَلَّدْتَهَا،
وَلاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِاللهِ.The right of the one who
trains you through knowledge is to magnify him, respect his sessions,
listen well to him, attend to him with devotion, and help him convey to
you the knowledge that you indispensably need. You can do so by emptying
your mind to (receive) his information, pay attention to him, purify
your heart for him, open your eyes wide before him by means of
abandoning the appetites and the passions. You should also know that you
are considered to be his messenger when you convey the information that
he provides you to the ignorant ones that you meet. Therefore, it is
binding upon you to convey it on his behalf properly, and avoid
betraying him when you are conveying his message and representing him.
All power belongs to Allah.

[^44]: ‌- Translator’s Note: In his will for Imam Hasan (‘a) and Imam
Husayn (‘a), Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) said: اللهَ
اللهَ فِي جِيرَانِكُمْ، فَإِنَّهَا وَصِيَّةُ نَبِيِّكُمْ، مَا زَالَ
يُوصِي بِهِمْ حَتَّى ظَنَنَّا أَنَّهُ سَيُوَرِّثُهُمْ.(Fear) Allah (and)
keep Allah in view in the matter of neighbors, because they were the
subject of the Prophet’s advice when he went on advising in their favor
until we thought he would allow them a share in inheritance.(Nahj
al-Balaghah, Sermon No. 64)

[^45]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:488, S. 86, H. 5.

[^46]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:487, S. 86, H. 2.

[^47]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:489, S. 87, H. 5.

[^48]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:490, S. 88, H. 1.

[^49]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:492, S. 90, H. 3.

[^50]: ‌- Abu’l-Fath al-Irbali, Kashf al-Ghummah 3: 142; ‘Allamah
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 78:83, H. 85 as quoted from the previous
reference book.

[^51]: ‌- Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha 2:265, H. 53; ‘Allamah
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 96:356, H. 25 as quoted from the previous
reference book.

[^52]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:560, S. 19, H. 1.

[^53]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:565, S. 133, H. 3.

[^54]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:620, S. 165, H. 1.


