Chapter 2: Rules And Foundations
================================

**Prelude**

**1. Religious and Conventional Laws**

**2. Controlling and Steering Emotions**

**3. Justice meted out under all circumstances**

**4. Nobility of Character and Indulgence**

**5. Charity and Preceding Others in Charitable Behavior**

**6. Good Example and Unique Behavior**

Prelude
-------

The second area of discussion appertains to rules that identify the
progress and direction of social relations and the foundations on which
they are established.

These rules and foundations steer the progress of social relations
towards self-perfection in the behavior of individuals and towards
social perfection in the activities of the virtuous community.

At the same time, they outline the ethical background and social
behavior of the individual by highlighting the role that ethics plays in
achieving social perfection in an individual.

Without these ethical restraints, social relations turn into a mere
formal mechanism, similar to customs and traditions, disintegrating as
soon as the social structure suffers the least change. This has actually
taken place under certain conditions like emigration from one society to
another, cultural and social intrusions imposed on a society, or
overthrow of political regimes. In Western societies, ethics has turned
into barren laws and traditions lacking any significant connection to
ethics, moral fiber, spirit, or sentiment.

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) summed up these rules in the following points:

1. Commitment to religious duties and conventional responsibilities

2. Controlling and directing one’s emotions

3. Deeming justice and fairness as the only level of comparison between
others and oneselfDeeming justice and fairness as the only level of
comparison between others and oneself

4. Nobility of character and dealing with people in terms of forbearance
and compassion

5. Charity and leading in charitable behavior

6. Distinguished behavior, acting as good example in general social
conditions

These regulations are congruous with the Islamic aspects of social
relations in trend, goals, form, and content. However, it is necessary
to deal with each of these regulations in detail to shed light on the
claimed congruity and connection.

Religious and Conventional Laws
-------------------------------

Commitment to the religious laws, reason-based pledges and covenants, as
well as common conventional manners approved by the Holy Legislator, is
in reality an ethical commitment towards Almighty Allah, the One and
Only Lord and Creator Who has bestowed uncountable graces upon
humankind. Almighty Allah had taken a pledge and a covenant from
humankind that they would profess His Oneness in godhead and lordship,
and obey and comply with His commandments and prohibitions in this
world. Referring to this covenant, the Holy Qur'an says:

> وَإِذْ أَخَذَ رَبُّكَ مِنْ بَنِي آدَمَ مِنْ ظُهُورِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ
> وَأَشْهَدَهُمْ عَلَى أَنْفُسِهِمْ أَلَسْتُ بِرَبِّكُمْ قَالُوا بَلَى
> شَهِدْنَا أَنْ تَقُولُوا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ إِنَّا كُنَّا عَنْ هَذَا
> غَافِلِينَ (172) أَوْ تَقُولُوا إِنَّمَا أَشْرَكَ آبَاؤُنَا مِنْ
> قَبْلُ وَكُنَّا ذُرِّيَّةً مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ أَفَتُهْلِكُنَا بِمَا
> فَعَلَ الْمُبْطِلُونَ (173)

*When your Lord brought forth the children of Adam and, from their
backs, their descendants, and made them bear witness against their own
souls, “Am I not your Lord?” They answered,* *“Yes! We bear witness.”
Lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection, “Surely, we were
heedless of this.” Or, lest you should say**, “Only our fathers
associated others with Allah before, and we were an offspring after
them: Will You then destroy us for what the vain doers did?”
(7:172-173)***

This commitment, therefore, is in reality the fulfillment of the pledge
and covenant mentioned in the Holy Qur'an and the acknowledgement of the
religion and system of Islam, which Almighty Allah revealed to Muhammad,
His servant and messenger, peace be upon him and his Household. This
religion came to guide humankind, organize their affairs, and build a
virtuous human community so that the believers of this divine message
who fulfill this covenant form the best nation.

These religious laws and regulations, including all commands and
prohibitions, are based on actual advantage and disadvantage in both the
individual and social movements of humanity. Obeying these religious
laws is in truth achieving advantages and evading disadvantages. The
second aspect of the Islamic concept of social relations, reinforcing
the social structure, cannot be put into practice except by means of
gaining advantages and warding off disadvantages.

Further, common conventional manners are just another expression of
legitimate social commitments that people of a society agree to use as
customs; therefore, conformity with these manners means conformity with
people themselves and with society. This is in accord with the first
aspect of social relations—openness and sociability.

### Obligatory and Forbidden Commitments

Positive and negative implementation of such regulation is found in the
details about the superstructure of social relations.

As for the positive aspect, this regulation can be found in fulfillment
of promises and covenants, restoration of securities to their owners,
participation in funeral ceremonies, presence in congregational prayers
and social gatherings, visiting the sick, and like matters that will be
discussed in further detail in the second part of this book.

Regarding the negative aspect, application of regulation can be found in
threatening others, causing them damage, violating their sanctities,
scrutinizing their weaknesses, or spreading corruptive influences among
them, which will also be discussed in the second part of this book.

Controlling and Steering the Emotions
-------------------------------------

The second constraint is to control one’s emotions, feelings, and
passions during involvement in certain events and in responding to the
results and consequences of those events. When observed, this regulation
embodies self-perfection in man’s progress towards Almighty Allah.

Many traditions, reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), emphasize such
regulation as a means of attaining self-perfection.

In two books entitled *Man-la-Yahdhuruhul-Faqih* and *Thawab al-A’mal*,
Shaykh al-Saduq has reported through a valid chain of authority on the
authority of Shu’ayb al-’Aqarqufi that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ مَلَكَ نَفْسَهُ إِذَا رَغِبَ وَإِذَا رَهِبَ وَإِذَا اشْتَهَى
وَإِذَا غَضِبَ وَإِذَا رَضِيَ حَرَّمَ اللهُ جَسَدَهُ عَلَى النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever controls himself when he desires, fears, craves, or becomes
angry, Almighty Allah shall ban Hellfire from consuming his body.*[^1]

According to another tradition that is reported by Shaykh al-Kulayni in
*al-Kafi* through a valid chain of authority on the authority of Safwan
al-Jammal, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُ الَّذِي إِذَا غَضِبَ لَمْ يُخْرِجْهُ غَضَبُهُ
مِنْ حَقٍّ، وَإِذَا رَضِيَ لَمْ يُدْخِلْهُ رِضَاهُ فِي بَاطِلٍ،
وَإِذَا قَدَرَ لَمْ يَأْخُذْ أَكْثَرَ مِمَّا لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A true faithful believer is he whose rage does not induce him to
abandon what is right, whose* *approval (of something) does not induce
him to indulge in the wrong, and whose power does not induce him to take
more than his due.*[^2]

### Self-Building and Control of Emotions

Without a doubt, self-building is one of the most imposing acts that man
adopts in his progress towards self-perfection. According to an
authentic tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have described
self-building as ‘the major jihad’.[^3]

One aspect of self-building is controlling emotions and steering them
towards what is right and approved by religious laws and divine goals.

In its subjective aspect, the significance of this regulation stems from
educating and strengthening the human will to be in a permanent state of
harmony with reason and religious laws in its choice and activity. The
Holy Legislator has conferred a special significance upon reason and
granted it a vital role in the progress of humanity and in guiding human
will towards uprightness and helping human souls accomplish the final
goal of their existence by controlling emotions during interaction.

In an authentic tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى خَلَقَ الْعَقْلَ ثُمَّ قَالَ لَهُ:
أَقْبِلْ. فَأَقْبَلَ. ثُمَّ قَالَ لَهُ: أَدْبِرْ. فَأَدْبَرَ. ثُمَّ
قَالَ: وَعِزَّتِي وَجَلاَلِي، مَا خَلَقْتُ خَلْقاً هُوَ أَحَبَّ
إِلَيَّ مِنْكَ، وَلاَ أَكْمَلْتُكَ إِلاَّ فِي مَنْ أُحِبُّ. أَمَا
إِنِّي إِيَّاكَ آمُرُ، وَإِيَّاكَ أَنْهَى، وَإِيَّاكَ أُعَاقِبُ،
وَإِيَّاكَ أُثِيبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When Almighty Allah created the intellect (i.e. reason), He ordered it
to come. So, the intellect did. He then ordered it to leave, and the
intellect responded. Then, Almighty Allah declared, “By* *My Might and
Majesty I take this oath, I have never created any creature dearer to me
than you. I shall never deposit you in your perfect form except with
those whom I love. Verily, it is you whom I will order, warn, punish,
and reward.*[^4]

According to another validly reported tradition, ‘Abdullah ibn Sinan
asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) whether the angels or mankind were more
favored.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَمِيرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلاَمُ: إِنَّ اللهَ رَكَّبَ فِي الْمَلاَئِكَةِ عَقْلاً بِلاَ
شَهْوَةٍ، وَرَكَّبَ فِي الْبَهَائِمِ شَهْوَةً بِلاَ عَقْلٍ، وَرَكَّبَ
فِي بَنِي آدَمَ كِلَيْهِمَا. فَمَنْ غَلَبَ عَقْلُهُ شَهْوَتَهُ فَهُوَ
خَيْرٌ مِنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ، وَمَنْ غَلَبَتْ شَهْوَتُهُ عَقْلَهُ فَهُوَ
شَرٌّ مِنَ الْبَهَائِمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ali ibn Abi-Talib, the Commander of the Faithful, (‘a) said: Almighty
Allah installed in angels reason without appetite, and in beasts
appetite without reason; while in human beings, He installed both reason
and appetite. Thus, a human being whose reason overcomes his appetite
becomes more favorable than angels, but he whose appetite overcomes his
reason becomes lowlier than beasts.*[^5]

### Nobility of Character and Control of Emotions

Controlling ones emotions contributes to self-perfection of individuals,
which automatically has a great bearing on the self-perfection of the
whole society.

Additionally, an individual characterized by uprightness and distinctive
moral features leaves an undeniable impact on the other individuals of
society. An upright individual’s social behavior will necessarily
reflect his or her sound psychological reality.

For that reason, the Holy Qur'an, highlighting this ethical aspect in
behavior, has praised the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) for the excellence
of his morality:

> وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلَى خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ (4)

***Most surely, you conform to sublime morality. (68:4)***

Justice and Fairness under All Circumstances
--------------------------------------------

The third rule in social relations is the commitment to justice and
fairness with all people without discrimination. Hence, one is required
to be fair even if such fairness forces him to confess his mistake in
any incident or issue. This rule expresses the ethical background of the
Islamic concept of social relations.

In its capacity as one of the most significant aspects of the social
system, this rule has been adopted by Islam as the basis on which its
whole system is established. Hence, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) regarded
justice as an essential foundation of man’s relationship with Almighty
Allah.

Second to divine mercy, justice is a pillar in man’s relationship with
the Creator; in the production and distribution of wealth; in
government; in judgment between parties of a dispute; and in man’s
relationship with himself.

### Maintenance of Justice among People

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) emphasized justice and fair play as the basis of
the social system in general and in social relations in particular. Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِتَّقُوا اللهَ وَاعْدِلُوا، فَإِنَّكُمْ تَعِيبُونَ عَلَى قَوْمٍ لاَ
يَعْدِلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Fear Allah and act justly yourselves, for you are censuring people who
do not establish justice.*[^6]

He (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْعَدْلُ أَحْلَى مِنَ الشَّهْدِ، وَأَلْيَنُ مِنَ الزُّبْدِ،
وَأَطْيَبُ رِيحاً مِنَ الْمِسْكِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Justice is sweeter than honey, softer than butter, and more fragrant
than musk.*[^7]

### Protest against Injustice

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) prohibited unjust treatment of
the people. Usually, injustice is the result of misappropriation and
disequilibrium in the accurate criteria of social relations.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ أَحَدٍ يَظْلِمُ مَظْلَمَةً إِلاَّ أَخَذَهُ اللهُ بِهَا فِي
نَفْسِهِ وَمَالِهِ، فَأَمَّا الظُّلْمُ الَّذِي بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ اللهِ
فَإِذَا تَابَ غُفِرَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No one commits a wrongdoing but that Almighty Allah shall punish him
for it in his personal affairs or property. As for wrongdoings that one
commits in his relationship with Almighty Allah, they are forgivable
when the wrongdoer repents.*[^8]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ مَظْلَمَةٍ أَشَدُّ مِنْ مَظْلَمَةٍ لاَ يَجِدُ صَاحِبُهَا
عَلَيْهَا عَوْناً إِلاَّ اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No act of injustice is graver than wronging one who has no helping
power to repel it save Almighty Allah.*[^9]

Abu-Basir has reported that two disputing men visited Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
and each one put forward his claim. After he had heard both of them, the
Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا إِنَّهُ مَا ظَفَرَ بِخَيْرٍ مَنْ ظَفَرَ بِالظُّلْمِ. أَمَا إِنَّ
الْمَظْلُومَ يَأْخُذُ مِنْ دِينِ الظَّالِمِ أَكْثَرَ مِمَّا يَأْخُذُ
الظَّالِمُ مِنْ مَالِ الْمَظْلُومِ. مَنْ يَفْعَلِ الشَّرَّ بِالنَّاسِ
فَلاَ يُنْكِرِ الشَّرَّ إِذَا فُعِلَ بِهِ. أَمَا إِنَّهُ يَحْصِدُ
ابْنُ آدَمَ مَا يَزْرَعُ، وَلَيْسَ يَحْصِدُ أَحَدٌ مِنَ الْمُرِّ
حُلْواً، وَلاَ مِنَ الْحُلْوِ مُرّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Truly, I say, he that gains something by unjust means has in fact
gained no benefit. Verily, the wronged party seizes from the faith of
the wronging party more than the wronging party seizes unjustly from the
property of the wronged party. He that causes evil to people must not
complain against the evil that is caused to him. Verily, the son of Adam
(i.e. man) will reap only that which he has sown. No one can harvest
sweetness from the bitter and no one can harvest bitterness from the
sweet.*

Upon hearing these words, the two disputing parties made up with each
other and left.[^10]

### Giving others their rights even if it be against oneself

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) urged their followers to be fair with all people by
giving them their rights even if it went against their own interests.
Hence, The Holy Imams (‘a) confirmed that the quality of faith (i.e.
*iman*) cannot be ascribed to anyone who does not treat all people
equally and give each one his due even if he does not receive his own
due.

Seemingly, any unjust act in social relations initially arises from
one’s preferring oneself to others and giving one’s own right precedence
over the rights of others. This trend then develops to include
preferring certain individuals to others and giving the rights of a
certain group precedence over the rights of the public. Justice will be
established among all people when each person gives all others their due
even if it is against oneself.

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have quoted the Holy Prophet
(S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيِّدُ الأَعْمَالِ إِنْصَافُ النَّاسِ مِنْ نَفْسِكَ وَمُوَاسَاةُ
الأَخِ فِي اللهِ وَذِكْرُ اللهِ عَلَى كُلِّ حَالٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Three acts are the masters of all deeds: (1) to treat people fairly
even if it is against oneself, (2) to be cordial with your brothers in
faith, and (3) to praise Almighty Allah in all circumstances.*[^11]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S)
as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ وَاسَى الْفَقِيرَ مِنْ مَالِهِ وَأَنْصَفَ النَّاسَ مِنْ نَفْسِهِ
فَذَلِكَ الْمُؤْمِنُ حَقّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who financially comforts the poor from his wealth and gives people
their dues, even if it be against his own interests, is a true and
faithful believer.*[^12]

Abu-’Ubaydah al-Hadhdha' has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ أُخْبِرُكَ بِأَشَدَّ مَا افْتَرَضَ اللهُ عَلَى خَلْقِهِ؟
إِنْصَافُ النَّاسِ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَمُوَاسَاةُ الإِخْوَانِ فِي
اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَذِكْرُ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عَلَى كُلِّ حَالٍ،
فَإِنْ عَرَضَتْ لَهُ طَاعَةٌ عَمِلَ بِهَا وَإِنْ عَرَضَتْ لَهُ
مَعْصِيَةٌ تَرَكَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*May I tell you about the most difficult duty that Almighty Allah has
imposed on His creatures? It is to give others their rights against
oneself, to equate brethren-in-faith with oneself, to praise Almighty
Allah under all conditions, to perform any act of obedience to Almighty
Allah whenever it is encountered, and to avoid any act of disobedience
to Him whenever encountered.*[^13]

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) instructed their followers strongly to love for
their brethren-in-faith whatever they loved for themselves.

This instruction can be evidently seen in Imam ‘Ali’s instructive letter
to his son, Imam Hasan (‘a), in which he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَحْبِبْ لِغَيْرِكَ مَا تُحِبُّ لِنَفْسِكَ وَاكْرَهْ لَهُ مَا
تَكْرَهُ لَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Love for the others whatever you love for yourself and hate for them
whatever you hate for yourself.*[^14]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْحَى اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إِلَى آدَمَ: إِنِّي سَأَجْمَعُ لَكَ
الْكَلاَمَ فِي أَرْبَعِ كَلِمَاتٍ: وَاحِدَةٌ لِي، وَوَاحِدَةٌ لَكَ،
وَوَاحِدَةٌ فَي مَا بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكَ، وَوَاحِدَةٌ فِي مَا بَيْنَكَ
وَبَيْنَ النَّاسِ… أَمَّا الَّتِي لِي فَتَعْبُدُنِي لاَ تُشْرِكُ بِي
شَيْئاً. وَأَمَّا الَّتِي لَكَ فَأَجْزِيكَ بِعَمَلِكَ أَحْوَجَ مَا
تَكُونُ إِلَيْهِ. وَأَمَّا الَّتِي بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكَ فَعَلَيْكَ
الدُّعَاءُ وَعَلَيَّ الإِجَابَةُ. وَأَمَّا الَّتِي بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَ
النَّاسِ فَتَرْضَى لِلنَّاسِ مَا تَرْضَى لِنَفْسِكَ وَتَكْرَهُ لَهُمْ
مَا تَكْرَهُ لِنَفْسِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah, through revelation, addressed to Adam the following: I
will summarize the whole wording for you in the following four
statements…one statement is about Me, the other about you, the third
about what is between you and Me, and the fourth is about what is
between you and the people…The word that is for Me is that you must
worship me without setting any partner with Me. The word that is for you
is that I reward you for your deeds when you are in the most urgent need
for that reward. The word that pertains to what is between you and Me is
that you pray to Me and I respond to you. The word that pertains to what
is between you and the people is that you accept for them whatever you
accept for yourself and hate for them whatever you hate for
yourself.*[^15]

Nobility of Character and Indulgence
------------------------------------

The fourth rule according to the instructions of the Holy Imams of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) is showing nobility of character, kindness and leniency
while interacting with people. This is the ethical basis of openness in
social relations.

It is necessary to understand that the ethical tenor of social relations
consists of love and affection. It is not an empty, formal relation or a
mechanism that is based on mutual benefits and interests; rather, it is
an emotional and sentimental tie because social relations cannot attain
perfection through common or personal interests but through mutual love
and affection.

Undoubtedly, good manners, showing affection to others, courtesy, and
forbearance in dealing with people are expressions of this love and
indicate the first important step on this path, remove all barriers and
negative impacts that stand against love, and symbolize love at the time
that its constituents and elements attain perfection.

Traditions corroborating this tenor and its outcomes have been reported
from the Holy Prophet (S):

Shaykh al-Kulayni, through an authentic chain of authority, has quoted
Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as relating the following:

A Bedouin from the Banu-Tamim tribe came to the Holy Prophet (S) and
asked for an advice. The Holy Prophet (S) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَحَبَّبْ إِلَى النَّاسِ يُحِبُّوكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Try to endear yourself to people and they will certainly love
you.*[^16]

The author of *Wasa'il al-Shi’ah* has dedicated two sections, in the
chapter on laws of association with people, to good manners and
forbearance. In these sections, he has recorded numerous traditions
confirming this fact and relating the perfection of faith to love and
endearing oneself to others[^17] because it has also been reported that
true faith and religion are in reality love. Let us now cite a number of
validly reported traditions that confirm these facts.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَكْمَلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِيمَاناً أَحْسَنُهُمْ خُلُقاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Certainly, the most faithful of the believers have the best
manners.*[^18]

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْخُلُقَ الْحَسَنَ يُمِيثُ الْخَطِيئَةَ كَمَا تُمِيثُ الشَّمْسُ
الْجَلِيدَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, good conduct dissolves sins in the same way that sunlight
dissolves snow.*[^19]

He (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ حُسْنَ الْخُلُقِ يَبْلُغُ بِصَاحِبِهِ دَرَجَةَ الصَّائِمِ
الْقَائِمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Good manners promote to the rank of those who persistently observe
fasting and spend their nights in acts of worship.*[^20]

He (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَكْمَلُ النَّاسِ عَقْلاً أَحْسَنُهُمْ خُلُقاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The wisest of all people are those with the best manners.*[^21]

He (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى لَيُعْطِي الْعَبْدَ مِنَ الثَّوَابِ
عَلَى حُسْنِ الْخُلُقِ كَمَا يُعْطِي الْمُجَاهِدَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ
يَغْدُو عَلَيْهِ وَيَرُوحُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Almighty Allah grants his servants a reward for good conduct
equal to the reward of one who is frequently engaged in jihad in the way
of Allah.*[^22]

He (‘a) is also reported to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَرَنِي رَبِّي بِمُدَارَاةِ النَّاسِ كَمَا أَمَرَنِي بِالْفَرَائِضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Just as my Lord ordered me to persevere in obligatory (religious)
duties, so also He ordered me to observe forbearance.*[^23]

He (‘a) is also reported to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُدَارَاةُ النَّاسِ نِصْفُ الإِيمَانِ وَالرِّفْقُ بِهِمْ نِصْفُ
الْعَيْشِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Treating people with moderation is half of one’s faith, and to be
lenient towards them is half of one’s sustenance.*[^24]

Sufyan ibn ‘Uyaynah reported that he once asked al-Zuhri whether he had
met ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (Zayn al-’Abidin) (‘a). Al-Zuhri answered, “Yes,
I have met him. I have never met a person more virtuous than he is. By
Allah, I have never known that he had a friend in secret or an enemy in
public.”

Sufyan asked, “How was that?”

Al-Zuhri answered, “Because all those who loved him envied him out of
their abundant knowledge of his outstanding merits, and all those who
hated him used to treat him with tolerance because he treated them with
even more tolerance.”[^25]

Fudhayl ibn Yasar reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) whether to
love and hate for Allah’s sake is part of faith. The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَلِ الإيمَانُ إلاَّ الْحُبُّ وَالبُغْضُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Is true faith anything other than such love and hate?*

Then the Imam (‘a) said the following Qur'anic verse to confirm his
words:

> اللَّهَ حَبَّبَ إِلَيْكُمُ الْإِيمَانَ وَزَيَّنَهُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ
> وَكَرَّهَ إِلَيْكُمُ الْكُفْرَ وَالْفُسُوقَ وَالْعِصْيَانَ أُولَئِكَ
> هُمُ الرَّاشِدُونَ (7)

*…Allah has endeared the faith to you and has made it seemly in your
hearts, and He has made hateful to you unbelief and transgression and
disobedience; these it is that are the followers of a right way.
(49:7)”*[^26]

Safwan al-Jammal reported on the authority of Abu-’Ubaydah Ziyad
al-Hadhdha' that Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said to him:

> يَا زِيَادُ وَيْحَكَ! وَهَلِ الدِّينُ إِلاَّ الْحُبُّ؟ أَلاَ تَرَى
> قَوْلَ اللهِ: "قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي
> يُحْبِبْكُمُ اللَّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ
> رَحِيمٌ" (31) أَوَ لاَ تَرَى قَوْلَ اللهِ لِمُحَمَّدٍ صَلَّى اللهُ
> عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: " اللَّهَ حَبَّبَ إِلَيْكُمُ الْإِيمَانَ وَزَيَّنَهُ
> فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ " (7) وَقَالَ: " يُحِبُّونَ مَنْ هَاجَرَ إِلَيْهِمْ "
> (9) الدِّينُ هُوَ الْحُبُّ، وَالْحُبُّ هُوَ الدِّينُ.

*O Ziyad, is religiousness anything other than love? Consider Almighty
Allah’s saying (in the Holy Qur'an),* ***“Say: If you love Allah, then
follow me, Allah will love you and forgive you your faults, and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful. (3:31)”*** *Consider Almighty Allah’s saying to
Muhammad (S),* ***“Allah has endeared the faith to you and has made it
seemly in your hearts. (49:7)”*** *He has also said,* ***“They love
those who have fled to them. (59:9)”*** *Thus, the religion is love and
love is religion.*[^27]

Although love, mentioned in these traditions, stands for love for
Almighty Allah, surely to love Muslims and faithful believers for His
sake has to be a class of faith because such love stems from love for
Almighty Allah and for His sake, as maintained by other traditions.

Sallam ibn al-Mustanir has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وِدُّ الْمُؤْمِنِ فِي اللهِ مِنْ أَعْظَمِ شُعَبِ الإيمَانِ. أَلاَ
وَمَنْ أَحَبَّ فِي اللهِ وَأَبْغَضَ فِي اللهِ وَأَعْطَى فِي اللهِ
وَمَنَعَ فِي اللهِ فَهُوَ مِنْ أَصْفِيَاءِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When a believer loves (others) for the sake of Almighty Allah, this
becomes one of the greatest* *parts of faith. Verily, he who loves,
hates, gives, and withholds for the sake of Almighty Allah is one of His
elite servants.*[^28]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ أَوْثَقِ عُرَى الإِيمَانِ أَنْ تُحِبَّ فِي اللهِ، وَتُبْغِضَ فِي
اللهِ، وَتُعْطِيَ فِي اللهِ، وَتَمْنَعَ فِي اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*One of the firmest handles of faith is to love, hate, give, and
withhold exclusively for the sake of Almighty Allah.*[^29]

Charity and Taking the Lead in Charitable Behavior
--------------------------------------------------

The fifth rule in the Islamic conception of social relations is to be
charitable towards others. This act can be classified into two types:

### Charitable Behavior towards all People

The first type of charity is to behave charitably towards all people
without taking into consideration whether a tie between the source and
the target exists or not. Examples of this type of charity are public
deeds of charitable people such as paving roads, digging wells, building
guesthouses, endowing property for public purposes, feeding the hungry,
helping the poor and the needy, building vocational institutes, and
establishing educational, health, and cultural centers. Similar
activities of charity, which demonstrate interest in the general affairs
of Muslims can be described as deeds that are *fisabilillah* (i.e. in
the way of Allah).

Such deeds, urged by Islam, are the most favorable and genuine form of
charity, since they bring about a great reward and compensation and
contribute to the perfection of individuals and communities. They are
charitable acts that have no direct connection with social relations,
although they have a broad-ranging effect on social relations.

### Charitable Behavior in Social Relations

The second type of charity is direct charitable behavior towards certain
individuals or Muslims in general. This type of charity represents the
basic pillar that helps perfect social relations. It also presents love
and affection as being the actual purpose behind building good social
relations.

It is the most powerful and effective means of gaining affection and
love, evading social problems, and diminishing negative reactions in
social relations. Finally, it is an image of the high moral standard of
man. All these features are visible in traditions that stress the
significance of doing good towards others.

For instance, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِصْنَعِ الْمَعْرُوفَ إِلَى مَنْ هُوَ أَهْلُهُ وَإِلَى مَنْ لَيْسَ
مِنْ أَهْلِهِ، فَإِنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ هُوَ أَهْلَهُ فَكُنْ أَنْتَ مِنْ
أَهْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do favor to those who deserve it and those who do not, because if they
do not deserve it, you are worthy of doing it.*[^30]

He (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِصْنَعُوا الْمَعْرُوفَ إِلَى كُلِّ أَحَدٍ، فَإِنْ كَانَ أَهْلَهُ
وَإِلاَّ فَأَنْتَ أَهْلُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do favors to everybody. Even if they do not deserve them, you are
worthy of doing them.*[^31]

### Doing Good to Oneself

In order to maintain equilibrium in this respect, Islam has rendered
doing good to others as doing good to oneself. Hence, Almighty Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ أَحْسَنْتُمْ أَحْسَنْتُمْ لِأَنْفُسِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If you do good, you will do good for your own souls, and if you do
evil, it shall be for your own souls also. (17:7)***

In view of this, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) did not only instruct their
followers to do good and behave charitably. They asked their followers
to *precede all others* in charity in such a way that the principle of
conceding one’s right and treating others kindly would become one of the
social duties incumbent on true Muslims, as it raises one towards
self-perfection and, at the same time, contributes to social perfection.

In this respect, Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ خَالَطْتَ فَإِنِ اسْتَطَعْتَ أَنْ تَكُونَ يَدُكَ الْعُلْيَا
عَلَيْهِمْ فَافْعَلْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If you can take the lead among those with whom you associate, then do
it.*[^32]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي قَوْلِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: (إِنَّا نَرَاكَ مِنَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ)
قَالَ: كَانَ يُوسِعُ الْمَجْلِسَ وَيَسْتَقْرِضُ لِلْمُحْتَاجِ
وَيُعِينُ الضَّعِيفَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Regarding the holy verse,* ***“Surely, we see you to be of the doers of
good. (12:36)”*** *He (i.e. Prophet Joseph (‘a)) was described thus
because he used to make room in his assemblies for those who had just
joined them, borrow money to give to the needy, and help the weak.*[^33]

Good Example and Unique Behavior
--------------------------------

The sixth rule of social relations is to be perfect examples of social
behavior. This basic pillar builds excellent social relations and leads
people to perfection. It is, moreover, the best means of teaching others
ethical behavior.‌[^34]‌

The Holy Imams (‘a) ordered their followers to commit to this principle
and play a vital role in persuading Muslims to emulate them.

Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported, through an authentic chain of authority,
that Safwan ibn Yahya reported Abu-Usamah Zayd al-Shahham as saying that
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إقْرَأْ عَلَى مَنْ تَرَى أَنَّهُ يُطِيعُنِي مِنْهُمْ وَيَأْخُذُ
بِقَوْلِي السَّلاَمَ، وَأُوصِيكُمْ بِتَقْوَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ،
وَالْوَرَعَ فِي دِينِكُمْ، وَالاجْتِهَادَ للهِ، وَصِدْقَ الْحَدِيثِ،
وَأَدَاءَ الأَمَانَةِ، وَطُولَ السُّجُودِ، وَحُسْنَ الْجِوَارِ.
فَبِهَذَا جَاءَ مُحَمَّدٌ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ؛
كَانَ يَأْمُرُ بِأَدَاءِ الْخَيْطِ وَالْمَخِيطِ. صِلُوا عَشَائِرَكُمْ،
وَاشْهَدُوا جَنَائِزَهُمْ، وَعُودُوا مَرْضَاهُمْ، وَأَدُّوا
حُقُوقَهُمْ؛ فَإنَّ الرَّجُلَ مِنْكُمْ إذَا وَرِعَ فِي دِينِهِ
وَصَدَقَ الْحَدِيثَ وَأَدَّى الأَمَانَةَ وَحَسَّنَ خُلُقَهُ مَعَ
النَّاسِ قِيلَ هَذَا جَعْفَرِيٌّ، فَيَسُرُّنِي ذَلِكَ وَيَدْخُلُ
عَلَيَّ مِنْهُ السُّرُورَ، وَقِيلَ هَذَا أَدَبُ جَعْفَرٍ. وَاللهِ
لَحَدَّثَنِي أَبِي عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ أَنَّ الرَّجُلَ كَانَ يَكُونُ
فِي القَبِيلَةِ مِنْ شِيعَةِ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَيَكُونُ
زَيْنَهَا، آدَاهُمْ لِلأَمَانَةِ، وَأَقْضَاهُمْ لِلْحُقُوقِ،
وَأَصْدَقَهُمْ لِلْحَدِيثِ، إلَيْهِ وَصَايَاهُمْ وَوَدَائِعُهُمْ،
تُسْأَلُ الْعَشِيرَةُ عَنْهُ فَتَقُولُ: مَنْ مِثْلُ فُلانٍ؟ إنَّهُ
آدَانَا لِلأَمَانَةِ وَأَصْدَقُنَا لِلْحَدِيثِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Deliver my greetings to every one whom you consider to be obeying me
and following my orders. (Say to them): I advise you to fear Almighty
Allah, to act piously with regard to the affairs of your religion, to
work painstakingly for the sake of Almighty Allah, to be honest in
speech, to fulfill the trusts entrusted with you, to make prolonged
prostration before Almighty Allah, and to observe good neighborliness.
Verily, these are the traits with which Prophet Muhammad (S) came. You
should give back things with which you were entrusted to their owners,
be the owners righteous or dissolute. The Messenger of Allah (S) used to
order his followers to fulfill their trusts even if they were only a
thread and needle. Build good relationships with your clans, present
yourselves at their funeral processions, visit the sick among them, and
carry out your duties towards them.*

*Verily, if one of you shows piety in his religious affairs, speaks
nothing but the truth, and behaves politely towards the people, they
will refer to him as belonging to Ja’far and they will say that this is
the way Ja’far educates his followers. This thing will please me and
fill me with delight. If one does the opposite, it is I who will be
defamed and offended, since the people will then say that Ja’far has
trained his followers in this manner. I swear by Allah that my father
(‘a) told me that a (true) Shi’ite in a clan would be the best of its
individuals, the most trustworthy, the most observant of their rights,
and the most honest. The other individuals of that clan would always
keep their wills and trusts with him.1 When they would be asked about
him, they would answer that he was unmatched among them, since he was
the most trustworthy and the most honest.*[^35]

Kathir ibn ‘Alqamah has reported that he once asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
for advice. The Imam thus (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوصِيكَ بِتَقْوَى اللهِ وَالْوَرَعِ وَالْعِبَادَةِ وَطُولِ السُّجُودِ
وَأَدَاءِ الأَمَانَةِ وَصِدْقِ الْحَدِيثِ وَحُسْنِ الْجِوَارِ.
فَبِهَذَا جَاءَنَا مُحَمَّدٌ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ. صِلُوا
فِي عَشَائِرِكُمْ وَعُودُوا مَرْضَاكُمْ وَاشْهَدُوا جَنَائِزَكُمْ،
وَكُونُوا لَنَا زَيْناً وَلاَ تَكُونُوا عَلَيْنَا شَيْناً. حَبِّبُونَا
إِلَى النَّاسِ وَلاَ تُبَغِّضُونَا إِلَيْهِمْ، فَجُرُّوا إِلَيْنَا
كُلَّ مَوَدَّةٍ وَادْفَعُوا عَنَّا كُلَّ شَرٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I command you to fear Allah, relinquish prohibited acts, stick to
devotional acts, prostrate yourself as long as you can, fulfill trusts,
tell only truths, and treat your neighbor kindly. This is exactly what
has been brought to us by Muhammad—peace be upon him and his Household.
Build up good relations with the members of your tribes. Visit the sick
among them. Attend their funeral ceremonies. Represent us excellently
(before others) and do not create a bad opinion of us. Draw people to
fondness towards us and avert from us every evil…*[^36]

‘Abdullah ibn Abi-Ya’fur has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُونُوا دُعَاةً لِلنَّاسِ بِالْخَيْرِ بِغَيْرِ ألْسِنَتِكُمْ،
لِيَرَوْا مِنْكُمُ الإجْتِهَادَ وَالصِّدْقَ وَالْوَرَعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Act as heralds to goodness among the masses by other means than your
tongues (i.e. speech) so that they can become aware of your diligence,
honesty, and piety.*[^37]

According to another narration of the same purport, the Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُونُوا دُعَاةً لِلنَّاسِ بِالْخَيْرِ بِغَيْرِ ألْسِنَتِكُمْ،
لِيَرَوْا مِنْكُمُ الْوَرَعَ وَالإِجْتِهَادَ وَالصَّلاَةَ وَالْخَيْرَ،
فَإِنَّ ذَلِكَ دَاعِيَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Act as heralds to goodness among the masses by other means than your
tongues (i.e. speech) so that they can become aware of your abstention
(from violating Almighty Allah’s prohibitions), diligence, prayers, and
goodness. Verily, these things are heralds.*[^38]

By means of these rules and foundations, the Islamic concept of social
relations reaches perfection. It is significant that the five aspects of
social concept are based on a number of well-built foundations whose
elements and details will be cited in the coming section of this book:
the superstructure of the social relations system of Islam.

[^1]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:132, S. 1, H. 8.

[^2]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:286, S. 53, H. 1.

[^3]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:122, S. 1, H. 1.
Al-Sakuni related the following on the authority of Abu-’Abdullah
al-Sadiq (‘a): On seeing the armies returning from the battlefront, the
Holy Prophet (s) said, “Blessed are those who have performed the minor
jihad, and have yet to perform the major one.” When asked what the major
jihad was, the Holy Prophet replied, “It is the jihad of the self
(struggle against self).”

[^4]: ‌- Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 1:10, H. 1; al-Hurr al-’Amili,
Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:160, H. 1.

[^5]: ‌- Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Ilal al-Shara'i’ 1:4-5, H. 1; al-Hurr
al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:164, H. 2.

[^6]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:233, S. 37, H. 1.

[^7]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:233, S. 37, H. 3.

[^8]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11: 338, S. 77, H. 3.

[^9]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:338, S. 77, H. 1.

[^10]: ‌- Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:334, H. 22.

[^11]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:225, S. 34, H. 2.

[^12]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:225, S. 34, H. 5.

[^13]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:226, S. 34, H. 10.

[^14]: ‌- Nahj al-Balaghah, Letter No. 31.

[^15]: ‌- Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:146, H. 13.

[^16]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:433, H. 1.

[^17]: ‌- Refer to al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:503-539,
Chapter: Etiquettes of Association with People (Ahkam al-’Ishrah), S.
104, 121. In addition, sections 29 and 30 are also full of other
traditions demonstrating the importance of endearing oneself to others
and associating with them with forbearance.

[^18]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:503, S. 104, H. 1.

[^19]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:504, S. 104, H. 6.

[^20]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:504, S. 104, H. 4.

[^21]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:504, S. 104, H. 9.

[^22]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:505, S. 104, H. 15.

[^23]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:540, H. 1, S. 121.

[^24]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:540, S. 121, H. 5.

[^25]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:542, S. 121, H. 10.

[^26]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:435, H. 16; al-Barqi,
al-Mahasin 1:409, H. 930, published by the Ahl al-Bayt World Assembly.

[^27]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:435, H. 17; al-Barqi,
al-Mahasin 1:409, H. 931, published by the Ahl al-Bayt World Assembly.

[^28]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, 11:431, H. 3.

[^29]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, 11:431, H. 2.

[^30]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:528, S. 3, H. 1.

[^31]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:528, S. 3, H. 2.

[^32]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:401, S. 1, H. 1.

[^33]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:405, S. 4, H. 1.

[^34]: ‌- In an independent thesis, I have discussed the topic of
excellent example and its psychological and spiritual impacts, as well
as its constructive role in societies. I hope I would be able to publish
it in an independent book. Besides, in this series of books, I have
discussed the topic of excellent example on a number of occasions,
especially in the chapters on goals and particularities, and spiritual
and moral contents of building a virtuous community. It is therefore
pointless to repeat.

[^35]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:398 H. 2.

[^36]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:400, H. 8.

[^37]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:513, H. 1.

[^38]: ‌- Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:105, H. 10 & 2:78, H. 14.


