Chapter 1: Superstructure Of Various Aspects Social Relations
=============================================================

**Prelude**

**1. Openness and Social Responsibility**

**2. Reinforcement of Social Structure**

**3. Contents of Social Relations**

**4. Levels of Social Relations**

**5. Special Treatment**

Prelude
-------

The superstructure of social relations denotes the details of the system
of association as tackled by books of traditions (i.e. *hadith*). This
system is composed of a set of obligatory laws on social etiquette and
manners, deals with the various forms of association with others, and
presents the ideal and most accurate outline for building social
relations.

Islam has identified the aspects of this concept, outlined its
foundations and rules and established (S)

In the coming chapters, we will briefly discuss the details of this
concept and the relationship between these details and the two aspects
of the Islamic concept of social relations. The correlation between the
rules of the concept and its features on the one hand and the
superstructure or details, on the other, will be made unmistakably
clear.

However, details and demonstration of the outlines and elements of this
concept is left for my independent book that is dedicated to the Islamic
concept of social relations.[^1]

This section is composed of two chapters. The first chapter deals with
the superstructure, which confirms and clarifies different aspects of
social relations.

The second chapter deals with the superstructure of the rules and
foundations of the concept.

Discussion of details will follow the sequence adopted in the first
section of this book.

Aspect of Openness
------------------

### Additional Indications of Openness

With regard to openness in social relations, the traditions of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) demonstrate this aspect.

(1) Traditions emphasize exchanging greetings, because salutation is
often the key to building good social relations with others.

Through a valid chain of authority, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported Imam
al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يُحِبُّ إِفْشَاءَ السَّلاَمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Allah the Almighty and Majestic likes offering salutation.*[^2]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ التَّوَاضُعِ أَنْ تُسَلِّمَ عَلَى مَنْ لَقِيتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*To greet everyone you meet is a sort of modesty.*[^3]

Instructing Imam ‘Ali (‘a), the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَلاَثٌ كَفَّارَاتٌ: إِفْشَاءُ السَّلاَمِ، وَإِطْعَامُ الطَّعَامِ،
وَالصَّلاَةُ بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّاسُ نِيَامٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Three characteristics make amends for sins: (1) offering salutation,
(2) feeding the needy, (3) offering prayers at night when others are
asleep.*[^4]

(2) The Holy Imams (‘a) emphasized amity as a feature of true believers.
In other words, a true believer must build good relations with all
people and endear himself to them so that he is a well-liked person.
Naturally, such amity is achievable only through wide-ranging relations
and associations with others.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفْضَلُكُمْ أَحْسَنُكُمْ أَخْلاَقاً، الْمُوَطَّأُونَ أَكْنَافاً،
الَّذِينَ يَأْلَفُونَ وَيُؤْلَفُونَ، وَتُوطَأُ رِحَالُهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The best of you are those with the best manners, whose ‘sides are
generously prepared’,*[^5] *who have close relationships with people and
people have close relationships with them, and whose carpets are always
trodden.*[^6]

(3) Traditions have emphasized the forbidding of alienation and rupture
of relations between Muslims. Islam believes it is necessary to keep the
door wide open in social relations even if one party is unhappy. Things
forbidden in Islam have grave consequences.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ خَيْرِ فِي الْمُهَاجَرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There is no good in breaking away (from others).*[^7]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ مُؤْمِنَيْنِ اهْتَجَرَا فَوْقَ ثَلاَثٍ إِلاَّ وَبَرِئْتُ
مِنْهُمَا فِي الثَّالِثَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I will definitely disavow any pair of believers who forsake each other
for more than three days.*

He was asked, “The wronging party deserves this, but why does this
include the wronged party, too?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

> مَا بَالُ الْمَظْلُومِ لاَ يَصِيرُ إِلَى الظَّالِمِ فَيَقُولُ: \<أَنَا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الظَّالِمُ.\حَتَّى يَصْطَلِحَا؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Why did the wronged party not go to the wronging party and claim that
he was the wronging party so that they would make peace?*[^8]

Al-Qasim ibn al-Rabi’ has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), in
his instruction to al-Mufadhdhal, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَفْتَرِقُ رَجُلاَنِ عَلَى الْهِجْرَانِ إِلاَّ اسْتَوْجَبَ
أَحَدُهُمَا الْبَرَاءَةَ وَاللَّعْنَةَ، وَرُبَّمَا اسْتَحَقَّ ذَلِكَ
كِلاَهُمَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whenever two men leave one another and become estranged, one of them
must be worth disavowal and curse, and sometimes both parties are worthy
of it.*

Mu’attab said, “May Allah make me your sacrifice. One may curse the
wronging party, but why is the wronged party then cursed, too?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

> لأَِنَّهُ لاَ يَدْعُو أَخَاهُ إِلَى صِلَتِهِ، وَلاَ يَتَغَامَسُ لَهُ
> مِنْ كَلاَمِهِ. سَمِعْتُ أَبِي عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ يَقُولُ: إِذَا
> تَنَازَعَ اثْنَانِ فَعَازَّ أَحَدُهُمَا الآخَرُ فَلْيَرْجِعِ
> الْمَظْلُومُ إِلَى صَاحِبِهِ حَتَّى يَقُولَ لِصَاحِبِهِ: \<أَيْ أَخِي،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا الظَّالِمُ.\حَتَّى يَقْطَعَ الْهِجْرَانُ بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ
صَاحِبِهِ، فَإِنَّ اللهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى حَكَمٌ عَدْلٌ يَأْخُذُ
لِلْمَظْلُومِ مِنَ الظَّالِمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The wronged party may also be cursed because he does not call the other
party to reconcile…I heard my father saying, “If two (of our Shi’ah)
disagree with each other and one of them prevails over the other, the
wronged party should come to the other and confess that he was wrong, so
that their disagreement will come to an end. Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, is surely a fair Judge and will certainly judge for the benefit
of the wronged party.”*[^9]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has also reported on the authority of his father that
the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّمَا مُسْلِمَيْنِ تَهَاجَرَا فَمَكَثَا ثَلاَثاً لاَ يَصْطَلِحَانِ
إِلاَّ كَانَا خَارِجَيْنِ مِنَ الإِسْلاَمِ، وَلَمْ يَكُنْ بَيْنَهُمَا
وِلاَيَةٌ، فَأَيُّهُمَا سَبَقَ إِلَى كَلاَمِ أَخِيهِ كَانَ السَّابِقَ
إِلَى الْجَنَّةِ يَوْمَ الْحِسَابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, any two Muslims that become estranged and refrain from
reconciliation within three days will have certainly abandoned the
religion of Islam, and their brotherhood-in-faith will be canceled.
Hence, the party who precedes the other in making peace will also
precede the other in entering Paradise.*[^10]

(5) Traditions have also highlighted the necessity of accepting the
apologies of others. Hence, a true believer must accept the apology of
those who had caused him pain. This trait reflects the significance of
maintaining good social relations, blocking the door in the face of all
sorts of rupture of relations, and eradicating the traces of the causes
and effects of such dispute.

### Exceptions

Islam has determined a set of exceptions in this field so that this
concept is complete and the significance of openness emphasized.

In our discussion of the fourth aspect of the Islamic concept of social
relations, we referred to some of these exceptions under general social
relations. Hereinafter, we will refer to these exceptions generally by
summing them in the following four points:

#### (1) Avoidance of situations that cause one to lose one’s reputation

Relations with people with bad reputations and suspicion must be
avoided, because they injure the reputations of the person who wants to
build relations with them. Examples of such relations are the following:

A. Relationships that bring accusations of sinful behavior or committing
of illegal deeds, such as associations with certain women—and even
certain men and children, are the first example. The same is applicable
to associations with certain rich and luxury-loving people. Accusations
can arise from the origin, form, or nature of these relations. Some
traditions forbid such associations.

For instance, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported on the authority of his
fathers that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَلاَثَةٌ مُجَالَسَتُهُمْ تُمِيتُ الْقَلْبَ: الْجُلُوسُ مَعَ
الأَنْذَالِ، وَالْحَدِيثُ مَعَ النِّسَاءِ، وَالْجُلُوسُ مَعَ
الأَغْنِيَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Association with the following three categories of people desensitizes
hearts: (1) sitting with dishonest or unscrupulous people, (2) talking
to women, and (3) sitting with the rich.*[^11]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has also reported Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَرَّضَ نَفْسَهُ لِلتُّهْمَةِ فَلاَ يَلُومَنَّ مَنْ أَسَاءَ بِهِ
الظَّنَّ، وَمَنْ كَتَمَ سِرَّهُ كَانَتِ الْخِيَرَةُ فِي يَدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever engages himself in situations of accusation should not blame
those who have a bad idea about him. Whoever conceals his secrets will
have public decisions in his hand.*[^12]

Imam al-Ridha (‘a) is reported to have quoted Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِتَّقُوا مَوَاقِفَ الرَّيْبِ، وَلاَ يَقِفِنَّ أَحَدُكُمْ مَعَ أُمِّهِ
فِي الطَّرِيقِ، فَإِنَّهُ لَيْسَ كُلُّ أَحَدٍ يَعْرِفُهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Avoid situations that bring about ill reputation. Avoid stopping even
with your mothers in public places, because not everyone knows that this
woman is your mother.*[^13]

B. Another example is relations that arouse accusations of doctrinal,
ideological, or political deviation, such as accompanying, sitting with,
studying under, and receiving from people who are heretical or aberrant.
Some traditions warn against this.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَصْحَبُوا أَهْلَ الْبِدَعِ، وَلاَ تُجَالِسُوهُمْ فَتَكُونُوا
عِنْدَ النَّاسِ كَوَاحِدٍ مِنْهُمْ. وَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ: الْمَرْءُ عَلَى دِينِ خَلِيلِهِ
وَقَرِينِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not accompany heretics and do not participate in their sessions,
lest people equate you with them. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said,
“Man follows the religion of his friend and companion.”*[^14]

#### (2) Keeping away from wicked associates

It is advisable to keep away from wicked individuals known for
corruptive behavior. By accompanying such individuals, nothing is gained
except harm and grievance. Besides, one is influenced by the company one
keeps.

Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) is reported to have quoted
the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُنْظُرُوا مَنْ تُحَادِثُونَ، فَإِنَّهُ لَيْسَ مِنْ أَحَدٍ يَنْزِلُ
بِهِ الْمَوْتُ إِلاَّ مُثِّلَ لَهُ أَصْحَابُهُ إِلَى اللهِ، فَإِنْ
كَانُوا خِيَاراً فَخِيَاراً، وَإِنْ كَانُوا شِرَاراً فَشِرَاراً،
وَلَيْسَ أَحَدٌ يَمُوتُ إِلاَّ تُمُثِّلْتُ لَهُ عِنْدَ مَوْتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Inspect those with whom you exchange discourses. At the hour of death,
Almighty Allah will display everyone’s companions before him. If
righteous was their companion, they will be shown righteousness, but if
evil was their companion, they will be shown evil. At the hour of
everyone’s* *death, I will be shown to him, too.*[^15]

Imam al-Ridha (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ عِيسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ: إِنَّ صَاحِبَ الشَّرِّ يُعْدِي،
وَقَرِينُ السُّوءِ يُرْدِي، فَانْظُرْ مَنْ تُقَارِنُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Jesus (‘a) said: Truly, an evil companion infects and a wicked
associate leads to perdition. So, inspect those whom you keep company
with.*[^16]

On the other hand, associations with such corrupt individuals may be
acceptable when the purpose is to guide them to the truth or to achieve
a private legal interest that is intended for a worldly or religious
benefit.

Wicked associates mentioned in traditions by descriptions or qualities
are the following:

A. Those morally deviated from the path of religion, such as corrupt
(sinful) people, liars, those who break off family ties, stingy people,
cowards, and foolish people.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ أَمِيرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِذَا صَعِدَ الْمِنْبَرَ قَالَ: يَنْبَغِي
لِلْمُسْلِمِ أَنْ يَتَجَنَّبَ مُؤَاخَاةَ ثَلاَثَةٍ: الْمَاجِنِ
الْفَاجِرِ، وَالأَحْمَقِ، وَالْكَذَّابِ. فَأَمَّا الْمَاجِنُ
الْفَاجِرُ فَيُزَيِّنُ لَكَ فِعْلَهُ، وَيُحِبُّ أَنْ تَكُونَ مِثْلَهُ،
وَلاَ يُعِينُكَ عَلَى أَمْرِ دِينِكَ وَمَعَادِكَ، وَمُقَارَبَتُهُ
جَفَاءٌ وَقَسْوَةٌ، وَمَدْخَلُهُ وَمَخْرَجُهُ عَارٌ عَلَيْكَ. وَأَمَّا
الأَحْمَقُ فَإِنَّهُ لاَ يُشِيرُ عَلَيْكَ بِخَيْرٍ، وَلاَ يُرْجَى
لِصَرْفِ السُّوءِ عَنْكَ وَلَوْ أَجْهَدَ نَفْسَهُ، وَرُبَّمَا أَرَادَ
مَنْفَعَتَكَ فَضَرَّكَ، فَمَوْتُهُ خَيْرٌ مِنْ حَيَاتِهِ، وَسُكُوتُهُ
خَيْرٌ مِنْ نُطْقِهِ، وَبُعْدُهُ خَيْرٌ مِنْ قُرْبِهِ. وَأَمَّا
الْكَذَّابُ فَإِنَّهُ لاَ يُهْنِئُكَ مَعَهُ عَيْشٌ. يَنْقِلُ حَدِيثَكَ
وَيَنْقِلُ إِلَيْكَ الْحَدِيثَ. كُلَّمَا أَفْنَى أُحْدُوثَةً مَطَّهَا
بِأُخْرَى مِثْلِهَا، حَتَّى إِنَّهُ يُحَدِّثُ بِالصِّدْقِ فَمَا
يُصَدَّقُ، وَيُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ بِالْعَدَاوَةِ فَيُنْبِتُ
السَّخَائِمَ فِي الصُّدُورِ. فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَانْظُرُوا
لأَِنْفُسِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whenever he ascended the minbar (to deliver a speech), Imam ‘Ali (‘a)
would say, “A Muslim should avoid befriending three categories of
people: the sinful, the foolish, and the liars. The sinful shows you his
evil acts as good deeds, wants you to be like him, and does not assist
you in the affairs of your religion and your life to come. It is
offensive and arduous to befriend such an individual whose visit to you
brings you dishonor. The foolish can neither advise you nor save* *you
from any problem even if he does his best. Moreover, he may harm you
although he intends to benefit you. His death is better than his life,
his silence is better than his words, and his remoteness is better than
his closeness. The liar deprives you of any pleasurable association. He
tells others of your conduct and relates the conduct of others to you.
Whenever he finishes telling one lie, he invents another so much so that
even his true statements seem untrue. He sows enmity between people to
plant malice in their hearts. Fear Allah and consider your own
good.*[^17]

B. The socially ignoble and lowly, mentally and culturally retarded,
such as the insane, the idiot, the mean, the timorous, the vile, the
uncivilized, and the illegitimate.

‘Ammar ibn Musa has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) advised him saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَمَّارُ، إِنْ كُنْتَ تُحِبُّ أَنْ تَسْتَتِبَّ لَكَ النِّعْمَةُ،
وَتَكْمُلَ لَكَ الْمُرُوءَةُ، وَتَصْلُحَ لَكَ الْمَعِيشَةُ فَلاَ
تُشَارِكِ الْعَبِيدَ وَالسِّفْلَةَ فِي أَمْرِكَ، فَإِنَّهُمْ إِنِ
ائْتَمَنْتَهُمْ خَانُوكَ، وَإِنْ حَدَّثُوكَ كَذَبُوكَ، وَإِنْ نُكِبْتَ
خَذَلُوكَ، وَإِنْ وَعَدُوكَ أَخْلَفُوكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O ‘Ammar, if you want graces to be poured on you constantly, manliness
to be perfected for you, and livelihood to be stable for you, you must
not share your affairs with servants and the lowly. If you entrust them
with anything, they will betray you; if they speak to you, they will lie
to you; if you are exposed to a misfortune, they will let you down; and
if they promise you anything, they will fail to fulfill it.*

‘Ammar ibn Musa has also reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُبُّ الأَبْرَارِ لِلأَبْرَارِ ثَوَابٌ لِلأَبْرَارِ، وَحُبُّ
الْفُجَّارِ لِلأَبْرَارِ فَضِيلَةٌ لِلأَبْرَارِ، وَبُغْضُ الْفُجَّارِ
لِلأَبْرَارِ زَيْنٌ لِلأَبْرَارِ، وَبُغْضُ الأَبْرَارِ لِلْفُجَّارِ
خِزْيٌ عَلَى الْفُجَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The love of the righteous for the righteous is a reward for the
righteous. The love of the sinful for the righteous is a merit for the
righteous. The hatred of the sinful for the righteous is adornment for
the righteous. The hatred of the righteous for the sinful is disgrace
for the sinful.*[^18]

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَمْسَةٌ يُجْتَنَبُونَ عَلَى كُلِّ حَالٍ: الْمَجْذُومُ وَالأَبْرَصُ
وَالْمَجْنُونُ وَوِلْدُ الزِّنَى وَالأَعْرَابِيُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The following five categories of people must be avoided under all
circumstances: (1) the leprous, (2) the mycobacterial,*[^19] *(3) the
insane, (4) the illegitimately born, and (5) the uncivilized.*[^20]

#### (3) Keeping Away from Those of Forbidden Occupations

Traditions have also warned against associating with people who work in
forbidden occupations and corrupt jobs and mock at religious laws and
the manners of Islam, such as those mentioned in the following
traditions:

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported his fathers (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِتَّةٌ لاَ يُسَلَّمُ عَلَيْهِمْ: الْيَهُودِيُّ وَالنَّصْرَانِيُّ
وَالرَّجُلُ عَلَى غَائِطِهِ، وَعَلَى مَوَائِدِ الْخَمْرِ، وَعَلَى
الشَّاعِرِ الَّذِي يَقْذِفُ الْمُحْصَنَاتِ، وَعَلَى الْمُتَفَكِّهِينَ
بِسَبِّ الأُمَّهَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The following six categories of people must not be saluted: (1) the
Jews, (2) the Nazerites, (3) men while discharging excrement, (4) men
sitting at tables where wine is served, (5) poets who traduce honorable
women, and (6) those who mock the mothers of other people.*[^21]

Seemingly, salutation in the previous tradition means the traditional
salutation of Islam (i.e. *salam*). However, to salute these categories
of people with other forms of greetings (such as *good morning* and the
like) is permissible.

Similarly, al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah has reported Imam ‘Ali the Commander of
the Faithful (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِتَّةٌ لاَ يَنْبَغِي أَنْ يُسَلَّمَ عَلَيْهِمْ: الْيَهُودُ
وَالنَّصَارَى، وَأَصْحَابُ النَّرْدِ وَالشُّطْرَنْجِ، وَأَصْحَابُ
الْخَمْرِ وَالْبُرْبُطِ وَالطَّنْبُورِ، وَالْمُتَفَكِّهُونَ بِسَبِّ
الأُمَّهَاتِ، وَالشُّعَرَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The following six categories of people must not be saluted: (1) the
Jews and the Nazerites, (2) those playing backgammon and chess, (3)
those addicted to intoxicants, (4) those playing lutes and mandolins,
(4) those who mock the mothers of others, and (5) poets.*[^22]

Apparently, poets mentioned in the previous traditions are intended to
mean exclusively those who traduce honorable women or violate the
religious laws and regulations, such as poets who praise tyrannical
rulers and corrupt people. This exclusiveness is deduced from the Holy
Qur'an that reads:

> وَالشُّعَرَاءُ يَتَّبِعُهُمُ الْغَاوُونَ (224) أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّهُمْ
> فِي كُلِّ وَادٍ يَهِيمُونَ (225) وَأَنَّهُمْ يَقُولُونَ مَا لَا
> يَفْعَلُونَ (226) إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
> وَذَكَرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا وَانْتَصَرُوا مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا ظُلِمُوا
> وَسَيَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا أَيَّ مُنْقَلَبٍ يَنْقَلِبُونَ (227)

***As for poets, the erring people follow them. Have you not seen how
they stray in every valley? And, how they say that which they do not do,
save those who believe and do good works, and remember Allah much, and
vindicate themselves after they have been wronged. Those who do wrong
will come to know by what a great reverse they will be overturned.
(26:224-227)***

#### (4) Keeping Away from Those Afflicted by Infectious Diseases

Other traditions have warned against associating with those afflicted by
infectious diseases, as has been noticed in a previously mentioned
narration as well as the following one.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), in the famous tradition of prohibitions (*hadith
al-manahi*), is reported to has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَرِهَ أَنْ يُكَلِّمَ الرَّجُلُ مَجْذُوماً إِلاَّ أَنْ يَكُونَ
بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَهُ قَدْرَ ذِرَاعٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is recommended for men to speak to a leprous individual from a
distance of one arm between them.*

He (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فُرَّ مِنَ الْمَجْذُومِ فَرَارَكَ مِنَ الأَسَدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Flee from the leprous as you flee from a lion.*[^23]

Reinforcing the Social Structure
--------------------------------

At the level of reinforcing the social structure, we will notice a
number of principles and methods, in addition to the previously cited
ones, confirmed by Islam in general and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in
particular. These principles are as follows:

### Holding Meetings

Seeing it as one of the most favorable methods of strengthening the
construction of the virtuous community, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) established
organized meetings purposed to discuss religious and worldly affairs,
because such meetings produce numerous beneficial consequences in the
fields of religion, spirituality, and morality. These meetings were
regarded as motivation for drawing near to Almighty Allah and as a form
of invigorating the affairs of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in addition to being
opportunities to relax and beg for forgiveness for sins. The Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) expressed love for all such meetings and their wish to have
personally participated in them.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَزَاوَرُوا فَإِنَّ فِي زِيَارَتِكُمْ إِحْيَاءً لِقُلُوبِكُمْ،
وَذِكْراً لأَِحَادِيثِنَا، وَأَحَادِيثُنَا تُعَطِّفُ بَعْضَكُمْ عَلَى
بَعْضٍ، فَإِنْ أَخَذْتُمْ بِهَا رُشِدْتُمْ وَنَجَوْتُمْ، وَإِنْ
تَرَكْتُمُوهَا ضَلَلْتُمْ وَهَلَكْتُمْ، فَخُذُوا بِهَا وَأَنَا
بِنَجَاتِكُمْ زَعِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(I advise you to) exchange visits, for such visits activate your hearts
and make you mention our discourses. Verily, our discourses lead you to
sympathize with one another. If you apply them to yourselves, you will
be guided to the truth and you will be saved. However, if you abandon
them, you will then be misled and steered towards perdition. So, apply
our discourses and I guarantee your deliverance.‌*[^24]*‌*

In addition to the account of Shaykh al-Kulayni, reporting Maysir as
mentioned on page 46 there are other traditions, such as the following:

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا اجْتَمَعَ ثَلاَثَةٌ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ فَصَاعِداً إِلاَّ حَضَرَ
مِنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ مِثْلُهُمْ، فَإِنْ دَعَوْا بِخَيْرٍ أَمَّنُوا،
وَإِنِ اسْتَعَاذُوا مِنْ شَرٍّ دَعَوُا اللهَ لِيَصْرِفَهُ عَنْهُمْ،
وَإِنْ سَأَلُوا حَاجَةً شَفَعُوا إِلَى اللهِ وَسَأَلُوهُ قَضَاءَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whenever three or more faithful believers meet, angels of their same
number are surely present with them. When they (i.e. the believers)
pray, the angels support their prayers; when they seek* *Almighty
Allah’s protection against an evil, the angels pray to Him to ward off
that evil from them; and when they beseech Him for a request, the angels
intercede on their behalf and pray to Him to respond.‌*[^25]*‌*

Mu’attab, Imam al-Sadiq’s manumitted slave, has reported that he heard
his master saying to Dawud ibn Sarhan:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا دَاوُدُ، أَبْلِغْ مَوَالِيَّ عَنِّي السَّلاَمَ، وَإِنِّي أَقُولُ:
رَحِمَ اللهُ عَبْداً إجْتَمَعَ مَعَ آخَرَ فَتَذَاكَرَا أَمْرَنَا،
فَإِنَّ ثَالِثَهُمَا مَلَكٌ يَسْتَغْفِرُ لَهُمَا، وَمَا اجْتَمَعَ
اثْنَانِ عَلَى ذِكْرِنَا إِلاَّ بَاهَى اللهُ تَعَالَى بِهِمَا
الْمَلائِكَةَ، فَإِذَا اجْتَمَعْتُمْ فَاشْتَغِلُوا بِالذِّكْرِ،
فَإِنَّ فِي اجْتِمَاعِكُمْ وَمُذَاكَرَتِكُمْ إِحْيَاءَنَا، وَخَيْرُ
النَّاسِ بَعْدَنَا مَنْ ذَاكَرَ بِأَمْرِنَا وَدَعَا إِلَى ذِكْرِنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Dawud, convey my greetings to my adherents and tell them that I say:
May Allah have mercy upon a servant (of Him) who meets with another
servant and talks about us. Verily, the third of them will be an angel
imploring Almighty Allah to forgive them. Whenever two persons meet to
mention us, Almighty Allah will certainly praise them before the angels.
Hence, whenever you meet, you must engage in mentioning us. Verily, your
meetings and your mention of our affairs revives our Leadership. The
best of all people after us are those who exchange views about our
affairs and call others to mention us.*[^26]

Khaythamah has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبْلِغْ مَوَالِيَنَا السَّلاَمَ وَأَوْصِهِمْ بِتَقْوَى اللهِ
الْعَظِيمِ، وَأَنْ يَعُودَ غَنِيُّهُمْ عَلَى فَقِيرِهِمْ،
وَقَوِيُّهُمْ عَلَى ضَعِيفِهِمْ، وَأَنْ يَشْهَدَ حَيُّهُمْ جَنَازَةَ
مَيِّتِهِمْ، وَأَنْ يَتَلاَقَوْا فِي بُيُوتِهِمْ، فَإِنَّ فِي لِقَاءِ
بَعْضِهِمْ بَعْضاً حَيَاةً لأَِمْرِنَا. رَحِمَ اللهُ عَبْداً أَحْيَا
أَمْرَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Convey my compliments to my loyalists and advise them to show reverence
to Almighty Allah: the rich among them must help the poor, the powerful
must help the weak, the living must attend the funeral ceremonies of the
dead, and they must assemble at their homes, for such meetings keep our
issue alive. May Allah have mercy upon a servant who keeps our
Leadership alive.*[^27]

Shu’ayb al-’Aqarqufi has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
saying to his companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِتَّقُوا اللهَ وَكُونُوا إِخْوَةً بَرَرَةً مُتَحَابِّينَ فِي اللهِ،
مُتَوَاصِلِينَ مُتَرَاحِمِينَ. تَزَاوَرُوا وَتَلاَقَوْا وَتَذَاكَرُوا
أَمْرَنَا وَأَحْيُوهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Be in awe of Almighty Allah and be devout brethren-in-faith who love
each other for the sake of Almighty Allah, meet each other constantly,
and have mercy on one another. Always exchange visits, meet each other,
mention our Leadership, and keep it alive.*[^28]

### Sincerity in Dealing with Muslims

The Holy Imams (‘a) taught their followers to act sincerely towards
Muslims, to perform their duties towards them honestly, to advise them,
to accept their advice, and to thank them when they inform them of their
defects.

This principle is undoubtedly one of the most effective courses in
reinforcing relations among individuals and firming up an unshakable
foundation based on a sense of responsibility, mutual trust, and
exchanging opinions to reach the truth.

Moreover, these principles must be applied according to the principle of
wisdom and fair exhortation.[^29]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَجِبُ لِلْمُؤْمِنِ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِ أَنْ يُنَاصِحَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sincerity in treatment is a duty imposed upon a faithful believer
towards other faithful believers.*[^30]

He (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَجِبُ لِلْمُؤْمِنِ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِ النَّصِيحَةُ لَهُ فِي
الْمَشْهَدِ وَالْمَغِيبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is obligatory upon every faithful believer to deal with the other
faithful believers with sincerity, be they present or absent.*[^31]

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدِّينُ نَصِيحَةٌ… للهِ وَلِرَسُولِهِ وَلأَِئَمَّةِ الدِّينِ
وَلِجَماعَةِ الْمُسْلِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*True religiousness is to act sincerely…towards Almighty Allah, His
Messenger, the leaders of the religion, and the community of
Muslims.*[^32]

Abu’l-’Udays has reported that Imam al-Baqir (‘a) advised him saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا صَالِحُ، إِتَّبِعْ مَنْ يُبْكِيكَ وَهُوَ لَكَ نَاصِحٌ، وَلاَ
تَتَّبِعْ مَنْ يُضْحِكُكَ وَهُوَ لَكَ غَاشٌّ، وَسَتَرِدُونَ عَلَى
اللهِ جَمِيعاً فَتَعْلَمُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Salih, follow him who causes you to weep and acts towards you with
sincerity, but do not follow him who makes you laugh but is cheating
you. When you all will be gathered by Allah, you will be made to know
the truth.*[^33]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحَبُّ إِخْوَانِي إِلَيَّ مَنْ أَهْدَى إِلَيَّ عُيُوبِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The dearest of my friends to me is he who reveals my defects to
me.*[^34]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَسْتَغْنِي الْمُؤْمِنُ عَنْ خِصْلَةٍ وَبِهِ الْحَاجَةُ إِلَى
ثَلاَثِ خِصَالٍ: تَوْفِيقٍ مِنَ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، وَوَاعِظٍ مِنْ
نَفْسِهِ، وَقَبُولِ مَنْ يَنْصَحُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A faithful believer is not complete when in need of three
characteristics: (1) Divine aid, (2) self-exhortation, and (3)
acceptance of one who advises him.*[^35]

### Mutual compassion, sympathy, and visiting

The Holy Imams (‘a) ordered their followers to exchange feelings of
compassion, kindness, and closeness and to exchange visits, because the
emotional and spiritual aspects in building good social relations are
the most important elements in strengthening and establishing a firm
foundation for these relations.

The virtuous community that included the companions of the Holy Prophet
(S) are described in the Holy Qur'an as:

> أَشِدَّاءُ عَلَى الْكُفَّارِ رُحَمَاءُ بَيْنَهُمْ (29)

***…harsh against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves.
(48:29)***

> أَذِلَّةٍ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ (54)

***… humble towards the believers… (5:54)***

> وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتُ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْض (71)

***As for the believing men and the believing women, they are guardians
of each other. (9:71)***

An independent chapter has been dedicated to this principle in the book
of *Wasa'il al-Shi’ah*. Let us now refer to some traditions that
demonstrate this principle, reference to which has been made on various
occasions in the previous books of this series.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُسْلِمُ أَخُو الْمُسْلِمِ؛ لاَ يَظْلِمُهُ وَلاَ يَخْذُلُهُ وَلاَ
يَخُونُهُ. وَيَحِقُّ عَلَى الْمُسْلِمِينَ الإجْتِهَادُ فِي
التَّوَاصُلِ وَالتَّعَاقُدِ عَلَى التَّعَاطُفِ وَالْمُوَاسَاةُ
لأَِهْلِ الْحَاجَةِ وَتَعَاطُفِ بَعْضِهِمْ عَلَى بَعْضٍ حَتَّى
تَكُونُوا كَمَا أَمَرَكُمُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، رُحَمَاءَ بَيْنَكُمْ
مُتَرَاحِمِينَ مُغْتَمِّينَ لِمَا غَابَ عَنْكُمْ مِنْ أَمْرِهِمْ عَلَى
مَا مَضَى عَلَيْهِ مَعْشَرُ الأَنْصَارِ عَلَى عَهْدِ رَسُولِ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muslims are brothers to each other. They neither wrong, nor disappoint,
nor betray each other. The duties that are incumbent on Muslims towards
each other are to exert effort in communication, agree on mutual
sympathy, treat the needy as they treat themselves, and empathize with
one another. If you abide by this, you will be exactly as Almighty Allah
has ordered you to be; compassionate and merciful towards one another
and feeling regretful when missing any opportunity to help your
brethren-in-faith, just like the conduct of the Ansar during the
lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (S).*[^36]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحِمَ اللهُ امْرَأً أَلَّفَ بَيْنَ وَلِيَّيْنِ لَنَا. يَا مَعْشَرَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ، تَآلَفُوا وَتَعَاطَفُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*May Allah have mercy upon a person who reconciles two of our adherents.
O group of believers, adopt manners of affinity with each other and have
sympathy for each other.*[^37]

### Restoring Estranged Parties to Friendly Relations

Traditions reported from the Holy Imams (‘a) urge reconciliation and
describe it as even better than the performance of prayers and
observance of fasting in general. Other traditions have underscored the
significance and merits of conciliation, showing its great contribution
to solidifying and consolidating general social relations among people
and removing all barriers and differences that hinder concord and
harmony in societies.

In their books of practical laws, master jurisprudents have dedicated an
independent chapter to reconciliation (*Kitab al-Sulh*) in which they
mention in detail the traditions and laws on this topic.

According to a validly reported tradition, Imam ‘Ali the Commander of
the Faithful (‘a) and Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) are reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَئَنْ أُصْلِحَ بَيْنَ اثْنَيْنِ أَحَبُّ إِلَيَّ مِنْ أَنْ أَتَصَدَّقَ
بِدِينَارَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*To make peace between two estranged persons is more favorable to me
than to give two (golden) Dinars as alms.*[^38]

Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) is also reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَدَقَةٌ يُحِبُّهَا اللهُ إِصْلاَحٌ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ إِذَا تَفَاسَدُوا،
وَتَقَارُبٌ بَيْنَهُمْ إِذَا تَبَاعَدُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The alms that Almighty Allah prefers is reconciling estranged parties
and drawing close those who have been alienated from one another.*[^39]

In his final instructive will to his two sons (Imam Hasan and Imam
Husayn (‘a)), Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوصِيكُمَا وَجَمِيعَ وِلْدِي وَأَهْلِي وَمَنْ بَلَغَهُ كِتَابِي
بِتَقْوَى اللهِ وَنُظْمِ أَمْرِكُمْ وَصَلاَحِ ذَاتِ بَيْنِكُمْ،
فَإِنِّي سَمِعْتُ جَدَّكُمَا رَسُولَ اللهَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ يَقُولُ: صَلاَحُ ذَاتِ الْبَيْنِ أَفْضَلُ مِنْ عَامَّةِ
الصَّلاَةِ وَالصِّيَامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I advise you (both) and all my children and members of my family and
everyone whom my writing reaches to fear Allah, to keep your affairs in
order, and to maintain good relations among yourselves, for I have heard
your grandfather (the Holy Prophet (S)) saying, “Improvement of mutual
differences is better than general prayers and fasting.”*[^40]

Abu-Hanifah, the cameleer of pilgrims, has reported the following:

One day, my son-in-law and I were engaged in a dispute about inheritance
when al-Mufadhdhal (ibn ‘Umar) passed by us. He paused for a
considerable time and then invited us to his house. When we went there,
he reconciled us by giving us four hundred Dirhams from his own money.
When both of us gave him our word that we would not continue our
dispute, al-Mufadhdhal said, “In fact, these Dirhams are not from my
personal fortune; rather, Abu-’Abdullah (Imam al-Sadiq) (‘a) ordered me
to reconcile any two of our faith whom I would see disputing about a
matter.”[^41]

In addition, although telling lies is one of the gravest forbidden acts,
the Holy Legislator has permitted it in peacemaking and disallowed
telling the truth if it would cause alienation between disputing
believers.

Hence, telling lies may be permitted when it is intended to restore two
believing parties to friendly relations with one another or to dissolve
their differences and disputations. However, telling lies in such
situations is contingent upon certain stipulations and circumstances.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported on the authority of his fathers that the
Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَلاَثَةٌ يَحْسُنُ فِيهِنَّ الْكَذِبُ: الْمَكِيدَةُ فِي الْحَرْبِ،
وَعِدَتُكَ زَوْجَتَكَ، وَالإِصْلاَحُ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ، وَثَلاَثَةٌ
يَقْبُحُ فِيهِنَّ الصِّدْقُ: النَّمِيمَةُ، وَإِخْبَارُكَ الرَّجُلَ
عَنْ أَهْلِهِ بِمَا يَكْرَهُهُ، وَتَكْذِيبُكَ الرَّجُلَ عَنِ
الْخَبَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Telling a lie is acceptable only in three situations: as a stratagem of
battle, when making promises to one’s wife, and for restoring friendly
relations among people. Telling the truth is reproached in three
situations: when the truth is malicious, when informing a husband about
what he would not like to hear about his wife, and when denouncing a
person’s news to be a lie.*[^42]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْكَلاَمُ ثَلاَثَةٌ: صِدْقٌ، وَكَذِبٌ، وَإِصْلاَحٌ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ.
تَسْمَعُ مِنَ الرَّجُلِ كَلاَماً يَبْلُغُهُ فَتُخَبِّثُ نَفْسَهُ
فَتَقُولُ: سَمِعْتُ مِنْ فُلاَنٍ قَالَ فِيكَ مِنَ الْخَيْرِ كَذَا
وَكَذَا خِلاَفَ مَا سِمَعْتَهُ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Speech is of three categories: telling the truth, telling lies, and
reconciliation between people…which means that if you hear some words
from a party that may enrage the another party, you should inform the
other party of the opposite of these evil words.*[^43]

### Respect of Neighbors and Consolidation of the Social Structure

The traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) continually emphasize respecting
one’s neighbors and treating them as special, since this principle plays
a vital role in reinforcing the structure of society. There are two
natural types of relationships: one of them is with neighbors and the
other, which is more important, is with family. As a general and
practical rule, the more neighbors cooperate with each other the more
comfortable, stable, and secure the entire society becomes.

### Preventive Procedures

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) advised taking a number of practical, preventive
measures to reinforce social relations, including the following:

#### A. Avoid incurring the rancor, animosity, malevolence, disputation, and detestation of people

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَتَانِي جَبْرَئِيلُ قَطُّ إِلاَّ وَعَظَنِي، فَآخِرُ قَوْلِهِ لِي:
إِيَّاكَ وَمُشَارَّةَ النَّاسِ، فَإِنَّهَا تَكْشِفُ الْعَوْرَةَ
وَتَذْهَبُ بِالْعِزِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Every time (Archangel) Gabriel came to me, he would exhort me. The last
thing he said to me was the following: Beware of incurring the hostility
of people, because this will unveil the hidden and remove dignity.*[^44]

The Holy Prophet (S) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ إِنَّ فِي التَّبَاغُضِ الْحَالِقَةَ. لاَ أَعْنِي حَالِقَةَ
الشَّعْرِ، وَلَكِنْ حَالِقَةَ الدِّينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Most certainly, provoking the disrespect of people is the genuine
shaver. It does not shave the hair, but the faith.*[^45]

#### B. Responding to greetings and salutations, replying to messages and letters and exchanging letters as a substitute of visits and meetings

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَدُّ جَوَابِ الْكِتَابِ وَاجِبٌ كَوُجُوبِ رَدِّ السَّلاَمِ،
وَالْبَادِي بِالسَّلاَمِ أَوْلَى بِاللهِ وَبِرَسُولِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Replying to messages is as obligatory as responding to greetings and
salutations. He who takes the initiative of offering salutation is more
favorable in the view of Almighty Allah and His Messenger.*[^46]

He (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّوَاصُلُ بَيْنِ الإِخْوَانِ فِي الْحَضَرِ التَّزَاوُرُ، وَفِي
السَّفَرِ التَّكَاتُبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In homelands, exchanging visits is a means of association. In travel,
correspondence is the means of association.*[^47]

#### C. Fulfilling promises, even if it takes a whole year

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَانَ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ فَلْيَفِ إِذَا وَعَدَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who believes in Almighty Allah and in the Day of Resurrection must
fulfill his promise.*[^48]

#### D. Specific restrictions while choosing trustworthy friends

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّدَاقَةُ مَحْدُودَةٌ، فَمَنْ لَمْ تَكُنْ فِيهِ تِلْكَ الْحُدُودُ
فَلاَ تَنْسِبْهُ إِلَى كَمَالِ الصَّدَاقَةِ، وَمَنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ فِيهِ
شَيْءٌ مِنْ تِلْكَ الْحُدُودِ فَلاَ تَنْسِبْهُ إِلَى الصَّدَاقَةِ.
أَوَّلُهَا أَنْ تَكُونَ سَرِيرَتُهُ وَعَلاَنِيَتُهُ لَكَ وَاحِدَةٌ،
وَالثَّانِيَةُ أَنْ يَرَى زَيْنَكَ زَيْنَهُ، وَشَيْنَكَ شَيْنَهُ،
وَالثَّالِثَةُ أَنْ لاَ يُغَيِّرَهُ عَنْكَ مَالٌ وَلاَ وِلاَيَةٌ،
وَالرَّابِعَةُ أَنْ لاَ يَمْنَعَكَ شَيْئاً مِمَّا تَصِلُ إِلَيْهِ
مَقْدِرَتُهُ، وَالْخَامِسَةُ أَنْ لاَ يُسَلِّمَكَ عِنْدَ النَّكَبَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Friendship is restricted to certain qualifications. Whoever does not
have these qualifications completely cannot be a perfect friend, and
whoever lacks all of these qualifications cannot be a friend. The first
of these qualifications is that the friend’s inward and outward
appearances must be the same. The second is that he must consider that
which benefits his friend is also to his own benefit and that which
harms his friend is harmful for him, also. The third is that neither
wealth nor position must cause him to change his relationship with his
friend. The fourth is that he must not prevent his friend from enjoying
anything that is under his control. The fifth is that he must not let
his friend down in misfortunes.*[^49]

#### E. Maintenance of equilibrium in relations

In the coming discussion of control over passions, we will mention some
traditions recommending maintenance of equilibrium in social relations
so that mutual decorum and respect remains intact and relations do not
disintegrate. For example, confiding excessively in one another can lead
to disappointment on both sides. Additional instructions and
recommendations come under the title of ‘Laws of Social Association.

### Consultation: Restrictions and Outcomes

It is necessary to mention the subject of consultation and display some
of its laws, limits, and outcomes because consultation is a significant
foundation of social structure and an important goal of social
relations.

#### Significance of Consultation

Islam and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have imparted a special significance to
the question of consultation in their concept of government‌[^50]‌ and
social relations.

In his book of *al-Mahasin*, al-Barqi has reported that Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُشَاوَرَةُ الْعَاقِلِ النَّاصِحِ رُشْدٌ وَيُمْنٌ وَتَوْفِيقٌ مِنَ
اللهِ، فَإِذَا أَشَارَ عَلَيْكَ النَّاصِحُ الْعَاقِلُ فَإِيَّاكَ
وَالْخِلاَفَ فَإِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ الْعَطَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Seeking the counsel of the reasonable well-wisher is a sign of
judiciousness, being blessed, and guidance to success by Almighty Allah;
so, if a reasonable, well-wishing man gives you any advice, beware of
defiance lest you come upon destruction.‌*[^51]*‌*

According to another narration also cited in the previous book, Imam
al-Baqir is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي التَّوْرَاةِ أَرْبَعَةُ أَسْطُرٍ: مَنْ لاَ يَسْتَشِرْ يَنْدَمْ،
وَالْفَقْرُ الْمَوْتُ الأَكْبَرُ، وَكَمَا تَدِينُ تُدَانُ، وَمَنْ
مَلَكَ اسْتَأْثَرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In the Torah are the following four lines (of wisdom): He who does not
seek the advice of others will surely regret. Poverty is the greatest
death. If you subjugate, you will surely be subjugated. He who holds a
position of leadership will surely act arbitrarily.‌*[^52]*‌*

Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإسْتِشَارَةُ عَيْنُ الْهِدَايَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Consultation is the very core of true guidance.‌*[^53]*‌*

To acquaint ourselves with the significance of consultation, we shall
cite the following points that have been pointed out by the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a):

#### Power and Backing

Consultation is the best support for man in his activities and
advancement. It is therefore an actual reliable power in social
relations.

In this regard, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported that the Holy Prophet
(S) instructed Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ فَقْرَ أَشَدُّ مِنَ الْجَهْلِ وَلاَ مَالَ أَعْوَدُ مِنَ الْعَقْلِ
وَلاَ وِحْدَةَ أَوْحَشُ مِنَ الْعُجْبِ وَلاَ مُظَاهَرَةَ أَحْسَنُ مِنَ
الْمُشَاوَرَةِ وَلاَ عَقْلَ كَالتَّدْبِيرِ وَلاَ حَسَبَ كَحُسْنِ
الْخُلُقِ وَلاَ عِبَادَةَ كَالتَّفَكُّرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No poverty is harsher than ignorance, no fortune better than the
intellect, no loneliness drearier than pride, no victory like
counseling, no intellect like moderation, no lineage like good manners,
and no worship like pondering (over things).‌*[^54]*‌*

Confirming this fact, Imam ‘Ali the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ غِنَى كَالْعَقْلِ، وَلاَ فَقْرَ كَالْجَهْلِ، وَلاَ مِيرَاثَ
كالأَدَبِ، وَلاَ ظَهِيرَ كَالْمُشَاوَرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No wealth is comparable to intelligence, no poverty comparable to
ignorance, no heritage comparable to good manners, and no support
comparable to consultation.‌*[^55]*‌*

#### Determination and Perseverance

Consultation reflects resolve and determination because one who counsels
with others naturally feels tranquil, steadfast, and eager to do the act
for which he has sought consultation.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported on the authority of his fathers (‘a)
that the Holy Prophet (S) was once asked to define perseverance. He
answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُشَاوَرَةُ ذَوِي الرَّأْيِ وَاتِّبَاعُهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Perseverance is to consult with the judicious people and then follow
their advice.*

### The Best Way to Understand Reality

Consultation is the best way to get to know reality and truth. Through
consultation, man gains insight into reality. The objective, unbiased,
selfless opinions of experienced people make him adopt a certain view,
position, or action.

Traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) stress this fact. For instance, Imam
‘Ali (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنِ اسْتَبَدَّ بِرَأْيِهِ هَلَكَ، وَمَنْ شَاوَرَ الرِّجَالَ
شَارَكَهَا فِي عُقُولِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who acts solely according to his own opinion will be ruined, and he
who consults other people shares in their understanding.‌*[^56]*‌*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإسْتِشَارَةُ عَيْنُ الْهِدَايَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Consultation is the very core of true guidance.‌*[^57]*‌*

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِسْتَشِرِ الْعَاقِلَ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ الْوَرِعَ فَإِنَّهُ لاَ يَأْمُرُ
إِلاَّ بِخَيْرٍ، وَإِيَّاكَ وَالْخِلاَفَ فَإِنَّ مُخَالَفَةَ الْوَرِعِ
الْعَاقِلِ مَفْسَدَةٌ فِي الدِّينِ وَالدُّنْيَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Seek the advice of the reasonable and pious men, because they order you
to good. Beware of defying them, because to defy reasonable and pious
men brings about corruption in religious and worldly affairs.‌*[^58]*‌*

Teaching Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah to seek consultation and take
advantage of the opinions of reasonable people in order to attain the
truth and arrive at the most apposite solution, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is
reported to have said the following in his instructive words to his son:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُضْمُمْ آرَاءَ الرِّجَالِ بَعْضَهَا إِلَى بَعْضٍ، ثُمَّ اخْتَرْ
أَقْرَبَهَا مِنَ الصَّوَابِ، وَأَبْعَدَهَا مِنَ الإرْتِيَابِ. قَدْ
خَاطَرَ بِنَفْسِهِ مَنِ اسْتَغْنَى بِرَأْيِهِ، وَمَنِ اسْتَقْبَلَ
وُجُوهَ الآرَاءِ عَرِفَ مَوَاقِعَ الْخَطَأِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Compare different opinions of men with each other and then choose the
one closest to reality and remotest from suspicion… He who depends
solely upon his opinion takes risks, and he who receives different
opinions will certainly learn to recognize erroneous ways.‌*[^59]*‌*

### Characteristics of Advisers

According to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), persons whose advice is sought and
opinions considered must be:

• Religious, pious, devout, and God-fearing

• Sincere in advising

• Wise and experienced

• Able to keep a confidence

• Moderate in personal moral standards (i.e., not characterized by
stinginess, cowardice, or avarice)

• Upright in social circumstances

• Moderate in emotion‌[^60]‌

Let us now cite a set of traditions mentioning the characteristics of
advisers:

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسْتَشِيرُوا فِي أَمْرِكُمُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In your affairs, seek the advice of those who fear their
Lord.‌*[^61]*‌*

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَاوِرْ فِي حَدِيثِكَ الَّذِينَ يَخَافُونَ اللهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In your affairs, seek the advice of those who fear Allah.‌*[^62]*‌*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يَمْنَعُ أَحَدَكُمْ إِذَا وَرَدَ عَلَيْهِ مَا لاَ قِبَلَ لَهُ بِهِ
أَنْ يَسْتَشِيرَ رَجُلاً عَاقِلاً لَهُ دِينٌ وَوَرَعٌ؟ أَمَا إِنَّهُ
إِذَا فَعَلَ ذَلِكَ لَمْ يَخْذِلْهُ اللهُ، بَلْ يَرْفَعُهُ اللهُ،
وَرَمَاهُ بِخَيْرِ الأُمُورِ وَأَقْرَبِهَا إِلَى اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What prevents you, when you encounter an unbearable problem, from
counseling with a wise, religious and pious man? If you do so, Almighty
Allah will never disappoint you, but will raise you and lead you to the
best solution and the one closest to Him.‌*[^63]*‌*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمَشُورَةَ لاَ تَكُونُ إِلاَّ بِحُدُودِهَا، فَمَنْ عَرَفَهَا
بِحُدُودِهَا وَإِلاَّ كَانَتْ مَضَرَّتُهَا عَلَى الْمُسْتَشِيرِ
أَكْثَرَ مِنْ مَنْفَعَتِهَا لَهُ. فَأَوَّلُهَا أَنْ يَكُونَ الَّذِي
تُشَاوِرُهُ عَاقِلاً، وَالثَّانِيَةُ أَنْ يَكُونَ حُرّاً مُتَدَيِّناً،
وَالثَّالِثَةُ أَنْ يَكُونَ صَدِيقاً مُؤَاخِياً، وَالرَّابِعَةُ أَنْ
تُطْلِعَهُ عَلَى سِرِّكَ فَيَكُونُ عِلْمُهُ بِهِ كَعِلْمِكَ
بِنَفْسِكَ، ثُمَّ يُسِرُّ ذَلِكَ وَيَكْتُمُهُ. فَإِنَّهُ إِذَا كَانَ
عَاقِلاً إنْتَفَعْتَ بِمَشُورَتِهِ، وَإِذَا كَانَ حُرّاً مُتَدَيِّناً
جَهَدَ نَفْسَهُ فِي النَّصِيحَةِ لَكَ، وَإِذَا كَانَ صَدِيقاً
مُؤَاخِياً كَتَمَ سِرَّكَ إِذَا أَطْلَعْتَهُ عَلَيْهِ، وَإِذَا
أَطْلَعْتَهُ عَلَى سِرِّكَ فَكَانَ عِلْمُهُ بِهِ كَعِلْمِكَ بِهِ
تَمَّتِ الْمَشُورَةُ وَكَمُلَتِ النَّصِيحَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Actually, seeking advice must be within limits, so if one ignores (or
violates) these limits, the harm will be more than the benefit. The
first of these limits is that the consultant must be wise. The second is
that he must be honorable and religious. The third is that he must be a
brotherly friend. The fourth is that when you tell him about your
secret, he must know it exactly as you know it and then he must keep it
in confidence. If the consultant is wise, you will then benefit from his
advice. If he is honorable and religious, he will make all possible
efforts to give you the best advice. If he is a brotherly friend, then
he will conceal your secret after you reveal it to him. If he knows your
situation well, then he will give perfect counsel and advice.‌*[^64]*‌*

Imam al-Ridha (‘a) has reported on the authority of his fathers that
Imam ‘Ali (‘a) quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُشَاوِرَنَّ جَبَاناً فَإِنَّهُ يُضَيِّقُ عَلَيْكَ الْمَخْرَجَ،
وَلاَ تُشَاوِرَنَّ بَخِيلاً فَإِنَّهُ يُقَصِّرُ بِكَ عَنْ غَايَتِكَ،
وَلاَ تُشَاوِرَنَّ حَرِيصاً فَإِنَّهُ يُزَيِّنُ لَكَ شَرَّهَا.
وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ الْجُبْنَ وَالْبُخْلَ وَالْحِرْصَ غَرِيزَةٌ
يَجْمَعُهَا سُوءُ الظَّنِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Never counsel with a coward because they narrow the possibilities in
your eyes. Never counsel with the niggardly because they hamper you from
attaining your goal. Never counsel with the greedy because they beautify
evil in your eyes. Be it known that cowardice, niggardliness, and greed
are inclinations that when gathered give a false idea about
things.‌*[^65]*‌*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported from his fathers that the Holy Prophet
(S) instructed Imam ‘Ali (‘a), saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عِلِيُّ، لَيْسَ عَلَى النِّسَاءِ جُمُعَةٌ. وَلاَ تُوَلَّى
الْقَضَاءَ، وَلاَ تُسْتَشَارُ. يَا عَلِيُّ، سُوءُ الْخُلُقِ شُؤْمٌ،
وَطَاعَةُ الْمَرْأَةِ نَدَامَةٌ. يَا عَلِيُّ، إِنْ كَانَ الشُّؤْمُ فِي
شَيْءٍ فَفِي لِسَانِ الْمَرْأَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O ‘Ali, women are not required to attend the Friday Congregational
Prayers…They must not hold the office of chief justice and their
guidance must not be sought. O ‘Ali, ill manners are inauspicious and
obedience to women brings remorse. O ‘Ali, if inauspiciousness is found
in something, it will be found on the tongues of women.‌*[^66]*‌*

According to another narration of a valid chain of authority, Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُعْصُوهُنَّ فِي الْمَعْرُوفِ قَبْلَ أَنْ يَأْمُرْنَكُمْ
بِالْمُنْكَرِ، وَتَعَوَّذُوا بِاللهِ مِنْ شِرَارِهِنَّ وَكُونُوا مِنْ
خِيَارِهِنَّ عَلَى حَذَرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not listen to women in right things lest they enjoin you to do wrong
things. Ask Allah’s protection against evil women and be cautious of the
good ones.‌*[^67]*‌*

### Duties of Advisers

The previous narration shows that it is imperative for an adviser to be
honest and sincere in giving advice and exert all possible effort to
guide towards the truth and actuality. A tradition holds that an adviser
is a trustee.‌[^68]‌

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنِ اسْتَشَارَ أَخَاهُ فَلَمْ يَنْصَحْهُ مَحْضَ الرَّأْيِ سَلَبَهُ
اللهُ رَأْيَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If one whose advice is sought by his brother-in-faith does not give the
best advice, Almighty Allah will deprive him of good reason.‌*[^69]*‌*

*In addition to honesty and sincerity, an adviser is required to conceal
the secrets of the advice-seeker, as is understood from the Holy Imam’s
statement, “An adviser is a trustee.”*

The previous discussion sufficiently proves that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
highlighted seeking advice in the field of social relations as being
most important.

Equality and Fraternity
-----------------------

These features can be clearly found in the various details of the system
of social relations. All these details indicate the fact that equality
and fraternity are genuine components for the establishment of social
relations with others.

Other details, including the following have been mentioned so far:

• reinforcing the social structure by holding meetings, exchanging
visits, and dealing with others sympathetically

• rules of commitment to social duties, forbearance, and courtesy in
particular

• fulfillment of trusts, testifying for or against others, presence in
funeral ceremonies, and visiting sick people

• forbidding killing of Muslims, seizure of their property, violation of
their chastity and family, entering homes or looking in them before
obtaining permission, safeguarding the chastity and dignity of all
Muslims

• prohibition of defamation of character, insulting, backbiting,
divulging secrets, imputing dishonor, wronging, disappointing,
ambushing, accusing, frightening, making charges, offending, cursing,
and scrutinizing the flaws of Muslims

• exchanging greetings and trying to be the first to greet, using kind
words, respecting, honoring, meeting others with a smile and good mien,
shaking hands, hugging, and kissing others as a sign of friendliness

Besides the above, Islam has also deemed it forbidden to greet the poor
in a way different from greeting the rich. In this regard, Imam al-Ridha
(‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لَقِيَ فَقِيراً مُسْلِماً فَسَلَّمَ عَلَيْهِ خِلاَفَ سَلاَمِهِ
عَلَى الْغَنِيِّ لَقِيَ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَهُوَ
عَلَيْهِ غَضْبَانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever meets a poor Muslim and greets him in a way different from
greeting a rich one, will find Almighty Allah angry with him when he
will meet Him on the Day of Resurrection.‌*[^70]*‌*

The prohibition against belittling faithful believers because they are
poor or humble is another indication of the significance of social
fraternity and equality. In this connection, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) reported
the Holy Prophet (S) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنِ اسْتَخَفَّ بِفَقِيرٍ مُسْلِمٍ فَقَدِ اسْتَخَفَّ بِحَقِّ اللهِ،
وَاللهُ يَسْتَخِفُّ بِهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ إِلاَّ أَنْ يَتُوبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who belittles a poor Muslim has in fact belittled Almighty Allah;
therefore, Almighty Allah will belittle him on the Day of Resurrection
unless he repents.‌*[^71]*‌*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنِ اسْتَذَلَّ مُؤْمِناً وَاحْتَقَرَهُ لِقِلَّةِ ذَاتِ يَدِهِ
وَلِفَقْرِهِ، شَهَرَهُ اللهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَلَى رُؤُوسِ
الْخَلاَئِقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever humiliates and demeans a believer because of his meagerness and
poverty, Almighty Allah shall expose him on the Day of Resurrection
before all creatures.‌*[^72]*‌*

Imam al-Ridha (‘a) reported on the authority of his fathers that the
Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَمْسٌ لاَ أَدَعُهُنَّ حَتَّى الْمَمَاتِ: الأَكْلُ عَلَى الْحَضِيضِ
مَعَ الْعَبِيدِ، وَرُكُوبِيَ الْحِمَارَ مُؤْكِفاً، وَحَلْبِي الْعَنْزَ
بِيَدِي، وَلَبْسُ الصُّوفِ، وَالتَّسْلِيمُ عَلَى الصِّبْيَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I will never abandon the following five as long as I am alive: eating
with the servants on the ground, riding beasts of burden unsaddled,
milking goats with my own hands, wearing woolen clothes, and offering
salutations to children.*[^73]*‌*

As has been already mentioned, Islam has deemed all Muslims equal to
each other, especially in the question of marriage. This is another
indication of the importance of equality and fraternity in Muslim
society.

Levels of Social Relations
--------------------------

Although the Islamic concept of social relations believes in equality in
the content of social relations, there are certain substantive social
reasons imposing different levels in social relations. These levels are
as follows:

***Relations of General Courtesy***

***Relations of General Association***

***Relations of Special Association***

### Relations of General Courtesy

Openness in relations, friendliness, forbearance, good association with
others, control over personal sentiments and emotions, charitable
behavior and taking the lead in goodness demonstrate a courteous
relationship with all individuals of society.

### Relations of General Association

Relations of necessity, or general association, mean the state of
association and companionship in various fields of life, such as earning
ones livelihood, traveling, dwelling, being neighbors, studying,
following a profession, etc. In such relations, man understands the
natural limits of relations so that he can benefit from the vital and
material advantages of life. Referring to this fact, the Holy Imam (‘a)
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّكَ تُصِيبُ مِنْهُمْ لَذَّتَكَ، فَلاَ تَقْطَعَنْ ذَلِكَ
مِنْهُمْ، وَلاَ تَطْلُبَنْ مَا وَرَاءَ ذَلِكَ مِنْ ضَمِيرِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Regarding the friends of necessity, you gain from them only your need;
therefore, you should not deprive them of their need. Do not ask them
for any other thing.*

In relations, it is required to exchange benefits and pleasures:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَابْذِلْ لَهُمْ مَا بَذَلُوا لَكَ مِنْ طَلاَقَةِ الْوَجْهِ
وَحَلاَوَةِ اللِّسَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Offer them a pleasant countenance and good words as long as they offer
you a pleasant countenance and good words.‌*[^74]*‌*

The details concerning this level of relations (relations of necessity)
can be found in laws regarding companionship on journeys and manners
with companions,‌[^75]‌ relations between employees and employers, the
etiquettes of teaching and learning, the etiquettes of attending
meetings, delivering speeches, and talking with others. In this area,
Islam instructs its followers to give seating to the newcomers, and to
stand up, show respect, and address others with their favorite names and
titles.

In this respect, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) reported the Holy Prophet (S) to
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَلاَثٌ يُصَفِّينَ وِدَّ الْمَرْءِ لأَِخِيهِ الْمُسْلِمِ: يَلْقَاهُ
بِالْبِشْرِ إِذَا لَقِيَهُ، وَيُوَسِّعُ لَهُ فِي الْمَجْلِسِ إِذَا
جَلَسَ إِلَيْهِ، وَيَدْعُوهُ بِأَحَبِّ الأَسْمَاءِ إِلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Three things will prove your friendship to your Muslim brother:
Welcoming him warmly, making room for him in meetings when he arrives,
and calling him by his dearest names.‌*[^76]*‌*

Reported by Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) too, the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا أَحَبَّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَخَاهُ الْمُسْلِمَ فَلْيَسْأَلْهُ عَنِ
اسْمِهِ وَاسْمِ أَبِيهِ وَاسْمِ قَبِيلَتِهِ وَعَشِيرَتِهِ، فَإِنَّ
مِنْ حَقِّهِ الْوَاجِبِ وَصِدْقِ الإِخَاءِ أَنْ يَسْأَلَهُ عَنْ
ذَلِكَ، وَإِلاَّ فَإِِنَّهَا مَعْرِفَةُ حُمْقٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If one of you loves his Muslim brother, he must ask him his name, his
father’s name, and his tribe’s name, because this is one of the duties
towards one’s brother-in-faith and one of the features of true
fraternity. If you do not do this, your acquaintance will be
foolish.‌*[^77]*‌*

Islam has also set forth laws about private chatter in public sessions.
In this respect, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا كَانَ الْقَوْمُ ثَلاَثَةً فَلاَ يَتَنَاجَ مِنْهُمُ اثْنَانِ
دُونَ صَاحِبِهِمَا، فَإِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ مَا يُحْزِنُهُ وَيُؤْذِيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If there are three persons sitting together, two of them must not talk
to one another and leave out the third because this act saddens and
injures him.‌*[^78]*‌*

### Relations of Special Association

The highest level of relations is the level of reliance, which
represents the relations of true friendship and gives rise to certain
duties and rights.

This level of relations specifies the characteristics of true friends,
which include: good sense, piety, trustworthiness, keeping a confidence,
supportiveness, generosity, honesty, observance of duties in general and
prayers in particular, and sincerity in fraternal terms aimed at winning
Almighty Allah’s pleasure. The following traditions further amplify this
level of association:

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has quoted Imam ‘Ali (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ عَلَيْكَ أَنْ تَصْحَبَ ذَا الْعَقْلِ وَإِنْ لَمْ تُحْمَدْ
كَرَمَهُ، وَلَكِنِ انْتَفِعْ بِعَقْلِهِ، وَاحْتَرِسْ مِنْ سَيِّئِ
أَخْلاَقِهِ، وَلاَ تَدَعَنَّ صُحْبَةَ الْكَرِيمِ وَإِنْ لَمْ
تَنْتَفِعْ بِعَقْلِهِ، وَلَكِنِ انْتَفِعْ بِكَرَمِهِ بِعَقْلِكَ،
وَافْرُرْ كُلَّ الْفِرَارِ مِنَ اللَّئِيمِ الأَحْمَقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is not wrong on your part to accompany wise people even if you are
deprived of their generosity; in fact, you may benefit from their
wisdom, but beware of their ill manners. Do not forsake association with
the generous even if deprived of their good sense. You can use your good
sense to benefit from their generosity. Break away from idiots and
despicable people.‌*[^79]*‌*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكَ بِالتَّلاَدِ، وَإِيَّاكَ وَكُلَّ مُحَدِّثٍ لاَ عَهْدَ لَهُ
وَلاَ أَمَانَةَ وَلاَ ذِمَّةَ وَلاَ مِيثَاقَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Stand by old friends whom you have put to the test, and do not
associate with inexperienced persons who observe neither their promises,
nor trusts, nor covenants, nor pledges.‌*[^80]*‌*

Special Treatment
-----------------

We will restrict the following discussion to introducing a few examples
of special relations mentioned in the sections on the laws of
association, and other examples mentioned in the sections on the rules
and principles of social relations. These are comparatively limited, yet
explain the hypothetical concept of this topic.

### Invoking Blessings on the Holy Prophet (S) and his Household (‘a)

The topic of invoking Almighty Allah’s blessings on the Holy Prophet and
his Household (*salawat*) under all conditions and circumstances is one
obvious expression of this special treatment. In this connection, we
find that to begin any supplicatory prayer by invoking blessings upon
the Holy Prophet (S) and his Household (‘a) results in that supplication
receiving a response, because Almighty Allah never rejects a prayer that
is preceded by this invocation. Similarly, Almighty Allah, out of His
magnanimity, responds to any prayer ending with an invocation of His
blessings on the Holy Prophet (S) and his Household (‘a). This fact has
been reported from Imam ‘Ali (‘a) who says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا كَانَتْ لَكَ إِلَى اللهِ سُبْحَانَهُ حَاجَةٌ فَابْدَأْ
بِمَسْأَلَةِ الصَّلاَةِ عَلَى رَسُولِهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
ثُمَّ سَلْ حَاجَتَكَ، فَإِنَّ اللهَ أَكْرَمُ مِنْ أَنْ يُسْأَلَ
حَاجَتَيْنِ فَيَقْضِي إِحْدَاهُمَا وَيَمْنَعُ الأُخْرَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If you would like your request to be granted by Almighty Allah, you
must begin your prayer with invoking His blessings on His Messenger (S)
and then voice your request, because Almighty Allah is too generous to
respond to a request and reject the other when two requests are placed
before Him together.‌*[^81]*‌*

Likewise, it is advisable to attach the convention of praising Almighty
Allah immediately after sneezing‌[^82]‌ with invoking Almighty Allah’s
blessings on the Holy Prophet (S) and his Household (‘a). Moreover, it
is advisable to repeat this invocation of blessings under all
conditions, including private matters, as an expression of taking
interest in special treatment.

Ibn Abi-’Umayr has reported on the authority of one of his companions
that a man sneezed in the presence of Imam al-Baqir (‘a) and followed it
with expressing thanks to Almighty Allah. Nevertheless, the Imam (‘a)
did not address him with the conventional statement; rather, he said,
“This man has violated our right!” Explaining this issue, the Imam (‘a)
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا عَطَسَ أَحَدُكُمْ فَلْيَقُلْ: الْحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
وَصَلَّى اللهُ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَأَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When you sneeze, you must say: alhamdu lillahi rabbi al-’alamina wa
salla allahu ‘ala muhammadin wa ahlibaytihi (All praise be to Allah, the
Lord of the worlds. May Allah send blessings on Muhammad and his
Household).*

The sneezing man therefore repeated this statement and only then, the
Imam (‘a) addressed him with the conventional answer.‌[^83]‌

In his epistle to al-Ma'mun, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّلاَةُ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَاجِبَةٌ
فِي كُلِّ مَوْطِنٍ، وَعِنْدَ الْعُطَاسِ وَالذَّبَائِحِ وَغَيْرِ
ذَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Invocation of blessings on the Holy Prophet (S) is obligatory in all
situations including sneezing, slaughtering animals, and other
situations.‌*[^84]*‌*

### Kindness to the Holy Prophet’s Progeny

Many traditions have been reported from the Holy Prophet (S), on the
authority of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), confirming imparting a special
treatment to the Holy Prophet’s progeny, including the descendants of
Imam ‘Ali (‘a), by doing favors and being kind to them.

In this respect, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have quoted the Holy
Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ صَنَعَ إِلَى أَحَدٍ مِنْ أَهْلِ بَيْتِي يَداً كَافَأْتُهُ بِهِ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever does a favor to any member of my household, I will reward him
for it on the Day of Resurrection.‌*[^85]*‌*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا كَانَ يَوْمُ الْقِيَامَةِ نَادَى مُنَادٍ: أَيُّهَا الْخَلاَئِقُ،
أَنْصِتُوا فَإِنَّ مُحَمَّداً صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
يُكَلِّمُكُمْ. فَتُنْصِتُ الْخَلاَئِقُ، فَيَقُومُ النَّبِيُّ صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَيَقُولُ: يَا مَعْشَرَ الْخَلاَئِقِ، مَنْ
كَانَتْ لَهُ عِنْدِي يَدٌ أَوْ مِنَّةٌ أَوْ مَعْرُوفٌ فَلْيَقُمْ
حَتَّى أُكَافِئَهُ. فَيَقُولُونَ: بِآبَائِنَا وَأُمَّهَاتِنَا، وَأَيُّ
يَدٍ أَوْ أَيُّ مِنَّةٍ وَأَيُّ مَعْرُوفٍ لَنَا؟ بَلِ الْيَدُ
وَالْمِنَّةُ وَالْمَعْرُوفُ للهِ وَلِرَسُولِهِ عَلَى جَمِيعِ
الْخَلاَئِقِ. فَيَقُولُ لَهُمْ: بَلَى، مَنْ آوَى أَحَداً مِنْ أَهْلِ
بَيْتِي، أَوْ بَرَّهُمْ، أَوْ كَسَاهُمْ مِنْ عُرْيٍ، أَوْ أَشْبَعَ
جَائِعَهُمْ فَلْيَقُمْ حَتَّى أُكَافِئَهُ. فَيَقُومُ أُنَاسٌ قَدْ
فَعَلُوا ذَلِكَ. فَيَأْتِي النِّدَاءُ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللهِ تَعَالَى: يَا
مُحَمَّدُ يَا حَبِيبِي، قَدْ جَعَلْتُ مُكَافَأَتَهُمْ إِلَيْكَ،
فَأَسْكِنْهُمْ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ حَيْثُ شِئْتَ. فَيُسْكِنُهُمْ فِي
الْوَسِيلَةِ، حَيْثُ لاَ يُحْجَبُونَ عَنْ مُحَمَّدٍ وَأَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ
عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the Day of Resurrection, a caller will cry out, “Listen! Muhammad
(S) is talking to you.” As all creatures become silent, the Holy Prophet
(S) says, “O creatures, whoever of you has done any favor, act of
kindness, or undertaking for me, may now stand up so that I can reward
him for that.” The creatures will say, “May Allah accept our fathers and
mothers as ransom for you! What sort of favor, act of kindness, or
undertaking could we have done for you? All favors, kindness, and
undertakings are Allah’s and yours over all creatures.” The Holy Prophet
(S) will then say, “Yes, there are such! Anyone who has accommodated any
of my descendants, done an act of kindness to any of them, behaved
charitably towards any of them, provided clothing to any of them who was
destitute, or provided food to any of them who was hungry, may now stand
up so that I can reward him.” Upon hearing this, some who have done such
things in the worldly life will stand up. Then, a call from Almighty
Allah will come to declare, “O Muhammad, My dearest! I hand over
rewarding these people to you, so you are allowed to make them occupy
any place in Paradise that you wish.” The Holy Prophet (S) will then,
allow these people to dwell in an elevated position in Paradise called
al-Wasilah where they will not prevented from meeting the Holy Prophet
and his Household (‘a).‌*[^86]*‌*

Imam al-Ridha (‘a), on the authority of his fathers, has reported the
Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرْبَعَةٌ أَنَا لَهُمْ شَفِيعٌ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ: الْمُكْرِمُ
لِذُرِّيَّتِي مِنْ بَعْدِي، وَالْقَاضِي لَهُمْ حَوَائِجَهُمْ،
وَالسَّاعِي لَهُمْ فِي أُمُورِهِمْ عِنْدَمَا اضْطُرُّوا إِلَيْهِ،
وَالْمُحِبُّ لَهُمْ بِقَلْبِهِ وَلِسَانِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I will be the intercessor of four categories of people on the Day of
Resurrection: (1) those who respect my descendants after my passing
away, (2) those who satisfy the needs of my descendants, (3) those who
make every effort to handle their affairs when necessary, and (4) those
who love them sincerely in word and deed.‌*[^87]*‌*

Imam al-Baqir (‘a), on the authority of his fathers, has reported the
Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَرَادَ التَّوَسُّلَ إِلَيَّ وَأَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُ عِنْدِي يَدٌ
أَشْفَعُ لَهُ بِهَا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فَلْيَصِلْ أَهْلَ بَيْتِي
وَيُدْخِلِ السُّرُورَ عَلَيْهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever wishes to make me his agency (before Almighty Allah) and to
have an attribute for which I will intercede for him on the Day of
Resurrection, may closely commune with my progeny and provide them with
tranquility.‌*[^88]*‌*

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا كَانَ يَوْمُ الْقِيَامَةِ جَمَعَ اللهُ الأَوَّلِينَ
وَالآخِرِينَ، فَيُنَادِي مُنَادٍ: مَنْ كَانَتْ لَهُ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ
اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يَدٌ فَلْيَقُمْ. فَيَقُومُ عُنُقٌ
مِنَ النَّاسِ، فَيَقُولُ: مَا كَانَتْ أَيَادِيكُمْ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ
اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ؟ فَيَقُولُونَ: كُنَّا نَصِلُ
أَهْلَ بَيْتِهِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ. فَيُقَالُ لَهُمْ: إِذْهَبُوا فَطُوفُوا
فِي النَّاسِ، فَمَنْ كَانَتْ لَهُ عِنْدَكُمْ يَدٌ فَخُذُوا بِيَدِهِ
فَأَدْخِلُوهُ الْجَنَّةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the Day of Resurrection, a caller will cry out, “Anyone who has done
a favor for the Messenger of Allah (S) may stand up.” Some people will
stand up. The caller will ask them, “What favor have you done for the
Messenger of Allah (S)?” They will reply, “After him, we communed with
his progeny.” The progeny will then be told to go in the midst of the
people and take those who have done favors to them by the hand and lead
them to Paradise.‌*[^89]*‌*

### Old Men

Showing respect to old men is another form of special treatment in the
category of weak people. In this regard, ‘Abdullah ibn Sinan reported
that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ مِنْ إِجْلاَلِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إِجْلاَلَ الشَّيْخِ
الْكَبِيرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*To respect old men is a kind of respect for Allah, the
All-majestic.‌*[^90]*‌*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ مِنَّا مَنْ لَمْ يُوَقِّرْ كَبِيرَنَا وَيَرْحَمْ صَغِيرَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who does not respect our old men and does not show mercy toward our
youngsters is not one of us.‌*[^91]*‌*

### People of the Qur'an

Another form of special treatment is to show respect toward those versed
in the religion and its laws, conveyers of the message of the Holy
Qur'an, and reciters of Almighty Allah’s revealed verses.

In this connection, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have quoted the
Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَهْلَ الْقُرْآنِ فِي أَعْلَى دَرَجَةً مِنَ الآدَمِيِّينَ مَا
خَلاَ النَّبِيِّينَ وَالْمُرْسَليِنَ، فَلاَ تَسْتَضْعِفُوا أَهْلَ
الْقُرْآنِ حُقُوقَهُمْ، فَإِنَّ لَهُمْ مِنَ اللهِ الْعَزِيزِ
الْجَبَّارِ لَمَكَاناً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The people of the Holy Qur'an shall be in the highest rank that human
beings can attain except for the Prophets and Messengers (of Almighty
Allah). Hence, do not belittle the (special) ranks of the reciters of
the Qur'an, because they do enjoy a distinctive rank in the view of
Allah, the Almighty and Omnipotent.‌*[^92]*‌*

### Faithful Believers

Another form of special treatment, such as providing comfort, is that
which must be shown to faithful believers (*mu'min*)‌[^93]‌. This has
been emphasized in many validly reported traditions, like the following
one reported by Shaykh al-Kulayni on the authority of Abu-Hamzah
al-Thumali, who related that he heard Imam al-Baqir (‘a) quoting the
following from the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ سَرَّ مُؤْمِناً فَقَدْ سَرَّنِي، وَمَنْ سَرَّنِي فَقَدْ سَرَّ
اللهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever gives pleasure to a faithful believer has in fact given
pleasure to me, and whoever gives pleasure to me has given pleasure to
Almighty Allah.‌*[^94]*‌*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ أَحَبِّ الأَعْمَالِ إِلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إِدْخَالُ
السُّرُورِعَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِ: إِشْبَاعُ جَوْعَتِهِ، أَوْ تَنْفِيسُ
كُرْبَتِهِ، أَوْ قَضَاءُ دَيْنِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Among the most beloved acts in the view of Almighty Allah is to give
pleasure to a faithful believer by satisfying his hunger, relieving his
anguish, or helping him settle his debts.‌*[^95]*‌*

Another form of special treatment toward faithful believers is to settle
their needs. In this respect, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ قَضَى لأَِخِيهِ الْمُؤْمِنِ حَاجَةً قَضَى اللهُ لَهُ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ مِائَةَ أَلْفِ حَاجَةً، مِنْ ذَلِكَ أَوَّلُهَا
الْجَنَّةُ، وَمِنْ ذَلِكَ أَنْ يُدْخِلَ قَرَابَتَهُ وَمَعَارِفَهُ
وَإِخْوَانَهُ الْجَنَّةَ بَعْدَ أَنْ لاَ يَكُونُوا نُصَّاباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever fulfills the need of his brother-in-faith, Almighty Allah shall
settle one hundred thousand of his needs on the Day of Resurrection. One
of these needs is that he is allowed to enter Paradise and to take his
relatives, associates, and friends to Paradise also provided that they
are not opponents (of the Ahl al-Bayt).‌*[^96]*‌*

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُؤْمِنَ لَتَرِدُ عَلَيْهِ الْحَاجَةُ لأَِخِيهِ فَلاَ تَكُونُ
عِنْدَهُ، يَهْتَمُّ بِهَا قَلْبُهُ، فَيُدْخِلُهُ اللهُ بِهَمِّهِ
الْجَنَّةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sometimes a faithful believer feels upset because he cannot solve the
problem of one of his brethren-in-faith. As a result of this feeling,
Almighty Allah allows him to enter Paradise.‌*[^97]*‌*

Another form of special treatment toward faithful believers is to
relieve their agony or ease their difficulties. In this connection, Zayd
al-Shahham has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَغَاثَ أَخَاهُ الْمُؤْمِنَ اللَّهْفَانَ عِنْدَ جَهْدِهِ
فَنَفَّسَ كُرْبَتَهُ وَأَعَانَهُ عَلَى نَجَاحِ حَاجَتِهِ، كَتَبَ اللهُ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَهُ بِذَلِكَ ثِنْتَيْنِ وَسَبْعِينَ رَحْمَةً مِنَ
اللهِ، يُعَجِّلُ لَهُ مِنْهَا وَاحِدَةً يُصْلِحُ بِهَا أَمْرَ
مَعِيشَتِهِ، وَيَدَّخِرُ لَهُ إِحْدَى وَسَبْعِينَ رَحْمَةً لأَِفْزَاعِ
يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَأَهْوَالِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah will record seventy-two items of His mercy for whoever
relieves the agony of his aggrieved brother-in-faith, drives away his
sorrows, and helps him achieve his goal. By virtue of one of these, He
will improve his financial affairs while the other seventy-one items
will be stored for him when he faces the horrors and terrors of the Day
of Resurrection.‌*[^98]*‌*

Other forms of special treatment towards faithful believers include
being cooperative with them, supporting them, and advising them.

### Neighbors

Let us now refer to further details in the form of traditions that are
reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a):

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُسْنُ الْجِوَارِ يُعَمِّرُ الدِّيَارَ وَيُنْسِئُ فِي الأَعْمَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Good neighborliness makes communities thrive and increases
longevity.‌*[^99]*‌*

Abu-Mas’ud has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُسْنُ الْجِوَارِ زِيَادَةٌ فِي الأَعْمَارِ وَعِمَارَةُ الدِّيَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Good neighborliness increases longevity and makes communities
thrive.‌*[^100]*‌*

Abu-Rabi’ al-Shami has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said the
following while his house was packed with people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِعْلَمُوا أَنَّهُ لَيْسَ مِنَّا مَنْ لَمْ يُحْسِنْ مُجَاوَرَةَ مَنْ
جَاوَرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Be it known to you all that whoever does not observe good
neighborliness with his neighbors, does not belong to us.‌*[^101]*‌*

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَدُّ الْجِوَارِ أَرْبَعُونَ دَاراً مِنْ كُلِّ جَانِبٍ: مِنْ بَيْنِ
يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ وَعَنْ يَمِينِهِ وَعَنْ شِمَالِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The border of neighborhood includes forty houses from all sides; the
front, the back, the right, and the left.‌*[^102]*‌*

‘Umar ibn ‘Ikrimah has reported the following narration from Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a):

One day, a man from the Ansar came to the Holy Prophet (S) and
complained that he had bought a house next to a man from whom neither
goodness nor security from harm could be expected. Immediately, the Holy
Prophet (S) ordered Imam ‘Ali (‘a), Salman, Abu-Dharr, and probably
al-Miqdad to go to the mosque and announce:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِيـمَانَ لِمَنْ لَمْ يَأْمَنْ جَارُهُ بَوَائِقَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Faithless is he whose neighbors are not safe from his harm.”*

After they had declared this statement three times each, the Holy
Prophet (S) pointed to forty houses from all directions to be the limits
of neighborhood.‌[^103]‌

Al-Hasan ibn ‘Abdullah has reported the Righteous Servant (i.e. Imam
al-Kazim) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ حُسْنُ الْجِوَارِ كَفَّ الأَذَى، وَلَكِنْ حُسْنُ الْجِوَارِ
صَبْرُكَ عَلَى الأَذَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Good neighborliness does not mean to stop harm from neighbors; rather,
it means to patiently endure the harm of neighbors.‌*[^104]*‌*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَفْلَتَ الْمُؤْمِنُ مِنْ وَاحِدَةٍ مِنْ ثَلاَثٍ، وَلَرُبَّمَا
إجْتَمَعَتِ الثَّلاَثُ عَلَيْهِ: إِمَّا بَعْضُ مَنْ يَكُونُ مَعَهُ فِي
الدَّارِ يُغْلِقُ عَلَيْهِ بَابَهُ يُؤْذِيهِ، أَوْ جَارٌ يُؤْذِيهِ،
أَوْ مَنْ فِي طَرِيقِهِ إِلَى حَوَائِجِهِ يُؤْذِيهِ. وَلَوْ أَنَّ
مُؤْمِناً عَلَى قُلَّةِ جَبَلٍ لَبَعَثَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عَلَيْهِ
شَيْطَاناً يُؤْذِيهِ، وَيَجْعَلُ لَهُ مِنْ إِيـمَانِهِ أُنْساً لاَ
يَسْتَوْحِشُ مَعَهُ إِلَى أَحَدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A faithful believer cannot escape one of the following three things
although he may encounter all of them: he may be harmed by one of the
members of his family who lives with him in the same house, or one of
his neighbors, or one who impedes him from managing his affairs. Even if
a faithful believer secludes himself on a mountain summit, Almighty
Allah will send a devil from which the believer may seek refuge.
Almighty Allah will designate for him friendship derived from his own
faith due to which he will never feel lonely.‌*[^105]*‌*

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ الْقَوَاصِمِ الَّتِي تَقْصِمُ الظَّهْرَ جَارُ السُّوءِ إِنْ رَأَى
حَسَنَةً أَخْفَاهَا وَإِنْ رَأَى سَيِّئَةً أَفْشَاهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A wicked neighbor is like a stab in the back. If this neighbor sees a
kind act (from another neighbor), he conceals it; however, if he notices
a misdeed, he divulges it.‌*[^106]*‌*

[^1]: ‌- Basically, I have depended upon traditions quoted from al-Hurr
al-’Amili’s comprehensive and voluminous book of Wasa'il al-Shi’ah (in
full, Tafsil Wasa'il al-Shi’ah ila Tahsil Masa'il al-Shari’ah); Volume
Eight: Kitab al-Hajj, Sections: Ahkam al-’Ishrah (Laws of Association),
as well as some other parts from Volume Eleven: Kitab al-Jihad,
Sections: Jihad al-Nafs, al-Amr bi’l-Ma’ruf wa’l-Nahy ‘an al-Munkar.

[^2]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, 8:438, S. 34, H. 1.

[^3]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, 8:438, S. 34, H. 4.

[^4]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, 8:439, S. 34, H. 5.

[^5]: ‌- This is an Arab proverb indicating lenience, generosity, and
hospitality.

[^6]: ‌- Carpets of those who have good relations with others are
usually trodden; i.e. they are frequently visited by people. See Shaykh
al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:102. The tradition is also recorded in al-Hurr
al-’Amili’s Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:510, S. 105, H. 1.

[^7]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:584, S. 144, H. 2.

[^8]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:586, S. 144, H. 10.

[^9]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:584, S. 144, H. 3.

[^10]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:585, S. 144, H. 5.

[^11]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:421, S. 18, H. 1.

[^12]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:422, S. 19, H. 1.

[^13]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:423, S. 19, H. 5.

[^14]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:430, S. 27, H. 1.

[^15]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:411, S. 11, H. 1.

[^16]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:411, S. 11, H. 2.

[^17]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:416, S. 15, H. 1.

[^18]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:418, S. 16, H. 1.

[^19]: ‌- Mycobacterium: Gram-positive, aerobic, filament-forming
bacteria of the genus Mycobacterium, or the family Mycobacteriaceae,
which include the agents of tuberculosis and leprosy. (Oxford Talking
Dictionary)

[^20]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:431, S. 28, H. 4.

[^21]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:432, S. 28, H. 5.

[^22]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:432, S. 28, H. 6.

[^23]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:431, S. 28, H. 2.

[^24]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:567, S. 23, H. 3.

[^25]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:568, S. 23, H. 7.

[^26]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:568, S. 23, H. 10.

[^27]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:21, H. 6.

[^28]: ‌-Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:21, H. 9.

[^29]: ‌- Introducing the bases of promulgation, the Holy Qur'an reads,
“Call unto the way of your Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and
reason with them in the better way. Lo! Your Lord is Best Aware of him
who strays from His way, and He is Best Aware of those who go aright.
(16:125)

[^30]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:594, S. 35, H. 1.

[^31]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:549, S. 35, H. 2.

[^32]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:549, S. 35, H. 7.

[^33]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:413, S. 12, H. 1.

[^34]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:413, S. 12, H. 2.

[^35]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:413, S. 12, H. 3.

[^36]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:542, H. 2.

[^37]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:542, S. 124, H. 5.

[^38]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 13:162, S. 1, H. 1 &
13:163, H. 6.

[^39]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 13:162, S. 1, H. 2.

[^40]: ‌- Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon No. 47.

[^41]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 13:162, S. 1, H. 4.

[^42]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:578, S. 141, H. 2.

[^43]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:578, S. 141, H. 6.

[^44]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:408, H. 6, S. 136.

[^45]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:579, H. 7, S. 141.

[^46]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:437, H. 1, S. 33.

[^47]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:494, H. 2, S. 93.

[^48]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:515, H. 2, S.109.

[^49]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:502, H.32, S.102.

[^50]: ‌- Further discussions of this question have been cited in my
book of al-hukm al-islami bayna al-nazariyyah wa’l-tatbiq (Islamic
Government, Theory and Application); Chapter: Constitutional System, a
Genuine System, pp. 113-137.

[^51]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:426, H. 6.

[^52]: ‌- Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 2:436.

[^53]: ‌- Nahj al-Balaghah, Maxim No. 211.

[^54]: ‌- Ibn Shu’bah al-Harrani, Tuhaf al-’Uqul (Masterpieces of
Intellects), pp. 10, translated into English by Badr Shahin; Ansariyan
Publications – Qum, 2001.

[^55]: ‌- Nahj al-Balaghah, Maxim No. 54.

[^56]: ‌- Nahj al-Balaghah, Maxim No. 161.

[^57]: ‌- Nahj al-Balaghah, Maxim No. 211.

[^58]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:426, H. 5.

[^59]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:429, H. 2.

[^60]: ‌- Some narrations have warned against seeking the advice of
women. This may be because women are generally known for inclination to
their emotions, and was a general feature of the women of that age. The
same thing can be applied to the warning against seeking the advice of
slaves because the social surroundings and the education of servants, at
that time, made them unqualified to give good advice. However, al-Barqi,
has mentioned in his famous book, al-Mahasin (2:437), that Imam Musa
al-Kazim (‘a) sought the advice of some of his slaves at times. When he
was asked about that, the Imam (‘a) would answer, “…It sometimes happens
that Almighty Allah presents the most accurate opinion on the tongue of
this slave.”

[^61]: ‌- Khalid al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 2:436.

[^62]: ‌- Khalid al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 2:436.

[^63]: ‌- Khalid al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 2:438, H. 26.

[^64]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:426-427, H. 8.

[^65]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:429, S. 26, H. 2. A
similar words have been included with the famous epistle of Imam ‘Ali
(‘a) to Malik al-Ashtar, as mentioned in Nahj al-Balaghah.

[^66]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:429, S. 25, H. 1.

[^67]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 14:128, S. 94, H. 1. It
is not improbable that such traditions about women and other social
classes were said in consideration of the nature of general
circumstances and morals of the women of that age, or in consideration
of the sentimental side that can overcome women.

[^68]: ‌- Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 2:436.

[^69]: ‌- Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 2:438.

[^70]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:442, S. 36, H. 1.

[^71]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:588, S. 146, H. 4.

[^72]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:591, S. 147, H. 4.

[^73]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:441, S. 35, H. 1.

[^74]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:404, S. 3, H. 1.

[^75]: ‌- Generally, these laws can be found in sections 30-34 of the
etiquettes of travel in al-Hurr al-’Amili’s book of Wasa’il al-Shi’ah.

[^76]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:409, S. 30, H. 2.

[^77]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:501, S. 1, H. 3.

[^78]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:472, S. 72, H. 1.

[^79]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:409, S. 8, H. 1.

[^80]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:412, S. 11, H. 3.

[^81]: ‌- Nahj al-Balaghah, S. 2, No. 361. This saying has been also
reported, through a valid chain of authority, from Imam al-Sadiq (‘a).
Refer to Jami’ Ahadiih al-Shi’ah 15:239, H. 13.

[^82]: ‌- One of the social conventions of Islam, it is highly
recommended to say alhamdu lillahi (All praise be to Allah) immediately
after sneezing. Upon hearing this phrase, it is highly recommended to
address the sneezer with the statement: yarhamuka allahu (May Allah have
mercy upon you), which is similar to the expression of God bless you.
This practice is called tasmit, in Arabic and Muslim jurisprudential
terminology. [Translator]

[^83]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:464, S. 63, H. 1.

[^84]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:465, S. 64, H. 2.

[^85]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 11:556, S. 17, H. 1.

[^86]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 11:556, S. 17, H. 3.

[^87]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 11:556, S. 17, H. 6.

[^88]: ‌- Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Amali, pp. 424, H. 947. In Wasa’il
al-Shi’ah 11:557, S. 17, H. 6, this tradition is reported in this way:
Whoever wishes to make me his agency (before Almighty Allah) and to have
an attribute for which I will intercede for him on the Day of
Resurrection, may invoke blessings on my progeny, and provide them with
tranquility.

[^89]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 11:558, S. 17, H. 7.

[^90]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:466, S. 67, H. 1.

[^91]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:467, S. 67, H. 3.

[^92]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 4:830, S. 4, H. 1.

[^93]: ‌- It is advisable to refer to the huge number of traditions,
mentioned in various sections of reference books of hadith, such as
Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, concerning the special treatment that must be shown
towards the faithful believers. For instance, refer to vol. 11, pp.
569-601 where features of this special treatment with faithful believers
manifest themselves, emphasizing the high level of social relations
necessary with this distinguished group.

[^94]: ‌- Shaykh Al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:188.

[^95]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 11:570, S. 24, H. 6.

[^96]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 11:576, S. 25, H. 1.

[^97]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 11:576, S. 25, H. 3.

[^98]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 11:578, S. 29, H. 1.

[^99]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:489, S. 87, H. 5.

[^100]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:489, S. 87, H. 3.

[^101]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:489, S. 87, H. 5.

[^102]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:491, S. 90, H. 1.

[^103]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:487, S. 86, H. 1.

[^104]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:484, S. 85, H. 2.

[^105]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:484, S. 85, H. 3.

[^106]: ‌- Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 8:491, S. 89, H. 1.


