Part Seven : the Role of Institutions
=====================================

**Who is Responsible?**

In the logic of Islam: ' Each of you is a guardian and each of you are
responsible for his guardianship'.113 Each person has a role and
responsibility without which society has no basis. Since the family is
the nucleus of society and the criterion for its advancement or decline
rests with it, then it must have a great role in this guardianship.

Girls of marriageable age, divorcees, widows, marital disputes, and for
that matter orphans are all subjects which require careful consideration
so that wherever possible their problems may be solved. This may be
achieved through facilitating the marriage of single persons or through
reconciling those parties who have separated. By taking care of orphans
and meeting their material and spiritual needs and giving them a good
practical and intellectual education.

In materialistic societies, which includes, in this age, Islamic
societies, these problems are widespread114 and individuals do not
receive the attention they deserve.

Hence all those who have faith and hope in Allah and the day of
resurrection, and who contemplate the reform of society should concern
themselves with assisting women and orphans. The emissary of Allah has
said: ' Have mercy on the weak, on women and on orphansâ€™.

Is it not the case that any one of us could be susceptible to these
problems? So if we do not have mercy on those less fortunate than
ourselves we may not be shown mercy when we or our children are in a
similar position and in need. In the Qur'anic verse: ' Let those
(disposing of an estate) have the same fear in their minds as they would
have for their own if they had left a helpless family behind. Let them
fear Allah and speak appropriately '.115 In the prophetic tradition: '
Have mercy upon those who are on the Earth and He who is in the heavens
will have mercy upon you '116 The parents are responsible for themselves
and the welfare of their family. Society, including intellectuals and
capitalists, is also responsible for supporting its elements and
families. The greater responsibility falls on the government and the
state.

**Marriage Agency**

Given that the lives of Muslims are beset by difficulties from every
quarter, the foremost of which are related to the family and marriage,
and since returning to the equilibrium of nature and Islam takes time
before the status quo is changed and matters return to their rightful
place, then it is imperative, as has been previously mentioned, that
marital foundations be set up to facilitate the marriages of single men
and women. The sexual impulse and the impulse to start a family are
present in both men and women and what stands in the way of this are the
artificial problems like housing requirements, furniture, earning a
living, mediation between the two parties, and expenses for medicaments
and educating the children etc. Primary institutions are needed for the
root and basis of marriage and secondary ones for its branches and
requirements. It is possible that committees for communal weddings be
formed which could assist in the marriages of large numbers of
youngsters and could provide a great deal of effort and financial
support. 'The hand of Allah is with the group'117 as is in the prophetic
tradition. There is also a great deal of reward due to whoever works
towards the marriage of single Muslims. The prophetic traditions are
full of special mentions of motherhood, childhood and the ill, as well
as the fact that it is a requirement of Allah's words to 'help one
another in righteousness and piety'118, as well as that of nature and
intellect.

Charitable organisations are among the best solutions to numerous
problems relating to the family and society and indeed in any area of
life in that they:

a). Stimulate the activities of individuals or similar organisations
because they tend to be pluralistic and encourage the activities of
others.

b). Can be a source of support for people as the reliance upon a group
is greater than that of an individual.

c). The obstinate individual will find no room therein for
megalomania.

d). Each individual will be heading in the right direction where there
is consultation and a meeting of minds as the most intelligent person is
he who combines his mind with those of others.

e). Wherever there is competition between a single group of
individuals, each one strives to be 'bigger and better' so that things
improve in quality and quantity in a way impossible for a single person
working alone to achieve however perfect and sincere he was. The
exception to this is only in the case of those 'restrained from error'
by Allah. Hence we find that the prophet, himself impeccable, saying: '
Oh people consult me in matters'119. and before that in the Qur'anic
verses: ' Consult them in affairs'120, and '. . . those who conduct
their affairs by mutual consultation'121, and '. . . by mutual consent
and consultation '122, and so on. Therefore there is a need for
charitable organisations in all areas of life.

**In Democratic States**

It is true that in Democratic countries, charitable organisations are
able to work to their full potential while this is not the case in
dictatorships or one-party states where they might be banned or expelled
or otherwise limited as was experienced in Iraq under the Republicans
from the late 1950's at the time of the coup of 'Abd-al- Karim Qasim
until the present day. Similarly in Iran under the Pahlevis.

Communal weddings in Democratic states are a simple matter. There, the
government is an institution like other institutions but monitors other
institutions in order to stop wrongdoing and to promote the advancement
of the country and guard the public interest. The public interest is
public in the full meaning of the word, where there are free political
parties and proper elections, and not as dictators wish to interpret the
public interest. They only see their own interests and hide behind
dazzling rhetoric. The organisation which works towards setting up
projects for communal weddings should take advantage of the
possibilities open to it in a democratic country where such
organisations are able to operate in relative freedom, in the light of
multi-party politics, ease of law and media and simplicity of obtaining
donations etc.

In dictatorships such as Iraq, such matters are not at all simple and
extreme caution must be exercised. Probably it should not be communal as
the regime bans or expels these kinds of groups. In fact the regime
would probably exploit the reputation of these groups for propaganda
purposes. This would be more detrimental to society than the benefit
hoped for in marrying people. (There is no obedience to Allah through
disobedience). In the case of dictatorial governments, people must cut
them off and not cooperate with them even in the building of mosques. As
Imam Al- Sadiq said: ' Do not build them even a single mosque'123.

**Facilitation and Substitution**

In the words of the poet: 'Oh my soul fulfil your grief for that which
you feared is now a reality.' The laws of Islam became hidden under the
Ottoman and Qajarite rulers and before that under the rulers of
Andalucia, the Moghuls and Russia. Today Muslims live in an abyss of
poverty, disease, ignorance, backwardness and chaos. How then in the
context of the family do we raise the economic level to eradicate
poverty? How do we raise health standards to combat illness? How do we
free ourselves from ignorance? How can we raise the family's status in
society so that it can leave chaos behind?

Individual action is not enough, just as the family is not able to
solve its problems alone. There is then a need in the Islamic community
for organisations to provide facilities and organisations to institute
change.

The first will provide facilities for families by opening schools and
hospitals and creating opportunities for employment. Otherwise the
children of poor or low-income families will not be able to pay the high
fees to enter the universities. Nor will they be able to pay the medical
bills of those with chronic diseases. Many is the time that a person has
sadly had to sell his house in order to pay to treat his heart disease,
or those who do not have a house to sell have died of that or some other
disease. At the same time, the rulers are embezzling billions in broad
daylight, and anyone who speaks out faces prison, torture, accusations
and execution.

The poor can barely find a morsel to eat and some families live out
their years on nothing more than bread and tea, some of them not tasting
meat or fruit for years on end. The instances of this are beyond number
and cover all aspects of life. I have seen a scholar sell his personal
library to cover the wedding expenses of his son. Facilitative
committees are then to some degree useful according to the principle:
'The complexity of a task should not prevent attempting the achievable
tasks.'124 The root of the problem lies in the substitution by the West
and its agent rulers of the laws of Islam which used to guarantee our
vitality and progress in life. 'He calls you to what will let you
live'.125 Therefore committees to institute change should be set up to
bring back the vital laws of Islam. Otherwise our life will be nothing
but strife and oppression, as in the Qur'anic verse: 'But whosoever
turns away from the remembrance of me shall find a straitened
existence'.126 It is true that the man who says he does not believe in
the law of gravity and throws himself from a high place will still find
his bones broken.

Or the man who says he does not believe in Archimedes principle and
throws himself in the sea without knowing how to swim, will still drink
water until he dies. The same goes for the laws of society, economics,
politics, education and the family as Islam confirms.

In so far as salvation lies in the return of these vital laws, then the
remit of the committees for change should be to substitute, law by law,
each of the false laws with the correct laws. In this way, Allah may
look upon Muslims with compassion and rescue them from the backwardness
and confusion they now experience.

Another way of supporting the policies of substitution and facilitation
is to form groups to make use of free media and equal rights to
implement the aforementioned two groups. Similarly help must be sought
from philanthropists and charitable bodies to collect funds to meet
people's needs as far as possible. All of this is possible if the
concern and efforts of reformists and committed individuals is combined
after which Allah may cause something to happen.

It is clearly possible to benefit from good Muslim businessmen in the
facilitation and substitution operation. Traders were previously the
jewel in the crown in the change that took place in favour of Islam and
Muslims. It is capital, power, and knowledge that direct society towards
the better or God forbid the worse.

It appears in the traditions that: ' Islam was built on three things;
the wealth of Khadijah, the protection of Abu Talib, and the morals of
the Prophet'. It is these three that helped to foment the rise of
Islam.

In another tradition from the Prophet: ' There are two groups in my
nation which if righteous so will my nation be righteous and if corrupt
so will my nation be corrupt. They are the scholars and the leaders.'

If money is not mentioned in this then it is probably due to the fact
that money is secondary to the two other things. As in when Imam Hussein
was killed through the power of Zayad, the edict of Shureih, and the
wealth of the public treasury which had been directed by the powers that
were and the edict towards evil and tyranny.

Muslim traders have the ability to raise the status of Islam and deepen
it and maintain it as a barrier against the vast currents over the ages.
Islamic charitable institutions be they schools, mosques, shrines, or
libraries mostly come from Muslim businessmen. So if they enter the
picture, God willing, the change and substitution will become easier.

The aforementioned committees should also take part in planning the
development operation. Businesses like agriculture, industry, commerce
and heritage may also be able to create those committees in this way.
Naturally all arms, drugs, and trade in other forbidden articles should
be at all costs avoided for Allah is not obeyed through disobedience.

**The Public Treasury**

One of the benefits of Islam is the provision of a place for gathering
moneys and then spending them on necessary matters. This place is known
as the public treasury. The policy of the public treasury is to gather
money from the rich and to spend it on the poor. This is alluded to in
the tradition of the prophet: ' I have been ordered to take from the
rich among you and give to the poor among you'.127 There are four
sources of funds for the public treasury: The Khums, The Zakat, The
Jizya, The Kharraj each of which are discussed in detail in the books of
jurisprudence.

These sources can fulfil the needs of the people and the state making
the need for raising public taxes obsolete except in very rare occasions
like earthquakes, flooding, famine or drought and this under the
supervision of the council of jurists and scholars. The secret to the
sufficiency of these four taxes is that Islam places matters in the
hands of the people while the responsibility of the state is the
supervision and direction of the finances through a small number of
specialised officials. This is dealt with in greater detail in other
books on the subject. Use must be made of the great potential energies
which should be rallied to productive work instead of wasting them in
needless bureaucracy where they may be dispensed with. The treasury
undertakes to fulfil the public's needs including the needs of those who
wish to marry but are poor.

In the event of there being no public treasury as is the situation now
in Islamic lands, then the principle of 'that which cannot be fully
realised should not be completely neglected' must be put into effect
through charitable bodies setting up funds to collect donations and
distribute them according to the needs of the public including
youngsters who wish to marry.

**Conclusion**

It is truly sad that ignorance, despotism, and selfishness motivate
many Muslims both rulers and ruled to such an extent that some Muslims
cannot find even a morsel of food or an abode or a wife and other basic
needs. Meanwhile, they are surrounded by the bounties of Allah - earth,
sky, light, the riches of nature, and the finest principles known to
humanity. But they have neglected the laws of Allah and have been
rewarded with these problems and crises which have destroyed their
religion and way of life.

What has become of Allah Almighty's words: 'are those who know equal to
those who do not know'128 ,or His words'. . . do not take those outside
your ranks into your intimacy: they will not fail to corrupt you. They
only desire for you to suffer'.129 or His words: ' . . . and consult
them in the affairs of moment . . .'130 , or His words: ' . . . so that
(wealth) does not merely circulate amongst a rich few.131 and so many
other verses and traditions? So that now the Muslim stands between two
points; 'bemoaning the state of his religion and his way of life'132 .
Whereas Imam Kashif Al-Ghata when he visited Iran said in the prologue
to his book 'I did not see one man or woman either weeping or
complaining' (meaning here unnatural weeping or complaining)'. Similarly
I do not recall any of that either in Iraq before the second world war
where Muslims were not yet subject to Eastern and Western laws.

Today though after having chosen for themselves to be led by the
Western agenda and have become a confirmation of Allah's words: 'But
whosoever turns away from the remembrance of me shall find a straitened
existence'133 Calamity has struck even the righteous among them
according to Allah Almighty's words: ' . . .and fear a trial which may
not only affect the wrongdoers amongst you '. . .134 I now offer some
examples of the oppression and distress which have surrounded
Afghanistan, Iraq and the Gulf. These are by way of example only for
every Islamic land has been struck by this plague.

A certain party in Afghanistan plants opium for export to neighbouring
countries and with the proceeds buys weapons with which to kill the
people of the country. In this there are at least five criminal acts:

1) Misuse of the blessings of Allah; good land that should be used for
good things is used for evil things. 2) The exploitation of workers and
means of production for bad ends instead of for righteous ends. 3)
Wastage of wealth on tools of destruction, bloodletting and
impoverishment instead of being used for building and construction and
the needs of the people. 4) Causing pain to the people and the
neighbouring countries that should be safe from the calamities of a
neighbour falling into the trap of addiction and corruption.

5) Destruction of the country: the natural result of the aforementioned
is the destruction of the country and the humiliation and impoverishment
of the people. This though is only the natural result of the type of
ignorance that we have mentioned and the abandonment of the laws of God.
In the Qur'anic verse: '. . . and be not like those who have forgotten
God and He made them forget their own souls . . .'135 Then the West puts
Saddam in place so he can embezzle more than 800 billion dollars worth
of Muslim wealth and do with Iraq and its neighbours such murder,
terrorising, imprisonment, torture, war, famine, torment, and economic
destruction as has not been witnessed in the whole of history.136 The
crimes of the Mongols, the Tartars and the Hajaj pale into
insignificance compared to the crimes of Saddam and his party. The West
then makes the Iraqi regime into a tool for terrorising and corrupting
the Gulf states and their other neighbours so that they ask for military
bases on their soil and buy from the West billions of dollars of arms137
rather than serving the needs of the people and improving the lifestyle
of the country. In this way the Islamic community is in the worst
possible state of oppression and distress.138

There is as we previously said no cure to this other than through a
general awareness which is the prelude towards a return to the laws of
Islam. For Islam is what will rescue humanity as that Muslim who went to
conquer Persia said when Rustum asked him 'What do you want' He said '
We have come to bring the people from obeying other people to obeying
Allah and to rescue humanity from the narrowness of the earth to its
wideness.


