Publisher’s Foreword
====================

The family is the very core of society. As it declines so falls
society. As it ascends so ascends society.

From this precept, comes the importance placed by the divine religions
upon the family, as well as the importance placed by deviant
philosophies on the notion of the non-essentiality of the family,
because the disappearance of the family means the disappearance of a
virtuous society.

To destroy is easier than to build. The pickaxes of Freemasonry,
Marxism, Existentialism, Sartreism, and Nihilistic philosophies have
swung into action to reduce the edifice of human society to rubble.
Through this demolition they have reaped great returns, and have
achieved a victory over high morals, and have succeeded in driving
European man towards perdition. These destructive elements have now
arrived in Islamic societies, spreading instability and disintegration
aimed at destroying the family structure whereas Islam stands in direct
opposition to these ideologies. For Islam strives to provide a firm
support for the family, to build a family, which is stable, calm and has
a goal and direction. This is what every human being looking for
happiness in life is searching for, and it cannot be achieved save
through early marriage and through a close relationship with the partner
and the children in an atmosphere of virtue, faith, truth, and self
sacrifice. This can only be realised through simplicity and by the
casting off of obsolete fetters and false traditions, for the pure
family begets a pure generation, an upright generation, a generation
which carries the community forward to progress and fruition.

This is the basis of Imam Shirazi’s valuable effort in which he puts
forward ideas and solutions to the problems of society. He deals with
human society in its widest sense and studies contemporary topics such
as the growth of the family and discusses views promoting the limiting
of offspring and explains the Islamic position regarding this notion and
other related ideas. Furthermore, he tackles certain modern problems
faced by the principle of marriage and offers solutions to these
problems, proposing a social programme to solve this once and for all in
so far as the phenomenon of celibacy will disappear from Islamic
societies. Despite the brevity of this book, it contains important ideas
coming from a man well known in Islamic circles as a source of religious
knowledge and for his important services to society and as the
contributor of hundreds of books to the library of Islam. His ideas are
important because they spring from an understanding of history and from
long experience in the field of social work. He does not propound the
religious view alone but marries it with historical understanding and
practical experience.


