Author’s Introduction
=====================

‘The family in Islam’ is the name of this short book, which I have
written as a basic guide to an important aspect of life, which the laws
of the West in Islamic countries have worked at destroying and continue
to do so. I have witnessed from beginning to end a half-century of
family matters and what I see latterly bears little or no resemblance to
what I saw formerly. With the adoption by Muslims of Western laws, both
their religion and their worldly life have disappeared, as Allah says in
His book the Qur’an: ‘They lose both this world and the next: That is
indeed the manifest loss.’1 Many Muslims, and not least their
governments, have welcomed the West and lapped up its laws thinking that
this was a path to liberation from the tyranny of the Ottoman and Qajar
empires whose flawed Islam and complete isolation after the fall of
their governments towards the West have been witnessed. They bring to
mind the words of the poet:

‘He who seeks refuge in ‘Amr on being tortured is like one seeking
refuge in fire from the burning sun’.

‘I complained about ‘Amr and when I left him and found other neighbours
I wept for ‘Amr’.

There is no doubt that the Ottoman and Qajar empires acted out with the
range of Islam and for this reason, the countries of Islam fell under
the control of the West and the East. But there is also no doubt that
the parable for Muslims in this respect became the example of the
Ummayads and the Abbasids, as the poet also says: ‘Ah would that the
tyranny of the sons of Marwan2 return to us, And would that the justice
of the sons of ‘Abbas3 never was’.

Muslims had thus become an embodiment of one who has ‘forgotten both
the paths'. For they were, under the Ummayads and the ‘Abbasids,
diminished in matters of religion and of earthly life, but under the
auspices of the West and the East, they were, except in a very few
circumstances, completely bereft of both spheres. Allah alone knows how
much we can bear of oppression and repression and deviation from His
laws until the correct Islamic situation returns to us. However, we
should realise that this return is not possible without awareness. By
awareness we mean awareness of the laws of Islam, from the notion of ‘a
single community without geographical borders’, through to fraternity
whereby every Muslim in any province of Islam is treated in all his
affairs as if he is from that province, and freedom, whereby every thing
is free except that which is prescribed as illegal, through to all the
other vital Islamic laws so profusive in number.

Each law in Islam is a vital entity promoting life, as the Qur’anic
verse says: 'Respond to Allah and His messenger when He calls you to
that which will enliven you'.4

This awareness, however, will only occur when Muslims have come
together in organisations and political parties and groups whereby they
will be in a state of utmost realism and direction, integrity and moral
rectitude. Thus Allah may surround Muslims with His kindness and salvage
them from this abyss the like of which they have not fallen into from
the first light of Islam until this century. This is because Allah only
conducts affairs by providing the ways and means to them. As He says in
His book in the story of ‘Dhul-Qarnain5’, repeatedly: ‘Then he followed
a way'6, or as happened to the people of Israel when they went against
His commands, He made them wander in the wilderness for forty years. The
aforesaid requires continuous effort and enduring patience. Do we not
see that the Khums tax, given its importance, is only mentioned in the
Qur’an once7, while the word ‘perseverance’ and its derivatives are
mentioned seventy times. In the hadith or tradition of the prophet it is
said: “As a part of faith, patience has the station of the head in
relation to the body. Just as there is no good in a body without a head,
there is no good in a faith that is not accompanied by patience”.

If then we work towards this and call upon Allah night and day, then it
is hoped that the greatness of Muslims will be returned to them along
with their independence and autonomy. Allah alone grants success and is
the sole refuge.


The Holy City of Qum,
Muhammad Shirazi
8th Jamadi-II, 1415 Hijra.


