Marital Relationships in the Major Religions
============================================

Allah says in the Qur’an in prohibition of adultery: ‘Verily it is a
vulgarity and a vileness and an evil path to follow’.20 The use of the
expression vulgarity, together with the particular past tense verb in
Arabic (Kaana) gives the command an eternal and static quality with
reference to God’s abstraction from time and the singularity of his law
in creation, a notion which is not confined solely to Islam but is
present in the remainder of the religions, because religion is one in
the realm of God, just as the inherent nature of creation is one.

So when we examine the sayings of many religions, we do so with the
premise that they support that, which preceded and succeeded them in the
field of rational knowledge and traditions and inherent nature and not
with the premise that they are a proof and an original source.21

**1. The Jewish Religion**

Jewish texts affirm the impropriety of bachelorhood considering it a
sin and making marriage necessary after the age of twenty. Abortion and
infanticide and methods of contraception are also considered a crime and
acts of unbelief.

Any woman or wife perpetrating adultery would warrant stoning and the
rapist of any married woman would be killed. The rapist of a virgin girl
would have to pay a monetary fine and take her as a wife for life for
his ill act towards her and those caught in the act of adultery would be
killed together.

Anyone slandering a married person without proof would be subject to a
fine and punishment.

**2. The Christian Religion**

In this matter, the Christian religion does not differ from the Jewish
religion because Christ came confirming what was in the Torah.22 Hence
Christianity prohibited abortion and placed it on a level with
premeditated murder. In the same way, homosexuality was prohibited in
the strongest possible terms.

The revolution of morals, which Jesus instigated, was in reality a war
against the distortion (of religious texts), dissolution, and degeneracy
among the people of Israel.

In the Gospels it says: 'You have heard it said: do not commit
adultery. But I say whosoever looks to a woman he desires has committed
adultery in his heart, and when your right eye calls you to sin, then
pluck it out and throw it from you. For it is better for you to destroy
one of your organs than for all of your body to go to Hell'23. 'It is
said that whosoever divorces a woman; let him give her a document of
divorce. But I say that whosoever divorces a woman other than in the
case of fornication has exposed her to the possibility of adultery'.24

**3. In the Religion of Zoroaster**

This religion encouraged marriage and building a family and bearing
children. In one of its texts it says that 'the married man is greatly
preferable to the bachelor and he who supports a family is much more
favoured than he who has no family, and he who has children is even more
favourable than that.'25

Elsewhere it says that 'every time the number of children of a man
increases, his closeness to his Lord increases.'26 Parents used to
organise the marital affairs of those of their children who had reached
the age of adolescence, it not being acceptable for a man to remain
unmarried. Also any occupation or work which would distance the
individual from the family was unacceptable. Among them, divorce was not
approved of except in the case of barrenness, or adultery, or infidelity
to the state of married life. Amongst their laws was the prohibition of
masturbation, which could be punished by flogging. The consequences for
one who committed adultery, or homosexuality, or lesbianism, was death.
Likewise, the punishment for abortion among them was execution.

**4. Buddhism**

In Buddhism, the punishment for an adulteress was to be publicly thrown
as prey to the dogs. As for her partner in the crime, he would be
roasted alive on a red-hot bed of steel. Looking at a woman with desire
decreased ones vows and the lustful glance stripped one of one's
intellect.

**5. Confucianism**

The ancient Chinese considered the holding back of a man from marriage
to be a character deficit and a crime against the ancestors and the
state which could not be excused, even for religious men. They used to
delegate a special official whose work was to make sure that every man
of age thirty was married and that every woman was married before the
age of twenty.

One of the sayings of Confucius says 'if a house stands on a firm
foundation then the world is safe and sound'.

**Conclusion**

After that brief summary of the family system among various
civilisations and religions, it is clear that all of humanity agrees
upon the call for marriage and procreation as an extension of the human
species, and upon the impropriety of the unmarried state and the
unlawfulness of fornication and infidelity etc. This concord from the
peoples of humanity shows its truthfulness and intrinsic naturalness.
Islam, obviously, does not accept a great number of the rules and
punishments of these ways of life and civilisations, but our concern is
the whole picture and the points of concord only.

**Marriage in Materialistic Societies**

Despite the obvious harmony of human nature regarding the establishment
of the family and married life, and that there is no structure to the
human species without this establishment and the fortification of its
elements, one can observe certain voices calling for that which goes
against the current of intrinsic human nature, and denies this law of
existence, and so just as disrespect towards and neglect of the law of
the atom has occurred, so mockery is made of the existence of the
family. Whilst the system of the universe has its own direct and natural
reaction through radioactivity, the family and society despite its not
having a direct and instantaneous natural reaction27, has a greater and
more severe effect after the passage and elapse of time.

Among the most important of the slogans, which have gone outside the
law of nature, are those said by Marx, Freud, and Durkheim.

Freud made the sexual impulse the basic factor in the development of
mankind, while Marx considered it to be Economics, and Durkheim went for
the social factor. The proof of the invalidity of these philosophies is
first and foremost that they are mutually contradicting in addition to
the fact that the pressures which surrounded society helped to create
them. The severe pressure which society faced from those who called
themselves religion, and the grave contradiction that appeared between
the words and deeds of the religious authorities is but one example.
Another example is the imposition of legal codes which go against human
nature like the church's prohibition of divorce, and the inquisition and
extreme quelling of any opposition together with the social gulf between
the elite and nobility and the poor and miserable. All these matters
have fuelled these philosophies.28


