Part Two : the Call of Nature
=============================

**Marriage as a Necessity**

Marriage is a vital necessity. The survival of the species depends upon
it and the survival of any organism is an intellectual necessity. Hence
the world’s intelligentsia try to prevent the extinction of a particular
organism. So what of humanity? The Qur'an states: 'But when he turns his
back, his aim everywhere is to spread mischief in the land and to
destroy crops and progeny, but Allah loves not mischief'.30

In the matter of destroying progeny there is no difference between
active destruction and passive destruction. Qur'anic verses and
prophetic traditions stress marriage as being mandatory for the common
good and recommended for the individual good.

This is from one angle. From another, were it not for marriage,
humanity would suffer from some extremely harmful diseases, as medical
science has proven, and the avoidance of any possible harm is mandatory
both from a religious and an intellectual point of view. From another
angle again, a person to deny himself, in moderation, of the good things
in life is also intellectually and religiously wrong as the story of
‘Ala shows in 'Nahj al-Balagha'.31 In a well-known case, the Prophet
himself stopped a man who had vowed to abstain (from all the good things
in life including marriage) by the saying ‘There is to be no monasticism
in Islam’.32 It may be argued that the Qur'anic verse: 'The monasticism
which they innovated was not prescribed by Us for them, (We commanded
them) only to seek the good pleasure of Allah'33, contradicts this.
However it should be pointed out that the rule was temporary in the face
of an overflow of Jews in the world, and therefore Islam abrogated the
rule. As for bringing together ‘they innovated it’ and ‘we did not make
it incumbent upon them’, it is clear that they innovated it firstly, and
then Allah ratified it.

**Early Marriage**

The custom of early marriage is upheld by the intellect and the
religion. It was the norm amongst Muslims from the dawn of Islam up to
and before the cultural, economic, and military assault by the laws of
the West and East upon their lands. If this (early marriage) had not
been the case, then it would have led either to depravity, the least
form of which is masturbation, or to illness as physicians have shown.

It was the custom of Muslims to marry off girls from the age of ten to
fifteen or thereabouts, and boys from attaining maturity up to age
eighteen. Early marriage was a vital necessity for them because of its
simplicity. There was no condition of completing studies or military
service. Marriage was like food and drink and clothing to them. A
certain man would need a certain woman and vice versa, and nothing would
prevent them from coming together in lawful matrimony.

The West, in placing obstacles and hurdles in the way of marriage, has
laid itself open to public and private licentiousness as well as various
other perversions. Its own figures show that most youngsters are
sexually active from age ten for girls and from reaching physical
maturity for boys, with all the dangerous consequences of that such as
abortion and the profusion of illegitimate children found on the streets
and in the slums, as well as various sexually transmitted diseases, and
adulterous acts together with marital and family infidelity and incest
and suicide, the appearance of homosexuality, and the trade in buying
and selling children and so on.

Knowing that Islam is the religion of human nature, it is clear that
sexual purity and cleanliness necessitates that we return to the
teachings of Islam in this important area of life.

It should not be argued however: Why did the Messenger of God not marry
until the age of twenty-five and for that matter ‘Ali, because it can be
said that one reason may be that the Prophet was poor, his family
suffering great hardship as is seen in the story of the dividing up of
the sons of Abu Talib. As for ‘Ali, he was at the most serious stage in
facilitating mankind's transition from darkness to light. It is clear
that in this state, a man sacrifices everything for the sake of his
goal.

**Simplicity of Dowry**

The Prophet has said: 'The best of women in my community is she of the
most radiant of face and the least of dowry'.37 This is common sense
more than tradition, for it is the needs of the young men and women
which lead them towards marriage and the dowry is no more than symbolic.
There should be nothing to prevent two souls from coming together in a
legal way no matter whether their conditions are poor or rich,
especially as we see now certain nations making the dowry incumbent upon
the man and others making it upon the woman and others still leaving it
out altogether.

Islam sanctions the dowry out of honour and respect for the wife but it
is not to be over done, rather it stresses the simplicity of the dowry
so that it is enough for the husband to teach the wife a chapter from
the Qur'an or a simple craft, or even give her a plain iron ring.

Then on, it is clear that after the marriage, the two will be motivated
towards working and earning, because the person who knows that he has a
responsibility will run towards life as opposed to one who does not feel
any responsibility.

Simplicity of dowry made for the best women of the nation according to
the Prophet because it makes this vital element of life easier and
quicker. ‘God wants for you ease and he does not want difficulty.’38 It
is related that the Prophet said: ‘Make things easy upon yourselves and
do not make things difficult.’39 Ease in anything promotes the absence
of stress on the person physically and mentally.

As for the 'most radiant of face', perhaps this stems from good moral
behaviour which promotes the radiance of the face and skin.40

In this way, it was the custom amongst Muslims, before the age of
Western materialism, for the dowry to be small and simple, except in a
very few cases, for the ‘Umayyad and ‘Abbasid caliphs diverged from the
traditions of Islam to the traditions of the Persian kings and the
Caesars in every domain and especially in the matter of dowries. Because
of this, the impeccable Imams used to emphasise and insist upon the
dowry of the sunna - that practised by the Prophet.

**The Parents’ House**

Muslim society, before the attack of materialism, used to marry off its
sons and daughters, and both parties - the parents and the children -
were satisfied and content with the parents house as an abode for the
newly-weds, without distinguishing between whether the house belonged to
the parents of the bride or of the groom. The couple would live in one
of the rooms of the house and everyone would contribute to the income,
work and affairs of the household.41 Because of this, marriage was
simple and easy regarding housing and furniture and assistance, and the
new couple would learn from the older ones various aspects of life.
Others would live in a new house whose land was free according to the
law ‘the land belongs to Allah and whoever lives upon it'42. The methods
of construction were simple and humble, and there were no governmental
difficulties such as taxes or planning permission or the like.

I still recall that the people at the Holy city of Karbala were almost
one hundred thousand in number and upon analysis; we would not find more
than four unmarried men among them. Today however, the situation is
quite the opposite. Society has collaborated with the state, which lays
down false laws in this respect. But wherever there is no steadfastness
and no organisation in exercising sexual capacity, it becomes distorted
and perverse.

It is necessary - if we desire happiness - to re-balance society, and
to return to the Qur'anic verse: ' He releases them from their heavy
burdens and the yokes that were upon them'.43 So that there will no
longer exist any social burdens or legal fetters, and therein lies the
happiness of Muslims in this world and the next.

**Simplicity of Requirements**

The saying of the Prophet ‘the least of them in dowry’44 includes all
possessions. If the custom present in certain countries now and as was
usual among the earlier Muslims, of the couple being satisfied with
their belongings before the wedding then this would doubtless be an
important factor in decreasing the level of non-marriage and
corruption.

My father told me that they used to live in Samarra in a single house,
and when his sister got married, the gift was very humble, not exceeding
a new dress, which her husband bought for her. On the night of the
marriage the bride moved to the room of the groom and the matter was
concluded.

I actually saw them myself. Theirs was the happiest of households and
they produced fine children and grandchildren. Contentment is a treasure
that never runs out, and contentment with reality, without the vain
excesses and exaggerations, which usually surround things, causes mental
and physical comfort.

History records the dowry of Fatima al-Zahra45 and the circumstances of
her marriage. The dowry was the sum of thirty dirhams according to
various versions. The furnishings of her marriage were basic in the
extreme so that even the carpet of the room was of sand, as is reported.
Despite this it was the happiest of houses not only in the history of
Islam but also in the history of humanity.

The messenger of God made this dowry sunna and made it the dowry of all
his daughters so it came to be known as the dowry of the sunna. However,
stealth and bravery are required from educationalists and in Islamic
circles, and from parents so that they can do away with these man-made
laws and detrimental customs.


