Part Three : the Married Couple: Conditions, Rights, and Customs
================================================================

**Religion and Morals**

The noble Prophet has said: ‘If one comes to you whose religion and
morals please you then marry them'46. This criterion that the prophet
has mentioned is the criterion of common sense also. Naturally the
person must be able to provide for his family if the wife so needs, just
as he should not be an invalid particularly with a venereal disease or
that, which incapacitates him from fulfilling the sexual needs of the
wife. If the behaviour of either of the married couple is not good, the
house becomes like a hell, and if one or other of them does not have a
code of conduct, which keeps them from wrongdoing then the man, might
even be prepared for his wife to become a prostitute. Religion and
morals can be judged from previous behaviour, and as to whether he or
she is capable of bearing children can be known from the relatives47 and
from certain medical checks.

As for beauty, wealth, position, and social status and so on, they are
not in the least bit essential (impossible as not everyone is beautiful
and wealthy).

As for age, for if the balance of Islam in marrying every widow and
widower is looked at then no fault could be found in either comparing
age or neglecting to do so although it is probably better to pay
attention to this element also. Hence the Qur'anic reference to the
People of Heaven as 'equal in age'.48

Hence we still see, even in this age, that this is the custom of many
Muslims although it was more prevalent in the past when it was
Islamic.

The wearing of the veil for women is also part of the religion as is
restraint by men from practising forbidden acts, particularly in this
material age with its voracious appetite for lust and seduction.

**Means of Subsistence**

There is no doubt that being able to expend to run the household is one
of the most important matters of married life. Allah states in the
Qur’an: ‘If they are poor then Allah will enrich them from His
bounty'.49

This is correct one hundred percent. This is because the unmarried man
does not have the motivation to earn money in the same way that the man
who feels a responsibility does. This in addition to the fact that it is
a matter from the unseen world as is everything we see in this world; it
has its apparent cause and its real cause which is the will of Allah.

However, despite this, a means of subsistence should be acquired
including place of abode and other needs. Islam has laid down laws in
this respect like ‘the land belongs to Allah and whoever develops it’50,
or ‘whoever attains something which no other Muslim has first attained
then he has the greater right to it'.51 Therefore it is possible that a
charitable organisation could build simple homes on land with wells or
the like for general water and rainwater tanks for drinking water, with
an orchard for fruits and vegetables and rearing animals. Then they
could be leased which would make things very simple for housing and food
and also clothing which could be made from the wool of the animals
reared in the house. If there were someone in the house who could sew or
perform another task for the family then that would be enough to cover
half the expenses. The other half could be obtained by work, which also
promotes physical and mental health, self-satisfaction and independence
from others.

So if God blesses us with manufacture and agriculture and we have water
and earth and willing hands, we will have become independent from
others. As ‘Ali said: ‘Become independent from whoever you wish and you
will become his equal'.52

**Equality**

Islam has made the Muslim man an equal to the Muslim woman. This tenet
was in effect in Islamic lands until the appearance of nationalisms and
geographical borders which were artificially created by the West to
split up the Muslims and their country. These two tactics were adopted
by various dictatorial rulers to assist them towards more despotism and
more provinces for their sponsors who put them into power in the country
on the condition that they implement their decisions, as well as the
fact that this completes their deception.

I remember that the people coming to Iraq from India, Pakistan,
Afghanistan, and Iran, from the Gulf, Syria and Lebanon used to marry
amongst each other and with Iraqis and vice versa. The same was true of
any land transactions even after the fall of the aforementioned rules of
land and precedence.

Colonialism and its agents set out to demolish the laws of Islam and
replace them with their own laws. With the same ease as marriage and
selling took place, so did buying and obtaining free goods such as salt
and fish and the like. The same can be said for freedom of movement
without passport, there being no geographical borders, along with all
the other tenets of Islam that have been gradually eroded. At that time
there was no barrier to any of the Islamic freedoms nor was there any
tax on anything.

In any case, it is imperative that Muslims concern themselves, except
in cases where they are compelled by force of arms, with bringing back
the laws of Islam in every aspect of their lives. This includes the
condition of equality between the married couple as stated by Islam and
has been shown by the jurists in their explanatory books and their
practical essays. Then the darkness may be lifted gradually just as it
came to our lands gradually.

**Abolition of Conditions**

It is imperative that all man-made conditions which have no connection
with Islam are abolished from the marital agreement. Granted, if
something is made a condition and it is religiously acceptable then it
may be agreed upon by the two parties, but as the saying goes: the more
restrictions there are on something the less frequently it occurs.

Every complication lessens the opportunity for marriage whether it be
the conditions of the groom or of the bride. It is probable that when a
law imposes a condition it seeks to solve a certain problem, but
problems are increased from another perspective. For example a law
seeking to prevent thieves from stealing by night might impose a
curfew.

The basis of marriage in Islam is simplicity and keeping away from
complications and un-Islamic traditions and surplus formalities, which
are routinely imposed. Among that which simplifies marriage is that no
fee is taken for the marriage contract, as was the case in Iraq fifty
years ago when the scholars who used to formulate the contracts were
prevented from taking payment for discharging their services.53

There is no doubt that complexity however small and minor causes delays
and in any number add up to a greater delay. Therefore if these matters
were abolished along with all the other officialities of which there are
an abundance these days, marriage would become easy and would be popular
among young men and women as well as divorcees and so on.

**The Couple's Happiness**

The principle that 'people have dominion over their wealth and their
own selves' is an important one Islamically.54 The West has progressed
and flourished relative to the extent it has practised it. Muslims have
regressed whenever they have neglected and ignored it.

This principle must be applied to the married couple. They are,
together, free in the choices they make in everything that God has
permitted. The only exception which many scholars have noted is in the
rights of the virgin girl if her father or paternal grandfather are
living, in which case she is subject to their opinion and requires their
permission to marry. When the giving of permission is feasible and no
other secondary principle applies, then her wishes should be satisfied
and permission given.

Similarly, it is not at all conceivable that the young man or woman
should be compelled to marry a certain person. Not only is this against
the sacred law and common sense, it very often causes problems, the
least of which are separation, estrangement and divorce, and in some
cases can reach the level of murder and suicide as is common today.

What place is there for compulsion in the relationship of marriage the
meaning of which is the intimate companionship of husband and wife by
day and by night at home or abroad, and throughout all the circumstances
and mental states of each party? Therefore the marriage of the two must
arise out of mutual agreement and no one should have the right to force
them to marry.

**Idolatry of Traditions**

There are certain traditions that have become so widespread as to be
now generally accepted as if they were God given laws whereas they do
not in reality have any connection with Islam. They are in fact
contradictory to the laws of God. The idolatry of customs and the
prevalence of deviations is a major problem which faces almost every
country. Hence, the necessity arises for visionaries and academics to
undertake a courageous stand against this crippling malady and to point
out its weaknesses.

These traditions at times assume a holy nature which can make the
people all the more ready to believe them and put them into practice. It
is not proper either from a religious or intellectual standpoint to pay
attention to the compatibility of star signs of the husband or the wife,
and although it is correct that a marriage taking place when the moon is
in Scorpio will not be joyous, even this may be eliminated through
supplication, Qur'anic verses or almsgiving.

There are also certain foreign customs that have reached the Islamic
world which observe that the married couple should not be related in any
way. This is not correct as can be seen in the marriage of 'Ali and
Fatima and certain of the Imams and their sons. It is related that the
Emissary of God looked to the children of 'Ali and those of ‘Aqueel
saying 'Our daughters are for our sons and our sons are for our
daughters'.55 Indeed, the habit of Muslims from the beginning of Islam
was to marry between cousins on the mother's and father's side. (This is
based on the fact that Allah Almighty has condoned and encouraged cousin
marriage as it is evident from the holy Qur’an, “O Prophet! Verily We
have made lawful for you your wives whom you have given their dowry . .
. and the daughters of your paternal uncle, and the daughters of your
paternal aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncle, and the
daughters of your maternal aunts . . .” Chapter 33, verse 50.)

Whatever the case may be, Islamic standards should not be mixed up with
Western standards.

**The Rights of the Married Couple**

The husband has no right over his wife other than the conjugal right,
and in the matter of her exit from the house for purposes other than in
fulfilling her duties56 since: 'No creature should be obeyed at the cost
of disobedience to the Creator'.57 These rights are brought together in
the following Qur'anic verses: 'And women shall have rights similar to
the rights against them according to what is equitable'.58

'They are your garments and ye are their garments'.59 'But men have a
degree over them'.60 There is absolutely no right for the husband to
transgress with regards to his wife, especially as the marriage has
taken place with her consent and with her ability to make conditions and
that she has certain rights over the wealth of the man if he divorces
her as well as other choices which are at her discretion. She also has
the right to make the condition that the man does not marry another
beside her, and that she can be the agent in divorcing herself, and that
he can not divorce her - as many scholars believe - according to the
report that Mansour Ibn Younis said: ' I said to Abu Al-Hasan that one
of my colleagues had a wife whom he divorced so she left him.

Subsequently he wished her back but the woman said " I will never marry
you until you agree not to divorce me and not to marry another besides
me". So Abu Al-Hasan asked whether he did so and I said Yes. He said 'He
has done ill'. Then he said 'But now, tell him that the condition should
stand, for the Emissary of Allah has said, "The Muslims should stand by
their personal conditions".

This was related by Sheikh Murtada in Al-Makasib. Further detailed
study of the hadith and pronouncements of the jurists can be found in
the book of Fiqh.61


