Part Four : Islam's Word On the New Born Child
==============================================

**The Fruit of Marriage**

The goal of marriage is the maintenance of human kind so it is
important that the two parents pay attention to bringing up the children
after marriage or even before it, as in the saying: 'Choose well for
your seed, for what is bred in the bone comes out in the flesh'. Whether
it be that the man chooses a fine mother or the woman chooses a good
father, the child will take after each of them. Then comes the time for
impregnation, the method for which Islam makes plain. Then the period of
pregnancy and suckling where it is recommended that it be undertaken by
a beautiful woman for 'beauty delights'. After that comes upbringing and
education and the age of studying, from kindergarten until university.
Similarly, care must be taken in choosing a name for them as in the
saying 'nomen est omen' and as has been proven by psychology. Hence, the
Prophet of Islam used to change ugly names to good ones.

The prevalence of children born with deformities, diseases,
incapacities and mental deficiencies in the Islamic world in the last
half of the twentieth century is one of the unpleasant results of
Western lifestyle which has overcome the Muslims with all kinds of
poisons and anxieties and corrupt habits from fashions and cosmetics to
foodstuffs and certain chemical medicines and so forth.

I myself do not recall, before the second world war, even one instance
of any of these terrible occurrences in infants where we used to live in
Karbala and Najaf when Iraq was living in a state of Islam. Today
however, hardly a day passes without us hearing of a case or cases of
abnormalities of this sort.

As for the cure, although it lies in the complete restoration to life
of Islam, prevention gives a clear and effective result in reducing
these diseases.

**The Importance of Health**

The married couple must place a great importance on hygiene because of
the Qur'anic verse: 'save yourselves and your families from the fire'62,
and because of the saying of Al-Sajjad: 'Your body holds a right over
you'. The human being has a responsibility for his body before Allah as
well as for the deeds he has done and their effect on later generations.
Illness is rife, particularly in this age where the rules of hygiene
have been destroyed in food, drink, clothing, transport, and housing,
together with travel from cold climates to hot climates and vice versa.
Modern technology has destroyed a large part of health, while new modes
of dealing with life have destroyed another part, and foods and drinks a
third part.

Similarly it is imperative that sexual health be maintained where an
excess of intercourse and bathing is one of the most detrimental things
to the health as Avicenna said: 'Stay continent (of semen) as far as you
can for it is the water of life to be poured into the womb'. Likewise, a
paucity of sexual intercourse has its own ills proven by medical
science, so the best is to opt for moderation and the middle course.

It is also important to observe the times for intercourse63 as is found
in the major works and mentioned by physicians. This particularly during
times of pregnancy when many ills can be directed to the foetus which
can result in its death, deformity or suffering from chronic
disorders.

Hence we see a prevalence of physical and mental disorders in children.
This stems from many causes including unhealthy parents and exposure of
the child to ills. Children then are now being born at a time when
exposure to diseases and problems is increasing, while mankind is
responsible before Allah for his children, as is reported reliably.

**Suckling**

There is no doubt that the best nourishment for the child is the
mother's milk as is confirmed by the religion and by medical science64,
except when an infectious disease or the like strikes the mother. One of
the reasons for the prevalence of diseases in the child and in the
mother is feeding something other than the mother's milk to the child.
It harms the new born because his metabolism is not prepared for
anything other than his mother's milk and so causes many types of
illnesses as is witnessed these days. It also harms the mother because
the body after childbirth prepares for breast feeding which, if it does
not take place, can cause the milk to become clotted and coagulated in
the breast, in addition to the dangers of non-secretion of surpluses in
the body which are intended to be discharged through their proper
channels.

Furthermore, the breast that does not feed tends towards sagging which
can lead to a decline of its beauty which is a loss where the woman who
has a partner is concerned. Beauty is beloved in religion, common sense
and in customs, as in the hadith: 'God is beautiful He loves beauty'65,
and other examples. The intellect weighs up each quality of perfection
and beauty is one of the parts of perfection. As for custom, it is too
obvious to mention. It is recommended that the natural mother should
feed the child whilst in a state of ritual purity because the milk
passes to the soul and to the body as is proven in the religion and in
medicine. Hence if the father is forced to feed the child by one other
than the child's natural mother, then it is recommended that he choose a
woman of good qualities according to the details laid out by scholars.

**Upbringing and Protection**

It is necessary for the parents to protect the children from deviancy
in morals and values. Protecting is incumbent religiously, as in the
Qur'an: 'Protect yourselves and your families from the fire'.66 In
previous times, before modern methods, and before the colonialist
networks had spread through Islamic lands, sons used to follow in the
footsteps of their fathers except in a very few cases. In this age
however, deviancy is the norm. The majority of youngsters today, despite
their young ages and lack of experience, and with their deviant modes of
thinking propagated by colonialist factions and organisations, view
their parents as reactionary and superstitious, whilst they themselves
have been seduced by the propaganda networks and mass media in the
country which promote every forbidden thing from alcohol to gambling,
licence and perversion. The immature youngster by his nature and
inexperience burns with vitality, activity, desire for change, and lust
and is thus quickly attracted towards deviancy.

Hence arises the necessity of a thorough concern for the children from
parents, relatives, and society as a whole. For without direction, harm
and corruption will not only strike the children but will become general
amongst their families and entire communities. The forces of Saddam in
Iraq, and the Communist forces in Afghanistan and the like have cost
these countries a lot of blood and tears. This is true of many of the
other Islamic lands where many lives have been sacrificed at their
hands.

When we say 'protection of children', we don't simply mean advice and
guidance, but as well as that we mean making them feel part of a healthy
environment and preparing for them the means of obtaining work and
making a living, and forging links for them with a mosque or a school or
a library or a religious community centre, and marrying them when they
come of age and seeking gainful employment for them.

**The Bond of Kinship**

Kinship has a prominent role in safeguarding society from deviance. The
married couple may not be related in any way so kinship develops through
their children, among themselves and between them and the parents'
relatives.

Kinship is a very important means of reaching a common understanding
and of strengthening the bonds of friendship and cooperation, of
solidarity and mutual regard. The parents should sow the seeds of this
in their children so that they may derive benefit from it and also give
benefit. For in kinship there is benefit gained and given, rights and
responsibilities, give and take. The rewards in it are unfathomable.

In the Qur'an comes the words: '. . . and be careful of (your duty to)
Allah, by whom you demand one another your rights, and to the bonds of
kinship'67.

Here the bond of kinship and guarding against breaking it are linked
with piety and God-consciousness and guarding against disobeying Him.

There are many reports about this matter. The Prophet has said: ' The
bond of kinship populates the houses and increases life spans even if
the inhabitants are not good people'68. Imam Al-Baqir has said: 'The
bond of kinship purifies deeds and makes wealth grow. It keeps
tribulations at bay and increases longevity'69.

Imam Al-Sadiq has said: 'The bond of kinship improves the character,
cleanses the hands, perfumes the soul, increases sustenance and adds to
longevity'70.

In another report from Imam Al-Sadiq comes that a man came to the
prophet and said: 'Messenger of God, I have a family and I was their
head but now they bring me pain and I wish now to disown them'.

The Prophet said 'Then God will disown you all'. The man asked 'What
shall I do then? 'The prophet said 'Give to he who denies you, bond with
he who cuts off from you and forgive whoever wrongs you. If you do this,
God will be your backer'71. A child disobeying and disrespecting his
parents, religiously prohibited and intellectually detestable, is a form
of breaking the bond of kinship. Similarly a father's disrespect to his
children - which is also disrespect and is referred to in traditions -
is also a kind of breaking this bond.

When a person is born he is surrounded by a plethora of rules and
etiquettes, as well as by universal laws and practices. Therefore a
person should prepare himself to adapt in a practical way to these rules
and etiquettes and to follow those laws and traditions. Otherwise he
will find himself to be the first casualty because of the clash he will
experience coming up against them and in many cases he may also cause
harm to others besides him.

**Virtues and Non-violence**

Supposing that a man had a number of wives long term, or if he became a
widower or his marriage was annulled or he became divorced, he should
not place the status of one wife above the other, nor should he place
the children of one wife over those of another. This can cause the
break-up and dispersion of the family in many cases, and can sow the
seeds of enmity and hatred amongst the children. In extreme cases this
can end up in injury, beating, murder and suicide.

The wives must also not be jealous of one another72 for this also
propagates enmity and all its consequences including murder, especially
if one wife has children while the other does not. These kinds of
enmities and quarrels as well as being disobedience to God which warrant
punishment in the afterlife also disturb the serenity of life without
good reason.

Some friends of mine who have visited parts of Asia and Africa and
certain Western countries have told me that the concepts held by some
Muslims of hatreds and enmities and quarrels and their consequences are
generally not present there.

Human nature often calls for these things but the consequences of them
is obvious if a person uses his intelligence and strengthens his faith
in God and desires His reward and fears His punishment.

A good upbringing and the development of an environment of tolerance
and loving and non-violence are the best way in manifold areas of life.
Hence the parents should school themselves and their children in noble
morals and praiseworthy virtues and non-violence in marital matters so
that they may find happiness in this world and the next.


