Chapter 1 : Imam Ali Bin Husain (a.s.): Childhood
=================================================

**INTRODUCTION**

Imam Ali bin Husain (A.S), more known by his title Zainul Abidin than
his actual name, is fourth Imam from the progeny of the Prophet Hazrat
Muhammed (S.A.W.W). Like his father Imam Husain (A.S), his uncle Imam
Hassan (A.S) and his grandfather Imam Ali (A.S) and the Prophet
(S.A.W.W), he was a Masoom (He did not commit any mistake or sins).

**HIS BIRTH**

He was born on 5th Shaban (or on 15th Jamadi-ul-Awaal) 38 A.H. (658
A.D) in Medina (some historians say he was born in Kufa).

His father was Hazrat Imam Husain (A.S) and his mother was Hazrat
Sheherbanu. She was a princess from Iran. She was the daughter of Yazd
gard II, the last king of Pre-Islamic Iran. Thus he was called "Ibn
Al-Khiyaratyn". or the son of the best two meaning: The Quraysh from the
Arabs and the Persians from non-Arabs.

The Muslims, at the time of Umar Khattab, captured Iran in 21 A.H. The
ruler, however, was able to run away from Muslims; later he was killed.
Several years later his two daughter's, Sheherbanu and Gayhanbanu were
brought as prisoners-of-war at the time when Imam Ali (A.S) was the
Caliph of the Muslims. They were sent to Imam Ali (A.S) by his governor,
Haris bin Jabir Joafi.

Imam Ali (A.S) freed the two sisters. The elder one Sheherbanu (who was
also known as Shahzanan, Sulafa, Ghazala and Sheherbanuya) was given in
marriage to Imam Husain (A.S). The younger sister was given in marriage
to Muhammed bin Abubakr. Sheherbanu gave birth to Imam Zainul Abidin (A.
S) where as Gayhanban gave the birth to Kassim, whose daughter was later
married to Imam Mohammed Baqr (A.S).

After her marriage to Imam Husain (A.S), she became very pious. She was
regularly praying and g Allah for having brought her to a house in which
mercy of Allah was coming every second.

It is reported that once a maid in her house showed pity to Sheherbanu
saying that it must have been very hard for her to live in the house of
Imam Husain (A.S), she having first lived the life of princess of
Persia.

Sheherbanu replied, "You should never talk like that for you do not
know where I was and where I am now. I was in the Hell fire and I came
to Paradise. I left the house of fire worshippers and came to the house
of the worshippers of one Allah...".

Sheherbanu died a few days after giving birth to Imam Zainul Abidin
(A.S). She was not present in Kerbala. Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) was
taken care off, as a child, by a maid whom he came to love and respect
like his own mother.

**HIS CHILDHOOD**

When he was born, Imam Ali (A. S) was still alive and he remained in
company of his grandfather for another two years. It is said that time
and again Imam Ali (A.S) would hug him and say, "My son you are Zainul
Abidin."

One day when Imam Ali (A.S) was praying, the young Zainul Abidin, who
then was only one and half years old, started imitating his grandfather.
He prayed the same way Imam Ali (A.S) did. On completing his prayers,
Imam Ali (A.S) said, "How truthful was the Prophet when he said our
young and our old are all the same, all being Muhammed." As a young boy
till when he became 12 years of age, he spent a lot his time with his
uncle Imam Hassan (A.S).

There after he stayed with Imam Husain (A.S) till 61 A.H. At the time
of Imam Husain's martyrdom, Imam Zainul Abidin was a youth of 22 years.
His childhood was not free from trouble. His mother died when he was
only an infant. He lost the care and love of his grandfather when he was
only two. As a young boy he saw the injustices that were done to his
uncle Imam Hassan (A.S).

As a young boy of 12, he saw his Uncle's bier being hit with arrows. It
must have pained him to see his Uncle's last wishes of wanting to be
buried next to his grandfather, the Prophet (S.A.W. W), being
unfulfilled. All these disturbed him and made him sad but, they never
shook his faith in Allah. As a matter of fact, the incidents that we are
about to describe show how peaceful he was in his mind and how strong
his love was for Allah.

As a young boy, he showed great love and respect As a young boy for the
sick people. Once, someone in his neighbourhood fell sick, Imam Zainul
Abidin (A.S) spent a lot of his time caring and comforting him. When the
sick man became well, he was so pleased with the young Imam that he
wanted to pay him back in any way that the Imam wanted.

Ali bin Husain (A.S), and that he came for Hajj in this manner every
year.

Imam Hasan (A.S that for the time Ali Bin Husain (A.S) stayed with him,
though still only a child, he showed great love for prayers. He would
get up in the midst of the night and pray till dawn.


