Chapter 3 : Imam Ali Bin Husain (a.s): Life in Medina After the Tragedy of Kerbala
==================================================================================

**THE PROBLEMS FAUNG THE IMAM TO CARRY OUT THE PREACHING OF ISLAM.**

It will be recalled that Yezid had given the Imam his freedom to return
to his home in Medina not out of love but out of fear. The Imam,
therefore, was still not out of danger. The Imam, therefore, had to find
out a way to preach the true message of Allah without appearing to be
working against the government.

This problem became even more difficult as Muslims throughout the
empire began to rise against Yezid. For example, Abdullah Ibne Zubair
declared himself the ruler of Mecca. In A.H 63 the Muslims of Medina
drove away Yezid's governor from Medina and appointed a man of.their own
choice in hisplace.

To save his crown, Yezid turned to using force. He decided to kill
anyone who opposed him. The Imam had to place himself in such a position
that no one could say that he was also amongst those plotting to
overthrow Yezid. Otherwise, the Imam would not be able to complete the
mission of saving Islam from its enemies. He would either be imprisoned
again or even be killed. Who would then be there to serve Islam the way
Allah wished it to be served?

**HOW THE IMAM KEEPS THE MISSION OF ISLAM ALIVE WITHOUT ANGERING THE
GOVERNMENT.**

When martyrdom was necessary to keep Islam alive, Imam Husain (A.S)
publicly opposed Yezid and gave. his life. When silence became necessary
to keep Islam alive, Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) retired in his house to
serve Islam in the best way possible.

From A.H. 62 to A.H. 95 when he left this world, Imam Zainul Abidin
(A.S) led a quiet life, preaching the Islam in two ways.

Firstly, he kept alive the message of Imam Husain (A.S) regarding Islam
trough mourning. There was not a day that passed without the Imam crying
in memory of his father Imam Husain (A.S) and others who gave their
lives in Kerbala. He encouraged his followers also to regard it as their
duty to remember the martyrs of Kerbala as often as they could.

The first time he entered Medina when returning from Damascus, he laid
down the tradition of mourning for Imam Husain (A.S). He pitched a tent
outside Medina and moUming dress he let the Muslims of Medina what was
expected of them from then onwards.

A man by the name of Noaman went to Medina three years after the events
of Kerbala. He saw the Imam standing near the grave of the Prophet
weeping and complaining to the Prophet about the III-treatment that Imam
(A.S) and the other members of the Prophet's family had received from
the Bani Umayyah. The Imam (A.S) remained in this position until when he
fainted and was then taken by his followers to his house.

Noaman went to Imam's house. Then asked the Imam what was the most
difficult time he had to face in Kerbala and during his imprisonment to
Kufa and Damascus. The Imam said, "A-Sham, A-Sham, A-Sham" and then
explained that in Sham the family of the Prophet was treated like
animals and presented to the court of Yezid like slaves.

In this way people of Medina were to see him mourning for his father
from then till his death some thirty five years later.

It is reported that when the Imam saw water he would weep, remembering
the thirst of the martyrs of Kerbala. When he saw a goat or sheep being
slaughtered, he would ask the slaughter if he had fed the animal and
given it water. On being assured that this had, indeed, been done, the
Imam would weep, saying that his father and other martyrs of Kerbala
were slaughtered hungry and thirsty of three days.

He held regular mourning session in his house. Those who attended these
sessions would then be served with food in the name of his father, Imam
Husain (A.S)

One day somebody told him. "O son of Allah's Messenger!. Up to when
would you weep like this?"

The Imam replied "'O servant of Allah. Prophet Yakub had twelve sons
but only one of them (Yusuf) was taken away form him, he wept so much
and for such long that his eyes turned white, his head turned gray and
his back was bent although his son Yusuf was still alive. Whereas I
watched my father, my brother and seventeen members of my family being
slaughtered all around me. How could my sorrow come to an end?".

Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) through such mourning sessions let the world
know the reason why it was necessary for Imam Husain (A.S) to sacrifice
his life but not accept Yezid as the rightful ruler of the Muslims.

The plot of Yezid and his family of Bani Umayyah to destroy Islam was
brought out in the open through the Imam's weeping for his father.

The second most important thing that the Imam did after returning from
Damascus was to spend a lot of his time praying to Allah. His prayers
were not only in the form of "Namaz" but also in the way of "Duas" or
supplications.He would read these supplications and then teach them to
his sons Hazrat Muhammad Baqir (A.S) and Hazrat Zaid. These
supplications were later complied in a book called SAHIFA KAMILA.(The
complete book).

This book is also known by other names such as SAHIFA SAJJADIA (the
book ofSajjad; Sajjad being another name of Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S);
Sajjad means one who spends a lot ofhis time in "Sijda"), or ZABURE ALE
(PsalmsofthehouseholdofM ed). The SAHIFA as we know it, today is made of
54 Duas, 14 additional 'Duas' and 15 'Munajat'. Over and above the
SAHIFA, there are many other supplications of the Imam which appear
under different covers.

With the help of these 'Duas', Imam Zainul .Abidin (A.S) taught Muslims
not only how to pray to Allah but also what is the essence of Islam.
Also the major elements of religion are contained in these Duas.
Moreover, the Duas teach us who Allah is and who the Prophet is and what
kind of life we should lead. For example, in the Dua called "AKHLAQ"
(The excellence of character), the Imam looks at different types and
qualities of behaviour which make a man's character and personality, and
tells his followers to have those qualities.

The Dua also teaches how Muslims should link themselves with the house
of the Prophet, the Ahlul-Bayt. These ideas, if preached in any other
form, would without and doubt, invite the government of Bani Umayyah to
put the Imam in trouble. But who would complain if the Imam addressed
his creator, Allah using "Duas"?

In this way through mourning for his father and praying to Allah, Imam
Zainul Abidin (A.S) kept the true message of Allah alive from the
evil-minded Bani Umayyah.


**Effect of The Imam's Approach To Preach Through Prayers**

The greatest result of the Imam's decision to lead a quiet life was:
the government became sure that he was not going to be dangerous to
them. They, therefore, left him alone. For example, when Muslim bin
Aqaba attacked Medina in A.H. 63, he did no harm to the Imam. Whereas
Muslim showed complete disrespect for the Mosque of the Prophet, he did
no harm to Imam Zainul Abidin's house. Those who sought shelter of the
Imam's house also remained safe from the army's cruelties. In fact
Muslim Bin Aqaba called Imam to his headquarters and treated him with
courtesy and respect.

All this was because the Imam (A.S) had shown no sign of wanting to
overthrow the government. What the government failed to understand was
that Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) was establishing the foundations of truth
which would, in future, provide strong basis of Islam which would live
for ever.

By being left on his own, not only did Imam (A.S) widened the horizons
of Islam, but al so found a place for himself to let the Muslims
community see for themselves who truly was the representative of the
Prophet.

This was a very important job to be done by the Imam. This IS because
the rulers of his time Yezid, Marwan, Abdul Malik bin Marwan and Walid
bin Abdul Malik all lead very un-Islamic lives yet they presented
themselves as the representatives of the Prophet (S.A.W.W). The presence
of the Imam was a continuous lesson for Muslims. The Muslims could
compare the excellent life of the Imam with that of the rulers and
decide for themselves who was the true successor of the Prophet and
therefore the leader of the community.

The effect of the teaching and the pure life-style of the Imam was such
that he came to be regarded as an excellent person and an authority of
the religion of Islam. At his time, there were seven scholar in Medina
who were called ""The seven lawyers of Medina", and who were considered
to be the best authorities on Islamic traditions and law. Imam Zainul
Abidin (A.S) was not only one among these seven scholars, he was the
best of them all.

One of these seven lawyers called Said bin Al -Musayyab considered the
Imam with highest respect: the respect that a lesser pe son shows to a
higher person. Another very famous and knowledgeable lawyer, Al-Zuhri,
gave the title of Zainul Al Abidin to the Imam!.

Sufyan Suri says that he once asked Zuhri as to why he always called
the Imam by the name of Zainul Abidin. Zuhri replied: "On the Day of
Judgement a caller will say. Where is Zainul Abidin? Then Husain's son
Ali, will come forward."

By the time the Bani Umayyah realised the wisdom of Imam Zainul
Abidin's approach to establish Islam through the memory of his father
and prayers of Allah, it was too late. Without the knowledge of the
government the Imam had raised his position in the Muslims community so
high that none of the rulers could reach, with all their wealth and
power. The following incident illustrates this point very well.

Hasham, the Bani Umayyah prince, went to Mecca for pilgrimage. After
completing his Hajj he wanted to kiss the "Hajare Aswad" but there was
such a big crowd that he could not reach there. He was therefore waiting
for the crowd to decrease so that he could then get near "Hajare Aswad".
With him were standing his royal attendants.

Then came a person dressed in simple clothes. He was approaching the
Kaaba very slowly when the crowd saw him they all scattered, making way
for him. The man slowly and with ease went round the "House of Allah"
(Kaaba) seven times, kissed the "Hajare Aswad" and went away Hasham, the
prince of the Muslims empire, could not believe what he saw. wasn't he
the prince? Why had he to wait and a stranger be shown such respect? Who
was he after all? He asked his attendants who the stranger was that he
should enjoy such a respect with people that even the prince could
not.

The attendants said they did not know who the person was, though they
knew very well that the person was Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) but were
afraid that if they said the truth Hasham would be offended.

However, the famous poet Farazdaq, who was being paid by the king to
write poems in praise of the royal family could not keep quiet. He read
long poem in praise of Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) the most important part
of which is ...

"..This is Ali (Bin Husain) whose parent is the Prophet, This is the
son of Fatima, if you do not know who he is.

Whoever recognizes his God knows also the greatness and importance of
this man, Because the religion has reached the nations through his
house."

Hisham burned with jealousy. He got Farazdaq in prison for praising the
Imam (A.S).

When the Bani Umayyah rulers realised their mistake they decided to
kill the Imam. By the instructions of Walid Bin Merwan, the governor of
Medina poisoned the Imam (A.S). The Imam (A.S) died from this poison on
25th Muharram A.H 95 (A.D. 713).


