Chapter 4 : Imam Ali Bin Husain (a.s): His Character and Personality
====================================================================

**GENERAL REMARKS**

The beliefthat our Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W W), his daughter, Hazrat
Fatima (A.S), Imam Ali (A.S) and other eleven Imams (whose biographies
we are going to study in this course) are all sinless and make no
mistakes, is a very important part of our faith. To us these fourteen
personalities were perfect.

However, as each of them had a special job to do and most of them lived
in different periods of time, each of them had a chance to show only a
few sides of his or her character. In the world in which Imam Zainul
Abidin (A.S) lived, the parts of his character which people could be
seen very clearly are described in the following pages of this
chapter.

**HIS PIETY**

He had great love and fear of Allah. These could be seen the way the
carried out his daily 'Wajib' prayers and other recommended prayers.
Three things can be said about his prayers to Allah:

1) Once he set up his mind to pray to Allah, he forgot about every
thing else. He gave himself totally to Allah. Nothing would disturb his
prayers. Consider the following incidents.

\* Once while he was praying, his house caught fire. To put down the
fire and more importantly to save their lives everybody in the house was
running here and there. But not the Imam (A.S). He continued his prayers
as if nothing had happened. When he finished his prayers, the fire had
already been put down. Somebody asked him, no the son Prophet, why
didn't you cut-short your "Sajda" when you heard the people shouting
that the house was on fire?"

The Imam replied, "When I heard 'fire, fire' I remembered the fire of
Hell. I compared that with fire in my house. I found the fire of Hell
more severe so I continued praying."

\* At another time his son, Hazrat Muhammed Baqir (A.S) had fallen in a
well. The child's mother was deeply upset and cried for the Imam's help.
The Imam was in the middle of his prayers. He neither broke his prayers
nor did he rush to complete his prayers fast. He continued his prayers,
at his usual speed. On completing his prayers he went to the well and
brought out the child. The child was safe and was not hurt at all.

\* It is said that once Shaitan (Devil) decided to disturb the Imam's
prayers. The Devil then took the form of a snake and stung the Imam's
legs continuously. The Imam felt the pain but he continued praying as if
nothing had happened. When he had finished he told the Shaitan to go
away. Then came a voice from Heavens saying, "You are Zainul Abidin (A.
S) (the decoration of the pious)"; every body who was present heard this
and the Imam (A. S) became famous by that name; \* It is common with
human beings, to shorten their prayers or even to neglect them at the
time of difficulties. This was not so with the Imam (A.S). On the
evening of Ashura in Kerbala, Imam (A.S) went through a very hard
time.

He remembered these hard times throughout his life But his prayers
remained as pure as ever- He Spent the whole night in "Sajda" praising
Allah in these words:

"There is no other God but Allah and that is the truth. There is no
other God but Allah in terms. of faith and truth. There is no other God
but Allah. I testify this by praying to Him".

Throughout his difficult journey from Kerbala to Kufa and from Kufa to
Damascus and all the time he was in prison, his prayers remained the
same as they had been during the normal times.

2) He spent a lot of his time in prayers. Beside the daily obligatory
prayers like his grandfather Imam Ali (A.S), he prayed 1000 rakats of
recommended prayers (Mustahab) daily in the day and at night. If there
was any time left that, too, he would spend in "Duas" and "Sujud". \*
Taoos Yamani reports that once he went to the House of Allah and there
he saw Ali Bin Husain (A.S) near "Hajare Aswad" (Black stone). He first
prayed and then bowed down in 'Sajda'. Taus says that he went near the
Imam to hear what he was saying and he heard the Imam say in presence of
Allah:

"Your humble servant is at your courtyard"
"Your sad one is at your courtyard"
"Your poor one is at your courtyard"
"Your beggar is at your courtyard"

Taoos says since that time whenever I need help from Allah I address
Him in this way and I get the help that I need.

\* It is reported that the Imam would get out of his bed at midnight
daily and go to his prayer carpet saying, "O my creator, the thought
that I will have to face you on the Day of Judgement has got me out of
my bed and made me sleepless." Having said so, he would bow-down in
prayers and put his cheeks on the ground. He would then weep in fear of
Allah and weep so much that the ground would become wet with his tears.
His family would gather around him but he would not even notice them. He
would continue addressing Allah saying, "O my creator, I don't wish for
the restful life of this world. I ask for your mercy at that time when I
shall be brought in your presence."

\* A man by the name of Zurara Bin Ayan once heard at midnight a caller
saying, "Where are those people who give away this world for the next
world?" another call came as a reply from the graveyard of Baqi saying,
"Such a person is Ali Bin Husain (A.S)."

\* If any member of his family asked him as to why he was praying like
this even though he was sinless, he would reply, "Why shouldn't I try to
be nearer to Allah than I am now?"

\* It is reported by Sheikh Mufid that once Imam Muhammed Baqir (A.S)
saw that his father's face had turned yellow through weeping all night.
His forehead was hurt. His legs and feet were swollen from standing long
hours in prayers. Imam Baqir started weeping. Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S)
asked his weeping son to bring to him the book containing the prayers of
Imam Ali (A.S).

He then read from the book for a while and closing it, he said,." who
is strong enough to worship the way Ali Ibne Abi Talib used to do?" the
massage from Imam Zainul Abidin was: compared to my grandfather my
prayers are too short and too little. So let me do as much as I can.

Fatima Binti Ali, the Imam's aunt called Jabir Bin Abdullah Ansari and
requested to talk to the Imam and persuade him not to pray so much that
his health could suffer. When Jabir talked to the Imam, the Imam
reminded Jabir about the Prophet's long prayers which led to the
revelation of those Quranic verses in which Allah tells the Prophet to
reduce his night prayers. The Prophet's Allah. In the reason for such
long prayers was to thank same way the Imam's long prayer were only to
thank Allah.

Whenever he heard of good news, he would bow down in "Sajda" to praise
and thank Allah. Whenever his desires were fulfilled he would go in
sajda. Whenever his problems were solved he would go in sajda. So much
did he spend his time in sajda; praying or praising or thanking Allah
that he became known as "Sayyidu Sajidin" or the leader of those who do
"Sajda".

Because he bent so much in prayers the skin over his knees and on his
forehead was as hard as that of the camel. From time to this skin had to
be peeled-off His forehead, too, was wounded because of remaining in the
position of "Sajda" for long hours.

3) Both before prayers and during prayers the Imam's behaviour would
change in fear of Allah. For example, when he did his "Wudhu" his face
would become pale and his body would shake. When he was asked for a
reason he would reply , "Don't you know before whom I am preparing to
stand?". Throughout his prayers his face continued to remain pale. After
completing his prayers, in his "Duas" and "Sajdas" he would weep so much
that his beard would be wet with tears.

Once someone saw him praying in the mountains on a bare rock which had
become hot with the sun's ray's. The man asked for the reason. The Imnam
explained saying, "This heat from the rock reminds me of the heat of the
Hell and gives me a better understanding when I pray for forgiveness
from Hell fire."

It was because of his prayers that he became known as "Zainul Abidin"
or the decoration of the pious people.

His piety was not just in prayers. He used to spend almost all his days
fasting. A maid who spent several years serving Imam reports that
throughout her service she never cooked any food for him nor prepared
his bedding at night.

By some accounts he fasted everyday except on forbidden days such as on
Idd days.

When he went for 'Hajj' he would do so most of the time walking. When
he did use a beast of burden, he would never beat to make it move faster
It therefore took him twenty days to travel between Medina and Mecca.

Once he was on such a pilgrimage to Mecca. He put on his "Ihram" and
was about to say "Labaik Allahumma Labaik" which is required from every
person doing "Hajj", his face turned yellow and he could not say
"Labaik" loudly. When he was asked why he did not do so, he replied,
"Suppose I said Labaik and Allah replied LaLabaik (I don't accept your
Labaik) what would happen to me?" It is reported that his whole Hajj was
spent in fear of Allah.


