His Patience ("sabr") and Forgiving- Nature
===========================================

Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) was similar to his uncle Imam Hassan (A.S) and
his grandson Imam Musa Kazim (A.S) (Our 7th Imam) by showing a lot of
pat, ience to their enemies.

You will remember that after the events of Kerbala, he went through
very bad times in the hands of his enemies, but at no occasion did he
show sign of anger or impatience. Whenever necessary, he replied to his
enemies bravely but without showing any anger or loss of patience.
Consider the following incidents.

\* When the Imam was a prisoner of Yezid in Damascus and was being
taken to the court, a Syrian came forward and abused the Imam saying,
"Tell me who has come out successful you or Yezid?"

Without getting angry the Imam replied, "When you hear the Azan you
make your own decision as to who is and who a failure." In the same way,
another old man of Syria addressed the Imam saying "Praise be to Allah
who destroyed you, who killed your brought peace in the country by
giving victory to the caliph of Muslims."

The Imam first the verse of Qur'an (42:23) meaning: "O Prophet to them
"I do not ask to be paid back for my services except they you should
love my verses?"

The old man replied that, indeed, he had read those verses but he did
not know how these verses had anything to do with the Imam. The Imam
then read two more verses from the Qur'an, meaning:

"Know o you believers'. Whatever of a thing you acquire, a fifth of it
is for the Prophet and for the Prophet's family (8:41). And "Allah
wishes to keep you away from uncleanness, O you the people of the house,
and to purify you with complete purification. (33:33) Then the Imam told
the that he prisoners were the family of the Prophet in these verses and
they were the ones for whom the Prophet had asked for respect and
love.

The old man then felt very sorry and apologized and the Imam forgave
him.

\* Hisham Bin Ismail, the governor of Medina used to give a lot of
trouble to the Imam. As time went by, he was removed from his position
by Walid, the king. As his punishment, he was made to stand at a public
place. People were given permission to do whatever they wished to him.
Imam (A.S) had suffered the most from his hands and the chance to take
his revenge. Instead, the Imam now was (A.S) went to him and greeted him
with respect and kindness knowing that if he did so then others would
follow him and save Hisham from insults and injury.

Together with his patience was his forgiving nature and his kindness.
The following incidents from Imam's life show this very clearly.

\* Once a slave girl, while serving him, dropped on him a heavy jug
full of water and cut his face. She said to him, ," Allah, the most high
says:

those who control their anger." "Before she could complete this verse
of the Qur'an, he said, "I have controlled my anger."

She continued, saying, "And those who forgive the people .." He
replied. "'May Allah forgive you." She went on, saying, ", Allah loves
those , who do good. "He replied, "'Go, you are a free person in the
presence of Allah, The High, The Mighty."

\* Once the Imam called his slave but the slave did not reply him. The
Imam called him two more times; only then he replied. The Imam asked him
if he did not hear being called. The slave replied that he did hear but
he ignored to answer because he knew that no harm would come to him from
the Imam (A.S).

When the Imam heard this he said, "Praise be to Allah who made my slave
safe from me."

During the times of the Imam (A.S) slavery was common. Slaves would
come from wars. The Imam used to get them as "Khums" from those who took
part in these wars. Also the Imam used to purchase some slaves and then
set them free.

He treated his slaves very well and would never beat them for any
mistakes. Instead, he would record all their mistakes. At the end of the
month of Ramadhan, he would call them and let them know of all their
mistakes. He would then tell them to pray to Allah to forgive the Imam
the way the Imam forgave them (the slaves). He would then set free all
slaves and give them generous gifts.

It is said that one of his such slaves whom the Imam had set free
progressed so much that on one occasion he loaned 10,000 dinars to Imam
Zainul Abidin (A.S). The Imam (A.S) later repaid this loan.

\* A person once spoke very harshly to the Imam and wrongly blamed the
Imam for things he had never done. The Imam listened to all these
quietly and without answering him. The man got tired and went away.

After he had gone the Imam asked his followers to go with punish the
person. They all went with the Imam (A.S). On his way the Imam started
reading the following verses of Qur'an:

"'Those who control their anger and forgive the people, Allah loves
those who do good." (3'133). His companions immediately knew that the
Imam would forgive the person.

When they arrived at the person's house and when the person saw them
all, he was sure, the Imam had come to punish him. However, the Imam
addressed him very gently saying, "Brother, you said things about me, if
truly I have those faults, then I pray to Allah to forgive me. If,
however, I do not have those faults, I pray to Allah to forgive you."

The man was put to shame. He said, "You are free from all those faults.
May Allah forgive me for making those false claims against you." \* Once
a man abused the Imam (A.S) in his presence. The Imam acted like he did
not hear it. Then the man shouted, "I mean you." The Imam (A.S) replied,
"And from you I am turning away." By this the Imam (A.S) was acting
according to the Qur'an which says "'Go to what is honourable and turn
away from the ignorant" (7:199).


**His Generosity**

His acts of piety did not end with only spending his time communicating
with Allah. He spent a lot of his time 34 serving human beings also. He
regularly visited the poor and the sick and provided for their
necessities of life without their knowledge. In the darkness of the
night, he would carry on his back bags of bread and food, cover his face
so that no one could recognize him and go from door to door of the needy
and serve them food.

None knew that this person was Imam Zainul Abidin(A.S) until his death
Zuhir says that once when it was raining heavily at night, he saw the
Imam carrying a heavy load on his back. He offered to help. The Imam
said he was on his way to a journey.

The next day Zuhir still saw the Imam in Medina. Had the Imam postponed
his journey? No. The Imam explained that he was preparing for the
journey of the next world. He was on his way to feed the poor and did
not want Zuhir to go with him as this could lead to the poor to
recognize who their benefactor was.

Sheikh Mufid records that Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) paid a visit to Zaid
Bin Uthama Bin Zaid who was very sick. Zaid was weeping because he had
debt of fifteen thousand dinars. The Imam promised Zaid that he would
pay the full debt immediately and he did so.

These acts of generosity were not meant for the poor and for the Imam's
friends only. It was extended even to - his enemies. As will be
illustrated in the following incidents.

You will recall that in A. H 64 the people of Medina removed Yezid's
governor from his post of governorship in Medina, Fearing for their
lives, the Bani Ummayyah started running away from Medina. Marwan Bin
Hakam had a large family of women and children and could not run away
for his life unless he could find someone who would agree to house his
women and children. Marwan approached several people including Abdullah
Bin Omar Bin Khattab but all refused to help him.

Finally Marwan turned to Imam Zainul Abidin for help.

Marwan was enemy number one of the Prophet (S.A.W.W) and his family. As
a matter offact, the Prophet (S.A.W W) had ordered Marwan and his father
Hakam Bin Aas to leave Medina as unwanted persons. It is the same Merwan
who had fought against Imam Ali (A.S) in the Battle of Jamal. Merwan
also was one ofthose who prevented Imam Hassan to be buried next to his
grandfather's grave. Again, it was Merwan who had told Walid, the
Governor of Medina in A.H. 60 to force "Bayah" from Imam Husain (A.S) in
the court or to cut-off his head if he refused.

Despite this, the Imam (A.S) agreed to help Marwan. Merwan's family
stayed with the Imam in Imam's house for as long as they wished. The
Imam then arranged for them to go to where Merwan was.

In fact, Imam's house was open for anyone who came seeking for
protection at this time.

To put down the rebellion in Medina, Yezid sent a strong army under the
one-eyed general called Muslim Bin Aqaba. Muslim brought back Medina
under the control of Yezid but before he could do the same to Mecca he
died.

Hasin Bin Namir took-over from Muslim and went to Mecca, to deal with
Abdullah Ibne Zubair whohad taken control of Mecca from Yezid. Before
Hasin could win back Mecca, he got the news that Yezid had died.

Hasin hurried back to Damascus with whatever that he was left without
food was left of his army. On the way and water. He and his army were
about to die in the desert out of thirst and hunger. Then he saw a man
coming in his direction. The man had a camel loaded with food and water.
Hasin begged the man to sell to him the food and water which he had with
him for any price. The man replied that his provisions were not for
sale. However, as Hasin needed them so badly he could have it all for
free.!

In his conversation with the stranger, Hasin recognized the stranger as
being no other person than Ali Bin Husain (A.S). Thinking that the Imam
had not recognised him, Hasin asked the Imam if he knew to whom the Imam
was extending his generosity.

The Imam replied, "I know that you are the murderer of my brother and
father and that you denied my father water and food till his martyrdom
but that shows who you are and my generosity shows what I am".

Hasin offered to help the Imam take control of Damascus. The Imam
refused saying, all that he did for him was because he was a human being
needing help. The Imam needed no reward or thanks. Saying so he went
away - leaving behind Hasin to bite his figures in disbelief Such was
the generosity of our fourth Imam, Ali Bin Husain, Zainul Abidin
(A.S).


