Chapter 5 : Some Miracles of Imam Ali Bin Husain (a.s)
======================================================

**WHAT IS A MIRACLE?**

Allah has made laws for all his creation. These laws can be divided
into two types. First, there are those laws which no one can change.
These are sometimes called the laws of nature. For example, the sun
rises in the east and sets in the west. The character of water is to
cool and that of fire is to burn. No one can bring the dead back from
death; these are but a few examples of the laws of nature.

Then there are the laws of Allah which are in the hands of man and they
can change them against the will of Allah. For example, the law of Allah
forbids to have relationship with another man as if he was a woman.
(This act was very common with the people who lived during the times of
Nabi Loot) But man can change this law, though by doing so he commits a
sin.

Miracle is said to have taken place when a law of nature, which in
normal conditions cannot be changed, is indeed changed. For example, the
Qur'an tells us of the miracles of Nabi Isa (A.S). He was born without
his mother having any relationship with a man. Again, when he was born,
he started talking, telling people that he was a Prophet with a book
from Allah. Or that he made the dead return to life. These acts are not
normal and they are called miracles or "Mojiza".

Miracles take place only when Allah wishes and He does so for very
special reasons. The main reason is that: Allah wants to prove his
existence. The Prophets and 12 Imams show miracles only when Allah
wishes them to do so. For example, Nabi Musa could turn his stick into a
snake to show that he had this power given to him by Allah.

Another good example of miracle is that': Our Prophet, Hazrat Muhammad
(S.A.WW), split the moon into two parts to prove to the "Kuffar" of
Mecca that he was a true Messenger of Allah.

Besides the Prophet (S.A.W.W), the other 13 Masoomin (That is Hazrat
Fatima and our 12 Imams) also did show miracles when it was necessary to
do so and when Allah wished them to do so.

Before I give examples of the miracles that Imam Zainul Abidin showed,
I shall explain the difference between a miracle and magic.

Whereas a miracle is the work of the men of Allah, magic is the work of
Shaitan or only a trick performed so cleverly that for sometime we see a
change in natural laws. For example, in the Qur'an we are told that
Firawn (Pharo) called magicians who could turn threads into snakes.

The difference between magic and miracle is the same as the difference.
between the snakes of magicians and that of Nabi Musa. The magician's
snakes were not real, the one of Nabi Musawas. As a result, the
magician's snakes only appeared like snakes and therefore could do no
harm or even fight with Nabi Musa's snake which swallowed the threads of
the magicians. The threads disappeared for good.


**The Miracles of Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S)**

Several miracles were shown by the Imam (A.S) but we shall look at only
two of them.

**MIRACLE 1**

After the martyrdom of Imam Husain (A.S), the army of Yezid cut-off the
heads of all the martyrs of Kerbala and removed them from their bodies.
Then they left those bodies without burying them. They did not allow
Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) to bury these martyrs. Instead, they took him a
prisoner to Kufa.

After the army of Yezid had left for Kufa, the tribe of Bani Asad, who
lived in the neighbourhood of Kerbala, came to bury the martyrs. Since
there was no way by which they could know whose body belonged to whom,
they were worried.

Suddenly, they saw a man on a horse coming in their direction. Fearing
that this could be a spy of Yezid coming to check on them, the Bani Asad
went into hiding. The man came where they were hiding and called them to
come out. He told them that he was Ali Ibn Husain (A.S) and had come
through miracle from Kufa to help them identify and bury the martyrs.

In this way Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) buried the martyrs and his father
where they lie buried today.

His coming to Kerbala was very important for two reasons. Firstly, an
Imam from Allah has to be given the burial services, when he dies, by
the Imam who takes over from him. No one could give the burial services
to Imam Husain (A.S) except him. But he was miles away and in chains as
a prisoner of Ibn Ziyad in Kufa. He therefore came to Kerbala by
miracle. Secondly only he knew who was who. Otherwise, we would never
know who was buried where the way we know today.

**MIRACLE 2**

After the martyrdom of Imam Husain (A.S) and after Imam Zainul Abidin
(A.S) had returned to Medina, some people began to consider Hazrat
Muhammad Hanafiya as their Imam. Hazrat Muhammad Hanafiya was Imam
Husain's younger brother He was very pious and had not himself said that
he was Imam. Only some misguided people began to consider him as their
Imam.

It became necessary to remove this misunderstanding. Therefore, Imam
(A.S) and his uncle, Muhammad Hanafiya decided to go together to where
"Hajar Aswad" (The black stone near Ka'aba) was.

At first, Hazrat Muhammad Hanafiya addressed the Hajar asking it to
confirm who the Imam was. But there was no reply. Then Imam Zainul
Abidin (A.S) addressed the Hajar. Aloud and clear voice came from "Hajar
Aswad" saluting the Imam by his full name and confirming that he and he
alone was the Imam of the time.

Let it be remembered that Hazrat Muhammad Hanafiya himselfhad never
claimed to be Imam. He fully supported Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) but he
addressed Hajar Aswad only to let the misguided people see for
themselves that he was not an Imam.


