Chapter 6 : Imam Ali Bin Husain's Sermons, Supplications (duas) and Saying
==========================================================================

**INTRODUCTION**

As he have seen before, the politics of his times were so bad that Imam
(A.S) could not openly preach Islam. If he did so, his enemies would get
a chance of preventing him from doing so by putting him away in prison
or even killing him. He could not therefore all the time preach as
openly as his grandparents had done before him.

As an Imam appointed by Allah, he knew when to openly expose the
enemies of Islam and when to preach Islam without openly naming the
enemies. Whenever possible, he gave sermons in which he openly named the
enemies of Islam and the wrongs that they did to the family of the
Prophet, though such moments were rare. Otherwise, the Imam used the
supplications (Duas) and sayings to teach proper Islam as opposed to
Islam which was being preached by the oppressive government of Bani
Umayyah.

**SERMONS**

The only chance that the Imam had to give an open sermon was in the
court of Yezid. It was very important for him to do so because all
along, the people of Syria were being told lies about the Prophet (S.A.W
W) and his family, especially about Imam Ali (A.S), Hazrat Fatima (S.A),
Imam Hassan (A.S) and Imam Husain (A.S). In the eyes of the Syrians,
Muawiya and Yezid were the true representatives of the Prophet (S.A.W.W)
and Imam Ali (A.S) and his children were the enemies of Islam.

As a matter of fact, Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) and the family of the of
the Prophet were presented in the court of Yezid as those who had fought
against Islam. It was very important for the Imam therefore to tell the
Syrians what was the truth. That is to say that Muawiyyah and Yezid were
the enemies of Islam and they had murdered the innocent members of the
family of the Prophet (S.A.W W); and the Imam gave a very powerful
sermon which you have already seen in chapter 2.

Notice that in this sermon, the Imam describes very openly high
position of the Prophet (S.A.W W) his family and other relatives of the
Prophet. He also proves that Yezid, his parents and his grandparents
were truly the enemy of Islam. Although he never got another chance to
give a sermon like this, this one sermon was enough to awaken the
Syrians from the sleep of ignorance. This sermon will always be a guide
to those Muslims who need to know truly how evil the Bani Umayyah were
and how virtuous the Ahlul Bayt were.

The other sermon that the Imam gave was very short but very effective.
We saw that in Chapter 2. This was given to the people of Medina on the
day the Imam returned from the prison of Yezid. The people of Medina
were not in darkness regarding the goodness of the family of the
Prophet, the way the people of Syria were. It was not at this time
necessary for the Imam to remind the people of Medina about the evils of
Bani Umayyah; what the people of Medina needed to be told were two
things.

First, they had to be made to know what Bani Umayyah did to Imam Husain
(A.S). Secondly, they needed to be told of what was expected of them now
that Imam Husain (A.S) had given his life. And the Imam did just that in
this short address to them which you have already seen in Chapter 2.

**SUPPLICATION (DUAS)**

Supplications ("Duas") are a kind of prayers to Allah. A person who
reads a "Dua" is actually addressing Allah.

In the Qur'an itself Allah tells us of the "Duas" of several Prophets
such as Nabi Nuh, Nabi Ibrahim and Nabi Musa. The Prophet taught his
companion S several Duas. Imam Alitaught Kumayl Bin Ziyadthe DuaofNabi
Khizrwhich came to be known as "Dua-e-Kumayl" and which is read every
Thursday evening. Imam Husain's (A.S) Dua of the day of Arafat was
introduced to you when .we were learning about the biography of Imam
Husain (A.S). Imam Zaiunl Abidin (A.S) therefore was not the first
person. to start this art of addressing Allah through a supplication.

What makes Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) so special is that: he made "Duas"
on almost every important occasion in a Muslim's life and filled these
Duas with knowledge of very branch of Islam. No Imam before him or after
him has taught us as Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) did through Duas.

Most of the supplications of Imam Zainul Abidin (A.S) today exist in a
book called "Sahifa Sajjadiya" (The book of Sajjad) or "Sahifa Kamila"
(A complete book) or ""Zabur-e-Ale Muhammad" (The psalms of the house of
Muhammad). The Imam used to teach these Duas to his sons Imam Muhammad
Baqir (A.S) and Zayd, the martyr These books remained in the family of
Imam Zaiunul Abidin from generation to generation and has survived till
today.


**Sahifa-E-Kamila**

The "Sahifa" as we know it today is a collection of 54 Supplications, I
4 other supplications and 15 Munajat.

These "Duas" can be put into two groups: The Duas that can be read on
any occasion (E.g. Supplication for ones Parents, Supplication in asking
for Pardon) and those which are for special occasions (E.g.
Supplications for day of Arafat, The day of Idd). These "Duas" are full
ofknowledge on Islam. The subjects listed here are but a few examples of
what is contained in these Duas:

How to address Allah
Merits of the Prophet (S.A.W.W) and his family
What are the main parts of Iman (Faith)
What behavior is expected from Muslims

Through these Duas, the Imam taught the standards and principles for
Muslims who would then be able to save themselves from "Corrupted Islam"
that was being taught by the Bani Ummayya.

**SAYINGS**

Whenever he got a chance, the Imam would advise his followers on how
they were to lead their lives. These advises or sayings are in plenty.
Over and above that, the Imam gave a lengthy advice on human rights.
These today appear in a book form and is called RISALAT AL-HUQUQ (Or a
treatise on rights). In this book, the Imam (A.S) gives examples of 51
different rights.

We shall reproduce here a few sayings of the Imam and few rights that
the Imam (A.S) describes fully in his RISALAT AL-HUQUQ.

**A SMALL SELECTION OF HIS SAYINGS:**

1) Once, one of his companions complained to him that out of jealousy
some people whom he had served very well were treating him badly. The
Imam gave him some advice which was:

\* Guard your tongue and do not speak about people whatever comes out
of your mouth, otherwise you will turn your friends into your enemies.

\* Avoid saying things which the minds of people are not prepared to
accept.

\* He who does not have wisdom will be ruined by the a smallest thing
(Mistake).

\* What harm will come to you if you take all Muslims to be your family
and your relations? Consider your elders to be your parents, those
younger than you as your children and those of your age as your
brothers. If you do so who is going to harm or abuse you?

\* Whenever a thought comes in your mind that you are better than any
other person, then think along these lines : If the person is older than
you then remind yourself that this person is better than you in matters
of Islam because he has done more good deeds than you have. If the
person is younger than you then remind yourself that this person is
better than you because he has committed less sins than you have. If he
is of your age than your argument should be : he is better than you in
matters of Islam since you know of your own sins but not of his.

\* If people show respect to you, think that this is because the people
are very good not that you are good. If the people say bad things about
you, think that something is really wrong with you. If you live in this
way, life will become pleasant for you, you will make many friends and
your enemies will be few.

(2) The Imam said, "Do not have relationship with, nor talk with nor
give company to 5 types of people:

\* The Liar: because they are like mirage : With their words they show
things different from what they really are. What is near they make it
look far and what is far they make it look near. In this way, they take
you away from truth.

\* The Greedy and the Sinner: because you cannot rely on their
friendship; for a small piece of food or even less than that, they will
sell you. \* The Miser: because they will let you down when you need
them most.

\* The Fool: because even when they try to do you good, they will end
you in difficulties.

\* Those Who have cut relationship with their relatives, because Allah
has cursed them in the Qur'an.

(3) Try to earn a high position in Paradise (Jannah).

Remember: Highest positions will be given to those who have been most
useful to their brothers in faith and who have been most helpful to the
needy. Remember: There are times when a person says but one good
sentence and that brings him very near to Allah and brings his freedom
on the Day of Judgement.

Never think that what you do for your brother in faith is unimportant
because these are the things that will be of much use to you on a day
when nothing else will be of any use.

(4) Drinking (Alcohol and other forbidden drinks) and Gambling are such
sins that they destroy the power to stop committing other sins.

(5) (Speaking) Good words increase a person's wealth and sustenance
(Rizk), prolong his life, make him to be loved by his wife and children
and take him to paradise.

**SELECTIONS FROM RISLAT-E-HUQUQ**

\* May Allah have mercy on you - know that Allah has rights against
you. These rights surround you in all your movements, in your rest, in
all your body parts and every thing that you use. Some of these rights
are big others are small.

\* The greatest right which is on you is from Allah Himself and this is
the root of all other rights .... The greatest right of Allah on you is
to worship Him without associating anything with Him. If you do that
with purity of heart, He promises to give you sufficiently what you need
here and in the next world ...

\* The rights of your teacher on you are: You should look at him with
honour, listen to him with full attention, sit facing him with respect
and do not raise your voice in his presence. If someone asks him a
question, you should not reply it but let the teacher do it. Do not
speak to any one or talk bad things about others in front of him. You
should hide his faults and speak of his good qualities. Keep away from
his enemies and do not make enemies with his friends. If you do all
these, angels will be your witness that you did what you were required
to do and that you obtained knowledge from him for the pleasure of Allah
only.

\* The rights of your mother are: she carried you where no one carries
anyone else; she fed you the fruit of her heart which no one gives to
anyone else; she protected you with all parts of her body. She did not
care if she remained hungry as long as you were fed; if she was thirsty
as long as you drank; if she was naked as long you had clothes on, if
she was in the sun so long as you were in shade. She lost her sleep for
you, she protected you from cold and heat so that you should live. You
will never be able to thank her unless if Allah helps you ....

\* The right of your neighbour is that you should guard him (His
belongings) when he is absent, respect him when he is present and help
him when he is wronged. Do not do any shameful act to him. If you know
of any bad things about him keep that secret. If you know he will accept
your advice then give it to him. Do not leave him alone when he is in
trouble. Help him out of his troubles, forgive him if he has wronged you
and treat him generously.


