Chapter 7 : His Family
======================

**HIS MARRIAGES**

The Imam's first wife was his cousin, the daughter of Imam Hassan
(A.S). Her name was Fatima. She was a very pious person. She was the
mother our fifth Imam, Hazrat Muhammad Baqir (A.S).

It is reported that once she was sitting leaning against the wall. All
of a sudden, the wall began to fall on her. She called out saying. "O
wall, by the honour of the Messenger of Allah you have no permission to
fall down right know" and the wall stood still. She moved away only then
did the wall fall. She then gave in charity 100 currencies.

Other than Imam Muhammed Baqir (A.S), he had from this marriage, three
other sons whose names were Abd Allah, Al-Hassan and Al-Husain.

According to Sheikh Mufid, besides Lady Fatima, he had as his wives, at
different times, several slave-girls. The main reason behind these
marriage was to raise the position of these helpless women who had
become slaves because of wars. By giving them a place in his house, he
gave them a way to live a life of independence and honor. For these
ladies gave birth to children who became part of Imam's family. For
example, Hazrat Zaid, who came to be known as Zaid the martyr, was born
from a slave girl from Sindh (India) called Huriya.

**HIS CHILDREN**

Sheikh Mufid in his book "Al-Irshad" says that besides Imam Muhammad
Baqir (A.S), Imam Zainul Abidin had ten more sons and four daughters. In
the next unit we shall learn more about Imam Muhammad Baqir (A.S); for
the rest of this chapter we shall learn about Zaid, Imam Muhammad
Baqir's half brother.

**ZAID THE MARTYR**

It is reported that once Imam's companion, Abu Hamza Thimali was
sitting with the Imam in the Imam's house. Suddenly a male child came in
the house and ran towards the Imam. Unfortunately, while running, the
child fell down and was hurt. The Imam (A.S) went quickly to where the
child was and took him in his hands with kindness and love. After that
the Imam (A.S) began to weep.

He then told the companion that the child was none but his son Zaid and
that those days were not far when, as an adult, he would rise against
the cruel government. He would then be killed and his dead body be
hanged. He also told Abu Hamza that he (Abu Hamza) would live to see
this. Years later what the Imam said would happen in fact did happen.

Hazrat Zaid was very pious and was a good reader of the Qur'an. The
Bani Umayyah's government treated the family of the Prophet, especially
the grandchildren of Imam Ali (A.S) so badly that Hazrat Zaid could not
sit quiet.

He went to complain to the king of that time, Bin Abdulmalik in
Damascus. Hasham received him very badly in his court. Hazrat Zaid said
to him, "Fear Allah".

This Was enough to make Hasham angry. He shouted at Hazrat Zaid saying,
"A low person like you is advising me to fear Allah?" Hazrat Zaid
replied, "There is no question of being low or high amongst the servants
of Allah when it comes to giving advice and calling each other towards
fear of Allah."

Hasham said, "I have heard that you want to become the ruler but you
are not fit to be one as you are the son of a slave-girl." Hazrat Zaid
replied, "No one is better to Allah than his Messenger. Hazrat Ismail ,
s mother (Hajra) was a slave-girl yet Hazrat Ismail was a Prophet and
Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.W) was from his progeny."

As Hisham had no reply to give, he started abusing Imam Muhammad Baqir
(A.S) saying, "What does your brother Baqarah (The Cow) do?" Hearing
this, Hazrat Zaid was greatly hurt and replied, Hasham without any fear,
saying' "O Hisham, the Prophet (S.A.W.W) gave him the name of Baqir and
you call him Baqarrah. Your actions Me opposite to that of the Prophet
(S.A.W W). On the Day of Judgement you will be equally far from him.
Baqir will go to paradise and you will go to hell."

By the orders of Hisham, Hazrat Zaid was thrown out of court' He went
away to Kufa. From there he raised an army to fight against the Bani
Umayyah. He had followers in Wasit, Mosel, Khurasan Ray, and Jurjan. In
Kufa alone he had about 15000 supporters. Among his followers were
reader of Qur'an, religious scholars and lawyers.

Hisham sent a big army under the command of Yusuf Bin Umar Saqafi.
Unfortunately, most of Hazrat Zaid's supporters left him. Only three
hundred soldiers remained with him when he came to the battlefield. He
fought very bravely until. he was martyred, having been hit by an arrow
on his forehead. This was in A.H. 121.

His son Yahya buried him secretly under a river bank but Hasham's men
found it out and dug out the body Hazrat Zaid's body was put on a
scaffold in Egypt. It remained there for some time then it was burnt and
the ashes thrown in the wind. Thus ended the life of one of the most
noble servants of Allah.


