The Rights of Women In Islam
============================

** **

16. What Rights does Islam offer to Women?
------------------------------------------

With the onset of Islam and its special teachings, the life of women
entered into a new phase - a phase which differed vastly from the
previous one and became one in which women availed of all kinds of
individual, social and human rights. The basis of Islamic teachings with
respect to women is exactly what we read in the Noble Qur\`an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَهُنَّ مِثْلُ الَّذِي عَلَيْهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…and they have rights similar to those against them in a just manner…”

i.e. the women possess rights and privileges in the same measure as the
responsibilities which they shoulder within the society.

Islam considers a woman, just like a man, to possess a human soul, will
and choice, and perceives her to be on the path of spiritual perfection,
which is actually the purpose of human creation. It is for this reason
that it has placed man and woman alongside each other, addressed them
together:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياَ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

and:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياَ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

and imposed moral, educative and scientific curriculum upon both of
them.

By means of verses such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحاً مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْـثى‏ وَ هُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَأُولٌئِكَ يَدْخُلُونَ الْجَنَّةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and whoever does good, whether male or female, and he is a
believer, these shall enter the garden.”***[^1]

Islam has promised the benefits of complete prosperity to both the
sexes.  
 By verses such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صالِحاً مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْـثى‏ وَ هُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيِّبَةً وَ لَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْرَهُمْ
بِأَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever does good whether male or female and he is a believer, We
will most certainly make him live a happy life, and We will most
certainly give them their reward for the best of what they did.”***[^2]

it has elucidated that every man and woman, by adhering to and
implementing the Islamic curriculum, can achieve material and spiritual
perfection, and possess a pure, good life that is replete with ease and
comfort.

Islam considers a woman, like man, to be completely free and
independent, and the Noble Qur\`an, by way of verses like:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ رَهِينَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Every soul is held in pledge for what it earns.”***[^3]

Or

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحاً فَلِنَفْسِهِ وَ مَنْ أَسَاءَ فَعَلَيْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever does good, it is for his own soul, and whoever does evil, it
is against himself.”***[^4]

It declares this freedom to be for all people - men and women.

We observe that the Islamic penal code sentences both genders with the
same kind of retribution, as can be seen in the following verse and
other similar verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّانِيَةُ وَ الزَّانِي فَاجْلِدُوا كُلَّ واحِدٍ مِنْهُمَا مِائَةَ
جَلْدَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The woman and the man guilty of adultery or fornication - flog each
of them with a hundred whippings.”***[^5]

On the other hand, since independence is an inevitable consequence of
(free) will and choice, Islam has also extended this independence to all
monetary privileges, permitting women to enter into various kinds of
monetary transactions and regarding her as the rightful owner of her
income and investment. In Suratul Nisa we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلرِّجَالِ نَصِيبٌ مِمَّا اكْتَسَبُوا وَ لِلنِّسَاءِ نَصِيبٌ مِمَّا
اكْتَسَبْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Men shall have the benefit of what they earn and women shall have
the benefit of what they earn.”***[^6]

In view of the fact that the word اکتساب (used in the verse) - unlike
the word کسب - is used to denote acquisition of wealth, the use of this
word conveys the meaning that the wealth which is acquired becomes
associated with the person acquiring it[^7],  and also taking into
consideration the general rule:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلنَّاسُ مُسَلِّطُونَ عَلى أَمْوَالِهِمْ.‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

“All the people have authority over their own wealth”,

we can easily infer that Islam holds the fiscal independence of women in
great esteem and does not differentiate between a man and a woman in
this regard.

In short, Islam regards a woman as a fundamental element of the society
and thus, she should not be treated as an entity that is lacking in
will, and dependant upon or in need of a guardian.

### One Should not Err With Respect to the Meaning Of ‘Equality’

The only thing that needs be taken into consideration - to which Islam
has paid special attention but which some individuals reject out of
excessive and imprudent sentimentality - is the issue of physical and
psychological difference between man and woman, and the difference in
their responsibilities.

We just cannot refute the reality that there exist vast physical and
psychological differences between the two sexes, and since these are
mentioned in various books it is not necessary that we repeat them here.
However, a summary of all of them is as follows: 

A woman is the base for man's existence since the development of the
children take place within her arms; hence just as she has been created
physically to handle the tasks of bearing, developing and educating the
coming generations, psychologically too she is in possession of a
greater share of feelings and sentiments.

With the existence of these vast differences, can it be said that men
and women must be in step with each other in all matters and should be
absolutely equal in all affairs and issues?

Should we not champion the cause of justice in the society?  But is
justice other than that every person should adhere to his own
responsibility and enjoy the benefits of the existential distinctions
present within him?

Thus, is it not contrary to justice to involve and engage a woman in
tasks that do not match and harmonize with her physical and
psychological setup?

Here we observe that Islam, even as it voices support for justice and
equality, grants precedence to man in some of the social tasks which
demand asperity or meticulousness - such as guardianship of the house -
and has allowed the woman to function as an assistant.

Both a 'house' and a 'society' are in need of an administrator, and the
reins of administration should eventually end up in the hands of one
person or else it would result in contest, chaos and confusion.

Under these circumstances, who is better suited for the task - a man or
a woman?  Impartial and unbiased computations reveal that the structural
state of man demands that the administration and management of the
family should be placed upon the man while the woman should act as his
assistant.

Even though there are some who insist on ignoring these realities, the
state of life prevalent in the present-day world and even within
communities that have granted women complete freedom and equality,
reveal that in practice the issue is exactly as has been stated above,
although in speech the issue may be made to appear differently.[^8]

### The Spiritual Worth of Man and Woman

The Noble Qur\`an perceives man and woman - with regards to their
presence before Allah and with respect to achieving spiritual ranks
under similar conditions - to be equal. It refuses to consider the
dissimilarity in their sexes and the difference in the structure of
their bodies, (which consequently manifest in the variation in their
social responsibilities), as being indicative of a difference in them
with regards to the achievement of human perfection; rather, in this
regard, it considers them to be on par with one another and hence
mentions them together.

Numerous verses of the Noble Qur\`an were revealed at a time when a
great number of the communities of the world had been reluctant to
recognize the female species as a human being, regarding her as an
accursed entity and a source of sin, deviation and death!

Many of the ancient communities even held the belief that a woman's
worship was not acceptable in the eyes of Allah. Many of the Greeks
considered a woman to be a defiled entity and an evil handiwork of
Satan. The Romans and some of the Greeks believed that basically females
did not possess a human soul and as such, the human soul was
specifically confined to the males!

Interestingly, till recently, Christian scholars in Spain engaged
themselves in discussing whether women, like men, possessed human souls
or not, and whether or not their souls would continue to live eternally
after their deaths. After their discussions they eventually concluded
that since a woman's soul is an isthmus between an animal and a human
soul, it cannot be eternal, save for the soul of Maryam J.[^9]

Here it becomes apparent how far from reality the allegation is, which
some ignorant individuals level against Islam that it is a religion of
males and not females. Generally speaking, if, due to physical and
sentimental differences which exist within males and females, some
differences in respect of social responsibilities are observed in the
Islamic Laws, it does not by any means, diminish the spiritual worth of
a woman. There exists no difference between a man and a woman in this
regard; the doors of success and prosperity lay equally open for both of
them, just as we read in the Qur\`an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَعْضُکُمْ مِنْ بَعْضٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“All are from one species and one society.”***[^10]

17. What is the Philosophy of Hijab?
------------------------------------

Undoubtedly, in this age of ours - which some have named as the 'age of
nudity and sexual freedom' and in which, West-stricken individuals
regard wantonness of women as being part of this freedom - the mention
of Hijab is very disconcerting for this group of people and at times is
even looked upon as a myth associated with the ancient times!

However, the innumerable evils and the ever-increasing problems arising
out of this unconditioned freedom have gradually resulted in the concept
of Hijab being viewed with a greater interest.

Of course, in the Islamic and religious environments - especially in
Iran after the revolution - a great number of issues have been clarified
and satisfactory answers to most of these questions have been provided.
Nevertheless, the significance of the topic demands this issue to be
discussed more comprehensively.

The issue under discussion is: Should women (with due apologies) be
placed at the disposal of all men for the purpose of being exploited by
them by way of sight, hearing and touch (excepting sexual intercourse),
or should these benefits be the sole prerogative of their respective
husbands?

The point of debate is about whether women should continue to remain
entangled in a never-ending competition in flaunting their bodies and
stirring up the physical and carnal desires of men, or whether these
issues should be uprooted from the social environment and restricted to
the familial and matrimonial milieu.    Islam advocates the latter plan
and Hijab can be looked upon as a part of this agenda, whereas the
Westerners support the former plan!

Islam avers that all such physical pleasures - sexual intercourse as
well as those derived by means of sight, hearing and touch - are
specific to the husbands, and anything beyond this is a sin which leads
to pollution and impurity within the society.

The philosophy behind Hijab is indeed evident since:

1. Nudity of women, which is quite naturally accompanied by adornment
and coquettishness puts men, especially the youths, in a state of
perpetual stimulation - a stimulation which affects their nerves,
generates within them pathological nervous excitement and at times even
brings about psychological disorders. There is a limit to the burden of
excitement which the human nerves can endure. Don't all the
psychologists caution that perpetual excitement leads to disorders and
diseases?

This is especially in view of the fact that the sexual impulse is the
strongest and the most profound of all impulses within man and, all
through the ages, has been the cause of destructive events and
horrendous offences, to the extent that people have gone on to say:  You
shall not come across any important event (in history), except that a
woman has played a part in it!

Is the continuous provocation of this impulse by means of nudity, and
intensifying it, not tantamount to playing with fire?  Is this act wise
and prudent?

Islam desires that Muslim men and women should possess a soul that is
calm, nerves that are composed, and eyes and ears that are pure, and
this is one of the philosophies of Hijab.

2. Substantiated and conclusive statistics reveal that with the rise in
nudity, the world has correspondingly witnessed a continuous rise in
divorces and matrimonial separations. This is because “whatever the eyes
see, the heart covets”; and whatever the heart (which here means the
errant and wild desires) covets, it seeks to obtain it at any cost.
Therefore, every new day the heart gets attracted to one and bids
farewell to another.

In an environment where Hijab is prevalent (together with adherence to
the other Islamic conditions), the husband and wife belong to each other
and their sentiments, love and feelings are exclusively for one another.

But in the 'free market of nudity' wherein women have been practically
transformed into a commodity of mutual use - (at least in issues other
than sexual intercourse) - the sanctity of a matrimonial alliance
becomes meaningless, and families, similar to a spider's web, swiftly
break apart and the children are left without guardians.

3. The increase in indecency and obscenity, and the escalation in the
number of illegitimate children are the most painful consequences of
non-observance of Hijab - a fact which, in our opinion, does not require
any figures and statistics; and the reasons for this, especially in the
Western society, are so very apparent so as to eliminate the need for
any mention.

We do not say that non-observance of Hijab is the sole and fundamental
cause of obscenities and illegitimate children, nor do we say that
colonialism and destructive political issues have not had any
contribution to it; rather, what we wish to state is that the issue of
nudity and non-observance of Hijab is as one of the instrumental and
effective factors for those evils.

In view of the fact that 'indecency', and worse than this, 'illegitimate
children' were and are amongst the sources of various crimes in human
societies, the dangerous dimension of this issue becomes all the more
clear.

We perceive the gravity of the matter when we hear that, according to
statistics,[^11] in the United Kingdom five hundred thousand
illegitimate children are born every year and then when we hear that a
group of British intellectuals has issued a warning to those in the
echelons of power with respect to this ongoing trend. The warning is not
motivated out of ethical or religious concerns but rather out of concern
for the dangers these illegitimate children pose to the safety of the
society, to the extent that their involvement is observed in numerous
criminal dossiers.

We (also) come to realize that even those who possess scant respect for
religion or ethical issues consider the issue of the spread of indecency
to be catastrophic. Thus, everything that serves to increase the sphere
of physical immorality in human societies is a threat for their
security, and the consequences - in whatever manner we may compute
them - shall always be to their detriment.

Studies by educated scholars reveal that reduction of work, backwardness
and lack of responsibility are most noticeably perceived in schools,
which are co-educational in nature and in centres where males and
females work together in an ambience of licentiousness and complete
freedom.

4. The issue of 'obscenity of women' and 'humiliation of their
personalities' also holds great importance and requires no statistics to
prove it. When a society desires a woman with a bare body, it is quite
obvious that day by day, it would demand increased beautification and
augmented ostentation from her. In a society wherein a woman, due to her
physical attraction, is utilized for promotion and publicity of
products, as a decoration for the reception rooms, or as a tool for
attracting tourists, her personality is reduced to that of a doll or a
trivial and insignificant item, and her lofty human values are totally
thrust into oblivion; ultimately, her only distinction and glory lies in
her youth, beauty and self-exhibition.

Thus, she is transformed into a device for satisfying the carnal desires
of a handful of individuals, who are polluted, deceptive and possess
satanic attributes!

In such a society, how is it possible for a woman to manifest herself in
the light of her knowledge, awareness, sagacity and moral traits, and to
occupy a lofty rank and status?

It is indeed painful that in the Western and West-stricken countries,
and in our country (too) before the Islamic Revolution, the maximum
prominence, fame, repute, money, income and standing had been for the
polluted and promiscuous women, who had come to acquire renown as
'artists and performers'. Wherever they went, the management of this
polluted environment would scramble after them to welcome their
presence!

Praise be to Allah that the entire apparatus was annihilated and the
female sex emerged from her previous triteness or her erstwhile standing
as a cultural doll and an insignificant item, and salvaged her
personality. She took for herself the veil without being secluded and
isolated, presenting herself in every expedient and constructive arena
of the society - even the battlefield - with the same veil and Hijab.

### Criticisms Levelled by the Opponents of Hijab

At this point we come to the objections which are levelled by those
opposing the veil and which need to be discussed, albeit concisely:

1. The most important thing which all of them support in unanimity and
which they propound as the fundamental objection with respect to the
issue of Hijab is that women constitute one half of the society but the
Hijab pushes this multitude into seclusion thereby causing them to lag
behind culturally and intellectually. Especially during the period of
economic thriving, when there is a greater need for active human
participation, this large female force would remain totally unutilized
in the path of economic progress, not to speak of their lack of presence
in social and cultural centres. Thus, they are transformed into a mere
consumer that is a burden for the society.

But those who have resorted to this logic have either been totally
oblivious of certain points, or have probably feigned lack of knowledge
about them:

Firstly: Who says that the Islamic Hijab isolates a woman and distances
her from the social arena?  If, in the past, it had been necessary for
us to exhaust ourselves in order to present proofs and arguments in
defence of this issue, now, after the Islamic Revolution, there does not
exist the slightest need for them, for with our own eyes we observe
groups of women, in the Islamic Hijab, presenting themselves in all
places - in offices, workstations, political rallies and demonstrations,
on the radio and television, in cultural and educational institutes, in
hospitals and medical centres, especially for nursing those injured in
war, and even in the battlefield against the enemies.  
 In short, the present state (of the Islamic society) is a fitting
riposte to all these objections; if previously we spoke of the
'possibility' of such a state, today we find ourselves facing the
'occurrence' of it and philosophers have stated that the best proof for
the 'possibility (of occurrence)' of a thing is the (actual)
'occurrence' of that thing, and this is something, which is too evident
and manifest to require any explanation.

Secondly:  Is managing the house, training and educating the youthful
children and transforming them into individuals not a task? After all,
through their strength and ability, the youths are able to set the
gigantic wheels of the society into motion.

People who do not view this great mission of women positively are
ill-informed of the role played by family and training in constructing a
healthy, prosperous and dynamic society. They imagine that the (correct)
manner is that our men and women, like those of the West should, at the
first sign of daybreak, leave their houses for their places of work,
either leaving their children in nurseries or locking them up in a room
thereby making them taste the bitterness of imprisonment at a time when
they are blooming buds.

They are totally oblivious of the fact that this approach not only
shatters their personalities but also moulds them into soulless
children, who are found to be lacking in human sentiments and
affections, and who will eventually jeopardize the future of society.

Secondly: Another of their objections is that the Hijab is a cumbersome
dress, which is not well suited for social activities, especially in the
modern automobile age. What should a veiled woman look after - herself,
her chador, her children or her work?

But these critics do not realise the fact that the Hijab does not always
mean a chador, but rather it refers to a woman's covering. If the Hijab
is possible by means of the chador, so much the better, but if not, then
a covering is quite sufficient.

The womenfolk of our country, who engage in farming and live in
villages - especially those who work in the rice-fields and perform the
most important and difficult work of cultivating and harvesting the
crop, have answered this objection, practically. They have shown that in
numerous places a village-woman, while observing the Islamic Hijab, can
work more than a man and better too - without the Hijab hampering or
obstructing her work in the slightest.

Thirdly: Another objection which they level is that since Hijab
establishes separation between men and women, it amplifies the greedy
nature of man and instead of extinguishing it, only serves to inflame
his covetousness, since:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أِلإِِنْسَانُ حَرِيصٌ عَلىَ ماَ مُنِعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“People covet that which is forbidden for them.”

A comparison of our present society in which the Hijab is prevalent in
all places - without exception - with the one that prevailed during the
period of the satanic regime, which used to force the women to take off
their Hijab will provide the answer to this objection, or more
correctly, this sophism and fallacy.

Those days, every alley and neighbourhood was a centre of wickedness and
depravity, and an ambience of incredible immorality prevailed within the
households. Divorces were rampant, the number of illegitimate children
was staggering and there were a thousand other curses.

We do not claim that all of these have been eradicated, but they have
undoubtedly been greatly reduced and our society, in this regard, has
regained its well-being. And if, Allah Willing, the state of affairs
continues its course and all the other tangles come to order, our
society, with respect to pureness of the households, and preservation of
the merit and worth of women, shall come to achieve a desired and ideal
state.[^12]

18. Why is the Inheritance of Men twice that of Women?
------------------------------------------------------

Although it appears that the inheritance of men is twice that of women,
a closer look reveals that from one viewpoint, the inheritance of women
is twice that of men!  This is due to Islam's support for the rights of
women.

### Explanation

Islam has placed certain responsibilities upon men, as a result of
which, virtually one half of their earnings is spent upon women whereas
no such responsibilities have been placed upon women.

The male has to bear the expenses for all of his wife's needs such as
housing, clothing, food and other necessities; apart from this, the
expenses of his minor children are also to be provided by him, whereas
the wife is exempt from every kind of payment, even if it is for her own
self. Thus, a woman can stockpile her entire share of inheritance,
whereas a man is bound to spend his share upon himself, his wife and
children. Consequently, half of his earnings are effectively spent upon
his wife and the other half is for him, whereas the entire share of the
wife remains unused and intact.

For a better understanding, consider the following example: Suppose that
the entire wealth existing globally is 30 billion tumans,[^13] which
will be gradually distributed as inheritance amongst men and women (sons
and daughters). When we compute the earnings of all men and women of the
world by way of inheritance, we find that of this amount, the share of
the men is 20 billion tumans while that of the women is 10 billion.

However, as is customary, the women will marry, after which the
responsibility of providing for their expenses will fall upon the
shoulders of men and so, the women can conveniently put their 10 billion
tumans aside while, at the same time, be a partner to the men in their
share of 20 billion, since this amount would be utilized by the men to
provide for the expenses of their wives and their children.

Thus, in reality, half of the share of the men - totalling 10 billion
tumans - would be spent on the women. This, in addition to the 10
billion tumans, which the women had placed aside, would collectively
amount to 20 billion tumans - two-thirds of the (supposed) global
wealth - whereas the men, effectively, do not use up more than 10
billion tumans for themselves.

In conclusion, the actual share of women, with respect to 'consumption
and use', is twice the actual share of men, and this distinction is
influenced by the fact that, generally, their ability and strength for
generating earnings is less than that of men. This is a kind of just and
logical support, which Islam has offered to the women, allotting a
greater actual share for them although, ostensibly, their share appears
to be one half (that of the males).

Incidentally, upon referring the Islamic sources we come to infer that
the above query had plagued the minds of the people from the very onset
of Islam.

Time and again they would question the Imams in this regard and their
answers predominantly pointed to one meaning, which is: Allah has placed
upon the males the onus of bearing the wife's expenses and paying them
the dower, and so, He has allotted them a greater share (from the
inheritance).

In the book Ma'aniul Akhbar it has been reported that Imam 'Ali b. Musa
al-Ridha (a.s) in reply to this query, said:  “The share of the females,
in the inheritance, is half that of the males because when a female
enters into marriage she receives something, while the male is obliged
to give something. In addition, it is the responsibility of the males to
shoulder the expenses of the females whereas the females are neither
responsible for their own expenses nor that of the males.”[^14]

19. Why is Blood Money for Women half that for Men?
---------------------------------------------------

Some individuals might possibly object that in the verses of qisas
(retaliation) it has been ordered that a man should not be subjected to
retaliation for the murder of a woman; but is a man superior to a
woman?  Why should a criminal, having killed a woman and shed
unwarranted blood of a gender constituting more than half the global
population, not be subjected to retaliation for his crime?

In answer to this it must be stated that the verse does not intend that
a man should not face retaliation for killing a woman, rather - as has
been explicitly explained in the Islamic jurisprudence - the guardians
of the murdered woman can seek retaliation from the male murderer, but
upon the condition that they pay half the blood money (to the heirs of
the murder).

In other words, when it is said that a man cannot be subjected to
retaliation for the murder of a woman, what is intended is
'unconditional retaliation'. However, if half of the blood money is
paid, then it is permissible to have him killed in retaliation (for the
crime committed by him).

There is no need to explain that the payment of the abovementioned sum
for seeking retaliation is not because the woman is any less human than
man or inferior to him. This is a perception which is totally misplaced
and illogical, and perhaps the expression 'blood money' is the basis for
this misleading notion. The payment of half the “blood money” is only to
compensate the loss, which is suffered by his family, after the
retaliation has been extracted.  
    
  

### Explanation

Predominantly, it is the men who are the instrumental members of
households monetarily and who, by means of their activities, shoulder
the expenses of their families. Thus, the difference between the death
of a man and that of a woman, in financial terms, is something which is
not concealed from anyone, and which, if not taken into account, would
cause unjustified damage to be inflicted upon the survivors of the dead
man and his innocent children.

Hence, Islam, by stipulating the payment of half the blood money in the
case of retaliation against a man, has taken into consideration the
rights of all the individuals and has prevented this economic vacuum and
irreparable blow to fall upon a family. Islam never permits that the
rights of other individuals - like the children of the person facing
retaliation - to be trampled under the pretext of the term 'equality'.

Of course, it is possible that some women may be higher earners for
their families than men, but as we do know, rules and regulations are
not determined by (a few) individuals but rather, the entire category of
men is compared with the entire category of women (take note).[^15]

20. What is the philosophy behind the dower for women?
------------------------------------------------------

In the Age of Ignorance, since the people did not attach any
significance to the women, they would essentially place the dower of the
women, which was their incontrovertible right, in the hands of their
guardians and it was looked upon as the rightful property of the
guardians. At times, they would even stipulate the dower of a woman to
be the marriage of another woman; for example, a brother would give his
sister in marriage to a person, who, in reciprocation, would marry his
sister to him and this itself would be the dower of the two women.

Islam abrogated all these unjust customs and, allocating the dower as a
categorical right of the women, has repeatedly counselled the men, in
the verses of the Qur\`an, to strictly and completely respect this right
of the women.

In Islam, no fixed amount has been ascertained for the dower and it is
reliant upon the understanding reached between the two spouses. However,
in numerous traditions it has been greatly emphasized to refrain from
stipulating a weighty dower, but this is a ruling which is recommended,
not obligatory.

At this point the question which arises is that both man and woman
benefit equally from the matrimonial alliance - an alliance that is
based on mutual benefits. This being the case, what is the need for man
to pay a sum, large or small, as dower to the woman?  Also, does this
issue not deal a blow to the personality of the woman and impart an
appearance of trade and transaction to marriage?

It is in the light of the above points that some individuals vehemently
oppose the issue of dower, especially West-stricken ones, who derive
their inspiration from the fact that dower is a custom, unconventional
in the West. Whereas (the reality is that) not only does the excision of
the dower not elevate the personality of a woman, rather, it serves to
jeopardize her position.

### Explanation

Admittedly, both man and woman derive equal benefits out of a
matrimonial alliance. Nevertheless there is no denying the fact that in
the event of a divorce, the woman has to sustain a greater loss, since:

Firstly: Man, due to his special physical ability, generally possesses a
greater control and yields greater influence in the society. However
much people may seek to deny this outright reality in the course of
their discussions, the state of human social life which we observe with
our own eyes - even in the European societies, wherein women enjoy the
so-called total freedom - reveals that high earning jobs are principally
held by men.

In addition, men possess greater options when embarking upon another
spouse-selection, but this is not so in the case of widows - especially
after witnessing some aging and being deprived of their assets of youth
and beauty - since the options that lie before them, in selecting a new
spouse, are greatly diminished.

Considering these aspects, it becomes evident that the conveniences and
resources which a woman loses after marriage is much more than what a
man loses and so, in actuality, the dower is something which serves to
indemnify a woman's losses and a means for securing her future. Apart
from this, the dower is also looked upon as a deterrent for man to seek
separation and divorce.

Admittedly, the dower, according to the laws of Islam, becomes
obligatory upon the husband as soon as the matrimonial alliance is
entered into, and the wife is entitled to claim it from him immediately,
but since it generally remains as an obligation upon the man, not only
is it regarded as savings for her future but also a backing, which
safeguards her rights and prevents the disintegration of her marriage
alliance (of course exceptions do exist, but what we have stated holds
true for the majority of the cases).

If there are people who have wrongly interpreted the dower as being a
kind of 'price-tag' for the women, this meaning has no connection with
Islam, for Islam has never looked upon the dower as a 'cost' or a
'price' of a commodity. The most excellent proof for this is the formula
of marriage in which the 'man' and the 'woman' are officially looked
upon as two fundamental parties of the marriage alliance whereas the
dower is regarded as a surplus issue and is placed on the side-lines.

It is for this reason that if, in the formula of marriage, the dower is
not mentioned, the formula does not become void whereas if, in a
transaction, the amount is not stipulated, it would definitely become
null and void  (of course, it should be noted that if the dower has not
been stated in the formula of marriage, the husband, after the
consummation of marriage, is obliged to pay the wife mahr al-mithl
(suitable dower), i.e. the dower, which is usually paid to women of
similar and equal stature.)

From the above we conclude that the dower is a kind of 'compensation of
loss' and 'backing to safeguard the rights of a woman' and not a 'rate'
or a 'price-tag'; probably, the use of the word nihlah - meaning
largesse - in verse 4 of Suratul Nisa is an allusion to this very
fact.[^16]

21. How does Islam permit the physical punishment of women?
-----------------------------------------------------------

In verse 34 of Suratul Nisa, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اللاَّتِي تَخَافُونَ نُشُوزَهُنَّ فَعِظُوهُنَّ وَ اهْجُرُوهُنَّ فِي
الْمَضَاجِعِ وَ اضْرِبُوهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (as to) those on whose part you fear desertion, admonish them,
and (if ineffective) leave them alone in the sleeping-places and (if
even this proves futile with no way of compelling them into fulfilling
their responsibilities, except the use of force, then) beat them.”***

The question that arises here is:  How can Islam permit the physical
punishment of a woman?

The answer to this objection, in light of this meaning of the verse, the
traditions which discuss it, the explanations which have been presented
in the books of jurisprudence and also the explanations which the
psychologists offer today, is not very difficult, for:

**Firstly:** The verse sanctions physical discipline for those
disobedient and irresponsible individuals for whom no other means have
proved effective. Incidentally this is not an issue that is new and
confined to Islam, rather, in all the laws of the world, when all
peaceful and non-violent means to compel a person into fulfilling his
obligations prove unproductive, there exist provisions to eventually
resort to force. This resort to force is not restricted to mere
beatings, but at times even extends to severe punishments and on
occasions going all the way up to the death penalty!

**Secondly:** The 'physical punishment' in this case - as has been
mentioned in books of jurisprudence - should be mild and moderate so as
not to cause breakage of bones, injuries or (for that matter, even)
bruises.

**Thirdly:** Modern psychoanalysts are of the belief that a segment of
the female populace possesses masochistic tendencies and when this state
intensifies within them, the only way to calm them down is by means of
mild physical punishment. Therefore, it is possible that the physical
punishment has been prescribed taking (the state of) such individuals
into consideration, for in their case, this mild physical penalty would
be lenitive in nature and serve as a kind of psychological remedy for
them.

Without any doubt, if any one of these steps (mentioned in the verse)
proves effective and the woman embarks upon performing her duties, the
man has no right to inconvenience her and it is for this reason that the
latter portion of the verse states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ أَطَعْنَكُمْ فَلاَ تَبْغُوا عَلَيْهِنَّ سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then if they obey you, do not seek a way against them.”***

If it is asked:  Such rebelliousness, violation and recalcitrance are
also likely to be displayed by the men; would the males then be
subjected to such punishments too?  The answer to this is in the
affirmative. In the event of their shirking their responsibilities, men
too, like the women, face retribution and even physical punishment; the
only difference being that, since this is something beyond the ability
of women, it is the duty of the Islamic judge to utilize various means -
even ta'zir (physical punishment) - to make such violators become aware
and heedful of their responsibilities.

The incident of the man, who had victimized his spouse and who, under no
circumstances, had been willing to submit before the truth whereupon
'Ali (a.s) with harshness and threat of the sword, forced him into
submission, is well-known.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللٌّهَ كَانَ عَلــِيًّا كَبِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely Allah is High, Great.”

Finally the verse again cautions the men from abusing their positions as
guardians of their respective households, and exhorts them to reflect
upon Allah's Power, which is above all powers, for surely Allah is High,
Great.[^17]

22. Why are men permitted to have more than one spouse whereas the women are not?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Noble Qur\`an has permitted polygamy (but, with strict conditions
and within prescribed limits) and here we have to face up to a barrage
of objections and assaults of the opponents, who, armed with a cursory
study and influenced by imprudent sentiments, have set out to oppose
this Islamic ruling.

The Westerners, in particular, tend to criticize us by saying that Islam
has permitted the males to create a harem and take for themselves an
unlimited number of spouses. As a matter of fact, Islam has neither
permitted the construction of harems - as they take it to mean - nor has
it permitted unconditional and unqualified polygamy.

**Explanation**:  Studying the conditions that prevailed in different
regions before the onset of Islam, we infer that unreserved polygamy was
a routine affair in those days even to the extent that on some
occasions, when the polytheists would convert into Muslims they would
have in their possession around ten spouses. Thus, multiplicity of wives
is not an invention of Islam; on the contrary, Islam has confined it
within the framework of the necessities of human life and qualified it
by means of strict conditions.

Islamic laws are determined on the basis of the actual needs of humans
and not on the basis of external propaganda and ill-considered
sentiments. The issue of polygamy too has been given consideration from
this angle. This is because none can deny the fact that men, in the
various goings-on of life, are more exposed to peril than the women, and
they are the ones, who predominantly bear the brunt of actual casualties
in battles and other catastrophes.

It cannot also be denied that the sexual life-span of men is more than
that of women since women, at a certain age lose their sexual strength
whereas men do not.

In addition, during menstruation and certain phases of pregnancy the
women are obliged to observe a restriction of sexual activity whereas
the men have no such restrictions.

Apart from all the above there are women who, due to various reasons,
lose their husbands and are usually not sought by the men as a
first-wife, and in the absence of polygamy, they would always have to
remain without a spouse; we read in numerous newspapers that this group
of widowed women, due to the restrictions placed upon the issue of
polygamy, complain of the tangles of life and regard this curb as a kind
of sentimental oppression which they are subjected to.

Taking these realities into consideration, in such instances wherein the
balance between men and women is disrupted due to certain factors, we
are left with no option except to select one of the following three
alternatives:

1. Men should, at all times, content themselves with just one spouse,
while the extra women should remain without a spouse for the rest of
their lives, suppressing and killing all their innate needs and internal
desires.

2. Men should have only one official and legal spouse, but are permitted
to establish illicit physical relationships with women, who are without
spouses, and keep them as mistresses and paramours.

3. Those, who possess the means, should be permitted to govern more than
one spouse. Individuals, who would not be inconvenienced physically,
economically and ethically, and who possess the ability to maintain
equity and even handedness amongst all their spouses and children,
should be permitted to take more than one spouse for themselves.  
 Undoubtedly, there exists no other alternative than these three.

If we were to choose the first alternative, we would have to wage a
battle against human innate instincts and spiritual requirements, and
disregard these sentiments and feelings of the women - a battle which we
would never win. On the assumption that this scheme is actually put into
practice, the inhumane aspect associated with it is something which is
clear for everyone to see.

In other words, when necessary, this issue should not always be
scrutinized from the viewpoint of the first wife but should also be
analyzed from the standpoint of the second wife. Those who consider
polygamy to be the cause of the sufferings of the first wife, view this
issue from only one perspective. It ought to be studied from three
perspectives -  from the standpoint of the male, the first spouse and
the second spouse, and the issue should be judged after taking into
regard the interests and well-being of all three of them.

As for the second alternative, if we were to select it, we would have to
legalize and formalize prostitution. In addition, the women, who are
kept as mistresses and used for sexual gratification, would neither have
any security nor a future for themselves, and their status would be
ruined, and these are things that no rational person should ever accept.

Thus, the only alternative that remains is the third one, which not only
responds positively to the innate desires and the inherent needs of the
women, but it also keeps women away from the evil consequences of
prostitution. It prevents disruption of the lives of this group of women
and thus serves to protect society from a multitude of sins.

It must be noted that although polygamy is a social necessity in certain
instances and is one of the incontestable rulings of Islam, fulfilling
the conditions necessary for it in the present times differs vastly from
that of the past. In the simple and Spartan life of the past, it was
easy for everyone to maintain equity amongst the spouses but in the
present times, those who wish to make use of this ruling must ensure
that comprehensive equity is observed. Basically, polygamy should not be
pursued for the sake of carnal and physical desires.

Interestingly, the very opponents of polygamy (such as the Westerners),
during the course of history, have encountered events that have clearly
manifested their need for it. For example, after World War II, the need
for polygamy was intensely felt in the war-torn countries, especially
Germany, which even compelled some of their intellectuals to reconsider
their views with respect to the prohibition of polygamy. In addition,
they conducted a study of the Islamic program of multiplicity of wives
from al-Azhar University.  

However, severe objections on the part of the Church forced them to
shelve their plans; the consequence of which was wild and outrageous
profligacy that eventually engulfed the length and breadth of the
war-torn countries.

Apart from the above, the inclination of some of the men to possess more
than one spouse is something that cannot be denied, although if it were
to arise as a result of carnal desires, it is not to be taken into
regard. A wife's inability to conceive and the husband's intense desire
to have a child provide a rational support to such an inclination.

There may be instances where the inability of the wife to satisfy the
intense sexual desires of the husband leaves him with no alternative
except to turn towards a second marriage - at times even compelling him
to resort to illegitimate means to achieve his objective in the absence
of legitimate ones.

Hence, in cases such as these, his inclination cannot be regarded as
being illogical or irrational. It is for this reason that even in
countries that prohibit polygamy, in reality, relationships with several
women are widely prevalent whereby one male tends to have illicit
relationships with several women at the same time.

The well-known French historian Gustav Lebon considers the issue of
Islamic polygamy, which is bound and limited by conditions, to be one of
the distinguishing features of this religion. Comparing it with the free
and illicit relationship of a male with several females in Europe, he
states:  In the West too, despite the fact that the weather and natural
environment do not warrant such a custom (polygamy), monogamy is
something that we come across only in books of law!  

For, I do not suppose that the presence of traces of this custom, in our
actual socialization, can be denied!  Honestly, I am at a loss and fail
to comprehend what the legal, but confined, polygamy of the East lacks
in comparison to the phoney polygamy of the West?  In fact, I declare
that the former is better and more seemly than the latter, in every
respect.[^18]

Of course it is not to be denied that some of the so-called Muslims,
without taking into regard the Islamic ideology behind this rule, have
sought to misuse it, maintaining ignominious harems for themselves and
violating the rights of their wives. This flaw is not in the law but
rather in the individuals themselves, and their deeds should not be
regarded as the laws of Islam. Is there any law, which, despite its
excellence, is not put to misuse by profiteering individuals for their
personal benefit?

Question: At this juncture some may question that if women find
themselves in the abovementioned circumstances; would they be permitted
to take two husbands for themselves too?

The answer to the above question is not very difficult:

**Firstly:** (Contrary to what is popular among the general public) the
sexual desire in men is several times more than that in women; books
relating to sexual issues state frigidity to be the disorder which is
prevalent in the majority of women whereas, in the case of men, it is
just the opposite. Even with respect to animals it has been observed
that sexual advancements are usually initiated by the males of the
species.

**Secondly:** Polygamy, in the case of men, does not entail any social
or legal complications whereas, if the women were to possess two
husbands, it would lead to numerous problems - the simplest of them
being the issue of genealogy of the child, for it would not be known to
which of the husbands it belongs, and such a child would certainly not
be cared for and supported by any of the husbands. Some of the scholars
are of the opinion that a child, whose father's identity is unknown,
tends to be less loved and cared for by the mother. Thus, such children
find themselves deprived and denied with respect to love and affection,
and unclear about their legal rights.

It may perhaps be unnecessary to mention that resorting to
contraceptives such as pills or the like can never yield certainty or
confidence that a child will not be conceived, for there have been
innumerable instances where women, who have used them or made mistakes
while using them, have conceived children. Thus, no woman can, by
trusting and relying upon such measures, take multiple spouses for
herself.  
 Due to these factors polygamy, in the case of women, cannot be
rational, whereas in the case of men, after observing its conditions, it
is not only logical, but practical too.[^19]

23. What is meant by ‘justice’ as mentioned in the conditions (to be considered) with respect to polygamy?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In verse 3 of SuratulNisa, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ أَلاَّ تَعْدِلُوا فَوَاحِدَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…but if you fear that you will not do justice (between them), then
(marry) only one.”***

Similarly, in verse 129 of this same chapter, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَ لَنْ تَسْتَطِيعُوا أَنْ تَعْدِلُوا بَيْنَ النِّسَاءِ وَ لَوْ
حَرَصْـتُمْ  
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And you have it not in your power to do justice between wives, even
though you may wish (it).”***

The question that arises here is: What is meant by 'justice' with
respect to multiple wives?  Is this 'justice' associated with issues of
life like sleeping together, gifting items and things, and providing
ease and comfort, or is it associated with respect to the heart and
human sentiments too?

Without any doubt justice, with respect to affections and sentiments of
the heart, is something that is beyond the control of man. Who possesses
the ability to exercise total control over his affection - a state,
which is governed by factors external to himself?  It is for this reason
that Allah has not considered the observance of this kind of justice to
be obligatory and in verse 129 of this chapter says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَنْ تَسْتَطِيعُوا أَنْ تَعْدِلُوا بَيْنَ النِّسَاءِ وَ لَوْ
حَرَصْتُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And you have it not in your power to do justice between wives, (with
respect to sentimental inclinations) even though you may wish (it).”***

Thus, till such time that the internal sentiments do not result in
granting preference to some of the spouses over the others in actions,
it is not prohibited. What is obligatory upon a man is to maintain
justice amongst the spouses with respect to issues that are practical
and external in dimension.

From the above explanation it becomes plain that those, who have sought
to correlate the above verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ أَلاَّ تَعْدِلُوا فَوَاحِدَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

with verse number 129:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَنْ تَسْتَطِيعُوا أَنْ تَعْدِلُوا بَيْنَ النِّسِاءِ وَ لَوْ
حَرَصْتُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

and thus conclude that polygamy is totally forbidden in Islam, have made
a grave error. - They have argued that the first verse places the
condition of 'justice', while the second verse considers this justice to
be an impossible task for the men.,

As has been referred to previously, the kind of justice, whose
observance is beyond the ability of man, is that which is associated
with the internal sentiments, and this is not one of the requirements
for polygamy; the condition for polygamy is the justice which is
associated with acts and deeds.

Testifying to this aspect is the latter part of the verse 129 of this
same chapter, which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلا تَمِيلُوا كُلَّ الْمَيْلِ فَتَذَرُوها كَالْمُعَلَّقَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Now that you cannot observe justice with respect to your sentiments
between your spouses, at least do not direct all your sentimental
inclinations towards one, leaving the other in suspense.”***

Consequently, people who have taken one part of this verse and abandoned
the other part, have erred in the issue of polygamy and it is a cause
for astonishment for every researcher.[^20]

Incidentally, according to Islamic traditions, it appears that the first
person to raise this objection was Ibn Abi al-'Auja - one of the
materialists and a contemporary of Imam as-sadiq (a.s) - who argued over
it with Hisham b. Hakam, the diligent Islamic scholar. Not finding the
answer to it, Hisham started out from his city, Kufah, towards Madinah
and approached Imam as-sadiq (a.s).

The Imam (a.s) was greatly astonished to see him in Madinah at a time
when it was not the season for Hajj and 'Umrah. Hisham presented his
question, whereupon the Imam (a.s) said:  “The justice intended in verse
3 of Suratul Nisa is the justice associated with the maintenance of the
spouses (and observation of their rights, and the manner of conduct and
behaviour) whereas the justice in verse 129, which has been regarded as
an impossible task, is the justice associated with internal sentiments
(thus, polygamy, with adherence to the Islamic conditions, is neither
prohibited nor impossible).”

After returning from his journey, when Hisham presented Ibn Abi al-'Auja
with the answer he swore that it was not Hisham's answer but somebody
else's.[^21]

It is quite evident that if we are interpreting the term 'justice'
differently in the two verses it is because of the clear context that is
present in both the verses. The verse under discussion clearly states:
Do not direct all your inclinations towards one spouse, and has thus
permitted the selection of two spouses, but on the condition that,
despite the difference in internal inclinations, no injustice should be
done to the other with respect to actions and deeds. Besides, the
initial portion of verse 3 of this same chapter expressly permits
polygamy.[^22]

24. What is the philosophy behind temporary marriage?
-----------------------------------------------------

It is a general and universal rule that if man's natural impulses are
not satiated in the correct manner, he will resort to incorrect and
devious means in order to satiate himself. In reality, the natural
desires cannot be eliminated; and upon the supposition that they could
be eliminated, such an act would not at all be rational for then it
would be tantamount to opposing the laws of Creation.

Thus, the correct option would be to satiate them in a rational manner
and utilize them constructively.

It cannot be denied that sexual desire is one of the strongest natural
impulses existing within man to the extent that some of the
psychoanalysts are of the opinion that it is the only primitive and
primary impulse within man while all the other impulses are secondary in
nature.

Now, in numerous circumstances and environments, a great number of
individuals belonging to a particular age-group are unable to enter into
a permanent marriage, or married individuals, who have embarked upon
protracted journeys or other commitments, are faced with the dilemma of
their sexual desires remaining unfulfilled. This issue has become
especially acute in our times wherein the matrimonial age, due to the
protracted period of education and other intricate social issues, has
gone up and rarely can a youth enter into wedlock at a lower age during
which he faces a period of heightened sexual tendencies.

What should be done in such circumstances?

Should the people be encouraged to suppress this impulse (like the monks
and the nuns)? 

Or should they be left free to indulge in profligacy, and the
ignominious and scandalous scenarios that presently exist be permitted?

Or that we should adopt a third alternative - one, which neither brings
about the problems of a permanent marriage nor leads to sexual
licentiousness?

In summary, permanent marriage, in itself, has never been able to cater
to the sexual needs of all the sections of the society - neither in the
past nor today. We stand at a crossing - either to permit 'prostitution'
(just as the material world of today has endorsed it and has officially
recognized it) or accept the idea of temporary marriage. Those who
oppose both prostitution as well as temporary marriage have not
presented a solution for this problem.

The blueprint of temporary marriage neither possesses the strict
conditions that are associated with permanent marriage so as to be
inharmonious with educational engagements or lack of financial
affluence, nor does it lead to the harmful ways of sexual wantonness and
prostitution.

### Criticisms levelled against temporary marriage

However, there are certain objections and criticisms that need to be
discussed, albeit concisely:

1. At times it is asked, what is the difference between 'temporary
marriage' and 'prostitution'?  Both of them can be considered to be
prostitution in exchange for a certain sum of money. This kind of
marriage is, in fact, a veil over prostitution and sexual pollution! 
The only difference between the two lies in the recitation of two simple
sentences (recitation of the marriage formula.)

Answer: Those who make this criticism apparently do not have any
awareness about the concept of temporary marriage. This is because
temporary marriage, like permanent marriage, is governed by rules and
ordinances. A woman entering into a temporary marriage must make herself
available solely for this husband for the entire duration of the
marriage, and must necessarily observe the 'Iddah after the termination
of the term. In other words, she has to refrain from entering into any
kind of matrimony with any other male for a period of forty five days at
least, so that it becomes clear in case she bears the child of the first
person.

The observance of this 'Iddah is obligatory upon her even if she had
resorted to the use of contraceptives to prevent conception.  If she
happens to conceive, this child like the children that result from a
permanent marriage, would have to be looked after and supported by the
man, and all the rules that are associated with children would come to
be associated with this child too. However, prostitution does not have
any of these rulings associated with it. Can these two issues ever be
compared with each other?

Of course, temporary marriage does differ from permanent marriage with
respect to the issues of inheritance (between the temporary
spouses),[^23] maintenance, and some other rulings; however these
differences do not place it on par with prostitution. In any event,
temporary marriage is a form of marriage which possesses its own
ordinances and stipulations.

2. Temporary marriage becomes a reason for some lustful individuals to
misuse this ruling and use it as a pretext to indulge in every kind of
prostitution and profligacy; consequently respectable individuals never
enter into it while women of good repute tend to avoid it.

Answer:  Is there any law in the world that has not been abused?  Should
a rule, which is a social requirement and is in accordance with the
human innate, be suppressed because of it being misused, or should
those, who misuse it, be taken to task?

Supposing some individuals misuse the pilgrimage to the House of Allah
and engage themselves in peddling drugs in the course of their trip;
should the people be prevented from participating in this great Islamic
congregation or should those, who misuse the occasion, be brought to
justice?

If we observe that nowadays respectable individuals experience an
aversion with respect to this Islamic statute, the fault lies not in the
statute but in those who act upon it, or to put it more correctly, in
those who misuse it. If, in our present day society, temporary marriage
were to be portrayed in its correct form and the Islamic government were
to implement it under the governance of specific rules and stipulations,
not only would its misuse be prevented but even respected individuals
(during social exigencies) would not experience an aversion towards it.

3. They say:  Temporary marriage results in guardian-less individuals,
such as illegitimate children, being handed out to the society.

Answer: In view of what we have mentioned previously, the answer to this
objection is quite plain since according to (man-made) law, illegitimate
children are neither affiliated to the father nor to the mother whereas
children resulting from temporary marriage do not possess the slightest
difference from those that result from permanent marriage - neither with
respect to inheritance nor with respect to social rights and
privileges - apparently this objection stems from their lack of
attention towards this reality.

### Russell and temporary marriage

In conclusion it appears expedient to present what Bertrand Russell, the
well-known English scholar, has stated in his book Marriage and Morals
under the topic Trial Marriage. After mentioning the scheme of Ben B.
Lindsey, one of the judges for juvenile delinquency, in connection with
'companionate marriage', he states as follows:

“His view is that young people should be able to enter upon a new kind
of marriage distinguished from ordinary marriage by 3 characteristics.
First, that there should be for the time being no intention of having
children and that accordingly the best available birth-control
information should be given to the young couple. Second, that so long as
there are no children and the wife is not pregnant divorce should be
possible by mutual consent. And third, that in the event of divorce, the
wife should not be entitled to alimony.”

After mentioning Lindsay's idea, which was presented above, Russell goes
on to state as follows:  He holds, and I think rightly, that if such an
institution were established by law, a very great many young people, for
example, students at universities, would enter upon comparatively
permanent partnerships, involving a common life, and free from the
Dionysiac characteristics of their present sex relations.[^24]

As you notice, the above plan with respect to temporary marriage is in
many ways similar to the Islamic concept of temporary marriage except
that the conditions and stipulations which Islam has laid out for it are
more lucid and perfect in various respects. In the Islamic temporary
marriage there is no prohibition in preventing conception, separation is
simple and alimony too is not obligatory.[^25]

25. Did temporary marriage exist during the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w)?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The general consensus of the Islamic scholars indicates that temporary
marriage was lawful during the initial period of Islam and, in fact, the
essentials of religion too emphasize this lawfulness - (and the
difference of opinion that exists in connection with verse 24 of Suratul
Nisa):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 فَمَا اسْتَمْتَعْـتُمْ بِهِ مِنْهُنَّ فَآتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ
فَرِيضَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then as to those whom you profit by, give them their dowries as
appointed.”***

as to whether or not it establishes the legitimacy of mut'ah does not,
in any way, serve to oppose the incontrovertible nature of the statute.
This is because even the opponents are of the belief that the legitimacy
of this statute has been established by means of the sunnah of the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w) - and the Muslims, during the initial stages of Islam,
even acted upon this ruling. Also, the famous sentence that has been
reported from 'Umar: 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُتْعَتَانِ كَانَتَا عَلَى عَهْدِ رَسُولِ اللٌّهِ أَنَا مُحَرِّمُهُماَ
وَ أُعَاقِبُ عَلَيْهِمَا مُتْعَةُ النِّسَاءِ وَ مُتْعَةُ الْحَجِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Two mut'ahs existed during the time of the Prophet of Allah and I
prohibit them and shall punish (those who act upon them), (and these
are) mut'ah of the women and Hajj of Tamattu'), is a clear proof of the
existence of this statute during the period of the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w); however, the opponents of this ruling claim that it was
abrogated and prohibited later on.”[^26]

Interestingly, the traditions which they present to substantiate their
claims of abrogation are contradictory and inconsistent. Some traditions
state that the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) himself abrogated this statute and
as such, the nullifier of this ruling would be the sunnah of the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w). Other traditions state that it was abrogated by the
verse of Divorce: 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِعِدَّتِهِنَ إِذا طَلَّقْتُمُ النِّسَاءَ فَطَلِّقُوهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Prophet! when you divorce women, divorce them for their prescribed
time.”***

However, it ought to be known that this verse has no connection with the
issue under discussion since this verse deals with divorce whereas there
is no divorce in a temporary marriage - the separation taking place when
the term (of marriage) reaches termination.

On the one hand, it is conclusively and categorically known that this
ruling was lawful during the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) while on
the other hand there is authentic evidence to prove that it had been
abrogated. Thus, according to an indisputable law, proved in
methodology, we shall judge that this statute continues to exist.

The well-known sentence of 'Umar is also a clear testimony of the fact
that this ruling had certainly not been abrogated during the period of
the Noble Prophet (s.a.w).

It is quite evident that none, except the Noble Prophet (s.a.w),
possesses the authority to abrogate laws and rulings, and it is only he
(s.a.w), who can abrogate and annul certain laws in accordance with
divine orders. After the Noble Prophet's death, the door to abrogation
of laws was completely closed or else every person, according to his
individual reasoning, would seek to abrogate portions of the divine laws
and consequently there would be no such thing as an eternal and
everlasting Shari'ah. Fundamentally, individual reasoning vis-à-vis
explicit sayings of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) lacks validity and
authenticity.

Significantly, in the book sahih Tirmidhi, which is one of well-known
siHaH of the Ahlus Sunnah, and also from al-Daraqutni,[^27] we are
informed of the following incident: 

Once, an inhabitant from Syria approached 'Abdullah b. 'Umar and
questioned him about Hajj-e-Tamattu', whereupon he expressly declared it
to be permissible. The man said: “But your father has prohibited it!”
'Abdullah b. 'Umar turned furious and said: “If my father prohibits it
while the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) permits it, should I forsake the sacred
sunnah of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and follow my father's statements? 
Arise and go away from my presence!”[^28]

Another tradition, possessing the same form as that seen in the above
tradition, has also been reported from 'Abdullah b. 'Umar, but in
connection with temporary marriage.[^29]

It has been reported from the book 'Muhadhirat' of Raghib that one of
the Muslims entered into a temporary marriage. He was asked: “Who
informed you that it was legitimate?”  He replied: ”'Umar!”  Astonished,
they asked him: “How is such a thing possible when 'Umar has himself
prohibited it and has even threatened to punish the people for it?”  He
said: “I too base my reasoning upon this, for 'Umar had said: 'The Noble
Prophet (s.a.w) had permitted it but I prohibit it.'  I accept its
legitimacy from the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) but shall never accept its
prohibition from anyone else!”[^30]

Another point that needs to be mentioned here is that those, who claim
that this rule has been abrogated, face some serious problems:

Firstly: In numerous traditions from Sunni sources it has been
explicitly stated that this ruling had not been abrogated during the
life-time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) but, rather, its prohibition came
into effect during the time of 'Umar. Thus, the proponents of abrogation
need to provide an explanation for all these traditions, which are
twenty four in number. 'Allamah Amini has mentioned them in detail in
volume six of his book al-Ghadir and two examples of them are presented
below:

1. It has been reported in sahih Tirmidhi that Jabir b. 'Abdullah Ansari
said: “During the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) we used to easily
enter into temporary marriage and this continued till 'Umar totally
prevented 'Amr b. Harith from entering into it.”[^31]

2. In the books Muwatta of Malik and Sunan Kubra of Behaqi it has been
reported from 'Urwah b. Zubair that one day, a lady by the name of
Khaulah Bint Hakim approached 'Umar and informed him that one of the
Muslims, Rabi' b. Umayyah, had committed mut'ah. Hearing this 'Umar
said: “Had I prohibited this act previously, I would have had him stoned
(but now, from this very moment, I shall prohibit it).”[^32]

In the book Bidayah al-Mujtahid of Ibn Rushd al-Andulusi too we read
that Jabir b. 'Abdullah Ansari said: “Temporary marriage was customary
and usual amongst us during the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w),
during the caliphate of Abu Bakr and (the first) half of the caliphate
of 'Umar. Afterwards 'Umar prohibited it.”[^33]

Secondly: The traditions that state that this ruling had been abrogated
during the life-time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) are ambivalent and
contradictory in nature. Some of them say that it was abrogated in the
battle of Khaibar, some report it to have been abrogated on the day of
the conquest of Makkah, some others specify that it was during the
battle of Tabuk, while yet others declare that it took place during the
battle of Autas, etc. Thus, all of these traditions, which advocate the
abrogation of this ruling, appear to be fabricated as they differ so
vastly from each other.

In view of what we have mentioned above, it becomes plain that the
statement of the author of the commentary al-Manar, when he says: 
“Previously, in the third and fourth volume of the magazine al-Manar, we
had expressly stated that it was 'Umar, who had prohibited mut'ah, but
later we happened to come across some traditions, which indicated that
it had been abrogated during the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and
not during the time of 'Umar, and accordingly, we rectify our previous
statements and seek forgiveness for it[^34] is a prejudiced declaration.

This is because vis-à-vis these contradictory traditions that declare
the abrogation to have taken place during the time of the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w), we have traditions, which expressly declare the ruling to have
continued till the time of 'Umar. Thus, neither is there a necessity to
apologize nor a need to seek forgiveness; the evidences presented above
indicate that it was the original declaration of the author that had
been true and correct, and not his second one!”

It is evident that neither 'Umar nor anyone else - not even the Imams of
the Ahlul Bayt G, who are the genuine successors of the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w) - can abrogate laws that had existed during the life-time of the
Noble Prophet (s.a.w). Basically, abrogation after the death of the
Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and the termination of revelation is absolutely
meaningless and inconceivable. It is also a matter of immense
astonishment that some individuals attribute the utterance of 'Umar to
his 'individual reasoning' (ijtihad), for ijtihad vis-à-vis 'nass'
(explicit text of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w)) is neither permissible nor
acceptable.[^35]  
    
  

26. What is the philosophy behind Muhallil?
-------------------------------------------

After the third divorce, the man and the woman must separate from each
other forever; however, if the woman enters into matrimony with another
man and, after the consummation of this marriage, procures divorce from
him, she can then marry the first husband again if she so desires. The
question which arises here is:  What is the philosophy behind this
Islamic ruling?

In specific circumstances divorce, like marriage, becomes a crucial and
essential issue and it is for this reason that Islam has permitted it.
But, since division and break-up of families tend to inflict irreparable
harm on the individuals and the society, Islam adopts various means in
order to prevent the occurrence of divorce to the maximum extent
possible - the issue of 'another marriage' or muhallil being one of
these means.

This is because a woman's official marriage with another man, after
having been divorced three times, is a great deterrent for pronouncing
repetitive divorces (on the part of the husband). A man who intends to
divorce his wife for the third time knowing fully well that with this
divorce she would get married to someone else, forever, would find his
conscience being pricked and, till the time he is certain that there
exists no other alternative, he will not embark on such an act.

In reality, the issue of muhallil or to put it more correctly, 'a
woman's second permanent marriage with another man' is an impediment
placed before capricious and deceptive males so  that they do not take
women to be playthings for their wanton desires, and misuse the ruling
of 'divorce and return'.

The conditions stipulated for this second marriage - one of them being
that it should be a permanent marriage - indicate that this second
alliance has not been stipulated for the purpose of providing the woman
and the first husband with an opportunity to get together again; thus,
this ruling cannot be misused by entering into a temporary marriage in
order to remove the impediment.

A tradition, which some of the commentators have mentioned, serves to
greatly elucidate the point. According to this tradition those, who
misuse this ruling by arranging a marriage alliance so that the woman,
by means of this marriage, can return to her first husband, are
distanced away from Allah's mercy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَنَ اللٌّهُ الْمُحَلِّلَ وَ الْمُحَللَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah curses the 'muhallil', and the person for whom this person has
endeavoured to act as a 'muhallil'.”[^36]

Thus, it ought to be said that the objective is to separate the man and
the woman after three divorces by means of this marriage, so that each
of them can lead a life as desired by him or her and to prevent
matrimony - an issue, extremely hallowed - from occasionally becoming a
victim of the satanic inclinations of the first husband.

However, since Islam has always respected rational and logical desires,
and utilizes every reformative opening that exists, it says:  If this
(second) alliance happens to break down too and the former spouses
develop attachment with respect to each other and have seriously
resolved to fulfil their familial responsibilities, there is no harm if
they come together. This new marriage lifts the prohibition from over
them and this is why it has been named as 'muhallil'.

It therefore becomes clear that muhallil has not been presented in Islam
as just an issue or a ruling but rather it speaks of a new marriage, a
concept which, in addition to the Qur\`anic verse, is also inferred from
the traditions of the infallibles (AS).

After studying the issue, another point which comes to the fore is that
the issue of new marriage is serious and in sincere earnest. But if
someone, from the very outset, had not intended to marry the woman
permanently, only enacting a role in order to present an appearance of a
muhallil (so that the woman acquires the excuse to return to her former
husband), such a marriage would serve no purpose since in such a case,
not only would the second marriage be null and void but in addition, the
first husband would also never become legitimate for the woman and the
previously mentioned tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَنَ اللٌّهُ الْمُحَلِّلَ وَ الْمُحَللَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

probably alludes to this kind of muhallil.[^37]

27. What is the philosophy behind the observance of Iddah?
----------------------------------------------------------

In verse 228 of Suratul Baqarah, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْمُطَلَّقاتُ يَتَرَبَّصْنَ بِأَنْفُسِهِنَّ ثَلاثَةَ قُرُوءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the divorced women should keep themselves in waiting for three
courses.”***

The question that crops up here is:  What is the philosophy behind this
Islamic ruling?

Since the breaking up of families generally tends to inflict irreparable
damage upon the fabric of a society, Islam has set stipulations which,
till the maximum possible limit, seek to prevent such matrimonial
break-ups. On the one hand it regards divorce as 'the most abominable of
the permissible acts', while on the other hand, by referring the
matrimonial disputes to the family courts established by the relatives,
and initiating reconciliatory measures through the relatives of the
disputing spouses, it has sought to prevent this occurrence.

One of these stipulations, which is itself a cause for delaying the
divorce and weakening this matrimonial break-up, is the observance of
'Iddah - the duration of which has been set to be three (قرء), which
means to become clean, three times, from menstruation.

### Iddah, a means for reconciliation and return

At times, due to certain factors, the mentality of a person comes to
possess such a state that a small dispute inflames feelings of revenge
so intense as to blanket the intellect and conscience, and
predominantly, the division of a family occurs in these circumstances.
 However, it frequently happens that a short while after the dispute the
husband and the wife come to their senses and repent for their actions,
especially when they realize that they would have found themselves in
great difficulty had their family broken up.

It is here that the verse, under discussion, states:  The women must
observe Iddah and remain patient till this wave passes by and the dark
clouds of strife and animosity disperse from the skies of their lives.

In particular, the stipulation of Islam asking a woman to refrain from
going out of the house during the period of Iddah serves to stimulate
the faculty of reflection within her and is very effective in the
betterment of her relationship with her husband.

And it is for this reason that we read in the first verse of Suratul
Talaq:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تُخْرِجُوهُنَّ مِنْ بُيُوتِهِنَّ وَ لاَ يَخْرُجْنَ إِلاَّ أَنْ
يَأْتِينَ بِفَاحِشَةٍ مُبَيِّنَةٍ وَ تِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللٌّهِ وَ مَنْ
يَتَعَدَّ حُدُودَ اللٌّهِ فَقَدْ ظَلَمَ نَفْسَهُ لا تَدْرِي لَعَلَّ
اللٌّهَ يُحْدِثُ بَعْدَ ذٌلِكَ أَمْراً  
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do not drive them out of their houses, nor should they themselves go
forth, unless they commit an open indecency; and these are the limits of
Allah, and whoever goes beyond the limits of Allah, he indeed does
injustice to his own soul. You do not know that Allah may, after that,
bring about reunion.”

Usually, reminiscence of the warm and sweet moments of the life before
divorce is sufficient to bring back the lost love and brighten the
dimmed light of affection.

### Iddah, a means to protect the generation

Another philosophy behind the Iddah is to make a woman cognizant of her
state with respect to pregnancy. It must be admitted that although
witnessing one phase of menstruation is usually indicative of absence of
pregnancy in a woman, at times it has been observed that a woman,
despite bearing a child, menstruates in the initial phase of her
pregnancy and hence, in order to be absolutely sure that she does not
bear a child from her previous husband, it has been ordered that she
should witness three periods of menstruation after which she can enter
into another marriage.[^38]

[^1]: Suratul Ghafir (40), Verse 40

[^2]: Suratul Nahl (16), Verse 97

[^3]: Suratul Muddaththir (74), Verse 38

[^4]: Suratul Jathiyah (45), Verse 15

[^5]: Suratul Nur (24), Verse 2

[^6]: Suratul Nisa (4), Verse 32

[^7]: Refer Al-Mufradat of Raghib Isfahani. It should be known that this
point is applicable in instances when كَسب and اِكتِساَب are used in
conjunction with one another.

[^8]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 2, pg. 113

[^9]: Refer the books An apology for Muhammad and the Koran,
Huqooq-e-Zan Dar Islam and other books related to the humans beliefs and
views.

[^10]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 3, pg. 223

[^11]: Please note that some of the statistics presented may be outdated
as this work is a translation from a book which was originally published
many years ago. (Ed.)

[^12]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 14, pg. 442

[^13]: The currency used in Iran - at present (2005), one US Dollar is
approximately 900 tuman.

[^14]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 3, pg. 290

[^15]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 611

[^16]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 3, pg. 263

[^17]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 3, pg. 373

[^18]: Le Civilisation des Arabes (Tarikh-e-Tamaddun-e-Islam Wa Arab),
translated by Fakhr Gilaani, pg. 509

[^19]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 3, pg. 256

[^20]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 3, pg. 255

[^21]: Tafsir al-Burhan, vol. 1, pg. 420

[^22]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 4, pg. 155

[^23]: Nevertheless, the children resulting from a temporary marriage do
not differ in any manner whatsoever from those resulting from a
permanent marriage.

[^24]: Marriage and Morals, pg. 84

[^25]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 3, pg. 341

[^26]: Kanz al-'Irfan, vol. 2, pg. 158. In Tafsir Qurtubi and Tafsir
Tabari, a tradition similar to the abovementioned tradition has been
mentioned. It has also found a mention in 'The Chapter Of Nikah' in vol.
7 of Sunan of Behaqi.

[^27]: Tafsir Qurtubi, vol. 2, pg. 762, under verse 195 of Suratul
Baqarah.

[^28]: The Mut'ah of Hajj that 'Umar had prohibited was the
Hajj-e-tamattu'. Hajj-e-Tamattu' is that initially a person enters a
state of ihram and after performing the rites of 'Umrah comes out of his
ihram, (whereupon everything, even sexual intercourse, becomes
permissible for him) after which, he once again goes into the state of
ihram and performs the rites of Hajj from the 9th of Dhul Hijjah. In the
Age of Ignorance, the people considered this to be incorrect and would
be given to astonishment over the fact that a person, having entered
Mecca during the season of Hajj, performs his 'Umrah and comes out of
his ihram, before having performed his Hajj. But Islam expressly
declared such an act to be lawful and this has been asserted in verse
186 of Suratul Baqarah.

[^29]: Sharh Lum'ah, vol. 2, 'The Book of Nikah'

[^30]: Kanz al-'Irfan, vol. 2, pg. 159 (footnote)

[^31]: al-Ghadir, vol. 6, pg. 206

[^32]: al-Ghadir, vol. 6, pg. 210

[^33]: Bidayah al-Mujtahid, The Book of Nikah

[^34]: Tafsir al-Manar, vol. 5, pg. 16

[^35]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 3, pg. 337

[^36]: Tafsir al-Manar, vol. 2

[^37]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 2, pg. 123

[^38]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 2, pg. 106


