Philosophy Behind Some of the Prohibited Acts of Islam
======================================================

28. What is the philosophy behind the prohibition of gambling?
--------------------------------------------------------------

It is very rare to find someone who is not acquainted with the various
harms of gambling, and in order to further explain this fact, we present
here, briefly, some of its evil consequences:  
  

### Gambling, the Premier cause of agitation and excitement

All psychologists are of the opinion that mental agitation and
excitement is the principal cause for many diseases. For example,
reduction in (body) vitamins, ulcers of the stomach, insanity, mild and
severe nervous and psychological disorders and the like, often arise as
a result of excitement - and the premier cause that brings about such
excitement is gambling. An American scholar has stated: In this country
alone, more than two thousand individuals die every year due to
excitement and agitation arising as a result of gambling, and on
average, the heart of a poker-player beats in excess of a hundred beats
a minute. At times, gambling also triggers cardiac and cerebral apoplexy
and is undoubtedly a factor which brings about early ageing.

Apart from what scholars have stated, a person who engages in gambling,
finds that not only is his soul subjected to tension but also the tracts
of his body come to possess an unusual and atypical state - his
heartbeat increases, sugar level in the blood rises, there occurs a
disruption in the secretion of the internal glands, the colour of his
face pales and he suffers from a lack of appetite. Upon conclusion of
the gambling bout and subsequent to a tensed battle of nerves he goes to
bed, predominantly resorting to alcohol and drugs in order to soothe his
nerves and calm his body. Therefore, the harm arising as a result of
these ought to be added to that which arises directly as a consequence
of gambling.

Another scholar has said:  A gambler is a diseased person, who is in
need of constant psychological attention. An effort should be made to
make him comprehend that there exists a psychological vacuum, which
propels him towards this reprehensible act, so that he embarks upon
treating himself.

### Connection between crime and gambling

One of the world's largest organisations dealing in statistics has
established that thirty percent of all crimes are directly related to
gambling, and it is also one of the factors which bring about seventy
percent of offences.

### The economic harms of gambling

During the course of a year, huge amounts of money are lost as a result
of gambling, aside from the numerous man-hours that go down the drain as
a result of it - even losing the enthusiasm to work during the rest of
the time. For example, it has been stated in one report that in the city
of Monte Carlo - one of the well-known gambling centres of the world - a
person, in a gambling spree spread over a period of 19 hours, lost a sum
of 4 million Iranian tumans. When the casino shut its doors he proceeded
straight towards the woods where he shot himself in the head. The
reporter adds that the woods of Monte Carlo have repeatedly witnessed
incidents of suicides on the part of such devoted gamblers.

### The social harms of gambling

Many gamblers, owing to the fact that they occasionally turn up winners
and possibly pocket thousands of other people's money within a short
time, are not inclined to enter into economic and manufacturing work as
a result of which, the wheels of economy and production tend to become
crippled in the corresponding ratio. If we inspect meticulously, we
would realise that all the gamblers and their families are a burden upon
the society, not only because they do not contribute the slightest
benefit to it but, on the contrary, they exploit it for their own
benefit and at times resort to theft to make good the losses incurred by
them during gambling.

In short, the evils of gambling are in such great measure that many of
the non-Islamic nations have prohibited it by law, although they may
extensively indulge in it in practice; for example, England prohibited
it in 1853, the Soviet Union did so in 1855, the United States
implemented the prohibition in 1854 while Germany followed suit in 1873.

At the end of this discussion it is interesting to note that according
to statistics compiled by some researchers, 90 percent of all
pick-pocketing instances, 10 percent of moral offences, 40 percent of
assaults, 15 percent of sexual abuses, 30 percent of divorces and 5
percent of suicides are brought about by gambling.

If we were to present a definition for gambling, we would have to
state:  Gambling means sacrificing wealth and honour, for acquiring the
riches of others by means of deception and craftiness, or, at times, for
recreation - but not attaining either of the two objectives.[^1]

29. What is music and what is the philosophy behind its prohibition?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

There exists no difficulty and difference of opinion as far as the issue
of prohibition of music is concerned, however, the difficulty lies in
differentiating and discerning what constitutes music.

### Are all pleasant and melodious sounds music?

Undoubtedly, this is not the case for it has been reported in the
traditions that the Qur\`an and the adhan should be recited in a
pleasant and melodious voice; in addition, the conduct of the Muslims
too indicates likewise.

Is every such sound, which possesses tarji (coming and going of sound in
the larynx, or technically speaking, rolling of the sound in it),
music?  This too is not established.

The conclusion that can be drawn from the statements of the (Shi'ite)
jurists and the Sunni scholars is that joyful tunes that are
bacchanalian, frivolous and futile in nature are regarded as music.  
 Expressing it more clearly, tunes that are commensurate with immoral
gatherings, and with corrupt and sinning individuals, are classified as
music.

In other words a tune, which stirs up the carnal passions within man and
he, in that state, considers consumption of intoxicants and indulgence
in sexual depravity alongside that tune to be totally fitting and
opportune, is called music!

It is significant to note that at times, in a composition, the tune is
music and essentially futile, as are the wordings - like when
inappropriate poems are recited in the company of a ravishing tune; at
other times only the tune is music, like when Qur\`anic verses,
supplications or poems of a lofty standard are recited in a tune that is
suitable to gatherings of the corrupt ones. Both forms are prohibited
(take note).

It is also necessary to mention that at times, 'music' is looked upon as
possessing two meanings - the general meaning and the specific one. The
specific meaning is the meaning that we have presented above - tunes,
which stir up passions within man and are connected to sinful
gatherings. But the general meaning alludes to every pleasant and
melodious sound, and it is for this reason that those, who view music in
the general meaning, have divided it into two categories, lawful and
unlawful music - lawful music being the melodious sounds, which do not
incite immorality and are not associated with such gatherings, whereas
unlawful music being the tunes, possessing the characteristics mentioned
above.

Thus, as far as the prohibition of music is concerned, there exists no
difference of opinion; the disagreement lies in the manner in which it
is interpreted.

However, music, like every other concept, also possesses forms which are
doubtful such that at times, a person fails to comprehend if a
particular tune is associated with immoral gatherings or not. In such
cases, on the basis of the Law of Bara'at, it is regarded as being
lawful (of course, after possessing a sufficient awareness of the
conventional meaning of this, there appears no reason to regard those
heroic tunes and music, which are associated with battle, sports or the
like, as unlawful).

Nevertheless, there are other aspects too that are related to this
issue, such as exceptions to music, which have been claimed by some but
rejected by others, and which need to be discussed in books of
jurisprudence.

The final point which we feel ought to be mentioned here is that the
discussion presented above was with respect to singing - however the
issue of use of musical instruments and the prohibition associated with
it is entirely different, and beyond the scope of our present
discussion.

### The philosophy behind the prohibition of music

A careful study of the meaning of music together with the conditions
mentioned by us clearly elucidates the philosophy that lies behind its
prohibition. A short study reveals the following evils associated with
it:

#### 1. Encouragement towards moral degradation

Experience, which is the best witness, has revealed that many
individuals, influenced by music, have abandoned piety and turned
towards lust and immorality. Musical gatherings are usually centres of
various wrongdoings and it is music that serves to fuel these evils.
According to some reports appearing in foreign newspapers, in a
gathering of a group of girls and boys, a special music was played which
induced so much excitement in them that they rushed towards each other
and began indulging in such obscene acts that one is ashamed to even
make a mention of them.

The commentary Ruhul Ma'ani, narrates that one of the elders of Bani
Umayyah said to them: “Stay away from music for it reduces modesty,
increases lust, shatters (one's) personality, is a successor and
substitute for intoxicants and leads to the same deeds, which arise out
of intoxication.”[^2]

This goes to show that even they had perceived its evil. If the Islamic
traditions have repeatedly stated that music fosters the 'hypocritical
soul' within man, it is an allusion to this reality, for such an
individual possesses a soul that has become polluted as a result of
depravity and being distanced from piety. If the traditions also state
that the angels do not enter into houses in which music is played, it is
because of this pollution and uncleanness, for the angels are entities
that are pure and seek purity.

#### 2. Heedlessness with respect to the remembrance of Allah

In some of the Islamic traditions, music has been interpreted to mean
lahw (amusement, idle sport) - an allusion to the fact that music
intoxicates a person in lust and passion to an extent that it makes him
heedless of Allah.

In a tradition from Imam 'Ali (a.s) we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ ماَ اَلْهىَ عَن ذِكرِ اللٌّهِ فَهُوَ مِنَ الْمَيْسَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every thing that causes man to become unmindful of Allah, (and drowns
him in lust) is a gamble.”[^3]

#### 3. The harmful effects upon the nerves

In reality, music is one of the important factors that cause narcosis of
the nerves. In other words, at times narcotics enter the body through
the mouth, just like alcohol; or by means of the faculty of smell, such
as heroin; or as a result of injection, like morphine; or, at times, by
means of the ears, such as music.

It is for this reason that, at times, certain forms of music lead people
into such high spirits that they come to possess a state similar to
intoxication; of course, there are also times when this state is not
reached, but nevertheless it does induce a state of mild stupor. It
explains why many of the evils of narcotics are also witnessed in music.

A close scrutiny of the biographies of celebrated musicians would reveal
that, in the course of their lives, they slowly began to suffer from
mental and psychological problems - some of them became patients of
psychological disorders; some others, losing their aptitude and mental
acumen, entered into the realms of lunacy and insanity; a group turned
paralytic and helpless; and some others, while in the course of their
musical performance, suffered sudden cardiac arrest due to an increase
in blood-pressure.[^4]

Some of the books written in connection with the detrimental effects of
music upon the human nerves, while mentioning the biographies of some of
the distinguished and celebrated musicians and singers, state that in
the course of their presentations, they suffered a sudden stroke and
died instantly in that very gathering.[^5]

In short, the extent of the harmful effects of music upon the human
nerves - leading to the frontiers of insanity, pressurising the heart
and the blood, and other undesirable stimulations - are in such a
measure that there is no need for any protracted discussion.

The statistics of deaths and fatalities reveal a great increase in
sudden deaths in our era, as compared to the past; several causes for
this phenomenon have been mentioned, one of them being the increase in
song and music, globally.

### Music, one of the tools of the colonialists

The world colonialists have always dreaded awareness on the part of the
general masses - especially the youths - and hence, a part of their
extensive programme for the continuation of colonialism focuses on
submerging societies into unawareness and ignorance, and increasing
unhealthy forms of amusement and entertainment.

Today, it is not just the commercial aspect which motivates the
narcotics trade but rather, it is an important political tool in the
politics of the colonialists. Establishment of prostitution centres,
gambling clubs and other unhealthy forms of amusements are some of the
other tools - one of the most important amongst these being the
expansion of the song and musical domain; a tool, which they insist on
utilizing for anaesthetizing people's thoughts and ideas. One can see
why music occupies a major portion of the airtime on global radio
services and is one of the principal items associated with the
programmes of mass media.[^6]

30. What is the philosophy behind the prohibition of fornication?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

1. Fornication leads to the occurrence of turbulence within the familial
mechanism and severance of the bond between fathers and children - a
bond, whose existence not only occasions social recognition but is also
responsible for the support for the child and for laying the foundations
of love, which causes this support to continue all throughout the
individual's lifetime.

In short, in a society containing a great number of illegitimate and
fatherless children, the social ties, which are governed by familial
connections, become highly unstable.  
 To comprehend the significance of this issue, it is sufficient to
ponder for a moment that if fornication were to be declared lawful in
the entire human society and the matrimonial system were to be uprooted
from it, the nondescript children who would come into the world in such
circumstances would not be supported by anyone - neither at the time of
their birth nor as they are growing up.

Apart from this, they would be left deprived of the element of love,
which plays a decisive role in curbing crime and violence. Consequently,
human society would be transformed into a society, totally beastly and
replete with violence in every sphere and dimension.

2. This reprehensible act brings about various kinds of individual and
social conflicts; stories about the state of affairs prevailing within
localities of disrepute and centres of corruption are illustrative of
the reality that horrendous crimes are committed alongside sexual
digressions.

3. Experience has revealed and science has proved that this act is
responsible for the dissemination of various diseases, and despite all
arrangements made for the purpose of combating its effects; statistics
reveal the extent to which people have lost and still lose the soundness
of their health by means of it.

4. This act can result in the abortion of the foetus, the killing of
children and the termination of lineage. This is because, such women are
never willing to foster their children; basically, the existence of
children is a great impediment for them, hampering them from continuing
their evil acts, and hence they constantly strive to get rid of them.

The practical failure of the absolutely absurd hypothesis - that these
children can be gathered in institutions under the supervision of the
government - has become plainly evident for it has been established that
it is extremely difficult to foster fatherless and motherless children
in this fashion. Besides, the result is often totally undesirable -
nondescript, hardhearted and criminal children, lacking in everything!

5. It should not be forgotten that the objective of marriage is not just
to satiate the sexual desire; rather, partnership in leading one's life,
spiritual intimacy, mental tranquillity, nurturing the children and
collaboration in every aspect of life, are some of the effects of
marriage - none of which are attainable without confining a man and a
woman to each other and prohibiting other women.  
 In a tradition, Imam 'Ali (a.s) says:[^7] “I have heard the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w) say: “Fornication possesses six evil effects, three of
which are (seen) in the world while three are (seen) in the Hereafter.

As for those that are (seen) in this world:  It robs away the purity and
the illumination from man, severs his livelihood and hastens his end.  

And those (seen) in the Hereafter are:  The wrath of Allah, the severity
of the Reckoning and the entry - or permanence of stay - in the fire of
Hell.”[^8]

31. What philosophy governs the prohibition of homosexuality?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Notwithstanding the fact that in the West, where sexual uncleanness is
extraordinarily excessive and such indecencies are not regarded as
reprehensible, the spread of such indecencies can never serve to
diminish the hideousness associated with them, and their moral,
psychological and social evils continue to exist as before (it has been
heard that in some of the countries like England this issue has been
legalized on the basis of a law that has been, with great impudence,
ratified by parliament).

At times, some materialists who are tainted with such uncleanness, in an
effort to justify their acts, state:  We have not come across any
medical prohibition in connection with it!

But they seem to have forgotten that fundamentally, every kind of sexual
deviation tends to affect all the mental and physical structures of
human existence, disrupting its balance and equilibrium.

**Explanation**: Man, by nature, possesses a sexual inclination towards
the opposite sex - this inclination being one of the most fundamental of
human impulses and one, which guarantees the continuation of his
lineage. Any act that serves to divert this inclination from its natural
course generates a disease and brings about a psychological deviation
within man.

Neither a male, who possesses inclination towards the same sex nor one,
who indulges in such an act is a complete male. Books dealing with
sexually related issues mention homosexuality as one of the most
dominant of deviations.

Continuation of this act gradually kills one's sexual inclination
towards the opposite sex and the person indulging in such acts tends to
develop feminine sentiments, eventually coming to suffer from an
excessive sexual debility, technically referred to as frigidity, such
that after a period he loses the ability to perform natural sex (sexual
intercourse with the opposite sex).

In view of the fact that sexual sentiments of a man and a woman
influence their physical organisation as well as the moral and mental
conditions specific to them, the harmful influence upon a person's body
and soul as a result of losing their natural emotions is all too
evident. It is even possible that individuals, suffering from such a
deviation, come to acquire a measure of sexual debility to the extent
that they lose the ability to procreate.

These individuals are usually psychologically unsound and, experiencing
a sense of strangeness with respect to their own selves and also with
respect to the society in which they live, gradually lose their
willpower (a precondition for every kind of success) causing a kind of
indifference to creep into their souls.

If they do not resolve to mend their ways soon, refuse to seek the help
of a medical practitioner or a psychologist despite the need for it and
this act transforms itself into a habit for them, it would be extremely
difficult for them to abandon it. Nevertheless, it is never too late to
give up this obnoxious habit - what is required is resolution and
application.

In any event, this mental vagrancy gradually leads them towards drugs,
intoxicants and other moral deviations and this is another great
calamity.

Interestingly, the Islamic traditions have alluded to these evils by
means of short but pithy expressions. A person once questioned Imam
as-sadiq (a.s) “Why has Allah prohibited sodomy?”  The Imam (a.s)
replied: “Had sex with boys been lawful, the men would have become
independent of women (and disinclined towards them) causing man's
lineage to become terminated and natural heterosexual intercourse to
come to an end, and this would have brought about great moral and social
evils.”[^9]

Significantly one of the punishments, stipulated by Islam for
individuals who practice these acts, is that it is forbidden for the
'doer' to marry the sister, mother or daughter of the person, subjected
to sodomy. That is, if the act were to occur before marriage, these
women would become forbidden for him, eternally.[^10]

32. What is the philosophy behind the prohibition of (consumption of) liquor?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
 There are many reasons for this prohibition including the following.

### Effects of alcohol upon age

A distinguished Western scholar claims that for every 51 deaths amongst
youths aged between 21 and 23 years who are addicted to alcoholic
beverages, there are not even 10 deaths amongst those youths not
addicted to alcohol.

Another reputed scholar has proved that a significant number of 20
year-old youths, who are expected to live up to the age of 50 years, do
not live beyond 35 years as a result of consumption of alcohol.

According to experiments conducted by 'life insurance' companies, it has
been established that the life-span of those addicted to alcohol is 25 -
30 percent less than that of those not addicted to it.

Another statistic reveals that the average age of those addicted to
alcohol is between 35 years and 50 years, whereas the average age of
non-addicts, when hygienic and sanitary issues are observed, is above 60
years.

### The effects of alcohol upon the offspring

If a person happens to be intoxicated at the time of conception, 35
percent of the acute alcoholic effects are passed on to the child and if
both - the husband and the wife - were to be intoxicated, 100 percent of
the acute effects are transferred to the child. In order that the
effects of alcohol on children are better comprehended, we seek to
present some statistics here:

Of the children having been born prematurely, 45% of them had fathers
and mothers, both of whom were alcoholics, 31% had mothers who were
alcoholics and 17% had fathers who were alcoholic.  
 6% of infants, who died shortly after birth, had alcoholic fathers
while 45% of them had alcoholic mothers.

75% of children possessing stunted growth had parents who were addicted
to alcohol while 45% of them had mothers who were addicted to it.  
 Amongst the children who suffered from a lack of sufficient
intellectual and mental abilities, 75% of them had alcoholic mothers
while 75% of them had alcoholic fathers.

### Effects of alcohol upon the morals

Attachment towards the family and the love for the wife and children
diminishes so much in an alcoholic person that it has been repeatedly
observed that fathers have killed their children with their own hands.

### The social harms of alcohol

Statistics compiled by The Legal Medical Institute of the city of Neon
in 1961 of social crimes reveals that alcoholics were involved in 50% of
all of homicide cases, 77.8% of violence and physical abuses, 88.5% of
thefts, and 88.8% of sexual offences. These figures reveal that an
overwhelming majority of crimes and offences are perpetrated under the
influence of alcohol.

### The economic harms of alcoholic drinks

A celebrated psychiatrist says:  Unfortunately, the governments only
take into consideration the monetary and tax benefits derived from
alcohol but fail to consider the enormous funds spent to rectify its
evils.

If the governments were to take into account the increased psychological
sicknesses in the society, the losses of a decadent society, the waste
of precious time, the driving accidents resulting from intoxication, the
corruption of generations, the laziness, idleness and nonchalance, the
cultural backwardness, the troubles faced by the police, the
reformatories for the guardianship of alcoholic children and the
hospitals for them, the judicial setup to look into crimes committed by
the alcoholics and the prisons to house the offenders, and other losses
that stem from the consumption of alcohol, collectively, they would
realize that the income derived from the taxes imposed on alcoholic
drinks is nothing compared to the above-mentioned losses.

Besides, the deplorable consequences of alcohol consumption cannot be
gauged in terms of just money, for death of near ones, breaking up of
families, lost ambitions and loss of intellect can never be compared to
money.

In summary, the harms of alcohol are so numerous that according to one
scholar, if the governments guarantee to close down fifty percent of the
public houses, it can be guaranteed that we would not be in need of
fifty percent of the hospitals and asylums. (Even) if the alcoholic
drinks trade were to be profitable for man - upon the assumption that
the forgetting of his sorrows  and a few moments of insensibility could
be viewed as a benefit for him - nevertheless, its harms are so much
more immense, extensive and protracted that the two just cannot be
compared.[^11]

At this juncture, we present some other points in the form of statistics
in connection with the enormous consequences of this harmful act:

i. According to statistics published in England in connection with
delirium tremens, when this condition was compared to other forms of
insanity, it was found that as opposed to 2249 cases of delirium
tremens, there were only 53 cases of insanity which were caused by other
factors![^12]

ii. Figures procured from American asylums indicate that alcoholic
patients constitute 85% of those suffering from psychological
disorders.[^13]

iii. An English scholar by the name of Bentham writes: “In northern
countries, alcoholic beverages make a person fatuous and imbecile, while
in the southern countries, it makes them insane. He then adds:  The
religion of Islam has prohibited all kinds of alcoholic drinks and this
is one of the distinctive features of Islam.”[^14]

iv. If statistics were to be compiled of those, who, in intoxication
have committed suicides, perpetrated crimes, destroyed houses and dashed
the aspirations of families, the figures would be truly staggering.[^15]

v. In France, 440 people die as a result of alcohol, everyday![^16]

vi. According to another piece of data, deaths in the United States
resulting from psychological disorders in a period of one year are twice
that of the casualties suffered by it during World War II, and according
to researchers, alcohol and cigarettes play a pivotal role vis-à-vis
psychological disorders in that country![^17]

vii. According to statistics published by an individual by the name of
Huger on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the magazine
Sciences, 60 percent of intentional murders, 75 percent of violent and
physical abuses, 30 percent of immoral acts (including incest with the
immediate relatives!) and 20 percent of thefts are related to alcohol
and alcoholic drinks. According to another set of figures compiled by
this same scholar, 40 percent of juvenile offenders have an alcoholic
record.[^18]

viii. From the economic point of view, in England itself, the losses
incurred every year as a result of absenteeism on the part of employees
due to alcoholism has been estimated to be around 50 million dollars,
which, by itself, is sufficient for the building of thousands of
kindergartens, primary and secondary schools.[^19]

ix. As per statistics published in connection with the losses arising as
a result of alcoholic beverages in France, alcohol burdens the French
budget by 137 billion francs per year (not including the personal losses
incurred by the individuals), details of which are as follows:

60 billion francs spent towards courts and prisons.  
 40 billion francs expended for social benefits and charities.  
 10 billion francs utilized for covering the expenses of the hospitals
for alcoholics.  
 70 billion francs for maintaining social security!

Thus, it becomes plainly clear that the number of psychologically
diseased individuals, hospitals, homicides, violent disputes, thefts,
offences and accidents are directly proportional to the number of public
houses that exist.[^20][^21]

33. What is the philosophy that governs the prohibition of (consumption of) pork?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A pig, even for the Europeans who principally consume pork, is a symbol
of dastardliness, and is an animal that is filthy and squalid. This
animal, in sexual issues, is extraordinarily nonchalant and reckless,
and apart from the effects of its meat upon the temperament - an issue
that has been scientifically established - its effects, especially with
respect to recklessness in sexual affairs, are clearly observed.

The prohibition of the consumption of pork had been proclaimed in the
Shari'ah of Prophet Musa (a.s) too, while in the Gospels the sinners
have been likened to the pig, which, in the course of anecdotes, has
been declared to be the personification of the Satan.

It is a matter of great astonishment that some people still insist on
eating its meat despite witnessing with their own eyes that on the one
hand its nourishment is usually filth - at times consuming its own
excrement - while on the other hand it is also plain for everyone to see
that the meat of this dirty animal contains two forms of a dangerous
parasite by the name of trichina and one form of the parasite taenia.

A single trichina is capable of spawning 15,000 times within a period of
one month and causes within man various diseases such as anaemia,
vertigo, diarrhoeal fever, rheumatic pains, nervous stress, internal
itching, accumulation of fat, exhaustion and extreme lassitude,
breathing problems, difficulty in chewing and swallowing food etc.

One kilogram of pork is likely to contain 400 million trichinae and
perhaps this was the reason that, some years back, consumption of pork
was prohibited in some parts of Russia.

Truly, the religion whose rulings acquire newer manifestations with the
passage of time is the religion of Allah - the religion of Islam.

Some people assert that by present day means it is possible to eliminate
all these parasites and make pork devoid of them, but even upon the
supposition that use of sanitary equipments or cooking of meat at high
temperatures completely eliminates all the parasites, nevertheless the
harms associated with pork cannot be denied for according to the
incontrovertible law referred to earlier, the meat of every animal bears
the traits of that animal and, by means of the glands and the hormones
secreted by them, influences the conduct of those, who consume it. Thus,
consuming pork may transfer the attributes of sexual depravity and
indifference towards the affairs of the womenfolk of the family - the
most blatant traits of the male members of this species - into the
person who consumes it.

And perhaps, one of the reasons for the excessive sexual profligacy
dominant in the West could be consumption of the meat of this sordid
animal.[^22]

34. What is the philosophy behind the prohibition of sexual intercourse during menstruation?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Copulating with women in this state, in addition to being revolting,
also entails great harm and this is a fact that has also been
corroborated by present-day medical studies. Some of the harms are: 
Possible occurrence of infertility in the man and the woman, creation of
an environment conducive to the development of microbes of sexual
diseases such as syphilis and gonorrhoea, inflammation of the female
genitals, entry of the menstrual matter - replete with microbes from
within the body - into the male reproductive organ and several other
detriments, which are mentioned in books of medicine. It is for this
reason that doctors prohibit sexual intercourse with such women.

The bleeding during menstruation is related to the congestion of the
uterine vessels and the flaking of its mucus; the ovaries too are in
tune with these vessels in this act of congestion.

Almost contemporaneous to menstruation the female ovule passes through
the fallopian tube and enters the uterus so that, in the eventuality of
the arrival of the male sperm, the two, in collaboration with each
other, can form the embryo.

Initially, the abovementioned blood discharge is colourless and
irregular but soon becomes red and regular till, near its conclusion, it
once again becomes light in colour and slips into irregularity.[^23]

Basically, the blood that is discharged every month during menstruation
is the blood that gathers in the internal uterine vessels for the
presumptive nourishment of the embryo. We do know that every month a
woman's uterus produces one ovule and simultaneous to this the internal
vessels, gearing themselves up for the purpose of nourishing the embryo,
become replete with blood.

If the ovule, having entered into the womb after having passed through
the fallopian tube, encounters the male spermatozoid, an embryo is
formed and the blood present in the vessels is utilized for its
nourishment. But if not, the blood, as a result of flaking of the womb's
mucus and the rupturing of the walls of the vessels, gets discharged
from the womb in the form of menses.

Thus, it becomes plainly apparent as to why copulation in such a state
is detrimental and prohibited. The womb, during this discharge, does not
possess any kind of natural preparedness to accept the spermatozoid and
thus comes to suffer harm.[^24]  
  

35. What is the philosophy for the prohibition of marriage with one’s ‘immediate relatives’?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In verse 23 of Suratul Nisa, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُرِّمَتْ عَلَيْكُمْ أُمَّهَاتُكُمْ وَ بَنَاتُكُمْ وَ أَخَوَاتُكُمْ وَ
عَمَّاتُكُمْ وَ خَالاَتُكُمْ وَ بَنَاتُ الأََخِ وَ بَنَاتُ الأُُخْتِ
وَ أُمَّهَاتُكُمُ اللاَّتِي أَرْضَعْنَكُمْ وَ أَخَوَاتُكُمْ مِنَ
الرَّضَاعَةِ وَ أُمَّهَاتُ نِسَائِكُمْ وَ رَبَائِـبُكُمُ اللاَّتِي فِي
حُجُورِكُمْ مِنْ نِسَائِكُمُ اللاَّتِي دَخَلْـتُمْ بِهِنَّ فَإِنْ لَمْ
تَكُونُوا دَخَلْتُمْ بِهِنَّ فَلاَ جُناحَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَ حَلاَئِلُ
أَبْنَائِكُمُ الَّذِينَ مِنْ أَصْلاَبِكُمْ وَ أَنْ تَجْمَعُوا بَيْنَ
الأُُخْـتَيْنِ إِلاَّ مَا قَدْ سَلَفَ إِنَّ اللٌّهَ كَانَ غَفُوراً
رَحِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Forbidden to you are your mothers and your daughters and your
sisters and your paternal aunts and your maternal aunts and brothers'
daughters and sisters' daughters and your mothers that have suckled you
and your foster-sisters and mothers of your wives and your
step-daughters*** ***who are in your guardianship, (born) of your wives
to whom you have gone in, but if you have not gone in to them, there is
no blame on you (in marrying them), and the wives of your sons who are
of your own loins and that you should have two sisters together, except
what has already passed; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***

The question that arises here is:  What is the philosophy behind the
prohibition of marriage with one's maharim?

In this verse allusion has been made towards the maharim - meaning the
ladies with whom marriage is forbidden - and on the basis of it, we can
conclude that there are three ways by which this relationship can come
into existence:

1. By birth - This is referred to as 'genealogical relationship'.  
 2. By matrimony - This is referred to as 'causal relationship'  
 3. By suckling - This is referred to as 'foster relationship'

Foremost, alluding to the maharim by birth, who constitute seven groups,
the verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُرِّمَتْ عَلَيْكُمْ أُمَّهَاتُكُمْ وَ بَنَاتُكُمْ وَ أَخَوَاتُكُمْ وَ
عَمَّاتُكُمْ وَ خَالاَتُكُمْ وَ بَنَاتُ الأََخِ وَ بَنَاتُ الأُُخْتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Forbidden to you are your mothers and your daughters and your sisters
and your paternal aunts and your maternal aunts and brothers' daughters
and sisters' daughters.”

It should be noted that the term 'mother' does not intend only the lady,
who directly gives birth to a person but also includes the paternal and
maternal grand-mothers and great grand-mothers. Similarly, 'daughter'
does not mean the direct daughter only, but also includes the
grand-daughters and the great grand-daughters, and similarly so with the
other five groups.

Even though unsaid, it is clear that all the people (except for a very
few), experience a sense of revulsion and reprehension towards such a
marriage, and even the Magi, who in their ancient books have permitted
these marriages, today reject them.

Although there are some people who strive to present the issue as one
having its origins in an ancient habit and custom, it should be borne in
mind that a habit or a custom can never be eternal and universal, for we
know that if a law is found to exist universally amongst all the
individuals of the human species and all throughout the ages, it
generally reveals that the law is in conformity and agreement with the
innate nature of man.

Apart from this, today the reality has been established that marriage
between consanguineous individuals entails numerous dangers such as
manifestation and aggravation (not generation) of latent and hereditary
diseases. There are some people who, apart from the maharim, do not even
approve of marriages between relatively distant relations, such as first
cousins, and are of the opinion that such alliances tend to accentuate
the dangers of hereditary diseases.[^25] Nevertheless, if this issue
does not create problems with respect to distant relatives (and usually
it does not), it is surely bound to create problems with respect to the
immediate relatives, amongst whom the ties of consanguinity are more
intense.

Besides, generally there does not exist a sexual attraction and appeal
amongst the maharim, since they mostly grow up together and thus appear
common and ordinary to each other - rare and exceptional cases cannot
form the criterion for general and universal laws - and we know that the
existence of sexual attraction is a condition for the consolidation of a
matrimonial alliance. Thus, if marriage were to take place between the
maharim this alliance would be weak and unstable.

Then the Qur\`an mentions the maharim that come into existence by way of
suckling, and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أُمَّهَاتُكُمُ اللاَّتِي أَرْضَعْنَكُمْ وَ أَخَوَاتُكُمْ مِنَ
الرَّضَاعَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And your mothers that have suckled you and your foster-sisters.”***

Although the Qur\`an, in this portion of the verse, has only mentioned
two groups from this category - the mothers and the sisters -according
to numerous traditions, those who become maharim as a result of suckling
are not confined to these two groups only. The well-known tradition of
the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) states: 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَحرَمُ مِنَ الرِّضاَعِ ماَ يحَرَمُ مِنَ النَّسَبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“All those, who become prohibited by means of genealogy, also become
prohibited by means of suckling.”

Of course, there are numerous details and particulars associated with
the measure of milk-feed and the manner and conditions of feeding (the
child) which bring about this relationship, and these have been
mentioned in books of jurisprudence.

The philosophy behind prohibiting marriage with such maharim is that the
bones and flesh of the child develop as a result of the milk of the
person and subsequently, the child comes to develop a resemblance with
the (actual) children of the person. For example, if a woman suckles a
child in a measure that its body develops and grows as a result of her
milk, a kind of resemblance comes into existence between this child and
the other (real) children of the woman. In reality, each of them come to
be regarded as a part of the woman and are like brothers who are related
by birth.

In the final phase the Qur\`an, alluding to the third kind of maharim,
classifies them into three categories:

a) …and mothers of your wives. As soon as the formula of marriage is
recited and a woman gets married to a man, her mother, grand mother etc,
all become eternally prohibited for the man.

b) …and your step-daughters who are in your guardianship, (born) of your
wives to whom you have gone in.  Just a mere recitation of the marriage
formula does not make the woman's daughters, obtained from a previous
husband, prohibited for the husband - rather, the condition is that in
addition to the recitation of the formula, the marriage should also be
consummated. The presence of this condition in this case endorses the
fact that the ruling in the case of the wife's mother, mentioned in the
previous sentence, is not bound by this condition, and technically
speaking, it strengthens the general nature of that ruling.

Although, apparently, the condition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 فِي حُجُورِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…in your guardianship” gives the impression that if the woman's
daughter, borne from a previous husband, is not brought up by the
husband, she is not forbidden for him, however, from the context of the
traditions and the incontrovertibility of the ruling, it can be
concluded that this condition is not, technically speaking, a
precautionary condition but rather a pointer towards the reason for this
prohibition.

This is because such daughters, whose mothers embark upon a new
marriage, are usually young in age and are mostly brought up under the
care of the new husbands as if they were their own daughters. The verse
states:  These are, in reality, similar to your own daughters. Does a
person ever marry his own daughter?  The selection of the word رَباَئِب
which is the plural form of رَبِيبَة -meaning 'the one brought up' - is
also for this very reason.

Pursuant to this part, the verse, for emphasizing the issue, adds: if
you have not engaged in sexual intercourse (with the woman) her
daughters are not forbidden for you:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ لَمْ تَكُونُوا دَخَلْتُمْ بِهِنَّ فَلاَ جُناحَ عَلَيْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

c) …and the wives of your sons who are of your own loins.   In reality,
the expression مِن اَصلاَبِکُم (of your own loins) has been employed so
as to annul an incorrect custom of the Era of Ignorance. In those days
it had been a common practice to select individuals and adopt them as
one's own sons;  the people would adopt an individual, who was someone
else's son, as their own son and all the rulings that were associated
with a real son would come to be associated with this adopted son.
Accordingly they never married the wives of their adopted sons. In
Islam, adoption and all the rulings (of the Age of Ignorance) associated
with it have been regarded as totally baseless.

d) …and that you should have two sisters together i.e., marrying two
sisters, at one time, is not permissible. Thus, there is no harm in
marrying two or more sisters if the marriages were to take place at
different times and after being separated from the previous sister.  
 Since it had been a common practice to take two sisters as wives at the
same time and there were individuals, who had entered into such
marriages, the Qur\`an, after the abovementioned sentence, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ مَا قَدْ سَلَفَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

…except what has already passed…; i.e. those, who have entered into such
marriages before the revelation of this law shall not face chastisement,
however they would now have to select and keep one of the two and leave
the other.

The secret behind the prohibition of such marriages by Islam could be
that two sisters, due to their genealogy and natural attachment, possess
intense fondness for each other, however when they become rivals they
are not able to preserve and maintain the former affection for each
other and consequently, a kind of emotional conflict manifests within
them, which is detrimental for them. This is because the impulse of
'affection' and that of 'rivalry' are in a state of perpetual conflict
within them.[^26]

[^1]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 2, pg. 76

[^2]: Tafsir Ruhul Ma\`ani, vol. 21, pg. 60

[^3]: Wasa\`il ash-Shia, vol. 12, pg. 235

[^4]: Tathir-e-Musiqi Bar Rawan Wa Aa'sab, pg. 26

[^5]: Ibid., pg. 92 onwards

[^6]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 17, pg. 22

[^7]: Majma' al-Bayan, vol. 6, pg. 414

[^8]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 12, pg. 103

[^9]: Wasa\`il ash-Shia, vol. 14, pg. 252

[^10]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 9, pg. 194

[^11]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 2, pg. 74

[^12]: Symposium on Alcohol, pg. 65

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Tafsir Tantawi, vol. 1, pg. 165

[^15]: Dairatul Ma'arif-e-Farid Wa Judai, vol. 3, pg. 790

[^16]: Balaha-e-Ijtima'i-e-Qarn-e-Ma, pg. 205

[^17]: Majmua'-e-Intisharat-e-Nasl-e-Jawan

[^18]: Symposium On Alcohol, pg. 66

[^19]: Majmua'-e-Intisharat-e-Nasl-e-Jawan, 2nd year, pg. 330

[^20]: Nashriya-e-Markaz-e-Mutala'-e-Peshraftha-e-Iran (about alcohol
and gambling)

[^21]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 5, pg. 74

[^22]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 586

[^23]: I'jaz-e-Qur'an, pg. 55, 56

[^24]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 2, pg. 92

[^25]: Nonetheless, in Islam, marriages between first cousins have not
been prohibited since such marriages are not akin to marriages with the
maharim and the likelihood of occurrence of eventualities in them is
lesser. We ourselves have been witness to numerous instances of such
marriages and the children that have resulted from them have been
physically healthy and intellectually gifted.

[^26]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 3, pg. 326


