The Noble Qur`an
================

36. Has the Qur\`an been altered?
---------------------------------

The popular opinion amongst the Shi'ite and Sunni scholars is that no
alteration has taken place in the Qur\`an, and the Qur\`an that is in
our hands today is the very same Qur\`an that had been revealed to the
Noble Prophet (s.a.w) - to the extent that not even a single letter or a
word has been added to it or deleted from it.

Some distinguished Shi'ite scholars - ancient and recent - who have
explicitly attested to this reality, are:

1. Sheikh Tusi, renowned as Sheikh al-Taifah, who has presented a lucid,
explicit and conclusive discussion on this matter at the beginning of
his famed commentary, al-Tibyan.

2. Sayyid Murtaza, one of the most celebrated 4th century (Hijri)
scholars of the Twelve-Imam sect.

3. The Chief of the Traditionists, Muhammad b. 'Ali b. Babwaih al-saduq,
while mentioning the beliefs of the Twelve-Imam sect, states: “Our
belief is that no alteration has taken place in the Noble Qur\`an.”

4. The distinguished commentator al-Tabrisi too, in the introduction of
his commentary, has presented a vocal discussion in connection with this
issue.

5. Kashif al-Ghita, one of the eminent later-generation scholars.

6. Muhaqqiq Yazdi, in his book al-'Urwatul Wuthqa, has reported the
opinions of a great number of Shi'ite jurists regarding non-alteration
of the Qur\`an.

7. It has been reported that numerous other great scholars like Sheikh
Mufid, Sheikh Baha\`i, Qadhi Nurullah and other Shi'ite scholars also
harboured this belief and opinion.

Preponderantly, great and celebrated Sunni scholars too hold this
belief.

It should be pointed out that some Shi'ite and Sunni scholars of Hadith,
whose knowledge with respect to the Noble Qur\`an was deficient, have
reported the occurrence of alteration in the Qur\`an. Nevertheless, by
means of explanations on the part of great scholars of both the sects,
this false belief has been discarded.

Sayyid Murtazha, replying to the book al-Masail al-Tarablasiyat, says:
“The veracity of the Qur\`an is so evident that (the certainty of) it is
similar to (the certainty of) the knowledge that we possess with respect
to the well-known cities of the world, great historical events and
popular books.”

In the aforesaid example, can a person ever harbour doubts about the
existence of cities like Makkah, Madinah, London or Paris, even though
he may have never travelled to these cities?  Can one ever deny the
Mongol invasion of Iran, or the French Revolution, or for that matter
World Wars I and II?

Why can one not deny the above?  It is because all these have reached us
as a result of successive transmissions and narrations. Similarly the
case is similar with the verses of the Noble Qur\`an and we shall
discuss this topic further a little later.

If biased individuals have attributed this belief to the Shi'ites with
the intention of sowing discord amongst the Shi'ites and Ahlus Sunnah,
the books of great and celebrated Shi'ite scholars are sufficient to
prove false their claims.

It is not strange that a person like Fakhr Razi, who is known to us as a
person displaying a particular bias and partiality with issues relating
to the Shi'ites, under the discussion pertaining to verse 9 of Suratul
Hijr, says: 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْناَ الذِّكْرَ وَ اِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُوْن
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, We have sent down the Reminder (the Qur\`an) and surely, We
(Ourselves) shall be its Guardian”***

is evidence to prove false the claims of the Shi'ites that there has
occurred alteration and addition and deletion in the Noble Qur\`an!

It ought to be expressly stated that if his allusion is towards the
great and renowned Shi'ite scholars and researchers, then it should be
known that none of them have ever possessed such a belief and opinion;
and if his allusion is towards a weak and an unauthentic view existing
amongst the Shi'ites, a similar view is prevalent amongst the Ahlus
Sunnah too - one, which is neither recognized by them nor by us.

The renowned researcher Kashif al-Ghita in his book Kashf al-Ghita
declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ رَيْبَ اَنَّهُ (اَيِ الْقُرْآن) مَحْفُوْظٌ مِنَ النُّقْصَانِ
بِحِفْظِ الْمَلِكِ الدَّيَّانِ كَماَ دَلَّ عَلَيْهِ صَرِيْحُ
الْقُرْآنِ وَ إِجْماَعُ الْعُلَماَءِ فِي كُلِّ زَماَنٍ وَ لاَ عِبْرَةَ
بِناَدِرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is no doubt that the Qur\`an has been protected from any
reduction (and alteration) as a result of Allah's protection - as is
indicated by the explicit statements of the Qur\`an and the consensus of
the scholars in every era; and any opposition (to this belief) by a
handful of individuals carried no significance and authenticity.”[^1]

The history of Islam has seen numerous such inappropriate attributions,
which only originate as a result of prejudice. We do know that the cause
of some of these misunderstandings have been due to the enemies, who
used to create such issues in an effort to ensure that no unity is
established within the ranks of the Muslims.

The state of affairs reached such a stage that the renowned author from
the Hijaz, 'Abdullah 'Ali al-Qasimi, in his book al-Sira', while
criticizing the Shi'ites, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشيعة هم أبدا أعداء المساجد و لـهذا يقل أن يشاهد الضارب في طول بلادهم
و غرضها مسجدا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Shi'ites have always been the enemies of mosques and for that
reason if a person were to travel the length and breadth of Shi'ite
cities, he would come across very few mosques!”

Reflect hard! For here in the Shi'ite inhabited cities we tire ourselves
counting the mosques which are found in the streets, bazaars, lanes and
even by-lanes and at times there are so many mosques in one place that
some people clamour out: Enough!  Let us focus on other things too.
Despite this we find this renowned author asserting things, which, for
those of us residing in these regions, only serve to evoke laughter, and
so what Fakhr Razi has ascribed to us should not cause too great an
astonishment.[^2]

37. How is the Qur\`an a miracle?
---------------------------------

In connection with the greatness of the Noble Qur\`an, we begin by
quoting a few statements from some of the renowned personalities and
also from those individuals, who have been accused of standing up to
combat the Qur\`an.

1. 'Abu al-'Ala Mu'arri (accused of attempting to challenge the Qur\`an)
says: “It is a matter of consensus amongst all the people - Muslims and
non-Muslims alike - that the book that Muhammad (a.s) has brought, has
subjugated the intellects and till today, no one has been able to bring
forth the like of it. The style of this book does not tally with any of
the styles that have been prevalent amongst the Arabs, such as oratory,
'rajaz’[^3] poetry, rhymed prose of the clergy etc.  
 The superiority and the attraction of this book is of such high calibre
that if one verse from it is placed amongst the words of others, it
would shine out like a radiant star in a pitch-black night!”

2. Walid b. Mughairah al-Makhzumi - He was well known for his prudence
and good management amongst the Arabs who used to benefit from his
acumen and managerial skills to solve their social problems in the
Pre-Islamic era. It was for this reason that he was called:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 رَيْحاَنَةُ قُرَيْشٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…the crème de la crème of the Quraish.” 

When he heard the first few verses of Suratul Ghafir from the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w) he appeared in a gathering of the tribe of Bani Makhzum
and said: “By Allah!  I have heard a speech from Muhammad, which
resembles neither the speech of humans nor that of the fairies.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِنَّ لَهُ لَحَلاَوَةً وَ إِنَّ عَلَيْهِ لَطَلاَوَةً وَ إِنَّ
أَعْلاَهُ لَمُثْمِرٌ وَ إِنَّ أَسْفَلَهُ لَمُغْدِقٌ وَ إِنَّهُ
لَيَعْلُو وَ لاَ يُعْلَى‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“His speech possesses a special sweetness and an exceptional beauty. The
top of it (like the fruitful branches of a tree) is full of fruits and
the bottom of it is (like the roots of an ancient tree) firm and strong.
It is a speech that shall prevail over everything and none shall prevail
over it.”[^4]

3. Thomas Carlyle, the renowned historian, in respect of the Qur\`an
says: “If we cast one look at this holy book, we observe that salient
realities and characteristics of the secrets of existence have been so
nurtured in its contents that its greatness and truthfulness becomes
plainly manifest - and this is a great distinction, which is specific
only to the Qur\`an and not seen in any other scientific, political or
financial work.

Yes, some of the books do tend to deeply affect the mind of the reader -
however, this just cannot be compared to the influence and effect of the
Qur\`an. As such, it must be said:  “The fundamental distinction of the
Qur\`an and its basic tenets lies in its truthfulness, pure sentiments,
salient topics and the important themes - none of which provide room for
any kind of scepticism and uncertainty - and in the fact that it
encompasses all the virtues and excellences that bring about human
perfection and happiness, and very clearly defines and illustrates them
all.”[^5]

4. John Davenport - the author of the book, An Apology for Mohammad and
the Koran, writes: “So exempt, indeed, is the Koran from these
undeniable defects, that it needs not the slightest castigation, and may
be read, from beginning to end, without causing a blush to suffuse the
cheek of modesty itself.”[^6] 

He also says: “It is universally allowed to be written with the utmost
purity and elegance of language in the dialect of the tribe of the
Koreish, the most Noble and polite of all the Arabs, but with some
mixture, although very rarely, of other dialects. It is, confessedly,
the standard of the Arabian Language, and abounds with splendid imagery
and the boldest metaphors … and is generally vigorous and sublime.”[^7]

5. Goethe, the German scholar and poet says: “The Koran is a work with
whose dullness the reader is at first disgusted, afterwards attracted by
its charms, and finally irresistibly ravished by its many beauties.”[^8]

On another occasion, he writes: “For years on end priests, lacking
cognizance of Allah, had held us back from comprehending the realities
of the Noble Qur\`an and the greatness of the person who had brought
it - Muhammad (s.a.w) - yet, as we have treaded the path of knowledge
and science, curtains of ignorance and baseless prejudice moved aside
from before us and very soon this indescribable book (Qur\`an) attracted
the world towards itself - profoundly influencing the knowledge and
science of the world - eventually becoming the pivot of thoughts and
ideas of the people of the world!”

He also says: “Initially we had turned away from the Qur\`an but it was
not long before this book attracted our attention towards itself leaving
us baffled and amazed in a measure that compelled us to bow our heads in
submission before its lofty and scientific laws!”

6. Will Durant - the famous historian says: “The Qur\`an has generated
within the Muslims such self-esteem, justice and piety that the like of
it has not been witnessed in any region of the world.”

7. Jules La Beaume - the French thinker and writer, in his book An
Explanation of the Signs, states: “The people of the world came to
acquire science and knowledge from the Muslims, who acquired them from
the Qur\`an, which is an ocean of knowledge, and caused streams (of
knowledge) to flow from it in the world, for mankind…”

8. Another orientalist, writes: “It is mandatory for us to acknowledge
that natural, astronomical, philosophical, mathematical sciences, which
have seen a boom in Europe, are mainly due to the blessings of the
Qur\`anic teachings and as such, we are indebted to the Muslims - in
fact, Europe, in this regard, is one of the cities of Islam.”

9. Doctor Laura Veccia Vaglieri - a professor in the University of
Naples - in her book The Rapid Growth of Islam, writes: “The divine book
of Islam is one example of a miracle. It (Qur\`an) is a book, which
cannot be imitated. The style and modes of the Qur\`an do not have any
literary precedent. The influence that this style has upon the soul of
man is a result of the distinctions and excellences that it possesses.
How can this miraculous book be a work of Muhammad (s.a.w), who had been
an unschooled Arab?

In this book we observe treasures and reservoirs of knowledge which is
beyond the ability and capacity of the most intelligent individuals,
greatest philosophers and strongest political and legal personalities.
And it is because of these aspects that the Qur\`an just cannot be the
work of an educated or a learned person.”[^9][^10]

One of the things which proves the authenticity of the Qur\`an and its
revelation by Allah is the fact that there is no contradiction or
discrepancy in the entire Qur\`an. To understand this reality, consider
the following explanation: The mentality of man is constantly in a state
of change. The Law of Development - under normal circumstances -
envelopes man, his thoughts and mentality, and with the passage of time,
tends to change his ideas and speech.

If we reflect carefully, we shall observe that the works of a writer are
never similar and uniform; even in one book, the start and the end are
seen to possess variations - especially so if a person finds himself in
the midst of great and important events - events, which would establish
the foundations of an all-encompassing ideological, social and doctrinal
revolution. Such a person, however much he may try to maintain
uniformity in his works, would never be successful - especially if he is
unschooled and fostered in an environment that is totally backward and
undeveloped.

However, the Qur\`an, which has been revealed over a period of 23 years
under various conditions, in various environments and in accordance with
the corrective and educative needs of man, is a book which deals with a
variety of topics. It is unlike other ordinary books that confine
themselves to just one topic like politics, society, philosophy, law or
history; rather, it is a book that, at times, talks about Unity and the
mysteries of creation, at other times about decrees, laws, customs and
etiquettes, and on occasions about the past nations and their shocking
histories, and about advices, admonitions, worship and man's relation
with Allah - and as Doctor Gustav Lebon puts it: “Qur\`an, the divine
book of the Muslims is not restricted to religious teachings only but
also contains political and social rulings for the Muslims.

A book possessing such features would normally not be free of
contradictions and discrepancies. However, when we witness that despite
these aspects all its verses are in complete harmony with each other and
without the slightest discrepancy, contradiction or asymmetry, we can
safely surmise that this book is not a product of human thoughts, rather
it is a book that has been sent down by Allah, a fact which has been
emphasized by the Qur\`an itself.”[^11][^12][^13]

Verses 12 to 14 of Suratul Hud once again stress the miraculous nature
of the Qur\`an and declare that this is not an ordinary speech and also
not a consequence of human thoughts; it is a divine Revelation, which
finds its origin in the Infinite Knowledge and Power of Allah. For this
reason it puts forth a challenge and dares the entire world to pick up
the gauntlet and step forward to combat it (by bringing the like of it).
In view of the fact that the contemporaries of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w)
and all the communities that have existed, till today, have failed to
stand up before this challenge - expressing their willingness to face
every other difficulty in trying to put Islam down but shying away from
endeavouring to combat the Qur\`an by bringing the like of it - it is
plainly evident that basically such a task was - and is - beyond the
ability of man. And is miracle something other than this?

Even today, this call of the Qur\`an still rings in our ears and this
eternal miracle still invites the entire world towards itself,
challenging all the knowledgeable and scientific circles to combat it,
not only with regards to eloquence - beauty and attractiveness of
speech - but also with respect to its contents -  sciences which, in
that period, had been hidden from man; laws and rulings that guarantee
prosperity and deliverance for the human species; statements and
explanations that are free from contradictions, discrepancies and
prevarications; historical accounts that are free from myths,
exaggeration and idle talks - and the like.[^14]

Sayyid Qutb, in his commentary, In the Light of the Qur\`an, has
reported that some materialists, who had presented themselves at a
convention of orientalists in Russia in 1954, in a bid to fault the
Qur\`an, said: “This book cannot be the outcome of the thoughts and
ideas of one man - Muhammad - but it must be the result of the efforts
of a large group of individuals!  Moreover, it also cannot be believed
that all of it had been written in the Arabian Peninsula, rather, it is
certain that parts of it have been written outside it!”[^15]

They found themselves helpless - since they, on the one hand, on the
basis of their reasoning which revolved around the rejection of the
existence of Allah and Revelation, always sought a material explanation
for every thing, whilst on the other hand were unable to accept the
Qur\`an to be the product of the thoughts of an individual within the
Arabian Peninsula - they had no other option except to come up with this
ridiculous theory of ascribing it to a group of individuals from within
and outside the Peninsula - a notion which history rejects
entirely.[^16]

38. Is the miracle of the Qur\`an confined to its eloquence only?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Without any doubt the miracle of the Qur\`an is not restricted to its
extraordinary eloquence, beauty of speech and the conveyance of
meanings - as some of the ancient commentators had believed - but in
addition to this it is also a miracle with respect to the scientific
facts contained within it, which it presented at a time when they were
unknown. Furthermore, the rulings and the historical accounts were
unadulterated by myths, superstitions and errors - without the existence
of any kind of contradiction and discrepancy in them.

In fact, according to some commentators, the specific tone of the words
of the Qur\`an are also miraculous in nature.

Various interesting testimonies have been mentioned to support this
claim, one of them being the following incident, which occurred with
Sayyid Qutb, the renowned commentator, who states as follows:  
 I shall not narrate to you the incidents that have occurred with others
but only that, which took place with me and had been witnessed by six
people (five others in addition to myself).

We were six Muslims, who were traversing the Atlantic Ocean on an
Egyptian ship, heading for New York. There were 120 passengers, but we
were the only Muslims on board. On Friday we decided to offer our Friday
prayers in the vessel that was in the middle of the Atlantic; in
addition to performing our religious obligation, it was also our
intention to present an exhibition of Islamic fervour and zeal before
one Christian missionary, who continued with his missionary work even
within the ship - especially since he was even keen to convert us to
Christianity!

The captain of the ship, an Englishman, granted his approval that we
establish the congregational prayers on the ship's deck and in addition,
even permitted the ship's personnel, all of whom were Muslims from
Africa, to join us in the prayers. They were overjoyed since this was
the first time that the Friday congregational prayer was being offered
on a ship.

I began reciting the sermon and led the congregational prayers and
interestingly enough, the non-Muslim passengers had gathered around us,
watching the performance of this Islamic obligation with interest.

After the completion of the prayers a large number of passengers came
forward to congratulate us upon our performance of the religious
obligation, but amongst them was a lady - a Christian from Yugoslavia,
who, as we came to know later, had managed to escape from the horrors of
Tito and Communism - who was extra-ordinarily influenced by the
congregational prayers to the extent that tears flowed down her face and
she could barely control herself.

She spoke simple English and in a voice which sounded greatly impressed
and filled with a special humbleness and veneration.  She asked us: “In
which language did your priest orate?” (She was under the impression
that the prayer must necessarily be established by a priest or a clergy
as is the case in Christianity, but very soon we made her realize that
every Muslim could perform this Islamic ritual.)  We then informed her
that we spoke in Arabic.

She said: “Despite the fact that I could not comprehend a single word of
what you said, I could discern quite plainly that these words possessed
a mystical resonance and tune. But more importantly and that which
extra-ordinarily attracted my attention was that in the speech of your
leader there were certain sentences, which appeared to be more
distinguished and illustrious than the others, and they seemed to
possess an exceptionally deep and influencing tone such that they
induced tremors within my body. Surely, these sentences were something
different. I think your leader, while delivering these sentences, had
been filled with The Holy Spirit!”

After a little reflection we realized that these sentences were the
verses of the Qur\`an, which I had been reciting in the sermon and in
the prayers. This issue shook us to the core and made us realize that
the special tone and resonance of the Qur\`an possesses such influence
and effect so as to tremendously influence and inspire a lady, who could
not even comprehend a single word of it.[^17][^18]

39. How do we know they have not brought the like of the Qur\`an?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In verse 23 of Suratul Baqarah we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِنْ كُنْـتُمْ فِي رَيْبٍ مِمَّا نَزَّلْناَ عَلَي عَبْدِناَ
فَأتُوْا بِسُوْرَةٍ مِنْ مِّثْلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you are in doubt about what We have sent down to Our Servant
(Muhammad), them produce a Surah (chapter) like it.”***

**The question that arises here is: How do we know that they have not
brought the like of the Qur\`an?**

A look at the history of Islam would provide the answer to this
question. This is because within the Islamic nations, during and after
the life of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) - even in Makkah and Madinah -
there lived fanatic and stubborn Jews and Christians, who seized every
opportunity to impair the strength of the Muslims.

In addition, amongst the Muslims too there lived a group of
pseudo-Muslims, whom the Qur\`an has named as 'hypocrites' and who
shouldered the responsibility of spying for the foreign powers (like the
one which has been narrated in history regarding the monk Abu 'Amir and
his cohorts from amongst the hypocrites of Madinah, and the manner of
their association with the Roman Empire, eventually resulting in the
construction of Masjid al-Dhirar (Mosque of Dissension) in Madinah and
the occurrence of that peculiar incident, which the Qur\`an has referred
to, in Suratul Taubah).

Undoubtedly, if this band of hypocrites and that group of hard-hearted
enemies, who used to scrupulously follow the affairs of the Muslims and
welcome anything and everything that could be used to the detriment of
them, had managed to lay their hands upon such a book, they would have
surely strived - to the maximum extent possible - to publicize it in
order to overwhelm the Muslims, or they would have, at the very least,
endeavoured to preserve it.

For this reason, history has gone on to record the names of even those
individuals, about whom there could exist the remotest of possibilities
that they might have endeavoured to combat the Qur\`an. Some of them are
as follows:

The name of 'Abdullah b. Muqaffa' has been mentioned in this regard and
he is said to have written the book al-Durrah al-Yatimah for this very
purpose.

However, this book is presently with us and has even seen several
editions in print but it does not contain the slightest indication or
reference to suggest that it was authored for this purpose. We fail to
comprehend how they have attributed this issue to him.

The name of the poet, Mutanabbi - Ahmad b. Husain Kufi - is also
included in this group and it is stated that he had claimed prophethood
for himself. However there are numerous proofs, which indicate that his
claims were probably more due to his highflying nature, a deprived
family background and love for rank and position than anything else.

Abu al-'Ala Mua'rri, has also been accused of this task, but despite the
fact that stinging anti-Islamic statements have been narrated from him,
he had never claimed to contest the Qur\`an; on the contrary, he has to
his credit made interesting statements regarding the greatness of the
Qur\`an.

However, Musailamah Kadhdhab - from the region of Yamamah - was indeed
of those, who stood up to challenge the Qur\`an. He has authored some
'verses', which are more of a recreation and amusement than to deserve
any serious attention. We present below a few sentences from them:

In opposition to Suratul Dhariyat, he has presented the following
sentences:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و المبذرات بذرا و الحاصدات حصدا و الذاريات قمحا و الطاحنات طحنا و
العاجنات عجنا و الخابزات خبزا و الثاردات ثردا و اللاقمات لقما اهالة و
سمنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By the peasants and the farmers!  By the harvesters!  By the separators
of chaff from the wheat!  By the separators of wheat from the chaff!  By
the makers of dough!  By the bakers!  By the soppers (those who crumble
bread in broth)!  By those who pick up the soft and oily morsels!”[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا ضفدغ بنت ضفدغ، نقي ما تنقين، نصفك في الماء و نصفك في الطين، لا
الماء تكدرين و لا الشارب تمنعين
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' Frog the daughter of frog!  Call out as much as you desire!  Half of
you in the water and half of you in mud; Neither do you make the water
muddy nor do you prevent one from drinking the water!”[^20][^21]

40. What do al-Huruf al-Muqatt’ah (The Broken Letters) of the Qur\`an mean?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the beginning of 29 chapters of the Noble Qur\`an we come across
al-Huruf al-Muqatt'ah (the Broken Letters) and as the name implies,
these letters appear to be broken up and separate from one another. They
apparently do not seem to convey any meaning.

The Broken Letters have always been considered to be of the mysterious
words of the Qur\`an. Commentators have presented numerous and varied
interpretations for them - new suggestions surfacing with the passage of
time and as a result of new research and study on the part of scholars.

Interestingly, we do not find any mention in history that the Pagan
Arabs or the polytheists had ever faulted and criticized the presence of
these Broken Letters, located at the start of the numerous chapters of
the Qur\`an, or used their presence to ridicule the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w). This fact itself indicates that apparently even they were not
completely ignorant of the mysterious nature of these Letters.

From amongst these interpretations, there are some which appear to be
more significant and authentic than others, and are also in conformity
with the results of the latest research performed in this regard. We
dwell on some of the most important of these here:

1. These letters refer to the fact that this divine Book - with all its
greatness, which has left all the Arab and non-Arab orators astounded
(over its eloquence) and has left scholars helpless and incapable of
opposing and challenging it - is composed of these very alphabets and
letters, which everyone is aware of.

But, despite the fact that this Book is comprised of these very ordinary
letters and alphabets, its words are so well-proportioned and
symmetrical, and possess such lofty meanings that they penetrate into
the very core of man, filling his soul with admiration and acclaim, and
forcing minds and intellects to acknowledge its greatness. The
disciplined order of its words and the construction of its sentences are
of the highest degree, placing the loftiest of meanings into the moulds
of the most beautiful of words, in a manner that has seen no parallel.

Another point that tends to corroborate this meaning is that in 24 of
the chapters which begin with the Broken Letters, these letters have
been immediately followed up by the mention of the Qur\`an and its
greatness, and this itself is indicative of the fact that there exists a
relation between the Broken Letters and the greatness of the Qur\`an. At
this juncture we present a few examples of these, as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الر كِتَابٌ أُحْكِمَتْ آيَاتُهُ ثُمَّ فُصِّلَتْ مِنْ لَدُنْ حَكِيمٍ
خَبِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Alif Lam Ra (This is) a Book, whose verses are made decisive, then
are they made plain, from the Wise, All-aware.”***[^22]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طس تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْقُرْآنِ وَ كِتَابٍ مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Ta Sin. These are the verses of the Quran and the Book that makes
(things) clear.”***[^23]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الم تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ الْحَكِيمِ  
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Alif Lam Mim. These are verses of the Book of Wisdom.”***[^24]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المص كِتَابٌ أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Alif Lam Mim Suad. A Book revealed to you.”***[^25]

In all of the above, as well as numerous other instances, the Broken
Letters have been immediately followed up by the mention of the Noble
Qur\`an and its greatness.[^26]

2. Possibly, one of the objectives of these Broken Letters was to
attract the attention of the listeners and to silence them and invite
them to give ear. This is because the mention of these letters, in the
beginning of a speech, was something strange and novel for the Arabs and
would arouse their curiosity and consequently, they would listen to the
speech following these letters.

Incidentally, the majority of the chapters which begin with the Broken
Letters are those, which have been revealed in Makkah and we do know
that in Makkah the Muslims were in a minority, and the stubborn and
obstinate enemies were loath to even listen to the words of the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w). At times they would create such uproar that the voice
of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) would be lost in the commotion - a fact
that has also been alluded to in some of the verses of the Qur\`an (like
verse 26 of the chapter Fussilat).

3. In some of the traditions of the Ahlul Bayt G, it has been mentioned
that these Letters are a kind of code and an allusion to the Names of
Allah. For example (المص) in Suratul A'raf alludes to:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أََناَ اللٌّهُ الْمُقْتَدِرُ الصَّادِقُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Meaning, “I am Allah, The Powerful, The Truthful.” 

As such, each of the four letters is an abbreviated form for one of the
Names of Allah.  
 The act of substituting an extended form with an abbreviated version
has been in practice since ancient times, although its use has assumed
greater proportions in our times, for we observe numerous instances
wherein elongated expressions and names of organizations have been
condensed into a small and single word.

It is necessary to mention that these various interpretations for the
Broken Letters are in no way contradictory to one another since it is
possible for all of them to be intended together - viewing them as
various latent and hidden meanings of the Noble Qur\`an.[^27]

4. There is a possibility that all or at least some of these Broken
Letters possess specific meanings - just as a word encompasses a meaning
within itself.

Incidentally, we observe that numerous traditions and many commentators,
in connection with the beginning of the chapters 'Taha' and 'Yasin',
state that طه (Taha) is in the meaning of ياَ رَجُل  ('O' Man!)' . In
addition to this, we also come across certain Arab poems, some of which
are probably associated with the period co-incident with the onset of
Islam or even before it, in which the word 'Taha' possesses a meaning
similar to “O' Man!' or something close to it.[^28]

As one reliable source has informed us, a few Western scholars involved
in the study of Islamic issues have generalized this notion to include
all the Broken Letters and are of the belief that these Letters, located
at the start of the chapters, are words possessing a specific meaning,
some of which have been pushed into oblivion with the passage of time,
while others have managed to reach us.

For otherwise, as they reason, it appears very improbable that the Arab
polytheists would hear the Broken Letters, not comprehend their meanings
and at the same time not use it as a pretext for mocking and
ridiculing - and history has not recorded a single instance where these
foolish cavaliers had ever used the Broken Letters as an excuse to react
in this fashion.  
 Although it appears difficult to accept this theory, universally and
with respect to all the Broken Letters, its applicability with respect
to some of them is quite acceptable; however, this is an aspect that has
been an object of discussion in the Islamic sources too.

It is interesting to note that in a tradition from Imam as-sadiq (a.s)
we read that 'Taha' is one of the names of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and
means:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياَ طَالِبَ الْحَقِّ الْهَادِي إِلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' Seeker of The Truth (and) the guide to it.”

From this tradition it can be concluded that 'Taha' comprises of two
cryptic letters: طا (Ta), which refers to:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طَالِب الْحَقِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Seeker of Truth”

and ها (Ha), which alludes to

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْهَادِي إِلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The guide to it.”

A final word in this regard is that the word طه (Taha) like يس (Yasin),
with the passage of time, has gradually transformed into a proper name
of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) such that the children of the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w) are also referred to as آل طه (The Children of Taha) as can been
seen in the case of Imam Mahdi (a.s), who has been addressed as يابن طه
(O' Son of Taha!) in Dua' al-Nudbah.

5. 'Allamah Taba\`taba\`i  has presented another possibility in
connection with the meaning of the Broken Letters - one, which could be
regarded as another interpretation for them. The summary of his view is
as follows:  
 When we place the chapters beginning with the Broken Letters under
careful scrutiny, we observe that the chapters which begin with the same
kind of Letters, contain subject-matter that is similar in nature.  
 For example, in the chapters which begin with حم (Ha Mim), these
letters are immediately followed up by the sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنْزِيْلُ الْكِتَابِ مِنَ اللٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Descended this Book (Qur\`an) from Allah.” or something similar in
meaning.

In the chapters which commence with الر (Alif, Lam, Ra), these Letters
are immediately followed up by the sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ آَياَتُ الْكِتاَبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“These are the verses of the Book” or something similar to this.

In the chapters, which begin with الم (Alif, Lam, Mim), these Letters
are followed by the sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذٌلِكَ الْكِتاَبُ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“This is the Book, there is no doubt in it” or that which resembles this
in meaning.

Thus, it can be speculated that there exists a special connection
between the Broken Letters and the contents of the chapters in which
these Letters are located - to the extent that, the content and the
meaning of Suratul A'raf (for example), which starts with المص (Alif,
Lam, Mim, sad) is consistent with the contents and the meanings of the
chapters that start with الم (Alif, Lam, Mim) and the chapter ص (sad).

However, it is possible that this relationship may be far too profound
for it to be fathomed by any ordinary intellect.

If the verses of these chapters were to be placed alongside each other
and subjected to a comparison, it is probable that a new meaning might
become manifest for us in this regard.[^29][^30]

41. Has the Qur\`an attested the contents of the Torah and the Gospels?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

In numerous verses of the Noble Qur\`an we find the expression that 'the
Qur\`an attests the contents of the previous Books'.

In verse 48 of Suratul Maidah, it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنْزَلْنا إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ مُصَدِّقاً لِمَا بَيْنَ
يَدَيْهِ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have revealed to you the Book with the truth, verifying what
is before it of the Book.”***

This has caused some of the Jewish and Christian preachers to consider
these verses as an authentication that the Torah and the Gospels have
not suffered distortion and alteration, and to say: Undoubtedly, the
Torah and the Gospels that are presently with us are not any different
from what existed during the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w).

Thus, if there has been any alteration, it could only have occurred
before the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w). But since the Qur\`an has
attested to the veracity of the Torah and Gospels of the time of the
Noble Prophet (s.a.w) thus the Muslims should formally accept these
divine, books as being unaltered and authentic.

Various verses of the Qur\`an testify that the signs and attributes of
the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and his religion did exist in those distorted
books, which were in the possession of the Jews and Christians then.
This is because, the meaning of 'distortion' of those divine books
surely does not mean that the entire books are false; rather, portions
of the original Torah and the Gospels did exist in those books and still
do, and the signs and attributes of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) did exist
within these books and/or other religious books which were in the
possession of the Jews and Christians (and even today the glad tidings
do exist in them).

Thus, the manifestation of the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w) and his divine
Book, in practice, has attested all those signs and attributes since it
is in conformity with them.

Hence, the meaning of the statement 'the Qur\`an attests the contents of
the Torah and the Gospels' is that the attributes of the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w) and the Qur\`an totally match and conform with what has been
mentioned about them in the Torah and the Gospels.

The use of the word تصديق (attestation) in the meaning of مطابقت
(conformity) is not restricted to this verse, but is also observed in
other verses too, like verse 105 of Suratul saffat in which it is said
to Ibrahim (a.s):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ صَدَّقْتَ الرُّؤْيَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You have attested your dream” meaning: 'Your actions were in
conformity with the dream which you had witnessed'.***

And in verse 157 of Suratul A'raf, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَتَّبِعُونَ الرَّسُولَ النَّبِيَّ الأُمِّيَّ الَّذِي
يَجِدُونَهُ مَكْتُوباً عِنْدَهُمْ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ وَ الإِِنْجِيلِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who follow the Messenger-Prophet, the Ummi, whom they find
written down with them in the Taurat and the Injeel…”***

Here, the meaning has been mentioned explicitly, i.e., 'the attributes
which they observe in him (s.a.w) match those that they have been found
in the Torah.

In any case, the above verses only indicate on 'the practical
attestation' of the Qur\`an and the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) with respect
to his (s.a.w) attributes present in the ancient books, and do not
suggest that all the contents of the Torah and the Gospels have been
affirmed. On the contrary, numerous verses of the Qur\`an declare that
they have altered and distorted the Torah and the Gospels, and this
itself is a firm testimony for what has been stated above.[^31]

42. Was the Qur\`an collected during the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) or after him?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We do know that the name of the first chapter of the Qur\`an is
Fatihatul Kitab, which means 'the Opening (chapter) of the Book
(Qur\`an)', and from various traditions of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) it
can be plainly concluded that this chapter had been familiar, by this
very name, during the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) too.

From here we are led to a very important Islamic issue that is contrary
to what is popular amongst a particular group, which is of the opinion
that the Noble Qur\`an existed in a scattered form during the time of
the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and it was during the period of Abu Bakr,
'Umar or 'Uthman that it was gathered together in the form of a book.

The Qur\`an, during the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w), had been
gathered together and possessed the same form and arrangement as we see
it today - commencing with this same chapter of al-Hamd. If not for
this, there exists no justification for it to be named as the Fatihtul
Kitab, for neither was it the first chapter to have been revealed to the
Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and nor does there exist any other reason for it
to be named so.

Various other evidences also exist, which serve to corroborate this
reality that the Qur\`an, in the form of a collection and assemblage as
it is in our possession today, had been collected during the time of the
Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and upon his orders.

'Ali b. Ibrahim narrates from Imam as-sadiq (a.s) that the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w) said to 'Ali (a.s): “The Qur\`an exists (in the written form) on
pieces of silk, paper and the like, and are scattered (so) gather them
together. The narrator then adds that 'Ali (a.s) departed from the
gathering, collected them in a yellow cloth and put a seal upon
it.”[^32]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ انْطَلَقَ عَلَي فَجَمَعَهُ فَي ثَوْبٍ أَصْفَر ثُمَّ خََتَمَ
عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Another testimony in this regard is that of the renowned Sunni scholar
Khwarizmi, who, in his book Manaqib, reports from 'Ali b. Riyah that
'Ali b. Abi Talib (a.s) and Ubayy b. Ka'b collected the Qur\`an during
the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w).

The third evidence is the statement of the renowned Sunni author Hakim,
in his book Mustadrak, wherein he quotes from Zaid b. Thabit: “Zaid
says: 'We used to gather the Qur\`an from the scattered pieces in the
presence of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and used to place them (the
scattered pieces) in their respective positions according to his orders.
However, these written works were still not in the form of a collection
(and so) the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) ordered 'Ali (a.s) to gather them
together in one place and asked us to be wary of losing or destroying
it.'”

Sayyid Murtaza, the great Shi'ite scholar says: “The Noble Qur\`an had
been collected, in its present form, during the time of the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w).”[^33]

Tabarani and Ibn 'Asakir narrate from Shu'bi that six persons from the
Ansar (Helpers) gathered the Qur\`an during the time of the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w)[^34] and Qutadah narrates: “I questioned Anas as to who
gathered the Qur\`an during the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and he
replied:  'Four persons, all of whom were from the Ansar - Ubayy b.
Ka'b, Mu'adh, Zaid b. Thabit and Abu Zaid.”[^35] Apart from these, there
are several other traditions too, but mentioning them would only serve
to prolong the discussion.

In addition to these traditions that have been mentioned in the Shi'ite
and Sunni sources, the selection of the name Fatihatul Kitab for Suratul
Hamd is a living testimony for proving this issue.

### One Question

At this point the question that arises is: how can we accept what has
been stated above when it is popular amongst some of the scholars that
the Qur\`an had been gathered after the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) (either by
'Ali (a.s)) or some other individual?

In answer to this, it must be said that what Imam 'Ali (a.s) had
collected was not just the Qur\`an but, in fact, was a collection which
comprised of the Noble Qur\`an, its commentary, occasions of the
revelations of the verses and other related issues.

As far as 'Uthman is concerned, there exists a Qur\`an, which indicates
that he, in order to prevent discrepancies and differences with respect
to the recitation of the Qur\`an, endeavoured to prepare a common
Qur\`an, which possessed (a common) punctuation and manner of recitation
(since till that time, punctuation had not been prevalent)

As for the insistence on the part of some, that the Qur\`an had not been
gathered at all during the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and it was
either 'Uthman or the first or the second Caliph, who came to acquire
this honour, it probably arises out of attempts to extol the virtues and
excellences for them. As a result, we find that every group attributed
this honour to a particular person and then narrated traditions in his
favour.

Basically, how is it conceivable that the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) would
overlook such an important task, whereas he had been mindful of matters
that were of much less significance?  Is not the Noble Qur\`an the
Constitution of Islam, the great Book of training and education, and the
basis for all Islamic concepts, notions and beliefs?  Did the
non-collection of the Noble Qur\`an during the time of the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w) not entail the danger that parts of the Qur\`an could be lost or
marred and dissentions could arise amongst the Muslims over it?

Apart from this, the famous tradition of Thaqalain, which both the
Shi'ites and the Ahlus Sunnah have narrated and in which the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w) had said: “I leave behind amongst you two weighty
things - the Book of Allah and my Ahlul Bayt,” itself proves that the
entire Qur\`an had been collected in the form of a book.

If we observe the traditions which indicate that the Qur\`an had been
collected by a group of companions under the supervision of the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w), the fact that we differ in the number of individuals
engaged in the task, should not be a matter of concern for it is
possible that each of these traditions mentions only some of the
individuals who had been engaged in the task of collecting and gathering
the Noble Qur\`an.[^36]

43. What are the ‘clear’ and the ‘ambiguous’ verses?
----------------------------------------------------

In verse 7 of the chapter Ale 'Imran we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَنْزَلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ مِنْهُ آياتٌ مُحْكَمَاتٌ
هُنَّ أُمُّ الْكِتابِ وَ أُخَرُ مُتَشَابِهاتٌ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He it is Who has sent down to you (O' Muhammad!) the Book, of it
there are some clear Verses, these are the basis of the Book and others
are ambiguous.”***

The question, which arises here, is: What is meant by the 'Clear' and
'Ambiguous' verses?

The word مُحكَم has been derived from احكام which means 'to prohibit'
and it is for this reason that fundamental and firm issues are called
محكم, for they prohibit and repel away destructive factors from
themselves. In addition, firm and conclusive talks and ideas, which keep
away every possibility of contradiction from themselves, are referred to
as محكم.

Thus, the Clear verses are those verses, whose meanings are so clear and
manifest that there exists no need for any sort of discussion with
respect to their meanings - such as the following verses…

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ اللٌّهُ أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: He Allah is One (alone).”***[^37]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ كَمِثْلِهِ شَيْ‏ءٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nothing whatsoever (is there) resembling the like of Him.”***[^38]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللٌّهُ خالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْ‏ءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah (alone) is the Creator of all things.”***[^39]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلذَّكَرِ مِثْلُ حَظِّ الْأُنْثَيَيْنِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The male shall have the equal of the shares of two females.”***[^40]

And thousands of other similar verses - dealing with issues relating to
'Aqaid (beliefs), laws and rulings, preaching, history - are all Clear
verses.

These Clear verses have been named as Ummul Kitab (Basis of the Book)
i.e. they are the basis for the interpretation and explanation of the
other verses.

The word مُتَشاَبِه (which appears in the verse under consideration)
basically means 'a thing, whose various parts are similar to one
another'. For this reason, the sentences or words, whose meanings are
ambiguous and at times appear to possess several meanings and
possibilities, are called مُتَشاَبِه. This is exactly what is meant by
the Ambiguous verses of the Qur\`an - for these are the verses of the
Qur\`an, which initially and at first sight appear to be ambiguous and
possess several meanings (although, after taking into consideration the
Clear verses, their meanings become evident and manifest.)

Although commentators have presented numerous possibilities in
connection with the meaning of 'Clear' and 'Ambiguous' verses, what we
have stated above is not only in total concordance with the original
meaning of these two words, but also with the occasion of revelation of
this verse, the various traditions which explain the verse and with the
verse itself.

This is because in the later portion of the abovementioned verse, we
read that certain individuals always utilize the Ambiguous verses as
their pretext (to promote their personal motives). It is evident that
they misuse those verses, which at first sight appear to possess several
meanings and interpretations, and this very fact conveys that متشابه
(Ambiguous) is in the meaning stated above.

The verses that speak of the Attributes of Allah and the details of the
Day of Judgment can be presented as examples of the Ambiguous Verses.
Some of these verses are as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَدُ اللٌّهِ فَوْقَ أَيْدِيهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The hand of Allah is above their hands”***[^41]***,***

which is regarding the Power of Allah;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اللٌّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And surely, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing”***[^42]

which refers to the Knowledge of Allah;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ نَضَعُ الْمَوَازِينَ الْقِسْطَ لِيَوْمِ الْقِيامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We shall set up the balances of justice on the Day of
Judgment”,***[^43]

which speaks of the means of measuring the Deeds.

It is evident that neither does Allah possess hands and ears (meaning a
special limb or organ) nor are the Scales for measuring the Deeds
similar to what we are accustomed to; rather these are expressions which
refer to a universal concept and meaning for Power, Knowledge and
Measurement.

It is necessary to mention that محكم and متشابه have also been used
differently in the Noble Qur\`an. In the first verse of Suratul Hud, we
read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كِتابٌ أُحْكِمَتْ آياتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A book whose verses are firmly arranged (together).” ***

In this verse, all the verses of the Qur\`an have been characterized as
محكم, denoting that all the verses of the Qur\`an are interrelated and
in complete harmony with one another.  
 In verse 23 of Suratul Zumar we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كِتاِباً مُتَشاَبِهاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A Book consistent (in its parts)”, which means 'a book, all the
verses of which are consistent and similar to one another with respect
to correctness, veracity and authenticity'.***

From what we have stated with respect to the Clear and Ambiguous verses
it is clear that a truth-seeking person, in order to comprehend the
Speech of Allah, has no option other than to place all the verses
alongside each other and derive the truth and reality from them.

If at first sight, he faces an intricacy and ambiguity in the apparent
meanings of some of the verses, he should clear the vagueness by taking
into consideration the other verses of the Qur\`an thereby reaching the
essence of the verses. In reality, the Clear Verses, from one
perspective, are like highways while the Ambiguous Verses are like
byways. It is apparent that if a person happens to lose his way in the
byways, he endeavours to reach the nearest highway and find his way from
there.

Reference to the Clear Verses as Ummul Kitab (Basis of the Book) is yet
another point which serves to corroborate this reality. The word Umm
means 'basis' and 'origin' of a thing and this is why a mother is
referred to as Umm, for she is the basis of a family and a shelter for
the children in times of trouble and distress. Similarly, the Clear
Verses are regarded as the basis, foundation and the mother of the other
verses.[^44]

44. Why are some of the verses of the Qur\`an ambiguous?
--------------------------------------------------------

Why is it that the Qur\`an, despite being light and illumination, and a
true and manifest speech and a book that has come for the guidance of
the general masses, contains the Ambiguous Verses?  Why are the contents
of some of the verses vague, so as to be misused by those seeking to sow
dissension and discord?

This is an issue which is immensely important and thereby calls for
great attention. For the most part, it is possible that the following
aspects could be reasons for the existence of the Ambiguous Verses in
the Qur\`an:

a. Words and expressions, which are used by humans for the purpose of
interacting with one another, have only been created to fulfil the needs
of their day-to-day lives; it is for this reason that when we step
beyond the finite boundaries of this material world and the discussion
dwells upon, for example, the Creator, Who is Infinite in every respect,
we observe very clearly that our words do not possess the ability to
hold and convey those lofty meanings.

As a result, we are forced to utilize words, which are non-expressive in
various aspects. This non-expressiveness and insufficiency of the words
is the cause of a considerable portion of the Ambiguous Verses of the
Qur\`an. Verses like:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَدُ اللٌّهِ فَوْقَ أَيْدِيهِمْ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The hand of Allah is above their hands.”***[^45]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلرَّحْمٌنُ عَلَي الْعَرْشِ اسْتَوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Beneficent (Allah) on the 'Arsh' is firm.”***[^46]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلـى‏ رَبِّها نَاظِرَةٌ  
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Unto their Lord (they will be) attentive.”***[^47]

and words like سَمِيْعٌ (All-Hearing) and بَصِيْرٌ (All-Seeing) are some
examples of this category, whose meanings become clear and manifest upon
consulting the Clear Verses.

Many of the realities (of the world of Existence) are related to the
'other world' or the metaphysical world - a realm, which is beyond the
horizons of our thoughts - and being imprisoned in the dimension of time
and space, we are unable to perceive the depths of those meanings. The
loftiness of the horizons of these meanings and the inability on the
part of our thoughts to comprehend such meanings become another reason
for many of the verses to appear ambiguous - like some of the verses
that deal with Qiyamah and other similar issues.

This is exactly similar to the case of a person desiring to explain the
issues of this world to an infant, who is in the embryonic stage in the
womb of the mother. If the person does not speak, he has fallen short in
his effort to convey the meaning, and if he does speak out, he has no
alternative except to mention them in a general and implied manner,
since the listener, in those circumstances, does not possess the ability
to comprehend more than this.

c. Another of the secrets for the presence of the Ambiguous Verses in
the Qur\`an is to put to work the mental and reflective machinery of man
and to create within him the motivation to ponder and meditate. It is
similar to the complex intellectual issues that are propounded to
strengthen the mental faculty of scholars in order that they reflect
more deeply and profoundly over issues.

d. A further aspect with regards to the presence of the Ambiguous Verses
in the Qur\`an - an aspect also corroborated by the traditions of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) - is that the presence of such verses serves to make
apparent the people's intense need and dependence with respect to the
divine Imams, prophets and their successors, and the reason that people
flock towards these leaders in order to benefit from the knowledge and
various forms of guidance that lie in their possession, and in this
manner practically acknowledge their leadership.

We can compare this with some of the academic books, which are
formulated in a manner such that the explanation of some of the topics
contained within them has been placed upon the teachers so that the
students, experiencing a sense of dependency with respect to the
teacher, do not sever their ties with him altogether, and as a result of
this dependency acquire inspiration from his thoughts and ideas in all
issues.  In the case of the Qur\`an, this is a confirmation of the
famous testament of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثِّقْلَيْنِ كِتَابَ اللٌّهِ وَ عِتْرَتِي
أَهْلَ بَيْتِي وَ إِنَّهُمَا لَنْ يَفْتَرِقَا حَتَّى يَرِدَا عَلَيَّ
الْحَوْضَ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I leave behind amongst you two Weighty Things; the Book of Allah and my
Progeny. And surely, the two shall not separate from one another till
they come to me at the Pool.”[^48]and [^49]

45. Is Bismillah a part of (every) chapter?
-------------------------------------------

Amongst the Shi'ite scholars there exists no difference of opinion in
the fact that Bismillah is part of Suratul Hamd and every chapter of the
Noble Qur\`an (except Suratul Taubah as shall be mentioned later)[^50].
Basically, the presence of Bismillah in the beginning of all the
chapters in the text of the Qur\`an is itself proof of this issue since
we do know that nothing has been added to the text of the Qur\`an and
the mention of Bismillah, at the start of all chapters, has been
prevalent since the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) till today.

However, as far as the Sunni scholars are concerned, the author of
Tafsirul Manar has presented a comprehensive collection of their views,
which is as follows: “There exists a debate amongst scholars as to
whether Bismillah, at the start of every chapter, is a part of the
chapter or not?  The ancient scholars from Makkah - jurisprudents and
the Qur\`an-Reciters alike - amongst them Ibn Kathir; those from Kufah,
amongst them the Qur\`an-reciters 'Asim and Kasa\`i; some of the
Companions and the Followers[^51] of Madinah; Thauri and Ahmad (in one
of his two opinions) and so too Shafi'i and his followers - all are of
the belief that it is part of the chapter. And similarly the Twelve-Imam
Shi'ite scholars and (according to them) the Companions like 'Ali, Ibn
'Abbas, 'Abdullah b. 'Umar and Abu Hurairah; some scholars from the
followers such as  Sa'id b. Jubair, 'Ata, Zuhri and Ibn al-Mubarik  -
all have opted for this opinion.”

He then adds: “Their most important proof is that the Companions and
those who came after them - despite emphasizing that the Qur\`an ought
to be purified from everything which is not part of it, for which reason
they never mentioned 'Amin' at the end of the (recitation) of Suratul
FatiHa - were unanimous in reciting 'Bismillah' at the start of every
chapter, except Suratul Baraat.”

He then goes on to state that Malik, the followers of Abu Hanifah and
some others considered Bismillah to be a separate verse, which had been
revealed to indicate the beginning of the chapters and serve as a
separator between them.

He then narrates from Ahmad (the renowned Sunni jurisprudent) and some
of the Qur\`an-reciters of Kufah that they believed Bismillah to be a
part of Suratul Hamd only and not of the other chapters.[^52]

From what has been mentioned above, it can be concluded that a definite
majority of the Ahlus Sunnah are also of the belief that Bismillah is a
part of every chapter.

We present below a few of the traditions that have been narrated by
means of the Sunni and Shi'ite chains of narrators (and confess that
mentioning all the traditions that exist in this regard is beyond the
scope of this work and more suited to a full-fledged jurisprudential
discussion on the issue.)

i. Mua'wiyah b. 'Ammar, one of the companions of Imam as-sadiq (a.s)
says: “I asked the Imam (a.s): 'When I stand for prayers, should I
recite 'Bismillah' in the beginning of Suratul Hamd?'  The Imam said:
'Yes'. I questioned him once again: 'When al-Hamd is completed and I
have to recite another chapter after it, do I have to recite
'Bismillah'?  Again he (a.s) said: 'Yes.'”[^53]

ii. Dar Qutni, a Sunni scholar, upon the authority of an authentic chain
of narrators reports that a person approached Imam 'Ali (a.s) and asked:
“What is the 'al-Saba' al-Mathani?'”[^54]  The Imam (a.s) replied: “It
is Suratul Hamd.”  The person said: ”(But) Suratul Hamd has (only) six
verses.”  Whereupon he (a.s) said: “Bismillahir RaHmanir RaHim is also
one of its verses.”[^55]

iii. Baihaqi, the renowned Sunni narrator, upon the authority of an
authentic chain of narrators reports from Ibn Jubair that Ibn 'Abbas
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِسْتَرَقَ الشَّيْطاَنُ مِنَ النَّاسِ، أََعْظَمَ آيَةٍ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيْم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Satan has tried to steal the greatest verse of the Qur'an away from the
people, and that is Bismillahir RaHmanir RaHim) (an allusion to the fact
that they do not recite it at the start of the Surahs.”[^56]

Apart from all the above, the conduct of the Muslims had always been to
recite Bismillah at the start of every chapter while reciting the
Qur\`an, and it has been established - by means of successive
narrations - that the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) too used to recite it. How
is it possible that the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and the other Muslims
would recite something that was not part of the Qur\`an and persevere in
this act of theirs?

The notion that some people have stated about Bismillah being an
independent verse and a part of the Qur\`an but not a part of the
chapters, is one which appears to be feeble and baseless. This is
because the meaning and contents of Bismillah indicate that it is for
starting or initiating a task and not that it possesses a meaning that
is independent. In reality, this is intense rigidity and bias that in
order to prop up their opinion they present forth every conceivable
possibility and consider a verse like Bismillah - whose meaning screams
out aloud that it is a beginning for that which is to come later - to be
an independent verse, totally unrelated with that which is before and
after it.

The only plausible objection, which the opponents possess in this regard
is that when the verses of the chapters of the Noble Qur\`an are
computed - with the exception of Suratul Hamd - Bismillah is usually not
taken into account; rather, the verse which follows it, is regarded as
the first verse.

The answer to this objection is clearly provided by Fakhr Razi in his
commentary Tafsir al-Kabir when he says: “There is no harm if
'Bismillah' is the first verse, by itself, in Suratul Hamd, and a part
of the first verse, in the other chapters of the Qur\`an.”  Thus, for
example, in Suratul Kauthar,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيمِ. إَنَّا أَعْطَيْنَاكَ
الْكَوْثَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

in its entirety, shall be considered to be one verse.

In any event, this issue is so plain that it is reported that once,
during his reign, Mu'awiyah did not recite Bismillah during a
congregational prayer. After the prayers some of the Muhajirin (The
Emigrants) and the Ansar (The Helpers) confronted him and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 اَسْرَقْتَ اَمْ نَسَيْتَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Have you stolen (Bismillah) or have you forgotten it?”[^57]& [^58]  
  

46. Why is it forbidden to give the Qur\`an to a disbeliever?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Giving the Qur\`an to a non-Muslim is forbidden on condition that such
an act becomes cause for its disrespect and violation of its esteem, but
if we know that a non-Muslim truly intends to study about Islam and thus
desires to analyze the Qur\`an, not only would it be permissible to give
him the Qur\`an but it might even become obligatory; those who have
prohibited giving the Qur\`an to a non-Muslim did not intend the
prohibition for such a case.

Consequently, great Islamic circles insist that the Qur\`an should be
translated into various languages of the world in order that the
invitation towards Islam reaches those who seek the truth and yearn for
reality.[^59]

[^1]: The commentary A'la al-Rahman, pg. 25

[^2]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 11, pg. 18

[^3]: A particular manner of reciting epic verses.

[^4]: Majma' al-Bayan, vol. 10, Under Suratul Muddaththir

[^5]: From the introduction of the book
Sazmanha-e-tamaddun-e-Imparaturi-e-Islam.

[^6]: An Apology For Mohammad And The Koran

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: The Rapid Growth of Islam - assistance has been taken from the
book, The Qur\`an and the Final Prophet for the above discussion in
connection with the miracles of the Qur'an.

[^10]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 135

[^11]: The Qur\`an and the Final Prophet, pg. 309

[^12]: Suratul Nisa, Verse 82 (Tr.)

[^13]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 4, pg. 28

[^14]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 9, pg. 42

[^15]: In the Light of the Qur\`an, vol. 5, pg. 282

[^16]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 11, pg. 410

[^17]: In the Light of the Qur\`an, vol. 4, pg. 422

[^18]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 8, pg. 289

[^19]: I'jaz al-Qur'an of Rafi'i

[^20]: From The Qur\`an and the Final Prophet.

[^21]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 133

[^22]: Surat Hud (11), Verse 1

[^23]: Suratul Naml (27), Verse 1

[^24]: Surat Luqman (31), Verse 1, 2

[^25]: Suratul A'raf (7), Verse 1,2

[^26]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 61

[^27]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 6, pg. 78

[^28]: Majma' al-Bayan in the discussion regarding the first verse of
the Surat Taha.

[^29]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 18, pg. 5, 6

[^30]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 20, pg. 346

[^31]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 210

[^32]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 20, pg. 346.

[^33]: Majma' al-Bayan, vol. 1, pg. 15

[^34]: Muntakhab Kanz al-'Ummal, vol. 6, pg. 52

[^35]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 6, pg. 102

[^36]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 8

[^37]: Suratul Ikhlas (112), Verse 1

[^38]: Suratul Shura' (42), Verse 11

[^39]: Suratul Ra'd (13), Verse 16

[^40]: Suratul Nisa (4), Verse 11

[^41]: Suratul Fath (48), Verse 10

[^42]: Suratul Baqarah (2), Verse 224

[^43]: Suratul Anbiya (21), Verse 47

[^44]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 2, pg. 320

[^45]: Suratul Fath (48), Verse 10

[^46]: Surat Taha (20), Verse 5

[^47]: Suratul Qiyamat (75), Verse 23

[^48]: Mustadrak Hakim, vol. 3, pg. 148

[^49]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 2, pg. 322

[^50]: Note by Translator

[^51]: Companions of the companions of the noble Prophet (S).

[^52]: Tafsir al-Manar, vol. 1, pg. 39-40

[^53]: Al-Kafi, vol. 3, pg. 312

[^54]: The Seven Oft-Repeated (verses) (Tr.)

[^55]: al-Itqan, vol. 1, pg. 136

[^56]: Sunan of Baihaqi, vol. 2, pg. 50

[^57]: Sunan of Baihaqi, vol. 2, pg. 49. Hakim has also mentioned this
tradition in his book Mustadrak, vol. 1, pg. 233, and has regarded it as
correct and authentic.

[^58]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 17

[^59]: Ibid., vol. 19, pg. 417


