Biography of the Author
=======================

   
     
 The eminent scholar, Ayatullah al-\`Uzma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Nasir
Makarim Shirazi was born in the year 1345 AH (1924 CE) in the city of
Shiraz, Iran to a religious family who were well known for their great
level of spirituality and noble ethical traits.  His Eminence finished
his elementary school studies in Shiraz and due to his eagerness to
learn, his powerful memorizing capabilities and other great talents, he
was regarded as one of the extraordinary students from amongst his
fellow classmates and because of this, was able to complete two years of
studies in one year!   
    
 The conditions that existed in Iran in those days obligated this young
man - who possessed such a talent and great aptitude to choose the path
of University studies to increase his knowledge and attain the higher
(material) levels of secular studies.  However through the hand of fate
and the blessings of the Maintainer of the Universe and his own internal
desires, this young man developed an attraction to becoming better
acquainted and delve deep into the genuine teachings of Islam,
especially since after the spring of 1348 AH (1937 CE) (just after he
finished his primary school), the Islamic Seminaries went thru a major
transformation and had taken on a completely new form.  
  

His Studies
-----------

   
 His Eminence started his formal Islamic studies at the age of 14 in
Madressah Agha Babakhan Shirazi and within a short period of time, was
able to complete the introductory studies such as Sarf, Nahw, Mantiq,
Bayan, and Badi\`, which were all needed to advance to the next level of
Islamic studies.   
    
 After completing these sciences, he turned his attention towards the
fields of Fiqh (Jurisprudence) and Usul al-Fiqh (Principles of
Jurisprudence) and again, due to the exceptional capabilities that he
possessed, was able to finish studying the complete levels of
introductory and both the levels of the intermediate Islamic studies in
approximately four years (something that normally takes 12 to 15
years)!  During this time, a group of students from the Islamic Seminary
in Shiraz were also benefiting from the classes that he himself was
teaching.   
    
 The positive criticisms and personal opinions of His Eminence on the
classes being held in Qum and in relation to the need for including
extra information within the books that were being taught in the various
Theological Seminaries, definitely played a role in the bright future
that awaited him.  While in religious gatherings in this city, his
capabilities, genius, meticulous and deep thought were witnessed by
others and because of this, no one was able to deny his God-given
talents.  
    
 Whereas this brilliant star was only a mere 18 years old, however
through his deep penetrating knowledge and the flowing pen, he was able
to write a commentary on the book Kifayatul Usul (one of the major books
of \`Ilmul Usul that must be studied in the Theological Seminary), in
which he was able to bring to light the ambiguous issues mentioned in
this traditional book.  At the age of 18, he formally entered into the
Theological Seminary of Qum and for the next five years, was present in
the religious gatherings and classes of some of the greatest teachers of
those days, such as Ayatullah al-\`Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad
Husain Burujerdi and other great personalities (may Allah be pleased
with them all).   
    
 In order for His Eminence to become better acquainted with the great
scholars, their ideas and thoughts who were studying and teaching in one
of the greatest Theological Seminaries of the Shi\`a, in the year 1369
AH (1950 CE), he made his way to the Hawza \`Ilmiyyah of Najaf al-Ashraf
in \`Iraq.  It was here that he was able to take part in the classes of
some of the greatest teachers such as: Ayatullah al-\`Uzma al-Hajj
as-Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim, Ayatullah al-\`Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Abul
Qasim al-Khu'i and Ayatullah al-\`Uzma al-Hajj \`Abdul Hadi ash-Shirazi
and other great teachers (may Allah sanctify their spirits).   
    
 At the age of 24, His Eminence was granted complete Ijtihad from two of
the great scholars of Najaf al-Ashraf.  In addition, Ayatullah al-\`Uzma
al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim even wrote a short, but comprehensive
letter of commendation for His Eminence's notes on the lessons of Fiqh
(The Book of Taharah).   
    
 His thirst for acquiring and gaining more knowledge continued with the
great teachers in Najaf al-Ashraf.  However, since he did not have the
means to survive and continue his studies in this holy city, he was
forced to return back to Iran in the year 1370 AH (1951 CE) and make his
way back to the holy city of Qum which was now the centre of gathering
religious scholars.  Once again, he joined the circle of scholars who
later on, had a profound impact on his life.  
    
 After returning to Iran, Ayatullah Nasir Makarim Shirazi began teaching
the intermediate and higher level of studies (Kharij) in Usul al-Fiqh
and Fiqh.  It is now close to 28 years that he has been teaching these
classes in the Theological Seminary which have been warmly accepted and
appreciated by a large number of students.  In addition, after teaching
a large number of the important books of Fiqh, he went on to write
summaries and notes of these great works.  At present the classes of
Kharij of Usul of this great personality are one of the most popular
classes in the Hawza \`Ilmiyyah of the Shi\`a and there are close to
2,000 of the most dedicated and dynamic students who take part and
benefit from his lectures!  
    
 From the beginning of his studies, he was habituated in writing books
in various fields of Islamic studies such as Theology, Islamic Awareness
and the issue of Wilayah (of the Ahlul Bait).  Moving ahead, he started
to write on the Exegesis of the Qur'an, Fiqh and Usul al-Fiqh and is
currently known and recognized as one of the greatest writers in the
Muslim world.  
  

Political Activities
--------------------

His Eminence was also very active in the early days that culminated in
the Islamic Revolution of Iran and it is because of this fact that he
was thrown in the despotic ruler's jail many times.  In addition, he was
even exiled on three separate occasions to three different cities -
Chanharat, Mahabad and Anarak.  However after the Revolution, he was
appointed to the first council of Representatives and played a pivotal
role in writing the first constitution.  
  

The Religious Help and Support
------------------------------

Ayatullah Nasir Makarim Shirazi has been quite active in various fields
of teaching and guiding the up-and-coming scholars in the Theological
Seminary of Qum, and has embarked on various projects and endeavours, of
which we mention just a few:  
  

### 1. Religious Publications Centre for the Shi\`a

   
 From some time back, His Eminence felt the need for the Hawza
\`Ilmiyyah of Qum to have a general publication organization which would
be able to defend the Shi\`a from the works that were being published,
by those wishing to mislead the people - unfortunately whose number is
great.   
    
 In addition, this is also something that the Muslims expected from such
a great Islamic University such as the Hawza \`Ilmiyyah, and thus people
from different strata of the community starting from the great Mara\`ja
Taqlid of the Hawza and others also put forward this request that
without doubt, a magazine should be published that would be able to
answer the religious enquiries of the youth and give them the answers
that they were looking for.  In addition, such a publication would be
able to fight against the books and magazines that were coming out
aiming to mislead the people.   
    
 Due to the fact that at that time, there were some minds (within the
Theological Seminary) that were not ready to accept such a publication,
thus, His Eminence sought out serious and original-writing scholars to
place the heavy responsibility on their shoulders of producing such a
publication.  In this regard, His Eminence, along with a group of other
scholars and the assistance of the leaders of the Hawza \`Ilmiyyah of
Qum and the financial support of well wishers, launched the magazine,
“Maktab-e-Islam”. 

This magazine was definitely something which was unparalleled in the
Shi\`a world and maybe from the point of view of its range of
circulation - amongst the various religious magazines being published at
that time - was the number one magazine across the entire Muslim world. 
This magazine brought a fresh new path of direction to the great
students and thinkers of the Hawzah.   
    
 At present, this publication has been going on strong for over 39
years - offering its valuable services to the Muslim world and the
Shi\`a communities and has found a special spot within the hearts of the
youth, the university students, teachers and other noble personalities
and it is through this publication that the light of Islam and
Tashayya\` has been spread from its focal point (Qum) to the entire
world.  
  

### 2. Organizing Gatherings to Offer Lessons in Theology and other Religious Teachings

   
 His Eminence felt that the books that had been written in the field of
Islamic Theology were not sufficient, nor were they, with the passing of
time, able to answer the questions that were being raised.  In addition,
these books were also not adequate in addressing the needs of the
current era.  The traditional books of theology were written centuries
ago where the questions that the materialists of today bring up were not
mentioned.  Also, the traditional books written in the past did not
discuss the various world religions who were hoping to impose their
values on the world.  In addition, the older books brought up issues
like those in relation to the Asha\`ris and Mu\`tazili and others such
as these which today discussions on beliefs such as these are no longer
applicable as discussions since these were 'seasonal'.  
    
 It is because of this fact that His Eminence, relying upon his literary
talent and exceptional abilities, was able to present the Theological
Islamic beliefs and the five Principles of Religion in an unparalleled
way!  It is through organizing the theological discussions that hundreds
of people were attending that these gatherings were made aware of these
issues at hand and through these gatherings, a compact and concise book
was compiled and published.  
  

### 3. Islamic Council to Protect the Youth

   
 His Eminence gave unparalleled lessons on Theology and other lessons
and discussions in which his students have been educated in eight
different subjects from amongst the different schools of thought
throughout the world.  It is through these classes that those being
trained would be able to discuss and have debates with others, who are
busy propagating other beliefs and schools of thought and would also be
able to write books concerning their beliefs - they would also be
equipped to answer any questions or issues that they put forth.   
    
 Within a short period of time, these religious gatherings were able to
produce students - each one of which was firmly grounded and specialized
in a particular field of study and even today, a group of active youth
who are well known authors within the Hawza \`Ilmiyyah, are busy
studying with.  As well, in order to save our dear youth from the
clutches of corruption, His Eminence formed an organization called the
*Educational Assembly for Protection of the Younger Generation*.  One of
the outcomes of this assembly is the publication of material that would
be attractive to the youth, and his office made them available to the
youth very promptly.  
  

### 4. Struggles Against Deviant Thoughts

   
 On one of his trips to the city of Shiraz, His Eminence came face to
face with one of the Sufi groups in this city.  A group of people in
Shiraz requested him to write a book that would outline the principles
of these Sufis - one that would explain their beliefs in a polite and
respectful manner.  His Eminence, by making use of the resources
available to him, sat down to write this book in the year 1953 CE which
outlined their beliefs and thoughts, and he named it ”*The Manifestation
of Truth”.*  
    
 The method in which he wrote this book caught the attention of the late
Ayatullah al-\`Uzma Burujerdi (may Allah be pleased with him) and after
requesting His Eminence to see him, he congratulated the author for his
valuable efforts.  In relation to this book, Ayatullah al-\`Uzma
Burujerdi (may Allah be pleased with him) wrote the following
commendation, “I have gone through this book in my spare time and did
not find even the smallest of weak points in it.  May Allah reward you
for your troubles.”  
  

### 5. Establishing Organizations and Centres of Learning

   
 In these regards, His Eminence had made the intention of establishing
such organizations in the same number of Ma\`sumin (peace be upon all of
them) that we have (14) and with the praise of Allah up until now, he
has been successful in establishing four such important schools within
the Theological Seminary of Qum and two religious organizations for the
welfare of the students who are living in the city of Mashad.  
  

### 6. Writings

   
 The number of publications of His Eminence currently lies at
approximately 130 volumes of books which have all been printed - some of
which have been reprinted more than 30 times!  Some of these have even
been translated into more than 10 living languages of the world and have
been published in various parts of the world.   
    
 The commentary of the Qur'an authored by him, Tafsir-e-Namuna (The
Ideal Commentary) has been translated into many languages, including
\`Arabic (al-Amthal Fi Tafsir al-Qur'an), and can be found in many
homes.  In addition to this commentary, he has also authored a thematic
commentary of the Qur'an entitled Payam-e-Qur'an (The Message of the
Qur'an) which has opened up a new chapter in the field of exegesis of
the Noble Qur'an.   
    
 In addition, the books he has written on the theological beliefs have
been a place where others can seek refuge from the assault of books
written with false beliefs in them.   
    
 Of the books of Fiqh that he has written, we mention a few:  Anwar
al-Fuqahah, al-Qawa\`idul Fiqhiyyah, Anwar al-Usul and the notes and
commentaries on the complete text of \`Urwatul Wuthqa which has been
printed many times over.  
    
 His practical guide for Muslims (Tawdhihul Masail) has also been
printed many times and has also been translated into \`Arabic, Urdu,
Turkish, Azari and English.  
    
 A complete list of other publications of this great scholar which have
been translated into English and are available is as follows. Most of
these can be read on his website at
[www.makaremshirazi.org](http://www.makaremshirazi.org).

1.       Ethical Discources [40 Lectures on Ethics and Morality] -
volume 1, 2 & 3 translated by Saleem Bhimji -published by the World
Federation of KSIMC
[[www.world-federation.org](http://www.world-federation.org)]

2.       Khums: The Islamic Tax translated by Saleem Bhimji - published
by the Islamic Humanitarian Service
[[www.al-haqq.com](http://www.al-haqq.com)]

3.       Lessons in Islamic Beliefs - Tawhid, 'Adalah, Nubuwwah, Imamah,
and Ma'ad translated by Laleh Bakhtiyar - published by Ansariyan
Publications [[www.ansariyan.org](http://www.ansariyan.org)]

4.       Life Under the Grace of Ethics translated by Monir Shafiei -
published by the Office of Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi
[[www.makaremshirazi.org](http://www.makaremshirazi.org)]

5.       Message of the Qur'an - A Thematic Exegesis of the Noble Qur'an
volume 1 of 10 translated by Saleem Bhimji - published by the World
Federation of KSIMC
[[www.world-federation.org](http://www.world-federation.org)]

6.       One Hundred and Eighty Questions - volumes 1, 2 & 3 translated
by Shahnawaz Mahdawi - published by the World Federation of KSIMC
[[www.world-federation.org](http://www.world-federation.org)]

7.       One Hundred and Fifty Lessons for Life translated by the office
of Ayatullah al-'Uzma Shaykh Nasir Makarim Shirazi - published by
Ansariyan Publications [[www.ansariyan.org](http://www.ansariyan.org)]

8.       Our Beliefs translated by the office of Ayatullah al-'Uzma
Shaykh Nasir Makarim Shirazi - published by the Office of Ayatullah
Makarim Shirazi
[[www.makaremshirazi.org](http://www.makaremshirazi.org)]

9.       Philosophy of Islamic Rulings written in co-operation with
Ayatullah Ja'far Subhani Translated by Sayyid Athar Rizvi - published by
Ansariyan Publications [[www.ansariyan.org](http://www.ansariyan.org)]

10.    Summary of the Islamic Rulings translated by 'Ali Abdul Rasheed -
published by the Office of Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi
[[www.makaremshirazi.org](http://www.makaremshirazi.org)]

11.    Tafsir of the Noble Qur'an - Suratul Jinn translated by Saleem
Bhimji - published by the Islamic Humanitarian Service and the World
Federation of KSIMC [[www.al-haqq.com](http://www.al-haqq.com)] &
[[www.world-federation.org](http://www.world-federation.org)]

12.    The tradition of Ghadir - The Expressive Evidence for Imamate
translated by the office of Ayatullah al-'Uzma Shaykh Nasir Makarim
Shirazi - published by the Office of Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi
[[www.makaremshirazi.org](http://www.makaremshirazi.org)]

13.    The Noble Qur'an - Translation and Commentary - volume 1 - 4
translated by Mansoor Amini - published by the Office of Ayatullah
Makarim Shirazi
[[www.makaremshirazi.org](http://www.makaremshirazi.org)]

14.    The Islamic Laws translated by the office of Ayatullah al-'Uzma
Shaykh Nasir Makarim Shirazi - published by the Office of Ayatullah
Makarim Shirazi
[[www.makaremshirazi.org](http://www.makaremshirazi.org)]


