The Prayers
===========

1. What is the philosophy behind Wudu and Ghusl?
------------------------------------------------

**1. What is the philosophy behind Wudu**[^1] **and Ghusl**[^2]**?**

Undoubtedly, Wudu possesses two manifest benefits - the medical benefit
and the ethical and spiritual one. From the medical point of view,
washing of the face and hands five times a day or at the very least,
three times a day, has an appreciable influence as far as the
cleanliness of the body is concerned. Wiping the head and the exterior
portion of the feet - the condition here being that the water reaches
the hair and the skin - means that we keep these portions clean too.  We
shall allude later when discussing the philosophy of ghusl, that the
contact of water with skin has a special effect in achieving the
equilibrium of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves of the body.

As for the ethical and spiritual aspect, since it is performed for Allah
and with the intention of pleasing Him, it possesses an educative
influence; especially since its implicit meaning - from head to toe I
strive to obey You - serves to corroborate this ethical and spiritual
philosophy.

In a tradition, Imam 'Ali b. Musa al-Ridha (a.s) says: “The reason why
the order for (the performance of) Wudu has been issued, and (the
reason) why the acts of worship should commence by it is that when the
servants stand before Allah and converse with Him, they should be clean,
away from uncleanness and pollution, and act in accordance with His
orders. Apart from this, Wudu eliminates drowsiness and lethargy from
man so that the heart can acquire the purity and luminosity for standing
in the presence of Allah.”[^3]

When we explain the philosophy of ghusl, the philosophy of Wudu should
become more clear.

### Philosophy of Ghusl

Some people question: Why does Islam order a person in the state of
'janabat’[^4] to wash his entire body whereas it is only a particular
organ that becomes unclean?  Is there a difference between urinal
emission and seminal discharge so as to necessitate the washing of only
the organ, in the former, but the entire body, in the latter?

There are two answers to this question - one brief and the other
comprehensive.

The brief answer is that the discharge of semen from the human body is
not an act that is restricted to just one part of the body (unlike urine
and other body wastes), a claim which is substantiated by the fact that
the effect of the discharge becomes manifest on the entire body.
Subsequent to a discharge, all the cells of the body slip into a
characteristic lethargy; which is an indication of its effect on all the
parts of the body.

### Explanation

Studies conducted by scientists reveal that within the human body there
exist two vegetative nervous networks which control and regulate all the
activities of the body. These two nervous networks - the sympathetic
nerves and the parasympathetic nerves - are spread out throughout the
body and around all the internal and external systems and tracts.

The function of the sympathetic nerves is to accelerate and stimulate
the activities of the various tracts of the body, whereas the
parasympathetic nerves function to decelerate and diminish them. In
effect, one plays the role of the accelerator of an automobile while the
other plays the role of the brakes; with a balanced functioning of these
two sets of nerves, the systems of the body work in a balanced and
normal manner.

At times certain occurrences in the body disrupt this balance and
equilibrium - one of these being the issue of 'orgasm', which is usually
contemporaneous with a seminal discharge.

In such cases, the parasympathetic nerves (the decelerating nerves) tend
to take a lead over the sympathetic nerves and consequently disrupt the
equilibrium, negatively.

It has also been established that amongst the things that could force
the sympathetic nerves into activity and re-establish the lost
equilibrium is contact of water with the body, and since the effect of
orgasm is noticeably felt on all parts of the body and the equilibrium
existing between these two sets of nerves is disrupted all over the
body, hence it has been ordered that after sexual intercourse or seminal
discharge the entire body should be washed with water so that as a
result of its regenerative effect, equilibrium is once again established
between these two sets of nerves all over the body.[^5]

Of course, the benefits of ghusl are not just confined to the above for,
in addition to this, it is also a form of worship whose ethical
influence cannot be denied. It is for this reason that if the body is
washed without the intention of seeking His pleasure and in compliance
with His orders, the ghusl would be deemed to be incorrect. In reality,
seminal discharge or sexual intercourse tends to affect the soul as well
as the body - the soul gets drawn towards material pleasures, while the
body is overcome by listlessness and stagnation.

The ghusl of janabat,[^6] which is a washing of the body and also of the
soul (due to its being performed in compliance with Allah's orders and
with the intention of seeking His pleasure), exercises a two-fold effect
upon the soul and the body - leading the soul towards Allah and
spirituality while at the same time leading the body towards
cleanliness, liveliness and activity.

In addition to the above, the obligation of the ghusl of janabat is an
Islamic compulsion for maintaining cleanliness of the body and
observance of hygiene throughout the life. There are numerous
individuals, who are neglectful of their cleanliness and hygiene, but
this Islamic ruling forces them to wash themselves at regular intervals
and keep themselves clean. This is not specific to the people of the
past eras, for even in our times there are numerous such individuals,
who, for various reasons, tend to be neglectful of their cleanliness and
hygiene (however, this is a general and universal rule which includes
even one who has recently washed his body).

The abovementioned three aspects clearly illustrate why the ghusl ought
to be performed and the entire body washed after a seminal discharge
(sleeping or awake) and similarly, after sexual intercourse (even if not
accompanied by a seminal discharge.

2. What is the Philosophy behind Tayammum?
------------------------------------------

**2. What is the Philosophy behind Tayammum?**[^7]

Numerous people question as to what benefit could the hitting of hands
upon the earth and then wiping them over the forehead and the back of
the hands possibly possess, especially in the light of our knowledge
that very many kinds of soil are dirty, polluted and a medium for the
transfer of microbes?

In answering such objections, attention ought to be paid to two points:

### 1. The Ethical Benefit

Tayammum is one of the acts of worship in which the 'soul' of worship -
in the true meaning of the word - becomes manifest. This is because man
wipes his forehead, which is the most honourable portion of his body, by
means of his hands that have been struck upon the earth in order to
exhibit his humbleness and humility towards his Lord as if to say:

My forehead and my hands are totally humble and subservient in Your
presence - after which, he proceeds to engage himself in prayers or
other acts of worship that require Wudu or ghusl. This, in itself, has a
great effect in developing within the people a spirit of humility,
subservience and thanksgiving.

### 2. The Sanitary Benefit

  Today, it has been established that soil, due to its containing
numerous bacteria, is able to do away with contamination and pollution.
These bacteria, whose work is to decompose organic substances and
eliminate various kinds of infections, are generally located, in
numerous numbers, on the surface of the earth or at  less depths, where
they are better able to benefit from the air and sunlight.

It is for this reason that an animal carcass or a human body - when
buried after death, and similarly polluted matter that is on the surface
of the earth - get decomposed in a comparatively short period, and in
the face of bacterial attack, the infection gets destroyed. Surely, if
the soil were not to have possessed such a characteristic, the entire
planet, in a short period, would have transformed into a centre of
infection. Essentially, soil possesses a property that is similar to an
antibiotic and is extraordinarily effective in eliminating microbes.

Thus, pure soil is not only uncontaminated but instead, serves to
eliminate contamination and in this respect it can, to a certain extent,
be a substitute for water - the difference being that water is the
dissolver, meaning that it dissolves the bacteria and carries it with
itself whereas soil eliminates the microbes.

But it ought to be noted that the earth for tayammum should always be
pure (Tahir), just as the Qur\`an employing an interesting
expression[^8] says: طَيِّبا [^9]

Interestingly, the use of the word صَعِيْد [^10], which has been derived
from the root صُعُوْد [^11], is an allusion to the fact that it is
better to use the soil lying on the surface of the ground for this
purpose - the same soil, which receives the air and the sunshine, and
contains the microbe-killing bacteria. If such a soil also happens to be
pure, then tayammum by means of it shall possess the above benefits
without carrying the slightest of detriment.[^12]

3. What is the manner of washing the face, and wiping the head and the feet in Wudu?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Verse number 6 of Suratul Maidah makes a mention of all those things
that bring about the purification of man's soul and hence, a
considerable portion of the rulings associated with Wudu, ghusl and
tayammum, which bring about purification of the soul, have been
explained therein. Initially the believers are addressed and the rulings
related to Wudu, are mentioned as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا قُمْـتُمْ إِلـى الصَّلاَةِ
فَاغْسِلُوا وُجُوهَكُمْ وَ أَيْدِيَكُمْ إِلـى الْمَرافِقِ وَ امْسَحُوا
بِرُؤُسِكُمْ وَ أَرْجُــلَكُمْ إِلـى الْكَعْـبَيْنِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! When you rise up to prayer, wash your faces and
your hands as far as the elbows, and wipe your heads and your feet to
the ankles.”***

In this verse the portion of the hand that ought to be washed during
Wudu has been mentioned, since مَراَفِق is the plural of مِرْفَق -
meaning elbow. Since it is possible that when it is said “wash your
hands”, it could be thought that they should be washed till the wrists -
as this is the measure that is generally washed - the verse, in order to
do away with this misconception, specifies 'as far as the elbows' (إِلَى
الْمَرافِقِ).

From the above explanation it becomes clear that the word إِلـىَ in the
verse is only for mentioning the limits of washing and not the manner of
washing as some have imagined - having taken the verse to mean: Wash the
hands from the tips of the fingers towards the elbows (as is prevalent
amongst a group from amongst the Ahlus Sunnah).

The above issue is similar to the case when a person instructs a worker
to paint the walls of a room from the floor up to a height of one meter.
It is plainly evident that it is not intended that the wall should be
painted from the bottom towards the top - rather, it means that this is
the portion that has to be painted - neither more nor less.

Hence, only the extent that needs to be necessarily washed has been
mentioned in the verse; however, as far as the manner of washing is
concerned, it has been mentioned in the traditions of the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w) that have reached us by means of the Ahlul Bayt G, and it is to
wash the hands from the elbows towards the fingertips.

The letter (ب), which is found in the word (بِرُؤُسِكُمْ) - according to
the explicit statements of some of the traditions and clear opinions of
some of the lexicographers  - is used to denote 'a part' (or portion) -
as such the meaning conveyed by the verse is: 'Wipe a portion of your
heads' which, in our traditions, has been delineated as the anterior
one-fourth region of the head and this one-fourth portion ought to be
wiped with the hand, however small be the measure of wiping.

It follows that the practice which is prevalent amongst some of the
Sunni groups, who wipe their entire heads and even their ears, is
inconsistent with the meaning conveyed by the verse.

The word أَرْجُلَكُمْ being located next to بِرُؤُسِكُمْ is a testimony
to the fact that the legs should also be wiped and not washed. (And if
we observe that during recitation, أَرْجُلَكُمْ is recited such that (ل)
possesses the fathah (the vowel point for 'a'), this is due to it being
superimposed upon the place of بِرُؤُسِكُمْ and not on the word
وُجُوهَكُمْ[^13] and [^14]

4. What is the need to face the Qiblah in prayers?
--------------------------------------------------

Verse number 115 of Suratul Baqarah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لِلٌّهِ الْمَشْرِقُ وَ الْمَغْرِبُ فَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا فَثَمَّ
وَجْهُ اللٌّهِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To Allah belong the east and the West: Whithersoever ye turn, there
is the presence of Allah.”***

In consideration of the above verse the question that comes to mind is:
If Allah is present wherever we face, what then is the need to face the
Qiblah (during the prayers)?

(The order for) facing the Qiblah is not at all intended to confine the
presence of the Holy Allah in a particular direction. However, since man
is a material entity and thus, must necessarily face a direction while
offering his prayers, it has been ruled that all should face one
particular direction during their prayers. This is with the objective of
realizing unity and harmony amongst the Muslims, and preventing
confusion, disorder and scattering amongst them. Just reflect how
scathing and disorderly it would be if each person were to offer his
prayers in a different direction and the people were to establish
scattered rows (for the prayers)?

Incidentally, the direction that has been stipulated as the Qiblah (the
direction towards the Ka'bah) is a region that is not only holy but also
one of the most ancient bases of monotheism and so, directing oneself
towards it serves to awaken the monotheistic reminiscences (within
oneself).[^15]

5. What secrets lay behind the changing of the Qiblah?
------------------------------------------------------

The change of Qiblah from Bayt al-Maqdas to the holy Ka'bah was a puzzle
for everyone; those who were of the opinion that every rule ought to be
permanent and unchanging, mused: If we had to necessarily pray in the
direction of the Ka'bah, why was it not ordered from the very onset?  If
Bayt al-Maqdas, which had been regarded as the Qiblah for the previous
prophets was superior, why then was it changed?

The enemies too found the issue a fertile ground to poison the minds of
the people. They probably might have said:  At the start he (s.a.w)
turned towards the Qiblah of the previous prophets but after tasting
victories he was overcome by racial and nationalistic tendencies and
therefore substituted it with the Qiblah of his own people!

Or they might have said: He initially accepted Bayt al-Maqdas to be his
Qiblah in order to attract the Jews and the Christians towards his
religion, but later, when he observed that it did not prove effective,
he changed it to the Ka'bah.

The agitation and commotion that these whisperings must have generated -
especially in a society in which the sediments of the eras of idolatry
and polytheism still existed, and one that had yet to be completely
illuminated by the light of knowledge, science, and faith - is all too
evident.

As a result, the Qur\`an explicitly states in verse 143 of Suratul
Baqarah that this was a great trial to discern the stance adopted by the
believers and the polytheists.

It is not improbable that one of the important reasons for the change in
Qiblah could be the following issue:

In that period, since the Ka'bah had been the hub for the idols of the
polytheists it was ordered that the Muslims should temporarily offer
their prayers in the direction of Bayt al-Maqdas and in this way
separate their ranks and disassociate themselves from the polytheists.
But when they emigrated to Madinah and established their own community
and rule, and when their ranks were completely demarcated from that of
the others, it was not necessary to continue with the existing posture
and hence they returned towards the holy Ka'bah, the most ancient focal
point of the prophets and the centre of monotheism.

It is plainly evident that offering prayers in the direction of Bayt
al-Maqdas was very difficult for those, who regarded the Ka'bah to be
the spiritual edifice of their own tribe, and equally difficult was the
return towards the Ka'bah, after having become habituated to the first
Qiblah.

In this manner the believers were placed in a crucible of examination in
order that the traces of polytheism, which still existed within
themselves, get burnt away in the hot furnace of this test, they sever
their association with their polytheistic past, and there develops
within them the spirit of absolute submission before the orders of
Allah.

Basically, just as we have previously mentioned, Allah does not possess
any place or location; the Qiblah is just a code for establishing unity
within the ranks of the believers and reviving the reminiscences of
monotheism and so, changing it would not transform anything. The
important thing is to submit to His commands and shatter the idols of
fanaticism, stubbornness and egotism.[^16]

6. What is the philosophy of prayers?
-------------------------------------

In Suratul 'Ankabut, verse number 45, mentions an important philosophy
with respect to the prayers when it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الصَّلاةَ تَنْهى‏ عَنِ الْفَحْشَاءِ وَ الْمُنْكَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and evil.”***

Since prayers remind man of two of the most powerful deterrents - the
Origin and the Resurrection - it thus possesses a deterring influence
with regards to indecency and evil.

A person, who stands up for prayers, recites Allahu Akbar and regards
Allah to be superior to and greater than everything else. Recollecting
His bounties, he praises Him and offers his thanksgiving. He eulogizes
Him for His Compassion and Mercy, and brings to mind the Day of
Judgment; professing his servitude, he yearns for His help, seeks the
Straight Path from Him and implores Him to protect him from treading the
path of the deviated ones and those, who earn His anger (the theme of
Suratul Hamd).

Undoubtedly, the heart and the soul of such a person shall experience an
impulse towards truth, purity and piety.

He goes into ruku' for Allah and places his forehead on the ground in
His august presence. Drowned in His grandeur, he shoves his egoism and
superiority complex into oblivion.

He testifies to His Unity and the prophethood of the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w).

He sends salutations upon the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and beseeches Allah
to place him amongst His righteous servants (tashahhud and salam).

All these acts create within him a tidal wave of spirituality, which is
reckoned to be a strong barrier against sins.

This act is repeated several times in a day; when he rises up in the
morning he gets immersed in His remembrance; in the middle of the day
when he is totally engrossed in the material life he suddenly hears the
muezzin calling the people to prayers. Interrupting his schedule he
hastens to present himself before Him. Even at the end of the day and
before sliding into the relaxing comforts of his bed he engages himself
in a communion with his Lord, illuminating his heart with His Light.

In addition to the above, as he engages himself in the preliminaries of
the prayers, he washes and cleans himself and keeps away usurped and
forbidden things from himself after which he proceeds to present himself
before his Friend. All these things effectively serve as a deterrent,
preventing him from treading the path of indecency and evil.

But ultimately, every prayer shall only keep one away from evil and
indecency in the same measure as the conditions of perfection and the
spirit of worship, which it happens to possess. At times it keeps one
away from evil, completely and wholly, whereas at other times it does so
partially and incompletely.

It is impossible that a person offers his prayers but they do not have
any effect on him - however superficial the prayer and however polluted
the person. Obviously, the effects of such prayers are less, but had
such individuals not been offering these prayers, they might have been
in a much more polluted state.

Stating this more clearly, 'refraining from indecency and evil'
possesses numerous levels and ranks, and every prayer, depending upon
the conditions of the prayers that have been taken into consideration
(while offering it), possesses some of these ranks

It has been reported in a tradition that a youth from the Ansar
(Helpers) used to offer his prayers with the Noble Prophet (s.a.w), but
despite this, he was prone to committing sins and evil deeds. When this
was brought to the notice of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w), he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ صَلاَتَهُ تَنْهاهُ يَوْماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“His prayers deter him for one day (only).”[^17]

This effect of the prayers is so significant that some of the traditions
refer to it as a gauge for distinguishing the accepted prayers from
those that that are not. As Imam as-sadiq (a.s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحَبَّ أَنْ يَعْلَمَ أَ قُبِلَتْ صَلاَتُهُ أَمْ لَمْ تُقْبَلْ
فَلْيَنْظُرْ هَلْ مَنَعَتْهُ صَلاَتُهُ عَنِ الْفَحْشَآءِ وَ
الْمُنْكَرِ فَبِقَدْرِ مَا مَنَعَتْهُ قُبِلَتْ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“One, who desires to know if his prayer has been accepted or not, should
observe if it has kept him away from indecency and evil, or not; the
measure in which it has kept him away (is the measure of his prayer
that) has been accepted.”[^18]

Continuing with the verse, Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَذِكْرُ اللٌّهِ أَكْبَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The dhikr (remembrance) of Allah is superior and more virtuous.”***

The apparent meaning of the above sentence appears to mention a more
important philosophy for the prayers. It mentions another effect of
prayers - an effect that is even more important than 'keeping one away
from indecency and evil' - and that is, it causes man to remember
Allah - this being the basis of every goodness and the foundation of all
felicities. In reality, its superiority and importance is due to the
fact that it is the cause for it (keeping one away from indecency and
evil).  
 Basically, remembrance of Allah keeps the hearts alive and sets them at
rest, and no other thing can be likened to it in significance and
importance.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ بِذِكْرِ اللٌّهِ تَطْمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“**Surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts set at rest**.”*[^19]

Essentially, the soul of every act of worship - whether it is a prayer
or something else - is remembrance of Allah. The preliminary acts of the
prayer, the recitations and actions in it, the supplications after the
prayers - all of these - serve to revive the remembrance of Allah within
a man's heart.  
 Worthy of attention is that an allusion has been made to this
fundamental philosophy of prayer in Surat Taha, when Prophet Musa (a.s)
is addressed as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَقِمِ الصَّلاةَ لِذِكْرِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“**And keep up prayer for My remembrance.**”*[^20]

In a tradition, Mu'adh b. Jabal states: No deed of man, for protecting
him from divine chastisement, is greater than 'remembrance of Allah'.
When he was asked: Not even Jihad in the way of Allah?  He replied: No
(not even Jihad), for Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَذِكْرُ اللٌّهِ أَكْبَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Although the philosophy of prayer is not something that is hidden from
anyone, a more careful study of the text of the Qur\`an and the
traditions guide us towards some more subtle points in this regard:

1. The spirit, foundation, objective, result and ultimately the
philosophy of prayers is remembrance of Allah - the same ذكر الله,
which, in the above verse, has been referred to as the optimum result.
However, it should be a remembrance that brings about 'reflection', and
a 'reflection' that leads to 'deeds'. In a tradition Imam as-sadiq
(a.s), interpreting the sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَذِكْرُ اللٌّهِ أَكْبَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذِكْرُ اللٌّهِ عِنْدَ مَا أَحَلَّ وَ حَرَّمَ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Remembrance of Allah at the time of performing a lawful or a forbidden
act.”[^21]

It means to remember Allah and seek that which is permitted and refrain
from that which is forbidden.

2. Prayers are a means for washing away the sins and achieving divine
forgiveness since they invite man towards repentance and rectification
of the past. Hence we read in a tradition that once the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w) questioned his companions: If there flowed, at the doorstep of
one of your houses, a river with pure and clean water and if the owner
happened to wash himself in it five times a day, would there be any dirt
or uncleanness on his body? The companions replied: No. The Noble
Prophet (s.a.w) then said: The prayer is similar to this flowing water.
Whenever one offers a prayer, the sins committed between two prayers get
washed away.[^22]

Thus, by means of the balm of prayers, the wounds that get inflicted
upon man's soul as a result of sins get healed and the rust that forms
on the heart is eliminated.

3. The prayer is a barrier against future sins. It strengthens the
spirit of faith within man and fosters the seedling of Taqwa (piety)
within his heart. We know that faith and piety are the strongest
barriers against sins and this is exactly what has been referred to in
the verse as 'keeping one away from indecency and evil'. Similarly, we
read in numerous traditions, that when the state of affairs of some
sinning individuals was brought to the notice of the A\`immah G, they
said: “Don't worry!  The prayer shall reform them” and it did!

4. The prayer does away with heedlessness and negligence. The greatest
tragedy for those journeying the path of truth is that they tend to
forget the purpose of their creation and get drowned in the whirlpool of
this material world and its ephemeral pleasures. But the prayer- since
it is offered at regular intervals and five times a day - repeatedly
warns man and causes him to bring to mind the purpose of his creation
and reminds him of his place and position in this world. This, in
itself, is a great bounty because man has in his possession a device
which alerts him strongly, several times in the course of a day.

5. The prayer serves to shatter pride and egotism. In the course of a
day, man offers seventeen rak'at and in each of them he places his
forehead on the ground twice before Allah, considering himself to be a
tiny entity before His greatness - rather, a zero in the presence of
Infinity. He tears apart the curtains of arrogance and egotism, and
shatters his pride and superiority complex.

We can understand why 'Ali (a.s), in that popular tradition in which the
philosophy behind the various acts of worship of Islam have been
explained, immediately after referring to faith, speaks about prayers
and explains:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَضَ اللٌّهُ الإِِيْمَانَ تَطْهِيراً مِنَ الشِّرْكِ وَ الصَّلاَةَ
تَنْزِيهاً عَنِ الْكِبْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah made faith obligatory in order to purify (the people) of
polytheism, and the prayer, in order to clean (them) of pride.”[^23]

6. The prayer is a tool for the development of moral excellences and
attaining spiritual perfection. It hauls man out of the limited confines
of this material world, invites him towards the spiritual realms and
places him in the company of the angels. Man, without sensing the need
for any intermediary, observes himself in the presence of his Lord and
engages in communicating with Him.

The repetition of this act several times in a day with special emphasis
on the attributes of Allah - His Compassion, Mercy and Greatness -
especially by way of reciting the various chapters of the Qur\`an after
Suratul Hamd, which itself is one of the best inviters towards good
actions and pure deeds, has an appreciable effect in the development of
moral excellences within man.

The Commander of the Faithful (a.s), mentioning the philosophy of the
prayers, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّلاَةُ قُرْبَانُ كُلِّ تَقِيٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The prayer is a means for the pious ones to attain nearness to
Allah.”[^24]

7. The prayer imparts value and significance to the other deeds of man,
since it revives the spirit of sincerity within man. This is because the
prayer is a collection of sincere intentions, pure speech and genuine
deeds, and a daily repetition of these aspects sows the seeds of other
good acts within the soul of man and strengthens the spirit of sincerity
within him.

We find that the Commander of the Faithful (a.s), in his testament after
being fatally injured on the head by the accursed b. Muljim, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللٌّهَ اللٌّهَ فِي الصَّلاَةِ فَإِنَّهَا عَمُودُ دِينِكُمْ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Fear Allah so far as the prayers are concerned for they are the pillars
of your religion.”[^25]

We know that when the pillars of a tent break down, the ropes and nails
that are around it - however strong they may be - are of no use,
Similarly, when the connection between the servant and Allah, which is
established by means of prayers, were to get severed the other deeds too
would lose their effect.  
 In a tradition, Imam as-sadiq (a.s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَوَّلُ مَا يُحَاسَبُ بِهِ الْعُبدُ الصَّلوٌةَ فَإِِنْ قُبِلَتْ قُبِلَ
سَائِرُ عَمَلِهِ وَ إِنْ رُدَّتْ رُدَّ ساَئِرُ عَمَلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The first thing that a servant shall be reckoned for (on the Day of
Judgment) shall be his prayers. If they are accepted, all his other
deeds shall be accepted too and if they are rejected, the other deeds
shall be rejected too!”

Perhaps, the reason for the above could be that the prayer is the key
towards establishing a connection between the Creator and the creation,
and if offered correctly, would generate within him sincerity and the
intention of attaining nearness to Allah - the two factors that are the
means for the acceptance of deeds. But if not, then all his other deeds
become tainted, and thus drop from reckoning.

8. The prayer, (not taking into account its contents, for the present)
in the light of the conditions necessary for its correctness, invites
towards purifying one's life. It is evident from the requirement that
the place where the prayers are offered, the clothes of the person
offering the prayers, the carpet upon which the prayers are offered and
the water and the place utilized for performing Wudu or ghusl should not
be usurped or obtained as a result of trampling the rights of others.

How can one, who is polluted of transgression, injustice, usury,
usurpation, selling short of weight, taking bribes and earning wrongful
income, manage to fulfil the preliminary conditions of the prayers? 
Thus, repetition of prayers, five times a day, is itself an exhortation
towards exhibiting consideration with respect to the rights of others.

9. In addition to the 'conditions for correctness', the prayers also
have 'conditions for acceptance' which, in other words, are referred to
as 'conditions for perfection'; these, if taken into consideration, also
act as an effective factor in abandoning many sins.

Books of jurisprudence and traditions mention numerous things that act
as impediments towards the acceptance of prayers - one of them being
consumption of intoxicants. It has been reported in the traditions that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُقْبَلُ صَلاَةُ شَارِبِ الْخَمْرِ أَرْبَعِينَ يَوْماً إِلاَّ أَنْ
يَتُوبَ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The prayers of one who consumes intoxicants, shall not be accepted for
forty days, except if he repents.”[^26]

In several traditions we read that an unjust and oppressive leader is
one of those persons, whose prayers are not accepted.[^27]  Some of the
traditions explicitly state that the prayers of one, who does not pay
the zakat, are not accepted; other traditions state that unlawful food,
vanity and egotism are of the impediments that prevent one's prayers
from being accepted. The extent of the constructive effect of
endeavouring to fulfil these 'conditions of acceptance' is only too
plain and obvious!

10. Prayers strengthen the spirit of discipline within man since they
have to be offered at specific times - any advancement or deferment of
which would only serve to render them invalid. Similarly, there also
exist rulings with respect to intention, qiyam[^28], qu'ud[^29], ruku',
sujud and the like, which, if taken into consideration, instill within
man a sense of discipline, thereby enabling him to include this factor
in the other affairs of his life, with absolute and total ease.

All the above are the merits that exist in individual prayers without
taking into account the issue of congregation, for if we are to consider
the merits of praying in congregation - which is, in reality, the soul
of the prayers - there would be innumerable additional benefits,
explanation of which falls beyond the scope of this book but which are
more or less known to us.

We conclude this discussion on the philosophy and secrets of prayers by
presenting a comprehensive tradition, reported from Imam 'Ali b. Musa
al-Ridha (a.s).

The Imam (a.s), replying to a letter in which he was asked about the
philosophy of prayers, stated: “The prayers have been legislated for
acknowledging and attesting the Lordship of the Lord, combating
polytheism and idolatry, standing in His presence with utmost humility
and modesty, confessing to one's sins, seeking forgiveness for the past
disobediences and placing the forehead on the ground, everyday, for the
purpose of glorifying and venerating Him.

It is also intended that man always remains alert, his heart does not
get clouded by the dust of forgetfulness, he does not become arrogant
and heedless, but instead humble and submissive, and becomes more
desirous of worldly and religious bounties.

In addition to this, the regular remembrance of Allah throughout the
day, achieved as a result of prayers, causes man not to become forgetful
and heedless of his Lord, Sustainer and Creator, and he is not overcome
by the spirit of rebelliousness. It is this attention towards Allah and
standing in His presence that restrains man from disobedience and
prevents corruption and depravity.”[^30] and [^31]

7. Why should we offer prayers at prescribed times?
---------------------------------------------------

Some people say: “We do not deny the philosophy behind the prayers and
nor do we refute its importance or its educative effects, but what is
the need for it to be offered at prescribed times?  Would it not be
better if the people were left free - each one to perform this
obligation as per his leisure and opportunity, and his mental and
spiritual preparedness?”

Experience shows that if educative issues are not regulated by means of
strict discipline and stipulations, many individuals tend to become
forgetful of them and their very foundation becomes shaky and unstable.
Such issues ought to be governed by means of strict discipline and
specific timings so that no one possesses any excuse for abandoning
them. It is particularly so in view of the fact that the performance of
these acts at prescribed times and more especially, when performed in a
congregation, possesses grandeur, magnificence and effect, which cannot
be denied. They are actually a huge lesson for human development.[^32]

[^1]: Minor ritual ablution (Tr.)

[^2]: Major ritual ablution (Tr.)

[^3]: Wasa\`il ash-Shia, vol. 1, pg. 257

[^4]: Ceremonial uncleanness (Tr.)

[^5]: The tradition of Imam 'Ali Ibn Musa al-Riza (a.s) probably alludes
to this issue when it states: لِأَنَّ الْجَنَابَةَ خَارِجَةٌ مِنْ كُلِّ
جَسَدِهِ فَلِذٌلِكَ وَجَبَ عَلَيْهِ تَطْهِيرُ جَسَدِهِ كُلِّهِ‏.

[^6]: “The 'janabat' comes out from his entire body and hence it is
obligatory for him to wash his entire body.” Wasa\`il ash-Shia, vol. 1,
pg. 466.

[^7]: Ablution with earth (Tr.)

[^8]: Suratul Maidah (5), Verse 6; فَتَيَمَّمُوا صَعِيداً طَيِّباً (Tr.)

[^9]: Pure (Tr.)

[^10]: Earth. (Tr.)

[^11]: Rising or ascending (Tr.)

[^12]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 3, pg. 400

[^13]: There is no doubt that there exists a comparatively great
separation between وُجُوهَكُمْ and أَرْجُلَكُمْ making the
superimposition upon it to appear remote. Apart from this, a great
number of Qur'an reciters have also recited the word أَرْجُلَكُمْ with
(ل) possessing the kasrah (the vowel point for 'i').

[^14]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 4, pg. 285

[^15]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 415

[^16]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 485

[^17]: Majma' al-Bayan, under the discussion regarding verse 45 of
Suratul 'Ankabut.

[^18]: Ibid.

[^19]: Suratul Ra'd (13), Verse 28

[^20]: Surat Taha (20), Verse 14

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 82, pg. 200

[^22]: Wasa\`il ash-Shia, vol. 3, pg. 7 (Chapter 2 from The Chapters
(regarding) the number of (obligatory) prayers, tradition 3)

[^23]: Nahj al-Balagha, saying 252

[^24]: Ibid., saying 136

[^25]: Ibid., letter 47

[^26]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, pg. 317 & 320

[^27]: Ibid., vol. 84, pg. 318

[^28]: Standing in Salat. (Tr.)

[^29]: Sitting in Salat. (Tr.)

[^30]: Wasa\`il ash-Shia, vol. 3, pg. 4

[^31]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 16, pg. 284

[^32]: Ibid., vol. 4, pg. 105


