Fasting
=======

8. What is the philosophy of fasting?
-------------------------------------

There are various aspects associated with fasts and they also possess
numerous physical and spiritual benefits. These tend to have a great
impact upon man - the most important of them being their ethical aspect
and their educative philosophy.

Some of their important benefits are that they make man's soul kind,
strengthen his determination and moderate his instincts.

When an individual fasts, despite his hunger and thirst, he must stay
away from food, water and sexual pleasures and prove practically that he
is not an animal within a stable, but an entity that can rein in his
wild soul and overcome his lust and carnal desires.

In fact, the most important philosophy of fasting is this spiritual
effect; man, who has a variety of food and drinks at his disposal and
can reach out for them the moment he experiences thirst or hunger, is
like the trees that grow near the rivers, seeking support of the walls
of the gardens. These fondled and pampered trees possess less resistance
and are short-lived. If water does not reach them for a few days they
immediately dry up and wither away. In contrast, the trees which grow
between the rocks on the mountains or in the deserts and which are
pampered from their incipience by strong storms, scorching rays of the
sun and harsh winters, and are deprived of luxuries, are strong, durable
and highly resistant!

Fasts act in a similar way with man's soul, granting it - in exchange
for temporary restrictions - a strong determination, steadfastness, and
the ability to face up to hardships and severe occurrences. Since it
controls the unruly instincts, it makes man's heart pure and luminous.

In short, fasts heave man out of the world of animals and elevate him
into the realm of angels, and the expression**:**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…so that you may guard (against evil).”***

in verse 183 of Suratul Baqarah[^1], while mentioning the philosophy
behind the fasts, also bears an allusion to all of the above realities.

The well-known tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّوْمُ جُنَّةٌ مِنَ النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The fast is a shield against the fire (of Hell)”[^2] is also a
reference to this issue.

In another tradition from Imam 'Ali (a.s) we read that some companions
asked the Noble Prophet (s.a.w): “What should we do to keep the Satan
away from us?”  He (s.a.w) replied: “Fasting blackens the face of the
Satan; charity in the way of Allah breaks his back; befriending someone
for the sake of Allah and persevering in performing good deeds cuts his
roots and seeking forgiveness severs the vein of his heart.”

In Nahjul Balagha, while explaining the philosophy of the various acts
of worship, the Commander of the Faithful (a.s), says regarding fasting:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الصِّيَامَ ابْتِلاَءً لِإِخْلاَصِ الْخَلْقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah ordered the observance of fasts for fostering (the attribute of)
sincerity within the people).”[^3]

In another tradition of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w), we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لِلْجَنَّةِ بَاباً يُدْعَى الرَّيَّانَ لاَ يَدْخُلُ مِنْهُ
إِلاَّ الصَّائِمُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Paradise has a door by the name of 'Rayyan' (the sated one) and none
shall enter Paradise through it except those who fast.”

The late Sheikh Saduq, explaining this tradition in his book Ma'ani
al-Akhbar, says: “The reason for selecting this particular name for this
door of Paradise is that the maximum inconvenience suffered by people
who fast is caused by thirst; when they pass through this door, they
shall be quenched in a manner that they shall never experience any
thirst ever again.”[^4]

### The Social Effects of Fasting

The social effects of fasts are evident. Fasts impart the message of
equality amongst the individuals of the society. By acting upon this
religious obligation the affluent ones not only get first hand
experience of the hunger of the hungry and the impoverished ones of
society, but economizing on their daily food also serves to benefit
them.

Yes, it is possible to draw the attention of the affluent ones towards
the state of the hungry and the deprived ones by describing their
conditions to them, but if this aspect were to be experienced
physically, the effects would be all the more noticeable. The fasts
provide a personal experience to this important social issue.

It is for this reason that it has been narrated that when Hisham b.
Hakam sought to know the reason for the legislation of fasting, Imam
as-sadiq (a.s) replied: “Fasting has been made obligatory in order to
establish equality between the rich and the poor; the rich experience
the pangs of hunger and thus fulfil their obligations with respect to
the poor.

Usually, the rich can attain whatever they covet; Allah desires that
there exists equality between His servants thereby making the rich
experience hunger, pain and trouble so that they may exhibit mercy upon
the hungry and the destitute.”[^5]

If the wealthy nations of the world were to fast for just a few days in
the year and experience the pangs of hunger, would there still exist any
hungry people in the world?

### The Medical and Curing Effects of Fasting

The miraculous effect of abstinence (from food) in curing various
diseases has been established in modern as well as ancient medicine. It
is a fact which just cannot be denied and one would be hard pressed to
find a doctor who does not refer to this fact in the course of his
writings. We all know that the cause of a great number of diseases is
extravagance in the consumption of various types of food.

This is because the unabsorbed components either accumulate in the form
of obtrusive fat particles at various locations within the body, or
remain within the blood stream as fat and surplus sugar. These
superfluous components, between the muscles of the body, are in fact the
perfect breeding grounds for microbes and infectious diseases. In this
state, the best way to combat these diseases is to do away with these
breeding grounds by means of abstinence (from food) and fasting! 
Fasting burns away the refuse and thus cleanses the body.

In addition, it also provides a noticeable and vital respite to the
digestive system and serves as an effective factor in tuning-up this
process, especially in the light of the fact that this structure is the
most sensitive of all the systems of the body and one which is in a
state of continuous operation all throughout the year.

It is clear that, as taught by Islam, the one who fasts should not
exhibit extravagance in consuming food during sahar[^6] and iftar[^7],
in order that he derives the maximum benefit medically, otherwise, it is
possible that the results might have a negative effect.

Alexis Sophorin, the Russian scientist, writes in his book: “Treatment
by means of fasting possesses special benefits and is useful for curing
anaemia, weakness of the intestines, acute and chronic inflammation,
internal and external abscesses, tuberculosis, sclerosis, rheumatism,
gout, dropsy,  sciatica, (peeling of the skin), diseases of the eyes,
sugar disorders, skin diseases, kidney and liver problems, and other
diseases.”

The abovementioned diseases are not the only ones that can be treated by
means of abstinence of food, rather diseases that are associated with
the very foundation of the body and are intertwined with its very cells,
such as cancer, syphilis, tuberculosis and plague can also be treated by
this means.[^8]  
 In a well-known tradition, the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَصُومُوا تَصِحُّوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Fast, in order that you become healthy.”[^9]

In another well-known tradition, he (s.a.w) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْمِعْدَةُ بَيْتُ كَلِّ داَءٍ وَ الْحَمِيَّةُ رَأْسُ كُلِّ دَواَءٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The stomach is the house of all maladies and abstinence (from food) is
the best of all cures.”[^10][^11]

[^1]: يا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الصِّيامُ كَما
كُتِبَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ‏ (Tr.)

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 96, Verse 256

[^3]: Nahj al-Balagha, saying 252

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 96, pg. 252

[^5]: Wasa\`il ash-Shia, vol. 7, the first chapter of The Book of Fasts,
pg. 3

[^6]: The time before beginning the fast. (Tr.)

[^7]: The time of breaking the fast. (Tr.)

[^8]: Ruzeh: Rawish-e-Nuween Baraai Darmaan-e-Bimaarihaa, pg. 65 (First
edition)

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 96, pg. 255

[^10]: Ibid., vol. 14

[^11]: Tafsir-e-Namunah, vol. 1, pg. 628


