Introduction
============

***"And say to the believing women that they lower their gaze and guard
their private parts and do not display their adornment save what is
apparent of it; and let them wear their head-coverings over their
bosoms..."*** ***(Holy Qur’an, 24:31).***

Islam recorded a great turning point in the history of woman which has
no rival to this day. Through it, she regained her honour and rights of
which she had been deprived for centuries under the burdens of unjust
views of the pre-Islamic era of Ignorance (*Jahiliyah*). Islam restored
her full rights to lead a noble life under the shadow of a glorious
civilized system.

For the first time in history, woman was able to enjoy her lofty human
rights, according to Islamic laws and legislation. Injustices was
removed from her and she could live as a human being having dignity,
honour and rank equal to man. This right was to be practised within the
limits of the Almighty Allah Who gave woman capabilities and prepared
for her a natural opportunity to participate in the building of life,
glory, establishing truth and spreading good.

This concept may remain as mere hopes and dreams to some people if it is
not supported by the terms of the Holy Qur'an and the traditions of the
Prophet and his infallible descendents (*Ahlul-Bait*) (peace and
blessings of Allah be with them all).

The society of *Jahiliayh* insisted on considering woman as a target for
curses, a focal point for evil thoughts of the devil, or comparing her
to an animal created in the form of a human being. Once the Holy Qur'an
was came, it declared the falsity of these opinions which contradicted
truth and reality.

It emphasized strongly that man and woman are twins gathered from one
source and essence.  
 0  
***"Oh people! Be careful of (your duty to) your Lord, Who created you
from a single being and created its mate of the same (kind) and spread
from these two, men numerous and women;..."*** ***(Holy Qur’an, 4:1).***

***"He it is Who created you from a single being, and of the same (kind)
did He make his mate, that he might incline to her;..."*** ***(Holy
Qur’an, 7:189).***

***"And Allah has made wives for you from among your selves, and has
given you sons and grandchildren from your wives,..."*** ***(Holy
Qur’an, 16:72).***

After declaring clearly the place of woman in life and human existence,
the Holy Qur'an attacks strongly the custom of burying one's daughter
alive (*wa'id*)[^1].

***"And when the female baby buried (alive) is asked, for what sin she
was killed,..."*** ***(Holy Qur’an, 81:8-9)***  
 It also ended the age in which woman was prevented from marriage unless
she paid a ransom to redeem herself or to be unjustly inherited after
her death.

***"O you who believe! it is not lawful for you that you should take
women as heritage against (their will), and do not straiten them in
order that you may take part of what you have given them, ..."***
***(Holy Qur’an, 4:19).***

It also removed their abasement and mistreatment by men.  
 Thus the Holy Qur'an placed more emphasis on dealing with them kindly:

***"...and treat them kindly; then if you hate them, it may be that you
dislike a thing while Allah has placed abundant good in it."*** ***(Holy
Qur’an, 4:19).***

In the past, poverty led some people to kill their children, the female
particularly enduring such burdens, so the Holy Qur'an removed this
(away from her):

***"...and do not slay your children for (fear of) poverty; We provide
for you and for them;..."*** ***(Holy Qur’an, 6:151).***

Islam declares that the foundation of honouring does not depend upon
manhood but on righteous deeds and faith (in Allah). Whoever does an act
achieves its results whether it be a man or a woman:

***"Surely the men who submit and the women who submit, and the
believing men and the believing women, and the obeying men and the
obeying women, and the truthful men and the truthful women, and the
patient men and the patient women, and the humble men and the humble
women, and the almsgiving men and the almsgiving women, and the fasting
men and the fasting women, and the men who guard their private parts and
the women who guard, and the men who remember Allah much and the women
who remember, Allah has prepared for them forgiveness and a mighty
reward."*** ***(Holy Qur’an, 33:35).***

Islam also insists that the believers are guardians of each other. They
spread goodness among themselves and bid to what is right and forbid
what is wrong and evil.

***"And (as for) the believing men and the believing women, they are
guardians of each other. they enjoin good and forbid evil and keep up
prayer and pay the poor-rate (zakat) and obey Allah and His Messenger;
(as for) these, Allah will show mercy to them;…"(Holy Qur’an, 9:71).***

Islam is firm in clarifying the nature of the relation between man and
woman in the framework of marriage.

***"...they are an apparel for you and you are an apparel for
them..."(Holy Qur’an, 2:187).***

***"And one of His signs is that He created mates for you from
yourselves that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love
and compassion;…"(Holy Qur’an, 30:21).***

Besides making laws for the rights of a woman, indeed the Holy
Legislation clearly brings attention to the necessity of honouring,
taking care of her and giving her, her full rights.  
 The Prophet of Allah, Muhammad (s.a.w.) says:

*"None would respect women except the magnanimous ones, and none would
insult them except the ignoble ones."*[^2]

*"Treaty our children equally concerning gifts (offers), so if I were
obliging, surely I would prefer women."*[^3]

*"I do not think that a man gets better in faith without loving women
better."*[^4]

In addition, there are many other holy texts which call for placing
woman in her natural position in the life of society.

Islam also gave other importance to woman. It shaped for her a special
dress in order to keep her dignity and preserve her personality against
loss and corruption. Islam achieved for woman, through *hijab* (Islamic
dress), two main things:

**First,** it kept her ideological role while performing her legislative
responsibility by presenting the needed services for the society,
progress and Islamic message and also her active participation in the
course of life around her according to the legislative limits which
Islam made clear.

**Second,** it protected the purity of woman and closed the way to any
action which might exploit and lead her to fall into the marshes of
vices; or change her to an instrument used to melt the society around
her - as happened in Modern Europe. In addition to what *hijab* achieves
of modesty and maintenance for woman and Islam aspires for lowering the
gaze and forbidding the wanton mixing with non-*mahram* men and women
and other principles, we will see to what extent Islam strives towards
protecting man and woman, and the whole society, against the spread of
vice, and a foolish and useless life.

Regarding these principles and decrees, the Almighty Allah says:

***"Say to the believing men that they cast down their gaze and guard
their private parts; that is purer for them; surely Allah is Aware of
what they do. And say to the believing women that they cast down their
gaze and guard their private parts and not display their ornaments
except what appears thereof, and let them wear their head-coverings over
their bosoms, and not display their ornaments except to their husbands
or their fathers, or the fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or
the sons of their husbands, or their brothers, or their brother's sons,
or their sisters' sons' or their women' or those whom their right hands
possess, or the male servants void of sexual stimulant, or the children
who have not attained knowledge of what is hidden of women; and let them
not strike their feet so that what they hide of their ornaments may be
known; and turn (repentant) to Allah all of you, oh believers! so that
you may be successful."*** ***(Holy Qur’an, 24: 30-31).***

Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds and may peace and blessings of
Allah be with Muhammad and his holy family.

**Al-Balagh Foundation**

Vocabulary Used In The Research
-------------------------------

1. ***Woman's veil in pre-Islamic era (Jahiliyah):*** It means to
prevent a woman from participating in public life and denying her
rights.

2. ***Islamic Hijab:*** Islamic mode of dressing which covers the whole
body of a woman with the exception of her face and hands.

3. **Mahram:** It means the relatives of a man or woman with whom
marriage is forbidden like one's parents, brothers, sisters, uncles,
aunts, nephews, nieces, grandparents, grandchildren and in laws.

4. ***Ajnabi or ajnabiyah*** (their plurals are *ajanib* and
*ajnabiyat*): They are those other than the above-defined categories
with whom marriage is allowed, for example cousins or other relations
and strangers. Or they are those with whom there is no legal obstacle
for marriage.

[^1]: Wa'id in Arabic means to bury girl children alive, Arabs, during
the pre-Islamic era of Jahiliyah, practised this custom and used
different ways to do it, Once Islam came, it abolished this heinous
practise and prevented them from doing it forever.

[^2]: Islam wa al-mar'ah (Islam and Women). Saeed Afghani quoting from
Tirmidhi.

[^3]: Ibid., Jami' al-Saghir.

[^4]: Man la yahdroho al-Faqih, Sheikh Saduq, vol. 3, chap. 103, Hub al-
Nisa'.


