Islamic Hijab: its Form and Meaning
===================================

Woman was greatly afflicted in two ways which were the main source of
different evils, sufferings and injustices that happened to her during
history.

Firstly, woman was considered as a humiliated being owned by men in
order to achieve their sexual enjoyment, and at the same time, she was
not more than a factory to produce offspring. She was compared to a
vessel for holding embryos. Other descriptions regarding woman were:
considering her as a devil in human form or the source of disobedience
in the existence.. etc. The natural results of all these views was only
to humiliate enslave, usurp her rights and prevent her from
participating in general life.

Indeed, the history of woman is filled with pictures of torture,
sufferings and injustices which afflicted her as we will explain in the
following pages of this study.

Secondly, woman was viewed as an instrument used for sex, enjoyment and
material profit. This outlook about woman came into existence with the
birth of modern European civilization. If the old outlook on woman was
to consider her as a degraded and humiliated creature, treating her with
repression by confiscating her freedom, the modern *Jahiliyah* deals
with her from the point of giving rein to sexual freedom.

Different means are used including education, schools, cinemas, some
philosophies' legislation, the internal systems of political parties in
Europe and the West in order to implant this outlook and deepen it. It
passed many rounds on its way to in spreading sexual disturbance which
led not only to the destruction of woman's personality, but also the
destruction of the family and the loss of human values in those
societies. Among the phenomenon of these afflictions is to undress women
and push them towards libido without caring for ethical and legal
barriers.

All these injustices, sufferings and the destruction of her personality,
which happened to her during human history, came about in two ways: The
*Ancient Jahiliyah* way and the *Modem Jahiliyah* way.

Woman has not been so lucky, during history, to receive a message that
protects her dignity, balance and respect for her position in society
other than the Islamic message, the message of the Almighty Allah, Lord
of the worlds. Thus, *hijab*, adopted by this great message, is one of
the confirmations of the Divine Care for this honoured creature as we
will see.

Two Concepts on the Hijab of a Woman
------------------------------------

Regarding the *hijab* of a woman and its relation to general life around
her, two main concepts appeared over the centuries which involved the
term *hijab*.

The Pre-Islamic Concepts of Hijab
---------------------------------

Ancient *Jahiliyah* cast its burden on history before the appearance of
Islam and women experienced a major portion of the injustice of those
times. Then a harsh and rigorous picture of *hijab* existed in which
woman was deprived of her rights to the extent that under the pressure
of this miserable and ignorant civilization she was considered only a
commodity to be bought and sold. She was deprived of her human values
and transposed to a material thing used by men for enjoyment or
sometimes used as a slave.

Whatever has been said concerning the allegations which led men, in
these ancient societies, to confiscate the existence of woman
completely, whether being imposed by economic, sexual or spiritual
causes, the fact remains that the exploitation of a woman and
deprivation of her rights, the confiscation of her humanity reached a
point where it became difficult for modern man to imagine.

The injustices which poured on women alternated between the phenomenon
of the *harem* and *wa'id* and what is between them of unjust concepts
and attitudes became numerous.

Some considered woman as a satan wearing the skin of a human in order to
serve man alone and achieve his enjoyment through her as Ancient
*Jahiliyah* believed.

Still others considered her body as a body of human and her soul as a
soul of an animal. This view was prevalent in Europe before its
Industrial Revolution.

It is for you, our dear reader, to imagine the immense tragedies which
happened to woman while she was considered a satan or an animal or a
commodity to be sold like any other material.

These are some true examples of woman's sufferings that were practically
experienced and depended on such unjust illogical ideologies.

The Holy Qur'an mentions some of the suffering of woman under the burden
of *Jahiliyah* society of the Arabs and which was strongly condemned by
Islam.

***"And when a daughter is announced to one of them his face becomes
black and he is full of wrath. He hides himself from the people because
of the evil of that which is announced to him. Shall he keep it with
disgrace or bury it (alive) in the dust? Now surely evil is what they
judge."(Holy Qur’an, 16:58-59).***

***"And do not kill your children for fear of poverty; We give them
sustenance and yourselves (two); surely to kill them is a great
wrong."(Holy Qur’an, 17:31)***

***"And When the female-y buried alive is asked, for what Sin she was
killed,..."*** ***(Holy Qur’an, 81:8-9)***

A Prophetic tradition says:  
*"A man named Qais bin Asim al-Timimy came to the presence of the
Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) and said: 'I buried all eight of my daughters
during Jahiliyah (the pre-Islamic period of ignorance)..."*[^1]

The pre-Islamic history of ignorance of the Arabs is illustrated
below:  
 "Burying female children was carried out in different miserable
conditions; the infant was buried alive! They used diverse ways in
practising this custom. If a girl was born to one of them, they kept her
for six years. Then, her father ordered for her to be perfumed and
beautified on the pretext of taking her to one of her relatives! A well
was already prepared for her in the desert. When she reached the well,
her father told her to look at it and then pushed her into it and threw
dust and soil over her!

"Others used this way: The mother, during the time of her delivery, went
and sat over a pit. If the newborn was a daughter, she dropped her into
the pit and filled it with dust. If it were a boy, she would take him
home!

"Those who did not want to bury their daughters, kept them humiliated
until they reached the age when they would be able to shepherd. Then
they were dressed in a woollen robe and sent to the desert to shepherd
camels!

"Those who did not prefer to send her to shepherd, used other means to
humiliate her personality by using wickedness against her. "For example,
if the girl grew up and wanted to marry and after her marriage if her
husband died, her guardian would come and dressed her in a special
garment which meant that she had no right to marry anyone unless her
guardian agreed. Thus, she was forced into marriage against her will! If
her guardian did not want to marry her, she would be imprisoned until
she died and then he would inherit her. If she wanted to save herself
from this state, she had to give some ransom to free herself.

"Others set women free on the condition that she should not marry anyone
except with her guardian's permission or she should pay a ransom. Others
imprisoned widows and kept her for one of their children until he grew
up and married her.

"Concerning a female orphan, they kept her with them and prevented her
from marriage with the hope of marrying her when their wives died or
made her marry one of their children wishing for her wealth and
beauty..."[^2]

The Greeks considered woman as an unqualified person who had no right to
practise any lawful disposals.[^3]

Even some Greek philosophers regarded the confinement of the name of
woman inside the home like the imprisonment of her body. Yosteen, the
famous Greek orator said:"We take wives only to give birth to our legal
children."

"Concerning the Romans, the Roman woman was considered as a cheap
property possessed by man. They treated her as they wished. A meeting
was held in one of the assemblies in Rome in order to discuss women's
affairs. In the end they decided that she was only an existence without
a soul and she did not inherit the life of the Hereafter. She is only a
filth and she should not eat meat nor should she laugh or talk. It was
obligatory for her to spend her time in serving and obeying.

"Some members of the Roman Assembly for Educators adopted a law which
forbids woman from possessing more than a half ounce of gold. She should
wear clothes of different colours and should not ride a coach more than
a mile outside Rome except in the case of some general festivals."[^4]

European history speaks about Greece and says that a Greek man sometimes
collected hundreds of women in his home. [^5]

The ancient history of Iran also mentions events and numbers similar to
those of Arabian *Jahiliyah* and old European civilization. If there is
any difference between the two, it is only in details. For instance,
consider the following: "In Ancient Iran no one secured his women
against others."[^6]

"Khosrow Parviz (a Sassanian ruler) possessed about 3000 women in his
harem and was never satisfied sexually. Whenever he desired to replenish
his harem, he would write letters to his governors wherein he would
describe the perfect and beautiful women he wanted. They, then, sent him
any women who fits his description."[^7]

In Europe, in its middle ages, it was believed that:  
 Woman represented not only the spring of disobediences and the source
of all evils and corruptions; but also the origin of human tragedies.
She was the cause of the misery for inhabitants of the earth. The
Christian's attitude towards women was explicitly explained by one of
the first popes called Tirtoliyan in the middle ages. He gave the
distorted opinion of Christianity about woman, "She was the entrance
used by Satan to enter man's soul. She was the reason that man was
pushed towards the prohibited tree (meaning the tree in the Garden of
Eden), violating the law of God, and disfiguring the image of God, that
is, woman."[^8]

The British philosopher, Herbert Spinser, says in his book, Describing
Sociology, about the status of woman in the Middle Ages:  
*"In fact, in Britain, the wife was sold during the 11th century and the
courts, belonging to churches in this century, legislated a law which
the husband had the right to transfer or loan his wife to an other man
for a limited time."*[^9]

Indeed, these disgraceful attitudes against woman were followed by
fearful actions, imprisoning her at home and veiling her from life,
historically called the veil of woman, i.e. to veil her from
participating in life and preventing her from enjoying her legal natural
rights.

This kind of black ideological veil *hijab* of woman, in Ancient
*Jahiliyah*, and in all the world including Iran, India, Egypt, Europe,
and Arab lands is the one which showed this figured picture of woman to
the callers of freedom of woman. *Hijab*, which Islam calls for, is
unlike the *hijab* of the period of the harem, *wa'id* and slave trade
from which women suffered.

The Islamic Concept of Hijab
----------------------------

Surely, the concept of *hijab* adopted by Islam differs completely from
the *hijab* which was introduced by the civilizations of *Jahiliyah*
including the miserable social phenomena which were existed in the
palaces of some Ummayad and Abbasid rulers concerning the exploitation
of women in order to achieve their own enjoyment.

Even the term *hijab* did not enter the ideological life of Muslims
except recently. Whatever has been said about woman, the fact remains
that Islam's aspiration for protecting her through shaping a special
dress for her shows Islam's honuor and respect for her and her dignity,
cleanliness and purity.

In Islam and its right message, there never exists any law or regulation
which prevents woman from participating in the aspects of life nor
imprisoning her at home like the civilization of the period of
*Jahiliyah*. Even this word *hijab* is newly used in Islamic
thought.[^10]

In addition to the special dress worn by woman while moving outside her
home - as we will explain later on - Islam also uses the term *sitir*
(screen) for this action.

Islam made it obligatory for both men and women to cast down their eyes
for others than their wives, husband or harem. On one hand, Islam makes
it obligatory for woman to wear *hijab*, on the other hand, it imposes
certain obligations for men too.

If a special dress is limited for woman to hide the fascinations
(beauties) of her body; on the other side it also imposes that men lower
their eyes to women others than their *mahram* women in addition to
guarding their private parts.

In agreement with this new use of the word *hijab* as a definition
within and Islamic context, it is correct for us to say: Islamic veil
includes both men and women; but its essence differs in the form that
preserves morals, protects virtue and respects woman in daily life.
Islam has nothing to do with imprisonment, or preventing woman from
exercising her natural right and there is no insult or degradation for
woman in its criteria and schemes.

It is honour for Islam that the establishment of its civilized practice
was a conviction for the end of the movement of exploitation and
enslavement which was practised by men against women in the period of
*Jahiliyah*, which blackened the history of man before the rising of the
blessed mission of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.).

The Islamic *hijab* is defined briefly as the shape of a modest dress in
addition to the limitation of the relation between men and women other
than the non-*mahram* (one who is marriageable) women and placing her in
a pure legal frame entwined with chastity, respect and giving rights.

[^1]: Majma' al-Bayan, Sheikh Tabrasi, vol. 5, Irfan Printing House,
Saida, 1937, p.442.

[^2]: Dhilal al-Qur'an, Shahid Sayyid Qotb, vol. 8, p. 479. Dar Ihya'
al-Turath al-Arabi, 1971, Beirut.

[^3]: Al-Mar'afi Jami' al- Adyan wa al-Usur, Muhammad Abdullah Maqsud,
p. 38, Quoting it from the book Woman During History, p. 41.

[^4]: Ibid., quoting from the book The Right of a Husband Upon His Wife
and the Right of a Wife Upon Her Husband, Taha Abdullah Afifi, p 12-13.

[^5]: Nidham Huquq al-Mar'a fi al-Islam, Shahid Sheikh Murtadha
Mutahhari, p,269, 1st edition, 1404 A, H., Tehran.

[^6]: Mas'alat al-Hijab, Shahid Murtadha Mutahhari, p.49, 1st ed., 1407
A. H. Tehran.

[^7]: Ibid., p, 87 quoting from the book Iran During the Sassanian
Period

[^8]: Majalat al-Ifaf No. 9, p.25.

[^9]: Al-Mar'a fi Jamii' al-Adyan wa al-Usur, Muahammad Abdullah Maqsud,
p.48.

[^10]: Mas'lat al-Hijab, Shahid Murtadha Mutahhari.


