Why Hijab?
==========

We hope that a perfect clarity is made concerning the difference between
the *hijab* adopted by *Jahiliyah* civilization in its dealing with
woman and the *hijab* adopted by Islam as a protective shield for woman
against aggression and attacks against her dignity by the followers of
sick inclinations.

What remains for us is to specify the central motives upon which Islam
depended in legislating the law of a modern dress according to the
limits of the Merciful Allah on His servants.

For the sake of clarifying the central motives without expatiation, we
mention the following points:  
 First, regarding the relation between man and woman, two theories are
suggested:

Theory one allows that man may sexually enjoy any woman in the society -
this has nothing to do with adultery.

Theory two restricts man's right for enjoyment to the women with whom he
has a legal and lawful matrimonial relation, and without which it is
unlawful for him to take her for enjoyment sexually.

The first theory is the one practised today by European man-made
civilization.

The second theory is the theory of Islam regarding the relation between
man and woman.

This is the essence of the matter from which other details are derived.
All man's behavior towards woman is derived from the first theory which
relates to his sexual enjoyment of women by participating in parties,
gatherings with other than his wife/wives and the illegal mixing of the
two sexes, and imposing the state of adornment on women and its
publicity in society and other affairs related to it.

Concerning the Islamic theory, the following points are divided:

By the act of covering woman's body, except the two hands and face, from
the eyes and minds of men, other than her household, and not spending
time in idle talk and walking with men and the like, as well as the
prohibition of complete privacy with a man other than her household and
other affairs related to Islamic jurisprudence, the Islamic concept
concerning the natural relation between man and woman is a protection
and safeguard against indecency and corruption.

If we take into consideration the nature of the two opinions and their
results. surely we will come to the conclusion that Islam is greatly
covetous concerning the dignity of woman and her respectability, purity
and honour with the caution of not changing her to a salable ill-used
commodity for man in society.

Therefore, Islam is covetous for fixing and organizing sexual relations
and then strives towards closing the means used by those evil-minded
individuals for exploiting woman and achieving their enjoyment through
her as they wish.

Then the *Jahiliyah* theory being old or new, desires to set free
abandonment of these principles for the sake of men.

The problem with this outlook is based on the sake of man and his
interest even it seems that some profits are achieved for woman!!

If we also take into consideration the size of profits and gains which
men achieve sexually and economically under this theory, we will find
that the phenomenon of harem and the act of exploiting woman practised
in the period of *Jahiliyah* are the same which are practised today in
the name of an attractive guise that insults women.

The new limitation which is used by modern *Jahiliyah* in the hands of
women is different from the old one only in its covering and outside
appearance. It remains a fetter to bind her hands, forbid freedom, and
confiscate her will. So man ha made woman a captive and slave by using
different means for achieving man's aims through trading, brothels,
cinemas, television and radio, newspapers, and fashion.

Various masses of women began to contemplate what they suffered under
European civilization and there are a few just men who raise their
voices against the miserable tragedies of woman are subjected to in
Europe under the shadow of exploitation practiced by men.

Here are some examples showing man's exploitation of woman and the
miserable results:

In Britain, 9 out of 12 girls - below 20 years of age - are subjected to
rape and kidnapping. The security forces were able to catch 13% of the
criminals. The percentage of crimes increased by 84% in recent years;
whereas juvenile crimes increased by fivefold during the first half of
1975.[^1]

An Italian newspaper *Amica* disclosed the following exciting facts
concerning the crimes committed in its country: "In fact, an Italian
woman fears leaving her home in order not to expose her dignity to the
mad young men who wander the roads and streets and those who have no
work except attacking women and girls and kidnapping them with the aim
of robbery or sexual abuse...surely a woman refuses to accept any
honourable work which forces her to return home at night so as not to
expose her dignity and life to danger."[^2]

In another report disclosing the woman tragedy under the materialistic
culture, the American Association for Family Services says: "The
disintegration of the family, which has reached an epidemic stage, tops
the list of social problems. Every year more than one million persons
are separated or divorced, which is sevenfold higher in percentage
compared with that of a century ago.

The number of illegitimate children increased three times compared to
1938, and each year 4 million illegitimate births are registered in the
U.S.A. Regarding the problem of the corruption of the youth, which has a
close relation with divorce, statistics doubled three times more than
those of 1940."

Another report says: "The U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
reports that in murder cases within families, the husbands are mostly
the murderers of their wives; and in 15% of family crimes the children
are the victims of their parents."

According to recent statistics released by UNESCO, "60% of the
housewives in the U.S.A. and Europe feel discontented, disappointed, and
miserable."[^3]

Dr. Homer, a Swede, when asked by the United Nations to study the status
of women in Arab countries in 1975, announced: "It is the Swedish woman
who should demand her freedom, as the woman in the Arab countries has
already reached the peak of her freedom under Islam." She added: "the
Swedish woman tries these days to have this year announced as 'The
International Year of the Woman,' and then declare another year for the
man, so that he may extract his rights from the women."

Dr. Homer continues in her report by saying: "25% of Swedish women
suffer from psychological and nervous sicknesses, and 40% of Sweden's
income is spent on these diseases caused by the so-called freedom which
the Swedish woman attained and which she is practising. In fact, the
tragedy of the Swedish woman is this very permissiveness which has taken
her to the edge of such a terrifying and perilous precipice."[^4]

The breakdown of family stability in Britain which has dramatically
increased the number of unmarried mothers, of unmarried people living
together and people living alone, is much to blame for these social
ills. According to figures published by the British Government on Jan.
14, 1988, the percentage of illegitimate births has soared from 4% in
the 1950s to 21% of all births in 1986, with the exception of Denmark
with 43%, Britain has the highest rate in Europe.

The statistics of social trends confirm that Britain has the highest
divorce rate in Europe and nearly twice the rate of France and West
Germany.

Between 1979 and 1985, it was found that the proportion of people
cohabiting without marriage nearly doubled. Some 15% of all single women
between the age of 18 and 49, including many divorced, were illicitly
cohabiting in 1985.

The breakdown in family life has also seen a rapid rise in the number of
people living alone. Nearly 25% of all households contained only one
person in 1986 compared with an average 10 persons in 1951!

The way the woman is treated in the western countries, which claim to be
the champions of freedom and equality, is evident from the International
Meeting on Women and Mass Media held in Athens, Greece, November 20,
1985.

One of the participants, Petra Kelly, a member of t he West German
Parliament, bitterly complained, "In Germany they treat us (German
women) like a minority, equal to invalids, the lower strata of society
and like children. They portray us pornographically and consider using
violence against us as natural. Every 15 minutes a woman is a victim of
rape."

The Meet urged the Greek Parliament to pass legislation banning the
exploitation of women on television. Though criticism of the
exploitation of women is fully justified, the women of these so-called
advanced countries are themselves to be blamed. If women did not consent
there would be no pornographic publications, sex films and nude
advertisements.

The following statistics reveal how alarming the family breakdown
epidemic has become in non-Muslim societies:

***France:***  
 One in four marriages end in divorce; in cities the rate may be as high
as 50%. Each year 600, 000 couples marry, 100, 000 choose to live
together without marriage and 100, 000 divorce.

***Canada:***  
 Almost 40% of first marriages end in divorce. The divorce rate doubled
between 1972 and 1982.

***The Former Soviet Union:***  
 About 70% of marriages break up in 10 years, according to *Moskovskaya
Pravda*, factors involved include drunkenness, lack of money and lack of
privacy.

***Central and South America:***  
 The UNESCO Courier stated that single-parent families are often created
by women migrating to the cities and having children in a series of
unstable unions. Due to alcohol abuse or the inability of husbands to
find adequate work locally, the family breaks up and mothers and
children are left in poverty.

The nations with the highest percentage of illegitimate births in the
world are in the Caribbean and in Central and South America.

***China:***  
 Although China's divorce rate is lower than most western nations, it
has risen 70% in 5 years. The *Peiking Review* reported that the divorce
rate is rising dramatically.

***United States:***  
 Half the marriages will probably end in divorce. Sixty percent of the
children born will spend part of their childhood in a single-parent
family.

***Japan:***  
 The divorce rate has doubled in the past 20 years. Before 1947, men
were allowed to evict their wives in the streets with only a short note
of divorcement. Now, about 70% of divorce cases are initiated by women.

***South Africa:***  
 The Coalition of South African Women's Rights says that one out of two
South African women is raped in their lifetime. This includes children
and even babies and old women!

***Britain:***  
 The divorce rate in the U.K. is the highest in western Europe. Nearly 1
out of 7 single women, age 18 to 49, lives with a man she has not
married.

The *Hospital Today*, a magazine of London, in its editorial of the
April 1975 issue, published a summary of the annual report of the
British Ministry of Health and Social Welfare. It says:"...Despite the
abundance of contraceptives and legalized abortion, it is noted that 86%
of the children are born to unmarried mothers! There is a further
serious problem. In 1973 the following cases were: 1 case of an
11-year-old pregnant girl; 6 cases of 12-year-old pregnant girls; 38
cases of 13-year-old pregnant girls; 255 cases of 14-year-old pregnant
girls. There were 166, 000 cases of legal abortion during the same year,
50% of which were by unmarried women."[^5]

Turning to the East, we find the decadence of society in the communist
world is no less hideousness as that in the capitalist world. The
magazine, *Interphase* in its April 1977 issue reports: "The grave
problem of the Soviet communist society is that out of every two
marriages one ends in divorce in most parts of western Russia. In
Moscow, for example, nearly 49% of the marriages ended in divorce after
the birth of the first child. In the Mavadansk region, the percentage of
divorce is as high as 72.9%. The Physicians, Conference, held at Moscow
University in 1975, called for urgent measures to tackle this grave
social problem, concerning the high divorce rate and the low birth
rate..."[^6]

It is worth noting that the said family problems are confined to the
non- Islamic regions of the previous Soviet Union. In spite of the many
years of communism's suppression of Islamic teachings in the Muslim
lands under the Soviets, Islam still exercises its influences on the
life and social conduct of the Muslims there, reducing family -
instability and the exploitation of women.

These miserable tragedies, and the like, form some fruits of the modern
European theory about the relation between a man and a woman.

For the sake of this, Islam takes measures to close the sources of
corruption in the life of people and to work, according to its concepts,
to stop the state of exploitation of women and the confiscation of their
rights and to establish dignity and honour in the life of people.

Thus, Islamic *Hijab* is among the most prominent terms used by the
Divine Authority to protect woman and make a clean human society.

We should address the current situation in many Muslim countries where
Western values have replaced Islamic ones. The societies of these
countries have discarded Islamic principles, including *hijab*, the
statistics of the West have followed. Divorce, prostitution, alcohol and
drug abase, and the beginnings of diseases such as AIDS are plaguing the
societies who have chosen to abandon their religious edicts. Illegal
relationships between boys and girls, men and women are becoming
accepted or at least unrestricted.

In Muslim countries where the society and the government remain loyal to
Islamic values, the occurrence of sexual crimes, indecency, divorce and
other social ills are noticeably less. The family structure remains
strong and healthy. The women have no fear of their environment and are
relatively safe to walk through their streets and bazaars.

Which theory is better then? Should we choose unlimited release, which
results in destruction and downfall, or the proposal which leads to the
preservation of society and which protects both man and woman without
making any difference even the supposition of the feeling of distress
from some protective procedures which follow the Islamic proposal?

Through social and psychological studies of the life of Man, a true
scientific fact is disclosed showing that Man enjoys two kinds of
natural needs (*jaw'ah*) in his entity:

**A.** There is a number of natural needs which impose themselves
spontaneously for stimulating without any external motives like the
instinct for the food and the instinct for the need of showing himself
to others, and love for ownership and the like.

**B.** Another kind of natural needs, inspite of their existence in man
and their activities, is able to be stimulated if other factors and
motives of stimulus are supplied from external human existence.  
 Among the prominent factors of these natural needs are: sexual
instinct, which is motivated by dissolute poems and literature,
seductive music, nudity and the like.

The upright Islam, the message of the Lord of the worlds the Creator,
Who is Aware of hidden affairs, is completely cognizant of the remote
factors which molded mankind, and the dangers against the movement of
human life if he goes out of the natural frame prepared for it and by
following it, the highest balances are achieved between these needs and
natural functions in all fields of human life.

According to Islam's awareness of these facts, it desires for not
stimulating these external instincts which are outside the frame of the
required balance.

To be harmonious with this desire, Islam puts various social, economic
and political schemes to work. These schemes provide a deep condition of
agreement between these internal human motives and the demands of the
individuals and the groups in which one lives.

The Islamic scheme in *hijab* and its fashioning the relation between
man and woman aims to keep the balance between man's demands on the one
side and its great desire for the purity, chastity and security of the
relation between the two sexes on the other. Thus, Islamic *hijab*
becomes a related foundation with the natural side of the human life in
addition to caring for morals and purity and organizations of social
life from the Islamic viewpoint.

Islam, through the modest *hijab* for woman, limits the nature of the
relations between the two sexes in a special way. It also deals with man
and woman together, limiting the responsibility for each of them towards
lawful execution. Woman is separated from man in responsibility inside
the framework of this scheme, only in *hijab* but they have the same
responsibility in other duties.

This is not to say that the role of man and woman in an Islamic society
are the same. They are not. A man shoulders the responsibility of
maintaining the family unit by his wealth and earnings, providing food,
shelter, clothing, medical care and general welfare for his household.
The woman is free to earn money and has full authority over that money,
but she is not required to finance her household.

A Muslim woman is responsible to care for and give proper training to
her children and to provide a peaceful and harmonious environment in
which the family unit may prosper and grow.

*Hijab* has an effect on the family unit as well as on the society. At
home where *hijab* is respected and honoured practically, family members
show kindness, helpfulness and peace towards one another. Because of the
separation of the two sexes of non-*mahrams*, crimes of a sexual nature
inside the family unit have no chance to fester as we witness all too
offer in Western families where incest has grown in such proportions
that it is almost taken for granted as common behaviour.

Islamic *hijab* provides much more than mere physical cover. It is a
cover that acts as a repellent of every kind of crime and vice which
destroys the individual and the society.

[^1]: Al-Qabas Newspaper, Kuwait, issued 6.2.1976, which also quotes
from an Italian Magazine Tempo.

[^2]: Ibid., 6-10-1976.

[^3]: Man and Religion, English version, 1st ed., p,81, Al-Balagh
Foundation quoting from a bulletin by Al-Iskanadariah University.

[^4]: Ibid., p.82.

[^5]: Ibid., p,84.

[^6]: Ibid.


