Responsibility of Hijab for Man and Woman
=========================================

Let us scrutinize the required important matters for both sexes in order
to specify the difference in responsibility between them concerning this
framework of Islamic *hijab*.  
 Both man and woman are responsible according to the following verse of
the Holy Qur'an:

***"Say to the believing men that they cast dawn their looks and guard
their private parts; that is purer for them; surely Allah is Aware of
what they do. And say to the believing women that they cast down their
looks and guard their private parts and not display their ornaments
except what*** ***appears there of, and let them wear their
head-coverings over their bosoms, and not display their or name except
to their husbands..."*** ***(Holy Qurâ€™an, 24:30-31).***

The great jurisprudents (*fuqaha*) have cited explanations for these
edicts:

**A.** A woman must cover her body and hair from the sight of
non-*mahram* man.

**B.** It is unlawful for a man to look at the body and hair of a
non-*mahram* woman with the exception of her face and hands. It is also
unlawful for a man to look her hair and this verdict is applied on a
woman concerning looking at men other than her father, son, uncle,
grandfather , brother and those related to them.

**C.** It is forbidden for a man to look at the details of the face of a
non-*mahram* women, or her hands with sexual desire and vice versa.

**D.** It is lawful for a man who wants to marry a woman to look at her
in order to be acquainted with her physical qualities and vice versa.

**E.** It is lawful for both a man and woman to look at the body of
their *mahrams* (except for the genital region) so long as it is not
with sexual desire, but to look with sexual desire, is forbidden
(*haram*) whether they are *mahram* or not.

**F.** It is obligatory for a woman to cover her body and hair from the
sight of a non-*mahram* men (i.e., those with whom she is legally
allowed to marry).

**G.** It is unlawful for a man to be alone with a non-*mahram* woman in
a place where nobody else can enter if they fear that they may commit
*haram* acts; but there is no objection for a man to be alone with a
non-*mahram* woman when other are not prohibited from entering the
place, even if the other are a mature rational child or in the state of
security from committing corruption.

**H.** It is unlawful for a non-*mahram* man to touch a non-*mahram*
woman nor a non-*mahram* woman may touch a non-*mahram* man such as
shaking hands and so forth.

**I.** If there is a necessity for a man to touch a woman, and vice
versa, such as medical cure or saving a drowning person, and there is no
a female doctor for the woman or a male doctor for man, it is lawful for
both sides to touch or look at the other side for tests, cure or the
like.

**J.** It is lawful for non-*mahram* men to hear the voice of
non-*mahram* women on condition that hearing should not be with sexual
desire or as a cause for committing *haram* acts and it is permitted for
a woman to make her voice heard through discourse or address by a
non-*mahram* man on condition that her voice should not mislead or
seduce listeners, because it is *haram* for a woman to talk to men in an
excited and agitating manner.

**K.** It is recommended for a woman to keep her beauty and elegance for
her husband because attractiveness and beauty represent an important
side in the life of woman and an essential source among the sources of
the happiness of matrimonial life.

**L.** It is forbidden for a woman to imitate men (by dress, actions or
behavior) and vice versa.

**M.** It is forbidden for a woman to perfume herself and go outside her
home, i.e. it is forbidden that her perfume is noticed by non-*mahram*
men while passing among them or mixing with them.

If we examine carefully these legal responsibilities which fall under
the frame of Islamic *hijab*, we will find that both men and women share
the task of responsibility regarding this rule, with the specification
concerning women in covering their body. This shows strongly that Islam
is aspires to establish clean relations between the two sexes; spread
purity and dignity among people; and safeguard the society with healthy
relations. It is not among its intentions to disgrace a woman's dignity
among people or prevent her from performing her role in life as it is
clear through the above mentioned laws concerning Islamic *hijab*.

If we want to judge strictly the matter of covering woman's body and we
have said it is correct to say that both men and women hold the same
task in the general framework of Islamic *hijab*, the question comes:
Why a woman alone bear the burden of covering her body and without man
to do so?

The fact, which no fair-minded person can doubt, is that the reason for
the specification of covering a woman's body alone relates to her
sentimental and physical qualities. Because the temptation side of woman
is much stronger than a man; she has the competent side for sensibility;
and she has instinctive tendencies for showing herself off. Thus,
ornaments and beautification are among her first specifications. If they
are unrestricted, she may cause, knowingly or unknowingly, and innocent
person to commit a *haram* act, thought or deed.

This natural characteristic of woman and which makes her more able to
attract, tempt and fascinate man towards herself, is the main reason
Islam tackles this point through *hijab*. Therefore, it is not normal to
ask a man to cover his body like her; whereas man in general does not
possess these specific characteristics, nor is he naturally prone to
decorate and beautify himself in order to draw attention of woman.
Still, Islam does require a man to dress in an appropriate manner so as
not to expose unnecessary parts of his body.

On the subject of attraction, two sure things exists, one in a woman and
one in a man. That which exists within a woman is the desire to show
herself off, it is a part of her nature. That which exists in a man is
an inclination towards looking, not just looking but flirting and
receiving pleasure from it. Both of these things exist. Will Durant says
that there is nothing in the world more firm and more persevering than a
man's desire to look at a woman.

It is also clear that men and women are sexually stimulated in different
ways. A woman, being a naturally sensitive and tender-hearted creature,
requires touching and tactile movements in order to stimulate her. A
man, on the other hand, is a much coarser creature, tough and virile
with a strong imagination. He can be stimulated by a mere look. A woman
covers herself to keep from showing off her body and the man cannot see
anything which will stimulate him sexually. How clever Islam is to adopt
*hijab* in society! So it completely conforms with the innate natures of
woman!

In accordance with this reality of attraction, we see that Islam also
forbids acts such as sodomy among men and lesbianism among women because
each of the two decrees has its own subject and background like other
legal decrees which rely on certain backgrounds necessary for them.  
 These are the true centres which addresses in order to build this
positive edict; the blessed Islamic *hijab*.


