Doubts Concerning Hijab
=======================

The question remains: Will the designers of progress share consciousness
of what they pretend concerning *hijab* that led to disable woman's
abilities towards development and paralyze her from rising against the
burdens of work in general life, and which disabled half of society?

Indeed, this miserable excuse is an extent to what was stirred up by the
agents of thinkers (ideologists) and politicians in the Muslim world
against woman's *hijab* which contradicts her freedom and hinders her
from achieving her wish to participate beside men in the world of
reality.

This stirring up requires that the origin of the problem should be
discussed, it is: Do the designers of progress originally believe
themselves when they propagate this rumor? What do they mean, in
reality, by the "freedom" of women?

If what is meant is to be free to express one's views; give one's
opinion; the freedom of possession; the freedom of choosing a suitable
husband; and the cultural freedom and what relates to it; there is no
obstacle in woman's *hijab* which stops her from enjoying these freedoms
and what relates to them?

Does *hijab* prevent women from seeking culture and knowledge or
competing in its diverse fields?

Does *hijab*, for example, prevent women from expressing their views and
ideas?

Does *hijab* intervene between woman and her right of possessing wealth?

It is proper to ask whether *hijab* originally has any relation to these
questions in reality and it is a matter which relates to the modesty of
woman, her dignity and the purity of her treatment with those around
her.

Economic ills and production levels are also affected by this question
of *hijab*. The wasted talents, energies and efficiency is apparent. Let
us suppose that there are two foundations or projects for production:

The first one deals with female workers who wear Islamic *hijab* and
conduct relations between non-*mahram* men and women in an Islamic
manner.

The second one deals with female workers who are seductively dressed and
adorned and follow the Western way of civilization in their relations
between the two sexes.

Surely, we see the foundation which observes *hijab* is hard working all
time for the sake of production and work, because of the nature of
relations between men and women.

While, on the other hand, we see in the second foundation, in which
flirtation and sexual discourses prevail, that much time and effort is
spent in the affairs imposed by fluidity and sexual excitement in that
imposed environment.

Let us suppose that there are two study halls:

• In the first one there are Islamic relations prevailing between the
young men and women, including Islamic *hijab*.

• The second hall is controlled by the free relations between young men
and women in which adornment is spread. What do we think, for each
example, regarding the performing of work and responsibility?! Is it
possible to describe the second hall as a serious place for studying?

In summary, has it not become clear that Islamic *hijab*, with its own
image and nature, has no negative reflection against the freedom of
woman nor her work nor her movement in general life.

It is true that if one imagines that *hijab* is the same as was used in
India, Iran, Egypt, and Europe during the pre-Islamic era "*Jahiliyah*"
in which they imprisoned women behind four walls, it is natural that she
thinks of herself as being deprived and hindered in her activities. The
result will be to disable half of the society or more. This is a matter
of fact which we should think about concerning the miserable conditions
for kind of *hijab* which hindered woman from general and social
movement. Islam condemns this kind of *hijab* of *Jahiliyah* and changed
it to a certain cover which includes clean and pure relations under the
name of *hijab*. There are great differences between the two kinds of
*hijab* as we have explained.

What the designers of progress imagine concerning *hijab* contradicts
the origin of the matter. The society, in which the disorder of sexual
relations prevail, is the main cause which hinders the abilities which
are, instead, spent in the affairs of sex, flirtation, and negligence
unlike the society in which clean relations are spread between the two
sexes.

Regarding their imagination about the abuse of the freedom of woman
under the shadow of modesty and purity which are brought about by
Islamic *hijab*; what they mean by freedom is the common sexual freedom
with all its dimensions of the adornment requirements which are spread
in all remote places and circumstances. Concerning other freedoms, they
do not think of, nor do they consider them in their logic based on
non-Islamic ideas.

Briefly, *hijab*, from the Islamic view, has no negative effects at all
against the freedom of woman nor her general movement no in her
participation in progress and making life around her active. The sane
logic considers Islamic *hijab* as providing great guarantees for the
freedom of woman and her dignity in addition to a larger participation
of woman in general social work and also in progress and development of
the society as a whole.

Beyond this, Islamic *hijab*, in its known form, gives woman her
personality and raises her position in society. People deal with a
modest woman, dressed in Islamic *hijab* from the point of view that she
is a human being. For a woman without *hijab*, people generally deal
with her from the point of view that she is a human being but through
her femininity and through what she stirs up in men by her exposed body.
Therefore, Islamic *hijab* will remain a weapon against affliction,
distress, fluidity and abuse.

It is worth mentioning here that in spite of Islam, staking great care
in covering a woman's body in front of non-*mahram* men; it also calls
for her to take suitable care for her beauty and body inside her home,
to enhance and respond to the demands of her femininity, which are
bestowed on her by Allah, the Most High, and also to achieve her lawful
wishes which are allowed by Islamic law.

While woman is restricted in showing off her body and adornments to the
general public, she is encouraged to beautify herself for her husband,
whereas she is not allowed to expose herself to men at large. She is in
fact, commended upon showing herself to her husband and to enjoy herself
with him totally.

Another point to mention is that the woman who observes the proper
Islamic *hijab* not only gains respect and dignity in the society and
from her family, but also she is pleasing Allah, the Most High, and
gaining rewards from His for her obedience to His religion. This is the
highest achievement for her. She is following Qur'an and traditions of
her Prophet; safeguarding the society from vice and corruption;
eliminating unhealthy thoughts and actions; raising work and production
levels and bringing purity and spirituality to the human race. All of
this she accomplishes, with little efforts, simply by the use of
*hijab*. The blessings she receives for this great deed can only be
speculated upon.

When she controls the tone of her voice, the movement of her body, the
manner of her behavior, and the hidden secrets of her person from those
who have no legitimate right to enjoy them, she is serving humanity in
untold dimensions.  
 This realm of responsibility that she shoulders brings about so many
sources of relief to her fellow beings, that it is easy to understand
how and why Islam has placed such importance on her. She is the backbone
of society and the foundation of man's growth as a human being. When she
becomes corrupted, she in turn corrupts the entire society.

When she is pure and guarded by the protection of *hijab*, the society
is protected as well.

Many of the social ills, diseases that plague the Western world, abuses
of drugs and alcohol, sexual deviations and other problems could be
cured if women were allowed to realize the concept of *hijab*. Of
course, in those societies, the idea is mass consumption, control of the
people's minds and oppression of their general well being and growth
toward perfection as they were created. These polluted and decadent
societies and the rulers behind them found the perfect way to achieve
their aims. They corrupted the women and therefore corrupted the people.


