Woman's Role in the Islamic Civilization
========================================

Quotations and Examples
-----------------------

The previous pages reflected the Islamic thesis about woman and *hijab*.
It is a conceptual view and a technical one.

What about the practical view? How has woman, in the Islamic history,
functioned in the society and what role has she actually played which
shows the high position Islam awarded her when she left the
superstitions and oppression of *Jahiliyah* behind her and donned the
Islamic *hijab*? In the following pages, we will look at some practical
confirmations of women who broke the chains of slavery and servitude of
man and adopted worship of the One True God, Allah, Most High.

Islam, itself, confirmed the wisdom of its laws in reality and they
remain a beacon for guidance toward the way of a glorious life which is
filled with goodness and firtility, offering virtue, glory and purity.
Since the light of Islam rose in the land of Arabia, the Muslim woman
shook off the dust of humiliation and enslavement and said farewell to
the days of imprisonment and burying girls alive. She began to live the
life designed by the revelation and laws of the Almighty Allah. She
began to participate in building a glorious society which was observed
by the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).

Thus, humanity became enlightened to this new environment shinning with
the light of prophethood. This way was first chosen by Khadijah bint
Khuwailid, the leader of the believers' mothers. She offered all her
wealth in order that the demands of the expenditure of Divine *Da'wah*
(missionary work and propagation of the religion), would be met in its
most severe and trying days of struggle with the idol worshippers of the
*Jahiliyah*. In fact, the financial support of He Holiness Khadijah
(a.s.), in those miserable circumstances, represented a keen weapon in
that cruel struggle between guidance and misguidance.

Indeed this honourable woman endured most of the material sufferings
because of her continuous support for the call to truth and the call of
the savior, Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.); and her firm stand as a believer
and a defender of the Message and the Messenger (s.a.w.).

From the first day of *da'wah* she was at the side of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) giving financial support, and more importantly, moral
inspiration, love and affection to this 'Gift to Mankind'. She was the
first to believe in him, defend him with her wealth and position, and
gave him comfort and ease in some of his most trying times.

The Commander of the Believers, Imam Ali (a.s.) refers to her position
in one of his sermons found in *Nahjul Balagha*. He says:

*"...every year he (Prophet) used to stay is the cave of Hira for some
time, and nobody used to be with him but I. None could then see or hear
him or be near him but I During those days Islam was the religion of
only the Prophet and his wife, Khadijah. I was the third of the trio.
Nobody else is this world had accepted Islam. I even then used to see
the divine light of revelation and smell the heavenly fragrance of
prophethood..."*[^1]

Other wives of the Holy Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.), after the death of
Her Holiness Khadijah (a.s.), also achieved great ranks in history. We
should not forget the role of Um-Salamah who memorized so many of the
traditions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.). Her regard and obedience to
truth and the right path is famous in the history of Muslims to the
extent that some of the *Imams* of *Ahlul-Bait* (a.s.) deposited
inheritances of the prophethood with her in difficult times.

The active participation of women in the socio-political history of
Islam is important. Among the first martyrs of Islam was Sommayah,
mother of Yasser, who was brutally tortured and became actually the
first martyr in Islam even before the migration to Medina. The
participation and bravery of Muslim women of the past is seen on the
pages of history. These heroic women possessed exalted personalities
such as Sommayah. Their active participation in the religio-political
movements is also a lesson to women all over the world urging them to
regain their lost identity.

One example of the power Islam gave to a woman's character from the
early history is Nasibah who lived in Medina. She was an Ansar (helper
of the immigrant from Mecca), and was known as Nasibah Jarahe. She was
married and had two sons named Ammar and Abdallah. Her name first
appears in the history of Aghabeh Bei'at. Here, new converts to Islam
shook the Messenger's (s.a.w.) hand in an oath of allegiance. During
this ceremony 60 men and two women from the Ansar converted to Islam.

The Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.), who highly respected women, placed his
hand in a dish of water and passed it to the women who in turn did the
same. The government of the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) was aided by these
people.

Nasibah's husband was martyred in the Battle of Badr. One of her sons
was also martyred at this time. This family, from the beginning of Islam
in Medina, fought alongside the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) against the
infidels.

History tells us that Nasibah took part in battles alongside Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.) as a surgeon. She participated in many battles
carrying a water skin upon her shoulders, treating the sick and injured
in the burning deserts of Arabia.

Nasibah, accompanied by her surviving son, Ammar, participated in the
famous Battle of Uhud. When the Muslims suffered a setback, she carried
her water skin giving relief to the thirsty and aiding the injured using
her primitive surgical supplies.

It is narrated from her that, "Amidst the fighting I saw my son running
away. Stopping him I said, 'My child! Why are you running away? Who are
you escaping from? From God or His Messenger?'"

She then sent him back, while she herself watched from a distance. It
was then that she suddenly noticed the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) being
surrounded by the enemy. In a quick-witted move she and her son rushed
to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) and joined in the fight with the
enemy. At this time one of the infidels martyred her son. It was here
that Nasibah grabbed her son's sword and with the help of Divine Power,
killed his assailant. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) said to her, "Well done!
May God's blessings be upon you Nasibah."

This heroic woman received 13 wound during this battle, one of which was
a sword wound on her neck. She lost a hand during the Yamamah War. It
has been narrated that this dear self-sacrificing lady of Islam will
return with the last Imam as a surgeon, God speed his appearance.

Her Holiness Zainab (a.s.), the courageous daughter of Imam Ali (a.s.),
played a great and most honourable role when she carried out her duty in
conveying the message of her brother, Imam Husayn (a.s.), the grandson
of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), after his martyrdom in his
everlasting revolution against the Ummayyad tyranny under the leadership
of Yazid.

She endured the task of explaining and conveying the aims and goals of
Imam Husayn's (a.s.) great revolution in every meeting and gathering she
attended. She disclosed the mask covering the black faces of the
oppressors in Kufa, Damascus and Madina. She took the role and
responsibility of protecting the prisoners of the family of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), including women and children, who
accompanied the severed head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) from Karbala's
burning sands to Damascus, while suffering the greatest heartbreaks.

Surely history bows its head in shame in front of this great woman to
whom Islam and the oppressed are indebted for what she sacrificed, and
for her resistance, patience and contributions in the way of truth. She
stood bravely against the oppressors and expose their shameful deeds and
policies. She brought the message of revolution , honour, dignity, and
truth out of the desert into the cities.

Her speeches in the courts of her captors of the most eloquent, biting
and pointed nature. Indeed, she is famous for her attack against Yazid
in his court in Damascus. She faced them all and accused them of their
deeds without fear of execution or torture which was the daily and
common practice against the enemies of the throne.

She continued for the rest of her life to expose injustice and relay the
message of her brother. She was a revolutionary fighter in her own right
and held a high position of pure character and strength throughout her
life. She was among the most honoured of people wherever she went. She
kept the revolution of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and helped her society to
realize their moral obligation and religious duty to fight tyranny and
oppression.

If we wish to investigate the pages of Islamic history, it is impossible
for us to overlook the attitude of Hamidah, the wife of Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq (a.s.) and the mother of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.). She took
care of the needy in Madina under the order of Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.). She
used to distribute the wealth among the needy and visit the poor and
offer them suitable material assistance.

Another example of the most virtuous women who played a great role in
our glorious Islamic history is Salil, the mother of Imam Hassan bin Ali
al-Askari (a.s.).

She played a vital role in defending truth and taking care of the Divine
Guidance. This honourable woman represented a link between two Imams,
Ali al-Hadi and Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) and the believers' bases during
the difficulties which the two Imams faced from the tyrants of their
times. She delivered the information and verdicts to the believers
through her contact with their leaders. She presented their questions
and information to the Imams (a.s.) concerning the movement of the
believers and their situations.

It is essential to remember that the participation of women in the
political activities is very important. After all, women constitute,
sometimes, more than half of every country's population and can change
the destiny of a society for the better or worse depending on the extent
of their political awareness and participation. *Hijab* in no way
hinders this participation as it did not hinder any of the women whose
examples we have mentioned.

A modern day example of this awareness and participation was seen in the
heat of the Islamic Revolution in Iran. With their babies in their arms,
and young children by their sides, women protested against the
tyrannical regime and were shot by the *Shah's* police. Several mothers
and their children were martyred during those demonstrations.

As the message of truth rose, and the voice of Revolution is heard once
again in the 20th Century, we see the women of Palestine, with tightened
fists shaking in the faces of Zionist soldiers, rocks and stones in the
other hand waiting for a chance to hit their targets. Today, these women
and women like them all over the world are considered to be the
cornerstone of this revolution. *Hijab* is their banner and they are
proud of their position as the freedom fighters against the biggest
enemy of truth.

We can see the effect that Islam has on the general public and *hijab*
on the women by recent examples in Azarbaijan and Bosnia-Herzegovnia.

Islam has renewed itself among them and it has given them the courage
and power to withstand the tyranny that plagues them. For many, Islam
was removed from their culture by communism and socialism. They call
themselves Muslims but they were, for the most part, ignorant of Islam's
laws. When they gained their independence from these anti-human,
anti-God systems, they moved toward the light of truth and regained what
they had lost. One of the first signs of this was the *hijab* of the
women.

These examples give imagination to what can be achieved by Muslim women
who follow Islamic principles and laws. They show the great role in the
life of people and the human experiment that she plays, contradicting
those miserable imaginations and opinions stirred up by the ignorant
concerning Islam and its unique ability in smashing the shackles
obstructing Muslim women from performing their great legal
responsibilities under the shadow of dynamic Islamic progress.

[^1]: Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon No, 192.


