Knowledege, Its Extent and Measure
==================================

Quod volumus facile credimus.

Feb. 8, 1677.Question. How far, and by what means, the will works upon
the understanding and assent?

Our minds are not made as large as truth, nor suited to the whole
extent of things; amongst those that come within its reach, it meets
with a great many too big for its grasp, and there are not a few that it
is fair to give up as incomprehensible. It finds itself lost in the vast
extent of space,

and the least particle of matter puzzles it with an inconceivable
divisibility; and those who, out of a great care not to admit
unintelligible things, deny or question an eternal omniscient spirit,
run themselves into a greater difficulty by making an eternal and
intelligent matter. Nay, our minds, whilst they think and (\*\*\*\*\*)
our bodies, find it past their capacity to conceive how they do the one
or the other.

This state of our minds, however remote from the perfection whereof we
ourselves have an idea, ought not, however, to discourage our endeavours
in the search of truth, or make us think we are incapable of knowing
anything, because we cannot understand all things. We shall find that we
are sent out into the world furnished with those faculties that are fit
to obtain knowledge, and knowledge sufficient, if we will but confine it
within those purposes, and direct it to those ends, which the
constitution of our nature, and the circumstance of our being, point out
to us.

If we consider ourselves in the condition we are in the world, we
cannot but observe that we are in an estate, the necessities whereof
call for a constant supply of meat, drink, clothing, and defence from
the weather; and our conveniences demand yet a great deal more.

To provide these things, Nature furnishes us only with the material,
for the most part rough, and unfitted to our use; it requires labour,
art, and thought, to suit them to our occasions; and if the knowledge of
man had not found out ways to shorten the labour, and improve several
things which seem not, at first sight, to be of any use to us,

we should spend all our time to make a scanty provision for a poor and
miserable life: a sufficient instance whereof we have in the inhabitants
of that large and fertile part of the world the West Indies, who lived a
poor uncomfortable life, scarce able to subsist; and that, perhaps, only
for want of knowing the use of that store out of which the inhabitants
of the Old World had the skill to draw iron, and thereof make themselves
utensils necessary for the carrying on and improvement of all other
arts; no one of which can subsist well, if at all, without that one
metal.

Here, then, is a large field for knowledge, proper for the use and
advantage of men in this word; viz. to find out new inventions of
despatch to shorten or ease our labour, or applying sagaciously together
several agents and materials, to procure new and beneficial productions
fit for our use, whereby our stock of riches (i. e. things useful for
the conveniences of our life) may be increased, or better preserved: and
for such discoveries as these the mind of man is well fitted; though,
perhaps, the essence of things, their first original, their secret way
of working,

and the whole extent of corporeal beings, be as far beyond our capacity
as it is beside our use; and we have no reason to complain that we do
not know the nature of the sun or stars, that the consideration of light
itself leaves us in the dark, and a thousand other speculations in
Nature, since, if we knew them, they would be of no solid advantage to
us, nor help to make our lives the happier, they being but the useless
employment of idle or over-curious brains, which amuse themselves about
things out of which they can by no means draw any real benefit.

So that, if we will consider man as in the world, and that his mind and
faculties were given him for any use, we must necessarily conclude it
must be to procure him the happiness which this world is capable of;
which certainly is nothing else but plenty of all sorts of those things
which can with most ease, pleasure, and variety, preserve him longest in
it: so that, had mankind no concernment but in the world, no
apprehensions of any being after this life,

they need trouble their heads with nothing but the history of nature,
and an inquiry into the qualities of the things in the mansion of the
universe which hath fallen to their lot, and being well-skilled in the
knowledge of material causes and effect of things in their power,
directing their thoughts as to the improvement of such arts and
inventions, engines, and utensils,

as might best contribute to their continuation in it with conveniency
and delight, they might well spare themselves the trouble of looking any
further: they need not perplex themselves about the original frame or
constitution of the universe, drawing the great machine into systems of
their own contrivance, and building hypotheses, obscure, perplexed, and
of no other use but to raise dispute and continual wrangling: For what
need have we to complain of our ignorance in the more general and
foreign parts of nature,

when all our business lies at home? Why should we bemoan our want of
knowledge in the particular apartments of the universe, when our portion
here only lies in the little spot of earth where we and all our
concernments are shut up? Why should we think ourselves hardly dealt
with, that we are not furnished with compass nor plummet to sail and
fathom that restless, unnavigable ocean,

of the universal matter, motion, and space? Since there be shores to
bound our voyage and travels, there are at least no commodities to be
brought from thence serviceable to our use, nor that will better our
condition; and we need not be displeased that we have not knowledge
enough to discover whether we have any neighbours or no in those large
bulks of matter we see floating in the abyss, or of what kind they are,
since we can never have any communication with them that might turn to
our advantage.

So that, considering man barely as an animal of three or four score
years' duration, and then to end, his condition and state requires no
other knowledge than what may furnish him with those things which may
help him to pass out to the end of that time with ease, safety, and
delight, which is all the happiness he is capable of: and for the
attainment of a correspondent measure mankind is sufficiently provided.
He has faculties and organs well adapted for the discovery, if he thinks
fit to employ and use them.

Another use of his knowledge is to live in peace with his fellow-men,
and this also he is capable of. Besides a plenty of the good things of
this world, with life, health, and peace to enjoy them, we can think of
no other concernment mankind hath that leads him not out of it, and
places him not beyond the confines of this earth; and it seems probable
that there should be some better state somewhere else to which man might
arise, since, when he hath all that this world can afford, he is still
unsatisfied, uneasy, and far from happiness.

It is certain, and that all men must consent to, that there is a
possibility of another state when this scene is over; and that the
happiness and misery of that depends on the ordering of ourselves in our
actions in this time of our probation here. The acknowledgment of a God
will easily lead any one to this,

and he hath left so many footsteps of himself, so many proofs of his
being in every creature, as are sufficient to convince any who will but
make use of their faculties that way,and I dare say nobody escapes this
conviction for want of sight; but if any be so blind, it is only because
they will not open their eyes and see; and those only doubt of a Supreme
Ruler and a universal law, who would willingly be under no law,
accountable to no judge; those only question another life hereafter, who
intend to lead such a one here as they fear to have examined, and would
be loth to answer for when it is over.

This opinion I shall always be of, till I see that those who would cast
off all thoughts of God, heaven, and hell, lead such lives as would
become rational creatures, or observe that one unquestionable moral
rule, Do as you would be done to.

It being then possible, and at least probable, that there is another
life, wherein we shall give an account of our past actions in this to
the great God of heaven and earth; here comes in another, and that the
main concernment of mankind, to know what those actions are that he is
to do, what those are he is to avoid, what the law is he is to live by
here, and shall be judged by hereafter; and in this part too he is not
left so in the dark, but that he is furnished with principles of
knowledge, and faculties able to discover light enough to guide him; his
understanding seldom fails him in this part, unless where his will would
have it so.

If he take a wrong course, it is most commonly because he goes wilfully
out of the way, or, at least, chooses to be bewildered; and there are
few, if any who dreadfully mistake, that are willing to be in the right;
and I think one may safely say, that amidst the great ignorance which is
so justly complained of amongst mankind, where any one endeavoured to
know his duty sincerely, with a design to do it, scarce ever any one
miscarried for want of knowledge.

The business of men being to be happy in this world, by the enjoyment
of the things of nature subservient to life, health, ease, and pleasure,
and by the comfortable hopes of another life when this is ended; and in
the other world, by an accumulation of higher degrees of bliss in an
everlasting security, we need no other knowledge for the attainment of
those ends but of the history and observation of the effect and
operation of natural bodies within our power, and of our duty in the
management of our own actions, as far as they depend on our will, i. e.
as far also as they are in our power.

One of those is the proper enjoyment of our bodies, and the highest
perfection of that, and the other of our souls; and to attain both of
these we are fitted with faculties both of body and soul. Whilst then we
have ability to improve our knowledge in experimental natural
philosophy, whilst we want not principles whereon to establish moral
rules,

nor light (if we please to make use of it) to distinguish good from bad
actions, we have no reason to complain if we meet with difficulties in
other things which put our reasons to a nonplus, confound our
understandings, and leave us perfectly in the dark under the sense of
our own weakness: for those relating not to our happiness any way are no
part of our business, and therefore it is not to be wondered if we have
not abilities given us to deal with things that are not to our purpose,
nor conformable to our state or end.

God having made the great machine of the universe suitable to his
infinite power and wisdom, why should we think so proudly of ourselves,
whom he hath put into a small canton, and perhaps the most
inconsiderable part of it, that he hath made us the surveyors of it, and
that it is not as it should be unless we can thoroughly comprehend it in
all the parts of it? It is agreeable to his goodness, and to our
condition, that we should be able to apply them to our use, to
understand so far some parts of that we have to do with, as to be able
to make them subservient to the convenience of our life, as proper to
fill our hearts with praise of his bounty. But it is also agreeable to
his greatness,

that it should exceed our capacity, and the highest flight of our
imagination, the better to fill us with admiration of his power and
wisdom;besides its serving to other ends, and being suited probably to
the use of other more intelligent creatures which we know not of. If it
be not reasonable to expect that we should be able to penetrate into all
the depths of nature, and understand the whole constitution of the
universe, it is yet a higher insolence to doubt the existence of a God
because we cannot comprehend himto think there is not an infinite Being
because we are not so.

If all things must stand or fall by the measure of our understandings,
and that denied to be, wherein we find inextricable difficulties, there
will very little remain in the world, and we shall scarce leave
ourselves so much as understandings, souls, or bodies. It will become us
better to consider well our own weakness and exigencies, what we are
made for, and what we are capable of,

and to apply the powers of our bodies and faculties of our souls, which
are well suited to our condition, in the search of that natural and
moral knowledge, which, as it is not beyond our strength, so is not
beside our purpose, but may be attained by moderate industry, and
improved to our infinite advantage.


