Supplement 1
============

The knowledge we acquire in this world I am apt to think extends not
beyond the limits of this life. The beatific vision of the other life
needs not the help of this dim twilight; but be that as it will, I am
sure the principal end why we are to get knowledge here, is to make use
of it for the benefit of ourselves and others in this world;

but if by gaining it we destroy our health, we labour for a thing that
will be useless in our hands; and if by harassing our bodies (though
with a design to render ourselves more useful) we deprive ourselves of
the abilities and opportunities of doing that good we might have done
with a meaner talent, which God thought sufficient for us by having
denied us the strength to improve it to that pitch which men of stronger
constitutions can attain to, we rob God of so much service, and our
neighbour of all that help which, in a state of health, with moderate
knowledge, we might have been able to perform. He that sinks his vessel
by overloading it, though it be with gold and silver and precious
stones, will give his owner but an ill account of his voyage.

It being past doubt, then, that allowance is to be made for the temper
and strength of our bodies, and that our health is to regulate the
measure of our studies, the great secret is to find out the proportion;
the difficulty whereof lies in this, that it must not only be varied
according to the constitution and strength of every individual man, but
it must also change with the temper, vigour, and circumstances, and
health of every particular man, in the different varieties of health,

or indisposition of body, which everything our bodies have any commerce
with is able to alter: so that it is as hard to say how many hours a day
a man shall study constantly, as to say how much meat he shall eat every
day, wherein his own prudence, governed by the present circumstances,
can only judge. . . The regular proceeding of our watch not being the
fit measure of time, but the secret motions of a much more curious
engine, our bodies being to limit out the portion of time in this
occasion: however,

it may be so contrived that all the time may not be lost, for the
conversation of an ingenious friend upon what one hath read in the
morning, or any other profitable subject, may perhaps let into the mind
as much improvement of knowledge, though with less prejudice to the
health, as settled solemn poring over books, which we generally call
study; which, though a necessary part, yet I am sure is not the only,
and perhaps not the best, way of improving the understanding.

2. Great care is to be taken that our studies encroach not upon our
sleep: this I am sure, sleep is the great balsam of life and restorative
of nature, and studious sedentary men have more need of it than the
active and laborious, because those men's business and their bodily
labours, though they waste their spirits, help transpiration, and carry
away their excrements,

which are the foundation of diseases; whereas the studious sedentary
man, employing his spirits within, equally or more wastes them than the
other, but without the benefit of transpiration, allowing the matter of
disease insensibly to accumulate. We are to lay by our books and
meditations when we find either our heads or stomachs indisposed upon
any occasion; study at such time doing great harm to the body, and very
little good to the mind.

1st. As the body, so the mind also, gives laws to our studies; I mean,
to the duration and continuance of them; let it be never so capacious,
never so active, it is not capable of constant labour nor total rest.
The labour of the mind is study, or intention of thought, and when we
find it is weary, either in pursuing other men's thoughts, as in
reading, or tumbling or tossing its own, as in meditation, it is time to
give off and let it recover itself.

Sometimes meditation gives a refreshment to the weariness of reading,
and vice vers√¢; sometimes the change of ground, i. e. going from one
subject or science to another, rouses the mind, and fills it with fresh
vigour; oftentimes discourse enlivens it when it flags, and puts an end
to the weariness without stopping it one jot, but rather forwarding it
in its journey; and sometimes it is so tired, that nothing but a perfect
relaxation will serve the turn. All these are to be made use of
according as every one finds most successful in himself to the best
husbandry of his time and thought.

2nd. The mind has sympathies and antipathies as well as the body; it
has a natural preference often of one study before another. It would be
well if one had a perfect command of them, and sometimes one is to try
for the mastery, to bring the mind into order and a pliant obedience;
but generally it is better to follow the bent and tendency of the mind
itself, so long as it keeps within the bounds of our proper business,
wherein there is generally latitude enough. By this means, we shall go
not only a great deal faster, and hold out a great deal longer,

but the discovery we shall make will be a great deal clearer, and make
deeper impressions in our minds. The inclination of the mind is as the
palate to the stomach; that seldom digests well in the stomach, or adds
much strength to the body, that nauseates the palate, and is not
recommended by it.

There is a kind of restiveness in almost every one's mind; sometimes,
without perceiving the cause, it will boggle and stand still, and one
cannot get it a step forward; and at another time it will press forward,
and there is no holding it in. It is always good to take it when it is
willing, and keep on whilst it goes at ease, though it be to the breach
of some of the other rules concerning the body.

But one must take care of trespassing on that side too often, for one
that takes pleasure in study, flatters himself that a little now, and a
little to-morrow, does no harm, that he feels no ill effects of an
hour's sitting up,-insensibly undermines his health, and, when the
disease breaks out, it is seldom charged to these past miscarriages that
laid in the provision for it.

The subject being chosen, the body and mind being both in a temper fit
for study, what remains but that a man betake himself to it? These
certainly are good preparatories, yet if there be not something else
done, perhaps we shall not make all the profit we might.

1st. It is a duty we owe to God, as the fountain and author of all
truth, who is truth itself; and it is a duty also we owe our own selves,
if we will deal candidly and sincerely with our own souls; to have our
minds constantly disposed to entertain and receive truth wheresoever we
meet with it, or under whatsoever appearance of plain or ordinary,
strange, new, or perhaps displeasing, it may come in our way. Truth is
the proper object, the proper riches and furniture of the mind,

and according as his stock of this is, so is the difference and value
of one man above another. He that fills his head with vain notions and
false opinions, may have his mind perhaps puffed up and seemingly much
enlarged, but in truth it is narrow and empty; for all that it
comprehends, all that it contains, amounts to nothing, or less than
nothing; for falsehood is below ignorance, and a lie worse than
nothing.

Our first and great duty then is, to bring to our studies and to our
inquiries after knowledge a mind covetous of truth; that seeks after
nothing else, and after that impartially, and embraces it, how poor, how
contemptible, how unfashionable soever it may seem.

This is that which all studious men profess to do, and yet it is that
where I think very many miscarry. Who is there almost that has not
opinions planted in him by education time out of mind; which by that
means come to be as the municipal laws of the country, which must not be
questioned, but are then looked on with reverence as the standards of
right and wrong, truth and falsehood; when perhaps these so sacred
opinions were but the oracles of the nursery, or the traditional grave
talk of those who pretend to inform our childhood; who receive them from
hand to hand without ever examining them?

This is the fate of our tender age, which being thus seasoned early, it
grows by continuation of time, as it were, into the very constitution of
the mind, which afterwards very difficultly receives a different
tincture. When we are grown up, we find the world divided into bands and
companies; not only as congregated under several polities and
governments, but united only upon account of opinions, and in that
respect combined strictly one with another,

and distinguished from others, especially in matters of religion. If
birth or chance have not thrown a man young into any of these, which yet
seldom fails to happen, choice, when he is grown up, certainly puts him
into some or other of them; often out of an opinion that that party is
in the right, and sometimes because he finds it is not safe to stand
alone, and therefore thinks it convenient to herd somewhere.

Now, in every one of these parties of men there are a certain number of
opinions which are received and owned as the doctrines and tenets of
that society, with the profession and practice whereof all who are of
their communion ought to give up themselves, or else they will be scarce
looked on as of that society, or at best be thought but lukewarm
brothers, or in danger to apostatize.

It is plain, in the great difference and contrariety of opinions that
are amongst these several parties, that there is much falsehood and
abundance of mistakes in most of them. Cunning in some, and ignorance in
others, first made them keep them up; and yet how seldom is it that
implicit faith, fear of losing credit with the party or interest (for
all these operate in their turns),

suffers any one to question the tenet of his party; but altogether in a
bundle he receives, embraces, and, without examining, he professes and
sticks to them, and measures all other opinions by them. Worldly
interest also insinuates into several men's minds divers opinions,
which, suiting with their temporal advantage, are kindly received, and
in time so riveted there, that it is not easy to remove them.

By these, and perhaps other means, opinions come to be settled and
fixed in men's minds, which, whether true or false, there they remain in
reputation as substantial material truths, and so are seldom questioned
or examined by those who entertain them: and if they happen to be false,
as in most men the greatest part must necessarily be, they put a man
quite out of the way in the whole course of his studies; and though in
his reading and inquiries he flatters himself that his design is to
inform his understanding in the real knowledge of truth,

yet in effect it tends and reaches to nothing but the confirming of his
already received opinions, the things he meets with in other men's
writings and discoveries being received or neglected as they hold
proportion with those anticipations which before had taken possession of
his mind.

This will plainly appear if we look but on an instance or two of it. It
is a principal doctrine of the Roman party to believe that their Church
is infallible; this is received as the mark of a good Catholic, and
implicit faith, or fear, or interest, keeps all men from questioning it.
This being entertained as an undoubted principle, see what work it makes
with Scripture and reason; neither of them will be heard-the speaking
with never so much clearness and demonstration-when they contradict any
of the doctrines or institutions; and though it is not grown to that
height,

barefaced to deny the Scripture, yet interpretations and distinctions,
evidently contrary to the plain sense and to the common apprehensions of
men, are made use of to elude its meaning, and preserve entire the
authority of this their principle, that the Church is infallible.

On the other side, make the light within our guide, and see what will
become of reason and Scripture. An Hobbist, with his principle of
self-preservation, whereof himself is to be judge, will not easily admit
a great many plain duties of morality. The same must necessarily be
found in all men who have taken up principles without examining the
truth of them. It being here, then, that men take up prejudice to truth
without being aware of it, and afterwards, like men of corrupted
appetites,

when they think to nourish themselves, generally feed only on those
things that suit with and increase the vicious humour,-this part is
carefully to be looked after. These ancient preoccupations of our minds,
these several and almost sacred opinions, are to be examined, if we will
make way for truth, and put our minds in that freedom which belongs and
is necessary to them.

A mistake is not the less so, and will never grow into a truth, because
we have believed it a long time, though perhaps it be the harder to part
with; and an error is not the less dangerous, nor the less contrary to
truth, because it is cried up and had in veneration by any party, though
it is likely we shall be the less disposed to think it so.

Here, therefore, we have need of all our force and all our sincerity;
and here it is we have use of the assistance of a serious and sober
friend, who may help us sedately to examine these our received and
beloved opinions; for the mind by itself being prepossessed with them
cannot so easily question, look round, and argue against them.

They are the darlings of our minds, and it is as hard to find fault
with them, as for a man in love to dislike his mistress: there is need,
therefore, of the assistance of another, at least it is very useful
impartially to show us their defects, and help us to try them by the
plain and evident principle of reason or religion.


