"scrupulosity, * 1678
=====================

\* Probably a draft of a letter to Mr Herbert, afterwards Earl of
Pembroke, to whom Locke dedicated the Essay.

"Shall I not pass with you for a great empric if I offer but one remedy
to the three maladies you complain of? Of at least will you not think me
to use less care and application than becomes the name of friend you
honour me with, if I think to make one answer serve the three papers you
have sent me in matters very different? But yet if it be found, as I
imagine it will, that they all depend on the same causes, I believe you
will think they will not need different cures.

"I conceive, then, that the great difficulty, uncertainty, and
perplexity of thought you complain of in these particulars, arise in
great measure from this ground, that you think that a man is obliged
strictly and precisely at all times to do that which is absolutely best;
and that there is always some action so incumbent upon a man, so
necessary to be done, preferable to all others, that if that be omitted,
one certainly fails in one's duty, and all other actions whatsoever,
otherwise good in themselves, yet coming in the place of some more
important and better that at the time might be done, are tainted with
guilt, and can be no more an acceptable offering to God than a blemished
victim under the law.

"I confess sometimes our duty is so evident, and the rule and
circumstance so determine it to the present performance, that there is
no latitude left; nothing ought at that time to come in the room of it.
But this I think happens seldom, at least I may confidently say it does
not in the greatest part of the actions of our lives, wherein I think
God, out of his infinite goodness, considering our ignorance and
frailty,

hath left us a great liberty. Love to God and charity to ourselves and
neighbours are, no doubt, at all times indispensably necessary: but
whilst we keep these warm in our hearts, and sincerely practise what
they upon all occasions suggest to us, I cannot but think that God
allows us in the ordinary actions of our lives a great latitude; so that
two or more things being proposed to be done, neither of which crosses
that fundamental law, but may very well consist with the sincerity
wherewith we love God and our neighbour, I think it is at our choice to
do either of them.

"The reasons that make me of this opinion are: 1st. That I cannot
imagine that God, who has compassion upon our weakness and knows how we
are made, would put poor men, nay, the best of men, those that seek him
with sincerity and truth, under almost an absolute necessity of sinning
perpetually against him, which will almost inevitably follow if there be
no latitude at all allowed us in the occurrences of our lives, but that
every instant of our being in the world has always incumbent on it one
certain action exclusive of all others.

For according to this supposition,

the best being always to be done, and that being but one, it is almost
impossible to know which is that one best, there being so many actions
which may all have some peculiar and considerable goodness, which we are
at the same time capable of doing, and so many nice circumstances and
considerations to be weighed one against another, before we can come to
make any judgment which is best, and after all are in great danger to be
mistaken: the comparison of those actions that stand in competition
together, with all their grounds, motives, and consequences as they lie
before us, being very hard to be made;

and what makes the difficulty yet far greater is, that a great many of
those which are of moment, and should come into the reckoning, always
escape us; our short sight never penetrating far enough into any action
to discover all that is comparatively good or bad in it, or the extent
of our thoughts to reach all the actions which at any one time we are
capable of doing; so that at last, when we come to choose which is best,
in making our judgment upon wrong and scanty measures,

we cannot secure ourselves from being in the wrong: this is so evident
in all the consultations of mankind, that should you select any number
of the best and wisest men you could think of, to deliberate in almost
any case what were best to be done, you should find them make almost all
different propositions, wherein one (if one) only lighting on what is
best, all the rest acting by the best of their skill and caution would
have been sinners as missing of that one best. The Apostles themselves
were not always of one mind.

"2nd. I cannot conceive it to be the design of God, nor to consist with
either his goodness or our business in the world, to clog the actions of
our lives, even the minutest of them (which will follow, if one thing
that is best is always to be done), with infinite consideration before
we begin it, and unavoidable perplexity and doubt when it is done.

When I sat down to write to you this hasty account, before I set pen to
paper, I might have considered whether it were best for me ever to
meddle with the answering your questions; my want of ability, it being
beside my business, the difficulty of advising anybody, and presumption
of advising one so far above me, would suggest doubts enough in the
case. I might have debated with myself, whether it were best to take
time to answer your demands, or, as I do, set to it presently.

"3d. Whether there were not somewhat better that I could do at this
time.

"4th. I might doubt whether it were best to read any books on this
subject before I gave you my opinion, or send you my own naked thoughts.
To those a thousand other scruples, as considerable, might be added,
which would still beget others, in every one of which there would be, no
doubt, still a better and a worse; which, if I should sit down and with
serious consideration endeavour to find and determine clearly and
precisely with myself to the minutest difference,

before I betake myself to give you an answer, perhaps my whole age
might be spent in the deliberation about writing two sides of paper to
you, and I should perpetually blot out one word and put in another,
erase to-morrow what I write to-day; whereas, having this single
consideration of complying with the desire of a friend whom I honour,
and whose desires I think ought to have weight with me, who persuades me
that I have an opportunity of giving him some pleasure in it, I cannot
think I ought to be scrupulous in the point, or neglect obeying your
commands, though I cannot be sure but that I might do better not to
offer you my opinion, which may be instable; and probably I should do
better to employ my thoughts how to be able to cure you of a quartan
ague,

or to cure in myself some other and more dangerous faults, which is
more properly my business. But my intention being respect and service to
you, and all the design of my writing consisting with the love I owe to
God and my neighbour, I should be very well satisfied with what I write,
could I be as well assured it would be useful as I am past doubt it is
lawful, and that I have the liberty to do it; and yet I cannot say, and
I believe you will not think, it is the best thing I could do. If we
were never to do but what is absolutely the best, all our lives would go
away in deliberation and distraction, and we should never come to an
action.

"5th. I have often thought that our state here in this world is a state
of mediocrity, which is not capable of extremes, though on one side
there may be great excellency and perfection; that we are not capable of
continual rest, nor continual exercise, though the latter has certainly
much more of excellence in it. We are not able to labour always with the
body,

nor always with the mind; and, to come to our present purpose, we are
not capable of living altogether exactly by a rule, not altogether
without it,-not always retired, not always in company; but this being
but an odd notion of mine, it may suffice only to have mentioned it, my
authority being no great argument in the case; only give me leave to
say, that if it holds true, it will be applicable in several cases, and
be of use to us in the conduct of our lives and actions; but I have been
too long already to enlarge on this fancy any further at present.

"As to our actions in general things, this in short I think:

"1st. That all negative precepts are always to be obeyed. "2nd. That
positive commands only sometimes upon occasions; but we ought to be
always furnished with the habits and dispositions to those positive
duties against those occasions.

"3rd. That between these two; i. e. between unlawful, which are always,
and necessary, quod hic et nunc, which are but sometimes, there is a
great latitude, and therein we have our liberty, which we may use
without scrupulously thinking ourselves obliged to that which in itself
may be best. "If this be so, as I question not that you will conclude
with me it is, the greatest cause of your scruples and doubts, I
suppose, will be removed; and so the difficulties in the cases proposed
will in a good measure be removed too. When I know from you whether I
have guessed right or no, I may be encouraged to venture on two other
causes, which I think may be concerned also in all the cases you
propose; but, being of much less moment than this I have mentioned here,
may be deferred to another time, and then considered en passant, before
we come to take up the particular cases separately.

Memorandum. The two general causes that I suppose remaining, are: "1st.
Thinking things inconsistent that are not; viz. worldly business and
devotion. 2nd. Natural inconstancy of temper; where the cures are to be
considered, at least as far as this inconstancy is prejudicial, for no
further than that ought it to be cured."

"Sir, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1678

"By yours of the 21st Nov. you assure my that in my last, on this
occasion, I hit right on the principal and original cause of some
disquiet you had upon the matter under consideration. I should have been
glad to have known also, whether the cure I there offered were any way
effectual; or wherein the reasons I gave came short of that satisfaction
as to the point,

viz., that we are not obliged to do always that which is precisely
best, as was desired. For I think it most proper to the subduing those
enemies of our quiet-fear, doubts, and scruples, and for establishing a
lasting peace, to do as those who design the conquest of new
territories, viz. clear the country as we go, and leave behind us no
enemies unmastered, no lurking-holes unsearched, no garrisons unreduced,
which may give occasions to disorder and insurrection, and excite
disturbances.

"If, therefore, in that, or any other papers, any of my arguments and
reasonings shall appear weak and obscure; if they reach not the bottom
of the matter, are wide of the particular case, or have not so cleared
up the question in all the parts and extent of it, as to settle the
truth with evidence and certainty, I must beg you to let me know what
doubts still remain, and upon what reasons grounded, that so in our
progress we may look upon those propositions that you are once
thoroughly convinced of, to be settled and established truths,

of which you are not to doubt any more without new reasons that have
not yet been examined. Or, on the other side, by your answers to my
reasons I may be set right and recovered from an error. For as I write
you nothing but my own thoughts (which is vanity enough-but you will
have it so), yet I am not so vain as to imagine them infallible, and
therefore expect from you that mutual great office of friendship, to
show me my mistakes, and to reason me into a better understanding; for
it matters not on which side the truth lies, so we do but find and
embrace it.

"This way of proceeding is necessary on both our accounts; on mine,
because in my friendship with you, as well as others, I design to gain
by the bargain that which I esteem the great benefit of friendship, the
rectifying my mistakes and errors, which makes me so willingly expose my
crude extemporary thoughts to your view,

and lay them, such as they are, before you: and on your account also I
think it very necessary, for your mind having been long accustomed to
think it true, that the thing absolutely in itself best ought always
indispensably to be done, you ought, in order to the establishing your
peace perfectly, to examine and clear up that question,

so as at the end of the debate to retain it still for true, or
perfectly reject it as a mistaken or wrong measure; and to settle it as
a maxim in your mind, that you are no more to govern yourself or
thoughts by that false rule, but wholly lay it aside as condemned,
without putting yourself to the trouble, every time you reflect on it,
to weigh again all those reasons upon which you made that conclusion;
and so also in any other opinions or principles, when you once come to
be convinced of their falsehood.

"If this be not done, it will certainly happen that this principle (and
so of the rest), having been for a long time settled in you mind, will,
upon every occasion, recur; and the reasons upon which you rejected it
not being so familiar to your mind, nor so ready at hand to oppose it,
the old acquaintance will be apt to resume his former station and
influence, and be apt to disturb that quiet which had not its foundation
perfectly established.

"For these reasons it is that I think we ought to clear all as we go,
and come to a plenary result in all the propositions that come under
debate, before we go any further. This has been usually my way with
myself, to which, I think, I owe a great part of my quiet; and, I
believe, a few good principles, well established, will reach further,
and resolve more doubts, than at first sight perhaps one would imagine;
and the grounds and rules on which the right and wrong of our actions
turn, and which will generally serve to conduct us in the cares and
occurrences of our lives, in all states and conditions, lie possibly in
a narrower compass, and in a less number, than is ordinarily supposed;
but, to come to them, one must go by sure and well-grounded steps."

[The argument is continued at great length, with the intent of
reconciling worldly business and devotion.]

1678.-HAPPINESS. That the happiness of man consists in pleasure,
whether of body or mind, according to every one's relish. The summum
malum is pain, or dolor of body and mind; that this is so, I appeal not
only to the experience of all mankind, and the thoughts of every man's
breast, but to the best rule of this-the Scripture, which tells that at
the right-hand of God,

the place of bliss, are pleasures for evermore; and that which men are
condemned for, is not for seeking pleasure, but for preferring the
momentary pleasures of this life to those joys which shall have no end.
VIRTUE. To make a man virtuous, three things are necessary: 1st. Natural
parts and disposition. 2nd. Precepts and instruction. 3rd. Use and
practice; which is able better to correct the first, and improve the
latter.


