Of Ethics in General
====================

1. Happiness and misery are the two great springs of human actions, and
though through different ways we find men so busy in the world, they all
aim at happiness, and desire to avoid misery, as it appears to them in
different places and shapes.

2. I do not remember that I have heard of any nation of men who have
not acknowledged that there has been right and wrong in men's actions,
as well as truth and falsehood in their sayings; some measures there
have been everywhere owned, though very different; some rules and
boundaries to men's actions, by which they were judged to be good or
bad; nor is there, I think, any people amongst whom there is not
distinction between virtue and vice; some kind of morality is to be
found everywhere received; I will not say perfect and exact, but yet
enough to let us know that the notion of it is more or less everywhere,
and that men think that even where politics, societies, and magistrates
are silent, men yet are under some laws to which they owe obedience.

3. But, however morality be the great business and concernment of
mankind, and so deserves our most attentive application and study; yet
in the very entrance this occurs very strange and worthy our
consideration, that morality hath been generally in the world rated as a
science distinct from theology, religion, and law; and that it hath been
the proper province of philosophers, a sort of men different both from
divines, priests, and lawyers, whose profession it has been to explain
and teach this knowledge to the world; a plain argument to me of some
discovery still amongst men, of the law of nature, and a secret
apprehension of another rule of action which rational creatures had a
concernment to conform to, besides what either the priests pretended was
the immediate command of their God (for all the heathen ceremonies of
worship pretended to revelation, reason failing in the support of them),
or the lawyer told them was the command of the Government.

4. But yet these philosophers seldom deriving these rules up to their
original, nor arguing them as the commands of the great God of heaven
and earth, and such as according to which he would retribute to men
after this life, the utmost enforcements they could add to them were
reputation and disgrace by those names of virtue and vice, which they
endeavoured by their authority to make names of weight to their scholars
and the rest of the people. Were there no human law, nor punishment, nor
obligation of civil or divine sanctions, there would yet still be such
species of actions in the world as justice, temperance, and fortitude,
drunkenness, and theft, which would also be thought some of them good,
some bad; there would be distinct notions of virtues and vices; for to
each of these names there would belong a complex idea, or otherwise all
these and the like words which express moral things in all languages
would be empty, insignificant sounds, and all moral discourses would be
perfect jargon. But all the knowledge of virtues and vices which a man
attained to, this way, would amount to no more than taking the
definitions or the significations of the words of any language, either
from the men skilled in that language, or the common usage of the
country, to know how to apply them, and call particular actions in that
country by their right names; and so in effect would be no more but the
skill how to speak properly, or at most to know what actions in the
country he lives in are thought laudable or disgraceful; i. e. are
called virtues and vices: the general rule whereof, and the most
constant that I can find is, that those actions are esteemed virtuous
which are thought absolutely necessary to the preservation of society,
and those that disturb or dissolve the bonds of community are everywhere
esteemed ill and vicious.

5. This would necessarily fall out, for were there no obligation or
superior law at all, besides that of society, since it cannot be
supposed that any men should associate together and unite in the same
community, and at the same time allow that for commendable, i. e. count
it a virtue, nay not discountenance and treat such actions as blameable,
i. e. count them vices which tend to the dissolution of that society in
which they were united; but all other actions that are not thought to
have such an immediate influence on society I find not (as far as I have
been conversant in histories), but that in some countries or societies
they are virtues, in others vices, and in others indifferent, according
as the authority of some esteemed wise men in some places, or as
inclination or fashion of people in other places, have happened to
establish them virtues or vices; so that the ideas of virtues taken up
this way teach us no more than to speak properly according to the
fashion of the country we are in, without any very great improvement of
our knowledge, more than what men meant by such words; and this is the
knowledge contained in the common ethics of the schools; and this is not
more but to know the right names of certain complex modes, and the skill
of speaking properly.

6. The ethics of the schools, built upon the authority of Aristotle,
but perplexed a great deal more with hard words and useless
distinctions, telling us what he or they are pleased to call virtues and
vices, teach us nothing of morality, but only to understand their names,
or call actions as they or Aristotle does; which is, in effect, but to
speak their language properly. The end and use of morality being to
direct our lives, and by showing us what actions are good, and what bad,
prepare us to do the one and avoid the other; those that pretend to
teach morals mistake their business, and become only language-masters
where they do not do this,-when they teach us only to talk and dispute,
and call actions by the names they prescribe, when they do not show the
inferments that may draw us to virtue and deter us from vice.

7. Moral actions are only those that depend upon the choice of an
understanding and free agent. And an understanding free agent naturally
follows that which causes pleasure to it and flies that which causes
pain; i. e. naturally seeks happiness and shuns misery. That, then,
which causes to any one pleasure, that is good to him;

and that which causes him pain, is bad to him: and that which causes
the greater pleasure is the greater good, and that which causes the
greater pain, the greater evil. For happiness and misery consisting only
in pleasure and pain, either of mind or body, or both, according to the
interpretation I have given above of those words, nothing can be good or
bad to any one but as it tends to their happiness or misery, as it
serves to produce in them pleasure or pain: for good and bad, being
relative terms, do not denote anything in the nature of the thing, but
only the relation it bears to another in its aptness and tendency to
produce in it pleasure or pain; and thus we see and say, that which is
good for one man is bad for another.

8. Now, though it be not so apprehended generally, yet it is from this
tendency to produce to us pleasure or pain, that moral good or evil has
its name, as well as natural. Yet perhaps it will not be found so
erroneous as perhaps at first sight it will seem strange, if one should
affirm, that there is nothing morally good which does not produce
pleasure to a man, nor nothing morally evil that does not bring pain to
him.

The difference between moral and natural good and evil is only this;
that we call that naturally good and evil, which, by the natural
efficiency of the thing, produces pleasure or pain in us; and that is
morally good or evil which, by the intervention of the will of an
intelligent free agent, draws pleasure or pain after it, not by any
natural consequence, but by the intervention of that power. Thus,
drinking to excess, when it produces the head-ache or sickness, is a
natural evil; but as it is a transgression of law, by which a punishment
is annexed to it, it is a moral evil. For rewards and punishments are
the good and evil whereby superiors enforce the observance of their
laws; it being impossible to set any other motive or restraint to the
actions of a free understanding agent, but the consideration of good or
evil; that is, pleasure or pain that will follow from it.

9. Whoever treats of morality so as to give us only the definitions of
justice and temperance, theft and incontinency, and tells us which are
virtues, which are vices, does only settle certain complex ideas of
modes with their names to them, whereby we may learn to understand
others well, when they talk by their rules, and speak intelligibly and
properly to others who have been informed in their doctrine. But whilst
they discourse ever so acutely of temperance or justice, but show no law
of a superior that prescribes temperance, to the observation or breach
of which law there are rewards and punishments annexed, the force of
morality is lost,

and evaporates only into words, disputes, and niceties. And, however
Aristotle or Anacharsis, Confucius, or any one amongst us, shall name
this or that action a virtue or a vice, their authorities are all of
them alike, and they exercise but what power everyone has, which is to
show what complex ideas their words shall stand for: for without showing
a law that commands or forbids them, moral goodness will be but an empty
sound, and those actions which the schools here call virtues or vices,
may by the same authority be called by contrary names in another
country; and if these be nothing more than their decisions and
determinations in the case, they will be still nevertheless indifferent
as to any man's practice, which will by such kind of determinations be
under no obligation to observe them.

10. But there is another sort of morality or rules of our actions,
which though they may in many parts be coincident and agreeable with the
former, yet have a different foundation, and we come to the knowledge of
them a different way; those notions or standards of our actions not
being ideas of our own making,

to which we give names, but depend upon something without us, and so
not made by us, but for us, and these are the rules set to our actions
by the declared will or laws of another, who hath power to punish our
aberrations;-these are properly and truly the rules of good and evil,
because the conformity or disagreement of our actions with these bring
upon us good or evil; these influence our lives as the other do our
words, and there is as much difference between these two as between
living well and attaining happiness on the one hand, compared with
speaking properly and understanding of words on the other.

The notion of one men have by making to themselves a collection of
simple ideas, called by those names which they take to be names of
virtues and vices; the notion of the other we come by from the rules set
us by a superior power: but because we cannot come to the knowledge of
those rules without, 1st, making known a lawgiver to all mankind, with
power and will to reward and punish; and, 2nd, without showing how he
hath declared his will and law, I must only at present suppose this
rule, till a fit place to speak of these, viz. God and the law of
nature; and only at present mention what is immediately to the purpose
in hand, 1st, that this rule of our actions set us by our law-maker is
conversant about, and ultimately terminates in, those simple ideas
before mentioned; viz. Thou shalt love they neighbour as thyself.

2nd., That the law being known, or supposed known by us, the relation
of our actions to it, i.e. the agreement or disagreement of anything we
do to that rule, is as easy and clearly known as any other relation.
3rd. That we have moral ideas as well as others, that we come by them
the same way, and that they are nothing but collections of simple ideas.
Only we are carefully to retain that distinction of moral actions, that
they have a double consideration, 1st, As they have their proper
denominations, as liberality, modesty, frugality, &c. &c., and thus they
are but modes, i. e. actions made up of such a precise collection of
simple ideas; but it is not thereby determined that they are either good
or bad, virtues or vices. 2nd, As they refer to a law with which they
agree or disagree,

so are they good or bad, virtues or vices. Eutrapelia was a name
amongst the Greeks, of such a peculiar sort of actions; i. e. of such a
collection of simple ideas concurring to make them up; but whether this
collection of simple ideas, called Eutrapelia, be a virtue or vice, is
known only by comparing it to that rule which determines virtue or vice,
and this is that consideration that properly belongs to actions, i. e.
their agreement with a rule. In one, any action is only a collection of
simple ideas, and so is a positive complex idea; in the other it stands
in relation to a law or rule, and according as it agrees or disagrees,
is virtue or vice. So education and piety, feasting and gluttony, are
modes alike, being but certain complex ideas called by one name: but
when they are considered as virtues and vices, and rules of life
carrying an obligation with them, they relate to a law, and so come
under the consideration of relation.

To establish morality, therefore, upon its proper basis, and such
foundations as may carry an obligation with them, we must first prove a
law, which always supposes a law-maker: one that has a superiority and
right to ordain, and also a power to reward and punish according to the
tenor of the law established by him. This sovereign law-maker, who has
set rules and bounds to the actions of men, is God, their Maker, whose
existence we have already proved. The next thing then to show is, that
there are certain rules, certain dictates, which it is his will all men
should conform their actions to, and that this will of his is
sufficiently promulgated and made known to all mankind.

DEUS.-Descartes's Proof of a God, from the Idea of necessary Existence,
examined. 1696.

Though I had heard Descartes's opinion concerning the being of a God
often questioned by sober men, and no enemies to his name, yet I
suspended my judgment of him, till lately setting myself to examine his
proof of a God, I found that by it senseless matter might be the first
eternal being and cause of all things, as well as an immaterial
intelligent spirit; this, joined to his shutting out the consideration
of final causes out of his philosophy, and his labouring to invalidate
all other proofs of a God but his own, does unavoidably draw upon him
some suspicion.

The fallacy of his pretended great proof of a Deity appears to me
thus:-The question between the Theists and Atheists I take to be this,
viz. not whether there has been nothing from eternity, but whether the
eternal Being that made, and still keeps all things in that order,
beauty, and method, in which we see them, be a knowing immaterial
substance, or a senseless material substance; for that something, either
senseless matter, or a knowing spirit, has been from eternity, I think
nobody doubts.

The idea of the Theists' eternal Being is, that it is a knowing
immaterial substance, that made and still keeps all the beings of the
universe in that order in which they are preserved. The idea of the
Atheists' eternal Being is senseless matter.

The question between them then is, which of these really is that
eternal Being that has always been. Now I say, whoever will use the idea
of necessary existence to prove a God, i. e. an immaterial eternal
knowing spirit, will have no more to say for it from the idea of
necessary existence, than an Atheist has for his eternal, all-doing,
senseless matter, v. g. The complex idea of God, says the Theist, is
substance, immateriality, eternity, knowledge, and the power of making
and producing all things.

I allow it, says the Atheist; but how do you prove any real being
exists, answering the complex idea in which these simple ideas are
combined? By another idea, says the Cartesian Theist, which I include in
my complex idea of God, viz. the idea of necessary existence.

If that will do, says the Atheist, I can equally prove the eternal
existence of my first being, matter; for it is but adding the idea of
necessary existence to the one which I have wherein substance,
extension, solidity, eternity, and the power of making and producing all
things are combined, and my eternal matter is proved necessarily to
exist upon as certain grounds as the immaterial God; for whatsoever is
eternal must needs have necessary existence included in it. And who now
has the odds in proving by adding in his mind the idea of necessary
existence to his idea of the first being? The truth is in this way, that
which should be proved, viz. existence, is supposed, and so the question
is only begged on both sides.

I have the complex idea of substance, solidity, and extension joined
together, which I call matter; does this prove matter to be? No. I, with
Descartes, add to this idea of matter a bulk as large as space itself;
does this prove such a bulk of matter to be? No. I add to it this
complex idea, the idea of eternity; does this prove matter to be
eternal? No. I add to it the idea of necessary existence; does this
prove matter necessarily to exist? No.

Try it in spirit, and it will be just so there. The reason whereof is,
that the putting together or separating, the putting in or leaving out,
any one or more ideas, out of any complex one in my head, has no
influence at all upon the being of things, without me to make them exist
so, as I put ideas together in my mind.

But it will be said that the idea of God includes necessary existence,
and so God has a necessary existence.

I answer: The idea of God, as far as the name God stands for the first
eternal cause, includes necessary existence.

And so far the Atheist and the Theist are agreed; or rather, there is
no Atheist who denies an eternal first Being, which has necessary
existence. That which puts the difference between the Theist and the
Atheist is this: that the Theist says that this eternal Being, which has
necessary existence, is a knowing spirit; the Atheist, that it is blind
unthinking matter; for the deciding of which question, the joining the
idea of necessary existence to that of eternal first Being or Substance,
does nothing. Whether that eternal first Being, necessarily existing, be
material or immaterial, thinking or not thinking,

must be proved some other way; and when thus a God is proved, necessary
existence will be included in the idea of God, and not till then. For an
eternal necessary existing Being, material, and without wisdom, is not
the Theist's God. So that real existence is but supposed on either side;
and the adding in our thoughts the idea of necessary existence to an
idea of a senseless material substance, or to the idea of an immaterial
knowing spirit, makes neither of them to exist, nor alters anything in
the reality of their existence, because our ideas alter nothing in the
reality of things, v. g. The Atheist would put into his idea of matter,
necessary existence; he may do that as he pleases, but he will not
thereby at all prove the real existence of anything answering that idea;
he must first prove,

and that by other ways than that idea, the existence of an eternal
all-doing matter, and then his idea will be proved evidently a true
idea: till then it is but a precarious one, made at pleasure, and proves
nothing of real existence, for the reason above mentioned, viz. our
ideas make or alter nothing in the real existence of things, nor will it
follow that anything really exists in nature answering it, because we
can make such a complex idea in our minds.

By ideas in the mind we discern the agreement or disagreement of ideas
that have a like ideal existence in our minds, but that reaches no
further, proves no real existence, for the truth we so know is only of
our ideas, and is applicable to things only as they are supposed to
exist answering such ideas. But any idea, simple or complex, barely by
being in our minds, is no evidence of the real existence of anything out
of our minds, answering that idea. Real existence can be proved only by
real existence; and, therefore, the real existence of a God can only be
proved by the real existence of other things. The real existence of
other things without us can be evidenced to us only by our senses; but
our own existence is known to us by a certainty yet higher than our
senses can give us of the existence of other things, and that is
internal perception, a self-consciousness, or intuition; from whence
therefore may be drawn, by a train of ideas, the surest and most
incontestable proof of the existence of a God.


