1677.-species
=============

The species of things are distinguished and made by chance, in order to
naming and names imposed on those things which either the conveniences
of life or common observation bring into discourse. The greatest part of
the rest, sine nomine herb?, lie neglected, neither differenced by
names, nor distinguished into species; viz. how many flies and worms are
there which, though they are about us in great plenty, we have not yet
named nor ranked into species, but come under the general names of flies
or worms, which yet are as distinct as a horse and a sheep, though we
never have had so great occasion to take notice of them.

So that our ideas of species are almost voluntary, or at least
different from the idea of Nature by which she forms and distinguishes
them, which in animals she seems to me to keep to with more constancy
and exactness than in other bodies and species of things: those being
curious engines do perhaps require a greater accurateness for their
propagation and continuation of their race; for in vegetables we find
that several sorts come from the seeds of one and the same individual,
as much different species as those that are allowed to be so by
philosophers.

This is very familiar in apples, and perhaps other sorts of fruits,
whereof some have distinct names and others only the general, though
they begin every day to have more and more given them as they come into
use. So that species, in respect of us, are but things ranked into
order, because of their agreement inn some ideas which we have made
essential in order to our naming them, though what is essentially to
belong to any species in reference to Nature be hard to determine; for
if a woman should bring forth a creature perfectly of the shape of a
man, that never showed any more appearance of reason than a horse, and
had no articular language, and another woman should produce another with
nothing of the shape, but with the language and reason of a man, I ask
which of these you would call by the name man?-both or neither?

**Understanding Arguments Positive and Negative. 1677

** In questions where there are arguments on both sides, one positive
proof is to preponderate to a great many negatives, because a positive
proof is always founded upon some real existence, whcih we know and
apprehend; whereas the negative arguments terminate generally in
nothing, in our not being able to conceive, and so may be nothing but
conclusions from our ignorance or incapcity, and not from the truth of
things which may, and we have experience do, really exist, though they
exceed our comprehension. This amongst the things we know and lie
obvious to our senses is very evident; for though we are very well
acquainted with matter, motion, and distance, yet there are many things
in them which we can by no means comprehend; for,

even in the things most obvious and familiar to us, our understanding
is nonplussed, and presently discovers its weakness; whenever it enters
upon the consideration of anything that is unlimited, or would penetrate
into the modes or manner of being or operation, it presently meets with
unconquerable difficulties.

Matter, and figure, and motion, and the degrees of both, we have clear
notions of; but when we begin to think of the extension or divisibility
of the one, or the beginning of either, our understanding sticks and
boggles, and knows not which way to turn. We also have no other notion
of operation but of matter by motion,-at least I must confess I have
not, and should be glad to have any one explain to me intelligibly any
other; and yet we shall find it hard to make out any phenomenon by those
causes. We know very well that we think, and at pleasure move ourselves,
and yet, if we will think a negative argument sufficient to build on, we
shall have reason to doubt whether we can do one or other; it being to
me inconceivable how matter should think, and as incomprehensible how an
immaterial thinking thing should be able to move material, or be
affected by it. We having therefore positive experience of our thinking
and motion, the negative arguments against them, and the impossibility
of understanding them, never shake our assent to these truths, which
perhaps will prove a considerable rule to determine us in very material
questions.

MEMORY-IMAGINATION-MADNESS.

MEMORY. When we revive in our minds the idea of anything that we have
before observed to exist, this we call memory; viz. to recollect in our
minds the idea of our father or brother. But when, from the observations
we have made of divers particulars, we make a general idea to represent
any species in general, as man; or else join several ideas together,
which we never observed to exist together, we call it imagination. So
that memory is always the picture of something, the idea whereof has
existed before in our thoughts, as near the life as we can draw it; but
imagination is a picture drawn in our minds without reference to a
pattern.

And here it may be observed that the ideas of memory, like painting
after the life, come always short, i. e. want something of the
original.

For whether a man would remember the dreams he had in the night, or the
sights of a foregoing day, some of the traces are always left out, some
of the circumstances are forgotten; and those kind of pictures, like
those represented successively by several looking-glasses, are the more
dim and fainter the further they are off from the original object. For
the mind, endeavouring to retain only the traces of the pattern, losing
by degrees a great part of them, and not having the liberty to supply
any new colours or touches of its own, the picture in the memory every
day fades and grows dimmer, and oftentimes is quite lost.

But the imagination, not being tied to any pattern, but adding what
colours, what ideas it pleases, to its own workmanship, making originals
of its own which are usually very bright and clear in the mind, and
sometimes to that degree that they make impressions as strong and as
sensible as those ideas which come immediately by the senses from
external objects,-so that the mind takes one for the other, and its own
imagination for realities.

And in this, it seems, madness consists, and not in the want of reason;
for allowing their imagination to be right, one may observe that madmen
usually reason right from them: and I guess that those who are about
madmen, will find that they make very little use of their memory, which
is to recollect particulars past with their circumstances: but having
any particular idea suggested to their memory, fancy dresses it up after
its own fashion, without regard to the original.

Hence also one may see how it comes to pass that those that think long
and intently upon one thing,

come at last to have their minds disturbed about it, and to be a little
cracked as to that particular. For by repeating often with vehemence of
imagination the ideas that do belong to, or may be brought in about, the
same thing, a great many whereof the fancy is wont to furnish, these at
length come to take so deep and impression, that they all pass for clear
truths and realities, though perhaps the greater part of them have at
several times been supplied only by the fancy, and are nothing but the
pure effects of the imagination.

This at least is the cause of several errors and mistakes amongst men,
even when it does not wholly unhinge the brains, and put all government
of the thoughts into the hands of the imagination; as it sometimes
happens when the imagination, being much employed, and getting the
mastery about any one thing, usurps the dominion over all the other
faculties of the mind in all other. But how this comes about, or what it
is that gives it on such an occasion that empire,-how it comes thus to
be let loose, I confess, I cannot guess. If that were once known, it
would be no small advance towards the easier curing of this malady; and
perhaps to that purpose it may not be amiss to observe what diet,
temper, or other circumstances they are, that set the imagination on
fire, and make it active and imperious. This I think, that having often
recourse to one's memory, and tying down the mind strictly to the
recollecting things past precisely as they were,

may be a means to check those extravagant or towering flights of the
imagination. And it is good often to divert the mind from that which it
has been earnestly employed about, or which is its ordinary business, to
other objects, and to make it attend to the informations of the senses
and the things they offer to it. J. L. 1678.

MADNESS.

Madness seems to be nothing but a disorder in the imagination, and not
in the discursive faculty; for one shall find amongst the distract,
those who fancy themselves kings, &c., who discourse and reason right
enough upon the suppositions and wrong fancies they have taken. And any
sober man may find it in himself in twenty occasions, viz.-in a town
where he has not been long resident, let him come into a street that he
is pretty well acquainted with at the contrary end to what he imagined,
he will find all his reasonings about it so out of order and so
inconsistent with the truth, that should he enter into debate upon the
situation of the houses, the turnings on the right or left hand, &c.
&c., with one who knew the place perfectly, and had the right ideas
which way he was going, he would seem little better than frantic.

This, I believe, most people may have observed to have happened to
themselves, especially when they have been carried up and down in
coaches, and perhaps may have found it sometimes difficult to set their
thoughts right, and reform the mistakes of their imagination. And I have
known some who, upon the wrong impressions which were at first made upon
their imaginations, could never tell which was north or south in
Smithfield, though they were no very ill geographers: and when by the
sun and the time of the day they were convinced of the position of that
place, yet they could not tell how to reconcile it to other parts of the
town that were adjoining to it, but out of sight; and were very apt to
relapse again, as soon as either the sun disappeared,

or they were out of sight of the place, into the mistakes and confusion
of their old ideas. From whence one may see of what moment it is to take
care that the first impressions we settle upon our minds be conformable
to the truth and to the nature of thing; or else all our meditations and
discourse thereupon will be nothing but perfect raving.

ERROR.

The foundation of error and mistake in most men lies in having obscure
or confused notions of things, or by reason of their confused ideas,
doubtful and obscure words; our words always in their signification
depending upon our ideas, being clear or obscure proportionably as our
notions are so, and sometimes have little more but the sound of the word
for the notion of the thing. For in the discursive faculty of the mind,
I do not find that men are so apt to err; but it avails little that
their syllogisms are right, if their terms be insignificant and obscure,
or confused and indetermined, or that in their internal discourse
deductions be regular, if their notions be wrong. Therefore, in our
discourse with others, the greatest care is to be had that we be not
misled or imposed on by the measure of their words, where the fallacy
oftener lies than in faulty consequences.

And in considering by ourselves to take care of our notions, where a
man argues right upon wrong notions or terms, he does like a madman;
were he makes wrong consequences, he does like a fool: madness seeming
to me to lie more in the imagination, and folly in the discourse.

SPACE.-1677

Space, in itself, seems to be nothing but a capacity, or possibility,
for extended beings or bodies to be, or exist, which we are apt to
conceive infinite; for there being in nothing no resistance, we have a
conception very natural and very true, that let bodies be already as far
extended as you will, yet, other new bodies should be created, they
might exist where there are now no bodies: viz. a globe of a foot
diameter might exist beyond the utmost superficies of all bodies now
existing; and because we have by our acquaintance with bodies got the
idea of the figure and distance of the superficial part of a globe of a
foot diameter, we are apt to imagine the space where the globe exists to
be really something, to have a real existence before and after its
existence there. Whereas, in truth,

it is really nothing, and so has no opposition nor resistance to the
being of such a body there; though we, applying the idea of a natural
globe, are apt to conceive it as something so far extended, and these
are properly the imaginary spaces which are so much disputed of. But as
for distance, I suppose that to be the relation of two bodies or beings
near or remote to one another, measurable by the ideas we have of
distance taken from solid bodies; for were there no beings at all, we
might truly say there were no distances. The fallacy we put upon
ourselves which inclines us to think otherwise is this, that whenever we
talk of distance, we first suppose some real beings existing separate
from one another, and then, without taking notice of that supposition,

and the relation that results from their placing one in reference to
another, we are apt to consider that space as some positive real being
existing without them: whereas, as it seems to me, to be but a bare
relation; and when we suppose them to be, viz. a yard asunder, it is no
more but to say extended in a direct line to the proportion of three
feet or thirty-six inches distance, whereof by use we have got the idea:
this gives us the notion of distance, and the vacuum that is between
them is understood by this, that bodies of a yard long that come between
them, thrust or remove away nothing that was there before.

1. I take it for granted that I can conceive a space without a body;
for, suppose the universe as big as you will, I can, without the bounds
of it, imagine it possible to thrust out or create any the most solid
body of any figure, without removing from the place it possesses
anything that was there before. Neither does it imply any contradiction
to suppose a space so empty within the bounds of the universe, that a
body may be brought into it without removing from thence any other' and
if this be not granted, I cannot see how one can make out any motion
supposing your bodies of what figures or bulk you please, as I imagine
it is easy to demonstrate.

If it be possible to suppose nothing, or, in our thoughts, to remove
all manner of beings from any place, then this imaginary space is just
nothing, and signifies no more but a bare possibility that body may
exist where now there is none. If it be impossible to suppose pure
nothing, or to extend our thoughts where there is, or we can suppose, no
being, this space void of body must be something belonging to the being
of the Deity. But be it one or the other, the idea we have of it we take
from the extension of bodies which fall under our senses; and this idea
of extension being settled in our minds, we are able, by repeating that
in our thoughts, without annexing body or impenetrability to it, to
imagine spaces where there are no bodies-which imaginary spaces, if we
suppose all other beings absent, are purely nothing, but merely a
possibility that body might there exist. Or if it be a necessity to
suppose a being there, it must be God, whose being we thus make, i. e.
suppose extended, but not impenetrable: but be it one or the other,
extension seems to be mentally separable from body, and distance nothing
but the relation of space, resulting from the existence of two positive
beings; or, which is all one, two parts of the same being.


