Relation Space. 1678
====================

Besides the considering things barely and separately in themselves, the
mind considers them also with respect, i. e. at the same time looking
upon some other, and this we call relation. So that if the mind so
considers anything that another is necessarily supposed, this is
relation; there is that which necessarily makes us consider two things
at once, or makes the mind look on two things at once, and hence it is
that relative terms or words that signify this relation so denominate
one thing, as that they always intimate or denote another; viz. father,
countryman, bigger, distant;

so that whatsoever necessarily occasions two things, looked on as
distinct, this connection in our thoughts of whatsoever it be founded
in, that is properly relation, which perhaps may serve to give a little
light to that great obscurity which has caused so much dispute about the
nature of space, whether it be something or nothing, created or eternal.
For when we speak of space (as ordinarily we do) as the abstract
distance, it seems to me to be a pure relation, and we call it distance;
but when we consider it as the distance or space between the extremities
of a continued body,

whose continued parts do, or are supposed to, fill all the interjacent
space, we call it extension, and it is looked on to be a positive
inherent property of the body, because it keeps constantly with it,
always the same, and every particle has its share of it; whereas,
whether you consider the body in whole mass, or in the least particles
of the body, it appears to me to be nothing but the relation of the
distance of the extremities. But when we speak of space in general,
abstract and separate from all consideration of any body at all or any
other being; it seems not then to be any real thing, but the
consideration of a bare possibility of body to exist: to this, I
foresee, there will lie two great objections:-

1st. The Cartesians will except against me as speaking of space without
body, which they make to be the same thing; to whom let me say, that if
spacium be corpus, and corpus spacium, then it is as true too that
extensio is corpus, and corpus extensio, which is a pretty harsh kind of
expression and that which is so distant from truth, that I do not
remember that I have anywhere met with it from them; and yet I would
fain know any other difference between extensio and spacium than that
which I have above mentioned. If they will say omne extensum et omnis
res positiva extensa corpus, et vice vers√¢,

I fully consent. But then it is only to say that body is the only being
capable of distance between its own parts, which is extension (for I do
not know why angels may not be capable of the relation of distance, in
respect of one another), which shows plainly the difference of the words
extension, which is for distance, a part of the same body, or that which
is considered but as one body, and that of space, which is the distance
between any two beings, without the consideration of body interjacent.

Besides this, there seems to me this great and essential difference
between space and body, that body is divisible into separable parts, but
space is not. This, I think, is so plain that it needs no proof; for if
one take a piece of matter, of an inch square, for example, and divide
it into two, the parts will be separated if set at further distance one
from another; but yet nobody, I think, amongst those who are most for
the reality of space, say the parts of space are or can be removed to a
further distance one from another. And he that, imagining the idea of a
space of an inch square, can tell how to separate the parts of it, and
remove them one from another, has, I confess, a much more powerful fancy
than I.

It is no more strange, therefore, that extension, which is the relation
of distance between parts of the same being, should be proper only to
body, which alone has parts, than that the relation of filiation should
be proper only to men.

To my supposition, that space, as it may be conceived antecedent to and
void of all bodies, or, if you will, all determinate beings, is nothing
but the idea of the possibility of the existence of body; for, when one
says there is space for another world as big as this, it seems to me to
be no more than there is no repugnancy why another world as big as this
might not exist; and in this sense space may be said to be infinite; and
so in effect space, as antecedent to body, or some determinate being, is
in effect nothing-To this I say will be objected, that space being, as
it is, capable of greater and less, cannot properly be nothing.

To this I say, that space, antecedent to all determinate beings, is not
capable of greater or less. The mistake lies in this, that we, having
been accustomed to the measures of a foot, an ell, a mile, &c. &c., can
easily frame ideas of them, where we suppose no body to be even beyond
the bounds of the world, but our having ideas in our head proves not the
existence of anything without us. But you will say, is not the space of
a foot beyond the extremity of the universe less than the space of a
yard? I answer, yes; that the idea of one, which I place there, is
bigger than the idea of the other;

but that there is anything real there existing, I deny; or by saying or
imagining the space of a foot or yard beyond the extremity of the world,
would suppose or mean anything more than that a body of a foot or a yard
(of which I have the idea) may exist there, I deny. Indeed, should a
body be placed a foot distant from the utmost extremity of the universe,
one might say it was a foot distant from the world, which seems to me to
be a bare relation, resulting from its position there, without supposing
that space to be any real being existing there before, and interposed
between them, but only that a real body of such dimensions may be placed
between them without removing them further one from the other. For the
relation makes itself appear in this, that whatsoever is so spoke of
requires its correlative; and therefore, speaking of the universe, one
cannot say it is distant, because without it we suppose no other
determinate or finite being which may be the other term of this
relation.

It will be answered, perhaps, that one may suppose a point in that
empty space, and then say it is a foot from that point. I answer, one
may as easily suppose a body as a point, if the point be quid reale; if
not, it being nothing, one cannot say the extremity or superficies of
the world is a foot from nothing; so that be it a point, or body, or
what other being one pleases, that is supposed there, it is evidence
there is always required some real existence to be the other term of the
relation.

And after all the suppositions that can be made, it can never truly be
said that the utmost superficies of the world is a foot distant from
anything, if there be nothing really existing beyond it, but only that
imaginary space.

That which makes us so apt to mistake in this point, I think, is this,
that having been all our lifetime accustomed to speak ourselves, and
hear all others speak of space, in phrases that import it to be a real
thing, as to occupy or take up so much space, we come to be possessed
with this prejudice, that it is a real thing, and not a bare relation.
And that which helps to it is, that by constant conversing with real
sensible things, which have this relation of distance one to another,
which we, by the reason just now mentioned, mistake for a real positive
thing,

we are apt to think that it as really exists beyond the utmost extent
of all bodies, or finite beings, though there be no such beings there to
sustain it, as it does here amongst bodies, which is not true. For
though it be true that the black lines drawn on a rule have the relation
one to another of an inch distance, they being real sensible things; and
though it be also true that I, knowing the idea of an inch, can imagine
that length without imagining body, as well as I can imagine a figure
without imagining body; yet it is no more true that there is any real
distance in that which we call imaginary space, than that there is any
real figure there.


