Forword
=======

All Praise is due to Allah, Who created human beings in the most
perfect image and gave correct estimate and guidance. Blessings and
peace be upon Muhammad (s.a.w.)1 the leader of the heavenly guided and
master of callers to the Lord of mankind. Peace be upon the heirs of the
Prophet's knowledge, the torch bearers of guidance and reform his
infallible descendants, and also peace be upon his rightly guided
companions.

Social tendency among people is a natural phenomenon. It attracts
mankind towards each other, and instills in them a feeling of
cooperation for achieving a better standard of life. There is also a
deep intrinsic need within people for social life.

Islam has a well-defined code which aims at achieving humanitarian
values and goals by two methods, namely the internal and the external.
These methods instill in the individual, family, society and state the
qualities of love, equality, reciprocity, justice, freedom and security.
Islam endeavors to achieve such sublime values by internal motives.
Force is not considered to start with in achieving Islamic goals and
internal motives are implanted by concepts and emotions which would be
reflected in human behaviour and aesthetic tastes.

Islam's concern for people's internal motives and external behaviour
was not left to the preachers' words only. The right bases, required
resources and practical measures are provided in order to mould people
according to the Islamic set of values. Hence human senses are ably
supervised by spiritual motives. There are several shining examples,
throughout our history, which provide striking evidence to these
facts.

----------------------------------------------------
1. (.s.a.w) : is the abbreviation at the Arabic phrase Sal-Lallahu'
aliehi we aalihi (May the blessing of God be with him and his holy
family).

[ 2 ]

But plots of neo-Jahiliyya in the shape of Western Arrogance armed with
material supremacy managed to gain control of the Muslim World's destiny
for a while. During this disastrous period of colonial hegemony they
tried to destroy the Muslims' educational code and the results were
appalling evil thoughts, ethical setback, anarchy and corruption of the
whole system of government.

A glance at the Muslim World reveals the catastrophic damage done by
Western Ignorance to families, schools, streets, factories, offices,
colleges and institutions. The most salient damage is evident when we
look at the mass media, educational and cultural institutions and
publishing houses.

Al-Balagh Foundation donates this small gift Features of Islamic
Education' to its dear subscribers, and prays to Allah, the most
Glorious to awaken our conscience and enable us to liberate Muslim
minds, develop our lands, cleanse the earth of evil and spread prayers,
virtue, justice and heavenly guidance throughout the world.


A1-Balagh Foundation

**Meaning Of Education**

Education is a process of grooming and reforming people through proper
direction and guidance throughout their lives and fields. This task is
especially entrusted to different people at different stages.

Therefore, education in this context means a process of building and
guiding human intellect in order to attain maturity and an ideal stage.
For this purpose, Heavenly Messages and Laws and successive Messengers
and Prophets (peace be upon them) were sent. They came to educate
mankind in a balanced systematic way, covering all human aspects such as
spiritual, conceptual, behavioral and physical. Their messages urged
people to manifest their humanity.

As already mentioned, education is a process of building, reform,
guidance and practical training for people and is not sheer transfer of
concepts and expanding of people's fields of information. Knowledge and
information play the role of an engineering design on which people's
personalities are based and constructed. Hence, culture and information
at the teacher's hands are similar to a design drawing at an

[ 3 ]

engineer's disposal, who is engaged in constructing a house or a
project. The building takes shape according to the drawing which has
been carefully prepared.

An engineering design reveals the scientific knowledge, experience and
aesthetic standard of an engineer. Similarly, educational codes,
elements and principles show the expertise of a learned teacher whose
challenge is to construct people's personalities according to a set of
aspired norms.

Therefore, a learned teacher's job resembles an engineer's in the way
of supervising and applying his thoughts, skill and vision.

A learned teacher or theoretician moulds people and society in
accordance with design of his education code. In other words, education
is considered the first step in building a society and civilization. For
this very reason, states, philosophical and social schools and heavenly
laws have placed a great emphasis on the bringing up of man according to
their respective educational codes, so that people would be prepared in
all aspects to live in harmony under the peaceful shades of a perfect
social code.

Thence, it is necessary to be fully conscious when studying non-Islamic
educational theories and principles. For these articulate, cleverly
disguised theories may influence our thinking and infect our society
with their deadly poisons and diseases.

It is important to point out that educational philosophy in the Muslim
World has lost its position. For this very reason, Muslim students fall
an easy prey to these plots, by blindly aping foreign educational
systems, schools and philosophies, without ever bothering to think about
the catastrophic consequences.

These philosophies have proved their failure in practice and inflicted
great disasters and pains upon mankind. They misled a greater part of
many generations disfiguring personalities, promoting sick ideas and
bringing untold misery. Alas, the materialistic world and society is
doomed to destruction due to such absurd philosophies.

Therefore, copying or importing of such harmful theories and
philosophies, rife with sick-thoughts, dangerous and destructive trends
will lead to damaging people's personalities and their behaviour. It
would also induce us to lose our splendid heritage and become meek
imitators of foreign perverted cultures, ultimately resulting in
terrifying ethical and behavioral damage.

[ 4 ]

Thus, it is a duty for our theoreticians, experts and masters of
education to be aware of these bitter facts. It is hoped that they would
revise and reform the existing educational pattern and policies, which
follow the footsteps of Western Ignorance's decaying systems and
theories. More so, considering the fact that our Muslim Nation possesses
a message, a civilization, a philosophy and an educational code for
molding people's personalities and defining clear goals too.

It has a diametrical difference compared to other educational codes and
philosophies produced by the materialistic thinking of either the
European and American Capitalist societies or the Eastern Communist
society.

Materialistic civilization is based upon certain ethical,
psychological, educational and social philosophies which derive from it,
their general view of life and man. This is in complete contrast to the
Islamic viewpoint with respect to general philosophy and thoughts which
are the basis of building and guiding a human being.

Accordingly it is necessary to shed light on the facts that educational
planning and conforming to Islamic code does not mean mere parrot
learning of texts or increasing number of lessons or enhancing syllabus
of Islamic subjects. Although such measures may be interesting, but it
is incorrect to confine Islamic education to a book.

The concept of viewing Islamic education as a collection of Islamic
texts in the fields of ethics, belief, Tradition of Prophet and
obligatory rituals (Ebadat), is a misunderstanding of its real meaning.
In fact Islamic way of education is concerned with building and guiding
people, based on a comprehensive code covering the family, school, and
society, and derived from thorough knowledge of Islam.

All types of knowledge, philosophy of sciences, culture, way of life
and interrelations in home, school and university are to be based on
purely Islamic principles, so that all aspects of life, conduct and
principals shine with Islamic spirit.

Islam has a unique and the most comprehensive stand when tackling
various subjects like society, history, origin of universe and life,
ethics, politics, economics, arts, legislation etc.... It has also its
clearly defined sources and firm bases. Hence, all theories, concepts,
schools' syllabuses, which cover all stages of education, should be
drawn from Islamic philosophy, code and general view. Furthermore, mass
media and cultural means in the society should be within the framework
of Islam, so that

[ 5 ]

civilization, society and people are built on purely Islamic teachings
and practices.

In short the Islamic message is an educational and humanitarian
message. It aims at building a society at every step and has well
defined concepts and laws. It develops all good human potentials and
reforms people's conduct and personalities.

Islam's role is to provide a guiding light and pave the road for a
practical and unique way of life for mankind. Concepts and knowledge
imparted to people are practical guidelines and a code for life in order
to furnish a design of a comprehensive human society.

The Master of humanity, the Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (s.a.w.) had
brought up an outstanding generation, who recognized no borders between
theory and practice. He taught and encouraged his companions to learn by
heart and practice the glorious verses of the holy Qur'an, and proceeded
gradually as the divine scripture was revealed in parts. Uthman Ibn
Madh'un and Ibn Massood, two of his companions narrate:

"The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) was teaching us ten verses at a time;
we were not permitted to proceed further unless we had mastered fully
the previous verses with respect to content and practice. Then, another
ten Qur'anic verses would be taught to us by the Prophet of Allah. '

Abu Abdur-Rahmafl as-Salmi narrates:

"We were told by the companions of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) who
taught us the Qur' an, that only ten verses at a time were taught to
them. They did not proceed to learn another ten verses unless the
previous ten were mastered with respect to their meaning and practical
implications." 2

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) was following this procedure in order
to build an Islamic society and individuals, in carefully calculated
steps and stages.

-------------------------------------------
(1)AbuL Qasim al-Khui, al-Bayan Fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, p.29, Mujaz Uloom
alQur'an, p. 123-154 by Dr. Dawod al-Attar. ( 2 ) ibid.

[ 6 ]

Muslims consider the Prophet (s.a.w.) the living example for the
Islamic Message. He is the perfect model of emulation for practicing
Muslims because he was, right from his birth guided by Allah, the most
High. Once he said: "My Lord has taught me and indeed it was a good
bringing- up".

The noble conduct and manner of the Prophet (s.a.w.) is therefore,
considered the most sublime and perfect human model, and the Message a
living example. Thus, the Tradition of Prophet is taken as the second
source of Islamic jurisprudence after the holy Qur'an. The Creator has
given credit to the Prophet in the following Qur'anic verse:

"Surely you are on an exalted morality.

Holy Qur'an (68:4)

Qur'anic verses emphasize the importance of following the footsteps of
the Prophet (s.a.w.) in all walks of life. "Certainly you have in
Allah's Apostle an excellent examplar for whosoever hopes in Allah and
the Last Day, and remembers Allah much.
Holy Qur'an ((33:21)

In the light of these directions, the first generation of Muslims
molded their life, and the holy descendants of the Prophet (s.a.w.)
carried the torch of call and guidance. The sixth Imam of the Prophet's
Household Imam Ja'far, as-Sadiq (a.s.)1 says in this regard~

"There is no proper belief without deeds, and belief cannot be firm
unless coupled with practice." 2 These are general guidelines on which
Muslims should base their lives in all sectors whether concerning an
individual, a family, a state or an institution.

------------------------------------------------------
(1) (a.s.) is the abbreviation of the Arabic phrase
aday-hi/ha'hiٌius-set am (Peace be with him/her/them).
(2) al-Hur ai-Amili. Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, Vol. 6, Chapt. 4, p. 127.


