Healthy Preparation
===================

"And seek, by means of what Allah has given you, the future abode, and
forget not your portion of the (present) world; and do good, as Allah
has been good to you. And seek not to work corruption in the earth;
surely Allah does not love the corrupt. Holy Qur'an (28:77)

Islamic education is a process of building people to enable them to
lead a good and healthy life. This process cannot be separated from
Islamic goals, their view of man, motives, behaviour elements as well as
the material and moral aspects of human existence. Correct Islamic
upbringing is concerned with all human activities and inspired from
Islamic laws and norms. It develops human body, spirit, ethics, mind and
emotions, etc.

This topic shall deal succinctly with all aspects of Islamic education.
This is in order to draw main lines of the educational process and
visualize Islamic picture of man and his personality. The first subject
that shall be dealt with, is the human body and its proper care.

Islamic teachings encourage physical training and development of the
human body. They insist on cleanliness, hygienic food, physical
training, precaution and cure of diseases as necessary measures to
secure a healthy and strong generation, because Islam greatly values,
valor, struggle (Jihad), military preparedness etc.

Islam trains human instincts and natural inclinations. It provides
guidance for sexual, intellectual, social and knowledge seeking
instincts which are wonderfully satisfied and protected against
deviation. Islam observes people's minds, research and science2 giving
them unparalleled importance. Evidence is furnished by the following
Qur'anic verse:

---------------------------------------------
(1) al-Kulaini, al-Kafi, Vol. 50.
(2) See our book Islam and Physical Care'.

[ 20 ]

"... Say: Are they equal' -those who know and those who know not? Only
the men of understanding are mindful'!" Holy Qur'an (39:9)

"And He has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is
in the earth, all, from Him, surely in that are signs for a people who
reflect." Holy Qur'an (45:13)

Our generous Prophet (s.a.w.) came up with the following enlightened
statements:

"Whoever treads the path of learning Allah will guide him! her way to
Paradise and angels will be happy and pleased with the seekers of
knowledge. Everyone on earth and in the universe would beseech (Allah's)
pardon for the knowledge-seeker, even a whale in the ocean. The status
of a scholar compared to that of a worshipper is like a full moon to the
star. Scholars are the heirs of prophets; prophets do not leave dinars
or dirhams but it is knowledge they leave, so whoever seeks knowledge,
his/her fortune is great."1

"Whoever desires worldly fortune should seek knowledge, whoever wants
the Hereafter should also seek knowledge and whoever looks for both,
should be a seeker of knowledge. Learning is compulsory upon every
Muslim; Allah loves the seekers of knowledge."2 Islam is keen on
building balanced personalities, by satisfying basic human instincts,
and giving required training in ethical, physical, intuitive, and
instinctive fields.

The mind and morals are given control over primitive instincts in human
beings and materialistic matters. This is done in order to secure
elevation of people from an animal level to a sublime human level.
Endless efforts are expended to develop ethical and intuitive norms
which modify psychological standards of people. For this reason, ethics
are exalted by Qur'an and firm calls are made for good conduct. Allah
the Highest says:

------------------------------------------------
(1) al-Kulaini. al-Kafi. Vol. I. Chap. 3. p. 34.
(2) aJ-Kulairpi. al-Kafi. Vol. I. Chap. 3. p. 331.

[ 21 ]

"Tread then the straight path as you are commanded, and also those who
repent with you; and transgress not; surely He sees what von do." Holy
Qur'an (11-112)

"Surely you are on an exalted morality." Holy Qur'an (68:4)

A review of the Prophet's Tradition regarding education, reveals that
morals is the fundamental aim. The Prophet proclaimed: "I have been sent
to complete the noblest of morals.

It is evident from the above that ethics is one of the most important
goals of Islamic education. The other field of Islamic education is the
spiritual and devotional upbringing. People are introduced to the
Creator and shown His Majesty and Unity, because obedience to Allah is
the purpose of human existence on earth. "I have not created jinn and
mankind except to serve Me." Holy Qur'an (51:56)

Hence, bringing up children in the light of knowledge and love towards
Allah is a pre-conditional step. Thinking about Allah's Glory and
practicing Islamic rites are further milestones of the Islamic education
code.

It is noteworthy that an Islamic bringing-up sublimes aesthetic tastes,
enhances spiritual horizons, and motivates the mind for enjoying
spiritual and material pleasures. Not only does it develops the five
senses in the human beings but sharpens them to air feelings of joy and
love the world over. Furthermore, it induces contemplation in the grand
creation of the universe and Allah's infinite power.

Islam calls for the enjoyment of the manifestations of beauty to
satisfy spiritual desires. It beautifully harnesses people's desires for
material and sensual pleasures and gives priority to spiritual joys and
aesthetic values in life. Allah the Highest says:

"Say: Who has forbidden the adornment of Allah which He brought forth
for His servants, and the good things of His providing? Say: These, on
the Day of Resurrection shall be exclusively for those who believed [ 22
]

during the life of the world; thus do We make signs clear for a people
who know." Holy Qur'an (7:32)

A narration from Imam Ali (a.s.) the leader of the believers says:

"Allah is Elegant and loves beauty; He likes His blessings to be seen
on people."1 It is narrated that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

"Allah, the Glorious, the Magnificent, likes beauty and adornment and
He dislikes misery and similar manifestations."2 Therefore, Muslims
ought to give aesthetic aspects due attention and importance.. People
should be trained to acquire the sense of appreciating beauty and fine
tastes, that would enable them to shun ugly and disgusting views and
distorted pictures, whether material or moral.

This field is actually very vast and covers so many subjects. For
instance, painting, calligraphy, merchandise, architecture, sewing.
embroidery, decoration, art, prose, poetry and drama are some of the
many subjects which offer scope for aesthetic taste and its
development.

However there is an important point to be observed and that is the
ethical border defined clearly by Islamic laws and moral norms.

On the other hand, Global Ignorance's (Jahiliyya) distorted version of
beauty and aesthetic values should not find channels to infiltrate our
noble schools of art and artists. Islamic ethical values disapprove of
abusement, obscenity, exploitation, sculpture, dancing, singing: Rythmic
melodies and chanting of musical instruments that stimulate carnal

-------------------------------------------------
(1) al-Kulaini. al-Kafi. Vol. 6. p. 438.
(2) aI-Kulaini. al-Kaf,. Vol. 6. p. 44.

[ 23 ]

desires and lead to corruption rejected by Islam's lofty artistic
standards. These are considered as ways of wasting time, and the
blessings of life. Such means of seduction and deception stimulate
animal instincts, clouding reason and intellect and make people lead the
life of beasts, which we see so evident ii the decaying Western society.
Such a state has a negative effect on human spirit and breaks up social
relations, ultimately ending in dangerous bodily and mental diseases.

Therefore. Islam has an excellent code of education and promotes
aesthetic values in order to have strong belief i Allah, and provides an
opportunity for real and ever last in pleasures and joys, It calls for
airing love and harmony within morally permitted fields.


**Who Is Responsible For Education?**

Civilization gradually developed with time, and many types of social
and cultural factors, were responsible for its progress. As already
noted education plays a fundamental role in building human conduct and
personality. Many parties share responsibility besides parents and
family members.

Educational process is taken up by other institutions gradually but
steadily, covering increased duties, as technological and organizational
advancement take new leads. Schools, Society, State and Mass Media are
beginning to assume ever increasing roles in this fields. The following
parties actively participate in educational matters:

1. Family
2. School
3. Society
4. State
5. The Individual

**1. Family:**

Family is the cradle where children see the first light of life. It is
acknowledged that the family leaves the deepest and most profound marks
on children's personalities, thoughts, behaviour and conduct. Childhood
is a crucial period in forming people's personalities because family
role is all- embracing during this time. Parents are charged with the
proper bringing up of children and Islam has assigned fathers to play a
leading role in this process. Allah, the Highest, addresses fathers in
the following verse:

[ 24 ]

"0' you who believe guard yourselves and your families against a fire
whose fuel is men and stones..." Holy Qur'an (66:6)

Therefore, fathers have to play an essential role in their children's
upbringing, safety and proper supervision. Islamic education is an
insurance against deviation and degradation, hence, fathers' negligence
for their children's Islamic education is considered a crime in Islam.
When children cannot discriminate good from evil, and are not armed to
defend themselves against a corrupt environment it surely reflects
fathers' faults in spoiling the youth.

Therefore, Islamic penal code holds fathers responsible for their
underaged1 children's mischief, and they have to the bear the cost of
material damage inflicted by children in their custody. On the Day of
Resurrection, fathers would be again questioned for such abuse.

**2. School:**

The second educational establishment in the life of a Muslim is school.
The school has a great responsibility and plays a vital role in the
growing teenage personalities. Schools are like factories, producing
human generations, training the whole nation and drawing a complete
picture of life for them.

Thus it is very important to attend schools with due care, especially
with regard to their main elements which besides teachers are the
educational syllabus, extra-curricular activities and disciplinary
supervision. These elements ought to be molded within an Islamic
framework, making out of schools an effective instrument for refining
impurities and wrong motives that may be acquired from the family or
environment. Moreover, schools are a suitable ground to discover talents
and nurture good motives.

They develop people in the right fields and strengthen good intents in
them, so that they would eventually play constructive roles in society,
after being properly equipped with scientific and cultural knowledge and
given appropriate training.

-------------------------------------------------
(1) In Islam a boy less than 15 years of age is considered under
aged.

[ 25 ]

In short schools should be charged for achieving a sound Islamic
educational program. These goals have already been reviewed in the
previous chapter, Islamic Education Goals'.

**3. Society:**

The third factor which shares education responsibility is society.

People's personalities are greatly influenced by social trends and
norms, culture, concepts, way of life, language and religion of the
society. Therefore, it is necessary to build the society according to
Islamic cultural norms. The social factors and the way of life should be
monitored carefully so as to achieve the upholding Islamic principle of,
"commanding people to act upon good deeds and refrain from evil
doings.

Friends and companions exercise profound influence on each other during
childhood and teenage stages, unconsciously creating lasting effects or
characters. Hence, it is important to keep children away from spoiled
friends, centers of corruption, especially when Muslims live in a
non-Islamic society or environment.

When we are lucky, having the opportunity of living in an Islamic
society, then dangers for children being misled would be minimized.
Muslim society would play a positive role in the bringing-up process,
imparting required influence on people's conduct and way of life.

**4. State:**

The state or more properly the type of government has always played an
interesting role in society and its educational process. In recent times
this role has become increasingly stronger and larger because of the
facilities provided by technological and organizational advancements.
Political and Ideological schools of thought have influenced various
governments to organize and supervise education process closely in order
to secure people's allegiance to their rule. Socialist, Communist,
Capitalist and Muslim governments are all concerned to see their
education institutions such as schools, colleges, universities,
newspapers, radio and television etc.... bring up people within their
planned codes and directives.

[ 26 ]

It may not be out of context to mention at this stage, that education
in Muslim countries is on the whole sadly influenced by non-Islamic
codes. Such secular codes bring up Muslim children in a way that will
lead to internal struggle within people and society which ultimately
leads to anarchy and social ills, as is the case of non-Muslim
societies. Therefore, it is a duty of men of letters, fathers, Muslim
scholars, and Islamic callers to be aware of this grave danger. Suitable
cultural measures should be taken in order to face this challenge and
protect the coming Muslim generations from falling into the abyss of
corruption and deviation.

**5. The Individual:**

When children grow up, get matured physically and mentally, they are
able to perform self-education. Thus, people are capable of modifying
their stands, thoughts and conduct. Allah's words testify this fact:

"Guard yourselves and families against a Fire...." Holy Qur'an (66:6)

There is stress on the individual's responsibility for self- education,
rescue from suffering and anguish, by the following verse:

"But as for him who fears to stand before his Lord and restrains the
soul from lust. Then surely Paradise is the abode." Holy Qur'an (79:
40-41)

Islam views self-education as having great effect in improving and
transforming people. The inner transformation of people would naturally
result in the keen observance of laws, on the part of the individual.

The Prophet has praised believers who undergo self-education, and has
proclaimed Paradise to be their reward. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.)
has narrated from his father's chain of authority to the Prophet:

"When the Day of Resurrection arrives, a caller from Allah will
proclaim, Where are the patient? A group of people would rise up, and a
team of angels would be ready to welcome them; (other) people would ask:
What type of patience you endured?' They would reply: We have endured
difficulties in the way of Allah, and refrained from His disobedience.'
Then he (the Prophet) said: A caller on behalf of Allah

[ 27 ]

would cry: My servants are truthful, make way for them to Paradise
without any questions.' " 1

A narration from Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says that during the time
of the Prophet (s.a.w.) a detachment was sent out for a battle. When
they returned to Medina, he (Prophet) said:

"Welcome to a people who accomplished the lesser struggle while the big
struggle is awaiting them. It was enquired: "O Messenger of Allah, what
is the big struggle? He (s.a.w.) replied: "Struggle with yourself
(desires)."2 Thus self-education is based on the above-mentioned
directives and guidelines. It strives for arriving at fruitful results
in the field of personal conduct and observance of Islamic laws, when
conforming to Islamic teachings.


**Some Suggestions For Parents and Children**

The directives concerning education in Islam are many and the ways for
reformation well defined. Here we will mention some of the most
important ones and concentrate on the following directives and
suggestions and beseech Allah to make our endeavors successful:

\* It is advisable for parents to build a harmonious and loving
relationship between them because constant disagreement or abnormal
behaviour on their part reflects on their children's conduct. Disrespect
for each other by the husband and wife, constant nagging or quarelling,
violence, discontent and an atmosphere of gloom and hatred have negative
effects upon the children's psychology and personality which ultimately
leads to bad behaviour and low morals.

Therefore the parents' mutual relationship and their behaviour is of
vital importance because it leaves its good or bad effects on the family
as a whole, but more particularly on the children, who in turn infect
the society.

---------------------------------------------------
(1) al-Hur al-Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi'ah. Vol. 6. Chap. 2, p. 189.
(2) al-Hur al-Amili. Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, Vol. 6, p. 122.

[ 28 ]

\* We must give our children love and kindness and teach them good
manners, in order to create a harmonious family. An atmosphere of peace
and security, would help them to develop their personalities and
guarantees their safe future. In contrast the child who doesn't receive
any love and sympathy from its parents, will grow up to be an
irresponsible misfit. Such a behaviour is likely to make the child
abnormal, and a psychological complex, full of hatred, aimlessness and
social ills.

\* Adolescent or growing up children, who are becoming conscious of
themselves and the environment around them should not be maltreated or
ridiculed by parents. Paying scant respect to their budding personality
and making them feel imperfect may lead them to disobey and dislike
their own parents. To treat them harshly and deprive them of their
material needs may push the adolescents toward such immoralities as
lying, theft, fraud, psychological disorders and etc., thereby affecting
the whole society.

\* It is not proper for parents to discriminate among their own
children, doting on one but neglecting the other, because the feeling of
negligence will instill in the child an unconscious abhorance for the
parents, weakening family ties and ruining the child's future.

\* The isolation and aloofness of a family which severes its ties from
all relatives, neighbours and society has a negative effect on the
children's lives, retarding their mental and social growth. On the other
hand when children observe their parents' firm ties with friends,
kinsfolk, and neighbours, interspersed with exchange of visits, gifts,
warm hospitality and a sincere concern for the others' needs, it is
natural for youngsters to absorb these qualities, learning good morals
and ettiquette.

\* Parents should draw an educational and cultural program for their
children, starting from early childhood even before the child enters
school.

They should recite Qur'anic verses and phrases like the Shahadatain'
(the two testimonies) necessary for a Muslim. They should tell morals
and narrate events from the life of the Prophet, his infallible
Household and pious -companions. Their glorious life full of courage,
magnanimity, truth, honor, love and kindness will inspire the children
and help mould their character.

\* The children should be introduced to Islamic events and rites and
should be explained the significance and importance of these dates.
Annual events like Lailatul-Qadr (The Qadr Night in Ramadhan), start
of

[ 29 ]

the Prophet's mission, The Eids, the Hajj pilgrimage and its dimensions
should be properly explained.

\* The belief in Monotheism (Tawheed) and Allah's pristine Majesty and
love towards Him, should be instilled in the children's heart. They
should be taught to remember Allah, and invoke His blessings, whether,
starting a meal, finishing it, undertaking something, facing
difficulties, etc., and should be taught to thank Allah on achieving
their aims. Parents must entertain questions arising in their children's
minds concerning belief, ideology, hereafter, laws etc., providing able
answers and clearing doubts.

\* Teaching children Allah's last revelation to mankind, the Holy
Qur'an, the way to recite it and understand its eternal wisdom. Parents
should encourage children to contemplate on the glorious verses of the
Qur'an and their meanings.

\* Parents should dissuade children from hearing, watching or
practicing forbidden things, or acts and explain their harmful effects
and the reason the thing or act is prohibited in Islam. It is a duty to
help children differentiate between Halal and Haram.

\* Fostering the spirit of Islamic brotherhood among children and
expanding their knowledge of the Muslim Ummah and its affairs, its past
history and the present situation. At tile same time it is necessary to
caution children against the enemies of Islam and their guilable plots
to' deceive and enslave unsuspecting Muslim peoples. Practical examples
can be provided from current events and the recent colonial past.

\* The lofty concept of repentance and being generous to a fault should
be nurtured in the children. Teaching them to forgive others and offer
apologies for faults of their own removes much ill-feeling and promotes
goodwill among the society. Ways of seeking Allah's forgiveness and
desisting from repeating a blunder should be encouraged. Of-course
parents have the right to use coercion to reform children but punishment
should be used as a last resort.

\* Instructing children in hygiene and cleanliness, so they take proper
care of their boy, clothes and appearance. A saying from the Prophet
says:

"Cleanliness is part of faith"

[ 30 ]

\* Children should be encouraged to take to sports and invest their
free time in constructive activities. Islam lays stress on physical
training.

\* Both male and female should be instructed in their respective
spheres. for nature and physique has created them as perfect foils to
each other with different responsibilities in life.

\* Guiding them to keep away from bad habits which eventually ruin both
body and spirit. A novel example is the Western society in which
children grow up in violence and moral decadence, reading and watching
fictious comic characters. No wonder today the godless societies of
Europe and America are inflicted with dangerous diseases and social
breakdown.

We earnestly hope our humble efforts to spotlight the importance of
Islamic Education will inspire Muslim parents and children to rally to
Allah's path.

We seek guidance from the holy Qur'an and implore Allah to guide us on
the glorious path of the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) and his infallible
Household. Ameen.

Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds.


