The Stranger
============

Tired and exhausted with the water-skin on her back, she was gasping
and going towards her house where innocent children, their eyes fixed at
the door, were eagerly waiting for the arrival of their mother. On her
way, an unknown man ap- proached her. He took the water-skin from her
and placed it on his back. The door opened and the children saw their
mother entering the house with a stranger. He placed the water-skin on
the ground and said:

"Well, it seems you don't have anyone to fetch water for you; how come
you are so forlorn?" "My husband was a soldier; Ali sent him to the
frontier where he was killed. Now I am alone with these little
children."

The stranger said no more. Bowing down his head he went away. But the
thought of the help- less window and orphans remained in his mind. He

5

could hardly sleep in the night. Early in the morn- ing he picked up a
basket; put some meat, flour and dates in it; went straight to her house
and knocked at the door.

"Who are you?"

"I am the man who brought your water yes- terday. Now I have brought
some food for the children" "May God bless you and judge between us and
Ali"

She opened the door. Entering the house he

said:


"I wish to do some good acts. Either let me knead the flour and bake
the bread or allow me to look after the children."

"Very well, but I can do the job of kneading and cooking better than
you. You take care of the children till I finish cooking" She went to
knead the flour Immediately he

6

grilled some meat which he had brought and fed the children saying to
each child while putting morsel in his mouth: "My son, forgive Ali if he
has failed in his duty towards you"

The flour got ready; she called: "Gentlemen! put fire in the oven:" He
went and put fire in the oven. When flames rose up, he brought his face
near the fire and said, "Taste the heat of fire. It is the punishment
for those who fail in their duty towards orphans and widows." By chance,
a woman from the neighbouring house came in. Recognizing the stranger,
she cried: "Woe, don't you recognize the man who is helping you? He is
Amirul-Muumineen (comman- der of the faithfuls) Ali bin Abi-Talib."

The widow came forward and shamefacedly cried: "Curse and shame to me.
I beg your pardon:" "No, I beg your pardon for I failed in my duty
towards you."

7


**Jowaiber and Zalfa**

"How beautiful it were if you could marry and establish a family,
ending this forlorn and isolated life? You could fulfil your natural
urges and also she could help you in your temporal and spiritual needs
and goals." "O Messenger of Allah, I have neither wealth nor beauty; nor
I have a noble descent or lineage. Who will marry me? And which woman
likes to be wife of a poor, short, black and ugly man like me?"

"O Jowaiber! God has changed the individual's worth through Islam. Many
people were high- placed in the pre-Islamic society and Islam brought
them down. Many were despised non-entities and Islam bestowed them with
honour and high rank and brought them up. Islam abolished the un-
Islamic discrimination and pride of lineage. Now all people irrespective
of their colour and origin are equal. Nobody has superiority over others
but

8

through piety and obedience to Allah. Among the Muslims, only that
person would be higher than L you whose virtues and deeds are better
than you. Now do as I tell you."

These words were exchanged one day between the Prophet and Jowaiber
when the Prophet came to see the people of "Suffa"

Jowaiber was a native of "Yamamah" where he came to know about the
Prophet and the advent of Islam. He was poor, black and short, but at
the same time intelligent truth seeking and a man of determination. He
came to Medina to look at Islam from near; in a short time he embraced
Islam. Since he had neither money, house nor any friends, he temporarily
was accommodated along with other poor Muslims in the Mosque by
permission of the Prophet. When it was revealed unto the Prophet that
the Mosque was not a place of habitation, it became necessary to shift
them elsewhere. The Prophet selected a site outside the Mosque and

9

erected a shed for them. The place was named as "Suffa" and the
residents were known as "Ashab-e- Suffa" - all of them poors from places
far away from Medina.

The Prophet came to visit them one day. Noticing Jowaibir among them he
decided to bring him out of this forlorn life. It was beyond the fancy
of Jowaiber to own a house and have a wife in his condition. And that
was why he replied to the Prophet as to how it was possible for anyone
to accept him in matrimony when the Prophet advised him to marry. But
the Prophet removing his doubts, explained to him the changes brought
about in the social outlook of the people by Islam.

After bringing Jowaiber out of his inferiority complex, he directed him
to the house of Ziad ibne Lubaid to request him for his daughter's hand
in marriage.

Ziad was one of the wealthiest persons of

10

Medina and commanded high respect among his tribes. When Jowaiber
entered his house, he was surrounded by his relatives and some of his
tribes- men. Jowaiber took a seat, paused for a moment and then raising
his head said, "I have brought a message from the Prophet. Do you like
to hear it confidentially or openly?"

Ziad: ; "A message from the Prophet is an honour to me, better you tell
it openly." "The Prophet has sent me to request you for your daughter
for myself" "Did he himself make this suggestion to you?" "I don't speak
on my own accord. Every- body knows me, I am not a liar"

"Strange! We don't give our daughters to per- sons of unequal status
nor outside our tribe. You go back I shall go to the Prophet and have a
talk with him myself." Jowaiber left the house murmuring, "By God,
whatever the Qur'an teaches and whatever is the

11

purpose of the prophet-hood of Muhammad is totally against what Ziad
says" Those nearby heard the murmurings of Jowai- bir.

Zalfa, the lovely daughter of Ziad, and the beauty-queen of Medina,
heard these words of Jowaiber. She came to her father and asked:
"Father, what was that man who just went out saying? And what did he
mean?"

"He had come to ask for your hand in marriage and was claiming that the
Prophet had sent him for this purpose." "Isn't it possible that he had
really sent him, and thus your rejection may amount to disobe- dience of
the Prophet's order ?" "What do you feel about it?"

"I feel you should bring him back before he reaches to the Prophet, and
then go yourself to find out the truth." He brought Jowaiber back to his
house with

12

due respect, and then himself hurried up to the Prophet. When he saw
him he said:

"O Messenger of God, Jowaiber came to my house and brought such and
such a message from you. I would like to inform you that our custom is
to give our daughters to persons of equal status and belonging to our
tribe, who are all your healpers and companions." "O Ziad, Jowaiber is a
Faithful man. That dignity and honour which you are talking about has
now been abrogated. Every Believer man is equal (for marriage purpose)
to every Believer wo- man."

Ziad returned to his house and explain d the matter to his daughter.
She said, "Please do not reject the proposal put by the Prophet. This
matter concerns me. I accept Jowaiber whatever his condi- tion may be.
If the Prophet is pleased with it, I am also pleased."

13

The wedding was duly soleminized. Ziad paid "Mahr" (Marriage) from his
own wealth and offer- ed good articles to the pair. They asked the
bride- groom, "Have you got a house where to take the bride?" He said,
"No, I had never thought that I would get a wife and sattle in domestic
life. It was the Prophet who came suddenly and had a talk with me and
sent me to Ziad's house."

Ziad arranged for him a house equipped with complete house-hold
effects, and transferred the bride superbly adorned with ornaments and
per- fumes.

Night came. Jowaiber did not know where was the house meant for him. He
was guided to the house and led to the bridal-chamber. When he saw the
house and its equipments and looked at the daz- zling bride, his past
came to his mind and he said to himself, "How poor I was when I entered
this city. had nothing - neither money nor beauty, neither any lineage
nor family - now God made

14

these affluences available to me through Islam. In- deed it is Islam
that has brought such changes in the social outlook of the people beyond
any imagi- nation. How grateful I am to God for bestowing upon me all
these Blessings!"

In spiritual ecstasy he went to a corner of the room; spent the night
in recitation of the Qur'an and prayer. It was dawn when he came to
himself and then decided to fast in gratitude to God. When women came to
see Zalfa in the morning they found her untouched. They kept the matter
secret from Ziad. Two nights and days passed in the same manner. He was
fasting during days and praying during nights. The women of the family
of the bride were worried. They thought perhaps Jowai- ber was impotent
and had no need for a woman. At last, they put the matter before Ziad.
He inform- ed the Prophet; the Prophet; called Jowaiber and asked,
"Don't you have any desire for woman?"

15

"Incidentally, I have very intense desire of that kind:"

"Then why didn't you go near your bride?" "O Prophet of God, when I
entered the house I found myself amidst that affluence. ,A state of
gratitude and devotion took me over. I thought it necessary to offer
thanks and prayers to Allah be- fore doing anything. Tonight I shall go
near my wife." Jowaiber and Zalfa lived a most happy life. When the call
for a Jihad (Holy war) came, he par- ticipated in it with the enthusiasm
typical of a brave Muslim, and achieved martyrdom under the banner of
Islam.

After his martyrdom, Zalfa was the most saught after woman for a wife
and people were eager to pay the greatest Mahr for her.


