The Prohibition of Water
========================

Moawiya was ruling over Syria as its governor for nearly sixteen years;
and was secretly planning to grab the Caliphate taking advantage of
every possible opportunity. The best excuse for him to revolt against
the Central authority and declare his own caliphate was the Othman's
murder. He had not done anything concerning the appeals of Othman for
help, during his life time. In fact, he was waiting for him to be
murdered, so that he could make it an excuse for his scheme. Othman got
murdered and Moawiya immediately sought to exploit the situation for his
own purpose.

On the other hand, people after the murder of Othman rallied behind Ali
(who because of various reasons was reluctant to take the responsibility
of Caliphate) and declared their allegiance to him. Observing that the
responsibility was now formally turned to him, he accepted it and his
Caliphate was proclaimed in Medina, the capital and centre of Muslim
world in those days. All provinces of Islamic government submitted to
his obedience - with the exception of Syria which was under Moawiya. He
refused allegiance to Ali, accusing him of sheltering the murders of
Othman. He recruited a large number of Syrian soldiers and made
preparation for the declaration of independence of his provinces.

After settling the issue of the battle of Camel (JAMAL), Ali turned his
attention to Moawiya. He wrote several letters to him, but in vain. Both
sides moved their armies towards each another. Abul Aawar Salmi was
leading Moawiya's advanced battalion and Malik Ashtar was in command of
the advanced battalion of Ali. They met at the bank of the Euphrates.
Ali's directive to Malik was not to be the first to attack. But Abul
Aawar made a severe attack to intimidate the soldiers of Ali. Malik then
pushed the Syrians far behind. Salmi now thought of another tactics. He
reached the Ghat, i.e. the slope on bank of the Euphrates which was the
only spot convenient to fetch water. He deployed his spearmen and
archers to guard the spot and prevent Malik and his company from coming
near it. Soon after, Moawiya himself arrived with a large army. Happy at
the strategy of his commander he further increased the number of the
soldiers guarding the approach to river. Soldiers of Ali were put in
distress owing to the shortage of water. Moawiya with pleasure said:
"This is our first Victory'." Only one man, Amr bin Al-Aas, the shrewd
minister of Moawiya did not think it a good policy. On the other side,
Ali himself had arrived and was informed of the situation. He sent a
letter with Saasa'a to Moawiya notifying:

"We have come here, but, as far as possible we do not like to wage a war
of fratricide between the Muslims. We earnestly hope to settle our
differences through negotiations and discussions. But we observe that
you and your followers have started using weapons of destruction before
trying anything else. Besides, you have denied water on my companions.
Instruct them to desist from this act, so that we can start
negotiations. Of course, if you do not like anything but war, we are not
afraid of Moawiya consulted his advisor. The general opinion was to take
advantage of the golden opportunity and ignore the letter. Only Amr bin
Al Aas against this view.

He said, "You are mistaken. The fact is that Ali and his men do not want
to start the war themselves, and it is because of this that they are
silent at present and have tried to dissuade you from your scheme
through this letter. Do not think they will retreat if you ignore their
letter and continue denying them the water. Because then they will take
out arms and will not stop till they have driven you away from Euphrates
with disgrace." But the majority of advisors was of the opinion that the
denial of water would weaken the enemy compelling them to retreat.  
 Moawiya personally was in favor of this idea. Discussion came to end;
Saasa'a asked for the reply; Moawiya, using the delaying tactics, said
that he would send the reply afterwards. meanwhile, he ordered his
soldiers guarding water to be extra alert and to prevent coming and
going of the soldiers of Ali.

Ali was distressed at this development, because it brought to an end
every hope of any amicable settlement through talks and negotiations,
and showed that the opposite side was devoid of every goodwill. Now, the
only way out was to use force He stood before his soldiers and delivered
a short but forceful address, the contents of which were as follows:

"These people have started oppression, and opened the door of conflict
and welcomed you with hostility. They are hungry for war and are
demanding war and blood-shed from you. They have denied you water. Now
you have to choose between the two paths. There is no third course.

Either accept the humiliation and oppression and remain thirsty as you
are, or satisfy your thirsty swords with their dirty bloods so that. you
may quench your thirst with the sweet water. Death is to live a defeated
and disgraceful life; and Life is to be victorious even at the cost of
death. Verily, Moawiya has gathered around him some ignorant and
misguided mob; and is taking advantage of their ignorance, so that they
are making their necks targets of the arrows of death."

This address moved the soldiers of Ali and stirred their blood. They
made a severe attack and pushed the enemy far back and took the
possession of (Shari'ah) Ghat.

Amr bin Al-Aas (whose forecast was now a fact) said to Moawiya: "Now, if
Ali and his army pay you with your own coin what will you do? Can you
take possession of the "Shariah" (Ghat) from them for the second time?"
Moawiya said, "In your opinion, how will Ali deal with us now?"

"I believe, Ali will not behave as you had done. He will not deny us
water. He has not come here for such deeds."

The soldiers of Ali after removing the soldiers of Moawiya from Ghat,
asked his permission to prevent the enemy from taking water. Ali said,
"Don't deny them water. These are the methods of ignorant. I do not set
my hands to such acts. I am going to start negotiation with them on the
basis of the Holy Book of God. If they accept my proposals, well and
good; and if they refuse,

I shall fight with them, but gentlemanly not by denying them water. I
will never do such thing and will not oppress them by shortage of
water'."

Not long afterwards soldiers of Moawiya used to come to the Ghat side by
side with the soldiers of Ali, and nobody prevented them.


