The Silly Shop-Keeper
=====================

A heavy built tall man was passing through the market of Kufa, his step
firm and assured. He had fine figure and sun-burnt face; encounters of
the battle-field had left their marks on him and the corner of one of
his eyes was slit. A shop-keeper, to amuse his friends, threw a handful
of sweepings onto the man. The man continued his walk in the same
assured and firm manner, without raising an eye brow or looking towards
the shop-keeper. When he went away, a friend of the shop keeper said:

"Do you know who the man is whom you have insulted just now?"

"No, I do not recognize him. He was a passerby like thousands of people
passing this way every- day. But tell me who was this man."

"Strange! Didn't you recognise him?! He was Malik Ashtar, the renowned
Commander-in-Chief of Ali."

"Strange! He was Malik Ashtar?! The same Malik whose bravery turns the
heart of lion into water and mention of whose name makes his enemies
tremble with fear?"

"Yes, that was Malik himself"

"Woe to me! What did I do? Now he will give order to punish me severely.
I must run to him immediately to apologize and pray him to forgive my
misbehavior:"

He ran after Malik. He saw him turning towards a mosque. He followed him
to the Mosque and saw that he had started praying. He waited till he
finished his prayer humbly introducing him- self he told him:

"I am the man who had committed the silly prank and behaved
disrespectfully to you"

Malik: "But, by Allah, I did not come in the mosque but for your sake;
because I knew that you were a very ignorant and misguided man and that
you give trouble to the people without any cause. I felt pity on you and
came here to pray for you and ask Allah to lead you onto the right path.
No, I did not have any such intentions as you were afraid of "


