The New Convert
===============

Two neighbours, a Muslim and a Christian, were on friendly terms.
Having concern for one another they used to enquire after each others
health, and exchanged views from time to time. The Muslim being a devout
and religious man spoke high of his religion and the result was that the
Chris- tian. friend embraced Islam.

The night passed and it was nearing dawn. The Christian, a new convert,
heard somebody ramming his door. Surprised and restless he shouted: "Who
is it?"

From the back came a loud voice, "I am so and so;" introducing himself.
He was the Muslim neighbour who had the honour of converting him to
Islam.

"What do you want at this late hour?"

17

"Be quick, put on your clothes and perform ablution, so that we should
go to the Mosque to- gether"

The new Muslim performed ablution (Wudu) for the first time in his life
and set out to Mosque behind his Muslim friend. They had arrived before
time. It was the time for the Recommended (not obligatory) prayer after
mid-night. They prayed till dawn - the time came for the morning prayer.
They prayed the morning prayer and were engaged in benedictions and
invocations till it became per- factly clear. When the new Muslim made a
move towards the door, his friend interrupted:

"Where are you going?"

"I am going home, Since I have finished my morning prayer, there is
nothing else to do now." "Wait a while and recite the benedictions till
the sun rises."

"very well."

18

He sat and recited the same till the sun rose. When he rose up to go,
his friend placed the Qur'an in his hand saying, "Read it till the sun
rises a little high. And I advise you to fast today. Don't you know how
much virtues and rewards there are in fasting?" The new Muslim did as he
was told, and sat reciting the Our'an till it was nearing noon. The
Muslim neighbour said: "Now it is almost noon; better we perform the
noon-prayer in the Mosque:" So, the Dohr (noon) prayer was prayed. Then
he said again: "After just a short time, the Asr (after-noon) prayer
will be prayed. We should perform that also at the proper time:" That
prayer was also performed.

Then he said, "It is almost evening now" and detained the new convert
till it was time for Maghrib (evening) prayer. When he rose up to break
his fast, the neighbour said, "there is one more prayer remaining. It is
named "Esha" or the sleeping-time prayer'." So they waited nearly one
hour for the proper time of this prayer. After that the new Muslim got
up and went away.

1 9

Next day at the same hour of night he again heard knockings at the
door.

"Who is there?"

"I am so and so............ your neighbour. Be quick, put on your
clothes and perform ablution to go to the Mosque together" "As soon as I
returned from the Mosque last night, I resigned from your religion.
Please go away and find some other idle man who has nothing to do in
this world, so that he may be able to spend his whole time in the
mosque. I am a poor man having wife and children to feed. I should
better go after my work to earn my livelihood'."

Imam Jaafer al-Sadiq relating the story to his friends and companions,
said: "In this manner a devout man after converting a new Muslim, had
himself kicked him out of Islam. You must bear this fact in mind and
should not trouble the people unnecessarily. You should judge their
strength and

20

capacity and act accordingly, so that they develop affinity for the
religion and do not run away from it. Don't you know that the policy of
Ummayyads is based on violence, oppression and intimidation whereas our
ways and methods are based on lenien- cy, brotherhood and persuation"

2 1

**NASIBA**

The deep scar on the shoulder of Nasiba, daughter of Kaab, spoke of a
major wound in the past. Whenever the women, specially of the younger
generation who had not seen the time of the Pro- phet or were too small
at that time, noticed the cavity in her shoulder, they enquired with
extreme curiousity about the frightening incident which had resulted in
the injury to her shoulder. They loved to hear her adventures in the
battle of Uhud from her own mouth.

She had never imagined that she would fight shoulder to shoulder with
her husband and two sons defending the Prophet in the battle of Uhud.
She had only taken the water-skin on her back so that she could provide
water to the injured and also had taken some home-made bandages to dress
their wounds. She had not thought of herself as worthy of any other work
on that day.

2 2

Although the Muslims were small in number and had only a limited supply
of equipments, they gave a grand defeat to the enemy who took to their
heels vacating the battle field. But soon after, due to the negligance
of some men guarding the "Ainain Hills;" the enemy made a surprise
attack from the rear,turning the victory of the Muslims into defeat. The
Muslims surrounding the Prophet fled away, leaving him almost alone in
the battlefield.

When Nasiba saw this precarious situation, she put the water-skin on
the ground, and took a sword in her hand. She fought with the sword and
also made good use of bows and arrows; and took a shield left over by a
fleeing soldier. Once she notic- ed a man shouting: "Where is Mohammad
himself?" She approached him immediately and inflicted a few blows on
him; but he was double-armoured and her attacks had not much effect on
him. He then inflicted such a heavy blow on the shoulder of the
armourless woman that it required treatment

2 3

for one year. Noticing a stream of blood gushing from her shoulder, the
Prophet called to one of her sons to immediately dress her wound. He put
a bandage over her shoulder and she again got busy in the battle.

Meanwhile one of her sons got injured. She took out a bandage and
dressed his wound. The Prophet watching the scene smiled at the heroism
of this woman. After dressing her son's wound she instructed him to get
going for the battle. These words were still in her mouth when the
Prophet pointed out a man to her and told her that he was the same man
who had injured her son. She attack- ed the man like a lioness and
inflicted her sword on his leg. He fell on the ground. The Prophet said,
"Well, thou hast taken thy revenge. Thanks for God who gave the victory
on him and made thy eyes cool."

Many Muslims were martyred and wounded. She herself was severely
wounded and there was

24

no hope of her life. After the battle of Uhud, the Prophet ordered the
wounded Muslims to persue the enemy upto Hamra-ul-Asad, to be sure of
their intention and condition. Nasiba also wanted to ac- company them
but the deep injuries did not allow her to do so. On returning from
Hamra-ul-Asad, the Prophet before reaching his house, sent some- one to
enquire about her health and was pleased to learn that she was alive.


