Complaint Against Husband
=========================

Ali during the days of his Khilafat used to personally listen to the
grievances and complaints of the people. Once, the days were hot and
people did not venture out of their houses after mid-day. Ali sat
everyday outside his house under the shade of a wall so that if someone
had any complaints, could lodge the same to him directly. Sometimes he
walked in lanes and streets observing the general condition of the
people.
One day he returned to his residence tired and sweating, and found a
woman waiting. Seeing him, she came near and said:

"I am in trouble. My husband oppresses me. He has turned me out from
the house and has threatened to beat me. If I go to him he will beat me.
I request you to do justice between us" "O Servant of Allah, it is too
hot now. Wait till it cools down in the afternoon. Then I shall come
with you and redress your grievances"

2 6

"If I stay out too long, I am afraid it may in- crease his anger:"

For a moment he bowed his head and then raised it up saying to himself,
"No, By God, justic ; to the oppressed should not be delayed. The right
of the oppressed should certainly be taken from the oppressor; and every
fear should be taken out from her heart so that she may stand boldly
before the oppressor and demand her right'."

"Tell me where is your house?" "It is in such and such place." "Let us
go."

He accompanied her to her house, stood at the door and called loudly,
"O Master of the house! Peace be upon thee." A young man came out. He
was her husband. He did not recognize Ali. He found that an old man of
about sixty years had accompanied her and assumed that she had brought
him for support and

27

mediation; but he kept silent.

"This lady has a complaint against you. She says that you have
oppressed her and have ousted her from the house. Besides you have
threatened to beat her. I have come here to tell you to fear Allah and
be kind to your wife."

"In what way does it concern you if I have not treated my wife well.
Yes, I had threatened to beat her, but now, since she has brought you to
plead for her, I shall throw her into fire and burn her alive."

Ali was disturbed by the impudence of the man. Drawing out his sword he
said, "I am only advising you to do good and admonishing you from bad
deeds; but you are replying me in such manner clearly saying to burn
this woman in fire. Do you think there is no authority in this world?"

His loud voice drew the attention of the pas- sers by, and a huge crowd
gathered. Whoever came

2 8

bowed down with reverence before the old man and saluted him by saying
"Peace be on you O Comman- der of the Fiathfuls"

When the rude young man realised as to whom he was talking with, he
trembled and supplicated, "O Ameerul Moumineen! forgive me. I confess my
faults and promise that henceforth I shall obey my wife."

Ali turned to the woman and told her to go in the house and cautioned
her not to behave in such a manner that her husband had to be angry
again.

**The Son Of Hatim**

Before the advent of Islam, there were in Arabia autonomous tribal
chiefs. The people were used to the rule of their chiefs and obeyed
them; and often paid them tributes and taxes. The well- known generous
Hatim, of the tribe of Tai, was one of the tribal chiefs of Arabia. His
son,

Adi, succeeded him after his death and the Tribe submit- ted to his
rule. He was taxing them to the extent of one-fourth of their income
every year. His lordship coincided with the advent of the Prophet. The
Tai tribes were idol-worshippers, but him- self was a Christian, but
kept his beliefs secret from his people. The people, after being
acquainted with the liberal teachings of Islam, felt themselves relieved
from the burden of their lords who had hitherto imposed their rule upon
the people. Owing to this fact, Adi, like other lords used to look upon
Islam as the greatest danger for himself; and was harbouring enmity
against the Prophet. But the die

30

was cast. People were embracing Islam in increasing- ly large numbers;
and the religion of Allah was ad- vancing day by day. He knew that the
day was near when the Muslims would come looking for him also, and that
would be the end of his lordship. He therefore, instructed his special
steward, a slave, to always keep strong and light-footed camels ready
near his camp and to remain watchful.

One day the slave came to him and said, "Make whatever arrangements you
want to make as the Muslims are very close." Adi mounted his family on
the camels and took whatever valuables and luggage he could take, and
escaped to Damascus where the people were of his religion. But in the
confusion, he forgot to take his sister, Safana with him; and she was
left behind.

The Muslims defeated the tribe in the battle; and some were made
captives. Muslims brought Safana to Medina alongwith other captives and
related the story of Adi's escapade to the Prophet.

31

The prisoners were sheltered in a low-walled com- pound near the
Mosque. One day, the Prophet, while going to the Mosque passed beside
the en- closure. Safana, intelligent and talkative as she was, moved
from her place and said:

"My father is dead; my guardian is hiding; be generous to me, God will
be generous to you."

Prophet: "Who is your guardian?" "Adi, son of Hatim" "The one who has
run away from God and His Prophet?"

Saying these words the Prophet went away. Next day again she repeated
the same words, heard the same reply. Her plea produced no result. The
third day, having lost her hopes, she decided to keep silent. But a
young man walking behind the Prophet made signs to her to repeat her
demand. She repeated the same words. The Prophet said, "Very well, I am
waiting for some reliable man from your tribe. As soon as such a man is
found I

32

shall send you with him to your tribe. Inform me if you find such a
person who has come to Medina" She asked the people who was the young
man walking behind the Prophet who had encourag- ed her to repeat her
demand. They said he was Ali.

After some time, Saffana informed the Pro- phet that some men of her
tribe had came to Medina. The Prophet gave her a new dress, some cash
for meeting the expense of the journey and a camel to ride on. She went
along with them to her brother in Syria.

When she saw her brother, she reproached him and said, "You brought out
your wife and children forgot me the memory of your father!" Adi appolo
gised to her. Then, as she was an intelligent wo- man, Adi consulted her
about his plan. He asked

"What do you advise me to do, since you have seen Mohammed from near?
Should I join him or

33

keep aloof from him?"

"I believe you should join him. If he is a Pro- phet of God it will be
a credit to your honour and nobleness. And if he is not a prophet, and
only wants to be a worldly ruler, then in a place (Medina) which is not
far from Yemen (your place), nobody will dare to dishonour you, because
of the honour and respect you have among the people of Yemen. Either
way, your honour is guaranteed."

The idea appealed to Adi. He decided to go to Medina and to observe the
Prophet's manners minutely. If he was a prophet he would follow him like
other Muslims. But in case he was only a man with worldly ambitions of
power and pelf, then he would cooperate with him to the extent of the
common benefits of both.

He entered the Mosque of Medina and saluted to the Prophet. The Prophet
accorded him due respect and took him to his house.

3 4

On their way a haggard woman caught hold of the garmet of the Prophet
and entered into a dis- cussion with him. A long time passed; and the
Prophet answered all her questions with kindness and patience.

Adi said to himself, "This is the one sign from the character of this
man that he is a prophet. Peo- ple having worldly ambitions do not have
such a disposition and temperament of replying to a poor old woman with
so much patience and kindness"

When they entered the house Adi found his life most simple and
unpretentious. There was only a quilt which the Prophet used to sit
upon, but now he spread it for Adi to sit. Adi insisted that the Prophet
should sit upon the quilt; but he flatly refused. Ultimately, Adi sat
upon the quilt and the Prophet sat on the ground. Adi said to himself,
"This is the second sign of the character of this man, This is the
character of the Prophets, not of the kings"

3 5

The Prophet turned to him and said, "But was not your religion
Christianity?" Adi said "Yes, why?" The Prophet said, "then why, and on
what grounds, were you taking one-fourth of the income of your people?
Is it not inadmissible in your reli- gion?"

Adi, who had kept his religion secret even from his closest relatives,
was surprised to hear it from the Prophet. He said to himself, "this is
the third sign that this man is a prophet."

Then the Prophet said: "You are looking at the present poverty and
helplessness of the Muslims. You find that the Muslims today are living
in dis- tress. They are surrounded by crowds of enemies and have no
security of their lives and properties. They have no power in their
hands. By God, the time is not far when such a vast wealth will come to
them that there will be no poor among them. By God. their enemies will
be vanguished and there will exist such a perfect peace and order that
a

36

woman shall be able to travel from Iraq to Hijaz alone and nobody will
trouble her. By God, the time is near when the white palaces of
Babylonia will come under the hands of the Muslims"

Adi embraced Islam with perfect Faith and Sincerity, and remained
faithful to the end of his life. He lived upon the years after the Holy
Prophet. He always remembered the talks of the Holy Pro- phet in his
first meeting with him, and the fore- casts at that time, about the
future of Muslims. He used to say, "By God, in my life-time I saw Muslim
conquering the white palaces of Babylonia, and there is such a peace and
order that a woman can travel from Iraq to Hijaz without anybody
troubling her. By God, I am sure a day will come when there will be no
poor among the Muslims"


