Nasiba
======

The deep scar on the shoulder of Nasiba, daughter of Kaab, spoke of a
major wound in the past. Whenever the women, specially of the younger
generation who had not seen the time of the Prophet or were too small at
that time, noticed the cavity in her shoulder, they enquired with
extreme curiousity about the frightening incident which had resulted in
the injury to her shoulder. They loved to hear her adventures in the
battle of Uhud from her own mouth.

She had never imagined that she would fight shoulder to shoulder with
her husband and two sons defending the Prophet in the battle of Uhud.
She had only taken the water-skin on her back so that she could provide
water to the injured and also had taken some home-made bandages to dress
their wounds. She had not thought of herself as worthy of any other work
on that day.

Although the Muslims were small in number and had only a limited supply
of equipments, they gave a grand defeat to the enemy who took to their
heels vacating the battle field. But soon after, due to the negligance
of some men guarding the "Ainain Hills;" the enemy made a surprise
attack from the rear,turning the victory of the Muslims into defeat. The
Muslims surrounding the Prophet fled away, leaving him almost alone in
the battlefield.

When Nasiba saw this precarious situation, she put the water-skin on
the ground, and took a sword in her hand. She fought with the sword and
also made good use of bows and arrows; and took a shield left over by a
fleeing soldier. Once she noticed a man shouting: "Where is Mohammad
himself?" She approached him immediately and inflicted a few blows on
him; but he was double-armoured and her attacks had not much effect on
him. He then inflicted such a heavy blow on the shoulder of the
armourless woman that it required treatment for one year. Noticing a
stream of blood gushing from her shoulder, the Prophet called to one of
her sons to immediately dress her wound. He put a bandage over her
shoulder and she again got busy in the battle.

Meanwhile one of her sons got injured. She took out a bandage and
dressed his wound. The Prophet watching the scene smiled at the heroism
of this woman. After dressing her son's wound she instructed him to get
going for the battle. These words were still in her mouth when the
Prophet pointed out a man to her and told her that he was the same man
who had injured her son. She attacked the man like a lioness and
inflicted her sword on his leg. He fell on the ground. The Prophet said,
"Well, thou hast taken thy revenge. Thanks for God who gave the victory
on him and made thy eyes cool."

Many Muslims were martyred and wounded. She herself was severely
wounded and there was no hope of her life. After the battle of Uhud, the
Prophet ordered the wounded Muslims to persue the enemy upto
Hamra-ul-Asad, to be sure of their intention and condition. Nasiba also
wanted to accompany them but the deep injuries did not allow her to do
so. On returning from Hamra-ul-Asad, the Prophet before reaching his
house, sent someone to enquire about her health and was pleased to learn
that she was alive.

**COMPLAINT AGAINST HUSBAND**

Ali during the days of his Khilafat used to personally listen to the
grievances and complaints of the people. Once, the days were hot and
people did not venture out of their houses after mid-day. Ali sat
everyday outside his house under the shade of a wall so that if someone
had any complaints, could lodge the same to him directly. Sometimes he
walked in lanes and streets observing the general condition of the
people.

One day he returned to his residence tired and sweating, and found a
woman waiting. Seeing him, she came near and said:

"I am in trouble. My husband oppresses me. He has turned me out from
the house and has threatened to beat me. If I go to him he will beat me.
I request you to do justice between us" "O Servant of Allah, it is too
hot now. Wait till it cools down in the afternoon. Then I shall come
with you and redress your grievances" "If I stay out too long, I am
afraid it may increase his anger:"

For a moment he bowed his head and then raised it up saying to himself,
"No, By God, justic ; to the oppressed should not be delayed. The right
of the oppressed should certainly be taken from the oppressor; and every
fear should be taken out from her heart so that she may stand boldly
before the oppressor and demand her right'."

"Tell me where is your house?" "It is in such and such place." "Let us
go."

He accompanied her to her house, stood at the door and called loudly,
"O Master of the house! Peace be upon thee." A young man came out. He
was her husband. He did not recognize Ali.

He found that an old man of about sixty years had accompanied her and
assumed that she had brought him for support and mediation; but he kept
silent. "This lady has a complaint against you. She says that you have
oppressed her and have ousted her from the house. Besides you have
threatened to beat her. I have come here to tell you to fear Allah and
be kind to your wife."

"In what way does it concern you if I have not treated my wife well.
Yes, I had threatened to beat her, but now, since she has brought you to
plead for her, I shall throw her into fire and burn her alive."

Ali was disturbed by the impudence of the man. Drawing out his sword he
said, "I am only advising you to do good and admonishing you from bad
deeds; but you are replying me in such manner clearly saying to burn
this woman in fire. Do you think there is no authority in this world?"
His loud voice drew the attention of the passers by, and a huge crowd
gathered. Whoever came bowed down with reverence before the old man and
saluted him by saying "Peace be on you O Commander of the Fiathfuls"

When the rude young man realised as to whom he was talking with, he
trembled and supplicated, "O Ameerul Moumineen! forgive me. I confess my
faults and promise that henceforth I shall obey my wife."

Ali turned to the woman and told her to go in the house and cautioned
her not to behave in such a manner that her husband had to be angry
again.


