Complaint Against Husband
=========================

Ali during the days of his Khilafat used to personally listen to the
grievances and complaints of the people. Once, the days were hot and
people did not venture out of their houses after mid-day. Ali sat
everyday outside his house under the shade of a wall so that if someone
had any complaints, could lodge the same to him directly. Sometimes he
walked in lanes and streets observing the general condition of the
people.

One day he returned to his residence tired and sweating, and found a
woman waiting. Seeing him, she came near and said:

"I am in trouble. My husband oppresses me. He has turned me out from the
house and has threatened to beat me. If I go to him he will beat me. I
request you to do justice between us"

"O Servant of Allah, it is too hot now. Wait till it cools down in the
afternoon. Then I shall come with you and redress your grievances" "If I
stay out too long, I am afraid it may increase his anger:"

For a moment he bowed his head and then raised it up saying to himself,
"No, By God, justice; to the oppressed should not be delayed. The right
of the oppressed should certainly be taken from the oppressor; and every
fear should be taken out from her heart so that she may stand boldly
before the oppressor and demand her right'."

"Tell me where is your house?" "It is in such and such place." "Let us
go."

He accompanied her to her house, stood at the door and called loudly, "O
Master of the house! Peace be upon thee."

A young man came out. He was her husband. He did not recognize Ali. He
found that an old man of about sixty years had accompanied her and
assumed that she had brought him for support and mediation; but he kept
silent.

"This lady has a complaint against you. She says that you have oppressed
her and have ousted her from the house. Besides you have threatened to
beat her. I have come here to tell you to fear Allah and be kind to your
wife."

"In what way does it concern you if I have not treated my wife well?
Yes, I had threatened to beat her, but now, since she has brought you to
plead for her, I shall throw her into fire and burn her alive."

Ali was disturbed by the impudence of the man. Drawing out his sword he
said, "I am only advising you to do good and admonishing you from bad
deeds; but you are replying me in such manner clearly saying to burn
this woman in fire. Do you think there is no authority in this world?"

His loud voice drew the attention of the passersby, and a huge crowd
gathered. Whoever came bowed down with reverence before the old man and
saluted him by saying "Peace be on you O Commander of the Faithful"

When the rude young man realized as to whom he was talking with, he
trembled and supplicated, "O Ameerul Moumineen! Forgive me. I confess my
faults and promise that henceforth I shall obey my wife."

Ali turned to the woman and told her to go in the house and cautioned
her not to behave in such a manner that her husband had to be angry
again.


