The Son of Hatim
================

Before the advent of Islam, there were in Arabia autonomous tribal
chiefs. The people were used to the rule of their chiefs and obeyed
them; and often paid them tributes and taxes. The wellknown generous
Hatim, of the tribe of Tai, was one of the tribal chiefs of Arabia. His
son, Adi, succeeded him after his death and the Tribe submitted to his
rule. He was taxing them to the extent of one-fourth of their income
every year. His lordship coincided with the advent of the Prophet.

The Tai tribes were idol-worshippers, but himself was a Christian, but
kept his beliefs secret from his people. The people, after being
acquainted with the liberal teachings of Islam, felt themselves relieved
from the burden of their lords who had hitherto imposed their rule upon
the people. Owing to this fact, Adi, like other lords used to look upon
Islam as the greatest danger for himself; and was harbouring enmity
against the Prophet. But the die was cast. People were embracing Islam
in increasingly large numbers; and the religion of Allah was advancing
day by day. He knew that the day was near when the Muslims would come
looking for him also, and that would be the end of his lordship.

He therefore, instructed his special steward, a slave, to always keep
strong and light-footed camels ready near his camp and to remain
watchful.

One day the slave came to him and said, "Make whatever arrangements you
want to make as the Muslims are very close." Adi mounted his family on
the camels and took whatever valuables and luggage he could take, and
escaped to Damascus where the people were of his religion. But in the
confusion, he forgot to take his sister, Safana with him; and she was
left behind.

The Muslims defeated the tribe in the battle; and some were made
captives. Muslims brought Safana to Medina alongwith other captives and
related the story of Adi's escapade to the Prophet. The prisoners were
sheltered in a low-walled compound near the Mosque. One day, the
Prophet, while going to the Mosque passed beside the enclosure. Safana,
intelligent and talkative as she was, moved from her place and said:

"My father is dead; my guardian is hiding; be generous to me, God will
be generous to you." Prophet: "Who is your guardian?"

"Adi, son of Hatim" "The one who has run away from God and His
Prophet?"

Saying these words the Prophet went away. Next day again she repeated
the same words, heard the same reply. Her plea produced no result. The
third day, having lost her hopes, she decided to keep silent. But a
young man walking behind the Prophet made signs to her to repeat her
demand. She repeated the same words. The Prophet said, "Very well, I am
waiting for some reliable man from your tribe. As soon as such a man is
found I shall send you with him to your tribe. Inform me if you find
such a person who has come to Medina" She asked the people who was the
young man walking behind the Prophet who had encouraged her to repeat
her demand. They said he was Ali.

After some time, Saffana informed the Prophet that some men of her
tribe had came to Medina.

The Prophet gave her a new dress, some cash for meeting the expense of
the journey and a camel to ride on. She went along with them to her
brother in Syria.

When she saw her brother, she reproached him and said, "You brought out
your wife and children forgot me the memory of your father!" Adi appolo
gised to her. Then, as she was an intelligent woman, Adi consulted her
about his plan. He asked "What do you advise me to do, since you have
seen Mohammed from near? Should I join him or keep aloof from him?"

"I believe you should join him. If he is a Prophet of God it will be a
credit to your honour and nobleness.

And if he is not a prophet, and only wants to be a worldly ruler, then
in a place (Medina) which is not far from Yemen (your place), nobody
will dare to dishonour you, because of the honour and respect you have
among the people of Yemen. Either way, your honour is guaranteed." The
idea appealed to Adi. He decided to go to Medina and to observe the
Prophet's manners minutely.

If he was a prophet he would follow him like other Muslims. But in case
he was only a man with worldly ambitions of power and pelf, then he
would cooperate with him to the extent of the common benefits of both.

He entered the Mosque of Medina and saluted to the Prophet. The Prophet
accorded him due respect and took him to his house.

On their way a haggard woman caught hold of the garmet of the Prophet
and entered into a discussion with him. A long time passed; and the
Prophet answered all her questions with kindness and patience.

Adi said to himself, "This is the one sign from the character of this
man that he is a prophet. People having worldly ambitions do not have
such a disposition and temperament of replying to a poor old woman with
so much patience and kindness" When they entered the house Adi found his
life most simple and unpretentious. There was only a quilt which the
Prophet used to sit upon, but now he spread it for Adi to sit. Adi
insisted that the Prophet should sit upon the quilt; but he flatly
refused. Ultimately, Adi sat upon the quilt and the Prophet sat on the
ground. Adi said to himself, "This is the second sign of the character
of this man, This is the character of the Prophets, not of the kings"

The Prophet turned to him and said, "But was not your religion
Christianity?" Adi said "Yes, why?" The Prophet said, "then why, and on
what grounds, were you taking one-fourth of the income of your people?
Is it not inadmissible in your religion?" Adi, who had kept his religion
secret even from his closest relatives, was surprised to hear it from
the Prophet. He said to himself, "this is the third sign that this man
is a prophet."

Then the Prophet said: "You are looking at the present poverty and
helplessness of the Muslims. You find that the Muslims today are living
in distress. They are surrounded by crowds of enemies and have no
security of their lives and properties. They have no power in their
hands. By God, the time is not far when such a vast wealth will come to
them that there will be no poor among them.

By God. their enemies will be vanguished and there will exist such a
perfect peace and order that a woman shall be able to travel from Iraq
to Hijaz alone and nobody will trouble her. By God, the time is near
when the white palaces of Babylonia will come under the hands of the
Muslims" Adi embraced Islam with perfect Faith and Sincerity, and
remained faithful to the end of his life. He lived upon the years after
the Holy Prophet. He always remembered the talks of the Holy Prophet in
his first meeting with him, and the forecasts at that time, about the
future of Muslims.

He used to say, "By God, in my life-time I saw Muslim conquering the
white palaces of Babylonia, and there is such a peace and order that a
woman can travel from Iraq to Hijaz without anybody troubling her. By
God, I am sure a day will come when there will be no poor among the
Muslims"

**IBNE SAYYABA**

Ibne Sayyaba, a resident of Kufa, was a young man whose father had
died. The tragedy of the death of his father, coupled with poverty and
unemployment, was destroying the soul of the sensitive man. One day
while sitting in his house, he heard a knock at the door. He was a
friend of his father. After offering his condolences, he said: "Did your
father leave anything for you?" "No"

"Then take this thousand Dirham; try to turn it into a capital, and
meet your expenses from its profit."

Saying these words he went away. Ibne Sayyaba, happy as he was, went to
his mother and showing the money told her the story. The same day, he
used the money in purchasing some merchandise and opening a shop; and
set his heart to it. He made a rapid progress. Soonafter he realised
that not only he had met his household expenses from the profit, but
even the capital had increased to a great extent. Now he thought of
performing pilgrimage, and approached his mother for her advice. She
said, "First you should repay the thousand Dirham which has brought such
prosperity to us, and then you may go to Mecca."

He went to see the friend of his father, and placing a purse of one
thousand Dirham before him, said, "Please accept your money back" The
man thought that Ibne Sayyaba was returning the same money because it
was not sufficient for any trade. So he said:

"If the amount is insufficient I can increase it" "Good God, it was not
insufficient. It has brought great prosperity to us and since I am now
quite well off financially, I have come to repay your money, and to
express my thanks to you, particularly when I have decided to go on
pilgri- mage.

He came to his home and packed his luggage for Mecca.

After performance of the holy Hajj, he came to Medina and went to see
Imam Sadique (a.s.) alongwith other pilgrims. There was a huge crowd in
the house of the Imam (a.s.). Being young he chose to sit at the far end
of the gathering, and from there watched the people coming and going;
and heard their questions and the answers given by the Imam. When the
house became nearly empty, the Imam (a.s.) pointed to him and said:

"What can I do for you?"

"I am Abdur Rahman, son of Sayyaba, of Kufa (from the tribe of
Bijilly)" "How is your father?"

"He died" "Ah! Ah! May God have His mercy upon him. Did he leave
anything for you?" "No, he didn't"

"Then how could you perform pilgrimage?" "After the death of my father
we were in distress. On one side his death and on the other side poverty
and unemployment, were crushing us extremely. Then one day a friend of
my father gave me one thousand Dirham and advised me to invest the
amount in business. I followed his advice and from its profit I came to
perform pilgrimage." Before he could finish his story, the Imam (a.s.)
said, "Tell me what did you do about the money of your father's
friend?"

I refunded the amount on the advice of my mother before coming out for
Hajj'.' "Very good. Do you like me to give you an advice?"

"May I be your ransom; of course"

"Be truthful and righteous. A truthful and righteous man is a partner
in the wealth of others."


