The Prohibition of Water
========================

Moawiya was ruling over Syria as its governor for nearly sixteen years;
and was secretly planning to grab the Caliphate taking advantage of
every possible opportunity. The best excuse for him to revolt against
the Central authority and declare his own caliphate was the Othman's
murder. He had not done any thing concerning the appeals of Othman for
help, during his life time. In fact, he was waiting for him to be
murdered, so that he could make it an excuse for his scheme. Othman got
murdered and Moawiya immediately sought to exploit the situation for his
own purpose.

On the other hand, people after the murder of Othman rallied behind Ali
(who because of various reasons, was reluctant to take the
responsibility of Caliphate) and declared their allegience to him.
Observing that the responsibility was now formally turned to him, he
accepted it and his Caliphate was

5 4

proclaimed in Medina, the capital and centre of Muslim world in those
days. All provinces of Is- lamic government submitted to his obedience -
with the exception of Syria which was under Moawiya. He refused
allegience to Ali, accusing him of shel- tering the murders of Othman.
He recruited a large number of Syrian soldiers and made prepara- tion
for the declaration of independence of his provinces.

After settling the issue of the battle of Camel (JAMAL), Ali turned his
attention to Moawiya. He wrote several letters to him, but in vain. Both
sides moved their armies towards each another. Abul Aawar Salmi was
leading Moawiya's advanced battalion and Malik Ashtar was in command of
the advanced battalion of Ali. They met at the bank of the Euphrates.
Ali's directive to Malik was not to be the first to attack. But Abul
Aawar made a severe attack to intimidate the soldiers of Ali. Malik then
pushed the Syrians far behind. Salmi now thought of another tactics. He
reached the

5 5

Ghat, i.e. the slope on bank of the Euphrates which was the only spot
convenient to fetch water. He deployed his spearmen and archers to guard
the spot and prevent Malik and his company from coming near it.
Soonafter, Moawiya himself arrived with a large army. Happy at the
strategy of his commander he further increased the number of the
soldiers guarding the approach to river. Soldiers of Ali were put in
distress owing to the shortage of water. Moawiya with pleasure said:
"This is our first Victory'." Only one man, Amr bin Al-Aas, the shrewd
minister of Moawiya did not think it a good policy. On the other side,
Ali himself had arrived and was informed of the situation. He sent a
letter with Saasa'a to Moawiya notifying:

"We have come here, but, as far as possible we do not like to wage a
war of fratricide between the Muslims. We earnestly hope to settle our
dif- ferences through negotiations and discussions. But we observe that
you and your followers have started

56

using weapons of destruction before trying anything else. Besides, you
have denied water on my com- panions. Instruct them to desist from this
act, so that we can start negotiations. Of course, if you do not like
anything but war, we are not afraid of

Moawiya consulted his advisor. The general opinion was to take
advantage of the golden op- portunity and ignore the letter. Only Amr
bin Al Aas against this view. He said, "You are mistaken. The fact is
that Ali and his men do not want to start the war themselves, and it is
because of this that they are silent at present and have tried to
dissuade you from your scheme through this letter. Do not think they
will retreat if you ignore their letter and continue denying them the
water. Because then they will take out arms and will not stop till they
have driven you away from Euphrates with disgrace." But the majority of
advisors was of the opinion that the denial of water would weaken the

57

enemy compelling them to retreat. Moawiya per- sonally was in favour of
this idea. Discussion came to end; Saasa'a asked for the reply; Moawiya,
using the delaying tactics, said that he would send the reply
afterwards. meanwhile, he ordered his sol- diers guarding water to be
extra alert and to prevent coming and going of the soldiers of Ali.

Ali was distressed at this development, because it brought to an end
every hope of any amicable settlement through talks and negotiations,
and showed that the opposite side was devoid of every goodwill. Now, the
only way out was to use force He stood before his soldiers and delivered
a short but forceful address, the contents of which were as follows:

"These people have started oppression, and opened the door of conflict
and welcomed you with hostility. They are hungry for war and are
demanding war and blood-shed from you. They have denied you water. Now
you have to choose between the two paths. There is no third course.

5 8

Either accept the humiliation and oppression and remain thirsty as you
are, or satisfy your thirsty swords with their dirty bloods so that. you
may quench your thirst with the sweet water. Death is to live a defeated
and disgraceful life; and Life is to be victorious even at the cost of
death. Verily, Moawiya has gathered around him some ignorant and
misguided mob; and is taking advantage of their ignorance, so that they
are making their necks targets of the arrows of death."

This address moved the soldiers of Ali and stirred their blood. They
made a severe attack and pushed the enemy far back and took the
possession of (Shari'ah) Ghat.

Amr bin Al-Aas (whose forecast was now a fact) said to Moawiya: "Now,
if Ali and his army pay you with your own coin what will you do? Can you
take possession of the "Shariah" (Ghat) from them for the second time?"
Moawiya said, "In your opinion, how will Ali deal with us now?"

5 9

"I believe, Ali will not behave as you had done. He will not deny us
water. He has not come here for such deeds."

The soldiers of Ali after removing the soldiers of Moawiya from Ghat,
asked his permission to prevent the enemy from taking water. Ali said,
"Don't deny them water. These are the me- thods of ignorant. I do not
set my hands to such acts. I am going to start negotiation with them on
the basis of the Holy Book of God. If they accept my proposals, well and
good; and if they refuse, I shall fight with them, but gentlemenly not
by denying them water. I will never do such thing and will not oppress
them by shortage of water'."

Not long afterwards soldiers of Moawiya used to come co the Ghat side
by side with the soldiers of Ali, and nobody prevented them.

60


**The Silly Shop-Keeper**

A heavy built tall man was passing through the market of Kufa, his step
firm and assured. He had fine figure and sun-burnt face; encounters of
the battle-field had left their marks on him and the corner of one of
his eyes was slit. A shop-keeper, to amuse his friends, threw a handful
of sweepings onto the man. The man continued his walk in the same
assured and firm manner, without raising an eye brow or looking towards
the shop-keeper. When he went away, a friend of the shop keeper said:

"Do you know who the man is whom you have insulted just now?"

"No, I do not recognise him. He was a passer- by like thousands of
people passing this way every- day. But tell me who was this man."
"Strange! Didn't you recognise him?! He was Malik Ashtar, the renowned
Commander-in-Chief

61

of Ali." "Strange! He was Malik Ashtar?! The same Malik whose bravery
turns the heart of lion into water and mention of whose name makes his
ene- mies tremble with fear?"

"Yes, that was Malik himself" "Woe to me! What did I do? Now he will
give order to punish me severely. I must run to him immediately to
apologise and pray him to forgive my misbehaviour:"

He ran after Malik. He saw him turning to- wards a mosque. He followed
him to the Mosque and saw that he had started praying. He waited till he
finished his prayer Humbly introducing him- self he told him:

"I am the man who had committed the silly prank and behaved
disrespectfully to you" Malik: "But, by Allah, I did not come in the
mosque but for your sake; because I knew that you were a very ignorant
and misguided man and that

62

you give trouble to the people without any cause. I felt pity on you
and came here to pray for you and ask Allah to lead you onto the right
path. No, I did not have any such intentions as you were afraid of "

**WHAT DID HAPPEN TO THY SONS?**

After the martyrdom of Ali and absolute do- mination of Moawiya over
the Caliphate, willy-nilly contacts were taking place between him and
the sincere followers of Ali. He tried hard to make them confess that
they did not gain anything by their friendship with Ali. Obviously they
had lost every- thing on the altar of that friendship. He longed to hear
from their mouth atleast some expression of regret and remorse, but this
wish never materialised. The followers of Ali, after his martyrdom, had
be- come more and more aware of his virtues and great- ness. Whatever
their sacrifices during his lifetime, now they were doing more for his
love, for his principles and for keeping his mission alive. They were
having all kinds of hardship very courageous- ly. And, as a result, the
endeavours of Moawiya sometimes produced opposite results.

Adi son of Hatim, the paramount chief of the

64

Tai Tribe, was one of the devoted, sincere and knowledgeable followers
of Ali. He had many sons. He, his sons and his tribe were always ready
to sacrifice their all for Ali. His three sons named Tarfa, Turaif and
Tarif were martyred in the war of Seffin under the banner of Ali. The
time went on; Ali was martyred; Moawiya usurped the Caliphate; and once
Adi came face to face with Moawiya.

To revive his sad memories and to make him confess how much harm had
come to him in the friendship of Ali, Moawiya said:

"What happened to your three sons, Tarfa, Turaif and Tarif?"

"They were martyred in the battle of Seffin under the banner of Ali"

"Ali did not do justice to you"

"Why?"

"Because he threw your sons in the mouth of death and preserved his own
sons in safety" "I did not do justice to Ali"

65

"Why?"

"Because he was killed and I am still alive. I ought to have sacrificed
myself for him in his life- time" Moawiya saw that he was not getting
what he had aimed at. On the other side, he also wanted to hear about
the character and life of Ali from those who had been nearer to Ali and
had lived with him day in and day out. Therefore, he asked Adi to
narrate to him the character of Ali as he had seen it. Adi asked to be
excused; but Moawiya insisted and then Adi said.

"By God, Ali was the most far-sighted and strong man. He talked with
righteousness and decided the cases with clarity. He was an ocean of
knowledge and wisdom. He hated the worldly pomp and show, and liked the
solitude of night. He wept more (in love of Allah) and thought more
(about Allah). In solitude, he scrutinized his own self and pitied about
the past. He preferred short

66

clothes and simple life. Amongst us he was lice one of us. If we
requested him for anything he granted our request. When we visited him
he made us sit near him without keeping any distance. Inspite of all
this humbleness, his presence was so awe- inspiring that we did not dare
utter any words before him. He was so majestic that we could not look at
him. When he smiled his teeth appeared like a string of pearls. He
respected honest and pious people and was kind to indigent. Neither a
strong man had any fear of injustice from him, nor a weak person ever
lost hope of his justice. By God, one night I saw him standing in his
place of worship when the dark night had engulfed everything; tears were
rolling down on his face and beard; he was restless like a snake-bitten
person and was weeping like a bereaved man."

"It seems as if even now I am hearing his voice as he was addressing
the world: \`O World, thou ist coming towards me and wantest to lure me?
Go

67

deceive someone else. Thy time is not come. I have divorced thee thrice
after when there is no re- turn. Thy pleasure is valueless and thy
importance insignificant. Alas! the provision is too little, the journey
too long and there is no companion'.'

Hearing these worlds of Adi, Moawiya started crying, then wiping off
the tears, he said:

"May God bless Abul Hassan (Ali). He was as you have said. Now tell me
how do you feel with- out him?"

"I feel like a mother whose dear one is behead- ed in her lap"

"Wouldn't you ever forget him?"

"Would the world allow me to forget him?"


