Aqueel As a Guest of Ali
========================

Aqueel arrived as a guest at the Government House in the days of the
Caliphate of his brother, Ali. Ali made a sign to his elder son Hassan
to offer a garment to his uncle. Hassan presented to him a robe and a
cloak. The night came; the weather was warm. They were sitting on
roof-top having amiable talks. It was time for dinner. Aqueel considered
himself to be the guest of the Absolute ruler of the Muslim world and
expected an extraordinarily colourful and rich dinner. But to his
surprise it was the most ordinary and simple one.

He said: "Is this all the food?" Ali:

"Isn't it a God's gift? I heartily thank Almighty God that he has
bestowed me with this gift."

Aqueel: "Then I should better tell you my needs at once, and be on my
way soon. I am in debt.

Please order to pay off my debt as soon as possible; and also help your
poor brother as much as you can, so that I return to my place relieved
of my burdens:"

"How much is your debt?" "One hundred thousand Dirham" "Oh! One hundred
thousand Dirham! So large? I am sorry, brother. I don't have so much
money to give you; but wait till the time comes for the disbursement of
stipends. I shall withdraw my personal share and give from it to you,
thus fulfilling my duty of cooperation and brotherhood towards you. If
my family and children were not in need of their own expenses, I would
have given you my entire share" "What?! !

Should I wait till the payment of stipends? You have the state-treasury
in your hand and still you are asking me to wait till the time of
disbursement and then only you will give me from your personal share!
You can withdraw any amount you want from the State Treasury. So, why
are you making me wait till then? Besides, what is your total share from
it? Even if you give me the your entire share, how far will it relieve
me of my trouble?"

"I am surprised to hear your proposal. What concern it does it, is of
me or you whether there is money in the Treasury or not?

We are just like any other Muslims. True, you are my brother and I must
help you as much as possible, but from my personal money, not from the
public treasury" The argument continued and Aqueel pleaded with Ali in
various ways. He continued to insist that Ali should give him from state
treasury. The place where they were sitting overlooked the market of
Kufa, and they could see the cash-boxes of the shop-keepers.

Ali said, "If you still insist and are not ready to listen to me, then
I have got another proposal for you. If you follow it you can repay all
your loan and still have plenty of money left'." "What is that?"

"Down over there are cash-boxes. As soon as the market is closed and
nobody is there, go down and break open the boxes. And take whatever you
want'.'

"Whose boxes are they?" "They belong to the people of this market. They
keep their cash in them:" "Strange! You are telling me to steal the
money of poor people who have earned it with their hard labour and have
gone home leaving it there trusting in God?"

"Then why are you urging me to open the boxes of the state-treasury for
you? Whom does it belong to? This also belongs to the same people who
are asleep in their houses carefree and in comforts. All right, I have
another suggestion. Follow it if you like."

"What's that?"

"If you are ready then pick up your sword and so will do I. The old
city of Hirah is not far from here. There are leading merchants and
wealthy people there. We make a surprise attack on one of them during
night and bring out enormous wealth with us."

"Brother, I haven't come here for theft and robbery that you are
suggesting these things to me. I am only asking you to instruct the
officials of the treasury to give me the money which is in your power,
so that I may repay my debt:"

"Suppose that we steal the property of an individual, isn't it better
that stealing from the property of millions of Muslims? How is it that
taking the property of an individual with sword is robbery, and usurping
the property of the general public is not? You are under the impression
that robbery only means attacking some individual and taking his
property by force.

The worst type of robbery is the same thing which you are proposing to
me to do now."

**THE FIRST SLOGAN**

News leaking now and then from Mecca to the tribe of Bani Ghefar had
attracted the mind of Abi Zar, a man of an inquisitive nature. He want
to reach to the depth of those developments in Mecca , but the distorted
news occasionally obtained from the individuals, were not making any
sense to him. The only definite thing known to him was that a new voice
has arise in Mecca, and the Meccans were striving hard to silence it.
But what was that new voice and why the Meccans were opposing it?

These were the questions which remained unanswered. His brother was
going to Mecca. He told him, "People tell me that a man has appeared in
Mecca and has brought some new talks, and claim they have been revealed
unto him from God. Since you are going to Mecca, investigate into the
same; and bring me the correct information." Days passed; he eagerly
waited for his brother; when he came back, Abu Zar asked him:

"What is the news, and how the things stand there?"

"So far as I could gather he is a man who invites people towards good
morals. He has also hrought some talk which is not poetry." "I had
wanted you to make a more thorough investigation. This much information
is not enough for my purpose. Better I should go there personally to
find out the truth:"

He put up some provision on his back and straight away came to Mecca.
He was determined to meet the man who had brought the new talks and to
hear the words from his own mouth. But he neither knew him nor thought
it prudent to enquire about him from someone else. The atmoshere in
Mecca was tense with oppression and intimidation. Without making his
intention known to anyone, he was looking in all directions, listening
to the gossip of the people around him hoping that it might provide him
a \`clue.' The Masjidul Haram was the centre of news and events. Hence
he came there with his baggage on the back. The day turned into night,
but he could find no clue. Night passed a little; he stretched himself
there. Soonafter a youngman passed nearby. He looked at Abu Zar with
searching eyes, and went away. His glance seemed to him very meaningful.
It occured to him that perhaps that youngman was the right person to
divulge his secret to. He followed him but came back not daring to speak
to him.

Next day also he sat whole day in Masjidul Haram alert looking to every
possible clue; but in vain. The night befell and he again stretched on
the same spot. The same youth appeared again and respectfully said, "Has
the time not come for you to come to your house and spend the night
there?" Saying this he took him to his house. Abu Zar did not divulge
his secret that night, nor did the youth ask him. Early morning Abu Zar
said good-bye to him and came to the mosque after his pursuit. That day
also turned into night and he could not make out anything from the talks
of the people. The youngman again appeared and took him to his house;
but this time he broke the silence:

"Can you tell me why you have come to this city?"

"I shall tell you if you promise to help me" "I promise I shall do my
best to help you" "The fact is that we have been hearing among our
tribes that a man has appeared in Mecca and has brought some talks
claiming the same to be revealed unto him from God. I have come so that
I may see him and may investigate about him. Firstly, tell me what do
you believe about him? secondly, can you guide me to him?"

"Rest assured he is on right and what he says is from God. I shall take
you to him in the morning. But as you are aware if these people came to
know about it your life as well as mine will be in danger. Tomorrow
morning I shall walk ahead and you follow me at a distance. If I will
see any danger I shall stand and bow towards the earth like a man
emptying a pot; then you must be off. If there is no danger you will
follow me where-ever I go".

Next morning the youth who was none else than Ali appeared from his
house, Abu Zar following him. Fortunately the way was clear and they
reached the house of the prophet safely. He made a thorough study of the
manners of the Prophet and also listened to the verses of the Qur'an.
Not much time has passed that he embraced Islam very enthusiastically.
He made a convent with the Prophet that he would not listen to any
reproach in the way of Allah during his whole life and would speak truth
even though it might be bitter for some tastes.

The Prophet said: "Now go back to your tribes and invite them towards
Islam till you receive my next order" He said, "Very well; but before
leaving this city I shall go before these people and will announce
before them the slogan of Islam, come what may."

He went straight to the heart of the City, i.e. the Mosque and cried
before the congregation of Quraish:

"(1 bear witness that there is no god but Allah and Mohammad is His
Servant and Messenger)." Hearing this slogan from the stranger, Meccans
rushed at him immediately and had Abbas son of Abdul Muttalib not come
to his rescue they would have torn him to pieces. Abbas said, "This man
is from the tribe of Ghefar, and the trade caravan of Quraish plying
between Mecca and Syria passes through their lands. Don't you think if
you kill one of their men, you will never again be allowed to pass
through their land safely?"

Abu Zar was rescued from their hands. However, he was not satisfied. He
said, "Once again I shall repeat this slogan. Let these people hear what
they don't like to hear at all. If they hear it again and again they
will become used to it." So, next day he repeated the same slogan. Again
the people attacked him and Abbas who was present there saved him from
their atrocities.

After that, according to the order of the Prophet, he returned home and
started preaching Islam among his tribe. When the Prophet migrated to
Medina, Abu Zar too went to him and remained in Medina almost to the end
of his life. He was extremely frank and owing to this virtuous
attributes he was exiled during the Caliphate of Othman, first to Syria
and later at a place named Rabza near Medina. There he died a lonely
death. The Prophet had said about him "May God bless Abu Zar! he will
live alone, will die alone and shall be brought up alone on the Day of
Resurrection."


