The Retirement
==============

The old man, a Christian by religion, had worked all his life; but had
not been able to save anything for his old age. Lately he had become
also blind. Old age, poverty and blindness had joined hands and he had
no other way except begging. He used to stand at the corner of a lane
for begging. People had compassion for him and gave him some alms from
which he ate every day, and so he con- tinued his sad life.

One day Ali, the Leader of the Faithfuls pass- ed through the lane and
saw the beggar in that con- dition. Ali, out of his concern for others,
enquired about the old man. He wanted to know the factors which led him
to that condition. "Had he no son to support him? Or, is there no other
way for him to live a respectable life in his old age?"

The people who knew the old man came for-
ward and informed Ali that he was a Christian and,

6 9

had worked hard so long as he had his eyes, and was young and strong.
Now that he had lost his youth as well as his eyes he was unable to do
any work; also he had no savings, so it was natural that he was begging.
Ali said, "Strange! Till he had strength you extracted work from him and
now you have left him on his own?" His story shows that he had worked
when he had the strength. Therefore, it is the duty of the Government
and the society to support him till he is alive. Go, and give him a
life-pension from the State-treasury ."

70

**IN THE LAND OF MINA**

The pilgrims had assembled in Mina. Imam Sadiq and his companions
sitting in a place were eating some grapes placed before them. A beggar
appeared and asked for alms. The Imam took some grapes to give him, but
he refused to accept it and asked for money. Imam told him to excuse him
as he did not have money. The beg- gar went away disappointed.

After going a few steps he had second thoughts came back and asked for
the same grapes. The Imam now refused to give him those grapes too. Soon
after, another beggar appeared. The Imam again took some grapes and gave
to him. He accepted it and said, "Thanks to the Lord of universe who
gave me my sustenance" On hearing these words, the Imam told him to wait
and gave him two handfuls of grapes.

71

The beggar thanked God for the second time.

The Imam again told him to wait and then turning to one of his friends
asked, "How much money is with you?" The man searched his pockets and
produced nearly twenty Dirhams which he gave to the beggar at the order
of the Imam.

The beggar thanking God for the third time said, "Thanks are
exclusively to God. O God! Thou art the Bestower of the good, and thou
hast no companion'." On hearing these words, the Imam took off his
garment and gave it to the beggar. Now, the beggar changed his tone and
spoke a few words of thanks to the Imam himself. Then the Imam did not
give him anything and he went away.

His friends and companions who were present there said, "We thought
that had the beggar conti- nued thanking God in the same manner as
before, the Imam would have continued giving him more and more. But when
he cnanged his talk and praised

7 2

and thanked the Imam himself, the Imam did not continue his help.

73

**The Protection That Was Revoked**

Muslims had migrated to Abyssinia because of the torture and
persecution by Quraish, but al- ways anxiously waited for some news from
their homeland. Those stand-bearers of Unity and justice of God (though
an insignificant minority in com- parison to the swarms of idolators who
were bent upon maintaining statuesque in religion and social system)
were confident that everyday their suppor- ters were increasing and the
rank of their adversa- ries was decreasing. They even hoped that soon
the curtain of ignorance would be removed from the eyes of the non
believers and the whole tribe of Quraish would embrace Islam, casting
away their idols.

By chance a rumour took wings in their local- ity in Abyssinia that the
whole Quraish had been converted to Islam. Though the news was not con
firmed, but the refugees deep faith in their religion, and their strong
expectation and hope in the ulti-

7 4

mate victory of Islam led a group of them to return to Mecca without
waiting for the confirmation of the news from reliable sources. One of
them was Othman bin Madh'un, the well-known companion of the Prophet who
was extra-ordinarily attached to the Holy Prophet, and was greatly
respected by all Muslims. When he reached near Mecca, he realis- ed that
the news was not correct; on the contrary, Quraish had intensified the
torture and oppression of the Muslims. He was in a bad fix: He could not
return to Abyssinia as it was far off; and if he en- tered Mecca,he
would immediately become a target of the Quraish's torture. At last, an
idea came into his mind. He thought of taking advantage of an Arabian
custom by placing himself under the pro- tection of one of the
influential men of Quraish.

According to the Arab custom if a person would request an Arab for
protection, he usually would grant his request and would protect him
even at the cost of his own life. For an Arab, it was a shame if someone
asked him for protection and he

75

did not grant that request eventhough he might be his enemy. So Othman
entered Mecca at mid-night and went straight to the house of Waleed son
of Mughira Makhzumi, a distinguished wealthy and in- fluential
Quraishite. He asked for his protection which was readily granted.

Next day, Waleed brought him to the Mosque and made a formal
announcement before the elders of the tribe that from that moment Othman
was under his protection, anyone doing anything against him would be
considered going against Waleed per- sonally. As Waleed was highly
respected by Ouraish, nobody dared to trouble Othman any more. He was
now a protected person. He moved freely as one of the Quraish attending
their sittings.

But at the same time, the persecution of other Muslims continued
unbated. It was hard on Oth- man, who was not happy at being Safe while
his fellow Muslims continued to suffer. One day he thought to himself
that it was not just on his part

7 6

to be safe under the protection of a pagan whereas his brethren were
being persecuted. He came to Waleed and said:

"I am sincerely thankful to you. You gave me protection and saved me;
but from today I want to go out from your protection, and join my
friends. Let, whatever happens to them, happen to me" "Nephew, perhaps
you are not happy with me, or perhaps, my protection could not keep you
safe" "Why, I am not unhappy at all. But I don't want to live any longer
under protection of anyone except God'."

"Since you have so decided, I would like you to come to the Mosque
announce your going out from my protection, as I took you the first day
there and announced your protection" "Very well, no objection to it."

They came to the Mosque. When the elders had gathered, Waleed said:
"Everybody should know that Othman has come here to announce his

7 7

exit from my protection"

Othman said: "He is right. I have come here with that very intention,
and also to inform you that so long as I was under his protection, he
protec- ted me very well and I had no reason to complain. The reason for
my going out from his protection is only that I don't like to live under
the protection of anyone except God."

This is how the protective period came to end, and he lost his immunity
from persecution. But he was still moving freely among Quraish as
before.

One day, Labeed bin Rabia, the well-known poet of Arabia came to Mecca
to recite his Qasida (poem) which he had recently composed, and which is
now considered as a masterpiece and classics of the pre-Islamic period
of Arabic literature.

The Qasida begins with the following line:

78

Know (that Ev ery thing is null and v oid ex - cept God; nothing ex
cept A llah is Truth). The Prophet had said about this line, "It is the
truest poem has ever composed'."

Anyhow, Labeed came, Quraish gathered to hear such a great poet. There
was a pin-drop silence to hear a reputedly best work of Labeed. He
started recitation with manifest pride:

(Know that everything is null and void except God).

Before he could recite the second line, Oth- man sitting in a corner
said loudly: "Excellent, you have spoken the truth. It is the fact;
everything except God is false."

Labeed recited the second line:

end).

(A nd, without doubt all riches come to an

79

Othman cried, "But this is wrong. Not all riches are to come to an end.
This is true only for the material riches of this world. The riches of
the life hereafter are immortal and eternal:"

The people were surprised. No body had ex- pected that a man who only a
short while ago was under the protection of another person and who now
had neither security of his life nor power of any wealth would dare
criticising a poet of Labeed's stature in the gathering of chiefs and
elders of the Quraish.

They requested Labeed to repeat the lines; the poet repeated the first
line and again Othman said: "True, correct'." But when Labeed repeated
the second line, Othman again said: "Wrong. It is not true; the riches
of that world are not perishable"

This time Labeed himself felt most annoyed. He cried: "O people of
Quraish! By God, your gatherings were not like this before. There were

8 0

not such rude and discourteous persons among you. How is it that now
among you I find such persons?"

A man from the audience with the intention of pacifying hire and making
him to continue his recitation, said affably: "Please, don't be angry to
the talk of this man. He is crazy. And he is not alone. There is a group
of some more crazy per- sons in this city. And they have the same belief
as this fool. They have gone out from our religion and have chosen a new
religion of their own"

Othman replied to that man forcefully. The man lost his temper; moved
from his seat and slap- ped at the face of Othman, putting his full
strength behind that slap. Othman got a black-eye.

Somebody said to Othman:

"Othman! you did not appreciate the value of the protection of Waleed.
Had you still been

8 1

under his protection, your eye would not have be- come black." "The
protection of God is safer and more dig- nified than the protection of
any other person. So far as my eye is concerned, the other eye also
longs to attain the same honour in the way of Allah:"

Waleed came forward and said:

"Othman, I am ready to take you again under my protection:" "But I have
decided not to accept anyone's protection except that of God."


