Ibne Sayyaba
============

Ibne Sayyaba, a resident of Kufa, was a young man whose father had died.
The tragedy of the death of his father, coupled with poverty and
unemployment, was destroying the soul of the  
 sensitive man. One day while sitting in his house, he heard a knock at
the door. He was a friend of his father. After offering his condolences,
he said:

"Did your father leave anything for you?" "No"

"Then take this thousand Dirham; try to turn it into a capital, and meet
your expenses from its profit."

Saying these words he went away. Ibne Sayyaba, happy as he was, went to
his mother and showing the money told her the story. The same day, he
used the money in purchasing some  
 merchandise and opening a shop; and set his heart to it. He made a
rapid progress. Soon after he realized that not only he had met his
household expenses from the profit, but even the capital had increased
to a great extent. Now he thought of performing pilgrimage, and
approached his mother for her advice. She said, "First you should repay
the thousand Dirham which has brought such prosperity to us, and then
you may go to Mecca."

He went to see the friend of his father, and placing a purse of one
thousand Dirham before him, said, "Please accept your money back" The
man thought that Ibne Sayyaba was returning the same money because it
was not sufficient for any trade. So he said:

"If the amount is insufficient I can increase it"

"Good God, it was not insufficient. It has brought great prosperity to
us and since I am now quite well off financially, I have come to repay
your money, and to express my thanks to you, particularly when I have
decided to go on pilgrimage.

He came to his home and packed his luggage for Mecca. After performance
of the holy *Hajj,* he came to Medina and went to see Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
along with other pilgrims. There was a huge crowd in the house of the
Imam (a.s.). Being young he chose to sit at the far end of the
gathering, and from there watched the people coming and going; and heard
their questions and the answers given by the Imam. When the house became
nearly empty, the Imam (a.s.) pointed to him and said:

"What can I do for you?"

"I am Abdur Rahman, son of Sayyaba, of Kufa (from the tribe of Bijilly)"
"How is your father?"

"He died"

"Ah! Ah! May God have His mercy upon him. Did he leave anything for
you?"

"No, he didn't"

"Then how could you perform pilgrimage?" "After the death of my father
we were in distress. On one side his death and on the other side poverty
and unemployment, were crushing us  
 extremely. Then one day a friend of my father gave me one thousand
Dirham and advised me to invest the amount in business. I followed his
advice and from its profit I came to perform pilgrimage."

Before he could finish his story, the Imam (a.s.) said, "Tell me what
did you do about the money of your father's friend?"

I refunded the amount on the advice of my mother before coming out for
Hajj'.'

"Very good. Do you like me to give you an advice?"

"May I be your ransom; of course"

"Be truthful and righteous. A truthful and righteous man is a partner in
the wealth of others."


