The Prayer That Was Granted
===========================

"O God, Do not let me return to my family'." These were the words that
Hind, the wife of Amr bin Jamuh, heard, from her husband when he left
the house fully armed for participating in the battle of Uhud. It was
his first time to fight alongwith the Muslims. He had not fought before
as he was very lame, and according to the clear rule of the Qur'an Jihad
(holy war against non-believers) is not incumbent upon those who are
blind, lame or sick. Though he himself had not participated in Jihad but
his four lion-hearted sons were always with the holy Prophet. Nobody had
ever thought that Amr, inspite of his genuine excuse, and after sending
four sons to Jihad, would want himself to be included among the soldiers
of Islam.

When his relatives heard of his decision they came to persude him to
change his mind. They said "First of all, you are exempted from Jihad,
by rule

8 3

of "Shariat" (divine law). Secondly, you have four brave sons who are
going with the Prophet. So, there is no need for you to go yourself."

He replied: "As my sons want to get eternal bliss and paradise, I too
have the same desire. Will it not be strange if they go and achieve
martyrdom while I sit in the house with you. No, it is not possible"

His relatives did not accept his views; and one after another came to
him to persuade him. At last, he appealed to the Prophet: "O Prophet of
God! My relatives want to con- fine me in the house. They are not
allowing me to participate in Jihad. By God it is my wish to go to
paradise with this lame leg"

"O Amir! After all, you have a genuine ex- cuse. God has exempted you.
Jihad is not incum- bent on you" "O Prophet of God! I am aware of that.
I know it is not incumbent upon me; even then........."

8 4

The Prophet said: "Do not forbid him from Jihad. Let him go. Since he
has a desire for attain- ing martyrdom, God may bless him with it."

One of the most spectacular scenes of the battle-field of Uhud was the
fighting of Amr bin Jamuh, who with his limping leg was attacking the
centre of the enemy's army and was shouting, "I have the desire of
paradise'." One of his sons was moving behind him. They fought gallantly
till both were killed.

After the war ended, many Muslim women came out of Medina for getting
correct news of the whole affair. They were anxious specially in view of
the frightening news which had reached the city. Aysha, wife of the
Prophet was one of them. When she came out of the city she saw Hind
pulling the rein of a camel with three dead bodies on its back. Aysha
asked:

"What is the news?"

"Thank God, the Prophet is safe. As he is

8 5

safe, I have no worries. The other news is that God has made the
non-believers suffer a reverse with sorrow."

"Whose corpses are these?"

"They are my brother, my son and my hus- band."


"Where are you taking them?"

"I am taking them to Medina for burial."

Saying this, Hind pulled the rein of the camel towards Medina. But the
animal seemed unwilling to proceed and finally sat down. Aysha said:
"The load seems heavy; he can't carry it" "No. This camel of ours is
very strong and usually carries the load of two camels. There must be
some other reason."

Saying this she pulled the rein towards Medina; again the camel sat
down. When she turned the camel towards Uhud, to her surprise the animal
started walking quickly.

8 6

The situation was strange. She thought, "per- haps there is some
mystery in it'." She then turned the animal towards Uhud and went
streight to the Prophet:

"O Prophet of God! There is a strange story here. I placed these
corpses to take them to Medina to bury them. When I pull the rein
towards Medina, the animal refuses to obey me. But when I direct him to
Uhud, he walks quickly."

"Did your husband say anything while coming to Uhud?"

"O Prophet of God! When he left the house, I heard him saying: \`O God,
Do not let me return to my family."

"Then this is the reason. The sincere prayer of this martyre has been
granted. God does not want this corpse to return. There are men among
you, Helpers of the Prophet, who if they ask any- thing from God, the
Almighty God grants their wishes. Your husband was one of them."

On the advice of the Prophet, these men were buried in Uhud. Then, the
Prophet turned to Hind and said:

87

"These men shall be together in that world" "O Prophet of God! Pray to
Almighty to keep me also with them:"

88


**The Right Of Companionship**

In those days, Kufa was the Capital and Centre of the Islamic
Government. All eyes of the vast and wide Muslim nation (with the
exception of Syria) were fixed at this city waiting as to what orders
were being issued and what decisions taken.

Outside the City two gentlemen, a Muslim and the other from People of
the Book (Jew, Christian or Zoroastrian) met on the road one day. The
Mus lim was going to Kufa and the other gentlemen to another place
nearby. Since a part of their jour- ney was common, they decided to
travel together.

On the way, they talked and talked on various topics of mutual interest
and ultimately arrived at the point where their paths separated. The
non- Muslim was surprised to see that his Muslim com- panion did not
take the path leading to Kufa but accompanied him on the other path,
where he was going. He asked:

89

"Well, didn't you say you were going to Kufa?" "Yes" "Then why are you
coming this way? The other one is the path to Kufa'."

"1 know. I want to walk a few steps with you to see you off. Because
our Prophet has said,

\` Whenever two persons travel together on the same path, they
establish reciprocal rights upon each other. Now you have got a right
upon me and for the sake of that right of yours I wish to walk a few
steps with you, and then, of course, I shall return unto my own path."
"Oh! Such an authority and power which is weilded among people in such a
perfect way by your Prophet, and the amazing speed with which his
religion has spread in the world, must be, I am sure, because of his
such noble character."

The surprise and admiration of this gentlemen reached its peak when he
learnt afterwards that his Muslim friend was Ali bin Abi-Talib, the
Caliph of that time. Soonafter he embraced Islam and was

9 0

counted among the most devout and selfsacrificing companions of Ali.


91

**THE BLACK MARKET**

The dependants of Imam Ja'afer Sadiq (a.s.) had increased in number; so
had his expenses. The I mam decided to invest some money in trade to
meet the increased expenses of the house. He arranged for an amount of
thousand Dinars which he gave to his slave named 'Musadif' directing him
to proceed to Egypt and to invest the amount in business on behalf of
Imam.

Musadif purchased some goods usually ex- ported to Egypt, and joined a
Caravan of traders, who were taking the same type of merchandise to
Egypt.

When they reached near Egypt, they met another Caravan coming out of
the City. They en- quired about each other's affairs. During the course
of conversation, they learnt that the goods which Musadif and his
friends were carrying were not available in Egypt and were in great
demand

9 2

there. They became very happy at their good for- tune. Indeed that was
an article of common use and people had to buy it at all costs. The
traders on hearing the good news decided to exploit the situation. They
agreed together not to sell the goods at less than hundred percent pro-
fit.

They entered the city. The situation was same as they had been told. As
previously agreed, they created a black market, and did not sell the
goods at less than double the cost.

Musadif returned to Medina with a net profit of one thousand Dinars.
Happy as he was he went to Imam Sadiq, and placed before him two bags,
each containing one thousand Dinars. The Imam asked "What is this?"

"One of the two bags represents the capital

93

you gave me, and the other one (which is equal to the capital) is the
profit I have made" "Certainly the profit is unexpectedly high. Tell me
how could you make so much profit?" "The fact is when we learnt near
Egypt that the merchandise we were carrying had become scarce there, we
agreed not to sell the goods at less than double the cost; and we did
accordingly'." "Glory be to God! You did such a work! You took oath to
create a black market among the Mus- lims! You swore not to sell the
goods at less than double the actual cost! No. I don't want such busi-
ness and such profit'."

Then picking up one of the bags, he said, "This is my capital." He did
not even touch the other one, and said that he did not want to have any
connection with that.

Then he said:

"O Musadif! It is easier to fight with a sword than to earn the
livelihood lawfully."


