The Retirement
==============

The old man, a Christian by religion, had worked all his life; but had
not been able to save anything for his old age. Lately he had become
also blind.

Old age, poverty and blindness had joined hands and he had no other way
except begging. He used to stand at the corner of a lane for begging.
People had compassion for him and gave him some alms from which he ate
every day, and so he continued his sad life.

One day Ali, the Leader of the Faithfuls passed through the lane and
saw the beggar in that condition. Ali, out of his concern for others,
enquired about the old man. He wanted to know the factors which led him
to that condition. "Had he no son to support him? Or, is there no other
way for him to live a respectable life in his old age?" The people who
knew the old man came forward and informed Ali that he was a Christian
and, had worked hard so long as he had his eyes, and was young and
strong. Now that he had lost his youth as well as his eyes he was unable
to do any work; also he had no savings, so it was natural that he was
begging. Ali said, "Strange! Till he had strength you extracted work
from him and now you have left him on his own?" His story shows that he
had worked when he had the strength. Therefore, it is the duty of the
Government and the society to support him till he is alive. Go, and give
him a life-pension from the State-treasury."

**IN THE LAND OF MINA**

The pilgrims had assembled in Mina. Imam Sadiq and his companions
sitting in a place were eating some grapes placed before them. A beggar
appeared and asked for alms. The Imam took some grapes to give him, but
he refused to accept it and asked for money. Imam told him to excuse him
as he did not have money. The beggar went away disappointed.

After going a few steps he had second thoughts came back and asked for
the same grapes. The Imam now refused to give him those grapes too. Soon
after, another beggar appeared. The Imam again took some grapes and gave
to him. He accepted it and said, "Thanks to the Lord of universe who
gave me my sustenance" On hearing these words, the Imam told him to wait
and gave him two handfuls of grapes.

The beggar thanked God for the second time. The Imam again told him to
wait and then turning to one of his friends asked, "How much money is
with you?" The man searched his pockets and produced nearly twenty
Dirhams which he gave to the beggar at the order of the Imam.

The beggar thanking God for the third time said, "Thanks are
exclusively to God. O God! Thou art the Bestower of the good, and thou
hast no companion'." On hearing these words, the Imam took off his
garment and gave it to the beggar. Now, the beggar changed his tone and
spoke a few words of thanks to the Imam himself. Then the Imam did not
give him anything and he went away. His friends and companions who were
present there said, "We thought that had the beggar continued thanking
God in the same manner as before, the Imam would have continued giving
him more and more. But when he cnanged his talk and praised and thanked
the Imam himself, the Imam did not continue his help.

**THE PROTECTION THAT WAS REVOKED**

Muslims had migrated to Abyssinia because of the torture and
persecution by Quraish, but always anxiously waited for some news from
their homeland. Those stand-bearers of Unity and justice of God (though
an insignificant minority in comparison to the swarms of idolators who
were bent upon maintaining statuesque in religion and social system)
were confident that everyday their supporters were increasing and the
rank of their adversaries was decreasing. They even hoped that soon the
curtain of ignorance would be removed from the eyes of the non believers
and the whole tribe of Quraish would embrace Islam, casting away their
idols.

By chance a rumour took wings in their locality in Abyssinia that the
whole Quraish had been converted to Islam. Though the news was not con
firmed, but the refugees deep faith in their religion, and their strong
expectation and hope in the ulti- mate victory of Islam led a group of
them to return to Mecca without waiting for the confirmation of the news
from reliable sources. One of them was Othman bin Madh'un, the
well-known companion of the Prophet who was extra-ordinarily attached to
the Holy Prophet, and was greatly respected by all Muslims. When he
reached near Mecca, he realised that the news was not correct; on the
contrary, Quraish had intensified the torture and oppression of the
Muslims. He was in a bad fix: He could not return to Abyssinia as it was
far off; and if he entered Mecca,he would immediately become a target of
the Quraish's torture. At last, an idea came into his mind. He thought
of taking advantage of an Arabian custom by placing himself under the
protection of one of the influential men of Quraish.

According to the Arab custom if a person would request an Arab for
protection, he usually would grant his request and would protect him
even at the cost of his own life.

For an Arab, it was a shame if someone asked him for protection and he
did not grant that request eventhough he might be his enemy. So Othman
entered Mecca at mid-night and went straight to the house of Waleed son
of Mughira Makhzumi, a distinguished wealthy and influential Quraishite.
He asked for his protection which was readily granted.

Next day, Waleed brought him to the Mosque and made a formal
announcement before the elders of the tribe that from that moment Othman
was under his protection, anyone doing anything against him would be
considered going against Waleed personally. As Waleed was highly
respected by Ouraish, nobody dared to trouble Othman any more. He was
now a protected person. He moved freely as one of the Quraish attending
their sittings. But at the same time, the persecution of other Muslims
continued unbated. It was hard on Othman, who was not happy at being
Safe while his fellow Muslims continued to suffer. One day he thought to
himself that it was not just on his part to be safe under the protection
of a pagan whereas his brethren were being persecuted. He came to Waleed
and said:

"I am sincerely thankful to you. You gave me protection and saved me;
but from today I want to go out from your protection, and join my
friends. Let, whatever happens to them, happen to me" "Nephew, perhaps
you are not happy with me, or perhaps, my protection could not keep you
safe"

"Why, I am not unhappy at all. But I don't want to live any longer
under protection of anyone except God'."
