The First Slogan
================

News leaking now and then from Mecca to the tribe of Bani Ghefar had
attracted the mind of Abi Zar, a man of an inquisitive nature. He want
to reach to the depth of those developments in Mecca , but the distorted
news occasionally obtained from the individuals, were not making any
sense to him. The only definite thing known to him was that a new voice
has arise in Mecca, and the Meccans were striving hard to silence it.
But what was that new voice and why the Meccans were opposing it? These
were the questions which remained unanswered. His brother was going to
Mecca. He told him, "People tell me that a man has appeared in Mecca and
has brought some new talks, and claim they have been revealed unto him
from God. Since you are going to Mecca, investigate into the same; and
bring me the correct information."

Days passed; he eagerly waited for his brother; when he came back, Abu
Dharr asked him:  
 "What is the news, and how the things stand there?" "So far as I could
gather he is a man who invites people towards good morals. He has also
brought some talk which is not poetry."

"I had wanted you to make a more thorough investigation. This much
information is not enough for my purpose. Better I should go there
personally to find out the truth:"

He put up some provision on his back and straight away came to Mecca. He
was determined to meet the man who had brought the new talks and to hear
the words from his own mouth. But he neither knew him nor thought it
prudent to enquire about him from someone else. The  
 atmosphere in Mecca was tense with oppression and intimidation. Without
making his intention known to anyone, he was looking in all directions,
listening to the gossip of the people around him hoping that it might
provide him a \`clue.' The Masjidul Haram was the centre of news and
events. Hence he came there with his baggage on the back. The day turned
into night, but he could find no clue. Night passed a little; he
stretched himself there. Soon after a young man passed nearby. He looked
at Abu Dharr with searching eyes, and went away. His glance seemed to
him very meaningful. It occured to him that perhaps that young man was
the right person to divulge his secret to. He followed him but came back
not daring to speak to him.

Next day also he sat whole day in Masjidul Haram alert looking to every
possible clue; but in vain. The night befell and he again stretched on
the same spot. The same youth appeared again and respectfully said, "Has
the time not come for you to come to your house and spend the night
there?" Saying this he took him to his house. Abu Dharr did not divulge
his secret that night, nor did the youth ask him. Early morning Abu
Dharr said good-bye to him and came to the mosque after his pursuit.
That day also turned into night and he could not make out anything from
the talks of the people. The young man again appeared and took him to
his house; but this time he broke the silence:

"Can you tell me why you have come to this city?"

"I shall tell you if you promise to help me"

"I promise I shall do my best to help you" "The fact is that we have
been hearing among  
 our tribes that a man has appeared in Mecca and has brought some talks
claiming the same to be revealed unto him from God. I have come so that
I may see him and may investigate about him. Firstly, tell me what do
you believe about him? Secondly, can you guide me to him?"

"Rest assured he is on right and what he says is from God. I shall take
you to him in the morn- ing. But as you are aware if these people came
to know about it your life as well as mine will be in danger. Tomorrow
morning I shall walk ahead and you follow me at a distance. If I will
see any danger I shall stand and bow towards the earth like a man
emptying a pot; then you must be off. If there is no danger you will
follow me where-ever I go".

Next morning the youth who was none else than Ali appeared from his
house, Abu Dharr follow- ing him. Fortunately the way was clear and they
reached the house of the prophet safely.

He made a thorough study of the manners of the Prophet and also listened
to the verses of the Qur'an. Not much time has passed that he embraced
Islam very enthusiastically. He made a convent with the Prophet that he
would not listen to any reproach in the way of Allah during his whole
life and would speak truth even though it might be bitter for some
tastes.

The Prophet said: "Now go back to your tribes and invite them towards
Islam till you receive my next order" He said, "Very well; but before
leaving this city I shall go before these people and will announce
before them the slogan of Islam, come what may."

He went straight to the heart of the City, i.e. the Mosque and cried
before the congregation of Quraish:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اشْهَدُ انْ لّآ اِلهَ اِلَّا اللّهُ وَ اَشْهَدُ اَنَّ مُحَمَّدً
اعَبْدُه وَرَسُولُه
  </p>
</blockquote>

"(I bear witness that there is no god but Allah and Mohammad is His
Servant and Messenger)."

Hearing this slogan from the stranger, Meccans rushed at him immediately
and had Abbas son of Abdul Muttalib not come to his rescue they would
have torn him to pieces. Abbas said, "This man is from the tribe of
Ghefar, and the trade caravan of Quraish plying between Mecca and Syria
passes through their lands. Don't you think if you kill one of their
men, you will never again be allowed to pass through their land safely?"

Abu Dharr was rescued from their hands. However, he was not satisfied.
He said, "Once again I  
 shall repeat this slogan. Let these people hear what they don't like to
hear at all. If they hear it again and again they will become used to
it."

So, next day he repeated the same slogan. Again the people attacked him
and Abbas who was present there saved him from their atrocities.

After that, according to the order of the Prophet, he returned home and
started preaching Islam among his tribe. When the Prophet migrated to
Medina, Abu Dharr too went to him and remained in Medina almost to the
end of his life. He was extremely frank and owing to this virtuous
attributes he was exiled during the Caliphate of Othman, first to Syria
and later at a place named Rabza near Medina. There he died a lonely
death. The Prophet had said about him

"May God bless Abu Dharr! he will live alone, will die alone and shall
be brought up alone on the Day of Resurrection."


