Presentation
============

To reach God and to prove that origin of existence - apart from its
scientific highway and Looking at the wonders of this designed world -
pure thought on the truth of encistence in also a clear original method.
The philosophy of this highway is considered far better and they choose
it. We will read At the beginning of this book, a summary of this phys
losiphical highway and in a straight line without an intermediate
directs the created towards the Creator. Then the book engaged in
scientific reasoning and Presents the esteemed reader in the this field
an interesting summary of the several directions of this scientific
highway , especially the receptions of today's worlds notable
researchers are presented.

In the filed of theology, other than debate on inherent proof, other
commotion causing problems are abundantly propounded. In this book a
concise and interesting summary of the following diocesans Are also
presented to the esteemed reader. For eccample, where does the
materialistic world originate from and how could it start? How can a
living thing possessing life come from an unloving element. Drawing
theory on the coming and development of evolution and to what extent
this system is valuable? Whether is the principle of evolution theory
agreeable with religion?

What do batter are brought forth by the theory of spontaneous and
occidental creation propounded by persons . with acceptance of the truth
of the self - Existent (God) and passing the artificial rocky road of
that direction, again, the subject of (God) in the arena of special
problems and these problems, from the beginning, caused the branching of
divine religions to appear. Is the Christian trinity acceptable and
agreable? Are Gods attributes as the Christians and yews say agrees with
is propounded in their holy books? Comparing Islamic unity and the
described God whether Common religions is the subject of the second part
of the book.

Finally, we reach part three, the stage of reaping thought and
theoretical benefits from the past three debates on principles, or
discussions on the superior attributes and virtuous names of God as
taught to man by Islam and the Quran- For this reason the Arabic and
Quran text of Gods virtuous names and superior attributes, with the
translation and transliteration in presented to the entombed reader at
the end of the book.


