Part 3: At-Tawhid
=================

26) At-Tawhid of Islam
----------------------

It will be seen from above-mentioned discussion how Islam, for the first
time in history of religions, explained “*at-tawhid*” (Oneness of God)
in such a way that there was no misunderstanding afterwards.
The Jews believed in one God, but theirs was not the universal but
tribal god. And even then, they had fallen in the pitfall of giving \`
Uzayr the title of \`son of God.'

It is the direct result of the teaching of Islam that Jews left calling
a man \`son of God'. Christians are trying to re-interprete the dogma of
Trinity; Hindus were compelled to rediscover that Vedas teach Unity of
God and that idolworship was wrong.
The surah of at-Tawhid is one of the shortest chapters of the Holy
Qur'an. It establishes the pure belief in the Oneness of God, rejecting
all types of 'shirk' in these words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الصَّمَدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يَلِدْ وَلَمْ يُولَدْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ كُفُوًا أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

***“Say: He is Allah, The One and Only:***
***Allah, the Eternal, Absolute;***
***He begetteth not, Nor is He begotten;***
***And there is none like unto Him.” (Chapter Al-Ikhlaas, n. 112)***

The first sentence of the Islamic kalimah, t hat is, “There is no god
except Allah” leads a Muslim throughout his life not only in religious
matters but in social behaviour also. “There is no god” shows a Muslim
that nothing in the universe is superior to Him. It is observed in
Qur'an that “He it is Who created for you all that is in the earth.” So
a Muslim knows that nothing in this world is to be worshipped. Neither
stone nor trees, neither animals nor human beings; neither the Sun, the
Moon nor the Stars can be worshipped, because everthing is created and
created for his benefit.

When a Muslim thus has rejected every falsehood and every idea of
nature-worship, idol-worship and human-worship, he is ready to believe
in the positive truth of the Unity of God. Believing in a Supreme being
gives an aim to our life and provides a purpose for our actions. Had a
man been left with the wrong impression that there was no God at all,
his life would have been aimless, and an aimless life is dangerous. So
it is added that there is no god “except Allah”. This sentence has a
negative as well as a positive aspect. Both are instrumental in creating
the belief that every man is equal to every other person. When nobody is
superior, nobody is inferior. Thus, the belief in the Unity of God
promotes the sense of brotherhood and equality and equity which is
another feature of Islam.

27) Attributes of Allah
-----------------------

Now time has come to explain in short what is our belief concerning God.
In preceding chapters almost all the aspects of our belief have been
explained. It should be apparent by now that there are many attributes
which are a must for God, while there are others which are beneath His
dignity and cannot be found in Him. Therefore, in our faith, the
attributes of Allah have been grouped as \`positive' and \`negative'.

### as-Sifaat ath-thubutiyyah

The positive attributes which are befitting Allah are called as-Sifat
ath-thubutiyyah. They are many in number, but only eight of them are
usually mentioned. They are:

1. al-Qadim: It means that Allah is Eternal, that is, He has neither
beginning nor end. Nothing except Allah is eternal.

2. al-Qadir: It means that Allah is Omnipotent, that is, He has power
over everything and every affair.

3. al- Alim: It means that Allah is Omniscient, that is, He knows
everything. Even our unspoken intentions and desires are not hidden from
Him.

4. al-Hayy: It means that Allah was always alive and will remain alive
for ever. 5. al-Murid: It means that Allah has His own will and
discretion in all affairs. He does not do anything under compulsion.

6. al-Mudrik: It means that He is All-perceiving, as as-Sami' \`
(All-hearing), al-Basir (All-seeing). Allah sees and hears everything
without any need of eyes or ears.

7. al-Mutakallim: It means that Allah is the Master of the word, that
is, lie can create speech in anything, as He did in a tree for Prophet
Musa (Moses - p.b.u.h.) and in the “Curtain of Light” for our Holy
Prophet (p. b. u. h. a. h. p.).

8. as-Sadiq: It means that Allah is true in his words and promises.

It is impossible to fix any limit to His attributes. This list is not
exhaustive but it is essential to understand the Glory of Allah. These
attributes are not acquired but are inherent in the conception of
Divinity.

### as-Sifat as-salbiyyah

The Negative Attributes which cannot be found in Allah because they are
below His dignity are called “as-Sifdt as-salbiyyah ”. They are many,
but like “as-Sifat ath-thubutiyyah ” only eight are listed here. They
are:

1. ash-Sharik: The word “ash-sharik” means a colleague or partner. Allah
has neither a colleague nor a partner in His Divinity.

2. al-Murakkab: This word means “Compound” or “Mixed”. Allah is neither
made, nor composed, of any material. He cannot be divided even in
imagination.

3. al-Makan: It means “Place”. Allah is not in a place because He has no
body and He is everywhere because His power and knowledge is
manificently apparent everywhere.

4. al-Hulul: It means “Entering”. Nothing enters into Allah nor does He
enter into anything or anybody. Therefore, the belief of Incarnation in
any form is abhorrent to the conception of Divinity.

5. Mahal al-hawadith: This means “Subject to Changes”. Allah cannot
change.

6. al-Mar'i: It means “Visible”. Allah is not visible. He has not been
seen, is not seen and will never be seen.

7. Ihtiydj: It means “Dependence” or “Need”. Allah is not deficient in
any virtue, so he does not need anything. He is All-perfect.

8. as-Sifat az-zaidah: This means “Added Qualification”. The attributes
of Alldh are not separate from His Being. When we say God is Omnipotent
and Merciful, we do not mean that His power and Mercy are something
different from His Person. We see that a child is born without any
power, and then he acquires stength day by day. It is so because power
is not his person.

God is not like this. He is Power Himself; Mercy Himself; Knowledge
Himself; Justice Himself; Virtue Himself; Truth Himself and so on.

It will thus be seen that according to Islam Allah is the name of God as
perceived in the light of the above Positive and Negative Attributes. In
other words, Allah is the Creator of the universe, Self-existent, the
source of all perfection and free from all defects.

28) Names of Allah
------------------

The proper name which Islam uses for God is “Allah”. “Allah” means “One
who deserves to be loved ” and “Into Whom everyone seeks refuge.” This
word, grammatically speaking, is unique. It has no plural and no
feminine. So this name itself reflects light upon the fact that Allah is
one and only one; He has neither any partner nor any equal. This name
cannot properly be translated by the word “God” because God can be
transformed in \`gods' and \`goddess'.

Two more frequently used names are ***ar-Rahman*** and ***ar-Rahim.***

ar-Rahman signifies that AllAh is Merciful and that His Mercy
encompasses each and everything in the universe without any dis tinction
on account of faith or belief. He makes, creates and sustains everything
and every man whether he be a Muslim or kafir (unbeliever). ar-Rahim
signifies that the Mercy of Allah on the Day of Judgement will surround
the true believers only, and that unblievers and hypocrites will be left
out.

It is apparent that both of these names signify a distinct aspect of
God's Mercy. His Mercy in this world, as signified by \`ar-Rahman' is
general; and the one in the life-hereafter, as signified by \`ar-Rahim'
is special.

It will be of interest to note that the word \` ar-Rahman' cannot be
used except for Allah, while \`ar-Rahim' can be used for others also.
That is why it has been told by Imam that “ar-Rahman is a reserved name
which denotes unreserved Mercy, and ar-Rahim is an unreserved name which
denotes Reserved Mercy. ”

29) Al-Asmau'l-Husna (The Beautiful Names of Allah)
---------------------------------------------------

Here is a list of 99 names used for Allah in Islam, together with their
meanings:

No. NAMES OF ALLAH MEANING

1. Allah Proper Name of the One and Only God

2. ar-Rahman The Merciful

3. ar-Rahim The Compassionate
4. al-Malik The Ruler

5. al-Quddus The Holy

6. as-Salam The Safety

7. al-Mu'min The Trusted

8. al-Muhaymin The Protector

9. al- 'Aziz The Powerful

10. al-Jabbar The Most Powerful

11. al-Mutakabbir The Magnificent

12. al-Khalik The Creator

13. al-Bari The Creator (from nothing)

14. al-Musawwir The Designer

15. al-Ghaffar The Forgiver

16. al-Qahhar The Almighty, The Subduer

17. al-Wahhab The Giver

18. ar-Razzaq The Provider; The Sustainer

19. al-Fattah The Opener

20. al-Alim The Omniscient; The All-Knowing

21. al-Qabid The Gatherer

22. al-Basit The Expander

23. al-Khafid The Humbler

24. ar-Rafi The Raiser

25. al-Mudhill The Subduer

26. al-Mu'izz The Exalter

27. as-Sami The All-Hearing

28. al-Basir The All-Seeing

29. al-Hakam The Arbitrator

30. al- 'Adl The Justice; The Just

31. al-Latif The Kind

32. al-Khabir The All-Knowing

33. al-Halim The Clement

34. al- 'Azzim The Great

35. al-Ghafur The Forgiver

36. ash-Shakur The Thankful

37. al- 'Ali The High

38. al-Kabir The Great

39. al-Hafiz The Protector

40. al-Muqit The Nourisher

41. al-Hasib The Reckoner

42. al-Jalil The Honorable

43. al-Karim The Generous

44. ar-Raqib The Guard

45. al-Mujib The One Who answers (the prayers)

46. al-Wasi The Enricher

47. al-Hakim The Wise

48. al-Wadud The Affectionate

49. al-Majeed The Glorious

50. al-Majid The Honorable

51. al-Ba'ith The Resurrector

52. ash-Shahid The Witness

53. al-Haqq The Truth

54. al-Wakil The Trustee

55. al-Qawi The Powerful

56. al-Matin The Strong

57. al-Wali The Guardian

58. al-Hamid The Praiseworthy

59. al-Muhsi The Reckoner

60. al-Mubdi The Beginner; The Creator

61. al-Mu 'id The Returner; The Resurrector

62. al-Muhyi The Bestower of Life

63. al-Mumit The Bringer of Death

64. al-Hayy The Living

65. al-Qayyum The Self-existing

66. al-Wahid The One

67. al-Ahad The Only; The Unique

68. as-Samad The Perfect; The Eternal

69. al- Qadir The Omnipotent

70. al-Muqtadir The All-Powerful

71. al-Muqaddim The Advancer

72. al-Mu 'akhir The Keeper Behind

73. al-Awwal The First

74. al-Akhir The Last

75. az-Zahir The Apparent

76. al-Batin The Hidden

77. al-Mawla The Master

78. al-Muta 'ali The Most High

79. al-Barr The Beneficent

80. al-Tawwab The Forgiver

81. al-Muntaqim The Avenger

82. al- 'Afuww The Forgiver

83. ar-Ra'uf The Compassionate

84. Malik'ul Mulk The Sovereign of the Kingdom (Universe)

85. Dhu'l-Jalal The Owner of Glory wa'l-Ikram and Honor

86. al-Muqsit The Just

87. al-Jami The One Who brings together; The Comprehensive

88. al-Ghaniyy The Rich; The Self-Sufficient

89. al-Mughni The Bestower of Richness

90. al-Mani The Prohibitor

91. ad-Darr The Bringer of Adversity

92. an-Nafi' The Beneficial

93. an-Nur The Light

94. al-Hadi The Guide

95. al-Badi The Maker(with previous example)

96. al-Baqi The Everlasting

97. al-Warith The Inheritor

98. ar-Rashid The Guide

99. as-Sabur The Patient

30) Attributes of Person and Action
-----------------------------------

Question: One of the names of Allah is al-Khaliq that is, Creator. As
Allah was Creator from ever, does it not follow that the created things,
that is, the universe is from ever?

Answer: Allah was not creating from ever. If you study carefully you
will find that the attributes of God, as mentioned in the above chapter,
may easily be divided into two groups:- First, there are those
attributes which can never be separated from the conception of divinity.
For example, we say that God is al Qddir (Omnipotent) al-Alim (
Omniscient) and al-Hayy (Everliving). These are such attributes which
can never be separated from the conception of God, because there never
was a time when God was not Omnipotent, Omniscient or Living. He was
al-Qadir, al- Alim and al-Hayy for ever, and will remain al-Qadir, al-
Alim and al-Hayy for ever.

Such attributes refer to the person of Allah, and are, therefore, called
*as-Sifatu'dhatiyyah* (Attributes of Person of Allah).

Second, there are the attributes which describe the actions of Allah.
For example, we say that Allah is al-Khaliq (Creator), ar-Razzaq
(Sustainer) etc. These are the Attributes which describe the actions of
Allah, and are, therefore, called as-Sifatu'l fi'liyyah (Attributes of
Actions of Allah).

These actions were not from ever, and therefore these attributes were
not used for Allah, from ever. You know that Allah is al Murid. He acts
according to His own plan and His own Will. He is not like fire which
burns without any intention or will of its own. Nor is He like the sun
which goes on giving light and warmth without intention and will of its
own.

Allah works according to His own plan. He created when He wished, and
not before that. It does not mean that God had no power to create. The
power to create was there for ever; because the \`Power' is not separate
from His person. But the appearance of that power, and bringing it into
effect, was not from ever. In short, Allah had power to create from
ever, but He did not create from ever. And when He created, He was
called al-Khaliq; but not before that.

Likewise, when he sustained, He was called ar-Razzaq; when He forgave,
He was called al-Ghaffar; when He avenged, He was called al-Qahhar; when
He gave life, He was called al-Muhyi; when He gave death, lie was called
al-Mumit.


