The Advent of Shiism in Iraq
============================

The story of the influence of Shi'ism in Iraq is a long one, to
describe which even briefly is beyond the scope of this article. From
the time Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (A) shifted his capital from Madinah to
Kufah [^1] in order to cope with the difficulties and problems of his
four and a half years reign, the seed of Shi'ism was planted in that
city. But this did not lead to any phenomenal increase in the number of
Shi'ites in Iraq. However, in the 2nd/8th century and thereafter Shi'ism
spread to other parts of Iraq.

Much later Shiism spread in Baghdad with the efforts of Shi'i Ulama'
and was able to survive despite the pressures and unlimited oppression
of the Abbasids. This situation continued until the entry of the Buyids
towards the middle of the 4th/10th century into Baghdad. The Buyids
supported the Shiites and over a period of one hundred years spread the
influence of Shiism in collaboration with such Shii 'ulama' as al-Shaykh
al-Mufid. [^2] Subsequently the Seljuq rule limited the Shi'i influence,
but could not eliminate it altogether.

With the passage of time, the power of the Alawids increased and the
Shiis emerged as an important religious group in Baghdad. Moreover, they
established another centre of Shiism at Hillah. The growing importance
of the Shi'is and their political influence led to conflict with and
opposition by the Sunnis. The 'Abbasid caliphs often persecuted the
Shi'is with the help of the Sunni group. The time of al-Nasir li-Din
Allah, the 'Abbasid caliph, marked the beginning of the Mongol
incursions into the eastern parts of the Muslim world.

The caliph tried to woo and enlist the support of the Shiis who formed
a powerful community in Baghdad and had sympathizers among the
Khwarazmshahis who had been hostile to the 'Abbasid caliph and supported
the Shiis of Baghdad. His inclination towards the Alawids and the
Shiites made some regard him as a Shii himself. Ibn al-'Tiqtaqa writes
about him that he believed in Imami doctrines and his ministers either
showed particular inclination towards Shiism or were Shi'i themselves."
[^3] This was deemed a political move for attracting the Shi'i support.

[^4] Al-Sa'di mentions his appointment of Ibn al-Alqami, a Shi'i, to the
ministerial office as a move to please the Shi'i scholar Radi al-Din Ali
ibn Musa ibn Ja'far ibnTawus al-Hasani. [^5] This action of al-Nadir
shows not only the influence of the Shiites, but exposes the latter's
confrontation with their opponents, a contradiction which he had tried
to resolve for his own advantage. This polarization continued for
several centuries and surfaced every year in conflicts on two particular
days, 'Ashura' and Ghadir. The details of these conflicts have been
recorded in al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah of Ibn Kathir, in al-Muntazam of
Ibn al-Jawzi, and in the Shadharat al-dhahab of Ibn al-'Imad
al-Hanbali.

In the latter period, Shi'i influence in the Abbasid administration was
of such magnitude that many of their ministers were Shii. Aside from
manifesting the Shi'ite acumen in administrative affairs, this fact
cannot be regarded as being unrelated to efforts at inducement of Shi'is
to accept the Sunni supremacy over the entire Islamic society. The last
Abbasid caliph, al-Mustasim, appointed Mu'ayyid al-Din ibn 'Alqami, a
Shi'i, as minister, and the latter held the post until the fall of
Baghdad and the execution of the caliph.

Despite the Abbasid caliphs' policy, some Sunni elements inside the
regime tried to make the caliph take occasionally an anti-Shi'i stand,
which would result in riots and carnage in Baghdad causing tremendous
losses to both the groups. Once such conflict occurred even in 654/1256,
one year before Baghdad fell. [^6]

It aggravated the hostility of the Shi'ah against the Abbasid
caliphate. In this regard a letter written by Ibn Alqami to one of the
Shi'i elders, al-Sayyid Taj al-Din Muhammad ibn Nasr al-Husayni,
clarifies the Shi'i position vis-a-vis the caliphate: Karkh (a locality
In west Baghdad where the Shiis resided), this venerable town, has been
destroyed and the legacy of the Noble Prophet has been ravaged. The
house of Ali have been pillaged and their Hashimite followers have been
taken captive.

That which happened is not surprising, for they are followers of
al-Husayn - upon whom be peace - whose sanctuary and sanctity were
violated and whose blood was spilled. No doubt, Satan has deceived this
group (the opponents). Now, what can be done save maintaining fair
patience? .... The announcement has been made (by the caliphal regime)
that so much troops are to be sent to the town so that the inhabitants
are driven away from the place in disgrace and misery. [^7]

The foregoing background was the established general rule which was,
however, occasionally broken. But sectarian prejudice adversely affected
both the sides. The rulers, acting in a manner injurious to their own
long-term interest and that of the people, either on account of
prejudice or for the sake of prolonging their rule, promoted sectarian
differences and discord. Such was the background that resulted in the
allegations regarding the Shi'i role in the fall of Baghdad, which was
in fact the fall of the Abbasid caliphate, and led some prejudiced
thinkers to accuse the Shiis of instigating the Mongols to overthrow the
caliphate.

Despite the fact that many Sunni ulama'-like Sharaf al-Din ibn al
Jawzi, a personal confidant of the caliph - were in the retinue of
Hulaga Khan, the presence of Khwajah Nasir al-Din al-Tusi,
(597-672/1200-1273) - may God's mercy be upon him -and the part of
Mu'yyid al-Din ibn Alqami the minister of al-Mustasim, in the events of
the time were taken as grounds for the allegation against the Shi'is.
This accusation was publi cized by the Hanbalis and their precursors,
whose hostility towards the Shi'is - like their enmity towards other
Muslim sects in Baghdad - was greater than that of any other hostile
group.


