The Points Which Shall Be Brought Out in This Study Are At Fellows
==================================================================

First, the Mongols themselves were already expanding their conquests in
Iran and Iraq. They hardly needed any incitement in this regard.
Secondly, the presence of Khwajah Nasir al-Din al-Tusi in the court of
Halagu Khan and the related reports cannot prove that he prompted Halagu
Khan to put an end to the Abbasid caliphate. Thirdly, the presence and
conduct of Khwajah Nasir al-Din al-Tusi had been for the sake of
reducing the losses and preventing the destruction of Islam, the truth
of which is evidenced in history.

Fourthly, Ibn al-'Alqami too had done nothing but express his genuine
convictions in taking a stand which appeared to him the correct position
in those conditions, with a view to protecting innocent lives which were
put in serious danger by the caliphate for the sake of protecting
itself. Fifthly, according to Ibn al-'Athir it was the Baghdad caliphs
who allured and encouraged the Mongols to conquer the Islamic lands. It
may be affirmed that on the whole the Shiis, like many of the Sunnis,
not only delivered themselves from the catastrophe through their correct
stand, but made use of the situation for spreading Islam in general and
Shiism in particular.

Before proceeding further in our study of the issues mentioned above,
it is necessary to examine the nature and content of the accusation
against the Shiis and Khwajah Nasir al-Din. Among the historians who
lived somewhat after the tame of the events was Ahmad ibn Mubammad ibn
Taymiyyah (d. 728/1327). He blamed Khwajah Nasir al-Din al Tusi for the
fall of Baghdad. Ibn Taymiyyah is the originator of a new school of
thought, whose background is traceable to Ahmad ibn Hanbal and the Ahl
al-hadith. His writings are noted for attach against Shiism, which are
severer than those of other groups. In many of his books, his anti-Shi'i
prejudice finds vehement expression.

In this regard too, with his characteristic bitterness which might have
been provoked by the increasing power of Shi'is in his times - he sits
for judgment and, in opposition to authentic historical accounts
pertaining to Mongol conquests written before him, holds the Khwajah
responsible for the fall of Baghdad. At one place, while mentioning the
fame of the Khwajah among the Sunnis and the Shiis, Ibn Taymiyyah
writes: "It was he who incited the Mongol Khan to kill the Caliph and
the ulama ......" Thereafter, he accuses the Khwajah of not paying heed
to Islamic precepts, of flouting the prohibitions of the Shari'ah, of
not performing the prayers, of commission of indecencies, of indulgence
in intoxicants, and of commission of adultery. [^8]

In another place Ibn Taymiyyah says about the Khwajah, "It was he who
ordered the Caliph to be killed and the Abbasid caliphate to be brought
to an end." [^9]

Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, one of his famous pupils, following him
accuses the Khwajah of participating in the killing of the Caliph and
ulama', while calling him such names as "Nasir al shirk wa al-kufr wa
al-ilhad" (an ally of polytheism, unbelief and apostasy). He condemns
not only the Khwajah's philosophical convictions, but accuses him of
denying the Hereafter,. rejecting Divine attributes, and of learning
sorcery, and worshipping idols at the end of his life. [^10]

The foregoing shows that neither Ibn Taymiyyah nor Ibn Qayyim
recognized any restraint in defaming him and went to the extent of
accusing the Khwajah of violating the prohibitions of the Shari'ah and
committing idolatry. Others like al Subki [^11]

and Khwand Mir

[^12] have followed suit with Ibn Taymiyyah in blaming the Khwajah of
having brought about the conquest of Baghdad. In modern times, some
orientalists, like the authors of the Cambridge History of Iran, have
mentioned the allegations about the role of the Khwajah. [^13]

Edward Browne and Arberry have accepted the alleged role of the
Khwajah, as mentioned by Dr. Hairi. [^14]

Among the Shi'is, too, from the 10th/16th century onwards, some writers
have applauded the Khwajah's alleged action against the Abbasids and
regarded the same as a strong point for the Khwajah. One of them is al
Khwansari in Rawdat al janat, who uses strong language in mentioning the
matter. [^15]

Likewise, Qadi Nur Allah al-Shushtari lauded the alleged role of the
Khwajah. [^16]

Aside from the approval or disapproval of the Khwajah's alleged action,
his involvement in the events is something doubtful. Laudatory remarks,
like that of al-Khwansari, surely arose from the writers' prejudice
against the 'Abbasid caliphs. Such writings do not constitute proper
evidence, because the earlier and original sources have not referred to
the Khwajah's role. Moreover, they belong to several centuries after the
period of the events in question. Yet, we may mention another writer
whose lack of care and susceptibility to influence by the background of
Sunni-Shii differences has led him a step further than Ibn Taymiyyah in
laying the blame on the Shiah in general, although he defends the
Khwajah against the charge of irreligion. He refers to the Shi'i role as
one of the primary causes of the downfall of the caliphate. [^17]

He writes: "...And eventually during the period, the hand of Shi'ism
came out of the sleeve of the Mongols and finished the matter once for
all." [^18]

He cites Khwand Mir (9th/15th century) in Habib al-siyar, Qadi Nur
Allah al-Shushtari, Ibn Taymiyyah, Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, and al Subki
with regard to the alleged role of the Khwajah in the overthrowal of the
Caliph, and writes: "...Almost all the sources agree in the matter."'
[^19]

No such consensus existed among the historians who lived close to the
time of the downfall of Baghdad, as will be made clear later on? [^20]

The reliability of the afore-mentioned writings is doubtful, since they
reflect the writers' prejudice. Even if it is assumed that Khwajah Nasir
al-Din had a hand in the event, any statement to the effect that "the
hand of Shi'ism came out of the Mongol sleeve" is a regrettable lapse
for anyone while making a serious historical judgement, and especially
when made by a researcher.


