Mongol Plans For Expansion and Sack of Baghdad
==============================================

History reports that Chenghiz Khan initially sought friendship and
close relations with the rulers of Iran and Iraq. At first he did not
want to invade and attack these lands. To develop friendly relations, he
sent his envoy and a trade delegation to the court of the Khwarazm Shah.
The pride of Sultan Muhammad Khwarazm Shah (d. 617/1220) caused him to
reject the overture and kill the envoy and the traders.

The sultan's arrogance created difficulties for himself and for Iran.
It led to a series of battles between the Mongols and the Khwarazmshahis
in the eastern parts of Iran? [^21] To be sure the thoughtless action of
Khwarazmshah, who perhaps failed to foresee the imminent success of the
Mongols, was one of the causes of the Mongol attack. According to Ibn
al-'Athir, the sultan regretted his ugly action and was seeking a way
out when Chenghiz Khan's message reached him. It said: "You killed my
companions and traders and took away their possessions. Now, be ready
for a war." [^22]

On the other hand, the Mongols, who at first wanted only to unify the
eastern territories, subsequently decided to expand their realm, and by
availing the excuse provided by the Khwarazm sultan began their
campaigns into Central Asia. Some other factors, too, prompted their
attach. In particular, the instigation of the Mongols by the Europeans
to attack Islamic lands is notable. During the Crusades such an attack
could be a great help to the Christians. In this connection, Armenian
Christians were on the side of the Westerners. From the time Chenghiz
Khan began to entertain his ambition of expanding his realm into the
regions of Western Asia, the Mongols vigorously pursued their conquests,
and until his death in 624/1227 many areas of Iran had come under the
Mongol onslaughts. These included Rey, Qumm, Kashan and Saveh, that is
areas of Iraq al ajam. [^24]

The survival of Jalal al-Din Khwarazm Shah and his attack and retreat
tactics in battling the aggressors (until 628/1230) restricted the
penetration of the Mongols to the central areas of Iran, and the
invaders turned towards the Caucasian areas where they extended their
conquests. With the departure from the scene of Jalal al-Din, the
Mongols, who had remained content with the occupation of Khorasan, began
to invade other areas of Iran as well.

That which is notable is the fact that the Mongols had since then the
conquest of Baghdad in their plans. Nearly twenty-one years before the
fall of Baghdad, when al-Mustansir bi-Allah was the caliph, the Mongols
had launched attacks on the city. This practically shows that
individuals like Khwajah Nasir al-Din could not have played a role in
instigating the invaders and that the Mongols were already on the move
in this direction. Rashid al-Din refers to the Mongol attack of the
years 634/1236 and 635/1237, in the following words: History on the
Khwajah's Role:

In the beginning of the mentioned period, the Abbasid caliph was
al-Mustansir bi-Allah. The Mongol forces under the orders of Baychownian
were dispatched for attack and they laid siege to Arbil .... When the
Caliph learnt about it, he sent Shams al-Din Arsalan with three thousand
cavalrymen. When the Mongols came to know about it, they immediately
lifted the siege and retreated. The Caliph asked the jurists to rule as
to which of the two, hajj and jihad, should take precedence, and the
fatwa was given by consensus in favour of jihad.

Then he ordered that the hajj pilgrimage that year be deferred. He
ordered the scholars and the jurists, the elite and the ordinary people
of Baghdad to train themselves in archery and the use of arms. He also
ordered the ditch and rampart of Baghdad to be built. the Mongols
returned another time with the purpose of taking Arbil .... Furthermore,
he commanded Amir Arsalan Takin to station himself together with his
forces outside Baghdad, awaiting the arrival of the Mongols. When the
Mongols came to know about it, they changed their direction towards
Daquq and the towns, around Baghdad, killing, pillaging and taking
captives .... The Mongols were routed and forced to retreat from Jabal
Himrin.

The Turks and the Caliph's slaves pursued them, killing many and
liberating the captives of Arbil and Daquq. [^25] Several similar reports
pertaining to the attacks in the years 632-635/1234-1237 have been given
by other historians. [^26] According to a report by Ibn Al al-Hadid, who
himself witnessed the Mongol onslaughts, a Mongol force led by Bajaktai,
the Junior, attacked Baghdad on 17 Rabi al-'Awwal 643/1245, which was
repulsed and the assailants retreated. [^27] In the year 647/1249 too,
the Mongols attacked, this time Khanaqin. [^28] The earlier attack of
643/1245, mentioned by Ibn Abi al-Hadid, is mentioned by Ibn -
al-Kazeruni (d. 697/1297) [^29] to have occurred on 17 Rabi al-Thani
642/1244.

There are subsequent evidences which indicate that the Mongols were
hostile to the caliph, and they regularly complained about him to the
Mongol Khan. This being the case, there was no need for anyone else to
incite them against the caliph.

When Mengu (Mongke) (649-658/1251-1260) assumed the leadership of
Mongols, Baychownian moved with a vast force to protect his domain in
Iran. He sent an emissary to the Khan and had complained about the
heretics' (the Ismailis) and the caliph himself. The grand qadi Shams
al-Din al-Qazwini, who was at the time near Mengu incited the latter
against the Ismailis, mentioning their influence over some regions.
[^30]

In the wake of the above developments, Mengu sent his brother Hulagu
(Hulegu) to lead expedition in the region, telling him: "...Start from
Quhistan (Ismaili possession in east Iran), destroy the walls and forts
and then move on to subjugate Iraq. If the caliph is found to be
submissive, do not harm him in any way, and if he behaves haughtily and
hypocritically send him to join the others." [^31] Khwand Mir reports
Mengu as having ordered Hulagu, "...Occupy the lands from the Oxus to
the furthest parts of Egypt." [^32]

If we review the behaviour of the caliph before and during the fifty
days of confrontation with the Mongol conqueror, it can be seen that he
had infuriated Hulagu Khan so much that had the Khawajah or anyone of
the nobles or scholars opposed him he too would have been killed as
well, as happened in the case of Husam al-Din who had warned Hulagu of
dire consequences if the caliph's blood were shed.


