History On the Khwajah's Role
=============================

In respect of affirmation or rejection of the alleged involvement of
Khwajah Nasir al-Din al-Tusi in the fall of Baghdad, we can divide the
historical records into three kinds:

(a) Sources Which are Silent Concerning the Khwajah:

Writings in this regard pertain to a period of within a hundred years
after the fall of Baghdad. Most of the writers either witnessed the
conquests of tile Mongols or lived in the decades immediately
thereafter. The absence of any mention of the Khwajah in these writings
can be taken to mean negation of the alleged role, since the question
had been rather a sensitive one.

Among the writers of the period, Minhaj Siraj in his book ,Tabaqat e
Nasiri (or Tarikh-e Iran wa Islam), which seems to be written in 658/
1260 (pp. 497), refers to the Mongol siege of Baghdad. He mentions some
imaginary victories of the caliph, as well as the purported treachery of
Ibn Alqami (to be discussed later on). He does not make any mention of
the Khwajah. [^33]

Ibn al-Ibn (d. 685/1286) is another writer who describes the Mongol
conquest of Baghdad in relatively greater detail. However, he does not
mention anything about the Khwajah in this regard. [^34] In the
subsequent pages he refers to the death of the Khwajah, mentions the
latter's deep knowledge of several sciences, but says nothing about any
role of the Khwiijah in political matters. [^35]

According to Dr. Ha'iri, Ibn al-Fawti in his book written in the year
657/1259 writes about the fall of Baghdad, but mentions nothing about
the Khwajah. [^36]

In the few pages written by Khwajah Nasir al-Din appended to Juwayni's
Tarikh-e jahangushai, where some details pertaining to the conquest of
Baghdad are given, nothing whatever is mentioned concerning any role of
the Khwajah in the events. [^37]

Hamd Allah Mustawfi, a famous historian and geographer of the 8th/14th
century (d. 730/1329), was among those who wrote about the Mongol
conquest of Baghdad. But he does not mention anything about the Khwajah
in the few lines he writes about the event. [^38]

Ibn Taba Taba (Ibn al-Tiqtaqa, d. 709/1309) is a critical historian who
wrote his book in 701/1301, wherein the fall of Baghdad is described in
the account of al-Musta'sim's life. However, he does not write anything
about the Khwajah having played any role in it. [^39] The only time' he
mentions the Khwajah's name is when Ibn Alqami came to Hulagu Khan and
was introduced by the Khwajah. [^40] In another instance he cites a
remark ascribed to the Khwajah - without however mentioning his name -
regarding the prophesy of some unnamed person. The prophesy was to the
effect that in the event of the caliph's being killed there would occur
certain natural disasters. [^41] We will return to this remark later
on.

Rashid al-Din Fadl Allah is another noted historian of the Mongol
period who also mentions the above-mentioned remark. He too has nothing
to say concerning any role of the Khwajah in relation to the Mongol
conqueror's attack on Baghdad or in the context of the caliph's
execution. Abu al-Fida' is another Arab historian and author of al
Mukhtasar fi akhbar al-bashar. He writes that the circumstances of the
killing of the caliph were not known, and he does not indicate anything
by way of suggesting any role of the Khwajah in this regard. This is
despite the fact that he mentions some points concerning the life of the
Khwajah. [^42]

Muhammad ibn Shakir al-Kutubi (d. 764/1362), author of Fawat
al-Wafayat, wrote a relatively elaborate biographical account of the
Khwajah (6 pages). However, in writing about the Khwajah's services for
Hulagu Khan and the Khwajah's standing with the latter, he makes not
even the smallest hint about any role of the Khwajah in the episode of
Baghdad. [^43]

Another historian of the 8th/14th century, Ibn al-Wardi (d. 749/ 1348),
in his book of history wrote about the fall of Baghdad. He affirms the
role of Ibn Alqami without referring to the Khwajah in any way. [^44]
However, he mentions the Khwajah's year of death (672 H.), his
birthplace, his services in Alamut and under Halagu, and his building of
an observatory. But nowhere does he write about any role of the Khwajah
in the events of the fall of Baghdad and the killing of the caliph.
[^45]

Al-Dhahabi (d. 746/1345), a well-known Sunni traditionist and scholar
of rijal, wrote about the Baghdad episode under the account of the
events of the year 656/1258. He mentions Ibn Alqami's position but does
not write anything about the Khwajah. [^46] Al-Safadi (d. 797/ 1394),
author of al-Wafi bi al-Wafayat, also does not mention any role in the
fall of Baghdad on the Khwajah's part. [^47]

Al-Nakhjawani who wrote his book in 724/1324 says nothing of the
Khwajah in the context of the Baghdad episode. [^48] Al-Ghassani (d.
761/1359) is another historian of the period who repeatedly hurls
insults at Ibn 'Alqami in a rather elaborate account of the fall of
Baghdad. However, he does not make even the slightest mention of the
Khwajah. [^49]

Ibn al-Kazeruni (611-697/1214-1297), who lived at the time of the
events, mentions nothing in his book about the Khwajah. [^50] Likewise,
al-'Atabaki (d. 874/1469) [^51] and al-Suyuti (d. 911/1505) do not refer
to the Khwajah. [^52]

The above-mentioned writers, mast of whom are famous historians of the
7th/13th and 8th/14th centuries, despite their sensitivity concerning
the Mongols and the downfall of the caliphate - especially with the
particular bias of some of them like Ibn al-Wardi and al-Dhahabi - do
not mention anything about the Khwajah. Had there been anything at all
to say in this context, they would have emphasized it, especially in
view of their unfavourable opinion of the Shiah. The fact that they did
not mention anything about the Khwajah cannot be viewed as irrelevant to
the non-existence of any role of the Khwajah in this important episode.
Furthermore, it may also indicate that before and during the fall of
Baghdad, the Khwajah did not have the personal influence with Hulagu
Khan as he did have after the event.

(b) Books Which Mention the Khwajah's Role:

Above we have cited the remarks of Ibn Taymiyyah, Ibn Qayyim
al-Jawziyyah, al-Subki, Khwand Mir, and al-Subki. It is necessary to
point out the following in their regard:

1. An examination of the original sources concerning the fall of
Baghdad revealed that despite the anti shii bias of some and the general
hostility towards the Mongols, none of the historians mentions anything
about the Khwajah's role. This itself is the best indicator of the
baselessness of the allegations of Ibn Taymiyyah, his likes and
followers.

2. The sectarian bias of Ibn Taymiyyah and his pupil Ibn Qayyim as well
as others like al-Subki and Ibn al Imad al-Hanbali who followed suit
with them, to the extent that even their expressions are altogether
similar - precludes any acceptance of their criticism of Khwajah Nasir
al-Din al-Tusi. Ibn Taymiyyah, in many of his works, takes an
antagonistic attitude toward the Shiah and makes many baseless
accusations against them, which mainly reflect his confusion between the
Ghulat and the Imami Shiis. The charge levelled by him against the
Khwajah in his book al-Radd 'ala al-Nusayriyyah, against the Ghali sect,
bears this out. The same allegation is also mentioned in Minhaj
al-sunnah, a refutation of al-Allaamah al-Hilli's Minhaj al-karamah. It
shows that he had been bent on levelling accusations, and like his other
accusations this one too was baseless. When al-Allamah al-Hilli heard
about Ibn Taymiyyah's refutation of his work, he remarked: "Had he
understood what I said, I would have replied to him" [^53]

3. When the accusation of Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn Qayyim that the Khwajah
had been instrumental in the Mongol sack of Baghdad is examined in the
light of their allegations that the Khwajah (a) did not observe the
precepts of the Shari'ah, (b) violated the prohibitions of the Shariah,
(c) did not perform salat, (d) committed indecencies, (e) used
intoxicants, (f) was guilty of adultery, (g) did not believe in
Resurrection, (h) denied the Divine attributes, (i) was guilty of
idolatry, and so on, it will be found that it was merely their
unreasonable bias which made them level such charges. Such slanders do
not deserve notice, and of course do not constitute grounds for any
noteworthy historical judgement.

4. An apt witness who can be cited as evidence against the credibi lity
of the remarks of Ibn Taymiyyah and his followers against the Khwajah is
Ibn Kathir (d. 864/1459). He was a Hanbali and is regarded as a follower
of Ibn Taymiyyah. [^54] Ibn Kathir was definitely aware of Ibn
Taymiyyah's allegations from at least three of the latter's writing.
Yet, he did not accept Ibn Taymiyyah's statements.


