Chapter 7: The Persecution of the Muslims
=========================================

Though Abu Lahab frequently succeeded in dispersing the crowds that
gathered to hear the message of Islam, word nevertheless spread in Makka
about it. People talked about the message of Islam. The thoughtful ones
among them posed the question: "What is this religion to which Muhammad
is inviting us?" This question showed curiosity on their part and a few
of them wanted to know more about Islam.

In the days that followed, Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, made many
attempts to preach to the Makkans. Abu Lahab and his confederate, Abu
Jahl, did what they could to sabotage his work but they could not
deflect him from his aim.

It was a strange message that Muhammad brought to the Arabs, and it was
unique. No one had ever heard anything like it before. Muhammad as
messenger of Allah, told the Arabs not to worship the inanimate objects
which they themselves had fashioned, and which had no power either to
give anything to them or to take anything away from them, and to whom
they had given the status of gods and goddesses. Instead, he told them,
they ought to give their love and obedience to Allah, the One Lord of
the whole universe. He also told them that in His sight - in the sight
of their Creator - they were all equal, and if they became Muslims, they
would all become brothers of each other.

But idolatry was an old "fixation" for the Arabs, and they were not
quite ready to dump their idols. They resented Muhammad's diatribes
against idolatry, and they were not very finicky about showing him their
resentment.

Muhammad also called upon the rich Arabs to share their wealth with the
poor and the under-privileged. The poor, he said, had a right to receive
their share out of the wealth of the rich. Such sharing, he further
said, would guarantee the equitable distribution of wealth in the
community.

Most of the rich Arabs in Makka were money-lenders; or rather, they were
"loan sharks." They had grown rich by lending money to the poor classes
at exorbitant rates of interest. The poor could never repay their debts,
and were thus held in economic servitude in perpetuity. The
money-lenders throve on usury as vampires thrive on blood. Sharing their
ill-gotten wealth with the same people they had been exploiting, was,
for them, something like a "sacrilege." By suggesting to them that they
share their wealth with the poor, Muhammad had tampered with a hornets'
nest!

Muhammad also wished to reorganize Arab society. The new doctrine that
he put forward for this purpose, made Faith instead of Blood, the
"linchpin" of the community. But the Arabs were bred in the code of
pagan custom and convention; they believed in the basic tribal and
kinship structures. For them "Blood" was the only workable basis of
social organization. In their perception, if Faith were allowed to
supplant Blood in this equation, it would wreck the whole structure of
the Arab society.

But Muhammad had little interest in "Arab society." His aim was to
create and to consolidate an "Islamic society," which is held together
by Faith and not by Blood. He, therefore, assiduously cultivated and
promoted the redeeming, transcending power of Faith.

**Philip K. Hitti**

Substituting the religious for the centuries-old blood bond as the basis
for social cohesion was, indeed, a daring and original accomplishment of
the Prophet of Arabia.

(Islam, A Way of Life)

For the Arabs, all these were new and unfamiliar ideas; in fact, they
were revolutionary. By preaching such revolutionary ideas, Muhammad had
made the old establishment furious. Most furious and most assertive in
the old establishment was the Umayyad clan of the Quraysh. Its members
were the leading usurers and capitalists of Makka, and they were the
high priests of the pagan pantheon. In Muhammad and the message of
Islam, they saw a threat to their social system which was based upon
privilege, elitism and force. His ideas, therefore, were most abhorrent
to them, and they were resolved not to let him change the status quo.

**Philip K. Hitti**

"...The Quraysh - particularly its Umayyad clan - custodians of the
Kaabah and the Zamzam, controllers of the caravan trade, and oligarchic
masters of the city, had special reasons for resistance (to Muhammad).
The new preaching might jeopardize pilgrimage to the Kaabah, next to
trade their main source of income. Moreover, the once-poor orphan was
introducing such dangerous economic doctrines as the rightful claim of
beggars and the destitute to a share in the wealth of the rich.
Additionally he (Muhammad) advocated a dangerous doctrine, one that
would substitute faith for blood as the social bond of community life.
If "the believers are naught but brothers" (Quran, 49:10) was acted
upon, the entire family, clan, and tribal unity would be undermined and
replaced by religious unity..."

(Islam - A Way of Life)

The hostility of the Umayyads to Muhammad and Islam was marked by
unrestrained vehemence, partly because it was atavistic. Their reflexes
were conditioned by generations of heathenism. They symbolized die-hard
opposition to Muhammad when he was in Makka, and they spearheaded an
implacable war against Islam when he migrated to Medina.

**Philip K Hitti**

"...the core of the opposition, the Umayyads, remained adamant in its
hostility (to Muhammad)..."

(Islam - A Way of Life)

But there were also a few individuals who found a strong appeal in these
new ideas which Muhammad was introducing, collectively called Islam. In
fact, they found them so attractive that they accepted them. They
abjured their idols and they began to worship Allah - their Creator.

Islam held special appeal for the depressed classes in Makka; for those
who were "poor and weak." Muslim historians have noted that the first
followers of the apostles and the prophets of the past also, were
invariably "poor and weak." When members of these classes became Muslim,
they also became aware that as pagans they were despised and rejected by
the highly class-conscious and race-conscious aristocracy of Makka but
Islam gave them a new self-esteem. As Muslims they found a new pride in
themselves.

Most of the early converts to Islam were "poor and weak." But there were
a few rich Muslims also like Hudhayfa bin Utba, and Arqam bin
Abil-Arqam. And all those men whom Abu Bakr brought into Islam, such as
Uthman, Talha, Zubayr, Abdur Rahman bin Auf, Saad bin Abi Waqqas and Abu
Obaidah Aamir ibn al-Jarrah, were also rich. They were members of
various clans of the Quraysh.

We may assume that at the beginning, the pagan aristocrats of Makka
witnessed the efforts of Islam to win recognition, more with amusement
than with irritation, not to speak of the hatred and the hysteria which
gripped them a little later. But as the movement began to gather
momentum, they sensed that the ideas which Muhammad was broadcasting,
were really "dangerous," and that there was nothing "funny" about them.
They argued that their forefathers had worshipped idols for countless
generations; therefore idolatry was right, and they were not going to
abandon it because Muhammad was denouncing it. But Muhammad was not
content merely with denouncing their idolatry. Far more dangerous and
frightening to the all-grasping Umayyads, were his ideas of economic and
social justice which threatened to pull down the fortress of their
privileges; to dismantle the peccant system of their monopolies, to
demolish the old structure of authority and hierarchy; and to smash all
the fossilized institutions of the past. They, therefore, made it clear
that privilege was something they were not going to relinquish - at any
cost - come hell or high-water.

But the one idea that the self-selected elite of the Quraysh found most
outrageous was the "notion" fostered by Muhammad that the members of the
depressed, despised and exploited classes, many of them their slaves,
were their equals - the equals of the high and mighty Quraysh! And even
more outrageous to them was the idea that if a slave accepted Islam, he
actually became superior to all the chiefs and lords of Quraysh. The
staple of their life was arrogance and conceit; and equality with their
own slaves, ex-slaves and clients, was utterly unthinkable to them. They
were obsessed with delusions of their own grandeur, and their
"superiority" to the rest of mankind. Equality and brotherhood of men
were totally alien and odious ideas to them.

By promulgating the "heterodox" doctrine of equality - the equality of
the slave and the master, the poor and the rich; and the Arab and the
non-Arab, and by repudiating claims of superiority of the bloodline,
Muhammad had committed "lese majesty" against the Quraysh!

The Quraysh worshipped many idols, and race was one of them.

But racial pride is discounted by Quran Majid when it declares that all
men have descended from Adam, and Adam was a handful of dust. Iblis
(=Satan, the Devil) became the accursed one precisely because he argued
for the superiority of his (presumed) high origins as against what he
considered to be the lowly origins of man. "Man," he said, "was created
from dust whereas I was created from fire." Such a sense of exclusivism
which also comes to a people purely out of a desire to claim superior
quality of blood in their being, has been denounced by Islam in the
strongest terms.

***(Iblis) said: "I am better than he (Adam): Thou createdst me from
fire, and him Thou createdst from clay."***  
***(God) said: "then get tree out from here: for thou art rejected,
accursed.***  
***"and My curse shall be on tree till the day of judgment." (Chapter
38; verses 76, 77, 78)***

Islam has knocked down the importance of race, nationality, color and
privilege, and has forbidden Muslims to classify men into groups on
grounds of blood and/or geographical contiguity or particular privilege
which they may claim for themselves. In the sight of Quran, the most
exalted person is the mutts i i.e., one who loves and obeys Allah most.
In Islam, the only test of a person's quality, is his or her love for
Allah. All other trappings of individual life are meaningless.

***O mankind! We created you from a single (pair) of a male and a
female, and made you into nations and tribes, that ye may know each
other (not that ye may despise each other). Verily the most honored of
you in the sight of Allah is (he who is) the most righteous of you. And
Allah has full knowledge and is well acquainted (with all things).
(Chapter 49; verse 13)***

But as noted above, the Quraysh of Makka were not in a receptive mood
for such ideas. They were perhaps intellectually incapable of grasping
them. They considered them as rank blasphemy. It was then that they
resolved to oppose Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, (may Allah bless him
and his Ahlul-Bayt) and to destroy the "heresy" called Islam before it
could strike roots and become viable. Their judgment was obscured by
their perversity, rapacity, paranoia, and warped perceptions. They were
driven by Hubris - the pride that inflates itself beyond the human
scale - and by their dense materialism to make such a resolve against
Muhammad and Islam.

With this resolution, the Quraysh declared their intention to fight, to
the last ditch, in the defence of their idols and fetishes as well as in
the defence of their economic and social system which guaranteed their
privileges.

Makka was in a state of war!

The Quraysh opened the campaign against Islam by harassing and
persecuting the Muslims. At the beginning, persecution was confined to
insults, jeers and mockery but as time went on, the Quraysh moved from
violence of words to violence of deeds. They hoped that through their
violence, they would destroy, or, at least, erode, the faith, of the
Muslims. They refrained from inflicting personal injury upon Muhammad
himself for fear of provoking reprisals but they had no inhibitions in
hurting the rank-and-file Muslims. For a long time, it were the latter
who bore the brunt of the malignity and the wrath of the Quraysh.

**Muhammad ibn lshaq**

Then the Quraysh incited people against the companions of the Apostle
who had become Muslims. Every tribe fell upon the Muslims among them,
beating them and seducing them from their religion. God protected His
Apostle from them through his uncle (Abu Talib), who, when he saw what
Quraysh were doing, called upon Bani Hashim and Bani AI-Muttalib to
stand with him in protecting the Apostle. This they agreed to do, with
the exception of Abu Lahab.

(Life of the Messenger of God)

Among the victims of persecution were:

Bilal, the Ethiopian slave of Umayya bin Khalaf. His master and other
idolaters tortured him in the savage glare of the sun of Makka, and they
tortured him beyond the limits of human endurance. But he was fortified
by inner sources of strength and courage which never failed him. Love of
Allah and love of His messenger made it possible for him to endure
torture with cheer. Abu Bakr brought deliverance to Bilal from torture
when he bought him from his master, and set him free. When the Apostle
of God and his followers migrated to Medina, he appointed Bilal the
first Muezzin of Islam. His rich and powerful voice rang through the air
of Medina with the shout of "Allah-o-Akbar" (=Mighty is the Lord). In
later years, when the conquest of the peninsula was completed, the
Apostle appointed Bilal his secretary of treasury.

Khabab ibn el-Arat. He was a young man of 20 when he accepted Islam. He
was a client of Bani Zuhra. The Quraysh tortured him day after day until
the time came when he migrated to Medina with the Prophet of Islam.

Suhaib ibn Sinan. Suhaib came to Makka as a slave. When he became a
Muslim, his master beat him up brutally, but could not break his spirit.

Abu Fukaiha, the slave of Safwan bin Umayya. He accepted Islam at the
same time as Bilal. Like Bilal, he was also dragged on hot sand by his
master with a rope tied to his feet. Abu Bakr bought him and emancipated
him. He migrated to Medina but died before the battle of Badr.

Lubina was a female slave of Bani Mumil bin Habib. Amin Dawidar writes
in his book, Pictures From the Life of the Prophet (Cairo, 1968), that
Umar ibn al-Khattab, a future khalifa of the Muslims, tortured her, and
whenever he paused, he said: "I have stopped beating you not out of pity
but because I am exhausted." He resumed beating her after he had taken
rest.

Abu Bakr bought her and set her free.

Zunayra was another female slave. When she declared that she had
accepted Islam, Umar ibn al-IChattab and Abu Jahl, took turns in
torturing her. They tortured her until she became blind. Amin Dawidar
says that a few years later she recovered her sight, and the Quraysh
attributed this recovery to the "sorcery" of Muhammad. Abu Bakr bought
her and set her free.

Nahdiyya and Umm Unays were two other female slaves, and their masters
tortured them for accepting Islam. Abu Bakr is said to have bought both
of them and emancipated them.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

...Abu Bakr bought many of the slaves and clients who were thus being
tortured by the unbelievers. Among these there was even a slave woman
whom Abu Bakr had bought from Umar ibn al-Khattab before the latter's
conversion. One woman is known to have been tortured to death because of
her attachment to Islam and her refusal to return to the old faith.

(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)

There were some other Muslims who though not slaves, were "poor and
weak," and were, therefore, exposed to the malevolence of the Quraysh.
One of them was Abdullah ibn Masood. He was distinguished among the
companions of the Prophet by the vast range of his knowledge and
learning. He had probably more familiarity with the ethos of Islam and
the vitals of the Islamic legal system than most of the companions of
the Prophet.

Abdullah ibn Masood was one of the earliest huffaz (=men who know Quran
by heart) in Islam. As each new verse was revealed, he memorized it, and
he compiled his own copy of Quran. This copy was seized by Uthman bin
Affan, the third khalifa, during his caliphate, and was burned.

It is reported that when a new chapter of Quran - Sura Rahman (the 55th
chapter) - was revealed, the Apostle of God asked his companions who
among them would go into the Kaaba, and read it before the pagans. Other
companions staggered but Abdullah ibn Masood volunteered to go. He went
into the Kaaba and read the new chapter out aloud. Next to Muhammad
Mustafa himself, Abdullah ibn Masood was the first man to read Quran in
Kaaba before a hostile crowd of the idolaters. They mauled him, not once
but repeatedly, but they could not intimidate him into silence.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

Yahya b. Urwa b. al-Zubayr told me as from his father that the first man
to read the Quran loudly in Makka after the Apostle was Abdullah bin
Masood.

(The Life of the Messenger of God)

M. Shibli, the Indian historian, says in his Seera that Abu Bakr was the
equal of the other chiefs of Quraysh in rank and wealth yet he "could
not read Quran out aloud" (in the Kaaba).

One of the earliest companions of Muhammad Mustafa was Abu Dharr
el-Ghiffari. He belonged to the tribe of Ghiffar which made its living
by brigandage. From travellers he heard that a prophet had appeared in
Makka who preached a new creed called Islam, and exhorted people to
abandon idolatry, to worship only One God, to speak only the truth, to
look after the poor, to feed the hungry, not to defame women, and not to
bury their daughters alive. Idolatry had repelled Abu Dharr even before
he heard about the message of Islam and the work of Muhammad. In fact,
he lived like an ascetic, and did not take any part in his tribe's
forays upon caravans of traders and pilgrims. He made his living as a
shepherd.

Abu Dharr sent his brother to Makka to verify the reports he had heard
about Muhammad. The latter went to Makka, met Muhammad, talked with him,
posed many questions to him, heard him read Quran, and then returned
home to report to Abu Dharr what he had seen and heard. Among other
things, he said to Abu Dharr: "You are already doing many of the things
that Muhammad is doing and preaching."

Abu Dharr, thenceforth, was attracted like a moth by the Light of Faith
burning in Makka. In his eagerness to see the Prophet with his own eyes,
and to hear Quran from his own lips, he decided to visit Makka.

In Makka, Abu Dharr was a stranger. His brother had told him that Makka
was seething with hostility toward the new Prophet. Not knowing,
therefore, who might be a friend and who a foe of the Prophet, he
hesitated to ask anyone about him. He spent a whole day in the shade of
the Kaaba watching passersby. In the evening, Ali ibn Abi Talib chanced
to walk past him, and noticing that he was a stranger in town, invited
him to his home for supper. Abu Dharr accepted the invitation, and
later, apprised Ali of the purpose of his visit to Makka which was to
see the Prophet of Islam. Ali, of course, was only too glad to conduct
his new friend into the presence of his master, Muhammad Mustafa.

Abu Dharr and the Prophet exchanged greetings. Within a few moments of
his meeting with the Prophet, Abu Dharr was convinced that he was in the
presence of a true messenger of God. From the messenger of God, he heard
the message of God (Quran), and learned the meaning of Islam. He found
both the messenger and the message irresistible. He was carried away by
the appeal of Islam. In fact, he wondered, how could he ever live
without Islam. He buried the past in which he had lived without Islam.

The first act of Abu Dharr, after his induction into Islam, was one of
defiance to the infidels in Makka. He went into the precincts of the
Kaaba, and shouted:

*There is no God but Allah, and Muhammad is His messenger*

As expected, the infidels fell upon him, and started raining blows upon
him. From this brawl he was rescued by Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib, an
uncle of the Prophet. He told the Quraysh that Abu Dharr belonged to the
tribe of Ghiffar whose territory lay astride the caravan routes to the
north, and if they did any harm to him, his tribesmen would bar access
of their caravans to Syria.

Abu Dharr el-Ghiffari is one of the most remarkable men in the history
of Islam. He publicly showed his contempt for the Quraysh and their
presumption of power - not only in Makka when they were idolaters but
also in later times in Medina when they had accepted Islam but had
revived pre-Islamic capitalism. He was the most outspoken, and one of
the most fearless men among all the companions of Muhammad Mustafa who
once said that "the sky did not spread its canopy on any man who was
more truthful than Abu Dharr."

Abu Dharr was like an elemental force looking for a purpose in life, and
he found it in Islam. He was the Voice of the Conscience of Islam.

Fear of violence by the Quraysh did not deter these heroic and noble
souls from accepting Islam, and each of them left a mark upon it by his
or her sacrifices.

Also notable among early Muslims, was Mas'ab ibn Umayr, a cousin of the
father of Muhammad Mustafa. Many years later, at the First Pledge of
Aqaba, the citizens of Yathrib (Medina) requested the Prophet to send
with them a teacher of Quran, and the choice fell upon him. This made
him the first "official" in Islam. He was also the standard-bearer of
the army of Islam in the battle of Uhud but was killed in action.

If a member of a pagan family accepted Islam, he was ostracized by it
for all time, without any hope for him of rapprochement. Many Makkans
saw Islam as a "divisive force" which was breaking up their families,
and some among them thought that they ought to check this "divisiveness"
from spreading. But beyond the threat of using force to suppress the new
movement, they could not think of anything else that would prove more
efficacious in halting its progress. They also thought that if they did
not act swiftly and resolutely enough, it was not unlikely that every
house in Makka would become a battle-ground in which the protagonists of
the old and the new faiths would be locked up in a sanguinary struggle
against each other. There were some others among them who imagined that
Muhammad was prompted by ambition to denounce their ancestral mode of
worship and their idols. All of them put their heads together and tried
to think of some unconventional solution of the problem. After long
deliberation, they decided to send Utba, one of the chiefs of Quraysh,
to meet Muhammad, and to try to "talk him out" of his mission. Utba was
noted for his persuasive ability.

Utba called on Muhammad Mustafa, and said: "O Muhammad! Do not plant
seeds of dissension and discord among the Arabs, and do not curse the
gods and goddesses our ancestors have worshipped for centuries, and we
are worshipping today. If your aim in doing so is to become a political
leader, we are willing to acknowledge you as the sovereign of Makka. If
you want wealth, you just have to say so, and we shall provide you with
all that we can. And if you are desirous of marriage in some noble
family, you name it, and we shall arrange it for you."

Utba concluded his speech and hoped that he would get from Muhammad a
favorable and a positive response. But to his surprise, Muhammad didn't
show any interest in rank or wealth or beauty. Instead, he read out to
him the Sura Sajda, (Chapter 32 of Quran Majid), the newest revelation
from Heaven.

Muhammad never allowed a compromise on principle to weaken his moral
authority.

Utba heard in silence, and then returned to the Quraysh to report on the
outcome of his embassy. He advised the Quraysh to leave Muhammad alone,
and not to meddle with him any more.

He is also reported to have told them that if Muhammad failed in his
mission, then they (i.e. the Quraysh) would lose nothing; but if he was
successful, then they would share all his glory and power.

But the Quraysh did not accept Utba's advice for moderation and
restraint in dealing with Muhammad and his followers.

The Quraysh continued to harass the Prophet and to persecute the
Muslims. But they also kept trying to think of some new wrinkle in their
campaign against Islam that might yield better results than all their
violence had done until then.

Muhammad Mustafa was protected by his uncle and guardian, Abu Talib. As
long as Abu Talib was alive, the infidels could not molest his nephew.
Some of them came forward with the new idea that they ought perhaps to
try to persuade Abu Talib himself to waive his protection of Muhammad in
the name of tribal solidarity. Tribal solidarity is basic for survival
in desert life. This was a truly bright idea, and was applauded by all
the tribal leaders. After all, tribal solidarity was something much too
important to be treated with levity even by Abu Talib, notwithstanding
all his love for his nephew.

The Quraysh decided to send an embassy to Abu Talib. They carefully
selected the members of a delegation which called on him, and appealed
to him in the name of the "tribal solidarity" of the Quraysh to waive
his protection of Muhammad who was "disrupting" that solidarity.

Abu Talib, of course, had no intention of waiving his protection of, or
of withdrawing his support to, Muhammad. But he mollified the delegates
of the Quraysh with pious platitudes and placatory words, and sent them
back.

The delegates also realized that they had come home from a
"phantom-chase." But they were unfazed by their failure, and a little
later, they made another attempt to inveigle Abu Talib into deserting
Muhammad. A new delegation went to see him and this time, its members
took with them a handsome young man, one Ammarra ibn Waleed, whom they
offered to Abu Talib for a "son" if he would surrender Muhammad to them.

Abu Talib must have laughed at the naivete of the infidels. Did they
seriously believe that he would give them his own son for them to kill
him, and would rear one of their sons as his own? The idea was most
ludicrous but once again Abu Talib handled the delicate situation with
his customary finesse, and they went away.

The second attempt of the leaders of Quraysh to coax Abu Talib into
giving up Muhammad, had also failed. When the meaning of this failure
sank into their minds, they argued that peaceful attempts to solve the
problem had all been unsuccessful, and now they ought to try something
really drastic.

In sheer exasperation and frustration, the policy-makers of the Quraysh
adopted a "hard-line" and sent their third and the last delegation to
see Abu Talib. Its purpose was to compel him to surrender Muhammad to
them. The leaders of the delegation presented an ultimatum to Abu Talib;
either he had to surrender Muhammad to them or else he would have to
face the consequences of his refusal to do so.

Abu Talib was a man of cheerful temperament and a sunny disposition but
it was a somber day in his life. The Quraysh, he knew, were not
bluffing. He, therefore, called Muhammad, and apprised him of the
purport of the Qurayshi representation, and then added: "O life of your
uncle! Do not place a burden upon me that I may find beyond my strength
to carry."

Muhammad answered: "O my uncle! If the Quraysh place the sun on my right
hand and the moon on my left, I shall not refrain from proclaiming the
Oneness of God. In the execution of this duty, either I shall succeed
and Islam will spread, or, if I fail, I shall perish in the attempt."

Abu Talib, of course, had no intention of dissuading his nephew from
preaching Islam. He was only testing his resolution. Now convinced and
satisfied that he (Muhammad) would not falter, he said: "Go my son, and
do whatever you like. No one will dare to do any harm to you."

**Sir William Muir**

"...but the thought of desertion by his kind protector (Abu Talib)
overcame him (Mohammed). He burst into tears, and turned to depart. Then
Abu Talib called aloud: \`Son of my brother! Come back.' So he returned.
And Abu Talib said, \`Depart in peace, my nephew, and say whatever thou
desirest. For by the Lord, I will not, in any wise, give thee up ever."

(The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877)

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Abu Talib said: \`Go forth, my nephew, and say what you will. By the
same God I swear I shall never betray you to your enemies.'

Abu Talib communicated his resolution to Banu Hashim and Banu
al-Muttalib and spoke to them about his nephew with great admiration and
deep appreciation of the sublimity of Muhammad's position. He asked them
all to protect Muhammad against the Quraysh. All of them pledged to do
so except Abu Lahab who declared openly his enmity to him and his
withdrawal to the opposite camp.

Quraysh inflicted upon Muhammad's companions all sorts of injuries from
which he was saved only through the protection of Abu Talib, Banu
Hashim, and Banu al-Muttalib.

(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)

Foiled and checkmated repeatedly in this manner by Abu Talib, the
patience of the polytheists reached the breaking point. Their virulence
had been building up for years. After the failure of their third embassy
to Abu Talib, they became desperate and reckless, and much more insolent
and menacing toward the Muslims. They resolved to let loose all their
frustrations and pent-up fury upon them - upon the unprotected Muslims,
and to crush the new faith with terror and brutality.

The Quraysh, it appeared, were going berserk!

The first victims of pagan attrition and aggression were those Muslims
who had no tribal affiliation in Makka. Yasar and his wife, Sumayya, and
their son, Ammar, had no tribal affiliation. Therefore they were
"foreigners," in Makka, and there was no one to protect them. All three
were savagely tortured by Abu Jahl and the other infidels. Sumayya,
Yasar's wife, died while she was being tortured. She thus became the
First Martyr in Islam. A little later, her husband, Yasar, was also
tortured to death, and he became the Second Martyr in Islam.

In this manner the wife and the husband made their choice in the eternal
conflict between light and darkness, good and evil, truth and falsehood,
right and wrong, and Islam and paganism. The choice was difficult but
they had no hang ups in the matter, and gladly paid for it with their
lives! They made their lives an oblation for Islam.

Quraysh had stained its hands with innocent blood!

In the honor-roll of martyrs, Sumayya and her husband, Yasar, rank among
the highest. They were killed for no reason other than their devotion to
Allah and their love for Islam and Muhammad Mustafa. Those Muslims who
were killed in the battles of Badr and Uhud, had an army to defend and
to support them. But Sumayya and her husband, Yasar, had no one to
defend them. They bore no arms, and they were the most defenseless of
all martyrs of Islam. By sacrificing their lives, they highlighted the
truth of Islam and they built strength into its structure.

Their martyrdom was a triumph of Faith over materialism. Friend and foe
were flabbergasted to see them defy death. They made the "tradition" of
sacrifice and martyrdom an integral part of the ethos of Islam.

***Among the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with
Allah: of them some have completed their vow (to the extreme), and some
(still) wait: but they have never changed (their determination) in the
least. (Quran Majid. Chapter 33, verse 23)***

Translator's Note

In the fight for Truth were (and are) many who sacrificed their all -
resources, knowledge, influence, life itself - in the Cause, and never
wavered. If they won the crown of martyrdom, they were blessed. (A.
Yusuf Ali)

Earlier, Sumayya, Yasar and Ammar had won the distinction of being the
First Muslim Family in the umma. Now they won another distinction:
Sumayya and Yasar became the First Two Martyrs in Islam. Muhammad
Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah, who knew how and why they were being
tortured, had comforted them; he had advised patience (sabr) of a true
believer upon them, and had told them that Allah had built for them a
palace in Paradise. Their son, Ammar, was also destined to wear the
Crown of Martyrdom - though in later times.

If the Yasars were the First Family of Muslims, they were also the First
Family of Martyrs. Each member of this blessed family died vindicating
the principles of Justice and Truth enshrined in Islam. God was pleased
to bestow upon them two of the greatest honors - Primacy in Faith and
Primacy in Martyrdom.

As noted before, Bilal, IChabab ibn el-Arat, Suhaib Rumi and other poor
and unprotected Muslims were made to stand on the torrid sand, and were
flogged by the infidels. Food and water were denied to them in the vain
hope that hunger and thirst would compel them to abandon Muhammad and
Islam. In persecuting the Muslims, the infidels were consistent,
persistent and innovative.

If the Quraysh found Muhammad alone, they seized the opportunity to
molest him. They of course wished to kill him but they had to curb this
urge. If they had killed him, they would have touched off vendetta or
even civil war.

One afternoon, Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah, went into the
Kaaba to read Quran. He was in the act of reading when suddenly he was
surrounded by the polytheists. They mobbed him, and they might have done
him some great harm but for the intervention of Harith ibn Abi Hala, the
nephew and adopted son of Khadija, who arrived on the scene just then.
He entered the melee to defend the Messenger of Allah from the violence
of the idolaters and polytheists of Makka.

Harith ibn Abi Hala kicked the pagans and fought with his fists. Most
probably he too was carrying a sword or a dagger as all Arabs did but he
did not wish to draw it and shed blood in the Kaaba. But in the fracas,
one of the idolaters drew his dagger, and stabbed him repeatedly. He
fell in a pool of his own blood, and died from multiple wounds in his
chest, shoulders and temple. He was the first Muslim to be killed in the
precincts of the Kaaba.

Harith was a young man of seventeen, and he gave his own life to save
the life of Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah. By doing so, he
won the aureole of martyrdom. He was the Third Martyr in Islam. His
death, so early in life, made the Prophet extremely sad. For Khadija,
Harith's death was a personal loss. She had brought him up as her own
child. But she forgot her own sorrow so she could provide emotional
support to her spouse in his sorrow.

Although the Arab historians are silent on this subject, much bitter
fighting must have taken place in Makka between the Muslims and the
infidels during the years before the migration of the Prophet of Islam
to Medina. Abu Talib protected his nephew as long as he lived, and after
his death, his son, Ali, took charge of this duty.

Ali was still a teenager when he appointed himself the body-guard of
Muhammad Mustafa. After the murder, in Kaaba, of Harith ibn Abi Hala, by
the pagans, Ali accompanied his master whenever the latter went out of
his house, and stood between him and his enemies. If a ruffian
approached Muhammad menacingly, Ali at once challenged him, and came to
grips with him. Writing about this period of the history of Islam, the
British historian, D. S. Margoliouth, says:

"The persons whose admission to Islam was most welcomed were men of
physical strength, and much actual fighting must have taken place at
Mecca before the Flight; else the readiness with which the Moslems after
the Flight could produce from their number tried champions, would be
inexplicable. A tried champion must have been tried somewhere; and no
external fights are recorded or are even the subject of an allusion for
this period."

(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, London, 1931)

There were no external fights in Makka before the Hijra (=Migration of
the Prophet from Makka to Medina); but there were many in the streets
and open spaces of the city. The young hoods of Makka threw rocks or
date stones at the Prophet when he walked past them, and Ali bloodied
their noses, battered their teeth, and broke their limbs. It was in
these "battlefields" that Ali, the young lion, acquired all his martial
skills. These "battles" in Makka were a "dress rehearsal" of the role he
was destined to play a few years later in Medina in the armed struggle
of Islam and polytheism. It was also in these early days, before the
Hijra (=Migration) that Ali became "the first line of the defence of
Islam." In fact, he also became, at the same time, the second line and
the last line of the defence of Islam. This, he and he alone, was to
remain for the rest of his life.

Quraysh tortured the bodies of the unprotected Muslims in Makka in the
hope that they would compel them to forswear Islam but they failed. No
one from these "poor and weak" Muslims ever abjured Islam. Adverse
circumstances can collaborate to break even the strongest of men, and
for the Muslims, the circumstances could not have been more adverse.

But those circumstances could not break them. Islam held them together.

For these "poor and weak" Muslims, Islam was a "heady" experience. It
had pulled life together for them; had put meaning into it; had run
purpose through it; and had put horizons around it. They, therefore,
spurned security, comforts and luxuries of life; and some among them
like Sumayya and her husband, Yasar, spurned life itself; but they
upheld their Faith. They died in the macabre violence against them of
the enemies of Islam but they did not compromise with falsehood.

May Allah be pleased with these heroic and noble souls and may He bless
them. Their faith and morale were, as the Quraysh discovered, just as
unconquerable as the faith and morale of their master and leader,
Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah. They were the diamonds that he
found in the rocks of the world. They were few in number but priceless
in value; to be expressed, not by quantity but only by quality, and that
quality was sublime.  
  


