Chapter 8: The Two Migrations
=============================

Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah, shared all the sorrows and
afflictions of his followers who were being tortured for believing in
Tawhid but he had no means to protect them. When it appeared that there
was going to be no deescalation in the violence against and persecution
of the Muslims by the pagans, he suggested to them to leave Makka, and
to seek sanctuary in Abyssinia which was then ruled by a Christian king,
well-known for being a just and a God-fearing man.

Following this suggestion, a group of Muslims, comprising eleven men and
four women, left Makka and went to Abyssinia. The group included Uthman
bin Affan, a future khalifa of the Muslims, and Zubayr bin al-Awwam, a
cousin of the Prophet. The Prophet appointed one of his principal
companions, Uthman bin Mazoon, as the leader of this group.

**Muhammad ibn lshaq**

When the Apostle saw the afflictions of his companions and that though
he escaped them because of his standing with Allah and his uncle, Abu
Talib, he could not protect them, he said to them: "If you were to go to
Abyssinia (it would be better for you), for the king (there) will not
tolerate injustice and it is a friendly country, until such time as
Allah shall relieve you from distress." Thereupon his companions went to
Abyssinia, being afraid of apostasy and fleeing to God with their
religion. This was the first hijra in Islam. (The Life of the Messenger
of God) The first migration took place in the fifth year of the Call
(Proclamation), i.e., in A.D. 615.

The king of Abyssinia welcomed the Muslim refugees from Makka into his
kingdom. He gave them sanctuary, and they found peace and security, and
they enjoyed freedom of worship.

It is reported that about a year later, the Muslim refugees in Abyssinia
heard rumors that the Quraysh in Makka had accepted Islam. If it was so,
then there was no reason for them to live in exile, and they were very
homesick. They, therefore, returned to Makka. But in Makka they found
out that not only the reports of the conversion of the Quraysh to Islam
were false but also that the latter had stepped up the persecution of
the Muslims. They, therefore, left Makka once again but not alone. Many
other Muslims accompanied them to Abyssinia. This new group comprised 83
men and 18 women, and may have included both the old and the new
emigrants; among them were Abdur Rahman ibn Auf, Abu Salma Makhzoomi,
and Abdullah ibn Masood. Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah,
appointed his cousin, Jaafer ibn Abi Talib, the elder brother of Ali, as
the leader of this group.

The second migration of the Muslims to Abyssinia took place in the sixth
year of the Call (Proclamation), which corresponds to A.D. 616.

The migration of the Muslims, and their reception in Abyssinia, alarmed
the Quraysh of Makka. They entertained the fear that the Muslims in
Abyssinia might grow in strength or might find new allies, and then,
some day, might return to Makka to challenge them. Therefore, to head
off this potential threat, such as they saw it, they decided to send an
embassy to the court of the king of Abyssinia to request him to
extradite the Muslims to Makka.

The Muslim refugees who had expected to be left in peace, were surprised
and dismayed by the arrival, in the Abyssinian capital, of an embassy
from Makka, led by a certain Amr bin Ass. Amr had brought rich presents
for the king and his courtiers to ingratiate himself with them.

When the king gave audience to the emissary of the Quraysh, he said that
the Muslims in Abyssinia were not refugees from persecution but were
fugitives from justice and law; and requested him to extradite them to
Makka. The king, however, wanted to hear the other side of the story
also before giving any judgment, and summoned Jaafer ibn Abi Talib, the
leader of the refugees, to answer the charges against the Muslims.

Jaafer made a most memorable defence. Following is a summary of his
speech in the Abyssinian court in reply to the questions posed by the
Christian king.

"O king! We were ignorant people and we lived like wild animals. The
strong among us lived by preying upon the weak. We obeyed no law and we
acknowledged no authority save that of brute force. We worshipped idols
made of stone or wood, and we knew nothing of the human dignity. Then
God in His mercy sent to us His messenger who was himself one of us. We
knew about his truthfulness and his integrity. His character was
exemplary, and he was the most well-born of the Arabs. He forbade us to
worship idols and he invited us to the worship of One God. He exhorted
us to speak the truth, and to protect the weak, the poor, the humble,
the widows and the orphans. He ordered us to show respect to women, and
never to slander them. We obeyed him and followed his teachings. Most of
the people in our country are still polytheists, and they resented our
conversion to the new faith. They began to persecute us, and it was in
order to escape from persecution by them that we sought and found
sanctuary in your kingdom."

When Jaafer concluded his speech, the king declared that he was
convinced of his veracity, and added, to the great disappointment of Amr
bin Ass, that the Muslims could live in his kingdom as long as they
wished, without any fear.

But Amr bin Ass bethought himself of a new argument which, he felt
confident, would appeal to the king who was a Christian. If it did, he
was certain, it would tilt the scales against the Muslims, and they
would be extradited.

On the following day, therefore, he returned to the court and said to
the king that he (the king) ought to waive his protection of the Muslims
because they rejected the divine nature of Jesus, and asserted that he
was a mortal like other men. When questioned on this point by the king,
Jaafer said: "Our judgment of Jesus is what was revealed to our Prophet,
viz., that Jesus is the servant of God, and is His Prophet, His Spirit,
and His Command given unto Mary, the innocent virgin."

The king said to Jaafer: "Jesus is just what you have stated him to be,
and is nothing more than that." Then turning toward the Muslims, he
said: "Go to your homes and live in peace. I shall never give you up to
your enemies." He refused to extradite the Muslims, returned the
presents which Amr bin Ass had brought, and dismissed his embassy.

**Washington Irving**

"Among the refugees to Abyssinia, there was Jaafer, the son of Abu
Talib, and brother of Ali, consequently the cousin of Mohammed. He was a
man of persuasive eloquence and a most prepossessing appearance. He
stood forth before the king of Abyssinia, and expounded the doctrines of
Islam with zeal and power. The king who was a Nestorian Christian, found
these doctrines so similar in many respects to those of his sect and so
opposed to the gross idolatry of the Koreishites, that so far from
giving up the fugitives, he took them more especially into favor and
protection, and returning to Amr b. Ass and Abdullah, the presents they
had brought, dismissed them from his court."

(The Life of Mohammed)

The Muslims spent many years in Abyssinia. Thirteen years later, they
returned, not to Makka but to Medina - in 7 A.H. (A.D. 628), i.e., seven
years after the migration of the Apostle of God from Makka to Medina.
Their arrival synchronized with the conquest of Khyber by the Muslims.

Jaafer ibn Abi Talib was the leader of all those Muslims who had
migrated to Abyssinia in 615 and 616. He appears to have been the only
member of the clan of Bani Hashim to leave Makka for Abyssinia with the
other refugees. All other members of Bani Hashim stayed in Makka.


