Chapter 9: Hamza Accepts Islam
==============================

Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah (may Allah bless him and his
Ahlul-Bayt), though safe under the protection of his uncle, Abu Talib,
was not immune from harassment by the infidels. Whenever they found an
opportunity for baiting him, they didn't miss it. On one occasion, Abu
Jahl found him alone, and used much offensive and vulgar language toward
him. That same evening when his uncle, Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib, came
home from a hunting expedition, his slave-girl recounted to him the tale
of Abu Jahl's gratuitous insolence toward him (Muhammad), and the
latter's forbearance, of which she had been an eye-witness.

Hamza was a warrior, a hunter and a sportsman, and was little interested
in the day-to-day affairs of the city. But Abu Jahl's conduct toward his
nephew so roused his anger that he seized his bow, went into the
assembly of the Quraysh where he (Abu Jahl) was reviewing the events of
the day to his compeers, struck him at his head with his bow, causing it
to bleed, and shouted: "I too have become a Muslim."

This was a challenge to Abu Jahl but he figured that silence was the
best part of valor, and did not tangle with Hamza, even restraining his
friends who wished to rise in his defence.

Hamza became a devout Muslim and a champion of Islam. He was the
comrade-in-arms of his other nephew, Ali ibn Abi Talib, and it were both
of them who carried slaughter and dismay into the ranks of the Makkan
army in the battle of Badr - the first battle of Islam - fought a few
years later.

The battle of Uhud was the second battle of Islam. In that battle, Hamza
killed one of the standard-bearers of the pagans of Makka. When they
charged the Muslim line, Hamza plunged into their midst. He was hacking
his way through their ranks when Wahshi, an Abyssinian slave, hurled a
javelin at him. Wahshi was engaged for this very purpose by Hinda, the
wife of Abu Sufyan and the mother of Muawiya. The javelin caught Hamza
in his groin; he fell on the ground and died immediately.

In the battle of Uhud the Muslims were defeated. After their rout, Hinda
and the other harpies she had brought with her from Makka, mutilated the
bodies of the slain Muslims. Hinda cut open Hamza's abdomen, plucked out
his liver and chewed it up. Muhammad ibn Umar Waqidi, the historian,
says that she made a fire in the battlefield, roasted Hamza's heart and
liver and ate them. Not satisfied with this, she cut the limbs, the ears
and the nose of Hamza, strung them into a "necklace," and entered Makka
wearing it as a "trophy" of victory.

Hamza had killed Utba, the father of Hinda, in the battle of Badr. In
the battle of Uhud, she slaked her thirst for vengeance which had given
her no rest since the battle of Badr.

Muhammad Mustafa, the Apostle of God, was deeply aggrieved at the death
and at the mutilation of the body of such a stalwart of Islam as Hamza.
He bestowed upon him the titles of the "Lion of God," and the "Chief of
the Martyrs."

Hamza accepted Islam in the fifth year of the Proclamation. May God be
pleased with him, and bless him.


