Chapter 10: Umar's Conversion to Islam
======================================

The most notable event of the year 6 of the Call was the conversion to
Islam of Umar ibn al-Khattab, a future khalifa of the Muslims. He was
one of the most rabid enemies of Islam and Muhammad Mustafa, the
Messenger of Allah, and was a great tormentor of the Muslims. The modern
Egyptian historian, Amin Dawidar, says in his book, Pictures From the
Life of the Prophet, that Umar's hatred of Islam, and his hostility to
Muhammad Mustafa, were matched only by the hatred of and hostility to
them, of his own maternal uncle, Abu Jahl.

It is said that one day Umar resolved, in sheer exasperation, to kill
Muhammad Mustafa, and thereby to extinguish the flame of Islam itself.
He left his home with this intention.

As noted before, the Muslims at this time (the end of the year 6) still
gathered in the house of Arqam ibn Abil Arqam to say their
congregational prayers. They were just beginning to assemble, when one
of them, looking out the window, saw Umar approaching the house with a
drawn sword. In a state of considerable alarm, he told other members of
the congregation what he saw. Presumably, they too were alarmed. But
Hamza, who was also present in the house of Arqam, reassured them, and
said that if Umar was coming with good intentions, then it was all
right; if not, then he (Hamza) would run him (Umar) through with his
(Umar's) own sword. But it so happened that Umar had come with the
intention of accepting Islam, and he did.

The story is told that Umar was going toward Dar-ul-Arqam with the
intention of killing the Prophet when a passer-by stopped him, and
informed him that his own sister and her husband had become Muslims; and
advised him to put his own house in order before undertaking any other
grandiose and chimerical project.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Umar went there (to Dar-ul-Arqam) resolved to kill Muhammad and thus
relieve the Quraysh of its burden, restore its ravaged unity, and
re-establish respect for the gods that Muhammad had castigated. On the
road to Makkah he was met by Nu'aym ibn Abdullah. Upon learning what
Umar was about, Nu'aym said, "By God, you have deceived yourself, O
Umar! Do you think that Banu Abd Manaf would let you run around alive
once you kill Muhammad. Your sister is a Muslim now. Why don't you
return to your own house and set it straight?"

(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)

Umar was furious to hear this. He immediately changed his direction from
the house of Arqam to the house of his sister to investigate the
allegation. In reply to his question, she gave him a discreet but
evasive answer.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

Umar came to the door (of the house of his sister) as Khabbab (a
companion of the Prophet) was studying the Sura Taha and When the Sun is
Overthrown. The pagans used to call this reading "rubbish." When Umar
came in, his sister saw that he meant mischief and hid the sheets from
which they were reading. Khabbab slipped away into the house. Umar asked
what was the gibberish he had heard to which she answered that it was
merely conversation between them...

(The Life of the Messenger of God)

Umar exploded in wrath at what he thought to be a prevarication, and
struck his sister in her face. The blow caused her mouth to bleed. Umar
was going to strike again but the sight of blood made him pause. He
suddenly appeared to relent, and then in a changed tone asked her to
show him what she was reading. She sensed a change in him but said: "You
are an unclean idolater, and I cannot allow you to touch the word of
Allah."

Umar immediately went home, washed himself, returned to his sister's
house, read the text of Quran, and then went to Arqam's house where he
bore witness to the Unity of the Creator and the Prophethood of
Muhammad.

**Sir William Muir** says that Umar's conversion to Islam took place at
the close of the sixth year of Mohammed's mission.

**Sir William Muir**

It (Umar's conversion) occurred in Dzul Hajj, the last month of the
year. The believers are said now to have amounted in all to 40 men and
ten women; or by other accounts, to 45 men and eleven women.

(The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877)

Umar was in his thirties when he became a Muslim.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

At that time, Umar ibn al-Khattab was a mature man of thirty to
thirty-five years of age.  
 (The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)


