Chapter 11: The Siege of Bani Hashim
====================================

The year 6 of the Proclamation was drawing to a close. The pagans of
Makka had already spent three years campaigning against Islam. They had
succeeded in generating much bitterness and hostility against the
Muslims, but they had nothing to show for it. Against the Muslims, they
had used every weapon in their arsenal ranging from attempts to dissuade
to seduce to tempt to insult and to ridicule. They had threatened to use
force and they had actually used force to blot out Islam, or, at least,
to contain it, but all their efforts had failed. The Muslims had
withstood all their attacks. The strength of the faith of the Muslims
had baffled their persecutors.

These repeated failures compelled the Quraysh, particularly the members
of its Umayyad clan, to reassess the situation vis-a-vis Muhammad and
Islam, and some of them tried to see their problem from a new angle. In
their search for a solution to the vexatious problem, it slowly began to
dawn upon them that their enemy was not the group of poverty-stricken
Muslims in Makka. Their real enemy - the enemy of the idolaters and the
polytheists - they realized, was Abu Talib! After all it was Abu Talib
who was protecting Muhammad and Islam so consistently and tenaciously.
The Muslims on the other hand, had no power to protect Muhammad. In
fact, they were themselves in desperate need of protection.

The long and bitter experience of the Quraysh left no doubt in their
minds that the author of their frustrations in their war on Islam, was
Abu Talib and no one else. Therefore, they concluded that they would
never break the impasse facing them, by hunting or persecuting the group
of indigent Muslims in Makka while their real enemy - Abu Talib - was
free to swagger in their midst, scoffing, as if, at them.

The Quraysh had at last succeeded in identifying their real enemy.

This success in "enemy identification" had the impact of revelation upon
the leaders of the Quraysh, and they decided to map out a new strategy
in their war against Muhammad and Islam.

**'Abd-al-Rahman 'Azzam**

"Finally, the Makkan oligarchy decided in desperation to take steps
against Abu Talib. In their opinion, he was the real protector of the
blasphemy, although still a revered upholder of Makkan institutions and
unconverted to Muhammad's faith (sic). They agreed to send him an
ultimatum..."

(The Eternal Message of Muhammad, London, 1964)

In the past, the Quraysh had made many attempts to "isolate" Muhammad
from his tribe, and they had hoped that they would either coax or bluff
Abu Talib into waiving his support to and protection of his nephew and
of Islam. If they could "isolate" Muhammad from the Bani Hashim, they
were convinced, they would be able to solve the complex and thorny
problem by the simple process of "liquidating" him.

But Abu Talib did not let the Quraysh "isolate" Muhammad. Not only he
was himself protecting his nephew, he had also rallied the clans of Bani
Hashim and Bani al-Muttalib behind him. These two clans were monolithic
in their support of Muhammad, and the infidels found themselves
powerless before them.

After long debate and deliberation, the Quraysh agreed that the
"intractability" and the "intransigence" of the Bani Hashim called for
sterner measures against them, and they decided to isolate and to
ostracize not only Muhammad but his protector, Abu Talib, and the clans
of Bani Hashim and Bani al-Muttalib as well.

It would be quite logical to assume that any attempt to ostracize Bani
Hashim would lead to a polarization of the groupings in Makka. Everyone
in Makka would have to declare himself for or against the Bani Hashim.
But it soon became obvious that in this confrontation, the Bani Hashim
would find the whole of Arabia ranged against them.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

It is nearly impossible for us to imagine the intensity and extent of
the efforts which Quraysh expended in its struggle against Muhammad, or
its perseverance during many long years of that struggle. The Quraysh
threatened Muhammad and his relatives, especially his uncles. It
ridiculed him and his message, and it insulted him as well as his
followers. It commissioned its poets to parody him with their sharp wits
and to direct their most caustic stings against his teachings. It
inflicted harm and injury on him and on his followers. It offered him
bribes of money, of kingdom and power; in fact, of all that which
satisfied the most fastidious of men. It impoverished the Muslims by
destroying their commerce and trade, and it banished and dispersed them
from their own country. It warned Muhammad and them that war with all
its horrors would befall them. As a last resort, it began a boycott of
them designed to starve them.

(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)

A **few days** before the beginning of the year 7, the leaders of the
various clans of the Quraysh met in a solemn conclave in the "town hall"
of **Makka, and, they drafted and signed** a document which stipulated
that unless the clan of Bani Hashim surrendered Muhammad to them, they
would subject it to an economic and social boycott. They pledged
themselves not to buy anything from, nor to sell anything to, the
members of the Bani Hashim, and they placed intermarriage with them
under proscription.

This agreement or covenant was sent to the other tribes for
ratification, and when they had ratified it, it was solemnly suspended
on the wall of the Kaaba.

The ratification of this covenant by the tribes was an act of
belligerence!

Abu Talib had to size up the new situation. He could clearly see that a
storm system was converging upon the Bani Hashim. After the tribal
endorsement of the covenant to boycott the Bani Hashim, the atmosphere
in Makka changed palpably; it became so explosive that they found
themselves in dire straits. Abu Talib realized that it would be
extremely perilous for the clan to live in the city where any moment,
the enemy could set fire to its houses. In the interests of the security
of the clan, therefore, he decided to leave Makka, and to seek safety
for it in a ravine at the edge of the city. The ravine had some natural
defenses, and it was, in any case, safer for the Bani Hashim to live in
it, than to live in their houses which were very much vulnerable to
attack.

On the first day of the year 7 of the Call or Proclamation, the two
clans of Bani Hashim and Bani AI-Muttalib, moved out of the city, and
took abode in a ravine which later came to be known as Shi'b Abu Talib.
They were now in a state of siege!

It was going to be a long siege.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

The pact into which the clans of Quraysh entered for boycotting Muhammad
and blockading the Muslims continued to be observed for three
consecutive years.

(The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)

**Marmaduke Pickthall**

For three years, the Prophet was shut up with all his kinsfolk in their
stronghold which was situated in one of the gorges that run down to
Mecca.

(Introduction to the Translation of Holy Quran, 1975)

The story of the siege of the Bani Hashim is a stirring chapter in the
epic of Islam, and has been depicted by every historian of the subject,
among them Muir and Margoliouth:

**Sir William Muir**

"...the Coreish entered into a confederacy against the Hashimites - that
they would not marry their women, nor would give their own in marriage
to them; that they would sell nothing to them, nor buy aught from them;
and that dealings with them of every kind should cease.

The ban was carefully committed to writing, and sealed with three seals.
When all had bound themselves by it, the record was hung up in the
Kaaba, and religious sanction thus given to its provisions.

The Hashimites were unable to withstand the tide of public opinion which
set in thus violently against them, and apprehensive perhaps that it
might be only the prelude of open attacks, or of blows in the dark still
more fatal, they retired into the secluded quarter of the city, known as
the Sheb of Abu Talib. It was formed by one of the defiles or
indentations of the mountains, where the projecting rocks of Abu Cobeis
pressed upon the eastern outskirts of Mecca. It was entered on the
cityside by a low gateway, through which a camel passed with difficulty.
On all other sides it was detached from the town by cliffs and
buildings.

On the first night of the first month of the seventh year of the mission
of Mohammed, the Hashimites, including the Prophet and his family,
retired into the quarter of Abu Talib; and with them followed also the
descendants of Al-Muttalib, the brother of Hashim. The ban of separation
was put rigorously in force. The Hashimites soon found themselves cut
off from their supplies of corn and other necessities of life; and a
great scarcity ensued... the failing stock of the Hashimites replenished
only by occasional and surreptitious ventures, reduced them to want and
distress. The citizens could hear the wailing of the famished children
within the Sheb ... among the relatives of the isolated band, were found
some who ventured, in spite of threats of the Coreish, to introduce from
time to time provisions by stealth at night, into the quarter of Abu
Talib. Hakim, grandson of Khuwaylid, used, though the attempt was
sometimes perilous, to carry supplies to his aunt Khadija."

(The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877)

**D. S. Margoliouth**

A process known to the pagan Arabs was excommunication; a purpose for
which special confederacies were established. Rolls would seem to have
been in common use at this time in Mecca; a solemn league and covenant
was made, written on a roll, and suspended in the Kaaba, by which the
heads of the Meccan households pledged themselves to exclude the Bani
Hashim and the Bani Muttalib from these rights, until, we may presume,
Mohammed was declared outlawed, and handed up to vengeance.

(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, London, 1931)

The total number of the members of the two clans of Hashim and
al-Muttalib, and their clients and slaves who left their homes in Makka
to seek sanctuary in the mountain hideout, was four hundred. Once they
"settled" in their hideout, and surveyed the landforms around them, they
could see that they were confronted with a challenge of superlative
complexity and magnitude. Whereas in the past they had to contend only
with the hostility of man, now they had to contend with the hostility of
nature also. They also noted that their new abode didn't come equipped
with what might be called a viable life-support system. They, therefore,
realized from the very first day that it would take all their grit,
skill, resourcefulness and resolution to adapt themselves to the new
surroundings. They knew that their survival would hinge upon their
ability to come to terms with an environment which could not be more
forbidding.

Khadija was born in an aristocratic family, and was bred in the lap of
luxury. She was, therefore, an absolute stranger to a life of austerity
and privation. But when, in an exigency, she was called upon to abandon
her spacious residence in the city to go into, and to live in a flinty
ravine, she did so willingly and cheerfully. The ravine was so desolate
that it shrivelled up the soul of an observer at first glance but she
didn't show any sign of consternation upon entering it. As inhospitable
as the new surroundings were, she rapidly adjusted to them. She focused
on the ordeal ahead, gathering her strength, her courage and her
resources. The resilience of her spirit was truly astonishing.

At the beginning of the siege, Ali was sixteen years old. He was charged
with the difficult and the dangerous duty of victualling the two clans.
He discharged this duty at great risk to his life, and brought water and
grain whenever he could find any. For one goatskin of water, he had to
pay one piece of gold, and he considered himself lucky if he succeeded
in bringing it to the ravine. His efforts, however, brought only partial
relief to the beleaguered clans.

Abu Talib himself didn't sleep at nights. For him the physical safety of
Muhammad took precedence over every other duty. When Muhammad fell
asleep, Abu Talib lifted him, and put him in the bed of one of his four
sons, and ordered his son to sleep in his (Muhammad's) bed. A little
later, he lifted his nephew again, and put him in the bed of another of
his sons. He spent the whole night lifting Muhammad out of one bed and
putting him in another. He had no illusions about his enemies; he knew
that they were tenacious, treacherous, vicious and vindictive. He,
therefore, did not make the mistake of underestimating them. If one of
them crept into the ravine with the intention of killing Muhammad, he
would most probably, kill one of the sons of Abu Talib, taking him for
the Prophet. Abu Talib and his wife were ever ready to sacrifice their
children for Muhammad. In fact, they would have been very happy to
sacrifice their own lives for him, if it were necessary. Not only they
themselves protected him; they also made every adult in the ravine
responsible for his safety.

There were times when Ali, notwithstanding all his daring and
resourcefulness, was unable to find any provisions; or if he found any,
he could not bring it into the ravine, being unable to circumvent
Qurayshi vigilance. On such occasions the children (and the adults) had
to go thirsty and hungry. But going thirsty and hungry was a norm in the
ravine. When water was available, mothers boiled leaves and bark of
trees in it to comfort children crying from hunger. The cry of hungry
children could be heard outside the ravine, and the Quraysh responded to
it with derisive laughter. They gloated over their "triumph" in making
the children of Bani Hashim cry for water and food.

The Quraysh were determined to make the blockade effective!

The most precious gift for the besieged clans during these three years,
was water. They and their clients and slaves received it from Khadija.
She gave Ali the pieces of gold with which he bought water. Her concern
for those around her manifested itself in many ways. She sought audience
from Allah to invoke His mercy upon them. Prayer was a vital activity
for her, and it was her "strategy" for handling adversity. She soon
found out that it was a simple but effective strategy.

Prayer enabled Khadija to meet the inevitable challenges she encountered
during the siege almost every day, and she surmounted them. She was the
guardian-angel of the tribe, and everyone in it felt the positive
character of her presence, and the support and the power of her vibrant
spirit.

***O ye who believe! Seek help with patient perseverance and prayer: for
Allah is with those who patiently persevere. (Chapter 2; verse 153)***

Khadija sought the help of Allah with patient perseverance and prayer.
When she prayed, she found not only help but also courage, strength,
peace, tranquillity and satisfaction.

***Those who believe, and whose hearts find satisfaction in the
remembrance of Allah; for without doubt in the remembrance of Allah do
hearts find satisfaction.***  
***For those who believe and work righteousness, is (every) blessedness,
and a beautiful place of (final) return. (Chapter 13; verses 28, 29)***

A. Yusuf Ali has explained "blessedness" as follows:

"Blessedness: an internal state of satisfaction, an inward joy which
reflects itself in the life of a good person, through good and ill
fortune. And then, there is always the final goal to which his or her
eyes are turned, the beautiful Home of rest in the Hereafter, after this
life's struggles are over. The goal is Allah Himself."

In the remembrance of Allah, Khadija, His devout slave, found
satisfaction and blessedness.

Occasionally, the few friends that the members of Bani Hashim had in
Makka, tried to smuggle food into the ravine, but if the pagans caught
them, they seized it.

One of the friends of Bani Hashim in Makka was Hisham bin Amr al-Aamiri.
He brought food and water for them as often as he could. He knew that
bringing provisions to the ravine had to be a covert operation -
discreet, precise, and nonviolent. Therefore, the time he had chosen to
deliver food and water to the besieged, was a few hours before daybreak.
But a time came when the infidels caught him, and threatened to kill him
if he persisted in bringing his loaded camels to the ravine for the Bani
Hashim.

Another friend of the Bani Hashim in Makka was Hakim bin Hizam, the
nephew of Khadija. He and a friend of his, Abul Bukhtari, brought
essential supplies to the Bani Hashim. Once both of them were driving a
camel loaded with food, water and clothing to the ravine when Abu Jahl
surprised them, and told them that he was going to confiscate the camel
and the provisions. At first, Abul Bukhtari tried to conciliate him but
he didn't want to hear anything. He barred their access to the ravine,
and refused to let them pass. Abu Bukhtari tried to force his way past
him. This led to a violent fist fight between them. Brawls like this
erupted very frequently near the ravine but the friends of Bani Hashim
in Makka did not lose heart, and did everything they could to bring
succor to it.

Hisham bin Amr al-Aamiri, Hakim bin Hizam, and Abul Bukhtari, were not
Muslims but they did not want to see any child or even a slave of Bani
Hashim perish from hunger or thirst, and they risked their own lives
time and again in carrying victuals to the Shi'b Abu Talib. They were
also very happy to pay the bill for such relief operations for three
years, and all they sought in return was the safety of the besieged
clans.

It should be pointed out here that on this particular occasion, the
anger and the hatred of the Umayyad clan of the Quraysh was directed,
not against the Muslims, but against the clan of Bani Hashim. Their aim
was to destroy Islam. But they could not destroy Islam without killing
Muhammad. They made repeated attempts to kill him but they failed
because they could not reach him. He was safe and comfortable behind the
"shield" of his clan - the Bani Hashim.

As noted before, the Umayyads rightly pinpointed Abu Talib, the chief of
Bani Hashim, as responsible for all their failures in their insensate
war against Allah and His Messenger, Muhammad. They never condoned him
for the part he played in the struggle.

As for the Muslims who did not belong to the clan of Bani Hashim, there
were many, and they were all living in the city. Some among them are
touted to have been influential, powerful and rich, and all of them
claimed that they loved their Prophet. But curiously, no one among them
ever came to see him much less to bring any aid to him. They enjoyed the
comfort and security of their homes for three years while their Prophet,
Muhammad Mustafa, lived, with his loved ones, teetering, as it were, on
the edge of a sword, surrounded by enemies who were thirsting for his
and their blood.

It might appear that Khadija's little family, consisting of her husband,
Muhammad Mustafa; her little daughter, Fatima Zahra; and her adopted
son, Ali ibn Abi Talib, lived, throughout the siege, like the rest of
the clan, in a state of non-stop and unmitigated suspense, never knowing
what terrors the next day or the night might bring for it. Every day was
crammed with perils. But she was never at a loss to find new reserves,
in her own Faith and Character, to strengthen it as an entity. She
discovered that there was nothing that she wanted more than feeling and
being close to Allah. By feeling and being close to Allah, she was able
to banish suspense.

For Khadija, the source of the greatest anxiety was the hunger and
thirst of the children. Whenever Ali or Hakim bin Hizam or Hisham bin
Amr brought provisions into the ravine, she took charge of them. The
children gathered around her, and she gave them food and water. They
looked at her with delight and wonder. She put their needs ahead of the
needs of their parents, and she put the needs of the parents ahead of
her own needs. She had a flair for extending the family outward to the
whole tribe.

***Those who wish for the (things of) the hereafter, and strive
therefore with all due striving and have faith, - they are the ones
whose striving is acceptable (to Allah). (Chapter 17; verse 19)***

The safety and security of the clans in the ravine were threatened not
only by the Umayyads, and not only by the specters of hunger and thirst
but also by excessive heat and excessive cold. In the long days of
summer, the sky spewed forth flames onto the earth, and the cliffs and
the rocks of the ravine bounced them back, making it a furnace. Khadija
gave water to the thirsty as often as she could. In winter, the long
nights became intolerably cold. Mothers made most desperate efforts to
protect their children from the ravages of cold. Khadija distributed
clothes and firewood to them.

The long siege had inevitably disrupted the rhythm of life of all
members of the clans of Hashim and al-Muttalib. Every day brought a grim
ordeal or a new menace to them. But they were never dismayed by them. In
fact, they were happy. The presence of Muhammad, the beloved of Allah,
in their midst was enough to make them forget all their anxieties, and
to keep them happy. They knew that Allah had chosen them to defend
Muhammad, His messenger, from his enemies. It was an honor they would
not barter even for an empire. Khadija inspired them with her example.
The majesty and power of her Faith gave them momentum, and they rode
through the storms of the years in exile with dignity and aplomb.

Khadija was buoyant from the beginning of the siege to its end. The
spirit of Truth and Benevolence was the invisible magic of her
personality. She knew that the tribe was under the protection of Allah,
and was, therefore, safe. The secret of her serenity is to be found in
the following verses of Quran Majid:

***1.*** ***Whosoever follows My guidance, on them shall be no fear, nor
shall they grieve.***  
***(Chapter 2; verse 38)***

***2. Behold! Verily on the friends of Allah there is no fear, nor shall
they grieve.***  
***(Chapter 10; verse 62)***

***3. Verily those who say, "our Lord is Allah," and remain firm (on
that way), - on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.***  
***(Chapter 46; verse 13)***

**Translator's Note**

The devotion and service to Allah result in the soul being made free
from all fear and sorrow, as regards the past, present and the future,
if we may take an analogy from the Time for a timeless state. Such
devotion and service are shown by (1) believing in the Signs of Allah,
which means understanding and accepting His Will, and (2) by merging our
will completely in His universal Will, which means being in tune with
the Infinite, and acting in all things to further His Kingdom. (A. Yusuf
Ali)

On Khadija there was no fear and no sorrow. She exemplified God's
Message in her workaday life!

Khadija's faith, kindness and charity were well-known to everyone. What
no one had seen until she began to live as an exile, was her patience
under suffering, and her will-to-fight. She endured suffering like a
stoic, and she fought against despair and despondency, and she defeated
them. Intertwined in the texture of her life was hope. Hope would seem
dramatically out of context in the surroundings in which Khadija was
living. But not for her. Her hope was invincible, and it was contagious.
She buoyed up the sinking hearts.

***They glory in the grace and the bounty from Allah, and in the fact
that Allah suffereth not the reward of the faithful to be lost (in the
least). (Chapter 3; verse 171)***

Khadija gloried in the Grace and Bounty from Allah. She was blessed with
them abundantly.

Foregoing is a rough outline, pieced together from various sources, of
the story of Muhammad Mustafa and Khadija, and the Bani Hashim and Bani
al-Muttalib, when they were in a state of siege in the Shi'b Abu Talib
from 616 to 619. Many important details are missing. But it is hoped
that research by dedicated historians and scholars will uncover new
facts. These new facts will enable the future historian(s) of Islam to
present a more complete and coherent story of the years when Islam was
in a state of siege!

The siege of Bani Hashim and Bani al-Muttalib lasted until A.D. 619. In
that year the clans returned to the city. Their siege by the Quraysh had
failed to produce the intended result. The members of the Bani Hashim
were defiant as ever, and their morale was high. It was just as
unthinkable for them, at the end of the siege, as it had been at the
beginning, to surrender Muhammad - their darling - to his enemies.

If Abu Jahl and the Umayyads abandoned the siege, it was not because of
any "change of heart" on their part; they were infidels unreconstructed
with a commitment to destroy Islam. They tried to prolong the blockade,
and to compass the ruin of Bani Hashim. But they were compelled to
abandon the siege because there were other forces at work against it.
Following is the account given in the earliest extant authority, the
biography of the Prophet by Muhammad ibn Ishaq, of the events which
culminated in the return to Makka of the clans of Bani Hashim and Bani
al-Muttalib from the Shi'b Abu Talib, after three years of exile:

Quote:

**The Annulling of the Boycott of the Bani Hashim**

The Bani Hashim and the Bani al-Muttalib were in the Shi'b (=mountain
hideout) as the Quraysh had made a covenant to ostracize them. Then some
members of the Quraysh itself took steps to challenge that covenant.
None tried harder in this matter than HISHAM BIN AMR because he was the
son of a brother of Nadla b. Hashim b. Abd Manaf on the side of his
mother, and was closely attached to the Bani Hashim. He was highly
esteemed by his people. When these two clans were in the Shi'b, he used
to bring a camel laden with food by night, and then when he arrived at
the mouth of the alley, he took off its halter, gave it a whack on the
side, and sent it running into the alley to them. He did the same thing
another time, bringing clothes to them.

Hisham went to see his friend, ZUHAYR B. ABU UMAYYA B. AL-MUGHIRA whose
mother was Atika, the daughter of Abdul Muttalib, and said: "Are you
content to eat food and wear good clothes while you know the condition
in which your uncles are living? They cannot buy or sell or intermarry.

By God, if they were the uncles of Abu'1-Hakam b. Hisham (Abu Jahl), and
you asked him to do what he has asked you to do, he would never do it."

He (Zuhayr) said: "Confound you, Hisham, what can I do? I am only one
man. By God if I had another man to back me, I would soon annul it." He
said: "I have found a man for you - myself." "Find another," said
Zuhayr. So Hisham went to AL-MUTIM B. ADIY, and said to him: "Are you
content that the two clans of Bani Abd Manaf should perish while you
look on consenting to follow the Quraysh? You will find that they will
soon do the same with you." He (Mutim) gave the same answer as Zuhayr
had, and demanded a fourth man.

Hisham then went to ABU'L BUKHTARI B. HISHAM, and he asked for a fifth
man, and then to ZAMA'A B. AL-ASWAD B. AL-MUTTALIB B. ASAD, and reminded
him of their kinship and duties. He asked whether others were willing to
cooperate in this task, and he gave him the names of the others. They
all said that they would meet at night near Hujun above Makka, and when
they did, they agreed to consider the matter of the document, and to
secure its annulment.

On the following day, when people got together, Zuhayr put on a robe,
and made the seven circuits of the Kaaba.

Then he faced the crowd, and said: "O people of Makka, are we to eat and
dress while the Bani Hashim perish, unable to buy or to sell? By God, I
shall not rest until this evil boycotting document is destroyed."

Abu Jahl shouted: "You are wrong. It shall never be destroyed."

Zama'a shouted back at him: "You are the one who is wrong. This document
of iniquity will be destroyed. We didn't want it even when it was first
drafted and signed."

Abu'l Bukhtari said: "Zama'a is right. We did not like this document
when it was written, and we do not like it now."

Al-Mutim added: Both Zuhayr and Zama'a are right, and anyone who says
otherwise, is wrong. We make Allah our Witness that we dissociate
ourselves from the whole idea, and what is written in the document.
Hisham also spoke, and he supported his friends.

Then AI-Mutim went up to the document to take it down and to tear it
into pieces. He found that worms had eaten most of it except the words:
"In Thy Name O Allah." This was the customary formula of the Quraysh to
begin their writing. The writer of the document was Mansur b. Ikrima.

Unquote.

AL-MUTIM BIN ADIY tore the infamous document of the Quraysh into pieces.
Those pieces were blown away by the wind, and no vestige was left of
them. It was an act that called for conviction and courage - conviction
that the Bani Hashim were the innocent victims of iniquity; and courage
to defy the Quraysh. His resolute action was the signal that the siege
of the Bani Hashim was over, and that its members could now return to
the city. Mutim himself and the young warriors of his clan rode in full
battle-dress to the ravine, and escorted Muhammad Mustafa, Khadija, and
all members of the two clans of Bani Hashim and Bani al-Muttalib, back
into Makka, and into their homes.

Dr. Muhammad Hamidullah writes on page 10 of his book, Introduction to
Islam, published by the International Islamic Federation of Student
Organizations, Salimiah, Kuwait (1977):

"After three years, four or five non-Muslims, more humane than the rest,
and belonging to different clans, proclaimed publicly their denunciation
of the unjust boycott."

Dr. Hamidullah has attributed the failure of the boycott to the humanity
of "four or five non-Muslims." They were, he says, "more humane than the
rest." He is right. They were more humane than the rest of the
non-Muslims in Makka. But were they more humane even than the Muslims
who were living in Makka?

Astoundingly, incredibly, history's answer to this uncomfortable
question is in the affirmative. The situation abounds in irony. After
all, apart from these five paladins - all non-Muslims -humanity did not
impel anyone else in Makka - non-Muslim or Muslim - to defy the Quraysh,
and to act in defence of the Bani Hashim!

There is one more question, viz., why did Zuhayr consider himself alone?

When Hisham broached to his friend, Zuhayr, the subject of annulling the
Agreement of the pagans to boycott the Bani Hashim, taunted him for
being insensitive to their sufferings, and reproached him for his
failure to act to bring that suffering to an end; the latter said:
"Confound you, Hisham, what can I do? I am but one man. By God, if I had
another man to back me, I would soon annul it."

Zuhayr's answer is cryptic. Why did he consider himself a minority of
one? Didn't he know that there were many Muslims in Makka? Why didn't he
try to enlist their support to bring the siege of Bani Hashim to an end?
He ought to have solicited their support. Even if they had withheld it,
it would not have done any harm to anyone.

According to the historians, some of the Muslims in Makka, were men of
rank and substance, and had considerable clout with the Quraysh. But for
some mysterious reason, it did not occur either to Zuhayr himself or to
any of his friends, to mobilize them (the Muslims). They decided to
ignore the Muslims. They went ahead, and took unilateral action to bring
the siege of Bani Hashim to an end.

Zuhayr and his friends were successful in their efforts to bring the
Bani Hashim back into the city. Muhammad Mustafa, Khadija, Ali, Abu
Talib and all other members of the Bani Hashim and Bani al-Muttalib,
returned to their homes. But by their action, Zuhayr and his companions
had demonstrated that the Muslims living in Makka, were not
"indispensable" for Muhammad and/or for Islam.

It is one of the supreme paradoxes of the history of Islam that the hand
that reached out to the wall of the Kaaba; took down the covenant of the
Quraysh to ostracize the Bani Hashim; and tore it into shreds, belonged,
not to a "believer," but to an "unbeliever," - Mutim ibn Adiy! Neither
Mutim nor any of his four friends, viz., Hisham bin Amr, Zuhayr ibn Abu
Umayya, Abu'1 Bukhtari bin Hisham and Zama'a bin al-Aswad, was a Muslim.
But all five of them were high-minded paladins, who did not acquiesce in
the injustice being done to the Bani Hashim. They did not rest until
they had restored justice in Makka.

Technically, these five paladins were not Muslims as noted above. But
they and they alone had the grit and the gumption to uphold a principle
that is Islamic, viz., the Principle of Justice. They upheld justice,
and by their heroic deed, won immortality for themselves in the saga of
Islam.

The Muslims, on the other hand, not only did not act; they did not even
protest against the cynicism and the highhandedness of the Quraysh. They
maintained, for three years, a discreet detachment and an unconvincing
silence. They were all men of prudence. Therefore, all that they did,
was to temporize, and to watch the drift of events.

The siege of the Bani Hashim lasted for more than a thousand days. What
is most amazing in the epic of that siege, is that the "monolith" of the
clans of Hashim and al-Muttalib did not show any "cracks" in it even
though it was subject to non-stop stress and tension from the beginning
to the end. The Quraysh could not find any traitor in the clans, not
even a slave who was willing to betray his masters; nor could they find
any sign of faintheartedness, not even in a child.

There were four hundred men, women and children in the Shi'b Abu Talib.
They were sharing with Muhammad and Khadija the experience of living in
exile, and no one out of them ever became a "deserter," either to save
his life, or to gratify the pangs of hunger and thirst, or to escape
from the extremes of heat and cold, or to escape from confinement
without end. They had no way of knowing how and when, if ever, the siege
would end, and if they would ever return to their homes. Days in exile
passed into weeks; weeks into months; and months into years. There was
absolutely nothing to sustain hope. And yet hope was one thing that
sustained them from beginning to end.

It appears that the collective but unspoken resolution of the heroic
"Four Hundred" was to "sink or swim" - with Muhammad. They would rather
be "prisoners" with Muhammad than be free citizens without him. For
them, life without Muhammad was not worth living at all.

Abu Talib and the other members of the Bani Hashim and Bani al-Muttalib
considered the siege a "test" of their love for Muhammad. The siege was
also a test of their morale, their physical courage and their moral
courage, their steadfastness, their perseverance, their patience under
suffering, and their strength. They passed in each of these tests. Allah
had entrusted the personal safety of Muhammad Mustafa - His Messenger -
to them. They had a commitment to protect him, and they brought glory
and honor to their commitment.

In three years of exile, Khadija's vast fortune ran out. She had spent
most of it on buying water. She was happy that her wealth was the means
through which Allah had saved the most precious lives in all Creation -
the lives of Muhammad Mustafa and his Ahlul-Bayt - and she was grateful
to Him for bestowing this honor upon her.

In the midst of convulsions and upheaval all around her, Khadija's faith
remained a constant, and it remained a source of unfailing strength to
her and to those around her. Her faith was sustained by prayer, as noted
before.

Khadija's faith was something almost "visible" and "tangible." She was
constantly in touch with Allah - the Source of Faith -through prayer.
Prayer was also the secret of her quiet courage. Her tranquil manner and
her serene presence, didn't let the morale of the tribe languish at any
time during the siege. She was an "anchor" for the whole tribe in all
the years of turbulence and tribulation.

The failure of the siege of Bani Hashim and Bani al-Muttalib by the
pagans of Makka, and the return of the two clans to their homes, was a
watershed in the history of Islam. It was proof of the resilience and
strength of the new creed.

At the beginning of the siege, the pagans had felt confident that they
had at last "cornered" Islam, and that it was at their mercy. Their
efforts to obliterate Islam were not half-hearted or sporadic, and they
had left nothing to chance. They dangled the specter of starvation
before the besieged clans. They had assumed that in the face of the two
scourges of constant hunger and thirst, and a constant state of
subjective alarm, the resistance of the besieged clans would break down,
and they would be compelled to surrender Muhammad to them (to the
pagans).

Without a doubt, human endurance has its limits, and interminable hunger
and thirst can break a man's spirit, no matter how heroic he may be. But
the pagans didn't know that the Faith of the Bani Hashim in Allah, and
their loyalty to Muhammad, were stronger than the fear of
hunger-and-thirst, and were, in fact, stronger than the fear of death
itself.

The members of the clan of Bani Hashim had no fear of death.

When Muhammad Mustafa planted the Banner of Tawhid and lighted the Lamp
of Faith in Arabia, he was at once challenged by the champions of the
idols. The idol-worshippers hated to see the Banner of Tawhid fluttering
on the horizon, and they sent their serried legions to eradicate it. But
those legions found the Banner surrounded and protected by the children
of Bani Hashim. The latter had rallied around it to protect it; and to
protect it they had to defy death every moment! The legions made fierce
and repeated charges upon the Banner but were repulsed each time. The
children of Bani Hashim defeated and routed the Legions of Misbelief.

The Lamp of Faith lighted by Muhammad Mustafa was threatened by the
hurricanes of paganism and polytheism. But the children of Bani Hashim
successfully defended that Lamp. The hurricanes spent all their force
and fury to put it out and failed.

In defending the Banner of Tawhid and the Lamp of Faith, many children
of Bani Hashim were killed. But as noted above, death held no terrors
for them. Tawhid and Faith were far more precious to them than their own
lives. They were proud of dying in defence of Tawhid and Faith. They
believed that both the Banner and the Lamp were their most precious
heritage, and it was their sacred duty to protect them, and they did.

Abu Jahl and the Umayyads made countless attempts to extinguish the
Flame of Islam. But they were unsuccessful. The Flame of Islam burned
ever brighter. How could they extinguish it when it had both visible and
Invisible protectors? If Bani Hashim were the visible protectors of the
Flame of Islam, Allah was its Invisible Protector, as we read in the
following verses of Quran Majid:

***Fain would they extinguish the light of Allah with their mouths, but
Allah will not allow but that His light should be perfected, even though
the unbelievers may detest (it).***  
***It is He who has sent His apostle with guidance and the religion of
truth, to proclaim it over all religion, even though the pagans may
detest (it).***  
***(Chapter 9; verses 32, 33)***


