Chapter 12: The Death
=====================

The five paladins of Makka had trampled upon the covenant of the Quraysh
to boycott the Bani Hashim. Thanks to their chivalry and gallantry, the
Bani Hashim could return to the city, and live in their homes once
again. But they had barely begun to recover from the rigors of living in
a mountain hideout for three years, when Khadija, the wife, the
companion and the friend of Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah;
and the benefactress of Islam and the Muslims, fell ill. Her illness was
brief but fatal. All her life she had lived in the midst of abundance
and luxury but the three years of exile had been a time of excessive
austerity for her which inevitably took its toll.

As noted before, Khadija was the first woman to declare that the Creator
was One, and that Muhammad was His Messenger. The glory and honor of
being the First Believer in the whole world, is hers to all eternity.

When Islam came under mounting pressure from its enemies, Khadija
sacrificed her comfort, her wealth and her home for it; and now it would
appear that she sacrificed her life also. Without a doubt, if she had
lived in her palatial house in Makka, surrounded by her maid-servants,
she might have lived for many more years. But she preferred to stand by
her husband and his clan, and to share the bitters of life with them.
During the siege, she had to endure not only the pangs of hunger and
thirst but also the extremes of heat in summer and cold in winter; yet
she never complained to her husband about them. Whether times were good
or bad, whether she had plenty or she had nothing, she was always
cheerful. Austerity and privation never soured her. It was this
temperament that was an unfailing source of comfort, courage and
strength for her husband during the bleakest moments of his life.

During the years of the siege, Khadija spent all her fortune on buying
essentials like food and water for the clan of her husband. When she
returned to her house, her last cent was gone; and when she died, there
was not enough money available in the house even to buy a shroud. A
cloak of her husband was used as a shroud for her, and she was given
burial in it.

Muhammad Mustafa never took another wife as long as Khadija lived, and
if she had not died, it is most probable that he would never have
married any other woman.

**Edward Gibbon**

During the 24-years of their marriage, Khadija's youthful husband
abstained from the right of polygamy, and the pride or tenderness of the
venerable matron was never insulted by the society of a rival. After her
death, the Prophet placed her in the rank of four perfect women, with
the sister (sic) of Moses, the mother of Jesus, and Fatima, the best
beloved of his daughters (sic).

(The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire)

Muhammad ibn Ishaq, the biographer of the Prophet, says that when there
was resumption of Divine revelation, after its cessation following the
first two visits of Gabriel, Khadija received a tribute and a salutation
of peace from Allah Ta'ala. The message was communicated to Muhammad by
Gabriel, and when he conveyed it to Khadija, she said: "Allah is Peace
(as-Salam), and from Him is all Peace, and may peace be on Gabriel."

Muhammad forever remembered Khadija with affection, gratitude and love.
During her illness, he kept a nightlong vigil nursing her, comforting
her and praying for her. He told her that Allah had promised Eternal
Bliss to her, and had built for her a palace of pearls in Paradise.
Toward morning her frail frame could not endure the attack of fever any
more and her sanctified and noble soul left this earth for its
destination in Heaven where it entered the company of the immortals. Her
death filled Muhammad's heart with sorrow.

Khadija died on the tenth of Ramadan of the tenth year of the
Proclamation of Islam.

Khadija was buried in Hujun above Makka. Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger
of Allah, himself descended into her grave to lie in it for a few
moments. Then he assisted the other mourners in lowering the body into
it. After the burial, he smoothed the earth on her grave.

Thus died Khadija, the first woman to believe in the Oneness of the
Creator.

Peace on Khadija to whom Allah Ta'ala sent His greetings and
salutations.  
 Peace on Khadija for whom Allah Ta'ala built a palace of pearls in
Paradise.  
 Peace on Khadija, the best of women, and the chief of all women.

Khadija died in 619. One month after her death, Muhammad Mustafa had to
sustain another shock in the death of Abu Talib, his uncle and guardian,
and the bulwark of Islam. The death of these two friends - Khadija and
Abu Talib - was the greatest shock that the Apostle of God had to endure
in the fifty years of his life. The two lamps of his life were
extinguished. He was overwhelmed with sorrow. He called the year of
their death "the Year of Sorrow."

The year 619 turned out to be a year of sorrow for Muhammad Mustafa in
more than one sense. The death of one's loved ones is naturally an
occasion for sorrow. But in the case of Muhammad, the death of these two
friends was not merely a subjective experience for him. He was soon made
conscious of the meaning of their death by a series of extraneous
events.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

Khadija and Abu Talib died in the same year, and with Khadija's death
troubles came fast one after another. She had been a faithful supporter
for him in Islam, and he used to tell her of his troubles. With the
death of Abu Talib he lost a source of strength in his personal life and
a defence and protection against his tribe. Abu Talib died three years
before he (Muhammad) migrated to Medina, and it was then that Quraysh
began to treat him in an offensive way which they did not dare to follow
in his uncle's lifetime. A young lout actually threw dust on his head.

Hisham on the authority of his father, Urwa, told me that the Prophet
went into his house, and he was saying: "Quraysh never treated me like
this when Abu Talib was alive."

(The Life of the Messenger of Allah)

**Washington Irving**

Mohammed soon became sensible of the loss he had sustained in the death
of Abu Talib who had been not merely an affectionate relative, but a
steadfast and powerful protector, from his great influence in Mecca. At
his death there was no one to check and counteract the hostilities of
Abu Sofian and Abu Jahl.

The fortunes of Mohammed were becoming darker and darker in his native
place. Khadija, his original benefactress, the devoted companion of his
solitude and seclusion, the zealous believer in his doctrine, was dead;
so also was Abu Talib, once his faithful and efficient protector.
Deprived of the sheltering influence of the latter, Mohammed had become,
in a manner, an outlaw in Mecca, obliged to conceal himself and remain a
burden on the hospitality of those whom his own doctrines had involved
in persecution (sic). If worldly advantage had been his objective, how
had it been attained?

(The Life of Mohammed)

Washington Irving has erred in stating that Muhammad had become "a
burden on the hospitality of those whom his own doctrines had involved
in persecution." Muhammad was never a burden to anyone at any time. The
members of his clan - the Bani Hashim - considered it an honor and a
privilege to defend him and to protect Islam - both of them their
greatest treasures. They were aware that with Muhammad in their midst,
they had become the recipients of the blessings of Heaven, and they had
no intention of forfeiting those blessings at any price.

Who else but the clan of Bani Hashim would defend Muhammad and protect
Islam? Muhammad was its flesh and its blood, and Islam was its life and
its love.

Another error that the distinguished historian has made is in the
question which he has posed: "If worldly advantage had been his
(Muhammad's) objective, how had it been attained?"

Attaining worldly advantage was not Muhammad's objective. The Quraysh
had offered him all the worldly advantages; they offered him wealth,
kingdom and beauty. They were all his for the asking. But he kicked at
them. Could they offer him anything else?

Muhammad had only one objective and that was to carry out the duty
imposed upon him by Allah Ta'ala, namely, to promulgate Islam - the
Religion of Allah.

**Sir William Muir**

The sacrifices to which Abu Talib exposed himself and his family for the
sake of his nephew, while yet incredulous of his mission (sic), stamp
his character as singularly noble and unselfish. They afford at the same
time strong proof of the sincerity of Mohammed. Abu Talib would not have
acted thus for an interested deceiver; and he had ample means of
scrutiny.

(The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877)

**Sir William Muir** further says in this connection:

"If indeed, it had not been for the influence and steadfast protection
of Abu Talib, it is clear that the hostile intentions of the Coreish
would have imperilled the liberty, perhaps the life, of Mohammed."

(The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877)

**Jurji Zaydan**

The reason why Abdul Muttalib made Abu Talib the guardian of Muhammad,
was that Abu Talib and Abdullah were the children of the same mother.
Without a doubt, the protection of Abu Talib was the major cause not
only of the success of Muhammad's mission but also of his physical
survival. Abu Talib was a dignitary of Quraysh, and a man of great
prestige. Muhammad lived in his house like one of his children...

(Complete Works, published by Dar-ul-Jeel, Beirut, Lebanon, Volume I,
page 91. 1981)

Lt. General Sir John Glubb writes in his book, The Life and Times of
Mohammed, that Abu Talib is not considered a hero by Muslims because he
died in unbelief. But he adds, "Nevertheless, if it had not been for the
staunch courage with which he stood by his nephew, Islam might have died
in its cradle."

Both **Sir William Muir** and Sir John Glubb and many other historians
have insinuated that Abu Talib died in unbelief. If challenged to prove
this, they would advert to an authority like Imam Bukhari. Bukhari says
in one of the "traditions" that he has collected that when Abu Talib was
on his deathbed, the Apostle urged him to become a Muslim but he said
that doing so would embarrass him with his Qurayshi friends.

The authors of this "tradition" forgot one thing. Abu Talib was dying,
and knew that he was not going to see his Qurayshi "friends" any more.
He knew that he was going into the presence of his Creator. At a time
like this he could not have cared less for the Quraysh. His anxiety at
all times was to win the pleasure of Allah. He proved by his deeds more
than anyone else could ever prove by his words that his faith in the
Oneness of God and in the mission of Muhammad as His messenger, was
rocklike and unshakable.

Amin Dawidar, the modern Egyptian historian, says that Abu Talib was
like a fortress for Muhammad which sheltered him from all the heat and
cold and the contrariness and cussedness of the world outside. "And when
Abu Talib died," he says, "Muhammad found himself face to face with the
enemy for the first time in his life. Without a doubt, the death of Abu
Talib was a great tragedy for him."

Abu Talib could not but be a Muslim and a Momin. No man can love
Muhammad and idolatry at the same time; the two loves are mutually
exclusive. And no man can love Muhammad yet hate Islam. The love of
Muhammad and the hatred of Islam cannot coexist. Whoever loves Muhammad,
must inevitably love Islam. If there is any one thing beyond any doubt
in the history of Islam, it is the love of Abu Talib for Muhammad. As
noted before, Abu Talib and his wife, loved Muhammad more than they
loved their own children. Such love could have had only one
fountainhead, namely, their conviction that Islam was divine in its
origins.

Abu Talib was proud that Allah had chosen Muhammad, the son of his
brother Abdullah, in all creation, to be His last and greatest messenger
to mankind. Muhammad was the greatest love and the greatest pride of his
uncle, Abu Talib.

In His Book, Allah Ta'ala identified the protection that Abu Talib gave
to Muhammad Mustafa, as His Own protection as per the following verse:

***Did He not find thee an orphan and give thee shelter (and care)?
(Chapter 93; verse 6)***

Allah Ta'ala gave shelter (protection) and care to His Messenger,
Muhammad Mustafa, through His slave - Abu Talib.

Abu Talib worked in Makka for the glory and power of Islam, and he was
the guardian of its absolute and incontestable values. For ten years, he
steered the "vessel" of Islam through dark and turbulent seas with a
skill, vision and faith that became the dismay of the guardians of the
idols of the pagans of Arabia. His deeds are an integral part of the
story of Islam, and they are also the most eloquent testimony of his
faith in Allah and His Messenger - in Islam!

May Allah bless His loving slaves, Khadija and Abu Talib. Both of them
put obedience to Him ahead of everything else in life.


