Chapter 15: Generosity
======================

Khadija, the princess of Arabia, and Muhammad Mustafa were married in
A.D. 595. Fifteen years later, Muhammad was chosen by Allah to be His
messenger. As God's messenger, his duty was to promulgate Islam in the
world. From that moment, every thing changed for Khadija. She made her
entire fortune an endowment for Islam. That endowment could not have
come at a more opportune time for Islam. Khadija told her husband that
all her vast wealth was his, and he could spend it just as he wished.

Khadija's generosity had a glowing spontaneity.

Muhammad Mustafa "invested" Khadija's wealth in Islam. There has never
been a better "investment" in the entire history of mankind. This
"investment" was a guarantee that Islam's march would not be halted or
even be retarded because of any lack of material means and support. It
was an investment that, to this day, is paying enormous "dividends", and
will pay "dividends" for every generation of the Muslims, to the end of
time itself.

But material wealth was not the only investment that Khadija made in
Islam. She also invested her time, talent, energy, spirit and heart in
Islam - an investment otherwise known as commitment. She knew her
spouse's dreams and hopes, and she shared them all with him.

Khadija's intent in supporting Islam was so transparent that Allah
Ta'ala was pleased to call her wealth His Own in the following verse of
Quran Majid:

***And He found thee in need, and made thee independent. (Chapter 93;
verse 8)***

**Translator's Note**

"The holy Prophet inherited no wealth and was poor. The true, pure, and
sincere love of Khadija not only raised him above want, but made him
independent of worldly needs in his later life, enabling him to devote
his whole time to the service of Allah." (A. Yusuf Ali)

Allah Ta'ala made His slave, Muhammad, rich with the wealth of Khadija.

Khadija and the Two Migrations to Abyssinia

Two groups of Muslims left Makka in the years 615 and 616 to escape
persecution by the Quraysh and they sought sanctuary in Abyssinia. The
total number of men and women in both groups was about one hundred.

With a few exceptions like Uthman and Zubayr, the rest of the refugees
in these two groups were too poor to bear the expenses of travel to
Abyssinia. Who equipped their caravans and paid their expenses so they
were able to travel? The historians have not answered this question. But
it is most probable that Khadija equipped the caravans and financed the
emigration of the Muslims from Makka to Abyssinia. In Makka, she alone
had the resources with which to underwrite emigration of Muslims on such
a scale.


