Chapter 18: Khadija and Ayesha
==============================

Hadhrat Ayesha was jealous not only of those wives of Muhammad Mustafa
who were living at the same time and in the same house as she was, but
also of a wife who was long since dead, viz., Khadija. In fact, she was
more jealous of Khadija, the dead wife, than she was of any of her
living co-wives. She was so jealous of Khadija that she reserved her
most bitter blasts against her.

Abbas Mahmud al-Akkad says in his book, -

"Ayesha did not nurse such strong feelings of jealousy toward any wife
of the Messenger of Allah as she did toward Khadija. The reason for this
jealousy was that Khadija had made a place for herself in the heart of
her husband which no one else could take. Muhammad Mustafa recounted her
merits night and day.

Muhammad Mustafa was constantly helping the poor and the sick. On one
occasion, Ayesha asked him the reason for this, and he said: "Khadija
had told me to treat these people with kindness and love. It was her
last wish."

When Ayesha heard this, she flared into a rage, and shouted: "Khadija!
Khadija! It seems that for you there is no other woman on the face of
the earth except Khadija."

The Apostle was a man of unlimited forbearance. But when he saw Ayesha's
outburst, he stopped talking with her."

If this incident points up the love that Khadija had for the poor and
the sick, it also points up the esteem in which she was held by Muhammad
Mustafa. He acted upon her wishes, notwithstanding the overt reaction
and resentment of Ayesha. He, in fact, acted upon the wishes of Khadija
as long as he lived. Didn't he know that any reference to Khadija
displeased Ayesha? Of course he did. Therefore, when she asked him why
he was feeding the poor, clothing the naked, and comforting the
cheerless, he ought to have given her a "discreet" answer, one that
would not have frayed her nerves. But he didn't. He just said: "I am
carrying out the wishes of Khadija."

Was this a coincidence that the last thought that Khadija had in this
world, was the welfare of the poor, the sick, the orphans, the widows
and the disabled? No. There is nothing coincidental about it. Everything
that Khadija ever said or did, was precalculated to win the pleasure of
Allah. And she knew that she could win the pleasure of Allah by giving
love and service to the most vulnerable of His humble slaves.

Khadija's largess was reaching the hungry, the poor and the sick, even
after her death. Her charity never came to a halt - in life or in death!

The name and image of Khadija were etched on the heart of Muhammad
Mustafa, and neither the hand of time nor the tantrums of Ayesha could
efface them.

Hadhrat Ayesha was aware that she could not dissuade Muhammad Mustafa
from praising Khadija, and from talking about her. But this **knowledge
did not put a crimp** upon her vis-a-vis her "anti-Khadija" stance.
Abbas Mahmud al-Akkad of Egypt, relates another incident in his book,
Avesha, as follows:

One day the Messenger of Allah was praising Khadija when Ayesha said: "O
Messenger of Allah! Why do you talk all the time about that old woman
who had inflamed gums? After all, Allah has given you better wives than
her."

Muhammad Mustafa said: "No Ayesha! Allah never gave me a better wife
than Khadija. She believed in me at a time when other people denied me.
She put all her wealth at my service when other people withheld theirs
from me. And what's more, Allah gave me children qpft through Khadija."

It appears that Ayesha's hatred of Khadija which she expressed so
blatantly, backfired upon her. Her husband told her that Allah gave him
children only through Khadija whereas his other wives **could not give
him any** child.

To be childless, is a very painful experience for a woman. But if she is
told that she is barren, the pain for her becomes a torture. And if it
is her own husband who taunts her for her barrenness, then the pain
becomes an agony.

But Ayesha could never repress her hatred of Khadija. She herself said
once: "I have never been so jealous of any woman as I am of Khadija."
She showed her jealousy over and over again, and each time she elicited
from the Messenger of Allah the same anger and displeasure.

The last child of Muhammad Mustafa and Khadija was their daughter,
Fatima Zahra. She was born in the fifth year of the Proclamation, and
eight years before the Migration. Her brothers, Qasim and Abdullah, had
died before her. It was the pleasure of Allah that the line of descent
of His messenger and friend, Muhammad Mustafa, should begin with his
daughter, Fatima Zahra. She was the joy of her father's heart, and the
light of his eyes. He cherished her and her children as his greatest
treasures. They were, for him, the epitome of the purest of all joys -
both terrestrial and celestial.

From time to time, Muhammad Mustafa had to leave Medina on his
campaigns. It was his invariable practice that he sent his army ahead of
him, and he himself was the last one to leave the city.

The last thing that Muhammad Mustafa did before leaving Medina, was to
visit his daughter, Fatima Zahra, the blessed one, and her children. He
entrusted them to the protection of God, and bade them farewell.

The first thing that Muhammad Mustafa did when he returned to Medina,
was to visit the house of his daughter. He invoked God's blessings upon
her and her family. During his frequent absences from Medina, there was
nothing that he missed so much as the children of his daughter. When he
saw them, he exchanged greetings with them, kissed them, dandled them,
and played with them. Once he was with them, his weariness from the
campaigns, and from long marches **in the dust** and heat of Arabia,
vanished, and he was refreshed and restored.

It was a pattern of life for Muhammad Mustafa, and he never veered from
it. His emotional life revolved around the house of his daughter.

Hadhrat Ayesha didn't share her husband's love for his daughter. Abbas
Mahmud al-Akkad says in his book, Ayesha:

In the first place, Fatima was the daughter of Khadija; and the
Messenger of Allah loved Khadija so much that he was constantly praising
and complimenting her. Ayesha resented this. In the second place, Ayesha
was childless. Whenever she saw her husband coddling and cuddling the
children of Fatima which he was doing all the time, she was further
embittered being painfully reminded of her own sterility. The relations,
therefore, of Ayesha and Fatima, were not very "friendly."


