Chapter 19: Khadija and Islam
=============================

Today, Islam is the greatest force in the world. Its enemies cannot do
it any harm. It is like a mighty oak which the storms of the world
cannot uproot. Yet there was a time when this mighty oak was a tiny
sapling, and desperately needed someone to protect it from the
hurricanes of idolatry and polytheism which threatened to uproot it.

Muslims may forget it but Islam cannot forget that in its infancy, it
were Abu Talib and Khadija who protected it. They made Islam
invulnerable. Abu Talib protected the sapling of Islam from the tempests
of misbelief and heathenism; and Khadija irrigated it with her wealth.
She did not let the sapling of Islam die from draught. In fact, she
didn't even let it wilt from neglect. Protecting Islam was, for Abu
Talib and Khadija, their foremost duty. Islam was their first love, and
it was a love which they passed on, as their "legacy" to their children.
If they - Abu Talib and Khadija - had protected the tree of Islam from
its enemies in the lifetime of Muhammad Mustafa, and had "irrigated" it
with vast quantities of gold and silver, their children and their
grandchildren protected it, from its enemies after his death, and
irrigated it with their blood. Their blood was the most sacrosanct blood
in all creation. After all, it was the blood of Muhammad Mustafa
himself - the Last and the Greatest of all Messengers of Allah, and the
Chief of all Apostles and Prophets.

Khadija was an "eye-witness" of the birth of Islam. She nursed it
through its infancy, through its most difficult, and through its most
formative years. Islam was given shape and design in her home. If any
home can be called the cradle of Islam, it was her home. She "reared"
Islam. If any home can be called the "axis" of Islam, it was her home;
Islam revolved around her home. Her home was the "home" of Quran
Majid -the Book of Allah, and the religious and political code of Islam.

It was in her home that Gabriel was bringing Revelations from Heaven for
ten years.

Khadija has collected more "firsts" in the history of nascent Islam than
anyone else. She was the first wife of the last messenger of Allah. She
was the first Believer. She was the very first mortal to declare that
the Creator was only One, and that Muhammad was His messenger. Next to
her husband, she was the very first individual who heard the Voice of
Revelation. She was the first person who offered prayers to Allah with
her husband. Whenever he went into the presence of Allah, she was his
constant companion. She was the first Mother of Believers. She was the
only wife of Muhammad Mustafa who did not have to co-exist with a
co-wife. All the love, all the affection and all the friendship of her
husband, were hers and hers alone -exclusively!

When Muhammad Mustafa proclaimed his mission as the messenger of Allah,
and told the Arabs not to worship idols, and called upon them to rally
under the banner of Tawhid, a tidal wave of sorrows broke upon him. The
polytheists began to thirst for his blood. They invented new and
ingenious ways of tormenting him, and they made many attempts to stifle
his voice forever. In those times of stress and distress, Khadija was a
bastion of strength for him. It was only because of her and Abu Talib
that the polytheists could not disrupt his work of preaching and
propagating Islam. She made, in this manner, a most important
contribution to the survival and propagation of Islam.

Khadija set basic standards that spell domestic peace, harmony,
happiness and fulfillment, and she upheld and reflected them in her
life. She demonstrated that the key to a family's strength and happiness
is the degree of emotional closeness between its members. She spelled
out the rights and duties of husbands and wives. The standards set by
her, became the "blueprint" for family life in Islam. Muhammad Mustafa
and Khadija spent twenty-five years together, and in those years, **they
formulated the** "laws" that make a marriage successful and a life
happy. Since then, even in temporal terms, the rest of the world has not
been able to find better laws. Islam incorporated the same laws in its
own programme.

Khadija turned the abstractions of idealism into reality. Her life with
Muhammad is concrete evidence of that fact. What she gave to the world
was not merely a set of principles or theoretical ideas but an
experience, rich in moments of pure enchantment with Islam, and subtle
rhythms of love for Allah and His Messenger.

As mentioned earlier, the pagan Arabs had a sense of honor gone all
awry. It was their "sense of honor" which impelled them to kill their
daughters. Islam of course put an end to this barbaric and horrendous
practice by making it at once a sin against Allah, and a crime against
humanity. Besides putting an end to female infanticide, Islam also gave
dignity, honor and rights to women, and it guaranteed those rights.

Allah Ta'ala wished to demonstrate that the laws of Islam were all
practicable. To demonstrate the practicability of those laws, and to
show the Islamic "Design of Life," He chose the house of His slaves,
Muhammad and Khadija. Without Khadija, the laws of Islam would have
remained meaningless. In fact, it is even possible that Muhammad Mustafa
could not have promulgated those laws without her.

One of the greatest blessings that Muhammad Mustafa and Khadija received
from Allah Ta'ala was their daughter, Fatima Zahra. As noted before,
Fatima was born after the death of her brothers, Qasim and Abdullah. She
was only five years old when her mother died. After the death of her
mother, Muhammad Mustafa, the messenger of Allah, became both a father
and a mother for her. In bringing up his daughter, the Messenger of
Allah was demonstrating the applicability of the laws of Islam. Since he
is the model for all Muslims, they have to imitate him in all his deeds.
He bestowed the utmost love upon, and showed the greatest respect to his
daughter.

Both in Makka and in Medina, many important persons, such as princes and
leaders of powerful tribes, came to see the messenger of Allah. He never
rose from the ground to greet any of them. But if he heard that his
daughter, Fatima Zahra, was coming to see him, he rose from the floor,
went forward to greet her, escorted her back, and gave her the place of
honor to sit. He did not show so much esteem and regard to anyone at any
time in his life - man or woman!

***Such is the bounty of Allah, which He bestows on whom He will: and
Allah is the Lord of the highest bounty. (Chapter 62; verse 4)***

Allah Ta'ala bestowed His Bounty upon Fatima Zahra, the daughter of His
friend and His messenger, Muhammad Mustafa.

It was Khadija's only daughter, Fatima Zahra, who became the recipient
of the accolades of Heaven in the 76th chapter of Quran Majid - Sura
Dahr. In fact, the whole chapter is "dedicated" to her and to her family
comprising her husband, Ali ibn Abi Talib; her children, Hasan and
Husain; and her maid, Fizza. She also became the "exegesis" of the 108th
Chapter of Quran Majid - Sura Kauthar (=Abundance). Allah Ta'ala gave
Khadija a son-in-law like Ali ibn Abi Talib who became the Lion of
Allah; "the Right Arm of Islam;" and the shield and buckler of Muhammad
Mustafa; and He gave her grandsons like Hasan and Husain who became the
Riders of the Shoulders of the Messenger of Allah, and "the Princes of
the Youth of Heaven."

Without a doubt, Islam means the practice of the house of Khadija; and
without a doubt, Quran Majid is the "dialect" of her family. Her
daughter, Fatima Zahra, and her grand-children, Hasan and Husain, grew
up "speaking" Quran Majid. She has the same relationship to Islam and
Quran Majid that light has to the eyes, lustre to a pearl; and fragrance
to a rose.

Even the most eloquent of languages fails adequately to express or
fittingly to commend, Khadija's merits. But Allah Ta'ala has promised
His reward to his loving slaves like Khadija in the following verses of
His Book:

Those who have faith and do righteous deeds, - they are the best of
creatures.  
***Their reward is with Allah: gardens of eternity, beneath which rivers
flow; they will dwell therein for ever; Allah well pleased with them,
and they with him: all this for such as fear their lord and cherisher.
(Chapter 98; verses 7, 8)***


