Â Introduction
=============

Khadija, the first wife of Muhammad Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah,
(may Allah bless him and his Ahlul-Bayt), and the first Believer, evokes
a most extraordinary personality. She played a stellar role in the
history of nascent Islam. She was, with Abu Talib, one of the two
greatest benefactors of Islam and the Muslims. At a time when Islam was
under unremitting predation pressure; and was, for three years, in a
state of unrelenting siege, she bailed it out, by her incredible
sacrifices. Her constancy, her tenacity, her vision, and her indomitable
faith in Allah, and in the mission of Muhammad Mustafa - His Last and
the Greatest Messenger - were the sine qua non as the underpinnings of
Islam during the first ten years of its existence.

For some mysterious reason, Khadija's role - so central in shaping the
destiny of Islam - has not received the recognition to which it is
entitled, from most of the Muslim biographers and historians. Such
recognition as they have given it, is, at best, perfunctory and
tentative. To the best of my knowledge and belief, a standard biography
of Khadija has not been published yet. This is a most lamentable lack in
the inspirational literature of Islam, especially at a time when, in the
West, there is growing interest in Islam as a creed, and in the story of
the respective roles of its various protagonists in its early days.

The material which is extant on the life of Khadija in various sources,
is scanty and fragmentary. Even this scanty and fragmentary material is
not free from stereotypical interpretations or misinterpretations of
history. The biographer or the historian must create a sensitized
climate of authentic understanding of Islam, and he must make an
evenhanded assessment of the roles of those personages who shaped its
history. Khadija is one of the most dynamic and vital personages in the
entire history of Islam. It is impossible to tell the story of Islam
without telling the story of the contribution she made to its survival,
its consolidation, and its eventual triumph.

Islam owes Khadija an unpayable debt!

Therefore, I believe that the publication of a biography of Khadija -
reflecting scientific spirit and scientific principles - which at one
time I envisioned as a necessity, now confronts the Muslim biographers
and historians as an overwhelming imperative.

Another reason why all Muslims should have access to the life-story of
Khadija, is, that like her husband, Muhammad Mustafa, may Allah bless
him and his Ahlul-Bayt, she too is a symbol of the unity of his umma.
She is a symbol that fosters unity of the Muslim umma.

An attempt has been made in this book to put together whatever material
on the life of Khadija was available in numerous scattered sources. But
it is an attempt which, it must be conceded, is hopelessly inadequate.
It purports to be a mere outline - to be referred to only until such
time as more authoritative works on the subject become available.
Nevertheless, it is essential for all Muslims, but especially for the
Muslim women, to be familiar with the story of the life of Khadija and
her work for Islam. She blended her personality with the personality of
Islam so thoroughly that she became its heart and core.

Khadija literally lived and died for Islam.

If Muslim women are in search of happiness in this world, and salvation
in the Hereafter, they must live in imitation of the sainted life of
Khadija. She is the "guardian" of the secret of winning the pleasure of
Allah; and she is the "custodian" of the key that will unlock for them,
the gates of success in the two worlds. She would be glad to share the
"secret" with them, if they want to know what it is; and she would be
glad to put the "key" in their hands, if they would seek it from her.

May Allah bless Khadija and her family.


