Foreword
========

By Hasnain Walji

  

*“From cradle to one’s grave,*

*Life seems but an illusion.*

*The phase of youth so brave,*

*‘Tis an even greater illusion.”*

Abu FaiyyazAbu Faiyyaz  
    
 This book is the fruit of one of the many discourses of the
distinguished thinker and scholar, Ayatullah Shahid Mutahhari (q.d.s.). 
Yet again, he conveys the dire need to re-think how we address
challenges posed in the modern era dominated by Western culture and its
attendant values.   
 This is a continuation of his life-long quest to bridge the gap that
seems to separate the traditional language of religion and the language
of modernity. The consequence of such a gap has given rise to
misconceptions which have become ‘concepts’. One such “concept” is
called ‘the generation gap’.

Having gained currency, this misconception which has now become an
accepted concept, and has taken the form of a self-fulfilling prophecy,
has actually created a ‘gap’ between generations.   
 It has given a license and respectability to the younger generation to
be ‘different’.  To use modern parlance it has become ‘cool’ to dress,
behave and act differently.  This is the roadmap that leads to MTV and
the land of hip-hop.

The title, *Guiding the Youth of the New Generation*, becomes all the
more relevant in this day and age of outsourcing, e-mails, web portals
and “blogging” - Western concepts and values are being adopted around
the world with enthusiasm. 

Aping the latest fads and fashions have now been extended to call
centers in the developing world where young men and women  now speak
with a Texan drawl and the next minute switch to a New England accent
attending to a caller from Boston.  Muslim youth can hardly be immune
from this.   
 Readers, especially parents, looking for a quick fix or a laundry list
of answers to the challenges will be disappointed. Although this book
will raise more questions than it answers, however Ayatullah Mutahhari
lays the responsibility squarely on the immediately preceding
generation, and states:

“Each generation is responsible for the guidance of the proceeding
generation - especially those people who are officially recognized as
the leaders of the society – they have a much greater responsibility...”

At the same time exhorts us not to address challenges of today with the
solutions of yesterday.  In this regard, he states:

“…the issue of leadership and guidance of this generation differs in its
methods and techniques throughout the various time periods and differs
according to the groups or people whom we are working with.  Thus, we
must completely remove the thought from our heads that this new
generation must be guided by following the methods used by the previous
generations.”

It is in this context that the book needs to be understood as providing
direction in addressing challenges in a manner relevant to the time we
live in.   It is in this context that the book needs to be understood as
providing direction in addressing challenges in a manner relevant to the
time we live in.   It is in this context that the book needs to be
understood as providing direction in addressing challenges in a manner
relevant to the time we live in.  

The late scholar also reminds us of the saying of Imam Jaʿfar ibn
Muhammad as-Sadiq (a.s.) that: “The person who is fully aware of the
time in which he is living in will never be overcome with bewilderment
(of the things around him).”

Therefore being cognizant of the era we live in, we need to focus on the
integration of intellectual, social, and emotional aspects that affect
our youths and especially students in Colleges and Universities.  

The need of this current era is to recognize that our youth continue to
struggle with the increasing fragmentation of the learning process as
much as the dichotomy of disciplines and contradictions inherent in
concepts such as pluralism.  They live in an era that subjects them to
many and varied ideologies and which demand of them a rational
explanation in matters of belief.   This awareness can help us to
nurture a generation of Muslims who in turn will be able to nurture the
next generation. 

In closing, we quote the words of the late poet of Pakistan, ʿAllamah
Iqbal who has written:

*Ya Rabb! dil-e-Muslim ko wo zinda tammana dey,*  
    *    Jo qalb ko germa dey, jo rooh ko tarpa dey.*  
* *  
*       * *O Lord, endow the Muslims heart with motivation anew,*  
*             Such that it can warm the heart and stir the soul anew.*  
* *  
*Phir wadi-e-faran kay her zarrey ko chamka dey,*  
    *   * *Phir shok-e-tamasha dey, phir zoq-e-taqaza dey.*  
*  *  
*       * *Let every drop of the Islamic nation shine once more,*  
*             Bless it with determination and zeal once more.*  
* *  
*Mehroom-e-tamasha ko phir deeda-e-beena dey,*  
    *   * *Dekha hai jo kuch main nay, auron ko bhi dikhla dey.*  
* *  
*        Those who have been blinded, give them fresh insights too,*  
*             What I have perceived, show the same vision to them
too.*  
    
 Hasnain Walji  
 Plano, Texas  
 Jumadi ath-Thani 1425 /August 2004


