Become a Scholar For The Time in Which You Are Living In
========================================================

There is a speech from Imam Jaʿfar ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (a.s.) which is
a very lofty speech.  This hadith has been narrated in al-Kafi[^1] in
which the following sentence is mentioned in a (long) hadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْعٌالِمُ بِزَمٌانِهِ لاٌ تَهْجُمُ عَلَيْهِ  اللَّوٌابِسُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The person who is fully aware of the time in which he is living, will
never be overcome with bewilderment (of the things around him).”*

This means that the person who knows, recognizes and understands the
time in which he is living will never fall prey to confusion or
perplexity about the things occurring around him. 

The word “confused” used in this hadith is commonly used in Farsi in the
meaning of a strong or forceful attack that is launched against another
person.  However in the ʿArabic language it is in the meaning of a
person who is carrying something and all of a sudden, out of his own
inability or unawareness, becomes negligent of his surroundings. 

In this hadith the Imam (a.s.) has told us that, “If a person is fully
aware of his own surroundings, then he will never fall prey or victim to
the confusion and bewilderment of those things around him, such that one
time he looks and forgets even his own hands and feet and he is not able
to make use of his own strength and energy nor is he able to gather
together his thoughts to solve a problem.”  This is truly a great
saying.

There are many such important phrases in this same hadith, although I
have not memorized all of them, however another line states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ يُفْلِحُ مَنْ لاٌ يَعْقِلُ وَ لاٌ يَعْقِلُ مَنْ لاٌ يَعْلَمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“That person who does not use his intellect will not be successful, and
that person who does not have knowledge will not be able to use his
intellect.”*

The meaning of intellect (عقل) is the power or ability to deduce and
rationalize something and to establish a relationship between two
arguments – meaning to bring about the prerequisites for an issue and
then come to a conclusion.  The intellect takes its source of
inspiration from knowledge and thus, intellect is the lamp whose oil
which it runs upon is knowledge.  The hadith then goes on to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ سَوْفَ يَنْجُبُ مَنْ يَفْهَمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

This means that whoever understands (something), then his outcome will
be that he will possess a virtuous, honourable character since the
outcome of a treasure or priceless good is through the work which it
puts forth.  By this it means that we should not be afraid of knowledge
and we must not think of knowledge as being something that is dangerous.

However in reality, we are the complete opposite meaning and
manifestation of this hadith that states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْعٌالِمُ بِزَمٌانِهِ لاٌ تَهْجُمُ عَلَيْهِ  اللَّوٌابِسُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

From the beginning to the end, from the top to the bottom, from the door
(of the Masjid) to the Mihrab, all of us are unaware of the times in
which we are living.  We are simply sitting down, unaware of our
surroundings, dozing off.  One time we are accosted that, for example,
this land must be divided up and that the land must be cleaned and
tilled (to make use of it). 

Unknowingly, it is as if this issue (in relation to the cleaning and
tilling of the land) launches an offensive upon us since we are
completely unaware of the time in which we are living.  We do not have
the foresight or speculation of what would happen in the future and have
not planned anything to determine what our responsibilities will be or
what we should be doing.

We in reality, do not know what is going on in this world and what is
being done beyond the curtains. We have suddenly faced the issue of
womens’ social rights.  Here, we don’t have enough time to think over it
and analyze all of its aspects in order to determine its importance. Are
those who are defending the social rights of women really serious?  Do
they really want to attract more fans?  Or is there another benefit that
they intend to gain from arousing such questions?  Along with these,
there will come other doubtful and unknown matters that we do not know.

Some sixty to one hundred years ago among the other Islamic countries,
the issue of guiding and leading the youth had been brought up, but they
have been busier in pondering and discussing this issue than we were.

[^1]: Al-Kafi, Volume 1, Pages 26 and 27


