What Must be Done?
==================

That which is even more important than charting a program for the
leadership of this generation is that we must strengthen the belief in
our own minds that the issue of leadership and guidance of this
generation is different in its methods and techniques throughout the
various time periods, and differs according to the groups or people whom
we are working with.  Thus, we must completely remove the thought from
our heads that this new generation must be guided by following the
methods used by the previous generations.

First of all, we must fully understand this young generation and
comprehend what sorts of peculiarities and distinctions they possess. 
In relation to this generation, there are two modes of thought that are
common, and usually, there are two ways that they can be dealt with.

From the point of view of some people, these youth are an insensitive
and rude group of people who have been deluded and enraptured by their
own lower desires.  They are worshippers of the self and possess
thousands of (other) deficiencies.  These people (who think this of the
younger generation) are constantly making faces at them and are always
speaking bad of this new generation.

However, the youth see themselves as the complete opposite of this
picture.  The youth do not see themselves as having any deficiencies. 
They imagine themselves to be the effigy of intelligence, the effigy of
sagacity, the effigy of higher qualities.  The older generation thinks
that this group have fallen into disbelief and that they are plunged in
to sin, while the new generation think that the older generation are
simple minded and ignorant.

The older generation tells the newer ones that they have lowered
themselves to the worship of their own selves and have become
disbelievers, while the new generation tells the older one that they do
not know what they are talking about and that they do not understand
them!  Generally speaking of course, it is possible that one generation
may consider the previous generation as being righteous people but it is
also possible that they may consider them as being misguided.


