An Example of Two Generations
=============================

There is a verse in Suratul Ahqaf that was recited before I began my
discussion.  In my opinion, this verse actually portrays the scene of
two generations – that of a righteous generation and the other of a
generation that has gone astray.  We cannot say that without a doubt
every proceeding generation would be more corrupt than the previous
generation and that the world is going closer towards corruption day
after day.  At the same time, we also cannot say that the future
generations will be more perfect than the previous generations and will
never fall into error.  
 The verses that we wanted to look at are as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) وَوَصَّيْنَا  الإِنسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ إِحْسَانًا حَمَلَتْهُ أُمُّهُ
كُرْهًا وَوَضَعَتْهُ كُرْهًا وَحَمْلُهُ وَفِصَالُهُ ثَلاَثُونَ شَهْرًا
حَتَّى إِذَا بَلَغَ أَشُدَّهُ وَبَلَغَ أَرْبَعِينَ سَنَةً قَالَ رَبِّ
أَوْزِعْنِي أَنْ أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ  الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ
وَعَلَى وَ الِدَيَّ وَأَنْ أَعْمَلَ صَالِحًا تَرْضَاهُ وَأَصْلِحْ لِي
فِي ذُرِّيَّتِي إِنِّي تُبْتُ إِلَيْكَ وَإِنِّي مِنَ  الْمُسْلِمِينَ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And We have enjoined on mankind kindness to his parents.  In pain did
his mother bear him and in pain she gave him bith.  The carrying of the
(child) to his weaning is (a period of) thirty months.  At length when
the child reaches the age of full strength and attains forty years he
says: ‘O my Lord! grant me that I may be grateful for Your favours which
You have bestowed upon me and upon both my parents and that I may work
righteousness such as You may approve; and be gracious to me in my
progeny.  Truly I have turned to You and truly I am of the
Muslims.”*[^1]

This verse of the Qurʾan presents us with one of the ways of thinking
and understanding of a righteous generation.  It has been said that this
verse was revealed in relation to Sayyid ash-Shuhada Imam Husain ibn
ʿAli (a.s.) - of course, he is simply the most perfect testimony of this
verse, however the verse is a general all-encompassing verse.

In this verse, there are five characteristics which have been mentioned
for a righteous generation.   
 The first characteristic is that of a soul which is thankful and
realizes the importance and worth of the blessing and gift of creation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) رَبِّ أَوْزِعْنِي أَنْ أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ  الَّتِي (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“…’O my Lord! grant me that I may be grateful for Your favours which
You have bestowed upon me…”*

Such a person looks at all of the blessings and bounties that Allah
(s.w.t.) has given to both of them (the mother and father) and the
previous generations and then says, “O’ Allah!  Give me the strength to
be able to discern the truth and realize its true worth.  Give me the
strength to be able to make the best use of the blessings that You have
showered upon us such that would earn Your pleasure.”  To be thankful
for any blessing means that we make use of that blessing as it should be
used.

After this, we pray that Allah (s.w.t.) should give us the ability to
perform actions that He is pleased with.  We pray that we too should be
given the chance to act in a way that is beneficial to ourselves, to
others and perform those things which would earn the pleasure of Allah
(s.w.t.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 ) وَأَنْ أَعْمَلَ صَالِحًا تَرْضَاهُ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“…and that I may work righteousness such as You may approve…”*

The third prayer is that we turn our attention to the future generation
and ask Allah (s.w.t.) for their goodness and for them to be righteous:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) وَأَصْلِحْ لِي فِي ذُرِّيَّتِي  (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“…and be gracious to through my progeny…”*

The fourth request made is that we are permitted to turn back towards
Allah (s.w.t.) for the mistakes, slips and shortcomings which we
performed in the past:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) إِنِّي تُبْتُ إِلَيْكَ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“…Truly I have turned to You…”*

The fifth and final prayer in this verse is that we ask to be granted
the state of submission to the Truth and those things which Allah
(s.w.t.) has specified for us in relation to the natural world and the
Islamic legislations.  It is through transgressing the limits set by
Allah (s.w.t.) that leads to our destruction and annihilation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) وَإِنِّي مِنَ  الْمُسْلِمِينَ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“…and truly I am of the Muslims.”*[^2]*19*

In relation to this generation mentioned above, it is then mentioned in
the Qurʾan:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) أُوْلَئِكَ  الَّذِينَ نَتَقَبَّلُ عَنْهُمْ أَحْسَنَ مَا عَمِلُوا
وَنَتَجاوَزُ عَن سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ فِي أَصْحَابِ  الْجَنَّةِ وَعْدَ
 الصِّدْقِ  الَّذِي كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“These are they from whom We accept the best of what they have done and
pass over their evil deeds, among the dwellers of the garden; the
promise of truth which they were promised.”* [^3]20

In this part of the verse, the tense changes to the plural form and thus
it is clear that it is not in reference to one individual.  In this
verse, it is stated that, “Such are they from whom We shall accept the
best of their deeds and pass by their ill deeds: (they shall be) among
the Companions of the Garden: a promise of truth which was made to them
(in this life).”

However the following verse is in relation to the corrupt, misled
generation, and it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) وَ الَّذِي قَالَ لِوَالِدَيْهِ أُفٍّ لَّكُمَا أَتَعِدَانِنِي أَنْ
أُخْرَجَ وَقَدْ خَلَتْ  الْقُرُونُ مِنْ قَبْلِي وَهُمَا يَسْتَغِيثَانِ
 اللَّهَ وَيْلَكَ آمِنْ إِنَّ وَعْدَ  اللَّهِ حَقٌّ فَيَقُولُ مَا
هَذَا إِلاَّ أَسَاطِيرُ  الأََوَّلِينَ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“But (there is one) who says to his parents ‘Woe on you!  Do you hold
out the promise to me that I shall be raised up even though generations
have passed before me (without rising again)?’  And the two of them (the
mother and father) seek Allah’s aid (and rebuke the son saying): ‘Woe to
you!  Have faith for the promise of Allah is true.’  But he says ‘This
is nothing but tales of the ancients!”*[^4]*’*

A conceited, perplexed and mentally undeveloped generation would learn a
few things, and then would not believe anything else that they hear;
thus they would cease being servants of Allah (s.w.t.).  They would say
to their father and mother, *“Woe upon you!”*  They would make fun of
their parents and would resort to laughing at their thoughts and
beliefs.  Such a generation would say to their them!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) أَتَعِدَانِنِي أَنْ أُخْرَجَ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do you hold out the promise to me that I shall be raised up?”*

Such a generation exclaims: “Do you expect me to believe that there is
another world after this one or that there is another life after this
one whereas we see that previous generations came, lived, died and that
is it!?” 

The father and mother are religious and are not prepared to hear
anything that goes against their religion and faith, however at the same
time, they see that the dearest of people to them is speaking to them in
such a way that it makes them upset and forces them to say to their
child:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) وَيْلَكَ آمِنْ إِنَّ وَعْدَ  اللَّهِ حَقٌّ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Woe to you!  Have faith for the promise of Allah is true!”*

One of the most painful things for a religious father and mother to see
is their dear child drifting towards disbelief of the religion, or to
see him or her deny the beliefs and go towards Kufr (complete
disbelief).  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) وَهُمَا يَسْتَغِيثَانِ اللَّهَ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“…and the two of them (the mother and father) seek Allah’s aid…”*

It is at this time that the cry for help can be heard in the heavens
when both the father and mother call upon Allah (s.w.t.).  However, the
child replies to their pleas by saying that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) مَا هَذَا إِلاَّ أَسَاطِيرُ الأََوَّلِينَ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“This is nothing but the tales of the ancients!”*

This verse gives us a picture of two completely different generations. 
One verse shows us a righteous generation, while the other verse gives
us the image of a corrupt generation.   
 With this said, let us see which group our young generation falls
under.

[^1]: Surah al-Ahqaf (46), Verse 15

[^2]: Suratul Ahqaf (46), Verse 15

[^3]: Suratul Ahqaf (46), Verse 16

[^4]: Ibid., Verse 17


