The Youth of Today
==================

Our young generation of today has both good qualities and some
deficiencies in them.  This generation has a series of understandings
and emotions that the previous generations did not possess and
therefore, we must always give them the benefit of the doubt. 

At the same time, they also have some corrupt thoughts and negative
ethical traits which must be removed from their character.  It is not
possible to remove these traits from them without keeping in mind and
respecting the good qualities that the youth possess – meaning their
understandings, emotions and their other noble traits and qualities –
thus, we must show respect to them in these regards. 

There is no dead end in life.  In the previous generations, the thoughts
and minds of the people were not as open as the generation of today. 
These emotions and good qualities were not present in the people of the
past, and thus we must show respect to the youth for their noble
qualities – and it is  
 Islam itself which has shown respect to these traits. 

If we do not wish to pay attention to these issues, then it is
impossible to think that we will be able to take charge and remove the
intellectual perversions and the negative ethical traits from the future
generations. 

The method that we have presently taken in the face of this generation
is that of making faces at them, criticizing them, and slandering them. 
We are continuously crying out to them that the movie cinemas are like
this, the theatres are such, the guest houses that exist between
Shamiran and Tehran (two cities in Iran) are such and such; the dance
halls are like this, the swimming pools are such and thus we
continuously cry out (about the corruption in all of these places) and
we must know that this is not the correct method to follow.  We must
return back to the original reason for the corruption found in these
places (and why this new generation should not go to these places).


