The Difficulties of This Generation Must be Understood
======================================================

Our main focus and concentration is that we must first identify where
the pains of this generation lie.  We must identify the intellectual
pains, the academic pains – those pains that would point us to them
being aware (of their responsibilities) – meaning those things which
trouble the youth of today which did not trouble the youth of the past. 

In these regards, the poet Mawlawi, has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسرت وزارى كه در بيمارى است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقت بيمارى هم از بيدارى است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر كه او بيدارتر پردردتر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر که او هشيارتر رخ زردتر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Remorse and humility occur at the time of illness: the time of illness
is wholly wakefulness (of conscience).  The more wakeful any one is, the
more full of suffering he is; the more aware (of God) he is, the paler
he is in countenance.”*

In the past, the doors to the events (happening around the world) were
closed to people – when the doors are closed to the people, then life is
easy – the windows too were closed.  Thus, no one knew what was
happening outside (of their own home).  No one knew what was happening
outside of their own city.  They did not even know what was happening in
other countries.  Today, these doors and windows (to other cities and
countries) are wide open. 

Today, the people are able to see the entire world and the advancements
that the world has made.  They see the knowledge of the world; they see
the economic powers around the world; they see the political and
military powers of the world; they can see the Democracies of the world;
they see the equality that is taking shape around the world; they see
the various movements, uprisings and revolutions taking place in the
world. 

The youth are seeing these things, thus, their emotions run high, and
they have a right to see these things and to think for themselves and
then say:

*“Why have we been left behind (in the face of all of these
advancements)?”* 

In the words of a poet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سخن درست بگويم نمی توانم ديد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كه می خورند حريفان و من نظاره كنم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I must speak the truth that I cannot stand to see,*  
*My opponents living well while I simply watch on.”*

In this way, the world is moving forward towards political, economic and
social freedom and is moving towards greatness, splendor, honour and
freedom however we are still asleep or are witnessing this movement from
far and are yawning away.

The previous generations did not understand all of these things and
could not discern them, however the new generation has a right to say:
*“Why is it that Japan, which is a country of idol worshippers, and Iran
which is an Islamic country within the same year and same time period of
existence, realize the need and have developed a new civilization and
industry.  However we see that Japan was able to reach to a level where
they are very easily able to compete with the Western nations, whereas
we see the condition that Iran is in?!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما و ليلى همسفر بوديم اندر راه عشق
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
او به مطلبها رسيد و ما هنوز آواره ايم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Layla* *and I were traveling together on the path of love, She reached
to that what she was searching for, while I still have yet to get
there.”*

Does this new generation not have the right to ask such questions?

The previous generations did not have the heavy weight of foreign
interference bearing down upon their shoulders that this current
generation is experiencing. 

Is this a sin?  Of course not!  This is not a sin!  Rather, experiencing
this is actually a heavenly message from Allah (s.w.t.).  If this
feeling and experience was not there, then this would have been a sign
that we are the target of the punishment and chastisement (of Allah
(s.w.t.)).   
 So then, now that this feeling is present, this means that Allah
(s.w.t.) wants to grant us salvation from this chastisement.

In the past, the level of intelligence of the people was low and very
few people entertained doubts, confusion and questions (about the
religion), however this mode of thinking has now changed and people are
asking more and more questions.  It is natural that when intelligence
increases, then questions would also be raised in the minds of the
people that were not thought of previously, and these doubts and
confusions must be removed from the minds of the people and the
questions that they pose and the needs of their intelligence must be
answered.

It is not possible that you can say to such a person that he should
forget his questions and just return to how the previous generations
were – rather, this is a very good opportunity to acquaint the people
with the truth and teachings of Islam.  It is not possible to explain
the truth to an ignorant, illiterate person and thus, in regards to the
guidance and leadership of the previous generation whose level of
thought was low, it was necessary for us to express the religion and
convey it to them in a particular way through a particular form of
writing.  However today, that old form of propagation and that old form
of writing has absolutely no worth or value. 

We must, and this is absolutely necessary, reform ourselves and have a
deep restructuring in this part of our actions.  We must be well
acquainted with the logic, thinking and language of the day and must
work for the guidance and leadership of the people in this manner.

The level of intelligence of the past generation was so low that if in a
gathering, a person was to speak things that went against other things
that he said (in the same gathering), then no one would have noticed or
complained about this. 

However today, if a young adult who is in the 10th or 12th grade were to
go and sit at the feet of the mimbar of a lecturer, he would be able to
pick up five or six, maybe even more problems with the lecture.  We must
pay attention to their thoughts and intelligence and thus, we can no
longer tell them to be quiet and stop wasting time.

As you know, it was not this way in the past.  In the past, a person
could recite a thousand lines of poetry in one sitting or other words of
praise that were completely opposite of one another and not a single
person would have understood that what the person was saying was going
against his own words!  For example, a person would first say that no
action can take place without a cause:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبـى  اللٌّهُ أَنْ يَجْرِى  الأُمُورَ إِلاٌّ بَأَسْبٌابِهٌا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Allah is much greater than that He would perform actions except for a
cause.”*

The person would state this fact and everyone would agree with him and
if right after saying this, he were to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
             إِذٌا جـٌاءَ  الْقَدَرُ عَمِيَ  الْبَصَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When fate comes the eyes are blinded.”*

Once again, everybody supported this claim and confirmed its reality!

There is a story that when the King of Nishabur[^1] had come to Tehran,
a great number of people gathered around him at the base of the mimbar
due to the beautiful voice that he had.  A prominent leader of the
community said to him, “Seeing as how such a great number of people have
gathered at the feet of the mimbar when you speak, why don’t articulate
a few rational words to them and stop wasting their time?” 

The King replied, “These people do not have the ability to understand
rational speech.  Rational words can only be spoken to people who have
intelligence and these people do not posses any intelligence!”  The
leader replied that the King was wrong in his synopsis and it was not as
he said.  The King retorted that it was exactly how he said and that he
would prove it to the leader. 

One day when the leader was in the audience, the King started to speak
on the mimbar about the tragedies that befell the Ahlul Bait E in the
city of Kufah, Iraq.  He recited some poetry in a beautiful, sorrowful
voice which made the people break into tears. 

He then said, “Be calm, be calm, be calm.”  After everyone calmed and
quieted down he said, “I would like to describe to you the scene of the
children of Abi ʿAbdillah (a.s.) while in the city of Kufah.  When the
Ahlul Bait (a.s.) entered into the city of Kufah, the weather was so
hot.  The sun was beating down upon them so much that it felt like fire
was being placed above their heads.  The young children of the family
were all thirsty and because of the intense heat, they were very hot. 
They were then put onto saddle-less camels and since the ground was full
of ice the camels kept slipping on the ice and thus, the young children
fell off of the camel onto the ground and started crying:  “واعطشاه” (O’
we are thirsty!)”

[^1]: A city just outside of present day Mashhad, Iran. (tr.)


