Signs of Intellectual Development
=================================

After a child passes through the stage of being breast-fed and the power
of his brain and the powers of discernment have developed, he then
starts to ask questions about the things around him and we must be ready
to answer his questions according to his level of understanding.  We
must not say to him, “Do not be nosy” or “What is it to you?” or things
such as this.  The child asking questions is a sign that his brain is
developing and that he is thinking. 

These questions also show that his spiritual powers have developed and
have taken a firm hold within him.  These questions are a natural sign;
they are a sign of creation.  The creation announces to others that it
constantly needs something new within itself and thus, those people who
are around the child must give him what he asks for.

The same thing can be said for society.  If within society, a new
feeling or understanding is brought forth, then this too is a sign of
development and progress of the society.  This is also a sign that the
elements within the society have a new need which much be met.  These
types of things must be shown as things which are different from the low
desires and the need of worshipping the self, and thus we should never
assume that these questions are some how a form of following the lower
desires.  Thus, when these things come about, we must immediately keep
in mind the following verse of the Qurʾan:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) إِنْ تُطِعْ أَكْثَرَ مَنْ فِي الأَرْضِ يُضِلُّوكَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ
 اللٌّهِ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If you were to follow a majority of the people on the Earth then they
would definitely misguide you from the path of Allah.”*[^1]*23*

In addition, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) وَ لَوِ اتَّبَعَ الْحَقَّ أَهْــوٌائَهُمْ لَفَسَدَتِ  السَّمٌوٌاتِ
وَ الأَرْضِ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And if you were to follow their lower desires instead of the* *Haqq
(Truth), then surely the Heavens and the Earth would have become
corrupt.”*[^2]*24*

[^1]: Suratul An\`am (6), Verse 116

[^2]: Suratul Mo’minun (23), Verse 71


