The Abandonment of the Qurʾan
=============================

Today, we have a complaint that we must address to this new generation
which is: Why are they not acquainted with the Qurʾan?  Why are they not
being taught the Qurʾan in their schools?  Even if we go to the
Universities, we see that the (Muslim) university students cannot even
recite the Qurʾan!  Of course it is unfortunate that this has occurred
however we must ask ourselves, “What steps have we taken to help them in
this path?” 

Do we assume that with the lessons of Fiqh, Shariʿah and Qurʾan which
are being taught in the Islamic schools (Madaris) that this is enough
for the new generation to become completely acquainted with the Qurʾan?

What is more amazing is that the previous generations were also
distanced from and had abandoned the Qurʾan – and then we wish to
complain to the new generation why they have not developed a
relationship with the Qurʾan!?  Without doubt, the Qurʾan has truly been
alienated from ourselves and then we still expect the new generation to
hold onto the Qurʾan!? 

At this point, we will prove to the readers how we have alienated
ourselves from this Sacred Book.  
 If a person’s knowledge is that of the science of the Qurʾan - meaning
that he does a lot of contemplation upon the contents of the Qurʾan and
if he knows the complete interpretation of the Qurʾan, how much respect
would such a person have amongst us?  None.  However, if a person was to
know “Kifayah”[^1] of Akhund Mullah Kadhim Khurasani, then he would be
respected and would be considered as one with integrity. 

Thus, the Qurʾan is truly unknown and has become distanced from us and
this is the same complaint that the Qurʾan itself will proclaim!  
 We are all included in the protests and objections of the Messenger of
Allah (S) when he complains to Allah (s.w.t.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) يٌا رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِي  اتَّخَذُوا هٌذَا  الْقُرٌآنَ مَهْجُوراً (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O’ my Lord!  Surely MY nation took this Qur*ʾ*an as something
trivial.”*[^2]

Approximately one month ago[^3], one of our own great scholars had gone
to the holy cities (in ʿIraq) and narrates that he visited Ayatullah
Khuʾi (q.d.s.).  He said to the Ayatullah, “Why have you stopped the
lessons in Tafsir which you were previously giving?”[^4]    The
Ayatullah replied to him that there were many obstacles and difficulties
in offering classes on Tafsir of the Qurʾan.  This scholar then told
Ayatullah Khuʿi (q.d.s.), “ʿAllamah Taba’taba’i (q.d.s.) has continued
his classes on Tafsir of the Qurʾan in Qum and thus, most of his time
is  spent in this area of study and research.”  Ayatullah Khuʿi replied,
“Ayatullah Taba’taba’i has sacrificed himself – he has withdrawn himself
from the society” - and he is right.

It is amazing that in the most sensitive issues of the religion, if we
see a person who sacrifices his entire life to study the Qurʾan, then he
will fall into thousands of difficulties and problems from the point of
view of his food, overall life, his character (within the society), his
respect and he will be removed from and deprived of many things. 
However, if he was to spend his entire life in the study of books such
as “Kifayah”, then he would be worthy of receiving everything! 

Thus, in summary, we can find thousands of people who know “Kifayah”
very well.  They also know the replies to the points brought up in
“Kifayah” and they even know the replies to the replies that have been
given - and they even know the replies to the replies of the replies of
“Kifayah” however we cannot find even two people who know the Qurʾan
properly!  If you ask any scholar about a verse of the Qurʾan, they will
say that they must go back and refer to the Tafsir of the Qurʾan. 

What is even more amazing than this is that the older generation has
acted in this regards to the Qurʾan, however we had higher hopes that
the new generation of the youth would be able to read the Qurʾan,
understand it and act upon it!

If the previous generations had not strayed away from the Qurʾan, then
without doubt, this new generation too would not have been led astray
from the path of the Qurʾan.  Thus, it is ourselves who have acted in
this way to earn the wrath and curse of the Prophet (S) and the Qurʾan.

In relation to the Qurʾan, the Noble Messenger (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ شٌافِعٌ مُشَفَّعٌ وَ مٌاحِلُ مُصَدَّقٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

By this we mean that in the presence of Allah (s.w.t.), the Qurʾan is an
intercessor and its intercession will be accepted and in relation to
those people who ignore the Qurʾan, it will complain (to Allah (s.w.t.))
and its complaints will be accepted as well.[^5]29

It is both the older generation and even the newer generation who have
done an injustice to the Qurʾan and continue to do so.  It is the
previous generation who had initiated this act of ignoring the Qurʾan,
and it is the newer generation who are continuing in their footsteps.  
 This in conclusion, in the issue of the leadership of the youth, more
than anything else, there are two things which we must do:

1) We must first recognize that which is troubling this generation. 
Once we have done this, then we can sit and think of the cure and remedy
for their problems, since without knowing what is troubling them, it is
not possible to go forth and cure the illness.

2) The second thing is that the older generation must first correct
themselves.  The older generation must ask forgiveness for the greatest
sin which they have committed and that is that they have left and
ignored the Qurʾan.  We must all return back to this Qurʾan and place
the Qurʾan in front of us and then march forward under the shadow of the
guidance of the Qurʾan so that we will be able to reach to happiness and
perfection. !

**Selection of Ahadith**

The Youth
---------

> 1) قال رسول اللّه صلّى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: ألشباب شعبة من الجنون.

1. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “The period of the youth is from
the stages of obsession.”[^6]  
  

> 2) قال الإمام عليّ عليه السّلام: جهل الشاب معذور وعلمه محقور.

2. Imam ʿAli ibn Abi Talib  (a.s.) has said: “The ignorance of the young
person is excusable and his knowledge is limited.”[^7]  
  

> 3) قال الإمام عليّ عليه السّلام: شيئان لا يعرف فضلهما إلاّ من فقدهما:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألشّباب والعافية.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. Imam ʿAli ibn Abi Talib  (a.s.) has said: “There are two things which
people do not recognize the greatness of until they lose them: their
youth and good health.”[^8]  
  

> 4) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: خير شبابكم من تشبّه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بكهولكم وشرّ كهولكم من تشّبه بشبابكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “The best of your youth are
those who resemble your old people[^9] and the worst of your old people
are those who resemble your young people.”[^10]  
  

> 5) قال الإمام الصادق عليه السّلام: وصيّة ورقة بن نوفل لخديجة بنت خوليد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذا دخل عليها يقول لـها: إعلمي أن الشّاب الحسن الخلق مفتاح للخير مغلاق
للشرّ، وأن الشّاب الشحيح الخلق مغلاق للخير مفتاح للشرّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. Imam Jaʿfar ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said: “Any time Waraqah
ibn Nawfil would go to see Khadijah binte Khuwaylid, he would advise her
as such, ‘You should know that surely the young person who has good
behaviour is the key to all goodness and is kept away from all evil,
while the young person who has bad behaviour is kept away from all
goodness and is the key to all evil.”[^11]  
  

> 6) قال الإمام عليّ عليه السّلام: إعلموا رحمكم اللّه أنّكم في زمان
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القائل فيه الحق قليل....فتاهم عارم، وشائبهم آثم، وعالـمهم منافق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. Imam ʿAli ibn Abi Talib  (a.s.) has said: “You should know that, may
Allah have mercy upon you, surely you are living in a time in which
those who profess to be on the Truth are very few in number … their
youth are obstinate, their young people are sinners, and their scholars
are hypocrites.”[^12]  
   

Training Of The Youth
---------------------

 

> 7) قال الإمام عليّ عليه السّلام: إنّما قلب الحدث كالأرض الخالية، ما
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القي فيها من شيء إلاّ قبلته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

7. Imam ʿAli ibn Abi Talib  (a.s.) has said: “Surely the heart of the
youth is like the uncultivated ground – it will accept whatever you
throw upon it [and that is what will grow from it].”[^13]37  
  

> 8) قال الإمام الصّادق عليه السّلام: - للأحول -: أتيت البصرة؟ قال: نعم.
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: كيف رأيت مسارعة النّاس في هذا الأمر ودخولـهم فيه؟ فقال: واللّه
إنـهم لقليل، وقد فعلوا وإن ذالك لقليل. فقال (عليه السّلام): عليك
بالأحداث؛ فإنـهم أسرع إلى كلّ خير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

8. Imam Jaʿfar ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (a.s.) said to a companion named
Al-Ahwal: “’Have you been to Basrah?’  The man replied, ‘Yes.’  The Imam
(a.s.) then asked him, ‘How did you find the enthusiasm of the people in
regards to this issue [of the Wilayah and Imamate of the Ahlul Bait] and
their acceptance of it?’  The man replied, ‘I swear by Allah surely
those people [who follow and accept this] are few in number.  They work
upon this [propagating this belief to others, even though they are small
in number.’  The Imam replied to him, ‘I advise you to work on the youth
[in educating them on these issues] since surely they are quicker to
accept all good things.’”[^14]  
    
  

Seeking Knowledge While A Youth
-------------------------------

 

>  9) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلَم: من تعلّم في شبابه كان
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بـمنـزلة الرسم في الحجر، ومن تعلّم وهو كبير كان بـمنـزلة الكتاب على
وجه الـماء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ا. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “The person who seeks knowledge
while in his youth is similar to the act of inscribing something upon a
rock; while the person who seeks knowledge while he is old is similar to
the act of writing something upon the water.”[^15]  
  

> 10) قال الإمام عليّ عليه السّلام: العلم من الصغر كالنقش في الحجر.

10. Imam ʿAli ibn Abi Talib  (a.s.) has said: “Gaining knowledge in
one’s youth is like imprinting something on a rock [it will always
remain].”[^16]  
  

> 11) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: من لـم يطلب العلم صغيرا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فطلبه كبيرا فمات، مات شهيدا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

11. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “If a person who does not seek
knowledge while he is youth, but rather goes to seek it when he becomes
old and dies in this state, he dies as a martyr [Shahid].”[^17]  
  

> 12) قال النبي أيّوب عليه السّلام: إن اللّه يزرع الحكمة في قلب الصغير
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والكبير، فإذا جعل اللّه العبد حكيما في الصبى لـم يضع منـزلته عند
الحكماء حداثة سنّه وهم يرون عليه من اللّه نور كرامته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

12. The Prophet Ayyub (a.s.) has said: “Surely Allah implants wisdom
[Al-Hikmah] in the heart of the young person and the old person.  So
then if Allah makes a servant a wise person in his youth then he would
not lower his status in the eyes of the intellectuals simply because he
is of a young age since they will see the nur (divine light) of Allah
radiating from this person.”[^18]  
    
    
    
  

The Young Person And Refraining From Seeking Knowledge
------------------------------------------------------

 

> 13) قال الإمام الكاظم عليه السّلام: لو وجدت شابّاً من شبّان الشيعة لا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يتفقه لضربته ضربة بالسيف.
  </p>
</blockquote>

13. Imam Musa ibn Jaʿfar al-Kadhim (a.s.) has said: “If I was to find a
youth from amongst the youth of the Shiʾa not gaining a deep knowledge
and understanding, I would surely strike him with a sword.”[^19]  
  

> 14) قال الإمام الباقر عليه السّلام: لو أُتيت بشاب من شباب الشيعة لا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يتفقه (في الدين) لأدبته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

14. Imam Muhammad ibn ʿAli al-Baqir (a.s.) has said: “If I were to find
a youth from amongst the youth of the Shiʾa that was not engaged in
gaining a deep knowledge and understanding [of the religion] I would
seriously reprimand him.”[^20]  
  

> 15) قال الإمام الصّادق عليه السّلام: لستُ أُحب أن أرى الشاب منكم إلاّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غاديا في حالين: إمّا عالـما أو متعلما. فإن لـم يفعل فرّط، فإنّ فرّط
ضيّع, فإنّ ضيّع أثـم، وإنْ أثـم سكن النار والّذي بعث محمّدا بالحق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

15. Imam Jaʿfar ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said: “I do not like to
see the youth from amongst yourselves except that he/she is passing the
life in one of two states: either as a scholar or as a student.  So then
if he is not in one of these two states then he is one who has wasted
(something) and surely the one who wastes is one who has squandered
something and surely the act of squandering is a sin and the person who
commits a sin shall reside in the Hell Fire – I swear by the one who
appointed Muhammad with The Truth.”[^21]45  
  

The Greatness Of A Young Person Who Worships [Allah]
----------------------------------------------------

 

> 16) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: إنّ اللّه تعالى يحب
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشاب التائب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

16. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “Surely Allah, the High, loves
the young person who is repents [for his sins].”[^22]  
  

> 17) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: ما من شيء أحب إلى اللّه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تعالى من شاب تائب، وما من شيء أبغض إلى اللّه تعالى من شيخ مقيم على
معاصيه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

17. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “There is nothing more beloved
to Allah, the High, than a young person who repents (for his sins); and
there is nothing more detested in the sight of Allah, the High, than an
old person who perpetuates in disobeying Him.”[^23]  
  

> 18) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: إنّ اللّه تعالى يباهي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بالشابّ العابد الـملائكة، يقول: أنظروا إلى عبدي! ترك شهوته من أجلي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

18. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “Surely Allah, The High, boasts
to the Angels in regards to the young person who is a servant (of His)
and He says, ‘Look towards my servant!  He has refrained from following
his lowly desires for My sake alone.’”[^24]  
  

> 19) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: فضل الشاب العابد الذي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تعبّد في صباه على الشيخ الذي تعبّد بعد ما كبرت سنّه كفضل الـمرسلين على
سائر الناس.
  </p>
</blockquote>

19. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “The greatness of the
worshipper of Allah who is a youth and who worships Allah while in the
stage of his youth over the old person who worships [Allah] after he has
become of old age is like the greatness of the deputed ones [the
Prophets and Messengers] over all other creations.”[^25]  
  

> 20) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: سبعة في ظلّ عرش اللّه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عزّ وجلّ يوم لا ظلّ إلاّ ظلّه: إمام عادل، وشاب نشأ في عبادة اللّه عزّ
وجلّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

20. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “There are seven individuals
who shall be protected under the shade of the Throne [Power] of Allah,
the Noble and Grand on the day when there shall be no shade except for
His shade: the just leader … and the youth who spent his time in the
worship of Allah, the Noble and Grand.”[^26]  
    
    
  

The Greatness Of The Person Who Spends His Youth In The Obedience To Allah
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

> 21) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: ما من شاب يدع للّه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدنيا ولـهوها وأهرم شبابه في طاعة الله إلاّ أعطاه اللّه أجر إثنين
وسبعين صدّيقاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

21. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “There is not a single young
person who turns away from the transient world and its pleasures only
for the [pleasure] of Allah and spends his youth in the obedience of
Allah until he reaches to old age, except that Allah would grant him the
reward of seventy-two truthful [and righteous] people.”[^27]  
  

> 22) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: إنّ أحب الخلائق إلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّه عزّ وجلّ شاب حدث السن في صورة حسنة جعل شبابه وجماله للّه وفي
طاعته، ذلك الذي يباهي به الرحمن ملائكته, يقول: هذا عبدي حقّا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

22. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “Surely the most beloved of the
creations to Allah, the Noble and Grand, is the youth who is young in
age and who is a very handsome/beautiful individual however he places
his youth and his beauty in Allah and in His obedience alone.  This is
the thing for which the Most Merciful [Al-Rahman] boasts to His Angels
about and says, ‘This is truly my servant.’”[^28]  
    
  

> 23) قال رسول اللّه صلى اللّه عليه وآله و سلّم: إنّ اللّه يحب الشاب
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذي يفني شبابه في طاعة اللّه تعالى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

23. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: “Surely Allah loves that young
person who spends his youth in the obedience of Allah, the Most
High.”[^29]  
  

> 24) قال النبي إبراهيم عليه السلام: لمـا أصبح فرأى في لحيته شيبا - شعرة
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بيضاء - : ألحمد للّه ربّ العالـمين الذي بلغني هذا المبلغ ولـم أعص
اللّه طرفة عين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

24. It has been narrated about Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) that one day he
woke up and saw a white hair in his beard and said: “All praise belongs
to Allah, the Lord of the entire universe who has made me reach to this
stage in my life in which I have not disobeyed Allah for as much as the
twinkling of the eye.”[^30]  
  

The Definition Of A Youth
-------------------------

 

> 25) قال الإمام الصّادق عليه السّلام: لسليمان بن جعفر الـهذلي - : يا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سليمان من الفتى؟ قال: قلت: جعلت فداك الفتى عندنا الشابّ, قال (عليه
السّلام) لي: أما علمت أن أصحاب الكهف كانوا كلهم كهولا فسماهم اللّه
فتية بإيـمانـهم؟! يا سليمان من آمن باللّه وأتّقى فهو الفتى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

25. Imam Jaʿfar ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (a.s.) said the following to
Sulayman ibn Jaʿfar Al-Hadhali: “O’ Sulayman, what is meant by a young
person [Al-Fata]?”  He said, “May I be sacrificed for your sake.  In our
opinion, a young person [Al-Fata] is a youth [Al-Shabb].”  The Imam said
to me, “However you should know that surely the Companions of the Cave
[Ashabul Kahf] were all old people, however Allah refers to them as
youth who have true faith?!  O’ Sulayman, the one who believes in Allah
and has consciousness of Him is a young person.”[^31]  
  

> 26) قال الإمام الصّادق عليه السّلام: - لرجل – ما الفتى عندكم؟ فقال له:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشابّ, فقال: لا. الفتى: المؤمن، إنّ أصحاب الكهف كانوا شيوخا فسماهم
اللّه عزّ وجلّ فتية بإيـمانـهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

26. Imam Jaʿfar ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (a.s.) said to a man: “What is
meant by a young person [Al-Fata] in your estimation?”  The man replied,
“A youth.”  The Imam (a.s.) replied, “No, the young person [Al-Fata] is
the true believer.  Surely the Companions of the Cave [Ashabul Kahf]
were all old people, however Allah, Glory and Greatness be to Him,
called them youth who believed in Him.”[^32]  
    
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الإمام الحسن ابن علي المجتبـى عليه السلام:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنكم صغار قوم و يوشك أن تكونوا كبار قوم آخرين فتعلموا العلم.  فمن لم
يستطع منكم أن يحفظه فليكتبه و ليضعه في بيته
  </p>
</blockquote>

> ) بــحار الأنوار – ج 2 – ص 152 – ح 37 (

   
 Imam Hasan ibn ʿAli al-Mujtaba (peace be upon him) has said:  
 “Surely today you are the youth of the nation, and tomorrow, you will
be the leaders of the community, thus, it is incumbent upon you to seek
knowledge.  So then if you are not able to memorize all that you learn,
then you must write it down and preserve it (for safe keeping) so that
you can refer to it later on (when you need it).”  
 Biharul Anwar, Volume 2, Page 152, Hadith 37  
  

[^1]: This is one of the major books in the field of Usulul Fiqh that
students of the Theological Seminary need to study as they progress in
their studies to reach the highest level of learning – Ba\`thul Kharij.
(Tr.)

[^2]: Surah al-Furqan (25), Verse 30

[^3]: From when this lecture was originally given in 1963. (Tr.)

[^4]: It has been narrated that Ayatullah Khu\`i was offering classes in
Tafsir of the Qurʾan some 8 or  9 years ago in Najaf, some of which were
also printed in book form.

[^5]: al-Kafi, Volume 2, Page 599

[^6]: Al-Ikhtisas, Page 343

[^7]: Ghururul Hikm, Hadith 4768

[^8]: Ibid., Hadith 5764

[^9]: You should know that people are of two categories of which the one
category is the young person who has distanced himself from following
the desires of his lower passions and is distanced from the ignorance
which is accompanied by the period of the youth.  He has a desire to
gravitate towards goodness and to distance himself from bad traits and
it is in regards to this type of youth that the Messenger of Allah
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) has said:   يعجب ربك من
شاب ليست له صبوة “Your Lord is amazed to see a young person who has
distanced himself from following the desires of his lower passions and
is distanced from the ignorance which is accompanied by the period of
the youth.”

[^10]: Kanzul \`Ummal, Hadith 43058

[^11]: Amali of al-Tusi, Page 302 and 598

[^12]: Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 233

[^13]: Tuhaful \`Uqul, Page 70

[^14]: Qurbul Isnad, Page 128 and 450

[^15]: Biharul Anwar, Volume 1, Page 222, Hadith 6 & Page 224, Hadith 13

[^16]: Ibid.,

[^17]: Kanzul \`Ummal, Hadith 28843

[^18]: Tanbiyatul Khawatir, Page 37

[^19]: Fiqhul Ridha, Page 337

[^20]: Al-Mahasin, Volume 1, Pages 357 and 760

[^21]: Amali of Al-Tusi, Pages 303 and 604

[^22]: Kanzul \`Ummal, Hadith 10185

[^23]: Ibid., Hadith 10233

[^24]: Ibid., Hadith 43057

[^25]: Kanzul \`Ummal, Hadith 43059

[^26]: Al-Khisal, Page 343, Hadith 8

[^27]: Makarimul Akhlaq, Volume 2, Page 373

[^28]: Kanzul \`Ummal, Hadith 43103

[^29]: Kanzul \`Ummal, Hadith 43060

[^30]: Illulush Shara\`iyah, Volume 2, Page 104, Hadith 2

[^31]: Tafsir al-\`Ayashi, Volume 2, Page 323, Hadith 11

[^32]: Al-Kafi, Volume 8, Page 395 and 595


