About the Author
================

   
 Ayatullah Murtadha Mutahhari (q.d.s.), one of the principle architects
of the new Islamic consciousness in Iran, was born on February 2nd,
1920, in Fariman, then a village and now a township about sixty
kilometres from Mashhad, the great centre of Shiʿa pilgrimage and
learning in Eastern Iran. 

His father was Muhammad Husain Mutahhari, a renown scholar who studied
in Najaf and spent several years in Egypt and the Hijaz before returning
to Fariman.  The elder Mutahhari was of a different caste of mind then
his son, who in any event came to outshine him.  The father was devoted
to the works of the celebrated traditionalist, Mullah Muhammad Baqir
Majlisi (q.d.s.); whereas the son’s great hero among the Shiʿa scholars
of the past was the theosophist Mulla Sadra (q.d.s.).

Nonetheless, Ayatullah Mutahhari always retained great respect and
affection for his father, who was also his first teacher, and he
dedicated to him one of his most popular books, Dastan-e-Rastan (“The
Epic of the Righteous”), first published in 1960, and which was later
chosen as book of the year by the Iranian National Commission for UNESCO
in 1965.

At the exceptionally early age of twelve, Mutahhari began his formal
religious studies at the teaching institution in Mashhad, which was then
in a state of decline, partly because of internal reasons and partly
because of the repressive measures directed by Riḍa Khan, the first
Pahlavi autocrat, against all Islamic institutions.  But in Mashhad,
Mutahhari discovered his great love for philos­ophy, theology, and
mysticism, a love that remained with him throughout his life and came to
shape his entire outlook on religion:

*“I can remember that when I began my studies in Mashhad and was still
engaged in learning elementary Arabic, the philosophers, mys­tics, and
theologians impressed me far more than other scholars and scientists,
such as inventors and explorers.  Naturally I was not yet acquainted
with their ideas, but I regarded them as heroes on the stage of
thought.”*[^1]

Accordingly, the figure in Mashhad who aroused the greatest devotion in
Mutahhari was Mirza Mahdi Shahidi Razavi (q.d.s.), a teacher of
philosophy.  But Razavi died in 1936, before Mutahhari was old enough to
participate in his classes, and partly because of this reason he left
Mashhad the following year to join the growing number of students
congregating in the teaching institution in Qum.

Thanks to the skillful stewardship of Shaykh ʿAbdul Karim Haʾiri
(q.d.s.), Qum was on its way to becoming the spiritual and intellectual
capital of Islamic Iran, and Mutahhari was able to benefit there from
the instruction of a wide range of scholars.  He studied Fiqh and Usul -
the core subjects of the traditional curriculum - with Ayatul­lah Hujjat
Kuhkamari (q.d.s.), Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Damad (q.d.s.), Ayatullah
Sayyid Muhammad Riḍa Gulpayagani (q.d.s.), and Hajj Sayyid Sadr al-Din
as-Sadr (q.d.s.). 

But more important than all these was Ayatullah Burujerdi (q.d.s.), the
successor of Haʾiri as director of the teaching establishment in Qum. 
Mutahhari attended his lectures from his arrival in Qum in 1944 until
his departure for Tehran in 1952, and he nourished a deep respect for
him.

Fervent devotion and close affinity characterized Mutahhari’s
relationship with his prime mentor in Qum, Ayatullah Ruhullah Khumayni
(q.d.s.).  When Mutahhari arrived in Qum, Ayatullah Khumayni was a young
lecturer, but he was already marked out from his contem­poraries by the
profoundness and comprehensiveness of his Islamic vision and his ability
to convey it to others. 

These qualities were manifested in the celebrated lectures on ethics
that he began giving in Qum in the early 1930s.  The lectures attracted
a wide audience from outside as well as inside the religious teaching
institution and had a profound impact on all those who attended them. 
Mutahhari made his first acquaintance with Ayatullah Khumayni at these
lectures:

*“When I migrated to Qum, I found the object of my desire in a
personality who possessed all the attributes of Mirza* *Mahdi*
*(Sha­hidi* *Razavi) in addition to others that were peculiarly his
own.  I realized that the thirst of my spirit would be quenched at the
pure spring of that personality.  Although I had still not completed the
preliminary stages of my studies and was not yet qualified to embark on
the study of the rational sciences (ma*ʿ*qulat), the lectures on ethics
given by that beloved personality every Thursday and Friday were not
restricted to ethics in the dry, aca­demic sense but dealt with gnosis
and spiritual wayfaring,* *­and thus, they intoxicated me.  I can say
without exaggeration that those lectures aroused in me such ecstasy that
their effect remained with me until the following Monday or Tuesday.  An
important part of my intel­lectual and spiritual personality took shape
under the influence of those lectures and the other classes I took over
a period of twelve years with that spiritual master (ustad-i ilahi)
[meaning* *Ayatullah Khumayni].*[^2]*”*

In about 1946, Ayatullah Khumayni began lecturing to a small group of
students that included both Mutahhari and his roommate at the Fayziya
Madressah, Ayatullah Muntadhari, on two key philosophical texts, the
Asfar al-Arbaʿa of Mulla Sadra (q.d.s.) and the Sharh-e-Manzuma of Mulla
Hadi Sabzwari (q.d.s.).  Mutahhari’s participation in this group, which
continued to meet until about 1951, enabled him to establish more
intimate links with his teacher. 

Also in 1946, at the urging of Mutahhari and Muntadhari, the Ayatullah
Khumayni taught his first formal course on Fiqh and Usul, taking the
chapter on rational proofs from the second volume of Akhund Khurasani‘s
Kifayatal Usul as his teaching text.  Mutahhari followed his course
assiduously, while still pursuing his studies of Fiqh with Ayatullah
Burujerdi.

In the first two post-war decades, Ayatullah Khumayni trained numer­ous
students in Qum who became leaders of the Islamic Revolution and the
Islamic Republic, such that through them (as well as directly), the
imprint of his personality was visible on all the key developments of
the past decade.  But none among his students bore to Ayatullah Khumayni
the same relationship of affinity as Mutahhari, an affinity to which the
Ayatullah Khumayni himself has borne witness to. 

The pupil and master shared a profound attachment to all aspects of
traditional scholarship, without in any way being its captive; a
comprehensive vision of Islam as a total system of life and belief, with
particular importance ascribed to its philosophical and mystical
aspects; an absolute loyalty to the reli­gious institution, tempered by
an awareness of the necessity of reform; a desire for comprehensive
social and political change, accompanied by a great sense of strategy
and timing; and an ability to reach out beyond the circle of the
traditionally religious, and gain the attention and loyalty of the
secularly educated.

Among the other teachers whose influence Mutahhari was exposed in Qum,
was the great exegete of the Qurʾan and philosopher, Ayatullah Sayyid
Muhammad Husain Taba’tabaʾi (q.d.s.).  Mutahhari participated in both
Tabatabaʾi’s classes on the Shifaʿ of Abu ʿAli Sina from 1950 to 1953,
and the Thursday evening meetings that took place under his direction. 
The subject of these meetings was materialist philosophy, a remarkable
choice for a group of traditional scholars.  Mutahhari himself had first
conceived a critical interest in materialist philosophy, especially
Marxism, soon after embarking on the formal study of the rational
sciences. 

Ac­cording to his own recollections, in about 1946 he began to study the
Persian translations of Marxist literature published by the Tudeh party,
the major Marxist organization in Iran and at that time an important
force in the political scene.  In addition, he read the writings of Taqi
Arani, the main theoretician of the Tudeh party, as well as Marxist
publications in ʿArabic emanating from Egypt. 

At first he had some difficulty understanding these texts because he was
not acquainted with modern philosophical terminology, but with continued
exertion (which included the drawing up of a synopsis of Georges
Pulitzer’s Elementary Principles of Philosophy), he came to master the
whole subject of materialist philosophy.  This mastery made him an
important contributor to Tabaʾtabai’s circle and later, after his move
to Tehran, an effective combatant in the ideological war against Marxism
and Marxist-influenced interpretations of Islam.

Numerous refutations of Marxism have been essayed in the Islamic world,
both in Iran and elsewhere, but almost all of them fail to go beyond the
obvious incompatibilities of Marxism with reli­gious belief and the
political failures and inconsistencies of Marxist political parties. 
Mutahhari, by contrast, went to the philosophical roots of the matter
and demonstrated with rigorous logic the contra­dictory and arbitrarily
hypothetic nature of key principles of Marx­ism.  His polemical writings
are characterized more by intellectual than rhetorical or emotional
force.

However, for Mutahhari, philosophy was far more than a polemi­cal tool
or intellectual discipline; it was a particular style of religios­ity, a
way of understanding and formulating Islam.  Mutahhari belongs, in fact,
to the tradition of Shiʿa philosophical concern that goes back at least
as far as Nasir ad-Din Tusi, one of Mutahhari’s personal heroes.  To say
that Mutahhari’s view of Islam was philo­sophical is not to imply that
he lacked spirituality or was determined to subordinate revealed dogma
to philosophical interpretation and to impose philosophical terminology
on all domains of religious con­cern; rather it means that he viewed the
attainment of knowledge and understanding as the prime goal and benefit
of religion and for that reason assigned to philosophy a certain primacy
among the disciplines cultivated in the religious institution. 

In this he was at variance with those numerous scholars for whom Fiqh
was the be-all and end-all of the curriculum, with modernists for whom
philos­ophy represented a Hellenistic intrusion into the world of Islam,
and with all those whom revolutionary ardor had made impatient with
careful philosophical thought.[^3]

The particular school of philosophy to which Mutahhari adhered was that
of Mulla Sadra, the “sublime philosophy” (hikmat-i mutaʿaliya) that
seeks to combine the methods of spiritual insight with those of
philosophical deduction.  Mutahhari was a man of tranquil and serene
disposition, both in his general comportment and in his writings.  Even
when engaged in polemics, he was invaria­bly courteous and usually
refrained from emotive and ironical word­ing.  But such was his devotion
to Mulla Sadra that he would passionately defend him even against slight
or incidental criticism, and he chose for his first grandchild - as well
as for the publishing house in Qum that put out his books - the name
Sadra.

Insofar as Sadra’s school of philosophy attempts to merge the methods of
inward illumination and intellectual reflection, it is not surprising
that it has been subject to varying interpretations on the part of those
more inclined to one method than the other. To judge from his writings,
Mutahhari belonged to those for whom the intel­lectual dimension of
Sadra’s school was predominant; there is little of the mystical or
markedly spiritual tone found in other exponents of Sadra’s thought,
perhaps because Mutahhari viewed his own inward experiences as
irrelevant to the task of instruction in which he was engaged or even as
an intimate secret he should conceal. 

More likely, however, this predilection for the strictly philosophical
dimension of the “sublime philosophy” was an expression of Mutahhari’s
own temperament and genius.  In this respect, he dif­fered profoundly
from his great mentor, Ayatullah Khumayni, many of whose political
pronouncements continue to be suffused with the language and concerns of
mysticism and spirituality.

In 1952, Mutahhari left Qum for Tehran, where he married the daughter of
Ayatullah Ruhani (q.d.s.) and began teaching philosophy at the Madressah
Marwi, one of the principal institutions of religious learning in the
capital.  This was not the beginning of his teaching career, for already
in Qum he had begun to teach certain subjects - logic, philosophy,
theology, and Fiqh - while still a student himself.  But Mutahhari seems
to have become progressively impatient with the somewhat restricted
atmosphere of Qum, with the factional­ism prevailing among some of the
students and their teachers, and with their remoteness from the concerns
of society.  His own future prospects in Qum were also uncertain.

In Tehran, Mutahhari found a broader and more satisfying field of
religious, educational, and ultimately political activity.  In 1954, he
was invited to teach philosophy at the Faculty of Theology and Islamic
Sciences of Tehran University, where he taught for twenty-­two years. 
First the regularization of his appointment and then his promotion to
professor was delayed by the jealousy of mediocre colleagues and by
political considerations (for Mutahhari’s closeness to Ayatullah
Khumayni was well known). 

But the presence of a figure such as Mutahhari in the secular university
was significant and effective.  Many men of Madressah background had
come to teach in the univer­sities, and they were often of great
erudition.  However, almost without exception they had discarded an
Islamic worldview, together with their turbans and cloaks.  Mutahhari,
by contrast, came to the university as an articulate and convinced
exponent of Islamic science and wisdom, almost as an envoy of the
religious institution to the secularly educated.  Numerous people
responded to him, as the peda­gogical powers he had first displayed in
Qum now fully unfolded.

In addition to building his reputation as a popular and effective
university lecturer, Mutahhari participated in the activities of the
numerous professional Islamic associations (anjumanha) that had come
into being under the supervision of Mahdi Bazargan and Ayatullah
Taleqani (q.d.s.), lecturing to their doctors, engi­neers, teachers and
helping to coordinate their work.  A number of Mutahhari’s books in fact
consist of the revised transcripts of series of lectures delivered to
the Islamic associations.

Mutahhari’s wishes for a wider diffusion of religious knowledge in
society and a more effective engagement of religious scholars in social
affairs led him in 1960 to assume the leadership of a group of
Tehran ʾUlama known as the Anjuman-e-Mahana-yi Dini (“The Monthly
Religious Society”).  The members of this group, which included the late
Ayatullah Beheshti (q.d.s.), a fellow-student of Mutahhari in
Qum, organized monthly public lectures designed simultaneously to
demonstrate the relevance of Islam to contempo­rary concerns, and to
stimulate reformist thinking among the ʾUlama.  The lectures were
printed under the title of Guftar-e-Mah (“Dis­course of the Month”) and
proved very popular, but the government banned them in March 1963 when
Ayatullah Khumayni began his public denunciation of the Pahlavi regime.

A far more important venture in 1965 of the same kind was the foundation
of the Husayniya-e-Irshad, an institution in north Tehran, designed to
gain the allegiance of the secularly educated young to Islam.  Mutahhari
was among the members of the directing board; he also lectured at the
Husayniya-e-Irshad and edited and contrib­uted to several of its
publications.  The institution was able to draw huge crowds to its
functions, but this success - which without doubt exceeded the hopes of
the founders, was overshadowed by a number of internal problems.  One
such problem was the political context of the institution’s activities,
which gave rise to differing opinions on the opportuneness of going
beyond reformist lecturing to political confrontation. 

The spoken word plays in general a more effective and immediate role in
promoting revolutionary change than the written word, and it would be
possible to compose an anthology of key sermons, addresses, and lectures
that have carried the Islamic Revolution of Iran forward.  But the
clarification of the ideological content of the revolution and its
demarcation from opposing or competing schools of thought have
necessarily depended on the written word, on the composition of works
that expound Islamic doctrine in systematic form, with particular
attention to contemporary problems and con­cerns.  In this area,
Mutahhari’s contribution was unique in its volume and scope.  Mutahhari
wrote assiduously and continuously, from his student days in Qum up to
1979, the year of his martyr­dom. 

Much of his output was marked by the same philosophical tone and
emphasis already noted, and he probably regarded as his most important
work Usul-e-Falsafa wa Ravish-e-Ri’alism (“The Principles of Philosophy
and the Method of Realism”), the record of Tabatabai’s discourses to the
Thursday evening circle in Qum, supple­mented with Mutahhari’s
comments.  But he did not choose the topics of his books in accordance
with personal interest or predilection, but with his perception of need;
wherever a book was lacking on some vital topic of contemporary Islamic
interest, Mutahhari sought to supply it. 

Single handily, he set about constructing the main ele­ments of a
contemporary Islamic library.  Books such as ʿAdl-e-Ilahi (“Divine
Justice”), Nizam-e-Huquq-e-Zan dar Islam (“The System of Women’s Rights
in Islam”), Mas’ala-yi Hijab (“The Question of the Veil”), Ashna’i ba
Ulum-e-Islami (“An Introduction to the Islamic Sciences”), and Muqaddima
bar Jahanbini-yi Islami (“An Introduc­tion to the Worldview of Islam”)
were all intended to fill a need, to contribute to an accurate and
systematic understanding of Islam and the problems in the Islamic
society.

These books may well come to be regarded as Mutahhari’s most lasting and
important contribution to the rebirth of Islamic Iran, but his activity
also had a political dimension that admittedly subordi­nate, should not
be overlooked.  While a student and fledgling teacher in Qum, he had
sought to instill political consciousness in his contemporaries and was
particularly close to those among them who were members of the
Fida’iyan-i Islam, the Militant Organization founded in 1945 by Nawwab
Safawi.  The Qum headquarters of the Fida’iyan was the Madrasa-yi
Fayziya, where Mutahhari himself resided, and he sought in vain to
prevent them from being removed from the Madressah by Ayatullah
Burujerdi, who was resolutely set against all political confrontation
with the Shah’s regime. 

During the struggle for the nationalization of the Iranian Oil Industry,
Mutahhari sympa­thized with the efforts of Ayatullah Kashani
(q.d.s.) and Dr.  Muhammad Musaddiq, although he criticized the latter
for his adherence to secular nationalism.  After his move to
Tehran, Mutahhari collabo­rated with the Freedom Movement of Bazargan
and Taleqani, but never became one of the leading figures in the group.

His first serious confrontation with the Shah’s regime came dur­ing the
uprising of Khurdad 15th, 1342/June 6th, 1963, when he showed himself to
be politically, as well as intellectually, a follower of Ayatullah
Khumayni by distributing his declarations and urging sup­port for him in
the sermons he gave.[^4] He was accordingly arrested and held for
forty-three days.  After his release, he participated actively in the
various organizations that came into being to maintain the momentum that
had been created by the uprising, most impor­tantly the Association of
Militant Religious Scholars (Jamiʿa yi Ruhaniyat-e-Mubariz).  In
November 1964, Ayatullah Khumayni entered on his fourteen years of
exile, spent first in Turkey and then in Najaf, and throughout this
period Mutahhari remained in touch with Ayatullah Khumayni, both
directly - by visits to Najaf - and indirectly. 

When the Islamic Revolution approached its triumphant climax in the
winter of 1978 and Ayatullah Khumayni left Najaf for Paris, Mutahhari
was among those who travelled to Paris to meet and consult with him. 
His closeness to Ayatullah Khumayni was confirmed by his appointment to
the Council of the Islamic Revolution, the existence of which Ayatullah
Khumayni announced on January 12th, 1979.

Mutahhari’s services to the Islamic Revolution were brutally curtailed
by his assassination on May 1st, 1979.  The murder was carried out by a
group known as Furqan, which claimed to be the protagonists of a
“progressive Islam,” one freed from the allegedly distorting influence
of the religious scholars.  Although Mutahhari appears to have been
chairman of the Council of the Islamic Revolu­tion at the time of his
assassination, it was as a thinker and a writer that he was martyred.

In 1972, Mutahhari published a book entitled ʿIllal-i Girayish ba
Maddigari (“Reasons for the Turn to Materialism”), an impor­tant work
analyzing the historical background of materialism in Europe and Iran. 
During the revolution, he wrote an introduction to the eighth edition of
this book, attacking distortions of the thought of Hafiz and Hallaj that
had become fashionable in some segments of Iranian society and refuting
certain materialistic interpretations of the Qurʾan. 

The source of the interpretations was the Furqan group, which sought to
deny fundamental Qurʾanic concepts such as the divine transcendence and
the reality of the hereafter.  As always in such cases, Mutahhari’s tone
was persuasive and solicitous, not angry or condemnatory, and he even
invited a response from Furqan and other interested parties to comment
on what he had written.  Their only response was the gun.

The threat to assassinate all who opposed them was already con­tained in
the publications of Furqan, and after the publication of the new edition
of ʿIllal-e-Girayish ba Maddigari, Mutahhari apparently had some
premonition of his martyrdom.  According to the testi­mony of his son,
Mujtaba, a kind of detachment from worldly concerns became visible in
him; he augmented his nightly prayers and readings of the Qurʾan, and he
once dreamed that he was in the presence of the Prophet (S), together
with Ayatullah Khumayni (q.d.s.).

On Tuesday, May 1, 1979, Mutahhari went to the house of Dr.  Yadullah
Sahabi, in the company of other members of the Council of the Islamic
Revolution.  At about 10:30 at night, he and another participant in the
meeting, Engineer Katiraʿi, left Sahabi’s house.  Walking by himself to
an adjacent alley where the car that was to take him home was parked,
Mutahhari suddenly heard an unknown voice call out to him.  He looked
around to see where the voice was coming from, and as he did, a bullet
struck him in the head, entering beneath the right earlobe and exiting
above the left eyebrow. 

He died almost instantly, and although he was rushed to a nearby
hospi­tal, there was nothing that could be done but mourn for him.  The
body was left in the hospital the following day, and then on Thursday,
amid wide­spread mourning, it was taken for funeral prayers first to
Tehran University and then to Qum for burial, next to the grave of
Shaykh ʿAbdul Karim Haʾiri (q.d.s.).

Ayatullah Khumayni (q.d.s.) wept openly when Mutahhari was buried in
Qum, and he described him as his “dear son,” and as “the fruit of my
life,” and as “a part of my flesh.” But in his eulogy Ayatullah Khumayni
also pointed out that with the murder of Mutahhari neither his
personality was diminished, nor was the course of the revolution
interrupted:

*“Let the evil-wishers know that with the departure of Mutahhari* *- his
Islamic personality, his philosophy and learning, have not left us. 
Assassinations cannot destroy the Islamic personality of the great men
of Islam…Islam grows through sacrifice and martyrdom of its cherished
ones.  From the time of its revelation up to the present time, Islam has
always been accompanied by martyrdom and heroism”*[^5]*.*

The personage and legacy of Ayatullah Mutahhari have certainly remained
unforgotten in the Islamic Republic, to such a degree that his
posthumous presence has been almost as impressive as the attainments of
his life.  The anniversary of his martyrdom is regularly commemorated,
and his portrait is ubiquitous throughout Iran.  Many of his unpublished
writings are being printed for the first time, and the whole corpus of
his work is now being distributed and studied on a massive scale.  In
the words of Ayatullah Khamene’i, President of the Republic, the works
of Mutahhari have come to constitute “the intellectual infrastructure of
the Islamic Republic.”

Efforts are accordingly under way to promote a knowledge of Mutahhari’s
writings outside the Persian-speaking world as well, and the Ministry of
Islamic Guidance has sponsored translations of his works into languages
as diverse as Spanish and Malay.  In a sense, however, it will be the
most fitting memorial to Mutahhari if revolutionary Iran proves able to
construct a polity, society, economy and culture that are authentically
and integrally Islamic.  For Mutahhari’s life was oriented to a goal
that transcended individual motivation, and his martyrdom was the final
expression of that effacement of self.  
  

[^1]: Ilal-e-Girayish ba Maddigari, Page  9

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: The authoritative statement of this view was made by Sayyid
Qutb in his Khasa’is al-Tasawwur al-Islami wa Muqawwimatuhu, Cairo,
numer­ous editions, which was translated into Persian and had some
influence on views toward philosophy.

[^4]: Mutahhari’s name comes ninth in a list of clerical detainees
prepared by the military prosecutor’s office in June, 1963.  See
facsimile of the list in Dihnavi, Qiyam-e-Khunin-i 15 Khurdad 42 ba
Rivayat-e-Asnad, Tehran, 1360 Sh./1981, Page 77.

[^5]: Text of Ayatullah Khumayni’s eulogy in Yadnama-yi Ustad-i Shahid
Murtadha Mutahhari, pp.  3-5.


