Two Types of Responsibilities
=============================

In the speech that I had given in this same venue under the topic of
*“Amr bil Ma*ʿ*ruf wa Nahi* ʿ*Anil Munkar” (commanding to that which is
right and forbidding from that which is evil),* I alluded to a point
which I will repeat here and that is: our religious responsibilities are
of two types - some responsibilities are related to our performance of a
task which takes shape in one particular form and shape.  All of the
particular aspects of the specified task and its individual facets have
been explained by the religion of Islam and we have been told that we
must perform a particular act in its specified form adhering to the
specific conditions. 

Of course, that particular action has been ordered to be performed (by
Allah (s.w.t.)) and there is a reason for it, however we are not
responsible for the outcome or the result of the action.  These sorts of
actions are referred to as *Ta*ʿ*abudiyat* (issues that have been
legislated which we must follow as acts of worship).  It is these sorts
of actions which we can also refer to as those which are the
“*Responsibility of the Form and Shape of the Actions”*. 

For example, the Salat is an act which has a specified introductory act
related to it (Wudhu, Tayammum, Ghusl) and conditions (relating to it);
it has certain particular provisions and parts to it; there are also
specified things which must not be performed and certain things which
invalidate the prayers.  We have been commanded to perform the Salat
regardless of the circumstances, and in its particular shape and form it
is the purest form of obeying the orders of Allah (s.w.t.).  Of course
though, this act of the Salat in its’ particular form has been ordered
for a result or outcome - there is a direct corollary in the performance
of this act:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) إِنَّ  الصَّلاَةَ تَنْهَى عَنِ  الْفَحْشَاءِ وَ  الْمُنكَرِ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Surely the* *Salat keeps a person away from evil and
wickedness.”*[^1]*8*

We are simply accountable for carrying out this act and are not
responsible for the outcome that this act will produce.  If we perform
the act in the correct and complete way as it has been shown to us and
how we have been ordered to perform it, then naturally the outcome
(distancing ourselves from evil and wickedness) will follow.

The second type of responsibility which we have within the faith of
Islam is referred to as the “*Responsibility of the Outcome.” * By this
we mean that the outcome or end result of the act is also the
responsibility of the person.  Just like a person sometimes says, *‘I
want such and such of an outcome for this act of mine.’* 

However as for how that outcome will come about - through what channels
and preliminary steps, by what conditions and how these will all be
carried out – we must state that they should be carried out in the best
possible way, however there is not one single, firm and describable way
that it must be done.  Rather, the ways, methods and through what
channels this outcome can come about changes with time and place.

Let me give you an example.  Let us suppose that you have a difficulty –
for example, one of your friends is in prison.  There is a time where
you expect a specific task to be completed from a specific person in
relation to this trouble that you and your friend are in.  For example,
your friend gives another person a letter and tells him to make sure
that he gives this letter to a particular person - and that too at a
certain time.  Obviously we can say that this letter was written for a
purpose and goal, however the other party is only responsible to deliver
the letter to the person whom you specified. 

Another time, you want to reach the outcome by yourself directly and
thus, have no need for the preliminary steps.  You tell your friend that
you want him to help you get out of prison - however through what ways
and means should be used - these are not specified by you.  The person
himself must go and see what the best way is to carry out this task.

Usually, these sorts of responsibilities take form where the means to
carry out the task is not of one type – meaning that the mode varies. 
In one instance, the person must make use of a particular way and
method, and at another time, he must make use of another method – the
specialties of the time and place that he is in and in addition, the
other particulars, may differ.  In these sorts of instances, the person
must sit down, ponder, think and come up with the best possible means to
reach an outcome.

Within the religion of Islam, we have both types of responsibilities. 
The Salat (prayers) and Sawm (fasting) and all other acts of worship
make up the first form of responsibility; and things such as Jihad (the
sacred defense of Muslims and the Muslim territory) form the second type
of responsibility.  In relation to Jihad, the Muslims have an obligation
to defend the nucleus of Islam and to protect the freedom of the Muslims
– however through what means?  Do they defend the cause with a sword,
gun or something else?  These things have not been specified and in
principle, these sorts of things are not able to be specified and
generalized!  In each and every age, the Muslims are obligated to choose
the best ways and methods to carry out this task (of defence):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) وَأَعِدُّوا لَهُمْ مَّا  اسْتَطَعْـتُمْ مِّنْ قُوَّةٍ وَ مِنْ
رِّبَاطِ  الْخَيْلِ تُرْهِبُونَ بِهِ عَدُوَّ  اللٌّهِ وَعَدُوَّكُمْ
وَآخَرِينَ مِنْ دُونِهِمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَهُمُ  اللٌّهُ يَعْلَمُهُمْ
وَمَا تُنفِقُوا مِنْ شَيْءٍ فِي سَبِيلِ  اللٌّهِ يُوَفَّ إِلَيْكُمْ وَ
أَنْـتُمْ لاَ تُظْلَمُونَ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Make ready your strength against them to the utmost of your power
including steeds of war to strike terror into (the hearts of) the
enemies of Allah and your enemies and others besides whom you may not
know but whom Allah does know.  Whatever you shall spend in the cause of
Allah will be repaid back to you and you shall not be treated
unjustly”*[^2]*9*

Thus we must see – what is the best form or method of guidance in each
and every time and era?  
 The issue of guidance and leadership is related to the second form of
responsibility mentioned.  The Muslims are responsible for the guidance
of one another.  Each generation is responsible for the guidance of the
next generation - especially those people who are officially recognized
as the leaders of the society – they have a much greater duty. 

In any case, this outcome – meaning that of finding the mode and way of
guidance – must be realized.  However as for the ways and methods which
should be used to reach to this goal, these have not been specified or
earmarked for specific times and or for eternity.  
 The noble verse of the Qurʾan states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
) يَا أَيُّهَا  الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قُوا أَنفُسَكُمْ وَأَهْلِيكُمْ
نَاراً وَقُودُهَا  النَّاسُ وَ  الْحِجَارَةُ (
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O’ you who possess true faith!  Save yourselves and your families from
the fire of hell whose fuel is that of mankind and stones!”*[^3]

This verse means that we must protect ourselves and our families from
the fire of hell whose fuel is men and stones.  Thus, we see that there
is an outcome that we must reach which is to save ourselves and our
families, however the way to reach this outcome has not been
specified.  
 In Islam, there is no complete, 100% correct method of guidance and
leadership that has been specified in which all of the parts – including
the introductory steps, forms, conditions and things which must be
performed have been mentioned.  In principle these things cannot be
specified and brought forth since they differ (according to the time and
place that one is living in). 

The (general) leadership of the people is not like the Salat which is a
matter of obedience to Allah (s.w.t.) or for example the recitation of
incantations and spells in which the person would simply memorize that
which he wishes to recite to charm and control scorpions or snakes where
any time a scorpion or snake would come around the person, he would
recite the things which he has memorized to keep away or to tame the
predator – meaning that there is no specific method which can be
employed in these regards.

[^1]: Suratul \`Ankabut (29), Verse 45

[^2]: Suratul Anfal (8), Verse 60

[^3]: Suratul Tahrim (66), Verse 6


