Methods of Leadership are Relative and Temporary
================================================

At a certain time and place, it may be through one thing that people
receive guidance, however it is possible that in another time and place,
that same thing may lead to misguidance and being led astray!

If the same logic that causes an old, illiterate woman to become a true
believer is used by an intelligent, learned person, then it may actually
cause him to being led astray.  Furthermore, it is possible that a book
that is in agreement with the thoughts of a particular time and which is
in conjunction with the opinions of a specific era and at the level of
their thinking, and which would lead to the guidance of the people (of
that time), may actually be classified as a book of misguidance in
another time period! 

We have books that, in their own time period, fulfilled the requirements
and responsibilities for when they were written and hundreds and
thousands of people received guidance through such a book; however those
same books – in our time period – would not guide anybody!  These books
are deemed too simple and could lead to the misguidance and cause doubts
and confusion in the minds of the people and thus, would be classified
as books of misguidance - such a book whose buying and selling, printing
and distributing would not be free of doubt!

It is amazing!  A book that had led thousands – rather hundreds of
thousands of people to the path of true guidance in the past may now be
classified as a book of misguidance?  Yes!  With the exception of the
Heavenly Book (the Noble Qurʾan) and the true words of the Maʿsumins
(a.s.), any other book we speak about has a particular message that is
aimed at a specific and limited time period.  When that era is over, the
book is then of no use.

This issue that I have just spoken about is a very important, societal
issue and even today is still regarded as an unknown, strange and
unfamiliar issue that we must overcome, however this issue has never
been discussed nor brought up.  I do not anticipate that this issue will
be made completely clear in this gathering of ours, however it must
continuously be stated that we must accept that the ways to guidance are
specific for their own time periods. 

With this said, it is necessary that we now bring forth proofs from the
Islamic texts in relation to this topic so that may be known that what
we discuss here is the view expressed in the Islamic works.  
 I started out my discussion with a verse of the Qurʾan which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
] أُدْعُ إِلـى سَبِيلِ رَبِّكَ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَ  الْمَوْعِظَةِ
 الْحَسَنَةِ وَجَادِلْهُم بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ [
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Call others to the path of your Lord through wisdom and good
exhortation and argue with them in the best possible manner.”*[^1]

According to the unanimous opinion of the commentators of the Qurʾan,
this verse presents us with three different ways to invite people and
offers us three distinct ways of guiding the people.  Each of these
three ways of guidance must be used in their own specific instances. 

This verse tells us that we must call people to the way of our Lord. 
The word Lord (رب) is a special term meaning one who is responsible for
upbringing and nurturing.  Since this level of guidance is a level of
invitation as well as upbringing and nurturing, the word used here is
Lord (رب).  Therefore, we are told to invite people to the path of our
Lord – the path which people must be nurtured and trained upon – but
through what means? 

We must use wisdom (الحكمة).  Wisdom is in the meaning of persuasive,
firm speech which has neither marks of alteration in it, nor one in
which doubts can occur.  In the terminology of the people of logic and
the philosophers, this is speech whose preamble is 100% based on pure
certainty.  By this we mean that the people must be called to the path
of the Lord with proof, wisdom and knowledge that is 100% pure and which
is completely unadulterated.  The commentators of the Qurʾan have
mentioned that inviting people through the use of logical, intellectual
wisdom, proofs and evidence is limited to one particular group of people
who have the ability to make use of this method.

The second method is through good exhortation (والموعظة الحسنة) meaning
that we must call the people to their Lord through good words, advice
and warnings which their heart and soul will be in agreement with. 
There are some people who do not possess the ability to express their
beliefs through the use of their intelligence and academic proofs, and
if an intellectual issue is presented to them, they immediately become
confused. 

Thus, the way to guide them is through good council and warnings.  Such
people must be guided through employing stories, narratives and
wisdom-based anecdotes and anything that would bring ease and comfort to
their hearts.  The responsibility of exhortation and good council is to
work on the heart of a person, whereas the job of intellectual and
logical proofs deal with the brain and thinking ability of a person.  A
majority of the people are still at a level of basing issues which they
believe in on their heart, soul and emotions and are not at a level of
using their intellect and thoughts.

The third stage is that of arguing with the people in the best possible
way (و جادلهم بالتي هي أحسن).  Thus, if a person is put face to face
with someone else whose purpose is not to arrive at the truth and whose
goal is not to understand what the actual facts are - rather he has come
and is ready to speak, argue and bring up points of contention - then
the other one too must dispute with that person as he is quarreling
with. 

However, we must argue with such a person in the best possible manner
such that the argument does not stray from the path of the truth and
reality.  Therefore, we must not resort to unfairness or injustice in
arguments, nor can we resort to lying or other similar things.

This verse gives us many different ways through which we can guide
people and each way has been put in place for a particular instance in
time.  Thus, it is clear that the ways through which we can guide people
are not all the same, nor are they equal!

[^1]: Suratul Nahl (16), Verse 125


