Reasons for the Differences Among the Miracles of the Messengers
================================================================

There is a hadith which is somewhat well-known which backs up our claim
of differences in the methods of guidance as seen in the reasons for the
differences among the miracles of the various Messengers sent.  Although
this hadith is in relation to the various miracles of the Prophets which
were of a different nature to coincide with different time periods,
however it still backs up our claims (in relation to the methods of
guiding the youth).  This hadith is actually the response that Ibn
Sikkiyt (r.d.a.) received from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) - the tenth Divinely
appointed religious guide. 

Ibn Sikkiyt (r.d.a.) is well known among the experts of ʿArabic
grammar.  His name is mentioned quite frequently in the books of ʿArabic
syntax and it is stated that he lived around the time of Imam ʿAlie ibn
Muhammad al-Hadi (a.s.) – thus, it was around the same time as the
political leadership of Mutawwakil.  Ibn Sikkiyt (r.d.a.) was also a
follower of the Shiʾa faith and was killed at the hands of Mutawwakil. 
It has been said that the reason why he was killed was because he had a
strong love for Imam ʿAli (a.s.) and his family (a.s.).

One day Ibn Sikkiyt (r.d.a.) was in the presence of Mutawwakil when two
of the sons of Mutawwakil came into the gathering.  Mutawwakil, about
whom it has been proverbially stated that he was one who possessed a
sword that was always in search of blood turned towards Ibn Sikkiyt
(r.d.a.) and said to him, “Are my (two) sons better or are the sons of
ʿAli - meaning al-Hasan and al-Husain - better?” 

This knowledgeable man (Ibn Sikkiyt (r.d.a.) was so surprised at
Mutawwakil that he immediately replied to him, “In my opinion, Qambar
(r.d.a.), the servant of ʿAli was better than your two sons and he
(Qambar (r.d.a.)) is even better than your two sons’ father.”  At this
point, Mutawwakil gave the order for his Turkish slave to come into the
room and cut the tongue of Ibn Sikkiyt (r.d.a.) out – and it is in this
state that he died.

In any case, this man asked Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) “O’ Son of the Messenger
of Allah!  Why is it that when Prophet Musa (a.s.) was raised as a
Prophet, his signs and the ways and miracles that he employed to invite
the people and to bring guidance to them was through his staff being
transformed into a serpent, and his hand that radiated with Divine light
and other things such as this. 

However when Prophet ʿIsa (a.s.) was raised as a Prophet, we see that
his method and the miracles which he used to invite the people was
something different.  He cured people who were born blind; he healed the
lepers; he brought the dead back to life and other things such as this. 
However our Prophet (S) – when he was appointed as a Messenger, his form
of miracle were none of these – meaning his miracle was through
expression and words – the Noble Qurʾan.”

The Imam (a.s.) replied to him that, “This was due to the difference in
times when these Prophets were raised.  During the time of Prophet Musa
(a.s.), people were amazed by magic and trickery, thus, the miracles of
Musa (a.s.) resembled the things that the others were performing, but
the difference was that Prophet Musa (a.s.) brought a miracle with
substance to it, whereas the other people had magic and witchcraft. 

As for the time of Prophet ʿIsa (a.s.), his era was one in which doctors
were in abundance and they were able to cure the most serious of
sicknesses and this brought amazement and bewilderment to the masses. 
Thus, Allah (s.w.t.) gave ʿIsa (a.s.) miracles that would be in line
with what the people of his time were performing. 

As for the time of the seal of the Prophets (S), his time was that of
speech and verbal communication and the attention that people paid to
oratory powers was very high.  It is for this reason that the greatest
teaching of Islam was brought forth through the noble words clothed in
the perfect garment of eloquence and expression (the Noble Qurʾan).”

Ibn Sikkiyt (r.d.a.) thoroughly benefited from the answer given to him
by the Imam (a.s.) and now that he understood this issue, he said to the
Imam, “O’ Son of the Messenger of Allah!  What is the Hujjah of Allah
right now?”  The Imam (a.s.) replied to him, “Intelligence” and said to
him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هٌذَا وَاللٌّهِ هُوَالْجَوٌابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“This, by Allah is the answer.”*

Thus, it is clear that the reason for the difference in miracles of the
Prophets was that through each of them, they were able to guide the
people in different time periods.  If this was not the case, then it is
possible that from Adam (a.s.) till Muhammad (S) – if Prophet Adam
(a.s.) had any miracles and if he was a Prophet (since there are some
people who say that he was not a Prophet) - there would have only been
one type of miracle.  However we see that this is not the case and that
each and every Prophet brought along with him his own specific miracle
that was fit for his time and age.


