The Generation of the Youth or the Mind Set of the Youth?
=========================================================

I should state this point here that when we use the phrase the
“generation of the youth,” our aim is not to specify the level or age of
the youth.  Rather, our aim is to speak to that level or group of people
who, due to the effects of their own studies and acquaintance with the
new civilizations, have developed a specific way of thought and
intellect – whether these people happen to be old or young. 

However most of these people are from the younger generation and it is
because of this that we refer to it as the “generation of the youth,”
whereas we see that there are also a great number of “older people” who
possess this new way of thinking and there are also many “youth” whose
thought pattern and beliefs resemble the older, past generations. 

In any case, our intention is to speak in regards to that category of
people who possess this specific mode of thinking – something which is
increasing day by day.  This is a mode of thinking which both the older
and younger individuals are beginning to possess and in the future, if
God forbid, the correct ways and methods to guide and lead this
generation are not put into practice, then we will lose complete control
of the future generations.

This issue is a very important issue in our country (Iran) – and even in
other Islamic countries where it is still an important issue – however
these countries realized this issue earlier than we did and thus, they
put forth this issue with great seriousness, while we still have not
taken this matter to be very important. 

Generally speaking - in our eyes – the younger generation is simply a
generation of people who are infatuated with themselves and who merely
worship their lower desires. 

We think that when they speak to us, we can simply make faces at them,
pass a few sarcastic jokes off of the Mimbar or that we can resort to
cursing them (for their errors) and speak bad things to them.  We think
that we can talk to them and make them listen to that which we are
saying, make them laugh at what we tell them and then everything will be
alright.  We think that we can exclaim and cry out to them: “O’ you from
such-and-such a (bad) school” and we think that this will solve all of
our problems.  These are all simply lullabies that we are saying and are
only there to keep us in our sleep and prevent us from actually thinking
about a way out and a better route to take.  In an instant, we will wake
up and realize that it is now too late to go back.


