Translator’s Note 
==================

In my early childhood my grandmother used to tell us that when we had
any fear of darkness or we found ourselves in any lonely place, we
should recite:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَعُوْذُ بِاللٌّهِ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ الرَّجِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I seek refuge from Satan, the cursed one

She told us that when we recited this, the Shaitan or the evil spirits,
if they were around, would run away. She asked us to recite this
whenever we came out of our home, while going to school or any other
place. She also asked us to say these words before we said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

Before eating our food or commencing any work. Later on, during our
theology classes at the school I learnt about the basics of *Isti’adha.*

Recently I have read a compendium of transcripts of 30 lectures,
Sermons, given by the Shahīd al-Mihrab Ayatullah Dastaghaib Shirazi. The
erudite scholar has very skilfully encompassed all the aspects of
Isti’adha drawing references from the authentic traditions and the Holy
Book.

Without going into the technicalities, which are for the scholars and
the researchers to delve in, the Ayatullah has give a very apt
explanation of the concept for the layman to understand. What really
surprises me is that every individual Muslim, from the very childhood,
gets used to seeking, Isti’adha - Allah (S.w.T.)’s Protection against
the machinations of Satan. This is done as a force of habit cultivated
through the instruction of the elders at home. But the details of the
need for doing it are known, to but a few.

A reading of the transcripts of the 30 lectures convinced me that they
must be available to as wide a group of Muslims as possible.

Hence this translation! I pray to Allah (S.w.T.) that the translation
gets published, gets widely circulated, and the spiritual reward (*ajr*)
goes to the Shahīd Dastaghaib. Insha Allah (S.w.T.)!  
    
  


