The Eighth Talk
===============

Taqwa: the first aspect of Isti’adha
------------------------------------

The summary of our discussion is that *taqwa* or piety is the first, and
foremost, aspect of Isti’adha. Therefore, this foremost aspect or pillar
must be very strong and formidable so that the super-structure built on
it too is strong.

The word *taqwa* is derived from the word *waqayat* which means guarding
and protecting. In the juridical sense, abstention from acting against
*awamir wa nawahi* (commandments and prohibitions) is termed *taqwa.*

It is necessary that *taqwa* should entrench itself to such a degree
that the very thought of committing sins becomes abhorrent to us. For
example, even if all the friends join together to encourage a man of
piety to gossip or backbite against another person, he must desist from
doing it. This is termed *malikat e taqwa* wherein a tendency develops
in a person that he is able to resist the onslaught of Satan.  
  

Abstinence from Reprehensible (makrūhāt)
----------------------------------------

To reach the elevated state of piety one has necessarily to abstain from
unbecoming habits and things. Then abstention from *Haram* or prohibited
things becomes easier for us. By practicing this abstinence, piety will
get stronger.

As far as possible we should not miss the optional prayers
(*Mustahabbat).* One who is regular at offering these optional prayers,
will never think of foregoing the mandatory prayers.

Thorny jungle and the barefoot traveler
---------------------------------------

Some learned scholars have given a very interesting definition of
*taqwa* and have explained it with an interesting example too.

When you walk barefooted through a thorny jungle, how will you traverse
the way? Will you keep your eyes up and walk casually or keep every step
with due care and observation to prevent the thorns hurting your bare
feet?

*Taqwa* too means that on the path of life Satan has spread thorns and
the man of piety has to save himself from getting hurt by them and keep
moving forward all the time.  
  

The bait and intrigue of Satan
------------------------------

The exercise of this care is so necessary that Imam *Zayn* al-’Abidīn
has included the following supplication in the *Sahifa al-Kamila:*

*“O Allah!* *I beseech for your protection against the bait and intrigue
of Iblīs!”*

You must have noticed that the hunter keeps his net hidden or
camouflaged that the animal notices only the bait and not the net. In
the urge for eating the bait, the animal gets caught in the net.

The accursed Iblīs uses several baits. He has several camouflaged
ditches of sin and perfidy to entangle his prey.

Piety has the faculty of seeking through Satan’s baits
------------------------------------------------------

The purpose of *taqwa* is to keep the eyes open and not let them get
enamored of the attractive things in the environment. They can thus see
through the baits of Satan.

People should pray to Allah (S.w.T.) to give them vision to see through
the schemes of Satan and don’t blindly fall prey to his schemes.

Some necessary examples: the Bazār is Satan’s trap
--------------------------------------------------

It is narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S.w.T.) that the bazār is the
playground of Satan:

*“The worst places on the earth is the market places. This is the
playground of Satan where he hoists his standard in the mornings and
places his chair, and spreads his chess-board. He cheats in the weighing
and measuring of things. He sells away adulterated things.”*[^1]

This is the reason that the Infallible Imams have exhorted people not to
linger for long in the bazārs. They say that bazār is a place only for
negotiations and making deals. It is not proper for people with learning
to associate themselves with the bazār.

Being the first to enter a bazār and emerging from it the last of all is
an undesirable act because in this period Satan will be the companion of
the person.

It has been narrated in the traditions that Hadrat Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s.) found Abdur Rahman b. Muljim, the accursed, gallivanting in the
bazār on 18th Ramadhan. The Imam (a.s.) inquired, “What are you doing
here?” He said, “I am going round the bazār!” The Imam (a.s.) said, “The
bazār is the place for Satan.” Aimlessly loitering in the bazār
motivates a person to indulge in undesirable activities. Even today
loafing in the bazār is not considered a good activity. If you wish to
be a man of piety you have to tread carefully in the bazār, as does a
person on a road full of thorns.

Isti’adha before entering the bazār
-----------------------------------

When you enter the bazār you must seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s protection in
the following manner:

*“O Allah!* *Protect me that I don’t get involved in sin by being unfair
in my dealings, by telling lies, by insulting others. Save me from
cheating and deceit. Prevent me from doing wrong propaganda and save me
from the thoughts of greed and avarice. All these are satanic acts.”*

I don’t suggest that one should never go to the bazār and not transact
there. My only appeal is that when one goes to the bazār, he should
remember Allah (S.w.T.) and use his better sense and care.

One person quotes from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.). He says, “I asked
the Imam (a.s.) that I have business transactions with a woman and I
have to, perforce, negotiate with he face to face. Is my looking at her
face legitimate or not?” The Imam replied, “*Ittaqillah! (*Keep Allah
(S.w.T.)’s fear in your heart and exercise care!)”

Imagine, there could be the possible risk of looking repeatedly at the
face of the strange woman might give rise to sinful thoughts in the mind
of the person and augur ill luck for him!

Satan’s trap in the Bazār
-------------------------

Even while walking on the street one has to be careful. If you think
that on one street there is a trap installed by Satan, take another and
safer street, even if that is more tortuous and can take more time to
traverse. For example, if there is a cinema theatre or a place of
indecent activities on your way, or there are indecent posters of women
on display, it is better to take a diversion and used some other street.
You might say that such things on the way never tempt you to indulge in
sin. But care is always advisable.

Fellow-travellers: a dangerous trap
-----------------------------------

Sometimes the person(s) traveling with somebody might prove satanic
traps. He might be foul mouthed, backbiter or a person of poor
intellect. Such a companion should be avoided.

Two companions, particularly when they are women, whose will is
generally weak, have tendency to be ensnared by Satan. When they start
gossiping, other’s matters come up for discussion. As time passes, they
shift from innocuous talk to backbiting, insinuations, scandals, mockery
and many such prohibited things.

The trap of Iblīs is such that in the beginning people talk about each
other’s health, exchange humor and narrate interesting anecdotes. But
then Satan misguides them to fall into his trap and start discussing
prohibited things.

You must have witnessed that when two persons get together, their talk
initially had no element of fault. But in about an hour’s time there
will be an element of lies in their conversation that might push them
into the morass of Hell. Emerging out of the morass will be a Herculean
task. As a follow up to the conversation, even if they go to a mosque,
you should not think that they are God fearing persons because Satan
continues to be with them.  
  

Recognize yourself
------------------

Iblīs has so many traps that if a person is not pious and careful, he
will get entrapped in such a way that he will not rest till the person
is consigned to the Hell.

O people with wisdom! Exercise care and keep your tongue in absolute
control. What right you have to find fault with others. Every individual
is answerable for his own actions. The burden of one person will not be
put on the back of another:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…And no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another… (Sura
al-An’aam, 6:164)***

Remember! Talking against each other, backbiting and carrying of tales
are all the traps of Satan. When you are in company of others, beware of
this trap.  
  

Woman is the most formidable trap
---------------------------------

Women are the most formidable traps of Satan, with the exception of
those women who have confronted and fought with Satan all their lives.

It takes some time for Satan to snare men out of the right path. But
women are more vulnerable and aid and abet the involvement of men too.
Have you not heard that Satan was not able to tempt Adam (a.s.) with all
his stratagems? Then he turned his attention towards Hadrat Hawwa (a.s.)
and succeeded in making both of them to do the forbidden.

It is narrated that Satan said to Hadrat Yahya (a.s.),” Whenever I fail
in trapping anyone, I use women to fulfill my plans!”

Yes! With the help of women Satan progresses towards his objective and
thus involves the men in his schemes.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ صَدَّقَ عَلَيْهِمْ إِبْلِيسُ ظَنَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly the Shaitan found true his conjecture concerning
them... (Sura Saba, 34:20)***

 

The company of women is the preface to sinning
----------------------------------------------

This is the reason that there are authentic traditions of the *Ahl al
Bayt* (a.s.) that excessive company of women makes men hard of heart.

This doesn’t mean that men should totally shun the company of women. But
care must be exercised because nearness to women is one of the traps
that are used by Satan. You must have observed that a single word from a
woman can drastically change the thinking of a man! Can render the
person emotional and turn him inadvertently towards many sinful acts.

It is a matter of concern that a strange (*Na Mahram)* woman in privacy
with a man then the trap of Satan becomes strong and very dangerous.

Shaking hands with a strange woman is *Haram.* Think of the impious
animals that how deeply they are entrapped by Satan that they are
totally unaware that the bodily touch of a woman is one of the uncanny
traps of Satan.  
  

The tale of Barseesa
--------------------

One imposter, whose name was Barseesa, always used to make the pretense
of prayer and lived in seclusion. People used to say that his prayers
would help in the fulfillment of their wishes.

The daughter of the king of the time once fell seriously ill. All
treatments proved futile. In the end it was thought that the only way
for curing her of the illness was the prayer of Barseesa. But the hermit
refused to come out of his seclusion to the city or the palace of the
king. In the end they reluctantly took the sick princess to his
hermitage. They left her alone with the hermit.

If this unfortunate hermit was a true man of piety he would have
objected to the leaving of the young princess alone with him. But he
fell in the trap of Satan. He looked at the girl and was attracted by
her beauty. He had not experienced such a situation throughout his life.
He could not control his baser instinct and raped the girl.

But Satan didn’t stop at this. He put doubts in the heart of Barseesa
that when people learn of his foul act they would lynch him. To save
himself from death he thought of killing the girl and burying her. He
also thought that if inquiries are made about the girl, he would say
that he didn’t know where she had gone.

With these doubts and fears in his mind, Barseesa killed the princess
while she was asleep. Then he dug up a trench and buried her.

It is narrated that Satan came in human form to the persons who were
searching for the princess and said, “I know where the girl is!” he then
guided them to the place where the grave was. The angry team demolished
Barseesa’s hermitage and dragged him to the court of the king. People
started spitting on his face. The king ordered him to be hanged.

In the olden days the hanging of criminals was not such an easy and fast
process as it is now. It was a prolonged and torturous procedure. When
Barseesa was about to die Satan came to him and said, “Even now if you
prostrate to me, I shall save you!” To save himself from death, Barseesa
agreed to prostrate to Satan. In his last breaths Satan tempted Barseesa
to commit a major sin and earn a place for himself in the fiery Hell.

[^1]: Safinat al-Bihar, Vol 1, Page 8


