The Ninth Talk
==============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them, they become mindful (of God and get awakened)
then lo! They see (aright). (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:201)***

* *

Isti’adha is Effective Only With Piety
--------------------------------------

The summary of the previous evening’s talk is that the prime and the
first aspect of *Isti’adha* is *Taqwa* or piety. If a person is pious,
then seeking Allah (S.w.T.)’s protection from Satan by saying *audhu
billahi min al-Shaitanir rajeem* is effective. Otherwise reiterating
these words a thousand times over will not bring any results.

Today I shall tell you about another meaning derived from the verse that
I have mentioned above and also at a few places in my previous talks.  
  

A Heart Without Piety is The Abode Of Satan
-------------------------------------------

A heart that has not experienced piety, believe me, is the abode of
Satan. Satan doesn’t relinquish such a heart easily.

A heart without piety is the heart that doesn’t remember Allah (S.w.T.).
It is in fact crowded with worldly desires like greed, selfishness and
Satanic fears. Such hearts are the repositories of wishes for the
worldly glitter and show. These hearts are also the shelter for Satan
and the sources of his evil designs. Unless the heart cures itself of
these satanic instincts and withdraws from supporting and advancing
Satan’s foul schemes, it is impossible that the environment for
*Isti’adha* takes shape in it.  
  

Sumptuous Food & Hungry Dog
---------------------------

You might have experienced that a hungry dog will not leave your side if
you are having with you some tasty food. However much you try to chase
away the dog, it will return to you. Even if you pick up a stick to
chase it away, it will stubbornly stay on. If you don’t have any food
with you, and a dog chances to come near you, then it will run away if
you chase but once. The reason for this lack of interest is that the
dogs have a very strong sense of smell and they would know where there
is a bone for them!  
  

A Sick Heart is The Eating Place For Satan
------------------------------------------

Your heart is under the observation of Satan. If he feels that there is
food for him in your heart that it has craving for worldly riches and
pomp, then certainly it is the ideal place for him to entrench himself
in. If he notices that your heart is having so much avarice that even
after acquiring a lot it has craving for more and is envious of others,
then he is very pleased to dwell therein. You may say *‘audhu billahi
min ash-shaitanir rajeem* a hundred thousand times, Satan will
tenaciously stay on!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الشَّيْطَآنَ لَكُمَا عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Shaitan is your open enemy! (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:22)***

The only remedy is that you should dispel from your heart all the
thoughts of things that attract him. Then with one utterance of the
words *‘audhu billahi* Satan will run away.  
  

The Majority are Entrapped
--------------------------

It is narrated that once Satan came to the presence of Hadrat Yahya
(a.s.). Prophet Yahya (a.s.) asked him about his treatment of Adam
(a.s.)’s progeny. He replied that men are divided into three groups.

The first group consists of the revered persons who are always out of
his reach. These are the Prophets (a.s.) and the Infallible.

Then Satan said that the second group consists of the people over whom
he can have his sway. But with penitence they nullify his maneuvers.

The third group of people is of those in whose hearts he, Satan, lives.
These form the vast majority of people.

O believers! Do such acts that Satan is unable to find an entry into
your hearts! Otherwise, mere utterance of the words of *Isti’adha* will
not be of any use.  
  

The Thief on the Look Out For Breaking into the House
-----------------------------------------------------

To prevent Satan from entrenching into your heart you will have to adopt
piety. Shun all things that are not liked by Allah (S.w.T.). Shun
avarice, immoral acts, bad habits and all such evil traits that take you
towards illegitimate acts and illegitimate food. The heart will then be
pure and clean.

Once the heart is cleansed of these things, then piety will find it’s
way into it. It will now have the fear of Allah (S.w.T.) and the fear of
the Day of Reckoning. Now Satan will be rendered absolutely helpless. He
does have the extreme desire to enter such hearts and waits for the
slightest chance that the person commits a mistake and opens the way for
him.

Satan is like a thief who does reconnaissance of the fort to find a
foothold or the slightest of openings to break in. But when he notices
that the keeper of the fort is alert he escapes from the ramparts
disappointed.

Iblīs Around The Heart
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them, they become mindful (of God and get awakened)
then lo! They see (aright). (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:201)***

 **إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ** ***Verily those who guard (themselves
against evil)*** *-* This is said about those whose hearts are free of
the thoughts of sin. When the heart is pure and clean, then
automatically all other organs get into sound repair. Therefore, the
tongue, the eyes, the ears and the limbs do not get associated with any
wrong act.

**إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ** ***when an evil thought*** *-* *Taa-if* is a
person who does *tawaaf* or circumambulates. Here it is meant Satan
going round the heart in search of a hole to break in.

**مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ** ***from Satan*** *-* it is the mention of the
retainers of Satan who go round the heart in search of an opening to
barge in. But **تَذَكَّرُواْ** **(t*****hey become mindful)*** *-* The
owner of the heart, a *mu’min,* is busy in Remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.)
and says, “*Ya Allah, astaghfirullah- ‘audhu billahi min ash-shaitanir
rajeem* *- O Allah! Protect me from the harm that Satan can cause me!”*

Hence, **فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ** ***then lo! They see (aright)*** *-*
Their eyes instantaneously illuminate with the light of vision and they
get warned of the thief in their environs.

Here I wish to point at the words *Taa-ifun min ash-shaitan* that
connote that the one who takes rounds of the heart of a *mu’min* to find
an entry is from the group of Satan.

Remember! If there is piety (*Taqwa)* for Allah (S.w.T.) in the heart,
then it will be pure and clean. The bright light of piety will put the
thief to shame and he escapes from there. Pity the heart that is devoid
of piety and full of worldly desires. Such a person will fall into the
clutches of Satan and meet a sad end.  
  

Why the Suicide?
----------------

One avaricious trader sold his goods worth thirty thousand for one
hundred thousand. Later on he learned that the first buyer sold the
merchandise for three hundred thousand within three days. He was
distraught with remorse that the opportunity of making a huge profit was
missed by him. He was jealous and envious of the traders who made the
big gain. He started crying and was restless during the day and in the
nights. He was so upset that at last he consumed lime mixed with sulfur
and committed suicide. The sole reason for the tragedy is that the
person was wedded only to worldly gains and was devoid of Allah
(S.w.T.)’s fear.  
  

Why Isti’adha is not Effective?
-------------------------------

We should all awake from the slumber of carelessness because the root
cause of all sins is the love for the world.

Keep your heart free of all pollutants. Because, if only the use of the
tongue sufficed, then saying *audhu billahi min ash-shaitanir rajeem*
prior to every mandatory prayer would do! This goes to prove that only
saying the *Isti’adha* from the tongue is not sufficient.

What is the reason that when people stand for prayer, their attention
hovers around everywhere and is not focused on the prayer! This despite
reiteration of Allah (S.w.T.)’s name by the tongue time and again. It
proves the point that the mind and heart of the person should be as much
present as the person uses his tongue during the prayer.

A person once lost his wallet. He searched for it the whole day. Around
the time of *Maghrib* prayer in the evening he remembered the place
where he had left the wallet. Immediately after saying the salutations
at the end of the prayer he called his servant to look for the wallet in
a particular place. The servant said, “Sir! Were you offering your
prayer or searching for your wallet?”

Remember! There are four things that prevent the light entering the
heart:

As long as we don’t guard against these four things, darkness will
prevail on our hearts. The very first thing that must be avoided is
impurity of the body. The second important thing is that we should
refrain from disobedience to Allah (S.w.T.). The third is to guard
against the fears and doubts created by Satan. The last, but not the
least, is abstaining from bad manners that can turn a man into animal.
As long as a heart remains under the spell of bad manners, it will not
understand the spirit of Isti’adha.

Such persons remain under the influence of Satan and away from Allah
(S.w.T.) even at the time of their death. It has been mentioned in the
traditions that, *“Yuhshar an-naas ‘ala niyyaatihim”* – “People will be
raised (on the Day of Judgement) based on their intentions”. Allah
(S.w.T.) gauges the intentions of the heart rather than the actions that
result from these intentions.

Remember That Death is A Reality
--------------------------------

There are very few sermons of Amīr al-Mu’minīn (a.s.), in *Nahj
al-Balagha,* that don’t throw light on this fact of life. He says,
“Don’t forget death because it is the best cure for the ailments of the
heart and the spirit. One who always keeps this fact in view, it is like
he has opened the door to guidance and reform.”

After the day’s toil when you reach home, then remember that perhaps
your body might be carried to the grave next morning. When you leave
home for work in the morning, keep in mind the possibility that you
might not return home alive.

If man inculcates this spirit in his nature, then slowly he will
overcome the traits of jealousy, parsimony, avarice, hypocrisy, satanic
fears and carelessness.

When I am not sure whether I will be alive till tomorrow or not, then
what is the use of avarice and unnecessarily displeasing others with my
actions?  
  

Flies Buzz Around Honey
-----------------------

Another example is sited for you. You must have noticed the way ants and
other insects hover around sweet things. No matter how much you try to
chase them away, they return to pester you. The only way to get rid of
them is to remove the things that attract them.

O Mu’min! Clean your heart of all impurities that Satan runs away with
one *Isti’adha* from you.  
    
 Hadrat Imam as-Sajjad (a.s.) used to recite *Du’a al-Hazeen* after the
nightly prayer (*Salat al-Layl, Namaz-e-Shab*). He supplicates to Allah
(S.w.T.) thus, *“O Allah help me! Satan is attacking my heart!”*

When a *mu’min* has nothing in his heart that interests Satan, and he
remembers Allah (S.w.T.), then only one *Isti’adha* would suffice to
chase the accursed enemy away.  
  

Satan, a Stumbling Block in the Way of Penitence
------------------------------------------------

It is narrated that when the following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا فَعَلُواْ فَاحِشَةً أَوْ ظَلَمُواْ أَنْفُسَهُمْ
ذَكَرُواْ اللّهَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُواْ لِذُنُوبِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who when they commit an indecency or do injustice to their
souls remember Allah and ask forgiveness for their faults... (Sura Aal
Imran, 3:135)***

Satan cried out and his retainer assembled around him and asked, “What
has happened? Why are you shouting?” The accursed one said, “Why
shouldn’t I shout and cry! We work so hard to make a man commit sins.
And he expresses penitence that renders our efforts null and void!”

Every individual from his retainers gave his own advice on the matter.
But Satan was not satisfied with any of those. Then someone said, “The
only way will be to prevent man from reaching the threshold of the door
of penitence!” Satan said, “Your suggestion is right! If there is any
way for us, this is the way!”  
  

The Practice of Imam as-Sajjad (a.s.)
-------------------------------------

Imam as-Sajjad (a.s.) used to supplicate to Allah (S.w.T.) in the
following way: *“O Allah (S.w.T.)! Keep me in your shelter from this
enemy who is after my life! O Helper of all the helpless! I am forlorn
and supportless! Come to my rescue. From one side this dog is attacking
me and on the other is the world tempting me with all its glitter and
attractions! There is pressure of avarice and greed on my heart! I seek
your help against all these!*”  
  

The Supplication of Ghareeq during the Absence of Imam al-Mahdi (a.j.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

   
 Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), while predicting the period of the absence
of the Last Imam (a.j.), says, “During that troublesome period there
will be so much of sedition that the angels would be astonished at the
very few deaths of men of piety!” The narrator asked the Imam (a.s.),”
What should the people do in that difficult time?” The Imam (a.s.)
replied, “They should recite the *Du’a al-Ghareeq.* This consists in
saying ‘*Ya Allahu ya Rahmanu, ya Raheemu ya Muqallibul Quloob, thabbit
qalbi ‘ala deenik - O Allah, O Beneficent, O Merciful, O Overturner of
hearts! Keep my heart steadfast on Your religion!”*

Man should think that he is really helpless in times when Satan’s
retainers are roaming free. No heart is safe from their onslaught. O
Allah (S.w.T.)! Guard our hearts from the effects of these Shayateen!  
    
  


