The Tenth Talk
==============

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them, they become mindful (of God and get awakened)
then lo! They see (aright). (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:201)***

* *  
 It is proved from the previous talk that the most important aspect of
*Isti’adha* is *Taqwa* or piety. If a person is devoid of antagonism of
Satan and doesn’t submit himself to Rahman, then he is in the trap of
Satan and his *Isti’adha* is of no use.  
  

Why Isti’adha
-------------

Here one might ask when there is *Taqwa* in a person, then what is the
need for *Isti’adha.* When a person doesn’t commit any sins, and is not
a transgressor, then there may not be the need for seeking Allah
(S.w.T.)’s Protection against the onslaught of Satan.

The reply to this question is that the question itself is topsy- turvy.
The fact is that *Isti’adha* is only for the people of *Taqwa.* One who
observes *Taqwa* will always submit to Allah (S.w.T.) for His protection
lest the evil Satan catch him unawares and achieve control over his
heart. Once Satan penetrates his heart, all his actions will be at the
instance of Satan.

A person whose heart is free of the influence of Satan and spends his
time in prayer and supplication to Allah (S.w.T.), should necessarily
seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s protection against the fears and temptations of
Satan, and his ilk, because they are always on the lookout for the
slightest opportunity to subdue him. A *mu’min* has to exercise utmost
care in this matter.  
  

Good Deeds or Guidance For Evil
-------------------------------

Satan strives hard to find a place in the heart of a *mu’min.* It is
narrated that even if a *mu’min* escapes unscathed from the trap of
Satan because of his good deeds ninety nine times, he might become the
victim on the hundredth attempt! It is quite possible that the
instigation for the good deeds ninety nine times too was by Satan only
to make the person complacent that he fell into the trap on the
hundredth attempt! Thus Satan derives satisfaction from destroying in
one stroke the effects of the good actions of the person spread over
long period. The dividing line between the good and the evil is very
narrow and one must take great care not to falter towards evil.
Therefore the Imams (a.s.) supplicate to Allah (S.w.T.) thus, *“O
sustainer, give me vision in the matter of Faith! That during
performance of good deeds Satan doesn’t involve me in fears and
misapprehensions and thus push me into the morass of evil.”*  
  

Evil Through Good
-----------------

There is a social function arranged by someone’s kin. Satan persuades
him to attend it as a matter of (*silat ar-rahm)* giving attention to
the welfare of his relations. When the person reaches the venue, he
finds that the party was in full swing with dance and song and service
of intoxicants. He doesn’t like the atmosphere. His heart prompts him to
get away from that participating in such gatherings is *Haram*. But
Satan tells him ‘If you leave the party while it is in progress, it will
amount to breaking the party. This step will be *qata ar-rahm* or
causing hurt to your relatives.’

Thus Satan misguides people from the path of virtue towards vice.

To Make One Miss The Mandatory Prompting People To Busy in Optional Rites
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes Satan encourages people to give more attention to optional
matters to make them miss the mandatory duties. For example, he prompts
a person to proceed on a pilgrimage to the mausoleum of Imam Ridha
(a.s.). he convinces him that performing this optional pilgrimage will
bring him lots of reward in the Hereafter. The person neglects his
mandatory duty of providing for his old parents and family and proceeds
on the pilgrimage.

Satan thus makes people overlook mandatory duties in the performance of
the optional.  
  

Losing Interest in Prayers
--------------------------

Sometimes Satan makes a person engrossed in an optional act to such an
extent that he loses interest and inclination to perform the mandatory
prayers. For example he puts in the mind of a person to proceed for the
Ziyarats to Karbala that his sins would be pardoned and his prosperity
would increase. Satan also convinces him somehow that if he went
illegally without proper papers and permissions, his rewards would be
redoubled! The person thus commences his journey. To his misfortune he
gets caught for making an illegal entry and is put in jail. Then he
curses himself why his legs were not fractured to prevent him from going
there. Imagine, how Satan tempted the person to go in a hurry for
performance of an optional act and as a result made him lose interest in
the pilgrimage of great felicity!  
  

O Allah! Give Us Vision in the Matters of Faith
-----------------------------------------------

The people of piety cannot do without recourse to *Isti’adha.* They are
always fearful of the interference of Satan because he keeps trying to
divert them from worship of Allah (S.w.T.). May Allah (S.w.T.) give the
vision to people that they are able to understand if the acts they are
doing are really good or are evil acts that Satan has tempted them to
perform. It is the common observation that an act appears good and
harmless but in reality it turns out to be otherwise.  
 To illustrate the point a tradition is mentioned here.  
  

Satan Praying Suspended in the Sky
----------------------------------

It is mentioned in *Bihar al-Anwar* from *Usūl al-Kafi* that Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) narrated about a person, in the olden times, who kept
himself busy in prayer and supplication to Allah (S.w.T.). He was so
deeply engrossed in prayer that Satan, despite all the efforts, was
unable to disrupt this activity. Upset at his failure, Satan called a
meeting of his retainers to devise ways and means of achieving his
desire. He said:

“I have not succeeded tempting the pious person despite all my efforts.
Can you think of a stratagem to unnerve him”?

One of his disciples said, “By creating evil desires in his mind I shall
motivate him to commit adultery.”

Satan replied, “There is no use. The desire for women has been
extinguished from his heart.”

Another disciple said, “I shall tempt him with delicacies and drinks
that he gets destroyed consuming *Haram* food and alcohol.”

Satan said, “No use! After years of penance he has lost palate for good
food.”

A third retainer said, “Perhaps he can be tricked through the way of
prayer which is his favorite activity!”

Satan said, “Yes. We might succeed this way.”

Anyway, the result of this confabulation was that Satan himself took the
responsibility to do the job. He adopted the garb of a human being,
suspended himself in the atmosphere sitting on a prayer mat and
pretended to be busy in prayer.

When the pious person saw this, he went to inquire of Satan about the
prayer that he performed to get the faculty of suspending himself in the
atmosphere. But Satan appeared so intently engrossed in prayer that even
after repeated calls he did not give any attention to the pious person.
Fed up of waiting, the person asked Satan to respond to him under an
oath. Satan took a respite from his pretended prayer.

The pious person asked, “What great task you have performed that you are
at such an elevated place?”

He replied, “I have achieved this status through commitment of a sin.
After committing the sin I have repented and done penance. Even now I
continue to be penitent. With my worship I am growing stronger by day.
If you desire to achieve the same status you too must commit adultery
and then busy yourself in penitence.”

The pious man said, “Neither do I know the way of doing adultery nor
have I money for the purpose.”

Satan gave him two Dirhams and explained the way to the house of a woman
of ill repute.

The pious person entered the town and inquired from the people about the
exact location of the woman’s house. People thought that he was
intending to visit her to sermon the woman to give up her foul ways. The
man went to the woman and gave her the money and demanded to do adultery
with her. At this point Allah (S.w.T.)’s help came to his rescue that
the woman thought of preventing him from committing the sinful act. The
woman saw piety written large on the face of the person and that he was
not habituated of going to such houses of ill repute.

She asked him, “How have you come here?”

The man replied, “This is not your concern. I have given you the money
and you must comply.”

The woman said, “As long as I don’t know the real reason of your coming
here, I shall not submit to you.”

Alas, the pious man yielded and told the entire story to her.

The woman said, “I might be losing custom by dissuading you from your
resolve, but I am sure it was only Satan who has sent you here.”

The man said, “You are wrong because he has assured me that I shall be
able to get the same status as enjoyed by him if I commit the sin of
adultery.”

The woman said, “Don’t be foolish! How are you sure that after
committing adultery you will ever get a chance to be penitent and your
penitence will get accepted? Believe me! You are under the spell of
Satan’s temptation.”

When the pious person was persistent, the woman said, “I am ready to
yield to you. But go back to the place once and see if the person is
still busy in prayer suspended in the atmosphere. If you find him there,
then you can come back to me. But if he is not there, then you must
believe that it was Satan who wants to deter you from the path of
piety.”

When the pious person reached the place, he found no trace of Satan
there. Then it dawned on him that the woman had saved him from falling
into the abyss of sin. He offered a sincere prayer for the fallen woman.

It has been said in the tradition that when the woman died, a revelation
came to the Prophet (S) of the time that he should join her funeral
procession. The Prophet (S) protested to Allah (S.w.T.) that she was a
fallen woman. The reply was, “Yes! But she was responsible for sending
back to us a pious person who was running away from piety under the
deceit of Satan!”

Sermons and moralizing are very valuable. Every effort must be made to
dissuade persons from committing sins. Motivate them to be penitent.
Allah (S.w.T.) will reward them as well as those who make effort to
reform such persons.

It is a matter of great surprise that when we look at the temptations of
Satan and our moral weaknesses, we fail to understand what will be our
end! Will we be able to reach Him? We only need Allah (S.w.T.)’s Mercy
and Munificence for our deliverance.

In a supplication we say:

*Idha ra-aytu maulaya dhunubi faz’itu wa idha ra-aytu karamika tam’itu*

*When I think of my sins O my Master, I am terrified! But when I think
of Your Kindness,* *I become hopeful!*


