The Eleventh Talk
=================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them, they become mindful (of God and get awakened)
then lo! They see (aright). (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:201)***

Satan The Initiator Of Actions
------------------------------

 The topic of discussion is *Isti’adha. Isti’adha* is the way of the
pious. Those who are not pious have Satan dwelling within them. All
their thoughts and actions are at the instance of Satan. Then what is
the need for their seeking Allah (S.w.T.)’s protection against the
influences of Satan.

Escape from Satan will naturally be sought by those who are men of piety
and whenever Satan creeps near their hearts, they busy themselves in the
*Dhikr* or Remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.). When Satan realizes this he
escapes from them.

The men of piety are always wary that they don’t commit prohibited
actions and don’t miss the legitimate and obligatory practices. Whenever
any satanic entity comes near their hearts, intuition warns them and,
they busy themselves in *Isti’adha.* When Satan notices this, he slinks
away.

When the persons of piety are busy remembering Allah (S.w.T.), their
vision and knowledge manifests to them the trap Satan has set for them.

My intention is to dwell in today’s talk on the word ‘*mubseroon’* in
the verse under reference. The men of piety are endowed ‘*baseerat’* or
vision by Allah (S.w.T.) to perceive the trap laid by Satan with their
own eyes. When Satan realizes that his game was over, he flies away. It
is very felicitous that a *mu’min* has the vision of the fears and
doubts that Satan can create. These fears and doubts could be in the
matters of faith or about morals etc.  
  

Satan doesn’t even Spare the Prophets
-------------------------------------

Certain fears and doubts created by Satan pertain to matters of belief
and in this aspect he doesn’t refrain from influencing even the hearts
of the prophets.

It is narrated that Satan came to Hadrat ‘Isa (a.s.) when he was
standing on the peak of a hill. Satan addressed ‘Isa (a.s.) saying, “O
Spirit of Allah! If you fall from this peak, can Allah save your life!”
He replied, “I can tell you with my vision and Understanding that Allah
would most certainly save me.” Satan added, “If you are so certain, dive
down from here that He saves you!”

Hadrat ‘Isa (a.s.) understood that Satan was up to his tricks. Therefore
he said, “O accursed one! Do you intend to put Allah to test! My Faith
is strong. Allah is Omnipotent and has control over every thing. You
have come here with the purpose of testing whether saving me is possible
or not.” Hadrat ‘Isa (a.s.) also added, “My Creator has commanded me not
to do such things. Purposely falling from the top of the hill will be an
attempt at suicide that is *Haram.* If one falls from the hill
accidentally, and Allah wishes him to live on, then He will save him!”  
  

Hadrat ‘Isa Converses With Satan
--------------------------------

It is narrated that once Satan came to Hadrat ‘Isa (a.s.) and said, “O
Spirit of Allah! You are yourself the Omnipotent and Omniscient God.”
Hadrat ‘Isa (a.s.) reprimanded him for this talk and said, “I am Allah’s
creation and slave on whose prayer He brings back the dead to life!”

When Hadrat ‘Isa (a.s.) tried to remove doubts of Satan in this manner,
he ran away from there crying.

Satan puts such doubts and fears in the minds of the pious persons. But
they understand his tricks with the light of piety that they are only
satanic doubts. For example; sometimes he puts a doubt in the heart of a
*mu’min* that a particular person, despite being young and strong, has
resorted to begging. Why has he turned a beggar? Satan’s purpose of
creating such doubts is to create apprehensions in the minds of
believers about the will of Allah (S.w.T.). But if the person is a
*mu’min* aware of Allah (S.w.T.)’s Greatness he will say,
“*Astaghfirullah!* How can I dare to question the Will of Allah? My
Faith is that His acts are all replete with wisdom beyond our
comprehension.”  
  

Satan Attempts to Create Fears in the Mind of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Every pious person strives to perform good deeds and Satan tries his
best to dissuade him from doing so. If a person performs a good deed,
Satan tries to neutralize its good effects through his tricks. For
example; he will encourage the person to express pride after doing some
good turn. Satan is thus the sworn enemy of all good deeds.

Here the example of one of the elite prophets of Allah (S.w.T.) will be
appropriate.

You must have heard of Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.) that when he was taking his
beloved son Ismail (a.s.) to *mina* to sacrifice him under the
Commandment of Allah (S.w.T.), Satan was flabbergasted. He knew that if
Ibrahim (a.s.) was able to fulfill this task, he would get a very
elevated place in the consideration of Allah (S.w.T.). He thought of
stratagems to prevent Ibrahim (a.s.) from achieving this.

The first thing he did was to go to Hadrat Hajra and create doubts and
fear in her mind. He told her, “I have seen an aged person guiding a
handsome youth by hand. Who is he?” Hadrat Hajra said, “That is my
spouse Ibrahim (a.s.).” Satan asked, “Are you aware of his intention as
to why he is taking your son along with him? His intention is to cut the
head of his son Ismail (a.s.)” Hadrat Hajra replied, “Ibrahim (a.s.) has
not harmed even his sworn enemies. How is it possible that he will sever
the head of his own son.” Satan said, “He is thinking that Allah
(S.w.T.) has commanded him to do so!” The great lady immediately
understood that the person talking to her was Satan and was trying to
create doubts in her mind. She said, “O accursed creature! Run away! If
what he is doing is under Allah’s Command then we abide by it.”

Iblīs Tests Faith
-----------------

The purpose of the creation of Satan is to judge on the Day of Reckoning
as to who was steadfast in keeping to the right path and who veered away
from it under his evil influence. Therefore Allah (S.w.T.) says in the
Holy Book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لَهُ عَلَيْهِم مِّن سُلْطَانٍ إِلَّا لِنَعْلَمَ مَن
يُؤْمِنُ بِالْآخِرَةِ مِمَّنْ هُوَ مِنْهَا فِي شَكٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he (satan) has no authority over them, but that We may
distinguish him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt
concerning it. (Sura Saba, 34:21)***

Although Hadrat Hajra is a woman but the strength of her faith is such
intense that she agreed to sacrifice her only son in the Way of Allah
(S.w.T.) without a whimper of doubt or fear.

Satan Attempts to create Doubts in the Mind of Ibrahim (a.s.)
-------------------------------------------------------------

Now Satan went to Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.) and said, “What are you trying
to do?” He replied, “I shall sacrifice my son, Ismail (a.s.) Satan said,
“What crime has he committed?” Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.) said, “This I am
doing on Allah’s Command!” Satan said, “If you kill your own son for the
good will of Allah, it will be a bad example for your followers to
emulate in the future!” Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.) again reiterated that what
he was doing was under the command of Allah (S.w.T.).

Satan said, “Is it not possible that what you are doing is not Allah’s
Command.” At this moment Hadrat Ibrahim hit Satan with a stone. This is
why there is the practice of the *Hajjis* throwing stones at *Rami
Jamarat* during *Hajj* as an emulation of Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.)’s
action.

Now the accursed Satan turned his attention towards Hadrat Ismail (a.s.)
who was walking behind his revered father. He said, “Young lad! Do you
know where you father is taking you?” Ismail (a.s.) said, “I don’t
know!” Satan added “Your father intends to kill you.” Ismail (a.s.)
asked, “How could he do such a thing?” Satan said, “He thinks that Allah
has commanded him to do it!” Hadrat Ismail (a.s.) said, “If he is acting
on Allah’s orders, then my life is a small sacrifice for that purpose!”
But, despite this rebuff Satan persisted in trying to create doubts in
the mind of the young Ismail (a.s.). Then Hadrat Ismail (a.s.) protested
to his father, “O father! See who is this person who is pestering me?”
Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.) said, “This is Satan the accursed!” Then Hadrat
Ismail (a.s.) too hurled stones at him.  
  

Have We too Spurned Satan at Any Time?
--------------------------------------

Now I address the revered *Hajjis* in this gathering! In emulation of
Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.) you have done the rite of *Rami Jamarat* during
the *Hajj*. *Jamarat* is not only a rite to be performed during the
*Hajj*, but throughout our lives we have to spurn and chase away Satan.

Where are those people who throw stones at Satan whenever he tries to
create fears and doubts in their minds. They confront him with boldness
and exercise control over themselves in times of anger and fury. When
the wish to do prohibited acts asserts itself, they shake it away with
determination.

Sometimes it happens that a person wishes to do a good turn, then Satan
brings forth a doubt that perhaps some other deed would be more
appropriate. The person thus falls in doubt and is unable to act.  
  

Who is Greater?
---------------

It is narrated that now the father and son determined to comply with
Allah (S.w.T.)’s Command; the father to sacrifice his son; and the son
too to offer himself in sacrifice to Allah (S.w.T.). The old father put
the son’s head on the ground and put the sharp knife on his throat. At
this moment the angels were surprised and asked each other, “Who is
greater, the father or the son!” The father is great because he is
willing to sacrifice his son who is the fruit of much prayer and
supplication. The son is great because he is offering himself in
sacrifice to Allah (S.w.T.) without a whimper of protest!

Both have come out successful in their test. But Allah (S.w.T.)’s Wish
was that Ismail (a.s.) should live.  
  

Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.)’s Laments
--------------------------------

It is narrated that when Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.) felt that the knife was
not cutting, and that the command for the sacrifice has been rescinded
by Allah (S.w.T.), he cried. Hadrat Jibril (a.s.) came to him and asked,
“Why are you crying?” He said, “I think I am not fit enough that my
sacrifice was not acceptable to Allah!” Jibrīl (a.s.) said, “You have
successfully gone through all the stages of the sacrifice. Your heart
even then cries that it has not reached its conclusion.” Then Hadrat
Jibril (a.s.) told Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.) about the hardships and the
supreme sacrifice in store for Imam Husayn (a.s.)!  
  


