The Thirteenth Talk
===================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them,*** ***they become mindful (of God and get
awakened) then lo! They see (aright). (Al-Aaraf 7:201)***

Taqwa or Piety is Achieved With Practice
----------------------------------------


When we admit a child for the first time in a school, on the first day
he is neither able to read nor write. He gets motivated to do any
schoolwork in the beginning with difficulty. But when he is slowly
initiated into reading and writing, he makes rapid progress. In time he
will not have any difficulty in coping with his lessons.

Same is the case of *taqwa* or piety. Man has to strive to abstain from
committing sins. Whenever he finds a situation to commit a sin, he
should control himself and avoid committing it. The way a child gets
used to reading and writing and becomes comfortable at these skills
after some time, similarly when one tries with full determination to
shun sinning, in good time he will be able to totally stop these
undesirable acts. At this stage Allah (S.w.T.) will put a light in his
heart that makes avoiding sins easier for him. He will have so much
control on his tongue that even for the kingdom of the entire world, he
would not tell a lie.

The same sins, the avoidance of which was next to impossible for him,
now become very difficult to commit! Man should make efforts to
inculcate such will power that he is able to avoid commitment of sins
with ease. With this faculty in his heart, he will draw pleasure from
the success of his efforts.

No doubt Allah (S.w.T.) doesn’t like infidelity in his creatures. “He
has made faith (*Imān*) dear to them. He has made it the adornment for
their hearts. And has created abhorrence in him for Infidelity and
disobedience.”
* *
At last a sinner starts disliking sins. He achieves the state of
*Taqwa* where sin appears bitter than the bitterest thing and every
small evil act seems the most evil. He thinks that every sin, howsoever
minor, worth reproaching to the maximum extent.

The highest level of piety is cultivated after much practice and
constant effort. There are a few stages and ranks of this piety.


Shunning Doubtful Things
------------------------

When a person gets used to avoiding prohibited things and depending only
on fair living, he advances one step, and with more effort he also
avoids use of things, which give him some doubt of their being
legitimate. Therefore, he not only avoids the use of *haram* objects but
also abstains from things about which he has the slightest doubt of
being *haram*.

He also abstains from uttering such words that Allah (S.w.T.) might
dislike the use of. In stages he achieves total avoidance of the use of
doubtful things in his day-to-day living.


Shunning of The Unbecoming Or Makrūhāt
--------------------------------------

The man now reaches a higher state of piety when he shuns the unbecoming
(*makrūhāt*) and the stage is set for the use of only the desirables
(*mustahab*). Now he has reached such a high state of piety that he does
not avoid the desirables although he knows that they are not mandatory
and not binding on him. He also meticulously avoids doing or using
unbecoming (*makrūh*) things that are, no doubt, not totally banned.


Shunning The Permissible For Shunning The Prohibited
----------------------------------------------------

He becomes careful in the use of such permissible things that give him
doubt that their use might make him avoid certain mandatory things.

For example, it is permissible to remain awake till mid-night in
conversation with friends. In that time there can be two or three rounds
of eating snacks. But, if one sleeps late on a full stomach, he might
find it difficult to stir out of his bed for the *Fajr* prayer that is
mandatory. Therefore, a pious person develops such a faculty in his
nature that he takes care to avoid every permissible thing that might
cause difficulty in performance of his mandatory duties.

Saving a Coin a Day For Use During Ramadhan
-------------------------------------------

A baker was our friend. He was very skillful and capable in his trade.
The month of Ramadhan came during summer one year. He took off from work
the whole month of Ramadhan to avoid the excessive heat of his work
place, while he fasted. He could do it by cleverly putting aside a coin
from his earnings every day for the eleven months previous to Ramadhan
to meet his expenses when he closed his shop during the fasting month.

Although spending this coin every day was permissible and well within
his rights, the baker wanted to prepare himself properly for the fasting
in Ramadhan that is mandatory!


Travel Becomes the Reason for Avoiding the Mandatory Duties
-----------------------------------------------------------

It is narrated that a person went to Imam (a.s.) and said, “I am
required to travel to a cold country. These days there is so much snow
fall there that the entire land is covered with it. It is difficult to
get water for *wudhu (*the minor ablution*)* nor is it possible to do
*tayyamum (*the dry ablution). In such a situation what instructions you
give me about performance of the mandatory prayers?”

The Imam got angry on him and said, “Why are you undertaking such a
journey that can disrupt you obligatory matters of faith? When you are
aware that because of your traveling on business to that place your
*taqwa* (piety) is affected, then you must avoid such travel”

When attending a gathering is permissible, but there is likelihood of
undesirable things happening there, then it is better to avoid attending
the party.

But all these doubts and confusions are for people with weak faiths, a
man of piety will never falter from the right course.

The Material Capacities
-----------------------

There are certain permissible acts that might make a person commit
*haram* actions. He thinks that in a material sense these acts have lot
of meaning. Although an act might be *mustahab* (desirable) or *mubah*
(permissible) the man of piety keeps a close watch on its implications
and consequences. He seriously considers what effect the performance of
the act might have on him. Then only he ventures to embark on performing
it.

In our daily lives why there is waste and profligacy? What use spending
lives on unproductive acts? When people don’t help their poor relatives
and friends cutting into their legitimate expenses, and make heavy
expenses through loans on pomp and show, their prayers are nothing short
of hypocrisy. They may not be rewarded in the Hereafter.

Taking interest in the pleasures of life is not *haram*. It is in fact
legitimate and permissible. But when such things are given unnecessary
importance, there can be the likelihood of *Qata ar-Rahm* or depriving
the near of kin of their legitimate rights and privileges. Even
sometimes people fulfill their desire for pomp by meeting the high
expenses with loans. Thus they might incur the risk of rendering their
acts *Haram*.

Another example is that good humor is permissible. In certain
circumstances it is desirable too. But we see that in excess, this
permissible act ends into practical jokes and results in the heart- burn
for the persons who are the subject of the humor. This can be tantamount
to hurting the feelings of *Mu’minīn* and is *Haram*.

Therefore it is necessary to adopt *Taqwa* and extravagant indulgence
in the material needs and excessive jest and humor must be avoided.
In a nutshell, there are three stages of *taqwa*:

Firstly: mastery in avoiding sins.

Secondly: Mastery in abstaining from the doubtful and the unbecoming
things.

Thirdly: avoiding such permissible acts that might be the precursors of
sins.


