The Fourteenth Talk
===================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them, they become mindful (of God and get awakened)
then lo! They see (aright). (Al-Aaraf 7:201)***

The second aspect of *Isti’adha* is *Tadhakkur,* the remembrance and
talk about Allah (S.w.T.). A person who acquires *Taqwa* or piety
becomes free of the domination of Satan. As long as the influence of
Satan on the person persists, he remains incapable of effective
*Isti’adha.* Satan keeps going round the hearts of the men of piety to
catch a chance of entering therein. But when these pious persons busy
themselves in the Remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.), then there is a
lightning of Allah (S.w.T.)’s Blessing and the net spread by Satan
becomes visible to them in the momentary illumination. This puts the
pious persons out of harms way.

Now, let us consider what is Allah (S.w.T.)’s intent about *Tadhakkur*
in the oft-quoted verse during our discussions.

The Thought of Sin and Remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.)
----------------------------------------------------

In *Tafseer al-Burhan* commenting 0n this Verse, Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) quotes from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) an incident that we are
summarizing here. When a *mu’min* suddenly gets the thought of crime in
his mind, Satan and his retainers make their maximum efforts to make the
person put his thought to action. But in that moment the pious person
remembers Allah (S.w.T.) and he abandons the thought of committing the
sin.

There are also stages of Remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.) that are
different according to the place and the situation. One of those
situations is that when the thought of sin comes in the mind of the
person, the instigator and prompter is Satan and the opposition of this
enemy is necessary. And also the pious person is in oath with Allah
(S.w.T.) that he will not follow Satan because the accursed creature is
his sworn enemy. He should therefore not break his oath and instead of
becoming *‘Abd ar-Rahman* (worshipper of Allah (S.w.T.)) become *‘Abd
ash-Shaitan* (worshipper of Satan). Therefore, it is imperative that he
keeps firmly to his oath and he should strive to resist Satan who can
only bring destruction and perfidy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَا بَنِي آدَمَ أَن لَّا تَعْبُدُوا
الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Did I not charge you, O children of Adam ! that you should not serve
the Shaitan? Surely he is your open enemy. (Sura Ya Sin, 36:60)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَضَلَّ مِنكُمْ جِبِلًّا كَثِيراً أَفَلَمْ تَكُونُوا
تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly he led astray numerous people from among you. What!
Will you not then understand. (Sura Ya Sin, 36:62)***

At another place in the Holy Qur’an it is said that Allah (S.w.T.) has
decided that those who follow Satan, Satan will push them into the abyss
of darkness and take them into the blistering Fires of Hell. When a
person adopts satanic thoughts and considers the temptations of Iblis
worth pursuing, then Allah (S.w.T.) closes all the avenues of salvation
for him and consigns him to the Hell.

Remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.) Relieves From Satanic Fears
---------------------------------------------------------

Whenever satanic fears start getting into the heart, the man of piety
busies himself in remembering Allah (S.w.T.). He thinks that if he
committed the sin, he will be pushed away from Allah (S.w.T.)’s
Blessing. What use will be the wretched life then!

It is quite possible that Satan, in his renewed attempt, puts a thought
in the heart of the person that he was depriving himself of the pleasure
of sin. The door of repentance was always open for him. The man of piety
will then reply to Satan that what is the guarantee that he will get the
chance of offering penitence for the sin. Even if he is able to do it,
what is the surety that it would be accepted? In the end the Remembrance
of Allah (S.w.T.) doesn’t allow Satan to gain an upper hand over the man
of piety.

Sometimes Satan puts a fear in the heart of the man of *Taqwa* that he
was encouraging him to commit only a minor sin.

But the heart busy in remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.) replies, “Run away!
You accursed one! Disobedience Allah (S.w.T.), anyhow, is a major sin.”

Sometimes Iblis the accursed threatens the man of piety that if he
didn’t comply with his advice, his end will be very pitiable. Sometimes
he gives him false hopes that the results of sins will be good. Satan’s
advice influences only those who befriend him (Satan).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا ذَلِكُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ يُخَوِّفُ أَوْلِيَاءهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is only the Shaitan that causes you to fear from his friends….
(Sura Aal Imran, 3:175)***

But the man of piety gets the understanding with Remembrance of Allah
(S.w.T.). The disturbing thoughts that come to the mind are only the
doubts and fears created by Satan. The man of *Taqwa*, no doubt, fears
only Allah (S.w.T.). Allah (S.w.T.) says at the end of the Verse:

***“Fear only Me if you are a believer (mu’min)!”***

Being Proud of One’s Prayers and Supplications
----------------------------------------------


Sometimes Satan tricks men into becoming proud of their prayers and the
love for the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.). For example, he says, “How nice! You
have gone on several pilgrimages to *Karbala al-Mu’alla!* You must have
done innumerable good deeds during the visits to the Holy place. Husayn
(a.s.) will certainly intercede on your behalf. Now, no sin can bring
retribution to you.”

But the *mu’min* instead of becoming proud and conceited with such
praises, should reply, “If I commit any sins, my intercessors {the Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.)} will be upset with me. This sin will become a curtain
between me and Imam Husayn (a.s.). Allah (S.w.T.) only knows how far I
would be pushed away from my intercessors by committing one sin! Feeling
proud of the felicity of the *ziyarat* of Imam Husayn (a.s.) in itself
is a sin that might deprive me of his (the Imam’s) intercession.”

A man of *Taqwa* can certainly be proud of its spiritual felicity, but
the pride can only be manifested as *Tashakkur* or gratefulness. This
expression of gratitude will not require any sermonizing from outside.
Sermonizing becomes necessary when the person himself is not aware of
his felicity and feels no urge to express his gratefulness to the
Creator for that. Hadrat Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s.) says, “Truly felicitous
person is one who is the preacher and sermonizer for himself!”

Satanic Fears in a State of Anger
---------------------------------


It happens that people sometimes become angry while they have a heated
exchange of words. As a result of the altercation one might use abusive
language. Satan tempts the other party to reciprocate in the same
language and tenor. But if he is a man of *Taqwa*, he immediately
controls himself by Remembering Allah (S.w.T.). His mind suggests to him
that if he behaved the same way as the opponent had behaved, then what
would be the difference between the two.

The opponent had used uncouth language and had followed the dictates of
Satan. If you do likewise, you too will render yourself the follower of
Satan. With the beneficence of *Dhikr of Allah* (S.w.T.) his conscience
will guide him to give a befitting reply to the opponent:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا خَاطَبَهُمُ الْجَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا سَلَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***and when the ignorant address them, they say: Peace. (Sura al-Furqan,
25:63)***

It is better because of the *Dhikr* of Allah (S.w.T.), the person is
able to dispel the fear and confusion from his mind. Otherwise, the
dispute can become a haranguing contest, each flinging foul-words on the
other and might even result in physical assault. If, at the rudimentary
stage of the dispute, effort was made to cool down the other party, the
matter could have been sorted out without much ado!

Now we can see at length how people get entangled in the web of Satan.
Even those who call themselves men of *taqwa* are not immune from this.
If they don’t busy themselves in *Tadhakkur,* they most likely would
fall in the trap sometime or other.

Presence of a moralizer and preacher is absolutely necessary for the
heart of every person to keep him warned not to become a victim of false
pride and abstain from childish actions. Remember! A real man is one who
always keeps the end in view. For example, when one keeps his cool
during a heated argument with another person, the matter can be sorted
out amicably. If this amicable nature is not there, how many persons
would suffer tremendous losses fighting over trivial things with a sense
of false pride. In such disputes Satan plays a very crucial role to
create rifts and commission of sins by the litigants.

It is necessary for every *mu’min* to keep the intercession of
*Tadhakkur* in his daily life. In the past there were such *Mu’minīn*
who dug their own graves during their life times and used to recite the
Holy Qur’an sitting inside these trenches. They did this to remind
themselves of the Hereafter and the interior of the graves was
illuminated with the felicity of *Tadhakkur*.

About Hizqeel
-------------

It is narrated that when Hadrat Dawood (a.s.) committed his initial
fault, and he went lamenting through hills and dales in penitence, he
reached the cave inside which Prophet Hadrat Hizqeel (a.s.) was busy in
supplication.

When Hadrat Hizqeel (a.s.) heard the moaning of the hills and the
beasts, he understood that Hadrat Dawood (a.s.) had come to him. The
reason for this was that when Hadrat Dawood (a.s.) recited the Zaboor,
the flora, fauna and the stones too joined him in the recitation. Hadrat
Dawood (a.s.) reached the entrance of the cave and called, “O Hizqeel
(a.s.)! Do you permit me to come up to you?” Hadrat Hizqeel (a.s.) said,
“Please don’t come to me because you are a sinner!” But Allah (S.w.T.)
sent a Revelation to him, “Because of Dawood (a.s.)’s first sin, don’t
reprimand him. To the contrary pray to Us for his pardon and well being!
Whenever we leave anyone to his own scruples, he might commit a
mistake!”

Now Hadrat Hizqeel (a.s.) caught hold of Hadrat Dawood (a.s.)’s hand
and guided him inside the cave.

Hadrat Dawood (a.s.) asked Hadrat Hizqeel (a.s.), “O Hizqeel (a.s.)!
Have you ever thought of committing a sin?”

He replied, “No! Never!”

Hadrat Dawood (a.s.) asked, “Did you ever feel proud?”

He replied, “No! Never!”

Hadrat Dawood (a.s.) asked, “Have you ever been tempted with the worldly
pleasures?”

Hadrat Hizqeel (a.s.) replied, “Yes! I was tempted!”

Hadrat Dawood (a.s.) asked, “Then! What remedy you use against these
temptations?”

He replied, “In such circumstances I get into this cave and take pity
from what I witness therein.”

Hadrat Dawood (a.s.) then entered into the recesses of the cave with
Hadrat Hizqeel (a.s.) He found inside there a plate of steel. On the
plate was lying a human skeleton and beside it was a tablet of steel on
which was inscribed:

“*I Arwai Bin Shalam*

*ruled for a thousand years,*

*established a thousand cities,*

*deflowered a thousand virgins.*

*But,*

*My condition is this*

*That my bed is dust*

*My pillow a stone*

*And*

*My body is the*

*Dwelling place of*

*Insects and vermin.*

*Whoever sets eye on me*

*Should not be carried away*

*With worldly attractions!*”[^1]



A Bed of Two Hands Full of Dust
-------------------------------

Imagine a person who was an emperor of great pomp and pageant, was
reduced to be put in a desolate cave and his mortal remains were lying
on a steel sheet in dust. He had insects and vermin crawling all over
his mortal remains. A *mu’min* must take a lesson from this incident. If
he had obeyed Satan and his baser instincts, and ran after the worldly
things, how long will the party last? A person who strives too hard for
his selfish ends forgets that he has to die inevitably and all the
paraphernalia that he accumulates will have to be left behind. He should
pray that whatever benefits and blessings he enjoyed, his end should not
be like of the mighty king whose story is narrated here.

Our topic of discussion is *Tadhakkur.* A person who leaves himself
uncontrolled and doesn’t remember Allah (S.w.T.), h will he will be
nowhere (like a rudder less ship). Man should strive to be like a
mountain in his moral behavior. One who is vulnerable to the wave of
doubts created by Satan, He should ensure that the glitter of the world
doesn’t overwhelm him. This is possible if he keeps in mind the
inevitable end that every mortal being is destined to!


Visit the Cemeteries is a Must
------------------------------

It is very necessary that one’s own conscience becomes his warner. In
the Islamic *Shari’ah* it has been very strongly prescribed to visit the
graves, particularly those of one's parents. Why this exhortation? This
is because one recitation *al-Fatiha* at the graveside of his parents
will result in rewards for them. He should give *sadaqa* (alms) for the
propitiation of their souls. The Prophet (S) has asked people to visit
the grave of their parents that it is the place from where prayers made
by them will be answered.

The biggest benefit of visiting the graves of the parents is that it
will make the person aware of the fact if the parent is not there with
him, he too will have to follow suit some time in the future. This will
give him the realization that he should not be attracted much to the
transient world. He will then learn to dispel the satanic fears and
apprehensions. He will start remembering Allah (S.w.T.) and think of the
Day of Judgment!

Hadrat Fatima Zahra (a.s.) at the Graveside of Her Grand Uncle
--------------------------------------------------------------

Hadrat Fatima Zahra (a.s.), after the sad demise of her father (S), had
to experience very audacious treatment from some persons that she fell
ill under the pressure of these happenings. Even then, on every Monday
and Thursday, with the permission of her husband (a.s.), she visited the
grave of her great-uncle, Hadrat Hamza and other martyrs in Uhud.

Even the Prophet (S) during his last illness, despite severe fever and
weakness, used to ask some persons to put their shoulders under his arms
and take him to the graveyard.

O Allah (S.w.T.)! Do make us *Ahl adh-Dhikr wat-Tadhakkur,* in the name
of Muhammad (S) and his Holy Progeny (a.s.).

[^1]: Ref: Ain al-Hayat, Page 178


