The Fifteenth Talk
==================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them, they become mindful (of God and get awakened)
then lo! They see (aright). (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:201)***

* *  
 Last evening our talk dwelt on the second aspect of *Isti’adha,
Tadhakkur.* Today we shall discuss some more meanings of *Tadhakkur* in
respect of the fears created by Satan.

There is a tradition of the Prophet (S), the authenticity of which is
universally accepted by all the schools of thought. The tradition has
also been quoted very much. The Prophet (S) has said, “*Actions are of
three types: the actions of righteous guidance, the misleading actions
and the actions that are mid way between the first two categories.”*  
* *

The Things That Are Definitely Good: The Actions of Righteous Guidance
----------------------------------------------------------------------

 Whatever thoughts come to the mind of a person whether to perform an
action or not, depend on the consideration of the three categories of
actions mentioned above. If it is sure that the action that a person is
about to perform is certainly good, and to his righteous advantage, then
pure feelings will develop in his heart. He will get the urge to go
ahead with the performance of the act. If you have such feelings about
any act that you wish to perform, and you are sure that it is a hundred
percent virtuous deed, and you don’t have the slightest doubt or fear
about its veracity, then you must go ahead doing it with full
determination and firmness. Such actions are deemed obligatory to be
performed tacitly.

Actions That Are Definitely Wrong: The Misleading Actions
---------------------------------------------------------

If you get the thought of performing an action about which you are
certain that it is satanic, and you know that it’s performance might
cause unrest, despite the urge to go ahead with it, you must have access
to *Tadhakkur* and abstain from doing it. Because of your awareness of
Allah (S.w.T.)’s Commandments, if you consider doing such acts as
prohibited, it will be a befitting precept in total consonance with the
words “*…fa idha hum mubseroon”* *(…then lo! They see aright)* *(Sura
al-A’raaf,* *7:201).*

* *

When There Is A Doubt About Acts: Whether Righteous Or Prohibited
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The third type of actions is about which one is not sure whether they
are righteous (*Rahmani)* or wrong (*Shaitani*). There are certain
lawful acts about which we have doubts in our minds. We have to arrive
at a decision whether to perform them or not.

Those who are perfect in piety, are the choicest in the reckoning of
Allah (S.w.T.). Their intuition tells them whether an act is really good
or not. Their vision is so powerful that they have a clear understanding
of what act is *Rahmani* and which is *Satanic.* But such men of high
piety are few and far between.  
  

Care is the Guarantee of Deliverance
------------------------------------

Those who are in the lower rungs of the roster of men of piety, they too
draw benefit from *Tadhakkur* and don’t decide to perform an act till
they are sure and confident that it is righteous (*Rahmani).* They will
not do it till they are doubly sure howsoever attractive it might seem
to them. They are conscious that performing the act, ignorantly, might
harm their faith. Therefore it is said, “*Qif indash Shubh - When you
have a doubt about an act being Rahmani or Satanic, better wait!”* The
morsel about which one has doubt whether it is *halal* or *Haram,* he
should rather wait till he makes it sure.  
  

The Touchstone
--------------

   
 In the *Islamic Shari’ah* there are clear-cut norms for removing doubts
and fears and for arriving at the righteousness or otherwise of acts.
These norms must be brought to the knowledge of people of piety that
they can abide by them. The standard set by the revered and Infallible
personalities is: Every act that is to satisfy the psyche of the person
will be Satanic. And the act that is contrary to his desire will be
righteous and *Rahmani*.  
    
 There are certain acts towards which the psyche is attracted. For
example: A person has to go on a journey that is not against his liking,
but he doesn’t know if the action has the approval of Allah (S.w.T.) or
not. Or perhaps Satan is instigating him to go on the trip. Sometimes
the man is inordinately attracted to take a journey. In such a situation
he should realize that the initiator of the idea is definitely some
satanic thought that wishes to involve him in some *Haram* act or at
least to deprive him of a legitimate act.  
    
 When you feel that your conscience is not willing to perform some act,
then it is a *Rahmani* instinct, you must go ahead in performing it.  
    
 Another thing should not remain hidden that this standard is not for
everyone. Because mostly people are inclined towards human desires and
these realities have nothing to do with them.  
  

Istikhara, Or Augury, Guides in Situations of Doubt
---------------------------------------------------

   
 It has been narrated that when you are at the cross-roads, and do not
know which is the righteous (*Rahmani)* way and which is the wrong one
(*Shaitani),* then doing *Istikhara* (augury) with Allah (S.w.T.) that
the righteous path can be determined.  
    
*Istikhara,* or augury, is *talab al-khair min Allah (S.w.T.)* (Seeking
good from Allah (S.w.T.)) saying, “O Allah (S.w.T.)! I am in doubt. I
don’t know if there is Your approval for my doing this task or not. With
Your Munificence make evident Your guidance in the matter.”  
    
 This is a situation of prayer, and in *Istikhara* always there is a
strong element of prayer to Allah (S.w.T.).  
  

Some People Misunderstand Istikhara
-----------------------------------

   
 Muslims have adopted a bad habit that they started using *Istikhara*
for matters connected with monetary benefit. This, truly, is not
*istikhara. Istikhara,* in fact, is a prayer by virtue of which a person
seeks Allah (S.w.T.)’s wish if performance of a particular act would be
in his best interest or not.  
  

Imam Husayn (a.s.) does Istikhara at the Mausoleum of The Prophet (S)
---------------------------------------------------------------------

   
 Imam Husayn (a.s.) went to the mausoleum of his grand father, the
Prophet (S) and after much grieving entreated Allah (S.w.T.), “O my
Sustainer! You know I am practicing, *amr bil ma’ruf* and *nahi ‘anil
munkar*, treading on the righteous path and denying the prohibited. In
this matter kindly give me guidance.” Then the Prophet (S), with Allah
(S.w.T.)’s orders, informed Imam Husayn (a.s.) that he had to proceed
towards Karbala.  
    
 It is better we quote here Imam *Zayn* al-’Abidin (a.s.). He says in
one of the supplications in *Sahifa as-Sajjadiya:*

*“O Allah! Whenever my heart is confused with two thoughts. One thought
for performance of an act that might be approved by You and the other,
perhaps, not to Your liking and instigated by Satan.* *Then O Allah!*
*Mould my determination and decision the way You approve of!”*  
  

Istikhara With the Sibha or Through the Holy Qur’an
---------------------------------------------------

If prayer dispels your doubts and confusion, it is very well. Otherwise,
you are within your rights to do *Istikhara* with the *Sibha* (rosary)
or from the pages of the Holy Qur’an. But there are two conditions for
doing this. One is that you must be in a state of supplication while
doing the augury (*Istikhara).* The other condition is that you can
correctly understand the meanings of the verses of the Qur’an when doing
*Istikhara* through its pages. One should also be in a position to
interpret the correct purport from the meanings.  
  

Strange Stories About Istikhara
-------------------------------

In Isfahan an important person suffered from measles. After treatment he
was put on a strict diet regimen. He was particularly warned against
over eating. During his period of convalescence he was invited at the
place of a leading cleric. When the table was arranged with numerous
types of mouth -watering dishes, the person’s mouth started watering.
But he also had the fear that if he went against the regimen and ate
well, it might be harmful for him. He also thought that if he didn’t eat
properly, the host might feel bad. He therefore did *Istikhara* from the
Qur’an. He saw the 69th verse of *Sura an Nahl* when he opened the book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ كُلِي مِن كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ فَاسْلُكِي سُبُلَ رَبِّكِ ذُلُلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then eat of all the fruits and walk thou in the ways of Thy Lord
submissively…*** ***(Sura an-Nahl, 16:69)***

This verse relates to the honeybees that received revelation to eat from
all the fruits and manufacture lot of honey. The person interpreted from
the verse that he had the permission to eat. Since he was on a strict
diet for many days, he enjoyed all the sumptuous fare with great relish.
The excess of eating resulted in deterioration of his condition and he
had to go straight to his grave from the party!

After this event when there was a discussion about *Istikhara,* one
scholar said, “The verse seen during the *Istikhara* pertains to the
honeybees that pick up a little nectar from each flower. If the person
had also tasted a little from each of the dishes served, and not eaten
like a glutton, he would have suffered no harm.”  
    
 The purpose of relating this tale is to impress on people that doing
*Istikhara* and interpreting the meaning and purport from the verses is
not easy. This can be done only by the learned.  
  

The Purpose of Revelation of the Holy Qur’an is not for Istikhara
-----------------------------------------------------------------

   
 The Holy Qur’an is not revealed for the purpose of *Istikhara* but for
the understanding of Allah (S.w.T.) by His creatures and for inculcating
the high moral values. Its purpose is not to show to the reader whether
any worldly actions are beneficial to him or not. Such reference to the
Book is not *Istikhara;* but it is soothsaying.

The standards prescribed for us to judge the veracity or usefulness of
acts has to be understood properly and to be acted upon implicitly.
Every matter that appears burdensome on the baser instincts of a person
is *Rahmani,* legitimate. Spending in the way of Allah (S.w.T.) doesn’t
make a person poor, although his instinct asks him to take care while
making such expense!  
    
 With the compliance of aforementioned conditions, we are not in
opposition to access to *Istikhara.* After every compulsory prayer we
supplicate, “O Allah (S.w.T.)! With your Munificence and Grace guide
me!” This supplication should be made with the single purpose of asking
for His Grace. In fact one should pray to Allah (S.w.T.) thus, “O Allah!
Keep me safe from perfidy and shame! O Allah! Prevent me from the
influence of evil thoughts and keep me under Your protection”.

Doing Soothsaying from The Holy Qur’an is Not Proper
----------------------------------------------------

   
 Such *Istikhara* and soothsaying from the Qur’an that is for the
purpose of predicting the future are not permissible. For example: When
a mother has to get her daughter wedded, gets an *Istikhara* to
ascertain how the girl’s future will be. For this purpose she goes to a
venerable person. He predicts that the future for the marriage is not
going to be good. The mother then worries. Then she goes to another
person. He predicts that the match is good and augurs well for the
future. She is now confused. She thinks how the same thing could get
diametrically opposite result when she asked for a *Istikhara* for the
same.

She must therefore seriously think about the premise on which she sought
such a prediction. She should seek the answer from the sacred
*Shari’ah.*

Publications about Istikhara
----------------------------

   
 Allama Majlisi has written a treatise “*Mafatīh al-Ghaib”* in which he
has entered a collection of traditions about *Istikhara.* Other scholars
too have published essays. Even then people are ignorant about the true
facts.

Allama Majlisi, in the beginning of the book, has written about the
merits of *Istikhara* and the need for it. He quotes some narratives to
prove that one has to seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s help in all matters.

Types of Istikhara
------------------

For every task that you undertake, you should seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s
support and pray for good end to your efforts. Whatever the end result,
remain consigned to Allah (S.w.T.)’s wish.

After seeking Allah (S.w.T.)’s support, rivet your attention to your
heart and act according to the signal you get from there.

After seeking Allah (S.w.T.)’s support, consult some sagacious *Mu’min*
and act on the matter according to his advice.

Do *Istikhara* through the Qur’an, the rosary, through chits or marble
like balls.

The Allama says that, “In several traditions there is a pointer towards
the first type of *Istikhara.* Several other scholars, like Shaikh
Mufīd, Allama Tūsi and Ibn Idrīs are hesitant about the fourth type of
*Istikhara.* But, since there are traditions in support of all the four
types of *Istikhara,* we cannot reject any of the four methods. Any way,
the first three ways of doing the *Istikhara* are very appropriate,
which in our times are almost defunct.”  
    
 Several youths came during their examination times and want a
*Istikhara* to be done whether they stand a chance of passing the
examination or not. In brief, we want to mention about the edict of
*Shari’ah* in such matters. We request you to communicate these words to
others in your circle that people better shun their wrong ways and do
not pollute their faith with silly habits.  
  

Clear Warnings about Istikhara
------------------------------

About *Istikhara* all schools agree that the Prophet (S) has advised
that this should not be avoided for any small or big task.

Amir al-Mu’minīn (a.s.) says, “During my journey to Yemen, on which I
went on the orders of the Prophet (S), besides other instructions, he
said, ‘O ‘Ali! During this journey never forget to see the *Istikhara*
at every stage.’ One who does *Istikhara* will never have troubles nor
one who consults others will ever repent.”

Every Imam has exhorted his successor about the *Istikhara* as he has
done about the recitation of the Qur’an.

This *Istikhara* about which so much has been said is not just seeing
the odd and even of the beads of the rosary. But the purpose is to seek
good from Allah (S.w.T.) (*Talab al-khaira min Allah).* In every task
that you do, you must seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s help and pleasure!

There are several traditions about the method and prayer for
*Istikhara.* One is that for routine works, one should say seven times,
“*Astakhair Allah berehmate khairat fi aafiah”.*

For important matters like travel, business deals or surgeries repeat
the same words a hundred and one times. If the words are said in a state
of prostration, it would be better. And if the words are repeated in the
prostration after a optional prayer, and better after the optional
prayer following the mandatory morning prayer (*Fajr).*  
* *  
 In another tradition it is narrated from Imam *Zayn* al-’Abidin (a.s.)
that the words of *Istikhara* should be repeated ten times for routine
matters and two hundred times for important matters like journeys,
*Umrah* etc.  
    
 People have been very strongly advised to seek help in their matters
from Allah (S.w.T.) in a state of prostration. That is the time when one
is nearest to Allah (S.w.T.). If men make this their habit and practice,
and never divert from it, then all actions will be felicitous. If a
person has any doubt about this, he should study in depth the methods
for removing the doubts recorded in the pure *Shari’ah*.  
  

Suggestions for Removing Doubts
-------------------------------

   
 The best suggestion is that which is in according to the *Nass
(categorical order)* of the Qur’an, and that is not to take advise from
any person other than one falling in the four following categories:

1. Wise, shrewd and far-sighted. It goes without saying that seeking
suggestions from foolish persons will be futile.

2. One who is religious and pious. Seeking suggestions from a faithless
and careless person is not desirable. When a person doesn’t care for
Allah (S.w.T.), how one can expect that he would care for ordinary
mortals?

3. One who is your friend and well-wisher. A person who is one’s
adversary cannot give advice in your interest.

4. A person who is your confidante and will not disclose about your
matters to others.

   
 If any person has all the four qualities, he can always be consulted on
important matters. Allah (S.w.T.), from whom you have sought help in
your matters, will convey to you through the advice of the person of
your choice about the best course you must adopt in your matters.  
  

The Holy Imams (a.s.) Used to Take Advice
-----------------------------------------

   
 Allama Majlisi quotes from Imam Ridha (a.s.) that he said, “My revered
father, Imam Mūsa Ibn Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), despite being of the
highest intellect, used to consult with his slave occasionally. For
example: Whenever he embarked on some important task, he used to seek
the advice of the clever slave. If performance of that task was
advisable, he would go ahead with it.”

“The Imam was once asked by some one, ‘Although you are the Imam of the
times, you are taking advice from a slave! Being the Imam you should
have knowledge of everything.’ He replied, ‘what do you know? Is it not
possible that Allah wishes to enlighten me about certain matters through
his mouth?’”  
    
 Whenever one is in a doubt and confusion about matters, he should act
in accordance with Allah (S.w.T.)’s injunction in the Holy Qur’an and
the sayings of the Prophet and the Imams (a.s.).  
  

Istikhara Through Chits
-----------------------

   
 At times when no advice is available or the available advice doesn’t
agree with that given by other equally competent persons, For example:
you have taken the advice of a person keeping in mind the four
established norms and he approved of your contention. The same matter,
when referred to another person of the same competence was not approved
by him. In such an event, to remove the doubt and confusion, you will
have to follow the following procedure:

Take six equal pieces or chits of paper. On each chit write,
“*Bismillahir Rahmanir Raheem. Khairum minal laahil hakeem li fulaan bin
(or ‘bint’ instead of ‘bin’ for a woman) fulaan (write your and your
father’s names in place of the 1st* *and 2nd* *fulaan).”* Then on three
of the chits write, “’*If’*a*l” (meaning ‘do!’)* and on the remaining
three write, *“la taf’al” (meaning ‘don’t do!’).*

Keep all the six chits under the prayer mat and offer two *rakaat* of
*Istikhara* prayer. After the salutation or during the last prostration
of the prayer recite a hundred times the following words, *“Asta-khiru
llaahi birahmatihi khairat fi ‘aafiya”* Now that the prayer is complete,
retrieve the chits from under the mat and shuffle them. After this
exercise pick the chits one after the other. If on three consecutive
chits it is inscribed, “*If’al”,* then it is very good and you can go
ahead with the performance of the task you intend to. If three
consecutive chits have written on them, “*La taf’al”,* then you will
have to abstain from doing the task. If you have picked up five chits,
one after the other, alternatively with the inscription of “*If’al”* and
*“la ta’fal”* alternately in that order, then if three of the five chits
have written “*If’al”* on them, then you must go ahead with your task.
But if three of these chits have inscribed on them “*La ta’fal”* then
you must refrain from performing the task.

It is better if the chits are of the same paper, of the same color and
of the same dimension.

If a person doesn’t have time for the *Salat al-Istikhara* and the
prayers mentioned above. Then, if he has good comprehension of the
verses of the Holy Qur’an, and is capable of interpretation of the
verses, in relation to the task for which the *Istikhara* is being
performed, he can as well make access to the Qur’an for his augury.

Shaikh Tūsi (r.a) has narrated in his book *“Tahdhíb”* that Yasa Bin Abd
Allah al-Qummi came one day to Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) and said, “I
intend to perform a task but I am unable to arrive at a firm decision
for or against doing it.” The Imam (a.s.) said, “When you stand up with
the intention of prayer, then think what your heart feels about the
matter. Act on that; because that is the time when Satan is the farthest
away from the man. Or you can open the pages of the Holy Qur’an at that
time and act according to the interpretation you derive from the verse
that meets your eyes.”

Doing Istikhara for Others
--------------------------

The practice of our times is to write *nek* (Farsi for “auspicious”) or
*bud* (unfavorable) on the Holy Qur’an, or we approach a scholar for
doing the *Istikhara.* Allama Majlisi says that even for the sake of
example we don’t have any tradition of the Prophet (S) or the Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.) that a Shi’ah went to any Imam (a.s.) for the purpose of
*Istikhara.* Therefore, there is no precedent that can be quoted in
support of our practice in this matter. There are certain clerics who
don’t agree to do *Istikhara* for others. But Allama Majlisi and some
other scholars approve that those who cannot do the *Istikhara*
themselves, can nominate another capable person as *wakīl*
(representative) to open the Holy Book and do the *Istikhara* for him.
The condition is that the person who opens the Book should be in proper
physical condition at the time and is conversant with the meanings of
the verses of the Qur’an.

Many jurists consider *istikhara* as not legitimate. They say that there
is no need to do the *Istikhara* and one must act and trust his affairs
to the Will of Allah (S.w.T.).

The conclusion is that we shall seek good (*khair)* from Allah (S.w.T.)
in our affairs and that is the crux of *Istikhara.*  
* *  
* *


