The Sixteenth Talk
==================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَلَى
رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, there is no authority for him over those who believe and rely
on their Lord. (Sura An-Nahl, 16:99)***

* *

Tawakkul or Trust in Allah (S.w.T.) Essential Part of Practicing Monotheism
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
 The topic of *Tawakkul* is one of the most important of the aspects of
the religion of Islam because the essential part of monotheism is
absolute trust in Allah (S.w.T.). In other words a Muslim is one who
seeks succor only from Allah (S.w.T.) for deriving benefits and warding
off of losses. In fact this is the meaning and purport of *la ilaaha
illallah* *(S.w.T.) wa laa hawla wa laa quwwata illa billaahil ‘Alliyil
Adheem.* *Hawqala* or saying *laa hawla wa laa quwwata illa billah* is
the key to the Heaven and the practical expression of monotheism by the
believer. Thus it is the expression by the person that he is not an
independent entity who has to depend on Allah (S.w.T.)’s wish in all
matters. It is his duty to believe in the *Musabbib al-asbaab* (the
Causer of causes), that is Allah (S.w.T.), the Creator of the Existence.

He should realize and believe in the fact that with the utterance of a
single word, “*Kun”,* became the cause of creation of the creatures in
the Universe. He should also have belief in the fact that the very
existence of the universe is the miraculous phenomenon of the *Musabbib
al-Haqeeqi* or the real doer of things and the absolute Creator, that is
Allah (S.w.T.) and not something that evolved by itself.  
  

Dependence on Allah (S.w.T.) for the Success of the Tasks That One Strives to Do
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Man must strive to achieve objectives but he must leave the success or
failure of his efforts to *Musabbib al-asbaab*. The source of strength
for the worldly gains or losses and the rewards in the Hereafter for the
person should be the absolute trust in Allah (S.w.T.). His faith about
the worldly affairs should be that if Allah (S.w.T.) wished he would
certainly be successful in his efforts. About the rewards of the
Hereafter, he should always remember that he has to abide by Allah
(S.w.T.)’s commands implicitly and trust in His beneficence.

Allah (S.w.T.) commands that man must strive for his worldly affairs,
but he should be away from greed and avarice. He should definitely make
efforts to acquire the worldly comforts but he should not go near
prohibited things. When a person’s attorney wants him to bring all his
documents to the court, can he refuse to do that? When he has thought
that he is incapable of handling his case himself, he has retained the
attorney. Then he has to trust him and proceed according to the advice
tendered by him.  
  

Essential to Have a Wakil or Attorney
-------------------------------------

O man! You are helpless and cannot be successful in this world nor in
the hereafter on your own! If you have trust in a power, then in times
of trouble you will not be shaky because your Wakil is there to help
you.  
    
 Don’t you recite in a supplication after your daily prayers (*Ta’qeeb*)
the following words: “*Tawakkaltu ‘alal hayyil ladhi la yamoot” (I trust
my affairs to the Ever Living and Undying Allah).*

He is the Greatest Wakil and the best help - *Ni’m al-Wakil, ni’m
al-Mawla wa ni’m an-Naseer.*  
* *

Satan Runs Away From The Mutawakkil or the One Resigned to the Will of Allah (S.w.T.)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
 It has been narrated that when a person stirs out of his house in the
morning, the satans will be waiting for him at the threshold. But when
he steps out of the house and says, “*Aamantu billahi tawakkaltu ‘alal
laahi* *–* *I believe in Allah and I place my trust on Allah.”* Then the
satans will slink away.

These words can be said in any language, it doesn’t matter. The words
are a support for the heart and surety for the life of the person. It is
a fact that if you trust your Wakil, He is Omnipotent and can keep away
from you all difficulties and hardships. He will help you get all the
profits that He deems are legitimate. There is none more generous and
powerful than Allah (S.w.T.).  
  

Ibn Zubair’s Rebellion After the Event of Karbala
-------------------------------------------------

At this juncture I remember a tradition quoted in the *Usūl al-Kafi.*
Abdullah Bin Zubair, who was one of the sworn enemies of the Progeny of
the Prophet (S), and even in the sermon of the Friday prayers he avoided
saying the *Durood* (benediction) on the Prophet (S). When people
protested against this practice, he said, “Benediction on the Prophet
(S) is void without reference to his progeny. But if I refer to his
progeny in the sermon, then many will lose their necks!”

Coming back to the main subject: after the event of Karbala, Abdullah
bin Zubair rose in rebellion in Mecca al-Mukarrama and made a claim for
the Caliphate. Some groups from Iraq joined him and slightly improved
his strength.

The accursed Yazid, who was looking for an opportunity that some one
raised his voice to give a justification for his harassing the people
with an iron fist. Abdullah bin Zubair gave him this opportunity by
claiming control over the Hijaz.  
    
 Yazid then sent Muslim bin Uqba and Haseen bin Namīr with a huge force
towards Hijaz and asked them to go via Madina al-Munawwara and make a
general massacre there to the maximum possible extent.

Imam Zayn Al-’Abidin and a Saintly Personality
----------------------------------------------

   
 On one hand there was the scheming of Ibn Zubair and on the other
Yazid’s hordes. It was only after a few days of the tragic events of
Karbala that Sayyid as-Sajjad (a.s.) had returned home to Madina. He was
very worried of the developments and expressed his fears to Abu Hamza on
the matter in the following words: “I emerged out of my home and
reclined on this wall (p*erhaps, by wall he means the ramparts of the
city of Madina*). Suddenly I noticed a person clad in two pieces of
white cloth that stood in front of me and said:

“‘Ali bin al-Husayn! What is the reason that you look worried? Are you
worried because of worldly difficulties? If such is the case, you should
not worry because Allah is the sustainer and gives livelihood to all.”

I replied, “I don’t have any care for the world!”

The man asked, “Then, are you worried for the Hereafter? Then this
matter too is not to worry about! Allah’s promise is true and He will
support you!”

“I am not concerned about the Hereafter either!” I replied.

“Then why do you look worried?” the man asked.

I said, “I am worried about the intrigues of Ibn Zubair.”

The Imam (a.s.) was worried because of the machinations of that sworn
enemy of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) and the attack of the hordes of Yazid.
The third fear, which was not unfounded, was the attack by Hajjaj on the
orders of Abdul Malik.

The person laughed and said, ‘Have you seen anyone who trusted Allah,
and Allah has not helped him? Have you ever seen a person who has spread
his hand to Allah for help and Allah has sent him disappointed?”

The Imam (a.s.) said, “No!”

And the person disappeared from the view!

About this event Allama Majlisi says, “It was either a saintly
personality, an angel or Hadrat Khidr (a.s.)”  
  

Speaking for the Tranquility of the Heart
-----------------------------------------

   
 Allama Majlisi says that such conversations are in no way a remark on
the high status of the Imams (a.s.) but are manifestations of
*Tadhakkur* and spiritual reminder of Allah (S.w.T.)’s Wish to put the
Imam (a.s.)’s heart at ease.

One example is that when an erudite scholar’s son expires, people tell
him to be patient that Imam Husayn (a.s.) too lost his son in the prime
of youth. This is *Tadhakkur.* Sermonizing or moralizing is done
irrespective of the age of the person who is the subject of this. The
person who moralizes can be raw and young and the person he talks to
could be highly learned and old! Sometimes it does happen that a child
says something and an old and learned person draws benefit from the
*Tadhakkur* of the infant!

Imam Husayn (a.s.) Talks to ‘Ali Akbar
--------------------------------------

   
 You must have heard that Hadrat Imam Husayn (a.s.), at one of the
stages on the journey to Karbala woke up uneasily from his sleep. ‘Ali
Akbar said, “O father! What is the reason that you are disturbed?” The
Imam (a.s.) replied, “I heard a herald announce that this group is
advancing towards their death! This journey is for martyrdom and
killings.” ‘Ali Akbar asked, “O father! Are we on the side of
righteousness?” The Imam (a.s.) replied, “Definitely! We are on the side
of the right!”  
    
 ‘Ali Akbar rejoined, “If we are the travelers on the path of
righteousness, then how good it will be that we sacrifice our lives in
the cause of Truth!”

Such words of wisdom from the mouth of the young son soothed the nerves
of the Imam (a.s.) and he prayed to Allah (S.w.T.) to enable the youth
to be Righteous!

 


