The Seventeenth Talk
====================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَلَى
رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, there is no authority for him over those who believe and rely
on their Lord. (Sura An-Nahl, 16:99)***

Tawakkul is the Result of the Knowledge, Circumstances and the Actions of an Individual
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The scholars and researchers are of opinion that *Tawakkkul* results
from three things: the knowledge of the person, his circumstances and
his actions. We shall talk about all the three aspects.

**Knowledge:** As long as a person is not learned, *Tawakkul* will not
be in him. This will depend on three things. The first is *Yaqeen* or
firm belief. The person should have absolute belief on Allah (S.w.T.)’s
unfathomable power that He is “*’Ala kulli shayyin Qadeer* (all things
are in His power) and “*Qaadir ‘ala kulli shayy”* (wields power over all
things). The most difficult tasks that man is unable to perform with all
his capabilities, are very easy of accomplishment by Allah (S.w.T.).
Nothing is there that is not in His Reach.  
  

Wisdom and Kindness on Men
--------------------------

**Yaqeen:** Secondly, yaqeen or faith is imperative that Allah (S.w.T.)
is ‘*Aalam as-sirr wal-khafiyyat,* He has knowledge of the manifest and
the hidden. In other words, He is Omniscient.

*Muntaha ash-shafaqat ‘ala ibaadihi:* Thirdly, the person should have
the firm belief that Allah (S.w.T.) is utmost kind on His creatures.
*Mu’min* is near and dear to Allah (S.w.T.). The instinctive love that a
mother has for her child is also from Allah (S.w.T.). Allah (S.w.T.)’s
love for His creatures is thousands of times more than a mother’s love
for her child. In fact, his love for the creatures is unfathomable. He
is the Sustainer; He creates, trains, and loves those He has brought up
with care. Many examples can be cited about this. But now we are quoting
one narration from *Hayat al-Qulub* of Allama Majlisi:  
    
 Hadrat Nuh (a.s.) cursed his disobedient people. As a result of this
curse, all the infidels got drowned in the flood. One angel came to
Hadrat Nuh (a.s.). Hadrat Nuh (a.s.) was a potter. At the time when the
angel came to him, he was busy on the potters-wheel making goblets and
tempering them on fire. The angel bought all the goblets from Hadrat Nuh
(a.s.) and started breaking them one after another. Hadrat Nuh (a.s.),
surprised and upset, asked him why he was breaking the goblets. The
angel said, “What right you have over the things that I have already
paid for?” Hadrat Nuh (a.s.) said, “Don’t you know that I had made the
goblets with my own hands?” The angel rejoined, “You have only made the
goblets, you have not created them! Even then you are upset at my
breaking them. When you got so many creatures drowned in the floods,
would not Allah (S.w.T.), the Creator, have felt upset and sad!” At
this, as is quoted in *‘Ilall ash-Sharay’i,* Hadrat Nuh bowed down his
head and wept so much that he was given the name of Nuh (one who wails)
because of this.  
  

The Prophet (S) Never Cursed Anyone
-----------------------------------

   
 Allah (S.w.T.), therefore, is very kind on His creatures because, one
who is the provider of sustenance has lots of love for those whom He
brings up. Allah (S.w.T.) expresses His displeasure on one of His
closest Prophets (a.s.) as to why he had cursed his people and caused
their destruction.  
    
 The greatness of the Last of the Prophets, Hadrat Muhammad (S.), can be
judged from the fact that he never cursed anyone throughout his life. He
is therefore, *Rahmatan lil ‘Aalameen* or Blessing for all the Worlds!
If he had cursed the infidels and polytheists, they would have all
perished.

An Example of Godly Affection
-----------------------------

One day the infidels caused so much hurt to the Prophet (S) that he fell
unconscious, and blood was flowing from his face and head. Someone
informed Hadrat Khadija (s.a.) that her husband was assaulted by his
enemies and caused him grievous injuries. They were wondering whether
she would find him alive or not. That day the angels came to the Prophet
(S) and asked him his wish. The Prophet (S), who is a blessing for all
the worlds, did not ask for the punishment of the infidels but, to the
contrary, he prayed for them in the following words: “O Allah (S.w.T.)!
Guide my people aright!” In addition to this, the Prophet (S) advocated
for them that, “They are not aware that I am Your Annunciated Prophet.
They are ignorant and I plead not to punish them!”  
  

People Themselves Seek a Place in Hell
--------------------------------------

   
 Don’t say that when the Prophet (S) is so forgiving, then why Allah
(S.w.T.) had to create the Hell. The creation of the Hell is not
contrary to *Ash-shafaqat ‘alal ‘ibaad (compassion on the creation).*
Man himself flies away from the way of Allah (S.w.T.)’s love
(*Shafaqah)* and rightly earns a place in the Hell.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَظْلِمُ النَّاسَ شَيْئًا وَلَـكِنَّ النَّاسَ
أَنفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah does not do any injustice to men, but men are unjust to
themselves. (Sura Yunus, 10:44)***

Allah (S.w.T.) loves them very much and keeps them warned repeatedly
about the Hell through the verses of the Qur’an. He exhorts them to keep
away from it. He also warns them against Satan’s tricks and that he is
the open enemy of men.  
    
 In a nutshell, unless you realize that Allah (S.w.T.) is Omnipotent and
Beneficent and has kindness and love for his creatures, you cannot
achieve the state of *Tawakkul.*  
   

Affection on a Kitten
---------------------

   
 In the Commentary, *Ruh al-Bayan,* it is said that someone dreamed of a
pious person after his death and inquired about his condition. He said
that one good turn had helped him very much. It was winter. In addition
to extreme cold it was raining cats and dogs. In the state of extreme
cold he noticed a kitten in search of warmth and shelter. It looked
hungry and weak. He took pity on the kitten and picked it up and hid it
in his coat of leather and took it home. There he fed the kitten and
protected it from cold. When the weather improved, he freed the kitten.
Allah (S.w.T.) had forgiven all his sins because of this good turn of
his.  
    
 How much Allah (S.w.T.) must be getting pleased if one did such a good
turn to a human being. There is another love much more superior
mentioned in the Qur’an. That is the love for Allah (S.w.T.). Allah
(S.w.T.) terms such persons His *mahboob* or the Beloved.

Therefore, the condition of knowledge is firm belief in affection for
Allah (S.w.T.) and that, because of this affection Allah (S.w.T.) loves
you.

Now the question is that despite all this why we don’t depend
(*Tawakkul)* on Allah (S.w.T.)? Is there anyone more dependable than Him
in our view? Do we know any personality who is wiser than, stronger than
and kinder than Allah (S.w.T.)? When one’s Allah (S.w.T.) is so
forgiving, why should he seek the affection of anyone else!

O Allah (S.w.T.)! Strengthen our hearts with the strength of belief that
we make only you the focus of our expectations! Call only you in times
of trouble and whenever Satan creates fears in our heart, we seek your
protection! We keep trust only on Your support at every step in our
lives. We mould ourselves into total *Mu’minīn* following the dictum of
“*if you are a mu’min do Tawakkul on Allah (S.w.T.)!”*  
* *

What Satan Has To Do With Those Who Have Tawakkul Or Dependence On Allah (S.w.T.)!
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you consider your Sustainer, Allah (S.w.T.), as the reservoir of all
your strength, and thereby become a person with *Tawakkul,* that is,
total dependence on Allah (S.w.T.), then Satan dare not have access to
your heart! Here we are reminded of the example of the king’s camp and
the ferocious dog at its entrance. But one who is close to the king,
will call from outside and orders would be given for his admittance.
Similarly, if one has closeness with the Creator of the Universe, and
has *Tawakkul* on Him, then his *Isti’adha* too will be acceptable and
Satan will never come near him.

Friends of Allah (S.w.T.) Have no Anxiety from Satan
----------------------------------------------------

Men have several enemies. Whenever they become the people of *Tawakkul,*
depending totally on Allah (S.w.T.), then all the enemies unite to
oppose them. Confronting so many strong enemies is not easy. There is
only one way of subduing them. That is *Tawakkul (Dependence)* on Allah
(S.w.T.). When one depends totally on Allah (S.w.T.), then Satan’s fears
and temptations would mean trifling to him. “*The friends of Allah
neither fear anyone nor do they face any sadness or misery”.*  
  

Blade of Dried Grass or Straw
-----------------------------

   
 Unfortunate are those hapless persons who have no place of succor. They
are just like the blades of straw that fly around with the gusts of the
wind. Satan will rest only after destroying such persons. In contrast to
these, the one who is powerful has access to the Omnipotent Allah
(S.w.T.), and only Allah (S.w.T.) is his succor.

Our lives are fast running out of time. We should not remain deprived of
*Tawakkul* on Allah (S.w.T.).  
* *

Tawakkul on Allah (S.w.T.) is Necessary in the Hereafter Too
------------------------------------------------------------

   
 As it is necessary to Trust on Allah (S.w.T.) during our worldly lives,
then, whatever is in store for us in the Hereafter too we shall have to
depend on Allah (S.w.T.) for his Beneficence. For this *Tawakkul* is
most important. Allah (S.w.T.) is the Master of all our affairs - in the
grave, in purgatory (*Barzakh),* on *Qiyamat* (Doomsday) and we have to
depend on Him in all these stages. It is Allah (S.w.T.) who brought us
from nothingness to the world and has been our Guardian till the
Resurrection (*Ma’ad)*!


