Preface
=======

Real protection can come only from the Force that is All-Pervading!

This work of Shahīd al-Mihraab Ayatullah Dastaghaib is presented under
the title and style of *“Isti’adha”.*

As is very evident from the title, the subject of the presentation is
about seeking Allah (S.w.T.)’s protection against the manoeuvrings of
Satan. With his high learning and knowledge of the Verses of the Holy
Book and the Traditions of the Infallibles of the Prophet’s Family, he
has delivered as many as thirty-five lectures on the intricate subject.
He has elucidated the five aspects of *Isti’adha,* namely piety or
*taqwa*, Remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.) or *Dhikr,* resignation on the
wishes of Allah (S.w.T.) or *Tawakkul,* honesty of purpose or *Ikhlas*
and humility in supplication or *Tadarrau.*

The Ayatullah’s discourses on these topics are highly illuminating and
interesting for those who peruse them. To support his arguments, the
author referred to the Verses, Traditions and tales with great skill. He
has presented the facts in a very lucid language that the readers of all
intellectual levels understand what he has conveyed to them.

The fact that has to be recognized is that the Ayatullah was the
people’s guide (*Marja’ at-Taqlid)* in his lifetime and therefore the
world mourned him at the time of his martyrdom and thereafter too. The
great works of the martyred Ayatullah are like the petals of a fragrant
flower. These publications people have been buying for themselves and to
gift to friends for deriving benefit from their reading.

The Martyr was himself a true practitioner of *Isti’adha.* Throughout
his life he struggled against the baser instincts *(nafs al-ammara*) and
to practice self- denial. This struggle of his was against the
machinations of Satan. In this struggle he was victorious. Therefore he
introduces Satan to his audiences in a very lucid and effective manner.
He gives to the audience the ways of protecting themselves and seeking
Allah (S.w.T.)’s Help to this end. The talks in this compendium are
studded with thought provoking references. They are so interesting that
the narrative retains the interest of the reader throughout the
narrative and doesn’t tire them for a while! The interest increases as
one makes progress with the reading!

I remember that once when an offset technician was photographing one of
the Ayatullah’s books, he got engrossed in reading the contents. He has
himself confessed that he was lost so much in reading the book that he
forgot that the time for the closure of the studio that day had already
come. Throughout the day he had not photographed even a page of the
book! He said that on later days too, many a time he got engrossed in
the contents of the book during the process of photographing it.

O Allah (S.w.T.)! Keep the Martyr’s spirit under the shadow of Your
Munificence and also bless the spirit of his grandson with those of
other martyrs!  
    
 Sayyid Muhammad Hashim Dastaghaib  
 05-12-1360  
 24-02-1982


