The Nineteenth Talk
===================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَلَى
رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, there is no authority for him over those who believe and rely
on their Lord. (Sura An-Nahl, 16:99)***

Sorrows and Happiness Are From Allah (S.w.T.)
---------------------------------------------

*Tawakkul* requires that people should understand that on everything is
Allah (S.w.T.)’s suzerainty and all things big and small are His. All
that happens is with His wish and command. As it is said in the *Sura
an-Najm* giving examples of certain things it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ هُوَ أَضْحَكَ وَأَبْكَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And that He it is Who makes (men) laugh and makes (them) weep; (Sura
an-Najm, 53:43)***

This means that it is Allah (S.w.T.) who controls the causes for men
becoming happy and sad. He provides wealth and riches to people and
makes them prosperous. The land on which we walk also belongs to Allah
(S.w.T.). The dwellings in which we live in, and all the paraphernalia
therein belong to Him only. We should have absolute Faith in His
Sovereignty over everything.

Without Knowledge Faith of Tawhid is Not Practical
--------------------------------------------------

As long as one doesn’t have faith in the facts mentioned, it is not
possible to understand the reality of *La hawla wa la quwwata illa
billah.* Man has to understand that the authority of anyone, other than
Allah (S.w.T.), on anything is totally negated. The word “*La*” asserts
that there is no power in the hands of anyone other than Allah (S.w.T.).
He alone is the reservoir and fountainhead of power and is the Creator
and the Possessor.

There is no permanent class or status for the creatures. The ability of
man to use the tongue and modulate words is because of the Will of Allah
(S.w.T.).

The Mouth Opened But Didn’t Close
---------------------------------

Sometime ago, a woman was brought to a hospital. Her lower jaw was
hanging downward. They said that she opened her mouth wide to yawn. Ever
since then she was unable to close her mouth.

It is true that making both the jaws meet is in His Power! The summary
of this discussion is that in matters man doesn’t have total control and
in everything the wish of Allah (S.w.T.) is Supreme. The matters that
are unseen will become visible only with Allah (S.w.T.)’s Wish. To
understand this phenomenon, it will need deep thinking and wisdom.


The Importance of Sura Al-Tawhid
--------------------------------

About a third of the contents of the Holy Qur’an is about *Tawhid* or
the Unity of Allah (S.w.T.). This highlights the importance of the verse
of *Tawhid* that is specifically pertaining to the fact of the Unity of
Allah (S.w.T.). According to some authentic traditions, the felicity of
reciting this Sura is equal to reciting a third of the Qur’an.

Who deserves this felicity? The person deserving this reward is one who
practices *Taqwa* or absolute piety. He can recite this verse thrice and
get felicity equal to the recitation of the complete Book.

As we have said earlier, saying *la hawla wa la quwwata illa billah* is
like having the key to the Heaven in one’s hands. But this privilege too
is only for those who are practitioners of true *Taqwa* and have a
complete understanding of and absolute faith on *Tawhid.* How could an
ignorant person with aimless recitation of *La hawla* deserve to get the
key to the Heaven?


Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.) is a Source of Pride for Those Who Trust on Allah (S.w.T.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first stage of *Tawakkul* is that people should not think of Allah
(S.w.T.) like a worldly attorney to whom they trust their matters with
full confidence. The second stage is that the person trusts on Allah
(S.w.T.) at least as much as a child puts his trust on the mother. The
third stage concerns the privileged persons whose wealth and possession
is only on the Will of Allah (S.w.T.). They do only that which has the
express approval of Allah (S.w.T.)!

Hadrat Ibrahim Khaleelullah (a.s.) had achieved the highest degree of
*Tawakkul.* When the men of Nimrod wanted to consign him to the fire,
Hadrat Jibril came and asked him, “If you have any requirement, please
tell me!” Hadrat Ibrahim said, “I do have a requirement, but I will not
ask it of you!” Jibril asked, “From whom, then?” Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.)
replied, “He is aware of all my needs! I need not ask him. He is
all-wise and He sees everything! Whatever He wishes for me, I too wish
for the same!”


Have We Ever Told The Truth
---------------------------

We must be uttering a thousand times the word *Hasbunallah wa n’im
al-Wakil* *(Allah suffices for us and He is best attorney!).* But in
reality have we ever trusted to Him, wholly or partially, our worldly
matters or affairs of the Hereafter?

Have we ever acted upon the injunction of the Holy Qur’an -*Fattakhi
dhuhu wakila –* (then take Him (Allah) as an attorney)? If the reply to
this question is in the negative, then what is the need of complaining
and living in doubts and fears? Believe me! There is only one reason for
all the trouble. That is, paucity of faith and belief.

A Mutawakkil is Never Greedy
----------------------------

If someone acquires *Tawakkul* in day-to-day life, then he will be free
of greed and avarice in his needs and wants.

During *Hijjat al-Wida,* The Last *Hajj*, the Prophet (S) held the
threshold of *Ka’aba* and turning towards his companions said, “*Ruh
al-Amin,* Jibril, has revealed to my heart that no person will die till
the sustenance earmarked for him in this world is not exhausted. This
means that the person will not die before consuming the last morsel of
food meant for him. Therefore, fear Allah (S.w.T.) and avoid greed and
avarice, lest you involve yourselves in illegitimate (*Haram*). The one
who reclines on the worldly matters, he will never be sated with however
much he gets!”

This doesn’t mean that one should not strive for search of livelihood.
Do strive, but always with *Tawakkul* in mind.

Dependence on The Wakil is Necessary
------------------------------------

Consider this example with care and attention. Suppose you are involved
in some legal problem. Dealing with this problem personally is beyond
you. We suggested to you to look for a wise and competent lawyer and act
on his advice. Then this act of yours will not be contrary to the
requirements of *Tawakkul* but also the attorney’s advice will be
binding on you because he wants things that way and your action also in
accord, because he wishes to set your matters right.

This example proves that following the attorney’s advice implicitly is
in accordance with the requirement of *Tawakkul.* Similarly Allah
(S.w.T.) reforms the affairs of people through the circumstances
(*asbaab*) created by Him.

Cure from ailments is at Allah (S.w.T.)’s Wish, but He also wants people
to go to a physician and get medicines prescribed. He has exhorted
people not to neglect this important matter in their lives. Similarly
about the affairs of the Hereafter Allah (S.w.T.) says that for
qualifying for the Heaven, a person’s own actions will be the yardstick
for judgment.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَن لَّيْسَ لِلْإِنسَانِ إِلَّا مَا سَعَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And that man shall have nothing but what he strives for. (Sura
an-Najm, 53:39)***

You should not depend only on your prayers for deliverance, but also on
His Munificence and Kindness. Don’t brood too much on your good deeds
that it gives rise to the instinct of pride that might go against you.
The best course for you is to implicitly follow the Commands of Allah
(S.w.T.).


A Shop Without Goods on Allah (S.w.T.)’s Support
------------------------------------------------

This is the reason that when the toilers stir out of their homes in
search of work, they say, “O Sustainer! We strive for earning the day’s
square meals. You must give abundance!” These words reflect the spirit
of *Tawhid.*

It is said that in Medina a person came to Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.)
and complained of penury. The Imam said that when he reached home in
Kufa, he should take a shop on rent and sit there. The man said, “I have
no money to invest on goods!” The Imam replied, “Do whatever you are
asked to do!” The man complied, rented a shop and started sitting there
every day. After a few days a person came to him with some goods and
asked him to sell them on the basis of a pre determined commission. The
owner of the goods said that he was leaving the goods in the shop on
consignment basis of sell-and-pay!

Another person came with some more goods and there was a flow of
suppliers of goods to the shop. Buyers too started flocking the shop.
The affairs of the person took a turn towards prosperity!

An Idle Youth is an Enemy Of Allah (S.w.T.)
-------------------------------------------

There are some people who, on hearing that one must put Trust on Allah
(S.w.T.), wrongly think that they need not make any efforts because
Allah (S.w.T.) will provide their sustenance. They are absolutely wrong.
They must work in obedience to Allah (S.w.T.)’s injunction for earning a
fair living and not only in obedience to the instructions given at the
place of work.

Whatever work a true Muslim does is only in Obedience to Allah (S.w.T.).
He knows the Prophet (S.)’s exhortation, “An idle youth is Allah
(S.w.T.)’s enemy” Therefore he goes out in search of his livelihood.

The Learned to Get Sustenance From Ghaib
----------------------------------------

Someone might raise an objection that why the people of learning don’t
stir out in search of livelihood? The truth is that the nature of work
of a seeker of knowledge (*Talib e Ilm*) is different from that of other
people. It may not be possible that a person wants to train himself in
jurisprudence and does other trades for a livelihood. He has to spend
all his time in seeking knowledge on the matters of the Faith. Allah
(S.w.T.) arranges their sustenance from - *min haythu la yahtasib -* *a
place he never imagined*! Therefore, it has been narrated that excepting
the seeker of knowledge, Allah (S.w.T.) has provided livelihood for all
the creatures from the material resources of the world.

Tawakkul Depends on the Circumstances
-------------------------------------

One very important sign of *Tawakkul* is not the presence of any element
of avarice in the person. The second sign is that when he meets
different people, there is no change in his attitude. In certain cases
persons think that they are men of *Tawakkul,* and imagine that they are
totally dedicated to Allah (S.w.T.), but when they meets with failure in
certain worldly affairs, they get dejected. This is a sign that they
were depending more on worldly concerns than on Allah (S.w.T.). If there
is total dependence on Allah (S.w.T.), then one would know that whatever
happened to them is with His express Wish and thank Allah (S.w.T.) under
all circumstances!


Weakness of Faith
-----------------

Blaming or praising the circumstances is both the signs of lack of
*Tawakkul* in a person and a proof of the weakness of his Faith,
because, if the Faith on Unity of Allah (S.w.T.) (*Tawhid*) is firm,
then *Tawakkul* will definitely be there. *Tawakkul* is always reflected
in the words and deeds, likes and dislikes, of a person.

If someone enjoys a gain for some reason and, instead of being grateful
to Allah (S.w.T.) for His Blessing, is only thankful to the favorable
circumstances for his success, then he is a *Mushrik* or polytheist.
Also, because of the circumstances, if he fails in his efforts, and
blames the circumstances for his misfortune, then he considers only the
circumstances as his *Mushkil Kusha* or his trouble-shooter and not the
Will of Allah (S.w.T.). This is a general failing of the human beings.

But one who puts his total trust on Allah (S.w.T.), he doesn’t depend
on the circumstances for the success of his tasks. If he fails in his
efforts after due trials, he resigns himself to the fact that Allah
(S.w.T.) willed it that way. Although the unfavorable circumstances
might have been the cause of his failure, he thanks Allah (S.w.T.) that
he believes the circumstances to be under the Power of the Almighty.

Acquiring Tawakkul is Mandatory
-------------------------------

*Tawakkul* is mandatory on the Muslims. Neglecting it will be tantamount
to not abiding by the mandatory action. As implicit faith on *Tawhid* is
compulsory, *Tawakkul* too is necessary for a Muslim. It is a fact that
when a person is firm in his belief of the Unity of Allah (S.w.T.), he
instinctly becomes a practitioner of *Tawakkul.* Such a person is
endowed with all the requirements of Faith. *Iman bil Tawhid* means that
he trusts all his affairs to the Wish of Allah (S.w.T.). He expects help
only from Allah (S.w.T.), fears Him and puts total Trust in Him.

The researcher Ardabili says in “*Zibdat al-Bayan”* that the Command of
Allah (S.w.T.) about *Tawakkul* is not specifically for the Prophet (S.)
but it is in general for all human beings. The Holy Verse “*Fattakhi
dhuhu wakila”* is for everyone and the witness for this is borne by the
other verses of the Holy Qur’an wherein the populace is addressed in
this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى اللّهِ فَتَوَكَّلُواْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and on Allah should you rely if you are believers. (Sura al-Maidah,
5:23)***

Therefore this is a general injunction for all Muslims.

Here it is possible that one might say that such injunctions in the
Qur’an are just a part of the code of moral values. Then the injunction
of believing in *La ilaaha illallah* might face the same doubt. The
meaning of *La ilaaha illallah* is that *Rabb (Lord), Ma’bud (Creator),
Mudabbir (Wise),* Worthy of Worship and All Pervading is only Allah
(S.w.T.) and none else. This is the Practical Tawhid (*Tawhid
al-Af’aali*). Is it possible that even those who do not have faith in
this might not be questioned for their lack of faith! No! In all
circumstances firm faith on *Tawhid* is compulsory.


Tawakkul and Counsel
--------------------

The researcher Ardabili says that in terms of the Holy Verse
***“Fatawakkal ‘ala Allah” (therefore place your trust on Allah)*** it
is still binding on every believer *(mu’min)* to take advice from others
in all matters. But he should also not think that the best solution for
his problems is only in the advice he has obtained from others. In fact,
he should depend on Allah (S.w.T.) that He puts the right advice on the
tongues of the advisers.

If because of good advice you succeed in your task, then don’t say that
the desirable result is only because of the advice. You should think
that Allah (S.w.T.) had guided your advisers aright! If you are
unsuccessful in your efforts, despite all the good advice, think that it
was Allah (S.w.T.)’s Wish.

Therefore, whether you acted on your own intuition or the advice of
others, hope for Allah (S.w.T.)’s Help in your matters. Always ask your
advisers to give their right suggestions mindful of Allah (S.w.T.)’s
Wish in the matter.


If There is no Tawakkul There is no Faith
-----------------------------------------

Ardabili says that one who has not acquired *Tawakkul* has deprived
himself of Faith. Because Allah (S.w.T.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى اللّهِ فَتَوَكَّلُواْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and on Allah should you rely if you are believers. (Sura al-Maidah,
5:23)***

This proves that if there is no *Tawakkul* there is no *Iman* or Faith.
This proves that the crux of the faith is to believe that Allah (S.w.T.)
is the Causer of the Causes (*Musabbib al-asbaab*) and the basic
requirement of the Faith is to Trust on Allah (S.w.T.). If you rate your
own view or the advice of others more than the Will of Allah (S.w.T.)
then you have distanced yourself from Him. In these circumstances you
have ceased to be a believer*,* then what is the question of your
practicing *Tawakkul?*


Tall Claims Belittle a Person
-----------------------------

A person, sixty years of age, had claims of being an adept at
everything, was particularly proud of his knowledge of medicine. He
claimed that he was the Aristotle of the time. He proudly said that he
maintained his body according to the rigid norms of medicine and that he
would certainly live with good health for the next forty years.

One day the man made a meal of yogurt and cucumber around the time of
*Dhuhr.* He was devoid of teeth that he had already lost. He developed a
heart- ache after his meal. He thought that the pain was due to the
cold. He made a self-diagnosis that he was chronic sufferer of
biliousness, and the yogurt he had eaten was not sufficient to curb the
bile. He therefore drank some lime- juice. He thought that this
treatment would give him comfort. But by *Asr* he was really put to
rest! He had expired!


Don’t Trust Your Own Intuition
------------------------------

One who depends only on his intuition, he thinks that there is no power
over him that has Wisdom of all the matters. Such a person suffers from
lack of Faith.

You must ensure that whenever you decide to do anything, depend on your
own wisdom, advice of friends and trust the matter to Allah (S.w.T.).
Don’t ever think that the reason for doing any task is permanent. We
never know what is the Wish of Allah (S.w.T.).

Briefly, if there is no *Tawakkul,* there isn’t Faith. The meaning of
*Tawakkul* is depending on other. If a person is the practitioner of
*Tawakkul,* he trusts his matters to Allah (S.w.T.). If he doesn’t Trust
Allah (S.w.T.) then he depends on others for the solution to his
problems.


The Twentieth Talk
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَلَى
رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, there is no authority for him over those who believe and rely
on their Lord. (Sura an-Nahl, 16:99)***

* *
In the last talk we have discussed the observation of the Researcher
Ardabili on the subject of *Tawakkul.* The 158th Verse of Sura Aal Imran
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشَاوِرْهُمْ فِي الأَمْرِ فَإِذَا عَزَمْتَ فَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللّهِ
إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُتَوَكِّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…so when you have decided, then place your trust in Allah; surely
Allah loves those who trust*** ***(Him). (Sura Aal Imran, 3:158)***

Consult with others about your work, when you make up your mind after
that, then trust on Allah (S.w.T.) and go ahead with your task. About
this Researcher Ardabili has said that whether the basis of the decision
to go ahead with the task is of your thinking or the advice of others,
*Tawakkul* on Allah (S.w.T.) is very important. Whatever the result,
success or failure, don’t think that it was because of the good or bad
advice you followed, but try to resign to the will of Allah (S.w.T.).

Whatever task you want to accomplish, whether for seeking some benefit
or for warding away some trouble, have *Tawakkul* on Allah (S.w.T.) for
that matter and don’t depend only on your own decision and the advice of
friends. Remember your friends too, like you, are fallible beings.
“Whomsoever you call for help, besides Allah (S.w.T.), is a creature of
Allah (S.w.T.) like you.” Therefore it is necessary that the
fountainhead of the strength of your heart should be none other than
Allah (S.w.T.). It must be remembered the wisdom and vision of men is
limited and may not have the comprehension of all the connected facts.

We don’t suggest that you should not consult nor do we ask you to
refrain from acting on the advice of your well-wishers. But you must
keep all your hopes only on Allah (S.w.T.) and pray to Him that He puts
the best alternative for your welfare on the lips of your advisers.
Allah (S.w.T.) says, “One who does *Istikhara* (seeks good from Allah
(S.w.T.)) will never be in trouble.” The reason for this is that one
will not be aware of what is in store for him. He seeks Allah (S.w.T.)’s
guidance because He knows everything about all the matters.

Istikhara And Tawakkul
----------------------

It has come in the narrations about Imam *Zayn* al-’Abidin (a.s.) that
whenever he had any important task to perform, like buying a house,
marriage or need for traveling, we would repeat the following words 200
times: *asta-khirullahi birahmatihi fi ‘aafiya.*

And, then, according to his own thinking he would act.

The Researcher Ardabili says that because of *Tawakkul,* it is mandatory
on Muslims that they leave all their affairs in the trust of Allah
(S.w.T.) and resign themselves to His wish. For example, a farmer sows
seeds in his fields trusting in Allah (S.w.T.) that he gets a good crop
and returns for his hard toil. When you succeed in any task, count it as
Allah (S.w.T.)’s wish and not only the result of your own efforts. If
you get the feeling of pride for you success, it might be tantamount to
be termed practitioner of polytheism (*shirk).*

It should be your faith that you are only an instrument to do the task,
but its results are not in your hands. Your duty is to knock at the door
of Allah (S.w.T.) and make efforts to create circumstances for the
fulfillment of the task.

Whatever work a man does, his faith should be that fulfillment and
accomplishment of the job is at the discretion of Allah (S.w.T.). The
erudite scholars of Islam have said and, Tabari too says in his
commentary, *Majma al-Bayan* that one should submit to Allah (S.w.T.)
his affairs in such a manner that the thought of his person gets
obliterated in the process. *Ija’al an-nafs kal maadoom - think of the
self as being absent.*

A farmer, after sowing the seeds of oats in his fields, keeps all his
hopes for a good crop on Allah (S.w.T.) and awaits His Wish. *Innallaha
huwar-Razzaq - the true Sustainer is Allah.*

All men, in their affairs, must have such faith in Allah (S.w.T.).

Everything Happens With The Wish of Allah (S.w.T.)
--------------------------------------------------

As a farmer is aware that his crop is not only the result of his
personal endeavors because lots of crops fail because of several reasons
and also are destroyed by natural calamities as well. Similarly a trader
should know that the profit in his business is not only because of his
skills in the trade. As a matter of fact the labor of the farmer and the
skillful investment of the trader are because of Allah (S.w.T.)’s
Support and Wish. Allah (S.w.T.) is, no doubt, the creator and the
Master of everything in the Universe. If His Wish was not favorable to
them, all the efforts of the farmer and the trader could have gone to
waste. Therefore, man should put his implicit Trust in Allah (S.w.T.),
otherwise he will not get anything other than failure and
disappointment.

Tawakkul in Times of Danger
---------------------------

It is He who gives relief from harm and danger. To face the enemy it is
necessary to manufacture arms and strengthen oneself. But success in
defense too is only at His pleasure. Therefore, to protect one’s life,
property, honor and specially the Faith, your total dependence must be
on Allah (S.w.T.).

*Tawakkul* doesn’t mean that one need not make efforts to strife for
material benefits, or to strive to ward off dangers and leave everything
to the care of Allah (S.w.T.). We have reiterated on the matter several
times that when the attorney tells his client to gather all the relevant
documentation and evidence himself, he has to do it. When the attorney
has all the data on the causes of the litigation, he can successfully
handle the case. The client cannot sleep away. He has to follow up the
proceedings of the case. Similarly for defense against an enemy, one has
to acquire and procure the necessary arms. Don’t also think that making
available the arms relieves you of action. Defense has to be done by you
yourself. But the reservoir and the fountainhead of the strength of your
heart is the support of Allah (S.w.T.) whose pleasure is essential for
victory and success.

Ignorant Tawakkul
-----------------

Many years ago in Samara there was literally an invasion by hordes of
scorpions. They started emerging from every hole and crevice, every door
and window. All the students fled from the schools. One student did an
*Istikhara* whether he could stay put in the school. Somehow, the
*Istikhara* came out favorable for staying. Therefore the student stayed
on at the Madrasah. He slept there in the night. In the morning his
cortege had be taken out from the premises.

This is an ignorant act that in the name of *Tawakkul,* expose oneself
to danger. The right thing would have been to flee from the place of
danger in *Tawakkul* of Allah (S.w.T.).

As *Tawakkul* is necessary, so is the effort to earn a livelihood is
necessary. Similarly putting ones conscience in danger too is *Haram*.
Allah (S.w.T.) issues His Orders through the circumstances. Sometimes He
does it without any recourse to circumstances to prove His
Omnipotence!


Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) and the Tiger
-----------------------------------------

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) was proceeding with a group from Kufa for
performing the *Hajj*. On the way a tiger confronted them. The people in
the group didn’t have the courage to face it. The Imam (a.s.) himself
went forward and waved to the tiger to go away. It turned and went away.
Then the Imam (a.s.) addressed the surprised group: “If you too were
free of sins, you could have done what I was able to do! Even the wild
animal would have obeyed you.”

The researcher Ardabili says that at such times the Imam, through
inspiration (*Ilham)* knows that Allah (S.w.T.) will give relief in such
situations without any reason. He also knows that such acts are
exceptional. Therefore, they cannot be applied everywhere as a rule.


Other Meanings Of Tawakkul
--------------------------

We have already mentioned that *Tawakkul* is the pursuance of legitimate
affairs and dependence on Allah (S.w.T.). A question might arise in the
minds that in some books *Tawakkul* has been mentioned in other senses
than trust on Allah (S.w.T.). An example is that” a *Mu’min doesn’t fear
Allah (S.w.T.)”.* Does *Tawakkul al-Wajib* or mandatory Tawakkul require
one not to fear a wolf or a formidable enemy? Does it also require the
person not to fear penury and disease?

In another place it is said that a man of *Tawakkul* must know that the
Master of all gain or loss is none other than Allah (S.w.T.). In another
place it is said that one should not expect anything from anyone but
Allah (S.w.T.). The true sense of *Tawakkul* is not derived from these
statements.


The Existence of Cause is Not Permanent
---------------------------------------

The researcher Ardabili says that explanation for such narrations is
necessary. Not seeking anything from anyone would only mean that the
person from whom one obtains anything is not the Ultimate Provider. If
one needs bread, he should not think that the baker is the sustainer
(*raziq).* The way one pleads for things with Allah (S.w.T.), one should
not do the same way with anyone else. Otherwise it would be *Shirk* or
polytheism.

These days there is a story taking rounds in Tehran that some people are
propagating the Wahabi Sect in Tehran. They say that saying “Ya
Muhammad” and “Ya ‘Ali” is *Shirk.* In support of their claim they quote
the verse: ***“Lo! those on whom ye call beside Allah are slaves like
unto you.” (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:194)***. They also quote: ***“Therefore
call not upon any one with Allah.” (Sura al-Jinn, 72:18)***

These are ignorant persons who do not seem to know the meaning of prayer
(*Du’a).*
* *

Calling Someone Other Than Allah (S.w.T.)
-----------------------------------------

The meaning of Du’a, or Supplication is calling or summoning someone.
Just calling and summoning is not forbidden. But doing it in a manner
that Allah (S.w.T.) is called is not desirable. The call that is
specifically associated with Allah (S.w.T.) is *Du’a.* If anyone called
in this manner, it will be Shirk. Cure from a disease has to be asked
for from Allah (S.w.T.). If the same thing is asked of from a physician,
it can be termed *Shirk.* From the physician one can only ask for
diagnosing the ailment and prescribing the medicines. The intercession
(*Tawassul)* of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (a.s.) falls under the same category.
If someone pleads to Hadrat Abul Fadl al-Abbas as one would plead with
Allah (S.w.T.), then it would be *Shirk.*

But none do like this. Everyone thinks that Hadrat Abbas is the
intercessor on their behalf.

Therefore, the meaning of *Tawakkul* is that other than Allah (S.w.T.)
none else should be termed as the provider. Consider everyone under
Allah (S.w.T.)’s will and pleasure. One should depend only on Allah
(S.w.T.). Don’t the people who object to saying “Ya Muhammad”, “Ya ‘Ali”
realize that everyday they call several persons other than Allah
(S.w.T.)!


