Twenty First Talk
=================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَلَى
رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, there is no authority for him over those who believe and rely
on their Lord. (Sura an-Nahl, 16:99)***

Tawakkul Necessary to Learn About Tawhid
----------------------------------------

The importance of *Tawakkul* is supported by the fact that it is an
important concomitant of belief in *Tawhid*. The first *Da’wah*
(initiation) of all the Prophets (a.s.) has always been *Tawhid* or
unity of Allah (S.w.T.). The Holy Qur’an dwells mostly on the topic of
*Tawhid*. The knowledge that one has to compulsorily acquire is the
knowledge about *Tawhid.* Knowledge starts with the understanding of
Allah (S.w.T.) and its peak is submitting oneself to His Will.

One who really aspires to be an *Aalim* (an erudite scholar), his first
duty is to get a clear understanding about *Tawhid*. He must perfect
himself in this aspect of learning. It is not sufficient to say that we
are Muslim and we have faith in Tawhid. The touchstone of *Tawhid* is
firm faith in *la ilaaha illallah* and true understanding of this
Commandment. This has to be accompanied by absolute faith on *Tawhid
al-Af’aali* that whatever happens is with the Wish of Allah (S.w.T.).
One has also to believe that every bounty is a gift from Allah (S.w.T.).
The faith has to be from the depths of the heart and not just an
utterance from the lips.

Difference Between Words and Deeds
----------------------------------

During a day we pray five times. During these prayers we utter the words
*Rabb al-‘Aalameen* at least ten times. But mere utterance of these
words is not sufficient for the perfect belief on the Lord of the entire
Universe. The belief has to be from the depth of the hearts that He is
the Creator of all those false gods who made spurious claims to godhood.
Mere words are not sufficient. They just purify a person as a part of
the mandatory performance of prayer five times a day. The main purpose
is the understanding of the real fact that One on whom every human being
puts faith is the sustainer of all the worlds. He is the Creator of
things from smallest particle to the elephant, the human race, earth,
sky, the constellations and Jinns and angels. He controls the affairs of
all His creatures. Although it is not possible for the human eyes to see
Allah (S.w.T.), a firm faith in the Qur’an gives one the belief to
attain true Islam.

Entrusting the Affairs
----------------------

Isn't the Holy Qur’an a Book Revealed by Allah (S.w.T.)?

If yes: then observe that from the beginning to the end it talks of
*Tawhid.* *Ma’bud* (Deity), *Rabb* (Preserver), *Malik* (Master) and
*Mudabbir* (Statesman) is Allah (S.w.T.). After knowing all this, when
the Faith on His Divinity *(Ilahiyat)* is perfected then one must trust
all his affairs to Him.

About *Tawakkul* the revered persons of the Faith have said that,
“*Tawakkul* is entrusting all affairs, minor and major, to Allah
(S.w.T.) who is the Absolute Master of the entire universe. If you
consider yourself His creature, you should not say that you want things
in a certain way. But whatever He does, whatever He Wishes and
whatsoever way He treats you, you must resign to His Wish.

Attachment to circumstances doesn't come in the way of *Tawakkul*. We
have said earlier that, *Laysa lil insaan illa ma sa-aa*, *“There is
nothing for man except for what he strives for” (Sura an-Najm, 53:39)*.
But this doesn't mean that one should depend wholly on the
circumstances. Your *Wakil* and Master Has said that He will give
sustenance according to the circumstances, but the circumstances without
Wish cannot guarantee any results.

Consideration of Verses Regarding Tawhid
----------------------------------------

We should give utmost importance to *Tawhid* over all other things.
Think a lot over the verses in the Holy Qur’an about the subject of
*Tawhid*. This will strengthen your Faith that circumstances have no
permanent form or status. At certain times the circumstances lose their
importance and the benefits that could have accrued will no more be
there. The circumstances or reasons becoming ineffective are a strong
indication that there is some All Prevailing Power that is Absolute, and
is not subject to any circumstances or reasons.

It is said about Plato (*Aflatoon*) that once he was afflicted with
acute diarrhea. However much he was treated, he was not getting relief.
His disciples said that although he was an adept at medicine, why he was
not able cure his own ailment. Plato told them to fetch him a certain
powder. He mixed that powder with water and took it. In no time his
diarrhea stopped. Then he turned to his disciples and said, “I did take
this powder earlier too. But as long as there is no Will of Allah
(S.w.T.), nothing can happen!”

Sometimes we see that certain things happen unexpectedly. At times we
very much want a certain thing, and the circumstances too are congenial,
but that thing doesn't come about.

Some years ago, Sadr al-Hukama, who was a physician of very high repute,
mentioned to me an anecdote. He said that once a patient was brought to
him who was very weak and thin. When he, the *hakim*, tested the patient
he found that he was in a very precarious condition with the kidneys,
liver and heart very badly affected. He felt that the patient might live
for a few days only and that he had refused to treat him. The patient's
relatives taunted the *Hakim* and said that perhaps he was imperfect in
his calling that he expressed inability to treat him. The *Hakim* was
upset with their misbehavior but kept quiet. In a lighter vein he told
them to go home and give him *Joshanda* (a simple decoction of herbs
used in homes for common colds).

After sometime, the same patient visited the Hakim. He was now in
perfect health. His relatives, who were angry on him during their
previous visit, were also there. They brought with them lot of cheese
and shortening as gift for him. They said that when he had such a simple
cure for the patient, why did he disturb them by saying that there was
no hope for the patient.

This proves that Allah (S.w.T.) has Power over everything. All
circumstances and reason have no effect when He wishes anything to
happen. We find through our experiences that sometimes the most
ineffective things have tremendous effect. At others, things that have
proven effectiveness turn out to be ineffective. All this is definitely
the result of Allah (S.w.T.)'s slightest gesture!

Allah (S.w.T.) told Hadrat Musa (a.s.), that he should seek even the
salt for his use from Him. Allah (S.w.T.) told him that He is the
provider of everything. This doesn't mean that one should keep sitting
at a place and expect Allah (S.w.T.) to provide everything. It means
keeping *Tawakkul* on him and keep searching for the salt for your
requirement! If Allah (S.w.T.)'s Wish is not there, the entire land will
be full of salt, but you may not get a grain of it for your use!

Fiqh and Tawhid
---------------

As long as one doesn't have absolute faith in *Tawhid*, a person cannot
become a *Faqih* or Islamic Jurist. The person will not have the vision
of the Faith. The skills acquired with hard work are a prelude to
attaining enlightenment. For this one has to be a friend of learning and
to be fully conversant with the dictates of the *Shari’ah*.

The populace will generally be involved in *Shirk* that they think that
the circumstances cause the events. Wherever one looks, he will find
people running after materialism. They worship circumstance and have
extreme love for wealth and pomp.

There are some people who give an impression as if the *Mihrab wa
Minbar* (the Niche in the mosque and the Pulpit) are their deity. They
should know that it is *shirk* to consider the 'cause' as the 'causer'.

Piety (Taqwa) and Tawhid
------------------------

It is our duty to reach the stage of learning where our faith in
*Tawhid* becomes absolute. “Understand well that there is no deity but
Allah (S.w.T.)”. The way for reaching that stage is through *Taqwa* or
piety. When your *Taqwa* is firm, then you will become erudite (*Aalim*)
with Allah (S.w.T.)'s help.

He will bestow you with the wealth of knowledge. This knowledge will
give you firm belief in “*la ilaaha illallah*” and “*la hawla wa laa
quwwata illa billah*”. Your faith will be firm and your worldly life too
will be better. When you transit from here to the Hereafter, then the
light of knowledge, faith and belief will be your guide. The ranks of
the Hereafter too will become visible to you in this light. There is no
doubt that action is necessary with knowledge. If you desire to be
ranked with the *Muqarrabeen as-Saabiqeen* (Trusted friends of yore),
those who had a special status in the consideration of the Prophet (S.)
and his Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), then you must attain perfect faith.

The True Faith
--------------

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) says that during one journey the Prophet
(S) met some persons. They greeted him. The Prophet (S) asked them, “Who
are you?” The persons replied, “We are *Mu’minīn*.” The Prophet (S)
asked, “What is the proof of your Faith?. Is it just a mere claim that
you are Mu’min or you have some strong proof for your claim?” They said,
“We absolutely trust in the Wish of Allah (S.w.T.) and we have entrusted
all our affairs to Him. We bow our heads in acceptance for whatever He
decided for us!” The Prophet (S) rejoined, “You are wise and learned!
You are near a stage when you will qualify to be in the company of the
prophets (a.s.)”[^1].

One who acquired *Hikma* (wisdom) he has acquired virtue in abundance
(cf. Sura al-Baqara, 2:269). By acquiring learning you know the secrets
of existence and will be in the know of what is not visible or evident.
You have risen above materialism. The entire world is worshipping the
apparent in this world, but you have risen far above that!.

Man should, therefore, perform such acts that he is able to acquire
knowledge and faith through their performance and he reaches the stage
of *Tawakkul*. He should entrust all his affairs to Allah (S.w.T.).

Abstain From Avarice
--------------------

The Prophet (S.) then told them:

“If you are truthful, then don't construct the house in which you may
not live. Don't hoard food that you may not eat! Fear Allah that you
ultimately have to return towards Him. If you are truly a person of
truth, Trust in Allah *(Tasleem wa Rida)* and men of *Tawakkul* then
avoid avarice. One who is after acquisition of properties, and plans
every time to have more of them and has concern that his holdings might
diminish in their value, will be always scared of the coming times. If
there is *Tawakkul* on Allah, there will be no concern for what comes
and what goes!

You will then have no fear of penury or starvation! Avarice is a sign
that all the claims of *Tawakkul* of the person are false. One who
doesn't practice contentment and is always engrossed in avarice, it
means that he has no Faith in the *Musabbib al-asbaab* (The Causer of
Causes), who is Allah. He only considers the circumstances as the
relievers of difficulties. If this is not the case, then he would not
construct a house in which he might not live, he would not hoard food
grains that are much more than the real need of his family. One woman
was saying that she had some money that she wanted to save for her
shroud and interment after her death. She was asked, 'Are you saving the
money with avarice in your mind. Otherwise, there is none who died and
did not get a shroud and burial! As long as man remains the slave of
circumstances, he will worship wealth! He should keep his death in view
that before warming a place the drum for departure might be sounded!”

Destined Towards Allah (S.w.T.)
-------------------------------

Allah (S.w.T.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ الَّذِيَ إِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And fear Allah, to Whom ye shall be gathered back. (Sura al-Maidah,
5:96)***

When you have the belief that - *Inna lillahi wa inna ilaihi raji’oon* -
we have to return towards Allah (S.w.T.), then how important it is for
you to exercise maximum care to ensure that you don't commit any act of
disrespect for Him, that you are destined to be presented before Him.
Expecting favors from others than Allah (S.w.T.) is a sign of grave
disrespect towards Him. How one would feel going to His presence that he
had been committing these transgressions throughout his life!

Whenever Imam Hasan (a.s.) thought of death and the grave, he used to
lament very much. Whenever he thought of the Day of Resurrection, he
used to faint with grief. He was fully aware of the Greatness and Might
of Allah (S.w.T.) and was conscious of the aura of the Day of Judgement.

Habib Ibn Madhahir was a Faqih
------------------------------

The Progeny of Muhammad (a.s.) were the people of Knowledge and wisdom.
Whosoever got a ray of knowledge in their company, became a practicing
man of learning (*‘Aalim ba ‘amal*). The scholars should know that they
must strive to get counted amongst those whom Aali Muhammad (a.s.)
accept as scholars and not merely the populace praise them as such.

Imam Husayn (a.s.), during his journey towards Karbala, sent a letter
through a courier to Hadrat Habib b. Madhahir to Kufa. The subject of
the letter was: *Ya ayyuhar rajul al-faqih* - O man of erudition! The
Imam (a.s.) wrote: Habib is truly a Faqih that he knows

Allah (S.w.T.) and also he recognize the Imam (a.s.). The foundation of
his fountainhead is the understanding of Tawhid. The worldly knowledge
and skills do not provide the instinct of Tawhid. Don't lose the way and
do not get involved in absolute ignorance (*Jahl al-Murakkab*) that you
are amongst the learned. This pride might destroy you.

[^1]: From Usūl al-Kafi Haqiqat al-Imān wal Yaqeen


