The Twenty Second Talk
======================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَلَى
رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, there is no authority for him over those who believe and rely
on their Lord. (Sura an-Nahl, 16:99)***

Tawakkul is the Concomitant of Faith
------------------------------------

The Holy Verses of Qur’an are commensurate with the evidence of wisdom
and intuition (*Wajdaan*), *Tawakkul* is an important condition and
concomitant of Faith. Therefore, it is very lucidly said in the Holy
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى اللّهِ فَتَوَكَّلُواْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and on Allah should you rely if you are believers. (Sura al-Maidah,
5:23)***

The other point is that as people are exhorted to adopt Faith, so are
they required to have *Tawakkul*. Having Faith on Allah (S.w.T.) doesn't
only mean that a person knows that there is only one God (Allah
(S.w.T.)) but also the faith that there is only one Creator of the
Universe who is Almighty and Has unfathomable Powers. *Aaminu billah* -
have Faith on Allah - is indicative of the fact that acknowledging Him
as the Most High and totally put your Trust in Him. Don't consider that
the circumstances are independent of His Wish and focus all your hopes
on Him. Therefore one who doesn't subjugate his circumstances and hopes
to Allah (S.w.T.), he doesn't have faith on Him. A person who doesn't
think that the worldly wealth, the healer, medicaments and other mundane
matters are subservient to the Will of Allah (S.w.T.), he is committing
infidelity.

Reason Versus Will
------------------

*Kufr* means 'to hide'. This hides the light of the *Haqīqa* (the
Reality), that is Allah (S.w.T.), from the person's view. When a person
succeeds in a matter because of the externally visible circumstances,
then his vision doesn't see the *Musabbib al-asbaab*, the Causer of
Causes, that is Allah (S.w.T.). He thinks that the cure is only because
of the investigation and prescription of the physician. He starts
believing in the doctor but doesn't get the thought of One that created
him and imparted him with the knowledge and the skill. The person who
has Faith in *Tawhid* understands all these intricacies. Therefore his
Faith will never be shaky. Even if he has access to the worldly
circumstances to achieve his ends, his trust is always in Allah
(S.w.T.).

Thus, one who is always the slave of circumstances and the apparent
causes, is a *Kafir*. Here, by *Kufr* I mean the Real *Kufr* and not the
apparent *Kufr* that can be removed by saying the two phrases of
witness - *La ilaaha illallah* and *Muhammadur Rasoolullah*. Such a
person, although a Muslim through his profession, is so weak in his
faith that it cannot take him to the level of salvation. The reason is
that the person hasn't yet understood that the worldly circumstances
have no element of permanence and they are absolutely under the Will and
Wish of Allah (S.w.T.).

The Holy Qur’an mentions several such matters that are the cause of
admonition. Just think of the River Nile parting from the middle With
Allah (S.w.T.)'s wish and twelve dry passages appeared in the river, The
bottom of the river became so dry that when people and their animals
traversed the passages, dust came up there. Does this not demonstrate
that the circumstance had lost its effect and everything therefore is
under the control of the Almighty.

If Allah (S.w.T.) wishes, absolute thirst can be quenched without
drinking water. But if His Wish is not there, then however much a person
drinks water, his thirst will not be quenched. In certain ailments, a
person is unable to gulp even a morsel of water. An example is the
ailment of dropsy.

Abdul Malik and the Ailment of Dropsy
-------------------------------------

It is written that Abdul Malik Marwan al-Umawi was afflicted with the
ailment of dropsy. His expert physician advised him that for a day or
two no water should go down his throat. If he drank any water, it would
prove fatal.

But thirst dominated the unfortunate fellow. He insisted that, in spite
the strict instruction to the contrary, he should be given some water to
drink. He cried, ”Give me some water, even if it takes my life out!”
Despite knowing well, that intake of water would kill him he drank some
and died!

Yes! The same water that is so essential for life, when consumed against
the wish of Allah (S.w.T.), instead of supporting life, becomes the
cause of its extinction.

It is written about Muawiya that, as said by the Prophet (S.), he was
suffering from the disease of *Jaw’u al-Baqr*. The symptom of this
disease is that the person becomes a veritable glutton and is not sated,
however much he eats.

Ashab al-Fīl
------------

In the Verse of *Fīl* (the Elephant) there is reference to some
incredible happening. When Abraha, and his army of elephants, came to
Mecca with the purpose of demolishing the *Ka’aba*, suddenly there
appeared a swarm of swallows in the sky. Each of the bird carried three
pebbles in its mouth and two each in every claw. The birds dropped these
pebbles on the soldiers of Abraha’s army who were riding on the
elephants. The pebbles pierced through the bodies of the men and their
elephants. Thus the entire contingent of the elephants and the soldiers
was routed. It was Allah (S.w.T.)'s wish that the invincible army of
Abraha was subdued with the pebbles.

According to the history of the *Jazeerat al-Arab*, the birth of our
Prophet (S) took place in the same year, which is popularly known as the
*Aaam al-Fīl*. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) was born in the year 30 *Aaam al-Fīl*.
Till the *Hijra* (The Migration) calendar came into vogue, the *Aam
al-Fīl* was the calendar in use.

You have also heard that the sharp knife did not do it's job on the
throat of Hadrat Ismail (a.s.). Hadrat Ibrahim (a.s.) used the sharpened
knife no less than seventy times on the tender throat of his son. But it
could not inflict even a small cut on the throat. Because, what was
wished by Allah (S.w.T.) was destined to happen! If Allah (S.w.T.)
wishes otherwise, the entire hoard of the arsenal of the world will not
cause harm even to the minutest of creatures.

We have therefore to understand that the most important aspect of the
Faith is *Tawakkul*.

The Limit of Belief is Tawakkul
-------------------------------

It is narrated that someone asked Hadrat Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s.) about
the limit of Faith. He replied, “*Yaqeen* or firm belief!” They asked
the Imam (a.s.), “What is the limit of belief?” The Imam (a.s.) said,
“*Tawakkul* on Allah (S.w.T.)!”

All this is the result of the knowledge of the relationship between the
*sabab* (cause) and the *Musabbib* (Causer). If someone has a firm
conviction that the effectiveness of the causes depends on Allah
(S.w.T.)'s Wish, then the belief is termed *Tawakkul*. Such a person
relies on the *Musabbib* (Causer) rather than on the *sabab* (the
cause). His total dependence is on the wish of the All Pervading Allah
(S.w.T.). He trusts all his affairs to Allah (S.w.T.). When he frees
himself from the clutches of the 'causes' or circumstances, then the
existence, or otherwise, of the causes is immaterial for him.

It is narrated that Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s.) has said, *“The Faith of a
person is not perfect till Allah (S.w.T.)'s Wish prevails over his own
thinking and intuition in his affairs.”*

When his Faith has reached a stage that he considers Allah (S.w.T.)'s
Wish must prevail over his own decisions, then even if he meets with an
accident, his concern will not be for his material belongings, kith and
kin, and he would resign to Allah (S.w.T.)'s Wish. But if a person cares
only for circumstances and causes, then only the physician and the
medicaments would be his saviours. The Entity who gives the vision to
the physician for the correct line of treatment will not be in the
consideration of the person.

Is it not time that we abstain from depending solely on circumstances
and causes in our matters.

The Hawk and the Prey
---------------------

Sayyid Jazairi writes in *Anwar al-Nu’mania* that a ruler got a lesson
in the following manner. One day he went hunting in the jungle. During
the hunt the time for *Dhuhr* prayer came. His retainers prepared the
lunch. They roasted a chicken and served it on his table. Suddenly one
hawk swooped from the sky and took away the chicken. The ruler got angry
and ordered his men to hunt for the hawk and he too started on the same
expedition. The hawk flew some distance, flew over a hill and went to
the other side of it. The ruler's men too climbed the hill and went to
the other side of it. They saw that a man, whose limbs were bound with
ropes, was lying on the jungle floor and the hawk was feeding him small
pieces of the roasted chicken. When the meat was finished, the hawk took
some water in its beak and helped the man to drink.

The men came near the person and made inquiries about him. He said that
he was a trader. He was on a business trip. At that place some thieves
overpowered him. They took away all his merchandise and wanted to kill
him. He appealed to them to spare his life. They expressed their fears
that he might go to the city and report to the authorities against them.
Somehow, they didn't kill him, but bound him firmly with ropes and
abandoned him at the spot. The next day the hawk brought some bread for
him and today it had fetched a chicken for him. It took care of the man
twice a day. When the ruler heard the story, he had a sudden change of
mind. He said that it was a matter of shame for them that they were
oblivious of Allah (S.w.T.) who took care of His creature even through a
wild bird. He left his crown and the throne and joined the ranks of the
men of piety. This proves that man can draw lessons from many places,
but they are few who get reformed.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), was making a commentary on Verse 102 of
Sura Yusuf (Chp. 12), ***“And most of them do not believe in Allah
without associating others (with Him).”*** someone asked the Imam
(a.s.),”How is it that a person can believe (be a Mu’min) and associate
partners with Allah (be a Mushrik) at the same time?”. The Imam (a.s.)
replied at some length, the summary of which is that in this verse,
*Shirk al-Khafi* or minor-shirk is meant. An example of this *Shirk* is
that a person says that if so-and-so were not there, he would have
perished. Or he says that if so-and-so were not there, he would have
been deprived of the family and children. The questioner asked, “What
should the person say, then?” The Imam (a.s.) replied, “The person
should say that if Allah (S.w.T.) had not sent a particular person in
His Mercy, he would have died!”

Therefore, *Tawakkul* doesn't require one to totally ignore the
circumstances and causes, but acceptance from the depths of the heart
that the cause to be effective depends absolutely on the wish of Allah
(S.w.T.). The Power and Authority is absolutely with Allah (S.w.T.).

Shameful Act
------------

Complete faith is necessary on this fact that one is not put to shame in
the place of action. If this belief is there, then there will be no room
for objection on the Divine Decree of Fate. (*Qada wa* *Qadar*). If, in
fact, what the person desires doesn't happen, then grumbling and
complaining is a sign of the weakness of his Faith.

Sometimes man thinks that he is firm in his faith, is a man of
*Tawakkul* and trusts everything to Allah (S.w.T.)'s Wish. But in a
small matter his claim is proved wrong. He even mistrusts his own self.
We sincerely pray to Allah (S.w.T.) that He preserves us against facing
shame in this world and the Hereafter. We pray that Allah (S.w.T.)
endows us with true *Tawakkul* that our total trust is focused on Him
throughout our lives.


