The Twenty Third Talk
=====================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَلَى
رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, there is no authority for him over those who believe and rely
on their Lord. (Sura an-Nahl, 16:99)***

Tawakkul in the Affairs of the Hereafter
----------------------------------------

Whenever there is mention of *Tawakkul*, the mind turns only to the
trusting of the mundane affairs to the care of Allah (S.w.T.). But, as a
matter of fact, the *Tawakkul* of a *Mu’min* encompasses both his
worldly affairs and the Hereafter. He thinks that the life Hereafter is
not transitory and therefore is more important. Therefore, all men must
do *Tawakkul* on Allah (S.w.T.) during this life and trust his affairs
to Him for the Hereafter as well.

As one seeks Allah (S.w.T.)'s help for supporting his efforts for
profits and warding off the possible losses, he should also believe that
the circumstances and the reasons for any action are subject to Allah
(S.w.T.)'s Wish for fulfillment or failure of the task. Similarly in the
spiritual matters too one should trust his affairs to Allah (S.w.T.)'s
Pleasure.

Reasons For Moral Felicity
--------------------------

The reasons for the moral and spiritual felicity that are related to
training of the conscience, acquisition of learning, belief and good
deeds that bring a person closer to the heaven and higher status there,
also need *Tawakkul* on Allah (S.w.T.) to be possible of achievement.
For example, hoping to achieve the heaven is not possible if a person
doesn't perform good deeds. But praying regularly, or fasting, or going
for the *Hajj* or giving alms to the needy cannot be termed as
acceptable to Allah (S.w.T.) if the person thinks that He needs you to
perform them.

To the contrary, these acts might make the person proud of his virtues.
Therefore all the hopes should be on Allah (S.w.T.) and the virtuous
acts should be for His pleasure and not to seek His rewards. Remember,
the good actions that are not acceptable to Allah (S.w.T.), howsoever
good they are, are no guarantee for one going to the heaven. Similarly
expecting to be spared from the hell after committing sins too is also
futile. However, it depends on Allah (S.w.T.)'s wish if the sins are to
be pardoned by Him or not. Similarly a virtuous person going to the
heaven or not is at the wish of Allah (S.w.T.). It is like the efficacy
of a medicine. The patient only recovers from the ailment by the use of
a medicament if Allah (S.w.T.) Wishes it to be so!

Depending Only on Actions is a Precursor of Destruction
-------------------------------------------------------

If man depends entirely on his actions for salvation, then he is
exposing himself to destruction. If there is anyone who can give
salvation to him, it is only Allah (S.w.T.). It is true that the person
has done good deeds but only Allah (S.w.T.) can make them effective.
That is possible if Allah (S.w.T.)'s wish and pleasure is for acceptance
of the deeds.

As we have already said that one should not be proud of his
intelligence, his physical strength, the might of his pen or his skill
at oratory. Similarly in spiritual matters, one should not depend only
on his prayer and fasting. He should know that relief from the hellfire
is not possible even if he is pious and abstemious. The actual salvation
depends on the wish of Allah (S.w.T.). Similarly, for the acceptance of
the good deeds of a person to qualify for the heaven is at the will of
Allah (S.w.T.) only.

Sometimes a person has good deeds in his account equal to the size of a
mountain. But in reality the weight of these good deeds is not even
equal to the size of a sliver of grass. Therefore, acceptance of the
deeds is not dependent on their reasons, but in all circumstances it
depends on the will of Allah (S.w.T.).

Actions and Allah (S.w.T.)'s Blessings
--------------------------------------

The Prophet of Allah (S.w.T.), in his last Sermon, that has been
recorded in the sixth volume of *Bihar al-Anwār* says at one point, “No
one should make a false claim nor should he have unfounded hopes.
Deliverance is dependent on good deeds and Allah (S.w.T.)'s Wish.”

Therefore man should not think that if he has performed some good deed
in the Way of Allah (S.w.T.), he becomes automatically eligible for
heaven; or, if his actions were contrary, his destiny will be hell. This
is faulty thinking. He should in fact have trust on the creator in a
similar manner that a farmer who does all the operations in his farm and
awaits Allah (S.w.T.)'s kindness for a good crop.

A seeker of knowledge too should focus his hopes on the wish of Allah
(S.w.T.) that He gives him understanding. Mere reading of books will not
give him understanding of the intricate contents therein. The learning
that needs intensive efforts also cannot be acquired by mere hard work.
There are some persons who show keen interest and hard work to acquire
learning, but they remain raw and green. We don't say that one should
not work hard at his studies, but what we mean to say is that only
depending on memory, understanding and hard work is not sufficient. For
success, one must have Tawakkul on Allah (S.w.T.) besides putting in
hard and sincere efforts.

Incredible Accident
-------------------

Around forty years ago, in this very place of learning, *Musheer
al-Mulk* Shirazi too was living. A well-known teacher, whose name is not
disclosed for some reason, used to teach *Fiqh* and Philosophy. He was
very well known for his memory and his erudition. He slept well one
night. But when he woke up in the morning, he had lost his complete
memory. Even at the Fajr prayer he couldn't recite the *Sura al-Fatiha*.
Anyway, the prayer was over. Later on when he opened the Holy Qur’an and
tried to recite its verses, he couldn't do it. His memory was totally
lost and he passed away in the same state.

Loss of Speech
--------------

O! Those people who are proud of their skills at oratory! The other day
a person who came from *Khorram Shehr* has said that a person, whom
incidentally I knew too, lost his power of speech since the last two
months. With difficulty he is able to communicate with a lips like a
small child. He is so worried with his condition that he abstains from
communicating as far as possible. He went to Tehran to consult
specialists about his condition. They have asked him to stay in the
hospital for treatment that, hopefully his speech might be revived.

I am mentioning this because people should not be victims of
complacency. They should remember Allah (S.w.T.) in all circumstances.
Try to excel in any field of learning, but remember that they should
rely only on Allah (S.w.T.) to give them understanding and the
opportunity to utilize the knowledge acquired by them.

The Light of Belief is Not Acquired
-----------------------------------

It is mentioned in the traditions, “Knowledge doesn't come with lot of
reading and writing, but it is a light that Allah (S.w.T.) puts into the
heart of a person whom He wishes to enlighten.” The station of firm
belief, the knowledge of Allah (S.w.T.)'s Names and His Attributes and
the treasury of the spiritual knowledge comes to a person only with
Allah (S.w.T.)'s wish. However much a person strives to acquire these,
he will not succeed if Allah (S.w.T.)'s Wish is not there.

Allah (S.w.T.) is Kind on His Creatures
---------------------------------------

All your activities should be such that you remember Allah (S.w.T.) all
the way. You must have a firm belief that whatever you do will have
effect and acceptance. What a beautiful phrase has been used in *Du’a
al-Iftitah*, “**He has endowed to us more than we asked for!”**

You offer the congregational prayer in the hope of His blessings and
with His *Tawakkul* in your hearts. You go for hajj also in the hope of
His grace. But, by praying in congregation and performing the *Hajj* a
few times, if you start thinking that the heaven is assured for you,
then you might be under a misapprehension. Remember, what you have done
is unlike the mundane work that the compensation is commensurate with
the work that one puts in. Acceptance of your prayers depends on the
wish of Allah (S.w.T.) only.

It is said that the value of a palm's length of the Heaven is equal to
value of the rest of the universe. Heaven is not a thing that can be
bought with some prayer and ignorant pride. It is also debatable whether
Heaven can definitely achieved by much prayer and supplication. The
truth is that all you possess, and all you do is wished by Him. One
might expect compensation for what really and truly belongs to himself!
Everything belongs to Allah (S.w.T.), and any compensation that is given
is only at His Wish! Man can only hope with *Tawakkul* on Allah
(S.w.T.).

O Allah (S.w.T.)! By the rights of Muhammad (a.s.) and his Holy Progeny,
give us the strength of courage and help us at every stage and make us
truly the people of *Tawakkul*!


