The Twenty Fourth Talk
======================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Bismillahir Rahman ir Rahim

قُلْ كُلٌّ يَعْمَلُ عَلَى شَاكِلَتِهِ فَرَبُّكُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ هُوَ
أَهْدَى سَبِيلاً

***Say: Every one acts according to his manner; but your Lord best knows
who is best guided in the path.*** ***(Sura Banu Israel, 17:84)***

Action & Sincerity of Purpose
-----------------------------

If there is value for anything in the consideration of Allah (S.w.T.),
it is the sincerity of purpose of His creatures. The Prophet (S) said:
‘Actions are judged by their intentions’ (*Innamal ‘amaalu*
*bin-niyaat)* If the purpose is to acquire the Wish of Allah (S.w.T.),
and the actions too are in accord with His wish, and then it will make
the person achieve great heights. But if the purpose is selfish, or not
totally legitimate, although the person always utters, “*Qurbatan
ilalllah*, and gives the impression of piety, there will be no use. Such
a person will rise empty handed from his grave and his *Nama-e-Aamāl*
(The Record of Deeds) will be blank. But if there is sincerity of
purpose in a man, then everything falls in the proper place for him.

The Verse that we have referred to in this context says: “*Say* *(O our
beloved messenger!): Every one acts according to his* *nature
(shaakila); but your Lord best knows who is best guided in the path.”*
*(Sura Banu Israel, 17:84)*

Now consider the meaning of the word *Shaakila*. If its meaning is
nature or bent of mind, then the purport of the Holy Ayah will be that
every person acts in accord with his nature and bent of mind. If the
person is in the influence of *Rahmani* (Legitimate) bent of mind, his
actions will naturally be virtuous. On the other hand if his nature is
dominated by satanic thoughts, his actions then will be prohibited
(*Haram*).

When a person's nature is *Rahmani*, his actions too are with sincerity
of purpose, even then if there remain some aberrations in his acts, he
might be forgiven for those minor faults. But when a person has satanic
nature, his efforts at doing good deeds will be futile. It is therefore
imperative to mend one's bent of mind.

Now let us consider the ways of mending the *Shaakila*. How the
*Shaakila* becomes *Rahmani*?

On a Two-Way Lane
-----------------

Every human being has naturally been placed on a two-way lane of virtue
and vice. As an individual he is neither virtuous nor vicious. He is
like a clean and blank paper on which anything can be written or
beautiful sketches can be drawn. Similarly ugly pictures or satanic
things too can be written on it. Useful and informative essays can be
written on it and misguiding things too can be scribbled on it. Man,
ever since he arrives in this world, at the two-way lane leading to
*Rahmani* or Satanic instincts. He has to choose between the worldly or
the *Ukhrawi*, that is, a way of life that can ensure for him a better
Hereafter.

Whichever way he inclines, his *Shaakila* too bends in that direction.
Every thing that he does, whatever he sees or hears, and even the
morsels that go down the person's throat contribute in the formation of
his *Shaakila*. Every word that is modulated by the tongue too has its
part to play in the person's *Shaakila*. The first impression that
anything has on a person will be on his psyche.

If you use foul language against a person or you think ill of someone
else, the first entity to take the ill effect of all this will be
yourself. This will take you away from virtue and you will be giving
place to evil in your *Shaakila*. Then, however much you pray and
supplicate, your prayer will not be as virtuous as it needs to be. When
your *Shaakila* is affected, then your intent will not be as solemn as
required for sincerity in prayer.

A piece of bread, *Halal* or *Haram*, pure or impure, when it goes down
your throat, your *Shaakila* takes shape. If the bread is *Haram*, then
every act performed by you will be satanic.

The Fury of Hell and the Echelons of Heaven
-------------------------------------------

Human actions might have very minimal effect on the *Shaakila* of a
person in his initial life. But by the time he comes of age, its
formation becomes rapid. If during this period the tongue, eyes, stomach
etc are freed from the bonds of guidance, and they indulge in prohibited
(*haram*) habits, then the *Shaakila* will turn satanic. Such a person,
when he departs from the world, will be in the group of Satans of the
other world. His place then will be the last stage of the Hell that is
called *Asfal as-Safeleen*.

But if the person, during his lifetime, tries to reform himself and
keeps a watchful eye on every small act of his, tries to keep his tongue
in check, opens his eye only in obedience to Allah (S.w.T.)'s dictates
then he can achieve a very high status in Heaven where the angels would
feel proud to serve him.

It is Only for Your Own Good
----------------------------

The exhortations that have come in the Islamic *Shari’ah* that Muslims
keep away from carnal desires, respect the limits defined by it and
don't go unbridled does not mean that Allah (S.w.T.) doesn't want them
to lead a happy life. Or that He doesn't like the Muslims to enjoy their
lives. The truth is never like that. But since your *Shaakila* is
affected and you might be facing the danger of getting pushed into the
Asfal as-Safeleen, you are warned to save yourself from the effects of
evil deeds. Every glance that you make on the television monitor and the
cinema screen, will leave a negative mark on your psyche. Slowly, you
will then come under the spell of Satan. If you don't mend your ways
soon, it might be impossible to reform the *Shaakila* after the age of
forty years.

Satan Feels Very Happy
----------------------

It is said that Satan kisses the forehead of the forty year old person
whose *Shaakila* is perverted. Satan says he would sacrifice himself on
the person who has no chance of reformation.

We don't say that reform of such persons is impossible. But definitely
it is very difficult. It is another matter if Allah (S.w.T.) is kind on
the person and he suddenly starts manifesting signs of reform and
reverts to virtuous ways!

Therefore, one should be kind on himself and guide others too to keep
away from lasciviousness.

When the *Shaakila* is perverted, then matters reach such a pass that
the person goes on pilgrimages, of *Hajj* and Ziyarat, not under
*Rahmani* instinct, but under the influence of Satan. All these
pilgrimages and the arrangements of meetings (Majalis) to mourn the
Martyrs of Karbala will be just to show off to others. He might think
that he was going for *Hajj* or Ziyarat just as a tour of pleasure or
business! He doesn't do anything with the true spirit.

The Major Jihad
---------------

It is very strongly advised that one should do *Jihad bin-Nafs*
(Struggle against one's own desires). You must have heard the tradition
of the Prophet (S.), narrated in the *Usūl al-Kafi*, that on his return
from the battlefront he said, “We are through with the *Jihad al-Asghar*
(the Minor Struggle) but the *Jihad al-Akbar* is still there.” The
companions asked what is that *Jihad*. The Prophet (S.) replied, “That
is *Jihad bin-Nafs*.”

Bearing the travails of this *Jihad* is tougher than going to fight on
the battlefront. Therefore the rewards for *Jihad bil Nafs* are greater
than for any virtuous act. This is the reason that the Prophet (S) has
termed it as the Major *Jihad*. To keep oneself firm in the midst of
carnal desires needs a much higher degree of valor than confronting the
enemy in the battlefield.

Reform of the *Shaakila* is not possible without reining in the carnal
desires. If you wish to conquer the strong fort of the heart to reach
Allah (S.w.T.)'s firmament, then it is your duty to abstain from every
forbidden thing (*Haram*) and the unbecoming (*Makruh*) things. You
should also perform every obligatory (*Fard*) regularly and also the
optional (*Mustahab*).

Shaakila and the Shari’ah
-------------------------

Reforming *Shaakila* is a very strenuous thing. But if one follows
carefully the rules of *Shari’ah*, from the very beginning and the
parents themselves give proper upbringing to the child in line with the
*Shari’ah*, then the reform can be achieved in a smooth manner.

It is the duty of the parents that they don't give such nutrition to the
children about which they are not certain that it is legitimate
(*Halal*). If a foster mother is arranged for a baby, they must make
discreet inquiries that the woman is pious and of a good background.
When the child grows, care has to be exercised that foul language is not
used in his presence. No act should be perpetrated in the presence of
the child that is morally undesirable.

Even if the parents have a difference of opinion, they should refrain
from airing them even in the hearing distance of the child.

When the child attains the age of understanding, make him practice
spending legitimately and frugally. He should be made to inculcate the
habit of charity so that when he grows up, he doesn't turn into a
parsimonious person. The child should be trained to dress modestly and
decently.

Give pure and clean food to the child. It is not proper to think that
the child cannot discriminate and hence can be given anything to eat.
Allah (S.w.T.)'s curse will fall on the parents who encourage their
children to drink liquors. How will such parents face Allah (S.w.T.)?
Those who take their children to cinemas and other such centers of
pleasure should know that the duty for formation of the child's
*Shaakila* that has been entrusted by Allah (S.w.T.) on them is being
neglected.

Every scene that is contrary to the norms of decency diminishes the
sense of shame in the child. He becomes impertinent and might insult
others. Such an unfortunate child, in later years, will find it very
tough to banish the negative traits that have taken root in his psyche
because of the neglect of his parents.

When a child attains the age of eight years, he should be made regular
at offering the mandatory prayers. When he is ten years, he should not
share a bed with any of his siblings. Even after attaining the age of
twelve, if he is not regular at prayers, he must be reprimanded.
Corporal punishment is permissible in such a situation. This punishment
should be discreet and within limits that it has positive and salutary
effect on the child.

The orders of the *Shari’ah* have to be borne in mind from the time the
mother conceives the child. The parents should abstain from taking
forbidden food that it does not have any evil effect on the fetus. While
mating, the parents should remember Allah (S.w.T.). In the beginning
they should say *Bismillah* that Satan doesn't enter the seed at the
time of conception. The thoughts of both the parents must be *Rahmani*
at that time to ensure that the child develops a *Rahmani Shaakila*. If,
at the time of conception, the father has satanic thoughts, then they
will have negative effect on the child. It will then need lot of efforts
to mould the child's *Shaakila* on virtuous lines.

Hadrat Fatima Zahra (s.a.)
--------------------------

Let us consider about the way Hadrat Fatima Zahra (s.a.) was conceived.
It is narrated that when Allah (S.w.T.) decided to send the mother of
the Imams (a.s.) to the world, then He, with His Omniscience, arranged
that her body should be so *Rahmani* that it should be as pure as the
Godly Spirit (*Ruh kulli Ilahi*). The body should be as rare or light as
the human spirit. Let it not be a secret that the bodies of the Imams
(a.s.) are as light as the spirits of the *Mu’minīn*.

Since the body of the Prophet (S) is all *Nur* and rarity, and is
absolutely *Rahmani*, his *shaakila* is absolutely pure.

It is narrated that the Prophet (S) was one day seated at *Al-Tah*. Imam
‘Ali (a.s.) and Hadrat Ammar was present. Also present were Hadrat Abu
Bakr and ‘Umar. Jibril came at that time and conveyed Allah (S.w.T.)'s
orders that the Prophet (S) should remain at that place for forty days
and abstain from meeting his wife during the period. He was also asked
to fast during the days and to spend the nights in prayer and
supplication. He was asked to abstain during all the forty days from
*Mubah* (permissible) acts like eating after sunrise and sleeping in the
nights. The purpose was to render the *shaakila* of the Prophet (S.)
most *latif* or subtle.

The Prophet (S) asked Hadrat Ammar to go to Hadrat Khadija and tell her
that he wouldn't go home for forty days and that his not coming home was
not because of any differences with her, but was under the orders of
Allah (S.w.T.).

Ammar gave the Prophet (S.)'s message to Hadrat Khadija. She sent back
her greetings to the Prophet (S) and said that she would patiently await
his return after forty days. She spent these forty days in prayer to
Allah (S.w.T.) at the house of her aunt, Hadrat Fatima bint Asad, the
mother of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.).

On the fortieth evening Jibril came and asked the Prophet (S) to delay
breaking the fast till the material for breaking the fast came from the
Heaven. After the prayer Jibril, and along with him Mikaail and Israfil,
(who generally don't come to the Prophets (S.) after the prayers), came
with the fruits from the Heaven (oats, grapes and dates) and water from
the springs of the Heaven.

Hadrat Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s.) says that the Prophet (S) always asked
him to keep the door of the house open at the mealtime so that anyone
who came could partake of the food. But on that evening he particularly
instructed not to allow anyone to come near him that none else had a
right to partake of the food he was having then. After the Prophet (S)
ate the food, Hadrat Jibril helped him wash his hands. The Prophet (S)
now wanted to offer his optional prayers, but Jibril said, “Tonight you
need not spend time in offering optional prayers. You must immediately
go to Hadrat Khadija that the Heavenly Matter has been incorporated in
your body.”

Hadrat Khadija says that she was about to sleep when there was a knock
on the door. She asked who it was. The Prophet (S) said, “Open the
door!” The Prophet entered the house. As usual she brought water for his
ablution. He offered two units of prayer of thanksgiving and went to
bed. But that night he didn't do ablution before coming to the bed.

Thus from that pure body, the pure spiritual material was transferred to
the purest womb.

The reality of this pure conception is wonderful. Hadrat Khadija (s.a.)
said that she immediately felt that she had conceived. From the very
next day, the pure foetus starting with her mother and reciting the
Praises of Allah (S.w.T.).

These facts sound incredible, but are only based on the Will of Allah
(S.w.T.).

It is among the *Mustahabbat* of our faith that on the Day of Judgement,
*Shafa’at al-Kubra* (the Major Intercession) will be in the hands of
Hadrat Fatima Zahra (s.a.)


