The Twenty Sixth Talk
=====================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فَبِعِزَّتِكَ لَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ إِلَّا عِبَادَكَ
مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He said: ‘Then by Thy Might I will surely make them live an evil
life, all, Except Thy servants from among them, the purified ones.’***
***(Sura Sad, 38:82-83)***

The Enemy of Faith & Action
---------------------------

The topic of our discussion was sincerity of purpose *(Ikhlas)*. We have
said that *Ikhlas* is a formidable refuge to save oneself from sins. If
someone wishes to save himself from the machinations of Satan, there is
no other way for him than making access to *Ikhlas*. Without reaching
this stage, the person will be in the hands of Satan as a ball is in the
hands of a child.

It is Satan who destroys the faith and action of people. If sometimes,
Satan is unable to destroy the faith of a person, he would certainly
despoil it. He puts to waste the good deeds the person has done that
could have been of help for him on the Day of Judgement. He is our
veritable enemy, and therefore, we shall have to reciprocate equally
fierce fully. *Fattakhi dhuhu aduwwa (therefore take him (satan) for an
enemy!).* The enemy is very powerful and every moment he keeps trying to
attack our hearts and our faiths. Therefore we should remain people of
*Ikhlas* that we don't become the abode of Satan's wickedness.

Ikhlas is the Height of Tawhid
------------------------------

In the first Sermon of Nahj al-Balagha Amir al-Mu’minīn (a.s.) says,
“The foundation of faith is the understanding (*ma’rifat*) of Allah
(S.w.T.). The height of this understanding is acknowledgement of His
being the Absolute Creator (and complete faith on the Day of Judgement
that has been the basis of the *Da’wa* (Invitation to the Faith) of all
the prophets (a.s.). The height of acknowledgement is his firm belief in
*Tawhid* and the height of *Tawhid* is the height of *Ikhlas* or the
sincerity of purpose. “

If our creator, and the creator of all the creatures, is Allah (S.w.T.),
then what relation do we have with anyone other than Him. Why do we
consider others as our saviors? If truly our faith is that there is no
god but Allah (S.w.T.) and every good is in His hands, then we don't
have any right to stretch our hands for help in front of anyone else. It
is by doing this that we give rise to hypocrisy. When man starts
thinking that even the creatures are capable of solving problems for
them and seeking recognition and respect in their eyes is a guarantee of
wellbeing, then they veer away from *Tawhid*. The path of hypocrisy is
laid for them now and satanic traits take root in their hearts.

If we are practitioners of *Tawhid*, then our prayers must be addressed
towards Allah (S.w.T.).

When we think that He is Ever Present, then why should we look to anyone
else. To the contrary, for the fulfillment of the purpose for which He
has created us, why should we involve others. It is not proper that we
make an exhibition of the performance of the obligatory acts in front of
others that they praise us. If we have firm faith on *“Kamaal at-Tawhid
al-Ikhlas* - The height of *Tawhid* is sincerity of purpose”, then we
truly consider Him our Creator and Sustainer and deem Him the guide in
all our affairs and don't attach ourselves to others for help.

Many Claims of Being Sincere
----------------------------

Most of human actions are contrary to the dictates of sincerity of
purpose. If Allah (S.w.T.) is the Only Sustainer, He is the One Who
gives and takes, He is the one who sends and calls back, all the charity
is in His control, then why do we give undue importance to circumstances
and causes? Whenever there are ups and downs in life, then why do we
bitterly complain about the Divine Decree of Allah (S.w.T.) *(Qada wa
Qadar)*? Discussion on this topic will be time consuming. Many a time it
happens that a person thinks all his life that he is sincere. But when
he reaches the end of the life, his eyes open wide. He then realizes
that his entire life was spent with insincerity to Allah (S.w.T.). Many
are men who spend their lives bowing their heads to many gods; even then
they consider themselves monotheists.

A person thought one night to go to the mosque and spend the whole night
in prayer there in total dedication and sincerity. Leaving behind his
comfortable bed, he reached the mosque and commenced the prayer on the
rough prayer mat. After sometime, in the darkness, he heard a voice. He
thought someone else was busy praying in the mosque. He also thought
that it was good that someone else too was in the lonely mosque who will
certainly mention to others that he was praying there the entire night.
The man continued his prayers with more dedication and interest. He
modulated his voice to give to it a touch of pathos. He spent the whole
night in that way. At dawn he noticed a dog cowering in a corner of the
mosque. Perhaps it had come into to mosque to save itself from the
extreme cold outside. This proves that he was praying the whole night to
make a show to the dog.

Satan’s Laments
---------------

If you are people of sincerity, then your concern will be only with Him
and consider only Him as your Only Accomplisher *(Kaar Saaz)* of all
your affairs. Pomp and pelf of the world should not overwhelm you. The
causer of recognition or ignominy for you is only Him. It is He who
sends ailments and also it is He who cures them. All the affairs in this
world trace their origin to Him.

When a person who has reached the stage of Sincerity of Faith *(Ikhlas
al-Iman)* enters the mosque, Satan becomes restless and starts
lamenting.

But this situation is very difficult and requires intense effort. This
is a task of great valor that man comes in conflict with Satan and does
the Major Jihad with his own baser instinct *(Nafs al-Ammara)* till he
attains the status of a person of sincerity *(Ahl al-Ikhlas)*.

Three Types of Persons are Accountable
--------------------------------------

I would like to quote a tradition in this connection. It is recorded in
*Mahajjat al-Baida* that on the Day of Judgement three groups will be
the first to be called for giving the account of their deeds.

The first will be the group of *‘Ulama* or scholars. Allah (S.w.T.) will
inquire of them as to what they were doing in the world and how did they
use the knowledge that was imparted to them? They will say, “O
Sustainer! You are witness that we spread knowledge in the world, kept
ourselves occupied with teaching and education, we authored books and
guided the people in general.”

Allah (S.w.T.) will say in reply, “You are lying because you did
everything to be termed an *‘Allama* (an erudite scholar) and a wise
person. This was mere show and its compensation was the people's praises
for you. What do you expect from Us now?”

The second group will be that of rich persons. They will be asked by
Allah (S.w.T.), “How did you use the wealth given to you by Us?” They
will say, “O Allah! You are witness that we spent the wealth in your
way. We did good turns, helped the beggars and needy and didn't go to
our graves with any regrets about the wealth that we left behind!”

Allah (S.w.T.) will reply to them, “You are liars! You spent on others
because you wanted them to praise you and call you magnanimous and your
name appeared on the newspapers and other media. You got the
compensation for your good deeds in the world itself. What else do you
expect from Us now”

(It has come in a tradition that seven groups will be in the shadow of
Allah (S.w.T.)'s Skies. One of this group will be of those who remain
incognito while they do charity and spend in the way of Allah (S.w.T.)
is such a manner that when their right hand does the charity, the left
will remain unaware of the act. Other than Allah (S.w.T.) none knows
about this good deed. When Hadrat Imam *Zayn* *al-’Abidin* (a.s.) used
to give money in the way of Allah (S.w.T.), he used to cover his face
with his shawl that he remained incognito while doing this good deed.
Even this went to the extent that the persons whom the Imam (a.s.)
personally helped, used to complain that he has not helped them! This
was because of the fact that at the time of getting the help, the
beneficiaries were unable to recognize the benefactor. A person might
spend huge amounts in charity to get praises from others and for showing
off. Their charity will then have no weight.)

The third group will be that of the persons who were martyred during
Jihad. They will be asked, “What have you done in the world? They will
reply, “O Allah! You know well that we laid our lives for Your cause.
Got wounded and bore hardships.” Allah (S.w.T.) then would rejoin, “In
the field of battle, rather than truly fighting for our cause, you
wanted to make a show of your valor to others and to gather booty.
Truly, you have not given your life for Us!” Some persons recite the
Holy Qur’an very much, but they intone it like a song to impress about
the control of their voices on others. Such persons too may not get any
reward in the Hereafter.

It is narrated that one person came to Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq and said, “O
Master! I recite the Holy Qur’an in my house and the people in my house
hear it. Sometimes my voice even travels outside of my house to the
hearing of the commuters on the street. What do you say about this?” The
Imam replied, “Keep the pitch of your voice in the middle that your
recitation does not give the impression that you are making a show of
it.”

Perhaps there is a point in this that the person may not be making a
show to the members of his family, therefore he was asked to recite at
an average pitch that the inmates got the benefit of hearing and getting
benefit from it. He also wanted the voice not to travel outside his
premises that others hear it and think that he was making a hypocritical
show of his prowess.

It is a strange thing that till a person takes refuge in the fortress of
sincerity of purpose he is not safe from the machinations of Satan. This
is the stage where a person prays from the depths of his heart:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّن يُجِيبُ الْمُضْطَرَّ إِذَا دَعَاهُ وَيَكْشِفُ السُّوءَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Or, Who answers the distressed one when he calls upon Him and removes
the evil... (Sura an-Naml, 27:62)***

O Allah! The hardships are huge and we had been so complacent and
careless that only Your benevolent attention can ameliorate our
situation. We were in self-deception that we became the victims of
insincerity thinking that we were sincere to You. Once the curtain rises
and the scene of death and the *Barzakh* (Purgatory) become evident to
us, we would realize the misapprehension we were in that we thought
ourselves to be the replicas of Salman!

Out through our lives we have been under the misapprehension that we had
been on pilgrimage to *Karbala al-Mu’alla* and *Mashad al-Muqaddas*.
There is no doubt that pilgrimage is highly felicitous, but the urge to
go on the tour must be from the depth of the heart. When one goes to
perform the *Hajj*, the title of *‘Haji’* is prefixed with his name.
That can be tantamount to making a show of his pilgrimage. In a
nutshell, there will be need for sincerity in whatever we do and it
should not be attended by an element of show.

The Highest Stages of Sincerity
-------------------------------

The Martyrs of Karbala are not called the chiefs of the martyrs just for
the sake of calling. Among these martyrs, the lowest according to the
worldly rating, was a Nubian slave. He said, “O Maula! I am very lowly
from the point of view of pedigree and descent! I am dark of visage. The
smell of my body is unpleasant. It is true that I am not fit to
sacrifice myself in your way! Be kind on me and accept me as a ransom
(*Fidya*)!”

The Imam (a.s.) didn't give him permission to go and battle. He cries
and says, “Master! In good times I had been the consumer of the
leftovers of your table! How can I abandon in times of hardship?” The
person pleaded with the Imam so much that he was given permission to go
to the field of battle. He, at last, attained the felicity of Martyrdom.
What act could be better than this!


