The Twenty Seventh Talk
=======================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فَبِعِزَّتِكَ لَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ إِلَّا عِبَادَكَ
مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He said: Then by Thy Might I will surely make them live an evil life,
all, Except Thy servants from among them, the purified ones.*** ***(Sura
Sad, 38:82-83)***

Sincerity and Good Deeds
------------------------

Pure and good is the thing that is free of impurities. For example: pure
gold that is only gold and nothing other than that. It has not been
alloyed with copper or any other metal. Or pure milk that has been
described in the Holy Qur’an thus,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِّمَّا فِي بُطُونِهِ مِن بَيْنِ فَرْثٍ وَدَمٍ لَّبَنًا خَالِصًا
سَآئِغًا لِلشَّارِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***..We gave you to drink of that which is in their bellies, from
betwixt the refuse and the blood, pure milk, palatable to the
drinkers.*** ***(Sura an-Nahl, 16:66)***

Similarly, action too, despite the environment of the carnal desires
around, should be pure and in the way of Allah (S.w.T.). This means that
when one seeks nearness to Allah (S.w.T.), there should not be any
worldly desire in the heart of the person. We have already said that
this is a spiritual act that doesn't depend on expressing in words and
coming in the heart.

Worldly Honor Too Is In Allah (S.W.T.)’s Hand
---------------------------------------------

One should ascertain whether the motive for any action is with Allah
(S.w.T.)'s love and nearness in mind or is it is a worldly motive. For
example: If you are going to make an address from the pulpit, whether it
is to please Allah (S.w.T.) or to earn money and fame. If you are doing
this for all the three, then remember, it is not possible to bring them
together. It is not possible that an act is done to please Allah
(S.w.T.) and to please a human being at the same time. If the act is not
performed with sincerity towards Allah (S.w.T.), neither will the act be
acceptable by Him, nor will the worldly purpose be accomplished. But if
an act is performed solely for the pleasure of Allah (S.w.T.), He might
give to the person worldly gain too.

About Malik Dinar
-----------------

In his early days Malik Dinar was a bullion merchant. He had made good
progress in the profession. Then avarice got better of him and he
thought ways of becoming the trustee of the *Jami’i al-Umaww*i *Masjid*
(Umayyad Mosque) in Damascus. He was desirous of this position because
lots of funds would be at his disposal as the trustee. In this greed
Malik disposed all his assets and distributed the money in charity.
Since the trustee is expected to be extremely pious and simple, he went
and stayed in the mosque. Whenever he found any person entering the
mosque, he would stand up and start praying.

The purpose was to attract the attention of the people to his piety so
that his candidature for the trusteeship could be clinched. But in
course of time people understood his insincere plan. They were covertly,
and sometimes overtly, making fun of him. They would ask him, “O Malik!
What is your intention?” A lot of time passed in this manner. Then he
realized that in his avarice he had reduced himself to the condition
that he was in. Now that all the people have gauged his plan, there was
no chance of him getting the trusteeship. He thought that his fate was
neither to get the worldly benefit nor of the Hereafter.

That night, with a broken heart, Malik expressed penitence (*istighfar*)
to Allah (S.w.T.) and sought His forgiveness for his sins throughout the
night. He was surprised the next morning to see the same persons who
were insulting him earlier, met him with due respect and asked him to
pray for them. In due course of time it was well known in Syria that
Malik was a man of great piety. Now the important persons came to him
and offered to him the trusteeship of the mosque. He declined the offer
politely and said that he had acquired the Good will of Allah (S.w.T.)
with difficulty and that he was not in the need of anything else.

The unlucky person who is devoid of sincerity will definitely be one who
loses the world as well as the Hereafter (*Khasira ad-duniya wal
aakhira*).

Futile Prayer
-------------

We have already mentioned that the acceptance of prayers is dependent on
the sincerity of the person. The prayer that is devoid of sincerity is
an exercise in futility and is useless. The lowest is the prayer through
which one seeks the pleasure of both the Creator and the creatures. In
such acts those elements of hypocrisy are present that are counted among
major sins. The prayer of a lower category than this is that which is
not even for the mental pleasure (*Hiz an-Nafsani*).

Sometimes the nature of a person plays its part in his intent. For
example: It is Friday and a warm day. The person wishes to go to the
swimming pool to cool himself and, at the same time, perform his
obligatory bath. Now, who could say that whether his intent is to swim
or to have his mandatory Friday bath. Or, for example: It is a cold day
and the person wishes to have his obligatory Friday bath and use a
public bath to warm his body as well. These acts are devoid of
sincerity. If you wish that your actions are absolutely sincere, then
there should not be any element of mental pleasure in them.

Supplement of any act is permissible (*Mubah*), if it assumes the status
of collateral act in perpetuity; otherwise it voids the spirit of the
act. By sincerity (*Ikhlas*) we mean that there is no supplementary or
subsidiary purpose. For example: if one has to perform his obligatory
bath and he combines it with a swim or a visit to the public bath, then
the person has, in reality, two intents, and the obligatory bath in this
case goes void!

Praise and Appreciation of People
---------------------------------

It is a very delicate situation. One should seek Allah (S.w.T.)
protection. Sometimes man remains insensitive and with one word of
worldly praise he forgets Allah (S.w.T.) and spoils his Hereafter. He
doesn't strike a deal with Allah (S.w.T.) for perpetual welfare, but for
some worldly praise he dedicates himself to the mundane ends.

Worse than this is the ambitious person who is not satisfied if he gets
the *Du’a al-Maghfirat* (prayer for Deliverance) after his death but
wants people to remember him thereafter and sing his praises. He will be
so much engrossed in the love for fame that even after his death people
will praise him.

A good name after the death of a person is useful. But the purpose in
his lifetime must have been only getting the pleasure of Allah (S.w.T.)
with his good deeds and not for the search of name and fame. If the
person had ulterior designs while doing good deeds, however much the
world praised him, his Hereafter will not be good.

Is Praise Beneficial?
---------------------

If a person is amoral and because of some misapprehension people admire
and praise him, will it in anyway benefit him to the extent of the point
of a needle or reduce his retribution to the extent?

Of what use is the popularity a person enjoyed in this world when he is
in purgatory (*Barzakh)*. When a person is in the angelic plane of
existence (*Aalam al-Malkut*) what relationship will he have with the
physical plane of existence (*Aalam al-Mulk*) that have different traits
of character? If the person has departed from here with the felicity of
*Iman*, and was virtuous and sincere in his life, then his actions were
for Allah (S.w.T.) rather than for worldly fame. You must pray for the
deliverance of the Muslims after their death and not sing poems in their
praise. For his good deeds every individual will receive rewards. But
otherwise, whether lights are put on his tomb or there is dust flying
around there, it will not make any difference.

Ahmad Bin Tawlan & the Reciter of Qur’an
----------------------------------------

If someone has departed from this world with good deeds behind him, and
he had staunch faith in the Book of Allah (S.w.T.), then recitation of
the Qur’an over his grave will be beneficial to him. Otherwise, you must
have heard the story of Ahmad Bin Tawlan that has been related by Allama
Damiri in *Hayat al-Haywaan*. That person was a king in Egypt. When he
died the Egyptian Government appointed a *Qari* to recite the Qur’an
near his grave. Suitable compensation was to be paid to him for this
work. He got busy reciting the Book at the grave.

One day news came that the Qari had absconded. After much search the
policemen located him and asked the reason why he ran away. He couldn't
gather enough courage to spell out the reason but was asking to be
relieved from his work. The authorities said that if he considered the
compensation low, it can as well be raised. He said that however much
they pay him, he was unwilling to do the job. They were confused and
said that until he said the true reason, they would not release him.

The man said, “Some days ago, the person in the grave complained to me.
He caught hold of my collar and said, 'Why are you reciting the Qur’an
at my grave? ' I replied, ' I have been appointed by the authorities to
do it to earn Reward for you.' The dead man said, 'Rather than giving
any benefit to me, every verse you recited was giving wind to the fire
of Retribution for me. It was being said to me that why I neglected
hearing the recitation during my worldly life? Why didn't I follow the
precepts laid down by the Holy Book? “Now I request you to kindly
absolve me of this duty.”

In the court of Allah (S.w.T.) nothing is more beneficial than truth and
sincerity. With your tongue you might say a hundred thousand times,
“*Qurbatan il-Allah*” but if there is no truth and sincerity of intent,
then mere utterance of the words will not be of any use.

The human psyche is either in search of recognition amongst the fellow
humans or to derive pleasure for itself. He thinks that he is a person
of much virtue. But when he sees the roster of his deeds on the Day of
Judgement, he will be surprised to know that his life had been one of
selfishness and for satisfaction of baser instincts.

But if action is accompanied with sincerity then even a bit of it could
be sufficient to elevate his status and become the cause of the person's
deliverance. Even two genuflections of prayer, offered with sincerity
and dedication of the heart, can qualify one for the Heaven. A lifetime
of prayer for the insincere purpose of show will be of no use at all.

Sayyid Ibn Tawoos says that the prayers that are motivated by the fear
of the Hell and the craving for the Heaven has an element of
selfishness, although correct according to the norms of Faith. It will
be better than the other acts of the person. Hadrat Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s.) has said, “O Allah! I pray to You not with the fear of the Hell
and for getting admittance to the Heaven. I pray to You only because You
are befitting for my prayer.”

In the light of this saying the prayer of a person with personal motives
of rewards will be of lower felicity.

The Prayer of an Erudite Scholar
--------------------------------

You must have heard that the two *Rakat* of the prayer of an *Aalim* is
rated more than the prayers of an ignorant (*Jahil*) person offered over
a period of a full year. The reason for this is that an erudite scholar
knows the facts and comprehends them. He understands all the dangers of
sensual pleasure. As against this, an ignorant person doesn't know what
will be the consequence of which act. He worships himself and others,
thinking all the time that he was praying to Allah (S.w.T.)!

Similarly you must have heard that praying in congregation behind an
*Aalim Imam* is a thousand times more felicitous than praying alone. The
reason is that the *Imam* has superior knowledge. And is never away from
*Ikhlas* or sincerity in prayer.

The Father & the Son
--------------------

During his journey to Karbala, Imam Husayn (a.s.) felt sleepy at one
stage. Then he told to his companions that he had heard a herald who was
telling aloud from the skies, “This group moves and death travels behind
them!”

‘Ali Akbar asked, “O father! Are we not on the side of the right and
will our death not be in Allah's cause?” The Imam replied, “Yes!” ‘Ali
Akbar said, “Then, we needn't worry about death!” What felicity will be
bigger than getting martyred in the way of Truth!” These words are the
reflections of the heart of a person who has sincerity of purpose
(Ikhlas). Allah (S.w.T.) has made the words the mirror of the heart.
There is neither any worldly desire in these words nor is the craving
for name and fame. They knew it fully well that Martyrdom was fated for
them!


