The First Talk
==============

The Importance of Isti’adha in the Qur’an and the Traditions 
-------------------------------------------------------------

The topic that has received the maximum attention in the Holy Qur’an and
the traditions of the Prophet (S) and his Vicegerents (a.s.) is
*Isti’adha* or seeking Allah (S.w.T.)’s help to protect one against the
manoeuvrings of Satan.

This is done by saying the words *audhu billahi min ash-shaitanir
rajeem.* But it is necessary that one should seek this protection from
the depths of one’s heart. That is true *Isti’adha.*

To highlight the importance of *Isti’adha*, Allah (S.w.T.) says in the
Holy Book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْآنَ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللّهِ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
الرَّجِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So when you recite the Qur’an, seek refuge with Allah from the
accursed Shaitan.*** ***(Sura an-Nahl, 16:98)***

During a prayer, it is mandated, that after saying the *takbirat
al-ihraam* (Allahu Akbar) one should say the *Isti’adha* in a low tone.
The commentators are of opinion that the *Isti’adha* in this situation
has to be in a low tone because it will be like the person wishing to
keep himself hidden and at the same time escape from the machinations of
the enemy (Satan)! The pointer is towards the fact that the supplicant
should seek protection against his mortal enemy who is waiting for an
opportunity to overpower him. This is done best by quietly tapping the
door of the Great Place of Succor!

Isti’adha before commencing a Prayer
------------------------------------

One most important time for *Isti’adha* is the moment of commencement of
a prayer. Whenever a person has to offer prayer to Allah (S.w.T.), he
should seek protection from Him against *Iblīs* who is always bent on
misguiding and taking him astray from the right path. *Iblīs* makes his
utmost efforts to destroy the good deeds of the human being that he is
deprived of the rewards that he might earn. At least, *Iblīs* or Satan
tries to make the person proud or deceitful about prayers.

For example, if one wishes to do the ablutions, he must do the
*Isti’adha* before commencing to do it by asking for Allah (S.w.T.)’s
Protection against the accursed Satan. The ablution should be done only
after doing *Isti’adha*. You must have noticed that many a time the same
ablution becomes Satan’s area of operation that he puts many lurking
fears or temptations in the mind of the person that make his entire
prayer null and void.

Therefore, *Isti’adha* is one of the most important aspects of prayer
that has to be performed in the truest sense, and implicitly, that Allah
(S.w.T.)’s protection from the accursed Satan is assured.

Absolute necessity of Isti’adha in permissible affairs
------------------------------------------------------

In permissible (*mustahab*), or day-to-day, affairs like eating food,
drinking water or wearing the clothes, *Isti’adha* is mandated. For
example, at the time of wearing the clothes one should recite:

*Allahummas-stur awrati wa laa taj’al ash-shaitan lahu naseeba*

*(O Allah!* *Keep my private parts hidden and save them from the
interference of shaitan)*

   
 In every situation, however lowly and futile, or elevated and likeable,
one should seek protection from Satan. While entering into the mosque,
one should do the *Isti’adha* lest the persistent Satan chases you even
at that threshold! Even while going to a washroom it is required to do
the *Isti’adha* as follows:

*Allahumma inni audhu bika minal khabeesil khabs ar-rijs al-khabs
ash-shaitanir rajeem*

*(O Allah I seek Your Protection from the accursed Satan and the defiled
impurities)*

Satan at the Threshold of the Mosque
------------------------------------

 One pious person said that he noticed Satan, in apocalyptic revelation,
standing at the threshold of the mosque. He asked him “O accursed one!
What are you doing here?” Satan replied, “Some of my associates have
been missed in these environs and I am waiting for them!” The pious
person understood that they must be intelligent persons who have gone
into the mosque and the accursed Satan was unable to follow them inside.
They must have taken care to say the *Isti’adha before entering the
mosque.*

Reciting the Isti’adha before starting out of one’s House
---------------------------------------------------------

*Isti’adha* is absolutely essential when one is going out of the
residence. At that time Satan awaits for the person outside. One should
do the *Isti’adha* and recite the following supplication at the moment
of emerging out of the house:

*Bismillahi wa billahi aamantu billahi tawakkaltu ‘alal laahi wa la
hawla wa la quwawata illa billaah*  
*(In the name of Allah (S.w.T.) and with His Help; I believe in Allah
and place my trust in Him. And there is no power besides Him)*

In the Holy Qur’an it is said with great emphasis that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ يَرَاكُمْ هُوَ وَقَبِيلُهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لاَ تَرَوْنَهُمْ إِنَّا
جَعَلْنَا الشَّيَاطِينَ أَوْلِيَاء لِلَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He (shaitan) surely sees you, he as well as his host, from whence you
cannot see them; surely We have made the shaitans to be the guardians of
those who do not believe.*** ***(Sura al-A’raaf, 7:27)***

Only one thing can save you from Satan the accursed. That is
*Isti’adha.* Besides Allah (S.w.T.)’s Protection there is no way of
saving oneself from the tricks and deceptions of Satan.

The Prophet of Islam (S) exhorted by Allah (S.w.T.) to do Isti’adha
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Man wishes to have access to the Presence of Allah (S.w.T.), but Satan
tries his best to prevent him from achieving this end. He puts so many
hurdles and impediments in the way of men that it becomes impossible to
reach the desired destination. The one and only way of precluding this
risk is to seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s protection against Satan.  
 Allah (S.w.T.) has ordered the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُل رَّبِّ أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ هَمَزَاتِ الشَّيَاطِينِ وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ
رَبِّ أَن يَحْضُرُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And say: O my Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from the evil suggestions
of the Shaitans; and I seek refuge in Thee! O my Lord from their
presence.*** ***(Sura al-Muminun, 23:97-8)***

Similarly elsewhere in the Qur’an, Allah (S.w.T.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِن شَرِّ الْوَسْوَاسِ الْخَنَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say I seek refuge from the evil of the whisperings of the slinking
(Shaitan). (Sura an-Naas, 114:4)***

Therefore when the enemy is so powerful and strong, we should not be
complacent and unmindful of him. We should gather all our faculties and
plan to save ourselves by seeking the Protection of Allah (S.w.T.).
Otherwise, one would find to his surprise that the place where he was
prostrating himself for long was, in fact, Satan’s abode and in his
ignorance he thought that he was prostrating to god. When, in such a
situation, he uttered ‘O god!” in actual fact he had been submitting
himself to Satan!

Worshipping Satan the whole Life
--------------------------------

An incident is narrated in *Muntakhab al-Tawareekh.* My mentor, Ustadh
‘Ali al-Haeri, told in one of his lectures, “In a village of the Isfahan
province a rustic villager was in the last throes of his life. The pious
person of the village was requested to say the *talqeen,* or pronounce
the creed to the dying person to repeat it. During the *talqeen* when
the sick person said *la ilaha illa Allah* to bear witness to the Unity
of Allah (S.w.T.), from a corner of the room a sound came - *Sadaqat
‘abdi –* ‘My creature says the truth!’ When the sick man said, ‘*Ya
Allah -* O God!’ Then again the sound came from the same corner of the
room, ‘*labbayk ‘abdi’- ‘*My creature I am here!’ The pious person
asked, ‘Who are you that calls?’ The reply was, ‘I am the one whom this
person had worshipped all his life! I am Satan!’

Yes! It is a fact that the man worshipped Satan his entire life. He was
always responding to the call of Satan. His tongue spoke at Satan’s
orders. His eyes saw things in response to Satan’s wishes. His heart
responded to Satan’s wishes. When throughout his life the person was at
the beck and call of Satan, then at the time of the *talqeen* whether he
said ‘*Ya Rabb*’ or *‘Ya Iblīs’* his respondent can only be Satan. Even
if the curtains got raised in the person’s last moments, and he was
repentant, even then he would get only disappointment! Of what use will
be this repentance!

O believers! Try to be steadfast in doing the *Isti’adha.* Don’t
underestimate your enemy, Satan! Don’t be under the illusion that only
repeating the words ‘*Audhu billahi minash-shaitanir rajeem’* is
sufficient. Remember! Unless you understand the purport of these words
and mould your actions as per the Commandments of Allah (S.w.T.), the
*Isti’adha* will not be of any utility.  
  

Isti’adha during the execution of Justice (Qadhawat), when in privacy with non-Mahram and while in a frenzy of anger
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the traditions of the *Ahl al-Bayt,* particular attention is drawn
for *Isti’adha* in the following delicate situations:

*Qadawat:* The qadi or judge has to say the *Isti’adha* when he
adjudicates a case and gives his judgment.

*Khalwat ba na-mahram*: When a person is alone with a stranger from the
opposite gender (such as a man with a young woman), it is imperative
that he seeks Allah (S.w.T.)’s protection from Satan (*Isti’adha*)
because in such a situation the accursed Satan makes his utmost effort
to lead the person astray.

*Frenzy of anger*: When a person is in a frenzy of anger, his blood
boils and Satan dominates him with full force. Because Satan is created
fiery and subtle (*latīf*), he enters into the person of the man with
great stealth. We quote here the example of Hadrat Nuh (a.s.) to explain
our point. Satan says, ‘In his frenzy of anger a man for me is like a
ball in a child’s hand!’ You must have seen that a child throws the ball
whichever way he wants, wherever he wants! In the same Satan overpowers
men in frenzy of anger and makes them commit prohibited (*Haram*) acts.
There is no wonder if Satan makes persons commit acts of *kufr*
(*infidelity)* in a frenzy of anger! Only those lucky persons escape
from such situations that have Allah (S.w.T.)’s particular Blessing
because they say the *Isti’adha* in such situations.  
* *


