The Thirtieth Talk
==================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَخَذْنَا أَهْلَهَا بِالْبَأْسَاء وَالضَّرَّاء لَعَلَّهُمْ
يَضَّرَّعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We did afflict its folks with tribulation and adversity that haply
they might grow humble. (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:94)***

The State Of Tadharru or Humility is Essential for Isti’adha
------------------------------------------------------------

The thirtieth aspect of Isti’adha is *Tadharru*. Sometimes Isti’adha
demands that man should be in a state of lamentation because otherwise
Isti’adha remains ineffective.

*Tadharru* means expressing ones helplessness and weakness through
lamentation and expressing the predicament that the person is in. We
have already said during our earlier discussions that man is confronted
with a very formidable enemy that he has to escape from his clutches and
the enemy perpetually keeps chasing him. Man is absolutely incapable of
confronting the enemy nor can he guard against his onslaught. Therefore
he has to look elsewhere for help to ward off the evil adversary. In
this situation he is like a small child who is chased by a venomous
snake. The child runs scared and falls in the lap of his mother for help
and protection from the reptile. This state is called the Isti’adha or
the act of seeking help and protection to ward off the enemy!

Therefore when man understands that the accursed Satan, who is his
mortal enemy, is about to attack him and he is all alone, helpless and
utterly incapable of protecting himself, then he cries and laments for
help from the Almighty Allah (S.w.T.). He says, “O Beneficent Allah
(S.w.T.)! I plead that the accursed enemy is barking like a wild dog and
attacking me!”

Tadharru Through Ma’thura or Transmitted Prayers
------------------------------------------------

Whenever a situation presents itself that a person has to seek Allah
(S.w.T.)'s Protection against the evil advances of Satan, then the
importance of *Tadharru* is highlighted through the transmitted
supplications. One of these supplications is *Du’a Hifdh min Sharri
Iblis (Dua for Protection from the Evil of Satan)* that runs like this:

*“O Allah!* *Iblis* *is one of your creatures who is focusing his sights
on me from such a place that I cannot see him. But You see him very
well, while he is not empowered to see you! You have control* *over all
his faculties. While he cannot interfere with what Your Wish and Will!*
*O Allah (S.w.T.)!* *I, therefore, plead with You and seek Your help
against him. O Sustainer! I don't have the capability to ward him off
other than Your Help!* *O Allah (S.w.T.)!* *If Iblis sets his sights on
me, You must take care of him! If he plans to cause me harm, You inflict
Your curse on him! Save me from his plots. Make the burden of his enmity
fall on his own neck! I am seeking Your munificence! O most Beneficent
of those who do kindnesses! And the blessings of Allah be on Muhammad
and his purified progeny.”*

Allah (S.w.T.) is Sufficient for His Creatures
----------------------------------------------

There is no doubt that if someone presents himself with total *Tadharru*
as an insignificant and hapless creature and seeks only His help,
accepts Him as the sole deliverer and seeks deliverance through Him,
then seeks His protection from Satan's evil acts, Allah (S.w.T.) will
definitely take him in His Protection. After assuring Allah (S.w.T.)'s
Protection, deliverance is assured! Therefore Allah (S.w.T.) Himself
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَيْسَ اللَّهُ بِكَافٍ عَبْدَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is not Allah sufficient for His servant? (Sura az-Zumar, 39:36)***

Recognizing the Enemy from Signs
--------------------------------

Recognizing the enemy and being aware of his existence doesn't depend
only on visual observation. But definite signs too are instrumental in
this recognition. For example: If in the darkness of night, a stone
comes from one direction and hits his face, and if there is a shower of
arrows on the person, then he knows for sure that the enemy is trying to
hurt him and is after his life and property.

In such a situation, before investigating about the existence of the
enemy, the person first tries to reach someplace of safety. If there is
a house nearby, he knocks at the door and asks for shelter from the
householder and trusts himself totally to his care and seeks his help
against the aggression of the unknown enemy. Therefore, if any person
has the fear of Satan's attack, although he cannot see him, he searches
for refuge from him.

Satanic Attacks
---------------

If one says that neither Satan can be seen nor his attacks witnessed,
then how could one expect to escape from his attacks? How could he seek
protection from others against a seemingly non-existent enemy!

The reply to this is that Satan's attacks don't go unnoticed. They are
manifested through the fears, doubts and restlessness that confront the
hearts of people day and night. He doesn't refrain a moment from this
nefarious act of his.

Some Humor
----------

Someone asked a wise person whether Satan too sleeps like men. The reply
was that if that were the case, he would have given some respite to men
while he slept and in that period they would be safe! But we observe
that man is not free from Satan's attacks. The educated reply is that
Satan is not a physical being and it doesn't need any rest or sleep.

The Signs of Satanic Attacks
----------------------------

How would one know that the fears and doubts in the human hearts are the
creations of Satan?

The reply is that every thought that a person gets that creates doubts
and fears about Allah (S.w.T.), the Prophet (S.), about the Day of
Reckoning and makes the person restless is the creation of Satan. As
against this, every thought of trust on Allah (S.w.T.), belief on the
eternal life, peace of heart and mind is *Rahmani*, or Godly, in origin.
Every doubt that takes one away from Allah (S.w.T.), deprives one of
rewards, causes the visitation of Allah (S.w.T.)'s wrath is definitely
the work of Satan. As against this, every thought that gives him the
feeling of nearness to Allah (S.w.T.) and gives him the hope of Reward
is purely *Rahmani*.

The Rahmani Thoughts
--------------------

There are three types of thoughts that encompass the human mind on a
continuous basis. The first are those about which the person has
definite information that they are legitimate and therefore *Rahmani*.
For example: When the time for prayer arrives, the thought comes that he
must pray. Or, when an opportunity comes for him to spend in the way of
Allah (S.w.T.), the thought comes that he must do the good turn, *Silat
ar-Rahm*, that someone has come to him asking for monetary help. Forgive
such persons who have harmed him. Be fair in transactions. In short, he
gets thoughts about acts that are legitimate as per the commands of
Allah (S.w.T.).

The Satanic Thoughts
--------------------

The second category is composed by the thoughts that can be defined
without any doubt of being satanic. They are all the exact opposite of
the first category that we mentioned just now. In this category are all
those fears and doubts that are contrary to the *Shari’ah* and wisdom.
For example: While spending in the way of Allah (S.w.T.) getting doubts
that there is paucity of means for personal needs, Or he thinks whether
it was necessary to incur the expense at that time.

Perhaps a more essential need for spending might crop up later on. He
may also think that another person is richer than him and more competent
to provide help to the seeker than himself. If someone harmed him, he
thinks of harming the person more in return. If some relative hurts him,
he thinks of breaking all relations with him. If he heard that someone
has done backbiting against him and revealed his faults to others, he
thinks of revealing all the weaknesses of the person to others. Even he
would think of making false allegations against the person. On the
whole, in human affairs the satanic thoughts seem to play a dominant
role and the person who practices the norms of - *Awamir wa Nawahi* -
do’s-and-don’ts takes care of them in minute detail.

Thoughts to Be Considered Seriously
-----------------------------------

The third category of thoughts that are not definitely satanic but they
are proved to be so when the person suffers because of them.

Satan intends to make the person forgetful of Allah (S.w.T.) through the
medium of these thoughts. He attacks the person while in prayer. If the
person gets shorn of dedication of the heart in the prayer, then it
becomes the playground of Satan. We present a fable here to illustrate
the point.

The Dreaming Milkman
--------------------

It is said that a milkman was carrying a pail full of milk on his head
from his village to the town. He thought how long he would carry this
heavy burden every day. He decided to save a portion of the earning
everyday in the future. When sufficient fund were accumulated, he would
buy a pair of sheep. The sheep will multiply and he would have many
lambs. These will form a good flock. He would take them daily to the
forest for grazing. In the forest he might be forced to pick up a
quarrel with another person. If the man hurt his son, he would box the
person. His imagination was so fertile that he thought the scene was
really happening. So he raised his fist to box the head of the person.
But, in fact the fist hit the pail of milk with a thud and the earthen
pail fell off his head and shattered spilling all the contents on the
ground.

Fear of the Past or Future
--------------------------

Sometimes Satan tries to bring back the thoughts of past events in the
mind of a person to make him sad. His plan will be to make the person
bitter about Allah (S.w.T.)'s Wish.

Worse than this, Satan puts all sorts of negative fears in the mind of
the person about a bleak future. For example: What will happen tomorrow?
Things may go topsy-turvy. What would he do about it? He will neither
have interest in prayer nor in any other virtuous act. He forgets that
before these depressing feelings leave him, he might die. In that event
he would be guilty of forsaking the mandatory acts.

Pitiable
--------

Some years ago a person sold a piece of real estate at thirty times its
purchase price. After some days the buyer resold it for a price as high
as ten times the price at which he purchased from him.

The person became a victim of satanic thought of disappointment and
jealousy. He started cursing himself for hurrying with the sale. He
cried and worried for most of a week. When the pressure became
impossible to bear, he mixed lime with sulphur and committed suicide by
eating it.

Another person sold his property for good price and invested the
proceeds on another property. Later on he found that his deal was not
good. No one was willing to buy his new acquisition even at a third of
its value. As a result the person succumbed to the pressure of the loss.

The Fear for Tomorrow
---------------------

Thirty years ago a stock trader became insolvent due to the slump in the
market. Because of this shock he stopped going out of his house.
Whatever assets he had left with him, he was gradually liquidating to
eke out a frugal existence. He was worrying that if things continued the
same way, how long he will continue to provide livelihood for himself
and his family. He estimated the value of his remaining assets and
divided that by the amount required for a month's expenses. He arrived
at the conclusion that he could carry on for the next three years with
the current monthly expenses. He started brooding as to what will happen
after three years. He was wondering that he might have to come on the
road begging. All his life he was a respectable trader. How will he be
able to extend his hands before others for help!

Getting overwhelmed by satanic fears and doubts he consumed poison and
committed suicide.

There are umpteen such examples that can be recounted. One instance is
sufficient to impress that Satan influences the human heart during such
adversities.

Generally we hear that a particular student has committed suicide
because of failing his examination. We also hear that a youth ended his
life after losing an important competition.

We might say that man is under the pressure of satanic fears and despite
all efforts he is unable to catch the devil by his horns. He is
literally helpless. .

But we say that this weakness is because of the total absence and lack
of faith, or paucity of faith, on Almighty Allah (S.w.T.). Such persons
don't have total faith that Allah (S.w.T.) is the Absolute Sustainer;
all the bounties of this world have been provided by Him. Man grabs
these bounties with both hands, but instead of thanking Him, he
generally is ungrateful. He values causes more than the circumstances
and instead of depending on Allah (S.w.T.) (*Tawakkul*) he pursues the
causes and forgets that death and destruction are obvious.

Angel Versus Satan
------------------

When on the one hand Satan introduces thoughts in the heart of a person
that are destructive of the faith, on the other hand the angels
appointed by Allah (S.w.T.) to keep company with the person give him
thoughts of benevolence and virtue. Definitely if Satan tells a person
to commit suicide to rid himself of the unbearable cares, the angels
warn him not to do such a precipitate act that he would render himself
unfortunate and his Hereafter would be destroyed. But a person who had
been following Satan all his life will not see reason.

There is another way Satan overwhelms people. In the beginning he
encourages them to do good deeds. But in fact they ultimately lead to
evil. For example: He introduces a *Mustahab* (desirable) thought in a
person's heart to nullify some of his *Wajib* (mandatory) acts. Satan
even tempts the person to commit some sinful act in the process. Even he
misguides the person to wrongly consider a sinful act as prayer. The man
in his ignorance carries on these sinful acts. Satan persuades the man
to do the mandatory things and keeps domineering him to convert virtue
into vice.

Since these machinations of Satan are very subtle and secret, man
generally falls into the trap. Therefore one has to be alert to these
things. To explain this aspect a few examples are given.

### 1. In Nahi Anil Munkar (Denying The Forbidden), Irtikab Or Commission Of Munkar Or Forbidden

A person sees someone urinating in the direction of the *Qibla*. Instead
of politely advising the person that the act is prohibited (*Haram*) and
impressing upon him the sanctity of the direction in which the *Ka’aba*
or *Qibla* is situated, he starts haranguing him. He sees another person
urinating in a standing posture and tells him angrily that he was doing
it like a dog instead of politely telling him that this way the urine,
which is unclean (*Najis*) would splash on his trousers and limbs and
the right way is to do it in a sitting posture. If the person thinks
that by such impolite and hurting behavior he is doing *Nahi ‘anil
Munkar*, stopping someone from doing the prohibited (*Haram*), he is the
guilty of the *Munkar* himself by adopting the impolite and hurting
manner of trying to reform the persons.

### 2. Theological Education of Children

The son of a person doesn't offer his mandatory prayers. His first duty
is to advise him nicely and affectionately to cultivate the habit of
regularity in prayer. If from the beginning the father adopts harsh
measures of reprimanding and bodily punishments, or stopped his pocket
money, then the child would turn stubborn and might also start stealing
money to meet his needs. In this situation the father will be a sinner
from the point of view of *Nahi ‘anil Munkar*.

### 3. Reducing the Recitation of The Holy Qur’an to a Show

A person has good voice and is also conversant with *Tajweed* or the
right way of intonation of the text of the Holy Qur’an. Satan induces
him to recite loudly that people listen to his reading and both will
derive felicity from the act. But the main intent of Satan here will be
to dominate his psyche to make a show of his good voice and prowess at
the recitation of the Book and feel proud at the appreciation and
accolades from others. This way, instead of earning the Goodwill of
Allah (S.w.T.), he will become the subject of His ire and deprive
himself of the Reward for the *Mustahab* act!

### 4. The Pulpit & Arch: the Playfield of Satan

A person is well versed in the knowledge of the Faith. Satan persuades
him to guide the people and answer their difficult questions. But at the
same time he introduces the element of pride in their hearts for their
erudition. The person writes a book that is definitely a service to the
community. But in the eyes of Allah (S.w.T.) his effort is negated
because of the pride the person feels for his scholarship.

Another scholar, who is a person of great power of speech and oration,
is told by *Iblis* that the pulpit and the arch (*Mihrab*) are the
rightful places for the Prophet (S) and the Imam and that he is their
successor. He must guide the people, instruct them about the rewards for
prayer and supplication and encourage them to adopt piety and
*Tawakkul*. But at the same time Satan introduces the instinct of pride,
greed and urge for having sycophants around him. As the interest of the
person in the pulpit and the arch increases in the person, in the same
proportion his status diminishes. As a result the steps of the pulpit
become the way to Hell for him and the arch the pit of Hell.

### 5. Alone With a Stranger Woman

Stranger (*Non-Mahram*) man and woman being together in privacy can be a
precursor to many a sin. Satan is always on the lookout for such
situations. This sort of a situation is ideal for him to cause the
destruction of the parties concerned.

Man should know that loneliness and privacy with a non-Mahram, even if
it is for the purpose of prayers, is not only the cause of disputes but
is *Haram* (forbidden) too. Even in such a situation prayer too is void.

To understand the problems related with privacy and loneliness with
strange women, we refer you to our eighth talk pertaining to *Barseesa*.

The Acid Test For Good & Evil is the Holy Shari’ah
--------------------------------------------------

One might say that whenever a doubt comes across the heart of a person
about a certain act, he should as well abstain from it for the fear of
it being satanic, and even if it is legitimate, the doubt might turn it
sinful.

Our reply to this contention, may Allah (S.w.T.) forbid, is not that the
virtuous acts and prayers to Allah (S.w.T.) should be avoided. What we
mean is that one should try to be in a state of Isti’adha to the
Almighty.

To further illustrate our point, it is necessary to say that every
thought that comes to the heart of a person should be weighed in the
scale of *Shari’ah*. If it is proved to be in accord with the Commands
of Allah (S.w.T.), then he should beware of satanic doubts and perform
the act purely for the pleasure of Allah (S.w.T.). This is very
necessary because Satan is always on a lookout for opportunities to
disrupt the prayers of the person for coming near to Allah (S.w.T.).

Treatment Through Isti’adha is Essential
----------------------------------------

The only remedy for the person is to keep at arm's length from Satan and
seek Allah (S.w.T.)'s protection against his intrigue. Therefore it is
binding on man that at the beginning of every virtuous act, whether
*Mustahab* (optional) or *Wajib* (mandatory), he must do *Isti’adha* by
saying *audhu billahi min ash shaitanir rajeem* in such a manner that
the heart is totally with the tongue. To be precise, every good act,
about veracity of which the *Shari’ah* approves, should be performed
implicitly but during the performance he should continue seeking Allah
(S.w.T.)'s protection against Satan that the task is accomplished
without any blemish and gets Allah (S.w.T.)'s approval and acceptance.

Identity of Satan in the Holy Qur’an
------------------------------------

Allah (S.w.T.) has introduced Satan at many places in the Qur’an as the
enemy of man. He has also warned man to beware of Satan's intrigues and
to keep away from him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَأْمُرُكُمْ بِالسُّوءِ وَالْفَحْشَاء وَأَن تَقُولُواْ عَلَى
اللّهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He only enjoins you evil and indecency, and that you may speak
against Allah what you do not know*** ***(Sura al-Baqara, 2:169)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَا بَنِي آدَمَ أَن لَّا تَعْبُدُوا
الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! that you should not serve
the Shaitan? Surely he is your open enemy*** ***(Sura Ya Sin, 36:60)***

Therefore, one who has Faith in Allah (S.w.T.), His Prophet (S) and the
Qur’an, should deem it necessary to be a sworn enemy of Satan and abhor
friendship with him.

It is very clear from these discussions that friendship with Satan means
getting dominated by the doubts created by him and following his
dictates. Enmity of Satan means defying his temptations and keeping
steadfast on the Commandments of Allah (S.w.T.).

Defying Satan is a Difficult Task
---------------------------------

Since Satan's temptations and intrigues are all compatible with the
sensual desires of human beings, they are very difficult to be contended
with.

For example: A person is very fond of honey and has sufficient quantity
available with him. But an eminent physician is present there and tells
him that honey is harmful for him and that he should abstain from
consuming it. Another person tells him that the physician is a quack and
therefore he is advising you not to take honey. In fact he is envious of
you that you possess a lot of honey and he doesn't have any himself. In
such a situation how can we expect the person to give ear to the
physician?

Or, a youth sits at a lonely place with a young damsel and the accursed
Satan upbraids them to commit a foul deed. With this end Satan uses all
his powers of persuasion to involve them in the sin and it will be very
difficult for the persons to defy and keep to the legitimate (*Rahmani*)
path.

‘Umar Ibn Sa’d and Satanic & Rahmani Thoughts
---------------------------------------------

‘Umar Ibn Sa’d, who was a worldly person greedy of power, committed the
satanic act of fighting with Imam Husayn (a.s.) to get the emirate of
Rayy as reward from the accursed Yazid. But he refused to accept the
*Rahmani* thought conveyed by his father Saad b. al-Waqqas through his
friend Kamil. The details of this are mentioned in the books of
*Maqatil*.

Satan's Task is to Tempt
------------------------

As a hungry dog doesn't leave a place where there are bones, Satan
doesn't go away from hearts that have the filth of carnal desires. Satan
will not allow that person to perform any act properly.

Our statement proves that the cause of ruination of men is their own
carnal desire and their temptations of Satan. He works as a catalyst for
these activities in the minds of men.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الشَّيْطَانُ لَمَّا قُضِيَ الأَمْرُ إِنَّ اللّهَ وَعَدَكُمْ
وَعْدَ الْحَقِّ وَوَعَدتُّكُمْ فَأَخْلَفْتُكُمْ وَمَا كَانَ لِيَ
عَلَيْكُم مِّن سُلْطَانٍ إِلاَّ أَن دَعَوْتُكُمْ فَاسْتَجَبْتُمْ لِي
فَلاَ تَلُومُونِي وَلُومُواْ أَنفُسَكُم مَّا أَنَاْ بِمُصْرِخِكُمْ
وَمَا أَنتُمْ بِمُصْرِخِيَّ إِنِّي كَفَرْتُ بِمَا أَشْرَكْتُمُونِ مِن
قَبْلُ إِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the Shaitan shall say after the affair is decided: ‘Surely Allah
promised you the promise of truth, and I gave you promises, then failed
to keep them to you, and I had no authority over you, except that I
called you and you obeyed me, therefore do not blame me but blame
yourselves: I cannot be your aider (now) nor can you be my aiders;
surely I disbelieved in your associating me with Allah before; surely it
is the unjust that shall have the painful punishment.’ (Sura Ibrahim,
14:22)***

On the Day of Judgement, when the people destined for the Hell complain
to Satan about the way he tempted and misled them, he will say,
“Whatever promises Allah made to you were right and whatever I promised
was absolutely wrong but it was your mistake that you trusted my
promises. I have never forced you into anything but only invited you to
sin and you complied with the invitation. Why do you now make me the
target of your complaints? Today neither can anyone help you nor do I
have any use of you. In the world you treated me equal to Allah and now
your fate is to bear the hardships of Hell.”

Satan thus played a dominating role in the destruction of man by
tempting him to yield to the carnal desires. In other words, the
internal enemy of man, the desires, and Satan, the external enemies join
hands and render him helpless.

The Poor Complainants
---------------------

If man turns towards Allah (S.w.T.) in this predicament and pleads with
Him for his helplessness and seeks His Protection against the intrigue
of Satan, Allah (S.w.T.) definitely listens to the appeals of the weak
and relieves them from difficulties.

Imam *Zayn* al-’Abidin (a.s.) says in one of his supplications:

*“Only Your Munificence can save me from Your retribution, or my
humility and lamentations would come to my rescue.”*

In another supplication the Imam (a.s.) says:

*“We are those defenseless people whose protection You have made
imperative on Yourself. We are* *the victims whom You have promised to
relieve of their hardships.”*

Another supplication of the Imam (a.s.) goes like this:

*“Because of suspicion and weakness of faith Satan took my reins in his
hands. I am scared of his bad company and my psyche is in his evil
clutches. I seek Your protection from his evil dominance and plead
humbly to free me from Satan's treacherous dominance.”*

Humility & Obedience to Allah (S.w.T.)
--------------------------------------

The only source of getting oneself rid of the intrigues of Satan is the
Court of Allah (S.w.T.) through prayer and lamentation. Allah (S.w.T.)
definitely listens to one who laments with humility. Allah (S.w.T.)
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَوْلا إِذْ جَاءهُمْ بَأْسُنَا تَضَرَّعُواْ وَلَـكِن قَسَتْ
قُلُوبُهُمْ وَزَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ مَا كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Yet why did they not, when Our punishment came to them, humble
themselves? But their hearts hardened and the Shaitan made what they did
fair-seeming to them. (Sura al-An’aam, 6:43)***

If they had remembered Allah (S.w.T.) at the time they became the
victims of the calamity, and pleaded with Him with humility and
lamentation, He would certainly have given them salvation. But Satan
kept them away from Remembering Allah (S.w.T.) by engrossing them in
carnal desires.

One who forgets Allah (S.w.T.), trusts only in the circumstances of
acquiring benefits and warding off harms. He thinks it is unnecessary to
plead with Allah (S.w.T.) lamenting humbly. Such a person will be
deprived of the attention of Allah (S.w.T.) in times of difficulty and
will be unable to protect himself from the intrigues of his enemy.

About Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.)
-------------------------

Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.)'s episode of getting forced into loneliness with
Zulaikha is full of lessons for people. To save himself from the
temptations of Zulaikha, Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.) lamented and pleaded with
Allah (S.w.T.), and Allah (S.w.T.) saved him from the calamity in a
wondrous manner. A complete Chapter of the Holy Qur’an has been
earmarked to relate this episode that people take lesson from it and in
times of difficulty follow the footsteps of Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.). This
Chapter of the Qur’an is a beacon for achieving felicity and guidance
for people

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ فِي قَصَصِهِمْ عِبْرَةٌ لِّأُوْلِي الأَلْبَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In their histories there is certainly a lesson for men of
understanding.*** ***(Sura Yusuf, 12:111)***

It is appropriate that we dwell briefly on the episode of Hadrat Yusuf
(a.s.).

Love Renders Helpless
---------------------

Although Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.) was bought by Aziz of Egypt as a slave, his
personality and character impressed Aziz so much that he treated Yusuf
(a.s.) with great respect and consideration. He was provided quarters in
the palace of Aziz and it is there that he attained majority from
childhood. Aziz had very strongly commended Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.)'s good
character to his queen, Zulaikha.

Besides the specific recommendation of her husband, Aziz, Zulaikha was
herself much impressed with the good looks and character of Hadrat Yusuf
(a.s.). She admired him very much. She fell madly in love with him. This
became a major and destructive scandal for the realm of Egypt. She was
rendered helpless in front of her bondsman slave. She planned every
moment to be in his company. But however much she tried, she did not
meet with any success. She tried much to entice him with her charms and
beauty. She only got back only quiet and disinterest from Yusuf (a.s.)
in return.

The True Love
-------------

Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.) was free of the carnal desires and deeply in love
with Allah (S.w.T.). He was so engrossed with the ultimate bliss that
the transient beauty and charm had no meaning for him. Zulaikha,
therefore, was defeated in all her attempts at tempting him. When it was
unbearable for her, she decided to take the final step.

She converted a remote room of her palace as her private boudoir. She
got it furnished with great care. She then dressed herself in a sensuous
manner to enhance her charms and called Yusuf (a.s.) into her boudoir.
She was sure that he would not be able to escape from her charms now and
would fulfill her desires. She was also proudly confident that since he
was her slave, he will have to comply with her wish.

As soon as Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.) entered the room, she shut the door and
presented herself to him with all the charms at her command and said,
“Come! Fulfill my wish!”

None Other Than Allah (S.w.T.) Can Help
---------------------------------------

Imagine the predicament of Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.) at this stage. He was
confronted with such a huge calamity. Such a trial it was for him! On
the one hand the charm of Zulaikha's profound beauty and on the other
satanic temptations and environment. The Queen of Egypt was inviting,
rather commanding, him to succumb to her charms. It is true that there
was nothing to protect him other than Allah (S.w.T.)'s help !

But Yusuf, whose heart was full of Allah (S.w.T.)'s love, didn't comply
with the carnal wish of the queen of Egypt and his feet remained firm on
the path of righteousness. He pleaded with Allah (S.w.T.), lamenting,
for His help against the machination of Satan.

Isti’adha With Allah (S.w.T.)
-----------------------------

At this stage Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ مَعَاذَ اللّهِ إِنَّهُ رَبِّي أَحْسَنَ مَثْوَايَ إِنَّهُ لاَ
يُفْلِحُ الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He said: I seek Allah's refuge, surely my Lord made good my abode:
Surely the unjust do not prosper.*** ***(Sura Yusuf, 12:23)***

Hadrat Yusuf told Zulaikha that his respect and value in the eyes of her
husband, and her own, is because of Allah (S.w.T.)'s Wish that He made
you favorably disposed towards me. Therefore, I shall have to obey Him
and seek His help to save myself from your temptations. Since your
desire and wish is satanic, my compliance with it would bring Allah
(S.w.T.)'s Retribution on me! Therefore, I cannot accede to your wish
and displease Allah (S.w.T.) who has endowed bounties on me directly or
through you. Going against His commands is impossible for me!

The Real Succour
----------------

Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.), who was a dedicated creature of Allah (S.w.T.) and
His true lover, sought Allah (S.w.T.)'s help and protection in the
matter which was full of dangers. Allah (S.w.T.) too had filled his
heart with the light of faith and had given him strength of conviction
that he refrained from the sin and protected himself from all the
temptations of Zulaikha. In fact to save himself against her advances,
he ran towards the bolted door. Zulaikha at the height of her carnal
desire pulled at the shirt of Yusuf (a.s.) from behind. Hadrat Yusuf
(a.s.) was successful in getting out of the door but his shirt was torn
from the back because Zulaikha was pulling it with extreme ferocity.
When both of them emerged from the room, they found Aziz standing in
front of them.

Zulaikha took the initiative, to prove herself innocent, told to her
husband, Aziz, that Yusuf (a.s.) was trying to molest her and that he
should be put into prison.

Now Yusuf (a.s.) had to tell the truth. He told Aziz, the King of Egypt
that Zulaikha herself was nursing foul intentions.

A babe in the cradle spoke, with the wish of Allah (S.w.T.), and said
that if Yusuf (a.s.)'s shirt was torn from the front then he is guilty
of what Zulaikha is accusing him of. But he was running away from her to
save himself, and she was trying to prevent him from going away by
holding his shirt from the back then it would be torn only at the back.
In this event, he is not guilty of the act that Zulaikha is accusing him
of. This witness went in favour of Yusuf (a.s.) and Allah (S.w.T.) has
relieved him of the trouble.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَلِكَ لِنَصْرِفَ عَنْهُ السُّوءَ وَالْفَحْشَاء إِنَّهُ مِنْ
عِبَادِنَا الْمُخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***..Thus (it was) that We might turn away from him evil and indecency,
surely he was one of Our sincere servants.*** ***(Sura Yusuf, 12:24)***

Further Trial
-------------

Certain ladies of Egypt upbraided Zulaikha for falling in love with a
slave. Zulaikha tried to convince them that they could not possibly
imagine the temptingly handsome looks of Yusuf (a.s.). She told them
that the proudest of women would surrender to him without a whimper of
protest.

She invited all these ladies for a meal and in the midst of that, she
summoned Yusuf (a.s.). When he came, all the women fell in love with him
at the first sight. They were so much engrossed in looking at him that
the oranges they were about to cut with the knives in their hands, fell
off and they cut their own fingers in utter confusion. This was a very
difficult situation for him.

Prior to this he had to face only Zulaikha. But now there was a bevy of
beauties, who were after him. They too made the same demands as Zulaikha
did earlier. In his helplessness, Hadrat Yusuf (a.s.) appealed to Allah
(S.w.T.) with humility and lamentation to protect him from the intrigue
of the women. He pleaded with Allah (S.w.T.) that if He didn't protect
him, he would join the ranks of the ignorant people.

Allah (S.w.T.) protected him from Satan's machination and gave to his
heart the light of faith. He gave him such strength that Hadrat Yusuf
(a.s.) overpowered all the women and their intrigue became ineffective.
He agreed rather to go into prison rather than succumbing to their
overtures. Allah (S.w.T.) answered his prayer and saved him from the
intrigue of those women.

A Tale of Admonition
--------------------

If this story is properly understood, every person who has total faith
in Allah (S.w.T.) will seek His Protection whenever he is under pressure
of carnal temptations. Allah (S.w.T.) will definitely answer his prayer
and protect him from satanic temptations.

In conclusion of this discussion we are recounting here a recommendation
of Amir al-Mu’minīn, Imam ‘Ali (a.s.).

Isti’adha of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.)
-----------------------------

Nawf al-Bikali said that he saw Hadrat Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s.) going out
of the city and proceeding swiftly towards the desert. Nawf asked him,
“O Maula! Where are you going?” He replied, “O Nawf! Let me go. My
wishes and my needs are calling me towards my true love!” Nawf asked, “O
Master! What are your wishes?” He replied, “Allah (S.w.T.) knows very
well the center of my wishes and it is not necessary to tell anyone else
about my desires. Man has to take care not to tell others about his
desires and wishes lest he make others partners to Allah (S.w.T.).”

Then Nawf said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! I am worried that at all times
striving to accumulate worldly wealth, I have made the world as the sole
axis of my activity and am depriving myself of the preparation for the
Hereafter!” Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said, “Get attached to Allah's Munificence.
He is the protector of the helpless and succour of the pious.” Nawf
said, “O Maula! Kindly guide me to that Court.” Hadrat ‘Ali (a.s.) said,
“Allah is Beneficent and Great. He doesn't disappoint anyone. With a
true heart and total dedication think of Him and you can achieve your
desires with His help.”[^1]

[^1]: Ref: Bihar al-Anwār, Vol 9, Kitab ad-Du’a, Chapter: Ad’iyaa wa
munajaat.


