The Second Talk
===============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُل رَّبِّ أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ هَمَزَاتِ الشَّيَاطِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And say: O my Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from the evil suggestions
of the Shaitans. (Sura al-Muminun, 23:97)***

To summarize the last talk, believers must give importance to
*Isti’adha* and, in accordance with the *Nass al-Qur’ani* (the
categorical Qur’anic Injunction), in all conditions, seek Allah
(S.w.T.)’s Protection from the machinations of Satan. Satan, and his
ilk, has never left man to his own scruples, nor will they ever do it.
They always strive to prevent man from doing any good deed. Whenever man
tries to do good, they create impediments in his efforts.

In certain circumstances the efforts of the satanic forces are
redoubled. These situations are when one delivers justice, when one is
alone with a young strange woman and at the moment when a person is in a
rage of anger. As illustrated in the previous talk, Satan tries all
forms of deceptions to destroy the human being.

Satan’s Trap or Bait
--------------------

This evening we shall consider three good deeds of men that Satan makes
the best efforts to nullify. They are:

*Ahad :* Promises or resolutions
*Nadhr :* Or offerings
*Sadaqa :* Or charity

When a person resolves to Allah (S.w.T.) for performing a certain act
and to give a *nadhr (*offering) after its fulfillment in accordance
with the norms of *fiqh,* Satan tries all the deceptions at his command
to prevent him from offering the promised *nadhr!*

Similarly when one wants to give a *sadaqa* in Allah (S.w.T.)’s way,
Satan tries his level best to prevent the person from giving it. It has
been oft recorded that when a person puts his hand in his pocket then
Satan, and his numerous retainers, cling to the person’s hand and put
all sorts of fears in his mind. As the Holy Qur’an warns:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشَّيْطَانُ يَعِدُكُمُ الْفَقْرَ وَيَأْمُرُكُم بِالْفَحْشَاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Shaitan threatens you with poverty and enjoins on you***
***lewdness.*** ***(Sura al-Baqara, 2:268)***

They will put a fear in the mind of the person that after doing the
charity he will be left with nothing and render him penurious. Sometimes
they put a fear in the mind of the person that after doing the charity
if he gets some urgent need for personal expense, then from where he
will get help! Therefore they persuade the person to refrain from giving
charity in the way of Allah (S.w.T.).

Don’t brag after giving charity
-------------------------------

And, despite everything, after one has given in charity, then Satan
tries his level best to render the good deed null and void and thus the
person doesn’t qualify to get reward for the good turn. To achieve this
end, Satan would use all his skills to persuade the person to publicly
brag about his charitable act. For example, Satan will put in the mind
of the person to tell to the beneficiary of the charity, ‘It was I who
came to your rescue in time of need! None else would have helped you!’
Or Satan would make him belittle the receiver of the charity by saying,
‘Take this money now. But please don’t come to me for help again!”
Therefore, Allah (S.w.T.) categorically says in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُبْطِلُواْ صَدَقَاتِكُم بِالْمَنِّ وَالأذَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do not make your charity worthless by reproach and injury. (Sura
al-Baqara, 2:264)***

In a nutshell, Satan is a mortal enemy of men and always schemes to make
their good turns go in vain. Therefore, they too have to render Satan’s
mean efforts ineffective!


Satan sets his sight on the hearts of people
--------------------------------------------

In all commentaries, and particularly in *Majma al-Bayan,* it is
narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that Satan always has an eye on the
heart of a believer*.* When he finds the person busy in prayer, he
flees. The Prophet (S) has said, ‘Satan has put a halter on the hearts
of men. But when man remembers Allah (S.w.T.), Satan escapes from him.
When a person ignores remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.), Satan would swallow
his heart.’ ‘Satan plans to swallow the heart of a believer*.* But when
the believer remembers Allah (S.w.T.), Satan runs away from him.’

Satan chases a person till the end. This subject has received great
importance in the Holy Book. Allah (S.w.T.) takes an oath from man that
he will not become a follower of Satan. In clear terms Allah (S.w.T.)
has described Satan as the sworn enemy of man:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَا بَنِي آدَمَ أَن لَّا تَعْبُدُوا
الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! that you should not serve
the Shaitan? Surely he is your open enemy. (Sura Ya Sin, 36:60)***

Allah (S.w.T.) has thus forbidden man not to befriend, Satan, his enemy
since creation and warned from becoming his follower.

What is Satan? Why he has been Created?
---------------------------------------

Two topics have always been the subjects of discussion- what is Satan
and what is the purpose of his creation? Also, what could be the
strategy to save oneself from his machinations and to dispel the fears
that Satan creates in the hearts of human beings. These topics need
discussion at length, the dissertations on the topics are neither
comprehensible for the layman nor are necessary for him. Therefore, they
are dealt here in brief to give the basic understanding to the common
man.

### What is the use of knowing about Satan

Researchers are of opinion that if there is fear of a housebreak in a
neighborhood, then the person with good commonsense would look for as
many persons as possible to confront the brigands. He will also ensure
that the doors and windows are securely locked from inside the house. He
will place suitable hurdles on the way by which the burglars might
access the house. But, to the contrary, if the person spends lot of time
in investigating about the brigands about their numbers instead of
fortifying his place, it might become too late to meet their assault.

Therefore, what is necessary for you is to find the ways of guarding
against Satan. Trying to find out about his creation, his ways of
creating fears in the human beings would be a purposeless exercise. The
duty of a person is to guard against Satan in all events.

Now that the *Mukhbir as-Sadiq* (the Truthful Messenger) has informed
that Satan is the sworn enemy of the humans since creation of man, you
should not waste time in futile talk and, instead, search for ways of
warding him away.

However, since these questions about Satan are oft repeated, the matter
is dealt here in brief:

### Satan has been created with fire and he is a rare creature

Although man is made of the four elements - fire, water, soil and air -
but the content of soil is prominent in his make-up. This gives volume
and weight to the human body. Therefore the power of comprehension and
action in a human being are limited.

Contrary to this, Satan is made of fire, with the fire and air being
predominant components in his make-up. Therefore Satan is absolutely
subtle (*latif*) and light and, therefore, has a very wide range of
actions and mobility in his control.

Man thinks that he has great faculties at his command but Satan has such
incredible capabilities that he can become so small as to easily pass
through a tiny crevice. He can also become so huge as to entirely
encompass a vast place! The distances that a man can travel over a month
with difficulty, Satan can traverse in the time taken to blink the eyes
once! The heavy weights that man is incapable of lifting, Satan can lift
effortlessly!

In *Sura an-Naml* Allah (S.w.T.) has made a reference towards this fact
while narrating the story of Hadrat Sulaiman (a.s.) the throne of
Bilqees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ عِفْريتٌ مِّنَ الْجِنِّ أَنَا آتِيكَ بِهِ قَبْلَ أَن تَقُومَ مِن
مَّقَامِكَ وَإِنِّي عَلَيْهِ لَقَوِيٌّ أَمِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***One audacious among the jinn said: I will bring it to you before you
rise up from your place; and most surely I am strong (and) trusty for
it. (Sura an-Naml, 27:39)***

### Satan can see us

There is an objection that if Satan exists, then why men are unable to
see him? This is an invalid objection. Human eyes cannot see rare
things. They can only visualize things that have volume. Can we see the
air that is absolutely rare? Can we see the waves of the wind, although
we feel them blowing. The human eye is made of soil and it can only see
the voluminous things. Therefore the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ يَرَاكُمْ هُوَ وَقَبِيلُهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لاَ تَرَوْنَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***he (shaitan) surely sees you, he as well as his host, from whence you
cannot see them.*** ***(Sura al-A’raaf, 7:27)***

Yes! At certain times the satans can make themselves visible to people.
Many prophets such as Hadrat Nuh (a.s.), Hadrat Yahya (a.s.), Hadrat
Muhammad (a.s.) and many men of high piety have seen Satan and even now
some pious persons must be there who have this experience.

### The creation of Satan and the felicity of Man

As far as the purpose for Satan’s creation, the Omnipotent Allah
(S.w.T.) creates whatever He desires to. The *raison d’être* (*hikmat)*
for creation of Satan requires a detailed discussion that will be out of
place here. But, in a nutshell, the creation of Satan (and his ilk) is
to test the felicity of the human beings. When men ward away the
deceptions of Satan, they ear a place in the Heaven and those who are
misled by him, will be Hell bound!

Allah (S.w.T.) has ordered men to do charity. Satan asked people not to
do charity lest their horde of wealth diminishes! Those who have wisdom
and strong faith snub Satan and tell him,’ Allah (S.w.T.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَنفَقْتُم مِّن شَيْءٍ فَهُوَ يُخْلِفُهُ وَهُوَ خَيْرُ
الرَّازِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whatever thing you spend, He exceeds it in reward, and He is the
best of Sustainers.*** ***(Sura Saba, 34:39)***

If you are steadfast in determination and patience like a mountain, then
wisdom and knowledge will take you to such a place that it becomes
evident if you were irresolute, the Satanic fears would sway your feet!
It is the existence of Satan that proves the felicity of men of piety
and wisdom who are steadfast despite all the stratagems of the accursed
one!

### The purpose to create Satan is to put Man to test

We all talk of Allah (S.w.T.) and the Day of Judgment. But do we really
have a strong faith is a moot question! It is only Satan (and his ilk)
that is a touchstone for testing the humans.

If you take Allah (S.w.T.)’s name with implicit faith, then why you
don’t have confidence in His promises. If, unfortunately, you have
accepted the fears that Satan has put in you mind, then you will be
rendered a *mu’min* only in the namesake. If you have a strong belief in
the existence of the Heaven, then why you don’t make a sincere effort to
earn a place in it! Why don’t you try to avoid going to the Hell as
Retribution for the evil deeds committed under the spell of Satan!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لَهُ عَلَيْهِم مِّن سُلْطَانٍ إِلَّا لِنَعْلَمَ مَن
يُؤْمِنُ بِالْآخِرَةِ مِمَّنْ هُوَ مِنْهَا فِي شَكٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he has no authority over them, but that We may distinguish him
who believes in the*** ***hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning
it; and your Lord is the Preserver of all things. (Sura Saba, 34:21)***

You see that a particular lady has claims of piety. Satan approaches her
in the garb of a human being and says, ‘Madam! You have become
old-fashioned and retrograde! You have covered yourself in such a clumsy
*chadar* (shawl)’. When you happen to see the lady a second time, she
will not look much different from gentlemen! Satan creates such doubts,
fears and changes in the human beings.

Definitely, the purpose of the creation of Satan is to test the human
beings as to their determination to be steadfast on the right path.
Those who are fickle minded and susceptible to be led astray by Satan
are also tested by Satan! Thus Allah (S.w.T.) gets a proof of who is
*mu’min* (believer) and who is *fajir* (immoral).



### Allah (S.w.T.)’s promise and Satan’s promise

It is a human failing that man gives more credence to Satan’s promises.
Satan prevents him from spending in the way of Allah (S.w.T.) by
creating unfounded fears in his heart. The thought is generated in the
man’s mind that what he would do if a more important need for
expenditure arises soon and he would be without the money that he was
giving for the good cause now.

But man forgets Allah (S.w.T.)’s promise and goes back on spending on
good causes. He remains in the service of Satan and is carried away,
spending huge amounts for name and fame, hearing his name mentioned on
the radio, television and the newspapers!

When Allah (S.w.T.) exhorts people to be kind to their poor neighbors,
needy relatives and to help them monetarily, they make an excuse that
their financial status doesn’t permit doing any such charity. But when
Satan dictates about expense on worldly activities, they spend without
giving a second thought!

### Allah (S.w.T.)’s call and the call of Satan

Satan has been created with the sole purpose of testing the human
beings. He encourages opening of cinema houses and trains satanic men
and entangles the two- legged animals in his bait.

Doesn’t the call of ‘*Hayya ‘alal falaah’* (come for the good act)
emanate from the mosque in the vicinity of cinema halls at the time of
*Maghrib* Prayer? These two situations are in the immediate neighborhood
of each other to test the people as to who are righteous and who are
going astray!

Who knows The Day of Reckoning might be tomorrow! For that Day the right
to get Reward and Retribution is being earned by men today!


### Satan never thrusts his will on people forcibly

Satan can never force anyone to do misdeeds. He has no such faculties.
He can only operate through creating doubts in the minds of persons and
tempting them to go astray with his deceptions. Satan says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِيَ عَلَيْكُم مِّن سُلْطَانٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And I had no authority over you… (Sura Ibrahim, 14:22)***

Satan’s job is only to create doubts and fears in the human mind. If a
person goes to the mosque, it is with his own conviction and decision.
When he goes to the cinema theatre, it is his own choice and decision.
It is the fault of the man who is tempted by Satan to make decisions
that make him a sinner. On the Day of Judgment when people surround
Satan and blame him for leading them astray, he will give a simple and
clear reply that he did not drag them into the Hell. They had themselves
decided to act the way they did! Satan would then ask men to curse
themselves rather than cursing him!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِيَ عَلَيْكُم مِّن سُلْطَانٍ إِلاَّ أَن دَعَوْتُكُمْ
فَاسْتَجَبْتُمْ لِي فَلاَ تَلُومُونِي وَلُومُواْ أَنفُسَكُم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And I had no authority over you, except that I called you and you
obeyed me, therefore do not blame me but blame yourselves. (Sura
Ibrahim, 14:22)***




