The Fourth Talk
===============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُل رَّبِّ أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ هَمَزَاتِ الشَّيَاطِينِ وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ
رَبِّ أَن يَحْضُرُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say thou: ‘O my Lord! I seek refuge unto Thee from the (evil)
promptings of the satans! I seek refuge unto Thee O my Lord from their
access to me. (Sura al-Muminun, 23:97-98)***



The only way to safety from Satan is Isti’adha]
-----------------------------------------------

The fears and hardships that man faces on account of Satan are not
hidden from anyone. Everyone knows that Satan is the worst enemy of
human beings. He doesn’t leave the men alone till their last breath. His
only purpose in the world is to see that man doesn’t profess faith on
Allah (S.w.T.) and the Hereafter. At least, Satan makes every effort to
ensure that men veer away from doing good deeds and get attracted to
evil acts.

The most important thing is that men make every effort to get rid of
Satan and his ilk. But to get rid of such powerful and organized group
of enemies is not an easy task. The Holy Qur’an prescribes the one and
only remedy for the situation, is *Isti’adha.* There are clear
indications in the Book saying, “*Fastaidh billah” (So seek refuge with
Allah!)*, because it is not possible to reach the Truth without doing
this.

The King’s tent and the ferocious watch-dog
-------------------------------------------

I had cited an example that Satan is like a ferocious dog that lingers
at the entrance to the king’s tent. Whenever anyone tries to go to the
presence of the king, the dog rushes at him with gnawing teeth. This is
such a mean janitor that barring the close friends of the king, none
other is safe. Only Allah (S.w.T.)’s favorites can reach Him without let
or hindrance from this enemy. Anyway, to enter the king’s tent we shall
have to seek protection from him from the evil dog. There is no other
way than seeking Allah (S.w.T.)’s help and protection from the accursed
Satan to achieve His nearness! Only Allah (S.w.T.)’s fury can contain
the accursed Satan.

Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s
protection that with His attention one can get protection from the
mischief of Satan. In this regard the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُل رَّبِّ أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ هَمَزَاتِ الشَّيَاطِينِ وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ
رَبِّ أَن يَحْضُرُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And say: ‘O my Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from the evil suggestions
of the Shaitans; And I seek refuge in Thee! O my Lord from their
presence.’ (Sura al-Muminun, 23:97-98)***

Particularly in privacy and loneliness, saving oneself from the fears
and temptations created by Satan is rather difficult. In such a
situation one must call:

*Ya Ghiyath al-mustaghitheen*
*Ya Malaadh al-laaedheen*
*O listener of the plaint of the plaintiff*
*O provider of succor to the refuge seeker!*

‘Save me from the machinations of Satan.’ If there is no protection of
Allah (S.w.T.), one cannot save himself from the onslaught of Satan’s
deceptions.

Isti’adha should emanate from the heart and not merely from the lips
--------------------------------------------------------------------

To gauge the reality of *Isti’adha*, only saying *audhu billahi min
ash-shaitanir rajeem* or saying its translation in one’s own language is
absolutely insufficient. Isti’adha is a meaningful and spiritual
condition that is conveyed by the words noted above. If Isti’adha is
prompted from the heart of the person, then only it will be effective.
Otherwise, just uttering the words would make one the play-thing of
Satan.

The three types of Isti’adha
----------------------------

There are three ways the *Isti’adha* is done:

There are persons who neither have the right spirit of doing *Isti’adha*
nor are they aware of the meaning of the words of *Isti’adha.* But, all
the same, as a force of habit, they utter the words: *audhu billahi min
ash-shaitanir rajeem.* Unless the *Isti’adha* comes with feelings,
understanding and from the heart, it becomes a satanic joke!

There are persons who know the meanings and purport of the words of
*Isti’adha* and are capable of saying them properly, but they haven’t
the right feelings in their heart and also their actions are in
obedience of Satan. Such *Isti’adha* will be for Satan rather than a
submission to Allah (S.w.T.) for His protection against Satan!

There is a third group of persons who say the words of *Isti’adha* from
the depths of their hearts and are fully aware of their meaning, purport
and spirit. These persons will be fully aware of the Greatness and
Omnipotence of Allah (S.w.T.). The *Isti’adha* of these persons will
always get the accepted by Allah (S.w.T.).


Seeking protection in Allah (S.w.T.)’s obedience
------------------------------------------------

The deity of the sinners and Allah (S.w.T.)’s disobedient persons is
always Satan. Such persons might curse Satan a thousand times to make a
hypocritical show to others. To put the matter in more precise words,
such persons outwardly say *‘audhu billahi min ash-shaitanir rajeem (I
seek refuge with Allah from the cursed shaytan)* but their character is
such that they make false allegations against others, use abusive
language, trifle with the self-respect of others and reveal others’
confidences. Such persons don’t refrain from committing any minor or
major sin and all the same utter the words of *Isti’adha!* In practice
their *Isti’adha* becomes *‘audhu bish-shaitan min ar-Rahman*, that
would mean seeking protection of Satan to escape from Allah (S.w.T.)
(*na’udhu billah!!).* On the lips of such persons are the words that in
obedience to Allah (S.w.T.) they are seeking His protection, but their
actions are all contrary to His Commandments. When the curtains of
ignorance are raised from the hearts of such persons, they realize that
all the time it was Satan who prompted them to utter the words *audhu
billah* to ridicule their weak faith!


A satanic book to refute Satan
------------------------------

It is said that a scholar of some repute thought of writing a book to
warn the people about the treacherous and mean acts of Satan. During the
same period a pious person met Satan in a state of apocalyptic
revelation. He told to Satan, “O accursed creature! The time has come
for your exposure! Such-and-such a maulana is very soon writing a book
about your nefarious acts!” Satan smiled derisively and said, “You are
involved in a misunderstanding! This book is being written at my
suggestion!” The pious person asked, “How is it possible?” Satan
replied, “I had put doubts in the heart of the scholar that he is a
person of high repute and he should make a show of his erudition. The
person doesn’t realize that although he has titled the book as
‘Refutation of Satan’, but his real intent is to make a show of his
erudition and achieve name and fame!”

In this way Satan tempts people to curse him and make them involuntarily
utter ‘*aaudhu billahi min ash-shaitanir rajeem’.*

Politics of the imperialist forces
----------------------------------

The imperialist regimes maintain their agents in their settlements who
are their instruments for attainment of the imperialistic ends. At
certain times, for the sake of their political compulsions, they
instruct the agents to criticize and abuse them, their imperialistic
masters! All this is done as a camouflage for their nefarious political
reality.

How wonderful is Satan’s politics! He has the distinction of being the
first politician ever! Satan can no doubt be called the mentor and
leader of politicians of all times. Politics, in other words, means
working behind the backs of the people. Satan, in this way, fools
everyone and doesn’t leave behind any footprints. The evil acts are
committed by people at Satan’s provocation, but they never realize that
he is behind their actions!

Isti’adha is for escape from sins
---------------------------------

“O Allah! Give us courage to keep away from Satan, prevent ourselves
from sinning and avoid committing crimes.” This *Isti’adha* with Allah
(S.w.T.) keeps us away from sins and reins our tongues from abusive and
harmful talk. Instead of using abusive language in anger, we should
rather say *audhu billa* at such times of provocation! It is always
advisable to seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s protection and help against the
machinations of Satan. In other words, the meaning of *audhu billah* is:

*audhu bi ta’a-at illah min ta’-at ish-shaitan*

*I seek refuge in the obedience to Allah (S.w.T.) from the obedience to
Satan*

Keeping the hand in the tiger’s mouth and trying to escape from it with one’s feet
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If a person keeps his hands in the mouth of a tiger and cries that he is
very scared of the tiger and seeks the safety of an invincible fort to
save himself from the animal attacking him! This is like the person who
keeps crying for protection from Satan but is, in fact, submissive to
and under his evil spell.

As long as a person uses foul language, he is the follower and slave of
Satan. In this condition his cursing Satan will be a stark lie. One
should seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s forgiveness (*istighfar)* for the
*Isti’adha* that he had done hypocritically!

The *Isti’adha* of a foul-mouthed person, in the eyes of Gnostics
(*‘Urafa*) is tantamount to saying *audhubish-shaitan,* because he
sometimes says *audhu* and at others *la hawla...,* but his actions
prove his falsehood.

If a tiger is chasing you, you will try to run into a fortified place of
safety rather than going near it and putting your hands into its mouth
and keep shouting for help. Similar is the reality of *Isti’adha.* It is
seeking Allah (S.w.T.)’s succor against Satan in His strong
fortification!


A true dream and Satan’s treachery
----------------------------------

A disciple of Shaikh Ansari has said that when he was studying under
him, one night he saw the accursed Satan in a dream. Satan was carrying
some bridles in his hand. He asked Satan, “why are you holding these
bridles in your hand?’ He replied, “I put them in the necks of people
and drag them! Yesterday I put a bridle around the neck of one Shaikh
Murtada Ansari and dragged him out of his house into the lane. But he
escaped from me from the middle of the lane and returned home!”

When he awoke in the morning, he went to the Shaikh and related to him
the dream. The Shaikh said, “Satan has told you the truth. The accursed
one did try to tempt me with his glib talk. In fact, at home we needed
certain things and I had no money handy at the time. I thought that from
the *Sahm e Imam* I had with me a copy of the Holy Qur’an. I thought
that I would sell it and use the money for my need as a loan to be
reimbursed later. I took the copy of the Qur’an and went into the lane.
Whilst buying my needs a thought came to me why I was doing such a
thing. I felt penitent, returned home and put back the copy of the
Qur’an in its original place”. [^1]

Some other persons have related the same incident in the following
manner:

When the Shaikh’s disciple saw the bridles in the hands of Satan, he
noticed that one of the bridles was very strong and thick. When he asked
the accursed Satan the reason for his carrying the bridles, he replied
that they were for putting around the necks of people and dragging them.
The person also asked, “For what purpose is the stronger and thicker
bridle?” Satan replied, “This is for your mentor, Shaikh Ansari.
Yesterday I put it round his neck and dragged him into the bazār. But he
managed to free himself and escaped.” The person asked, “Which one of
the bridles is for me?” Satan replied, “For you there is no need of a
bridle. You can become my victim only with my sweet talk!”


[^1]: This incidence is quoted from the biography of the Shaikh Ansari,
‘Seerat wa Shakhsiyat’ pages 88-89.


