The Fifth Talk
==============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them, they become mindful (of God and get awakened)
then lo! They see (aright). (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:201)***

The meaning should be manifested by the words
---------------------------------------------

*Isti’adha* is one of the important one of the important aspects of the
faith and is obligatory on every Muslim. As already been mentioned,
earlier, it should be from the depths of the heart of the person and not
just the repetition of the words through the mouth. Qur’an wants people
to-*fastaidh billah-* seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s protection. This means that
the words should not be repeated as a force of habit like the parrots.
The reality requires one to seek freedom from the accursed Satan and
submit to Allah (S.w.T.) for His help. If these two objectives are
achieved, then the *Isti’adha* is really *Isti’adha*! Otherwise it will
just be an exercise in futility. In a nutshell, when the words of the
*Isti’adha* are uttered, it should be in the true spirit required of
him.

When we consider carefully the spirit of *Isti’adha,* we find that it
has five well-defined aspects:

1. *Taqwa* or piety.
2. *Tadhakkur* or remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.).
3. *Tawakkul* or trust in Allah (S.w.T.).
4. *Ikhlas* or sincerity.
5. *Aajizi* or humility towards Allah (S.w.T.).

When a person practices all these five aspects, his *Isti’adha* will be
accepted by Allah (S.w.T.). Then the accursed Satan will remain a long
distance away from the person whether he says *audhu billahi min
ash-shaitanir rajeem* or not. In other words, when Satan comes to a
*mu’min* he becomes scared of man as an ordinary human being gets scared
of the company of Jinns.

Satan runs away from the men of piety
-------------------------------------

The examples of aspects of *Isti’adha* are briefly explained from the
Holy Qur’an.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them, they become mindful (of God and get awakened)
then lo! They are forthright. (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:201)***

When the men of piety have any fear from Satan, then they busy
themselves in prayer and they instantaneously get enlightened.

Therefore, the very first condition for keeping oneself safe from form
Satan is to become pious. Those who adopted piety, busy themselves in
prayer whenever they fears of Satan in their hearts. They get
enlightened that Satan created the fears. They also realize that Satan
had fled because of their prayer and that they are in the protection of
Allah (S.w.T.). The *ayat* mentioned above is a pointer to the believers
towards adoption of piety and remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.).

Need for trust on Allah (S.w.T.)
--------------------------------

Allah (S.w.T.) says in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْآنَ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللّهِ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
الرَّجِيمِ إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ
وَعَلَى رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So when you recite the Qur’an, seek refuge with Allah from the
accursed Shaitan, Surely he has no authority over those who believe and
rely*** ***on their Lord.*** ***(Sura an‑Nahl, 16:98-99)***

One who has trust in Allah (S.w.T.), Shaitan will have no control on
him. Satan can influence only those who don’t trust on Allah (S.w.T.)
and all their confidence is on material and worldly aspects of their
lives. If the same person has trust on Allah (S.w.T.), then Satan
becomes helpless in his maneuvers.

When a person doesn’t trust Allah (S.w.T.) from the depths of his heart,
then all his pleadings for protection will be of no avail. According to
the verse quoted above, Satan would gain ascendance over him. In the
later verse of the Qur’an there is a reference towards this aspect:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا سُلْطَانُهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ يَتَوَلَّوْنَهُ وَالَّذِينَ هُم
بِهِ مُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, his authority is only over those who befriend him and those
who associate others with Him. (Sura an-Nahl, 16:100)***

One who has forgotten the Munificent Allah (S.w.T.) and befriended
Satan, he has no concern for *Isti’adha* or seeking protection from
Satan.

Satan has nothing to do with the sincere people
-----------------------------------------------

Another important aspect of *Isti’adha* is sincerity. This saying of
Satan is recorded in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فَبِعِزَّتِكَ لَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He said: Then by Thy Might I will surely make them live an evil life,
all, Except Thy servants from among them, the purified ones. (Sura Sad,
38:82-83)***

The purport of sincerity (*Ikhlas)* has been explained at various places
in the Holy Qur’an. As the need arose, we have referred to this aspect
in our talk and there is further need to stress on this aspect.

Thus it is established that the *Isti’adha* of only the persons sincere
to Allah (S.w.T.) is appropriate. Since Satan has no influence on such
persons they are those who escape from his machinations.

Do we have the capability of Piety (Taqwa) and Remembrance (Tadhakkur) of Allah (S.w.T.)?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

After living long years we have not drawn any benefit from knowledge of
the Faith. May Allah (S.w.T.) protect us from compounded ignorance
(*Jahl al-Murakkab).* We have earlier said that the first aspect of
*Isti’adha* is *Taqwa* or piety. One who has not adopted *taqwa,* will
not be able to escape from Satan. Only with piety one can keep out of
the clutches of Satan.

A woman who can come to the bazār wearing indecent dress is satanic from
head to toe! And the man who chaperons such a woman in public can never
escape from the attention of Satan.

It goes to prove that one who doesn’t save himself from what is
forbidden (*haram)* can never prevent himself from the influence of
Satan.

If a person dwells in a usurped house, he cannot escape from Satan
unless he quits the occupation of that house. If a person is in habit of
doing prohibited things, he cannot do *Isti’adha.*

Illegitimate sustenance is the biggest impediment in the way of Isti’adha
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The important aspects of *Isti’adha* are absolute piety and total
abstinence from prohibited things. Having prohibited (*Haram*) food
renders the entire body of the person satanic. He becomes attached to
Satan because Satan’s blood flows in the veins of the person.

The tongue with which such a person says *audhu billahi min
ash-shaitanir rajeem,* is in fact, the tongue of Satan. The reason for
this is that the person has drawn nutrition from satanic food.

*Shahīd ath-Thani (The Second* Martyr) writes in his ‘*Asrar as-Salat’*
that the Prophet (S) has said: “Allah (S.w.T.) sees your hearts and not
your faces.”

This proves that mere talking and arguing might have some effect on
people but for Allah (S.w.T.) nothing has any weight other than the
absolute facts.

Therefore, about the sacrifices that we make in the way of Allah
(S.w.T.), the Holy Book categorically says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَن يَنَالَ اللَّهَ لُحُومُهَا وَلَا دِمَاؤُهَا وَلَكِن يَنَالُهُ
التَّقْوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***There does not reach Allah their flesh nor their blood, but to Him is
acceptable the guarding (against evil, Taqwa) on your part... (Sura
al-Hajj, 22:37)***

Until the last vestiges of Haram are not removed Isti’adha is not possible
--------------------------------------------------------------------------


As long as even one morsel of *Haram* food is in the body of a person,
he is himself like Satan. Beating drums seeking protection from Satan is
his hypocrisy. As long as he is not able to shake away the influence of
Satan from his person, all his prayers are mere pretences.

About *rizq al-halal* (legitimate food) there are several traditions of
*Ahl al Bayt (a.s.)*. *Rizq al-Halal* is like a seed on which the
quality of the plant will depend. Care must be exercised pure and good
seed to ensure the health and sturdiness of the tree.

Allah (S.w.T.) says in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ كُلُواْ مِمَّا فِي الأَرْضِ حَلاَلاً طَيِّباً
وَلاَ تَتَّبِعُواْ خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ
مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O men! Eat the lawful and good things out of what is in the earth,
and do not follow the footsteps of the Shaitan; surely he is your open
enemy. (Sura al-Baqara, 2:168)***

Abstain from doubtful food
--------------------------

When one has doubt about the food being *halal,* he should rather
abstain from eating it. Avoid using *Haram* food and clothes. The use of
these will have such deleterious effect on the person that he becomes
the victim of fears and doubts.
** **


