The Sixth Talk
==============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them,*** ***they become mindful (of God and get
awakened) then lo! They see (aright). (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:201)***

A summary of the discussions of the previous evenings is that the main
purpose is to escape from the clutches of Satan and attain the
protection of Allah (S.w.T.). The main plank for achieving this is
*taqwa* or piety. Abstention from Satan is possible when a person
implicitly follows the mandated practices and avoids *Haram* acts. If
the person is careless about these things, then escape from Satan is
impossible. His example will be like that of a person who is willfully
combating with a wild animal but keeps crying that he wished to escape
from its clutches.

Keep reiterating - *’audhu billahi min ash-shaitanir rajeem,* “*I seek
refuge with Allah from the cursed satan*”, but if you are unaware of the
aspects of *Isti’adha,* and therefore are not complying with them, then
the entire exercise will be futile.

*Innal ladhina-ttaqu (Surely those who are* *God-conscious):* The people
who are in the process of escaping from sinful acts, and Satan tries to
overwhelm them, they instantaneously busy themselves in the remembrance
of Allah (S.w.T.). With the felicity (*baraka)* of this act, the
curtains of thoughtlessness are raised from their eyes and they
comprehend the evil schemes of Satan very clearly. Thus they are able to
save themselves from the evil bait of Satan.

It is only the persons of piety who are able to save themselves from the
effects of Satan. Otherwise, the evil influence of Satan is always
around!

We have mentioned that piety is a very important tool concerning our
food habits. Our food, or nutrition, is like the seed of plants. The
type of food one takes nourishes good or satanic tendencies in a person.
If the seed is satanic, then the body acquires evil tendencies. If a
*Haram* morsel goes down the throat, then the control over the body will
come into the hands of Satan. Till the time that morsel remains in the
body, Satan too will occupy it.

It is mentioned in the traditions that eating one *Haram* morse*l* of
food, the effects will remain in the body for forty days and, during
this period, the prayers of the person may not be answered.

We are helpless and powerless
-----------------------------

If someone gives a serious thought to the facts he would cry out (the
verse of the Qur’an), “*Amman* *yujeebul mudtarra… -* *Who is there to
answer the distressed…”* The foods we consume take us to darkness. There
is no light in them that can give nourishment to our spirits. Our
tongues too are influenced by these foods that we utter falsehoods and
abusive language. We indulge in misguiding games and play. Backbiting
has become our habit. All our limbs and organs have been exposed to the
effects of *Haram* and unsavory (*makrūh)* foods. The body has therefore
become insensitive to the instinct of remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.). The
limbs and organs have thus turned into the playthings of Satan.  
  

The purity or otherwise of food
-------------------------------

One type of *Haram* food is *najis* (impure) food. If impure food goes
down the throat, Satan will transmit his effect throughout the body.

Even babes in arms should not be fed with *najis* food*.* One should not
think that a child is innocent and free from the incidence of the rules
of *Shari’ah.* Remember, the adults are bound with the requirements of
the *Shari’ah* and it is their duty to take care to nourish their
children with pure food. When a child is brought up on *najis* food, he
will develop negative and un-Islamic tendencies as he grows up. It is to
be borne in minds that only animals can take *Najis* food*.*

The occasion when one is required to abstain even from *Halal* food is
when he is fully sated and can eat no more at that moment. Over-eating
is a prohibited and a satanic trait.  
  

Identify the Haram morsel of food
---------------------------------

A thing that comes to you in an illegitimate manner is *Haram* or
prohibited. If one acquires bread by cheating someone or he has usurped
it from someone, or has bought it from the proceeds of usury, or has
consumed without the knowledge or permission of the rightful owner, then
he has contravened the rules of *Shari’ah.* This is a *Haram* act.

The next in line of impure foods is the ‘*murdaar’* or the meat of an
animal that has not been slaughtered properly as required by the
*Shari’ah.* This applies also to those animals eating of whose meat is
permissible in the Islamic *Shari’ah.* For example, if a person, while
slaughtering an animal, doesn’t intentionally say the words *Bismillah*
before putting the knife to the throat of the animal, eating of such
meat is prohibited. Allah (S.w.T.) says in the Holy Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَأْكُلُواْ مِمَّا لَمْ يُذْكَرِ اسْمُ اللّهِ عَلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Don’t eat that thing on which Allah (S.w.T.)’s name has not been
uttered. (Sura al-An’aam, 6:121)***

Therefore if a *halal* animal is slaughtered without saying *Bismillah,*
consumption of such meat is forbidden.

Sayyid Tawus has recommended application of this verse to all foods,
although the verse pertains only to animal foods. Sayyid Tawus says,”
All the eatables that are prepared without taking the name of Allah
(S.w.T.) before commencing the preparation, I don’t partake of! How can
a *mu’min* eat the bread that has been cooked by the baker without
taking the name of Allah (S.w.T.).”  
  

The baker’s oven and the satanic tune
-------------------------------------

Times have changed in a funny way. If Sayyid Tawus was living today, he
would recall the days when the baker would come to the oven and recite
the *Hadith al-Kisa* and offer prayer before commencing his work.

Today the bread is baked listening to blaring music! They cook the bread
accompanied by satanic music. We consume those morsels infused with
satanic temperament!  
  


