The Seventh Talk
================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِّنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُواْ فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil thought
from Satan afflicts them, they become mindful (of God and get awakened)
then lo! They see (aright). (Sura al-A’raaf, 7:201)***

Be Satan’s antagonist
---------------------

   
 We have said that till a person doesn’t maintain a distance from Satan,
the true spirit of *Isti’adha* will not manifest in him. The person who
indulges in sinning is Satan’s subordinate. Allah (S.w.T.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ فَاتَّخِذُوهُ عَدُوًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely the Shaitan is your enemy, so take him for an enemy.. (Sura
al-Fatir, 35:6)***

He is your enemy from the beginning. You too should reciprocate with
enmity. Don’t befriend him. But if you commit sins, it will be obedience
to your enemy, Satan. And obedience is a component of friendship. Always
beware that your treacherous enemy is keeping an eye on you. No man is
safe from him for a single moment. If you think that you are safe from
him, it is nothing but complaisance.

Does Satan sleep?
-----------------

Someone asked a pious scholar whether it is mentioned in any traditions
about Satan sleeping and taking rest. The learned scholar smiled and
gave a very interesting reply, “If that accursed creature ever slept, I
would have some respite!”  
 When you sleep, the accursed Satan is fully awake. He never sleeps. He
always guards over men and looks for opportunities to bring harm them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ يَرَاكُمْ هُوَ وَقَبِيلُهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لاَ تَرَوْنَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He, and his retainers, watch over you from such a place that they can
see you and you can’t see them. (Sura al‑A’raaf, 7:27)***

You must remain fortified
-------------------------

What shall men do, then? When the enemy is so powerful and stealthy and
can attack through hidden means, it becomes our duty to become fully
armed and fortified against Satan. When the enemy is looking for your
slightest fault or negligence, then you too must guard against him fully
armed. The ammunition for men against Satan is *taqwa* or piety. Adopt
piety to meet the onslaughts of Iblis!  
  

Mu’min’s arms: mustahabat (non mandatory) prayers and tark al-makruhat, or abstinence from undesiderable acts
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
 Offering non-obligatory prayers, to the best of one’s physical
capabilities, is very effective for warding off the enemy, Satan.
Similarly, abstaining from doing or using things, although permissible
but not desirable, is very useful. *Tark al-Ghaflah* or Avoidance of
Carelessness too might help.

The more a person is careless of the enemy, Satan, the more he will have
the propensity to commit sins. With carelessness one might find himself
dangerously near the mouth of a serpent. Despite all the friendship and
nearness with Satan, the person will not get any support from him when
the time for retribution (*mukafaat)* comes. At that moment Satan will
turn away his face as if he never knew the person.  
  

Satan intensifies his attacks in stages
---------------------------------------

The initial attempts of Satan will be to tempt the *mu’min* to commit
unsavory things (*makrūhāt).* Then he will open the way of the minor
sins (*dhunub* *as-saghira*) to the person.

He puts into the mind of the person that the sins he was committing were
very trivial and thus encourages him to inadvertently commit major sins
(*dhunub al-kabira).*

The man himself thinks that he was committing minor sins, which thought
is itself a major sin[^1].

Satan them persuades the person to commit major sins as a habit. In this
way he overwhelms the heart and the spirit of the person. He attacks the
*mu’min’s* faith and puts him in severe doubts and fears. Thus Satan
makes him his helpless prey. He doesn’t keep the person capable of
comprehending that he is the victim of Satan’s plot.

Only the people of *taqwa* (piety), with their effective defenses, can
save themselves from the maneuvers of Satan. The poor ignorant person
cannot meet the onslaught of Satan.  
  

Wudhu or ablution, the sharp instrument of defence of a Mu’min
--------------------------------------------------------------

Of several non-obligatory things that can come to the aid of a *mu’min*
is to always maintain the state of *wudhu.* The Prophet (S) says*,
“Al-wudhu silaah al-mu’min*!” (*Wudhu* is the weapon of a mu’min!)

It is the duty of a *mu’min* to confront the satans that he is in mortal
combat with them. Therefore he must always be clean and with valid
*wudhu.*

A person should always be with *wudhu,* and if some time has passed
after performing the ablution, he should renew it as a measure of
carefulness that it might have gone void without the person noticing it.
It is said, “*Al-wudhu nūr wal wudhu ‘alal wudhu nūrun ‘ala nūr” (Wudhu
is a light and performing a wudhu over another is light upon light!).*
This is the light that dispels the darkness created by Satan in the
hearts of the persons.  
  

Fasting and charity break the backbone of Satan
-----------------------------------------------

In the armory of a *mu’min* there are certain arms about which the
Prophet (S) has made a particular mention. He (S) said:

“*Fasts of a mu’min blacken the face of Satan. Sadaqa or charity breaks
the backbone of Satan.* *Istighfar — entreaty with Allah for mercy —
will cut Satan’s vein of life, and love of Allah and good deeds of the
person uproot Satan.*”[^2]

When you fast the face of Satan, your enemy, will be blackened. If the
curtains are raised from your eyes, you will notice that Satan’s face
has turned black on account of your fasts.

But Satan is not so weak and emaciated that only by fasting you get his
face blackened and with a strike of charity you shatter his backbone.
You have to perform every action with absolute sincerity that they pass
through the seven curtains and break Satan’s backbone and destroy him.

Now let us talk about *Sadaqa* or charity. According to what the Prophet
(S) has said, it does break the backbone of Satan. But there is a
condition that your charity should be acceptable to Allah (S.w.T.).

I have seen Satan’s mother
--------------------------

It is narrated in *Anwār Jazairi* that once during an acute famine a
preacher was speaking from the pulpit in a mosque. He said, “If someone
wants to give *sadaqa,* seventy satans cling to his hand and try to
prevent him from doing the good turn.” One *mu’min* who was seated very
near the foot of the pulpit told to his friends with surprise, “What has
Satan to do with *sadaqa?* I have some wheat at home. I shall go home
just now and bring it to the mosque to give away in charity. I shall see
how the satans prevent me from doing it!”

The man got up and went home. On reaching home, when his wife became
aware of his intention, she shouted at him, “In these days of acute
famine you have no care of your wife and children! Perhaps the famine
conditions might prolong and we might all die of starvation because of
shortage of wheat.” Therefore, getting engulfed with doubts the *mu’min*
returned to the mosque empty handed.

The friends asked him, “What has happened. You have returned from home
without the wheat? Alas! The seventy satans had clung to your hands and
prevented you from doing the sadaqa.” The man said, “I didn’t see the
satans, but definitely I have seen their mother who came in the way of
my doing the good deed!”

This proves that man tries to take cudgels with Satan but many a time
his wife or others distract him from the good turn.

Sadaqa is also not giving a few coins reluctantly because:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَن تَنَالُواْ الْبِرَّ حَتَّى تُنفِقُواْ مِمَّا تُحِبُّونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***By no means shall you attain to righteousness until you spend
(benevolently*** ***in the way of your Lord) out of what you love.***
***(Sura Aal Imran, 3:92)***

What is your financial position? If you are really affluent, Satan’s
backbone will not break unless you do a sizeable charity. There will be
another condition attached to your charity that you should not brag
about it to the beneficiary nor to other friends. Belittling the person
who has received your help by reminding of your good deed can render
your *sadaqa null and void.*  
  

Penitence: another weapon in the hands of a Mu’min
--------------------------------------------------

Satan makes all his possible efforts to put man in the morass of sin.
But if the man expresses penitence at that time from the depths of his
heart, Satan’s heart would then shatter into smithereens with
disappointment.

But the enemy is very cunning. He strives hard to see that the person
fails to reach the threshold of penitence and forgiveness. Satan now
infuses an inspiration into the heart of his subject, “What has
happened? What big sin you have committed that you are so ashamed! Don’t
you notice around you that others are committing bigger sins and happily
living! You are still young. Even if penitence is necessary, you can do
that when you are old. At that time penitence will be ideal that you
will be weak and sickly and you may not have strength to break your
resolve of penitence. This is the time of your youth. How do you expect
to keep your promise of abstinence after expressing penitence?”  
  

Two more powerful weapons to defeat Satan
-----------------------------------------

Two more weapons that, according to the Prophet of Allah (S.w.T.) (S),
are most effective in defeating Satan are: Sincere obedience of Allah
(S.w.T.) and steadfastness in doing good deeds.

It is a *Jihad al-Akbar* when a person, just for the sake of Allah
(S.w.T.) and His friendship, ignores his personal profits and gains.
This is better than the *Jihad* fought with the infidels because this is
confrontation with *Nafs al-Ammara* or the vile personal instincts. If
one fails in this *Jihad,* he may not succeed in the other! The cause of
the defeat will definitely be the instigation and temptation by Satan.
In this defeat the person will not only die but also be given
retribution in the Hereafter.

Imam as-Sajjad (a.s.) says in one of his supplications:

*“O Allah (S.w.T.)!* *I seek you protection from my enemy! O Master of
the House! The ferocious dog is attacking me. Come to my rescue and save
me from the harm that it can cause to me!”*  
  

Iblīs bites the foot of Imam as-Sajjad (a.s.)
---------------------------------------------

In *“Madinat al-Muajiz”* it is said that Imam as-Sajjad (a.s.) was busy
one day in his prayer. Iblīs wanted to cause disturbance to the Imam’s
concentration. He ordered one of his retainers to disrupt the Imam’s
concentration by causing him bodily harm. The narrator says that the
accursed satan came to the Imam in the shape of a big python.

We have already mentioned earlier that satans have the faculty to appear
in any shape and form they wish to.

Anyway, he went near the Imam (a.s.) who was fully absorbed in his
prayer. The accursed creature bit one of the toes of the Imam (a.s.).
But the pain of the bite was not felt by the Imam (a.s.) nor was his
concentration disturbed an iota. At that moment a loud sound of Allah
(S.w.T.)’s anger was heard and the accursed creature was punished. Then
the herald said, “*Anta Zayn al-’Abidin – indeed, you are the adornment
of the worshippers!”*  
* *

Warn People against Satanic Deceptions
--------------------------------------

O people of wisdom! Keep people informed of the machinations of Satan.
The aberrations of peoples’ morals have already given some satisfaction
to Satan. Don’t endorse his accursed wishes any further. *Nahi ‘anil
Munkar* (abstinence from the prohibited) is obligatory on every
believer. At least express abhorrence of the satanic actions. There is
no precondition attached to doing this. It is the bounden duty of all of
us to save ourselves from such a situation!

Those who witness some foul act of their friends and, instead of
advising them to abstain from such acts, encourage and abet them in
doing more such acts, then they too will be deemed partners in the
commitment of the undesirable acts. It is observed that a person
abstains from going to cinema theatres and clubs to avoid getting looked
down upon in the society. But he does have a desire to visit such
places.

This would mean that he is not afraid of Allah (S.w.T.) but fears his
fellow men! Despite his abstinence from going to places of ill repute,
he is committing a sin because of his evil desires.

Thinner than the hair and sharper than a sword
----------------------------------------------

Beware of becoming the companions of Satan that he penetrates into your
person. We might be carrying a hallucination that we are performing good
deeds and, in actual fact, our actions are all at the instigation of
Satan. This situation is so delicate that it is thinner than the hair
and sharper than the sword.

According to Hajji Noori some people die with the false pride that they
are the friends of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) and think that by making such claims
they will earn a place in the Heaven.

If they are true friends of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) then they would implicitly
comply with all the commandments of the Faith. It is quite possible, if
they are making empty claims of friendship with Imam ‘Ali (a.s.), they
are acting on the instigation of the accursed Satan!

Beware O hapless Muslims! Your faith is in danger! If Satan puts you in
doubts at the time of your death, what would happen to you? In your own
false pride you claim to be Imam ‘Ali (a.s.)’s friend!

Where are you heading? In whose obedience you are indulging? If that is
Satan, then he is your friend and guide. The friendship of ‘Ali (a.s.)
too might be there in your heart. But let it not be dominated by other
evil influences! Confess whether you value your worldly desires more
than the love of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.)! If your concern is fulfillment of
worldly desires, are you not concerned for the Hereafter?  
  

The Hereafter depends on the worldly desires
--------------------------------------------

The hearts have been conquered by satans. Who is worried about the
Hereafter? When people go to the *Majlis* of *Hadrat Abul Fadl
al-Abbas,* they seek his intercession for the fulfillment of their
worldly desires. If their wishes were fulfilled without the
intercession, they might not have gone to the *majlis!*

Has it ever happened that you have sought intercession that your end
comes with love of ‘Ali (a.s.) in your hearts and you don’t become the
victims of Satan at the time of death!

A difference of three hundred thousands years
---------------------------------------------

It has been narrated in the traditions that some of the friends of
Hadrat (a.s.) will reach him after three hundred thousand years of
retribution.

This is true because your heart is for Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) in a thousand
ways! But before reaching the presence of the Imam (a.s.) the curtains
have to be raised. First, the traces of love for others have to be
removed before one could get access to ‘Ali (a.s.) “O Amīr al-Mu’minīn!
You must yourself show kindness to your friends!”

We should hope that we die with the love for ‘Ali (a.s.) in the depths
of our hearts and Allah (S.w.T.)’s Beneficence is on us!  
  

[^1]: The books wirtten by Ayatullah Dastaghaib, Dhunub al-Kabira (The
Greatest Sins) and Qalb as-Saleem (The Tranquil Heart) cover this
subject at great length.

[^2]: Safinat al-Bihar, vol 2, page 62


