Chapter 46 : Would the Imams (a.s.) Like To Know They Would Know H 667, Ch. 46, H 1
===================================================================================

Ali ibn Muhammad and others have narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from
Ayyub ibn Nuh from Safwan ibn Yahya from ibn Muskan from Badr ibn
al-Walid from abu al-Rabi' al-Shami from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has
said the following. "Would the Imam (a.s.) like to know he would
know."

H 668, Ch. 46, h 2

Abu Ali al-Ash'ari has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan from ibn Muskan from Badr ibn al-Walid from Abu al-Rabi' from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Would the Imam (a.s.) want
to know he would know."

H 669, Ch. 46, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from 'Umrah ibn Musa from Musa ibn
Ja'far from 'Amr ibn Sa'id al-Mada'ini from abu 'Ubayda al-Mada'ini from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "When the Imam (a.s.)
would will to know something Allah will grant him such knowledge."


**Chapter 47 : The Imams (a.s.) know when they will die and they die
voluntarily H 670, Ch. 47, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Salamah ibn-al-Khattab from )
Sulayman ibn Sama'a and 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad from 'Abdallah ibn
al-Qasim al-Batal from abu Basir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following.
"Whoever of the Imams that would not know what would happen to him and
to what events he would proceed such a person is not a possessor of
Divine authority over His creature."

H 671, Ch. 47, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn al-Hassan ibn
Muhammad ibn Bashshar has said that a respectable man from Qati'a al-
Rabi' (a quarter in the Karkh part of Baghdad) from the general public
(non-Shi'a) of Baghdad, from whom people would narrate hadith has said
to me the following.

"I have seen (experienced) from the people of this family of whose
virtues people speak, things that I have never seen (experienced) no one
else to be like him in his virtue and worship." The narrator has said
that he asked the man.

"Who is he? And how did you find him?" He then said, "In the days of
al-Sindi ibn Shahik (a vazir of Harun al-Rashid) we gathered eighty
people of the leading personalities in goodness to meet Musa ibn Ja'far
(a.s.) . Al-Sindi asked us, "Gentlemen, please examine this man. Has
anything happened to him?" People think that he is tortured and they
make a huge noise about it. This is his dwelling place and his bed
which, has enough room and he is not constrained.

Amir al-Mu'minin (Harun al-Rashid) has not done any bad things to him.
He is kept here until the right time comes so he can debate Amir
al-Mu'minin (Harun al-Rashid). He is quite well and comfortable from all
aspects. You may ask him questions." The narrator has said, "We had no
other intention but to see to the man, to his virtue and his excellent
attitude.

Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) then said, "Whatever he (al-Sindi) has said
about the capacity of the place and other such things are as he has
said. However, O people, I let you know that I am being poisoned with
seven pieces of dates. Tomorrow my color will turn green and after
tomorrow I will die." The man has said, "I looked at al-Sindi ibn
Shahik. He shivered in terror and shook like the leaves of a branch of
palm tree."

H 672, Ch. 47, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Faddal
from abu Jamilah from 'Abdallah ibn abu Ja'far who has said that my
brother narrated from Ja'far (abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) from his father that
he went to Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) on the night in which he passed away
and offered him a drink requesting, "Father, please drink it."

He said, "Son, this is the night in which I will pass away and during
such night the Messenger of Allah also passed away." (The date of the
demise of the two holy ones, as generally held, is not the same.
However, being the same day is a possibility).

H 673, Ch. 47, h 4

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn
'Abd al-Hamid from al-Hassan ibn al-Jahm who has said that he said to
al-Rida (a.s.) the following. "Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) knew his
assassin,

the night in of being murdered and the spot whereat who be murdered. It
is his words on hearing the ducks at the house, "These are the quacks
that will be followed by lamentations." Also the words of 'Umm Kulthum
(his daughter). "Would that you pray inside the house and send someone
else to lead the prayer in the Mosque."

He refused to do so and at that night he went many times out of the
house unarmed. He knew that ibn Muljim, may he be condemned will murder
him with a sword. He must not have exposed himself to it" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It is true but it was chosen that night wherein the
measure and the determination of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High
would come to pass."

H 674, Ch. 47, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from some of our
people from abu al- Hassan Musa (a.s.) who has said the following.
"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High expressed anger at the Shi'a. He,
therefore, let me choose either myself or them (to receive protection).
I swear by Allah, that I protected them with my own soul."

H 675, Ch. 47, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Musafir that abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) said to him
the following. "O Musafir, in this water passage there is fish." The
narrator has said that he said, "Yes, "May Allah take my soul in service
for your cause, there is fish there."

The Imam (a.s.) then said, "I saw the Messenger of Allah last night and
was saying, "O Ali, what is with us is better for you." (The mention of
fish is to show equality of degree of certain in his knowledge from
observation and his knowledge from his dream.)


H 676, Ch. 47, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Ahmad ibn 'Aidh from abu Khadija from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "I was in the presence of my father
during the day in which he passes away. He made several recommendations
to me about his funeral matters, such as washing his whole body,
shrouding him and placing him in his grave.

I then said to him, "Father, I have not seen in a better health from
the day you complained illness than today. I do not see in you any sign
of death." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Son, have you not heard about Ali ibn
al-Husayn (a.s.) calling from behind the wall, 'O Muhammad, come. Be
quick.'"

H 677, Ch. 47, h 8

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from Sayf ibn 'Umayra from 'Abd al-Malik ibn A'yan from abu
Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, sent support for Imam al-Husayn
(a.s.) up to the fill between the heavens and earth. Then he was let to
choose either victory or meeting Allah. He, however, chose the meeting
of Allah the Most High."


