Chapter 64 : the Specific Words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High and the Messenger of Allah That Grant Divine Authority To Everyone of the Imams (a.s.) H 757, Ch. 64, H 1
================================================================================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus and Ali
ibn Muhammad from Sahl ibn Ziyad, abu Sa'id from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Yunus from ibn Muskan from abu Basir who has said that he asked abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about the following words of Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High. "Believers, obey God, His Messenger,

and your leaders (who possess Divine authority). . . ." (4:59) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "This was sent from heavens about Ali ibn abu talib
al-Hassan and al-Husayn (a.s.)." I then said, "People say, "Why did He
not specify Ali and his family by their names in the book of Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High?'" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Say to them, 'The
command for prayer came to the Messenger of Allah but He has not
specified (the number of the Rak'ats) for them three nor four.

It, in fact, was the Messenger of Allah who explained to them this
matter. The command for Zakat (a form of income tax) came to the
Messenger of Allah and there was no specific taxable number such as one
Dirham on every forty Dirham. It was the Messenger of Allah who
explained it for them. The command for Hajj came to the Messenger of
Allah.

It did not say walk senven times around the Ka'ba . It was the
Messenger of Allah who explained it for them. The verse about obedience
came "Believers, obey God, His Messenger, and your leaders (who possess
Divine authority). . . ." (4:59) It came to declare that Ali, al-Hassan
and al-Husayn (a.s.) were the leards who possessed Divine authority.

The Messenger of Allah then said about Ali (a.s.), "On whoever I have
Divine Authority, then Ali (a.s.) has Divne Authority over him also." He
also has said, "I enjoin you to follow the book of Allah and my family
because have prayed to Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High not to
separate these two from eachother until He will make them arrive
al-Kawthar (at the pool of Paradise) to meet me. He has granted my
prayer as such.

" The Holy Prophet (s.a.) has said, "Do not try to teach them (The Imam
(a.s.) becaue they are far more knowledgeable than you.

" The Holy Prophet (s.a.) has said, "The Imam (a.s.) will never take
you out of the gate of guidance and they never make you enter the gate
of misguidance." Had the Messenger of Allah remained silent and would
not explain anything about his Ahl al-Bayt (family) the family of so and
so would have advanced their claim for Imamat (Leadership with Divine
Authority). However, Allah, the Most Holy,

the Most High, has revealed it in His book to confirm the explanantions
of His Prophet about Ahl al-Bayt (in the following verse), "People of
the house, God wants to remove all kinds of uncleanliness from you and
to purify you thoroughly.

" (33:33) Ali, Fatima, al-Hassan andlhy (a.s.) were there and the Holy
Prophet (s.a.) made them to enter under al-Kisa' (the Cloack) in the
house of 'Umm salama and then said, "O Lord, every prophet has a family
and a gravity, and these are my family and gravity." 'Umm Salama at this
point said, "Am I not of your family?" The Holy Prophet (s.a.) said,
"You are in goodness but these are my family and my gravity.

" Whe the Messenger of Allah passed away Ali (a.s.) had the utmost
priority and guardianship of the people all because of what the
Messenger of Allah had preached about him. It was because of raising him
up for the people and holding his hand in his hand. When Ali (a.s.) (was
about to) passed away he could not (and would not) enter Muhammad ibn
Ali or al-'Abbass ibn Ali or anyone of his other sons in the position of
Imamt.

Otherewise, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (a.s.) would have said, "Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, has revealed about us jus as He has done so
about you, and He has commaned people to obey us just as He has
commanded people to obey you.

The Messenger of Allah has preached to people about us just as he has
done so about you. Allah has removed al-Rijs uncleanliness from us just
as He has done so to you. When Ali (a.s.) left this world, al-Hassan had
the utmost priority for Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority)
because he was the eldest. When was about to die he could not, and would
not, enter his sons in the position of Imamat.It is because ;Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, says, ". . . The relatives are closer to each
other, according to the Book of God, than the believers and the
emigrants. . ." (33:6)

He then places Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority) in his sons.
If so, al-Husayn (a.s.) would have said, "Allah has commanded people to
obey me just as He has commanded people to obey you and to obey your
father. The Messenger of Allah has preached to people about me just as
he has preached to people about you and your father.

Allah has removed al- Rijs (unleanliness) from me just as He has
removed from you and your father. When the Imamat (Leadership with
Divine Authority) was infull force with al-Husayn (a.s.) there was no
one in his family to who could claim against him as he could calim
against his brother and father,

had they wanted to diver it from him and they would not do so. After
them it found its place with al-Husayn (a.s.) and the interpretation of
this verse continued, ". . . The relatives are closer to each other,
according to the Book of God, than the believers and the emigrants. . .
." (33:6)

After al-Husayn (a.s.) Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority) found
its place with Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.). After Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.)
it (Leadership with Divine Authority) found its place with Muhammad ibn
Ali (a.s.)." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Al-Rijs means doubts, I swear by
Allah that we never doubt in our Lord."

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Muhammad ibn Khalid and al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from
Yahya ibn 'Imran al- Halabi from Ayyub ibn al-Hurr and 'Imran ibn Ali
al-Halabi from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) a similar hadith.

H 758, Ch. 64, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isi from
his father from 'Abdallah ibn al-Mughirah from ibn Muskan from 'Abd
al-Rahim ibn Ruh al-Qasir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "The
Prophet has more authority over the believers than themselves.

His wives are their mothers. The relatives are closer to each other,
according to the Book of God, than the believers and the emigrants.
However, you may show kindness to your guardians. This also is written
in the Book." (33:6) About who this verse has come? He then said, "It
came about the governance (Leadership with Divine Authority).

This verse continued to apply to the lineage of al-Husayn (a.s.) after
him. We, thus, are of a proirity to governance (Leadership with Divine
Authority) and to the Messenger of Allah than the beleivers of
immigrants and the Ansar." The narrator has said that then he asked the
Imam (a.s.), "Do the sons of Ja'far have any share in it?

" The Imam (a.s.) said,"No, they do not have any share in it." I asked,
"Do the sons of al-'Abbass have any hsare in it?" He said , "No, they do
not have any share in it." I counted for him the folks from the
descendents of 'Abd al-Muttalib and in answer to all he would say, "No."
The narrator has said that then he forgot the sons of al-Hassan
(a.s.).

I went to see at another time andasked him, "Do the sons of al-Hassan
(a.s.) have any share in it?" He replied, "No, I sweatr by Allah, O 'Abd
al-Rahim, no one related to Muhammad has any share in it except us."

H 759, Ch. 64, h 3 Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Hashimi
from his father from Ahmad ibn 'Isa from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). The Imam
(a.s.) has said the following about the words of Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High.

"Only God, His Messenger, and the true believers who are steadfast in
prayer and pay alms, while they kneel during prayer, are your
guardians." (5:55) It means to have greater priority and authority to
deal with your affairs, your souls and your property. Such priority and
authority belong to Allah His Messenger and the believers, Ali and his
descendents who are the Imams until the Day of Judgment.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has then described them saying, ".
. . the true believers who are steadfast in prayer and pay alms, while
they kneel during prayer,. . ." Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) was praying
Zuhr (early afternoon) he was in the second Ruku' (bowing ddown). He was
wearing a gown that vallued a thousand Dinar (unit of money). The Holy
Prophet (s.a) had made him t wear it. King Najashi had sent it as
present to him.

A begger came and said the Islamic greeting words, "Be in peace O
Allah's authority and the aauthority over the believers who possesses
greater priority over them than their onw selves. Give some charity to a
destitute. He threw the gown to the begger and pointed with his hand to
pick up and take it. At such time Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
sent this verse of the Holy Quran.

He combined His blessings with hiis belessing in the form of his
children. Whoever of his children with whom Imamat found place was due
to this blessing was like him (in giving charity). They would give
charity while bowed down in Ruku' of prayer. The begger that asked Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) for chaarity was from the angels. Those who ask
the Imams from his children will also be from the angels."

H 760, Ch. 64, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father from Ibn Abu 'Umayr from 'Umar ibn
Udhaynah from Zurarah and Fudayl ibn Yasar and Bukayr ibn A'yan and
Muhammad ibn Muslim and Burayd ibn Muiawiyah and Abu '1- Jarud,
together, that Abu Ja'far (p.b.u.h.) said:

"Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, charged His Messenger with
the Mastership of Ali, and sent down to him: Your Master is only Alldh,
and His Messenger and those who believe who perform the prayer and pay
zakat. He decreed the Mastership of those in authority, although they
(the people) did not understand what it was.

Allah command Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) to interpret (and explain)
Mastership for them as he had interpreted (and explained) prayer, zakat,
fasting and hajj. When this came to him from Allah, the mind of the
Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.ah.p.) became straitened by it and he became
afraid lest they (the people) abandon their religion and come to deny
it.

So his mind was staitened and he consulted with his Lord, to Whom
belong Might and Majesty; and Allah to Whom belong Might and Majesty
revealed to him: O Messenger, deliver that which has been sent down to
thee from thy Lord; for if thou cost not, thou wig not have delivered
His Message. Allah will protect thee from men (al-Ma'idah, 5:67).

He complied with the command of Allah, may remembrance of Him be
exlated, and endorsed the Mastership of Ali on the day of Ghadir Khumm.
He convened the communal prayer, and he commanded the people that those
who were witnesses should inform those who were absent."-'Umar ibn
Udhaynah said: \`Ali but Abu'l-Jarudsaid: 'Abu Ja'far (p.b.uh.) said:
"One divine precept came down after another, and the Mastership was the
last divine ordinance.

And Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, sent down: Today I have
completed your religion for you, and I have perfected My blessing upon
you ( al-Matidah, 5 :3 )." Abu Ja' far (p.b.uh. ) said: "Allah, to Whom
belong Might and Majesty, said: 'I shall not send down (any ordinance)
to you after this ordinance: I have completed the divine ordinances for
you.' " ' "

H 761, Ch. 64, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim from ibn as-Sinai from Ja' far ibn Bashir from Harun
ibn Kharijah that Abu Basir said:

"I was with Abu Ja'far (p.b.uh.) at a session, when a man said to him:
'Tell me about the Mastership (wilaych) of Ali, whether it is from Allah
or from His Messenger?' He became angry, and said: 'Woe betide you! The
Messenger of Allah (p.b.uh.a.h.p.) was too fearing of Allah that he
should say what he was not commanded by Allah. Indeed, He decreed it
(the M. u,,''rship of Ali-p.b.u.h.)- just as Allah decreed prayer,
zakat, fasting and hap. ' "

H 762, Ch. 64, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Muh. ammad ibn
al-Husayn, the two together from Muhammad ibn Isma'il ibn Bazi' from
Mansur ibn Yunus that Abu 'I-Jarud said:

"I heard Abu Ja'far (p.b.u.h.) say: Aliah, to Whom belong Might and
Majesty, made five things incumbent on (his) servants: they accepted
four and rejected one.' I said: 'May I be made your ransom, name them
for me.

' He said: 'Prayer; but the people did not understand how to pray, then
Jibril (pb.uh.) came down and said: "O Muhammad, inform them of the
timings of their prayers." Then zakat was sent down, and He said: "O
Muhammad, inform them of their zakit as you have informed them of their
prayer.

" Then fasting was sent down, and, when the day of 'Ashura came, the
Messenger of Allah (pb.uh.ah.p.) sent a message to the villages around
it (Medina), and they fasted on that day. Then (the fasting) of the
month of Ramadan, between (the months of ) Sha'ban and Shawwal, was sent
down. Then hajj was sent down, and Jibril (p.b.uh.) came down and
said:"Inform them of their hajj as you informed them of their prayer,
their Rabat and their fasting.

" Then the Mastership was sent down, and when this came to him on
Friday at 'Arafah (or 'Arafat, the gathering place for the pilgrims on
the 9th of Dhu 'l-Hijjah, near Mecca), Allah, to Whom belong Might and
Majesty, sent down: Today I have completed your religion for you, and I
have perfected My blessing upon you (al- Ma'idah,5:3).

The completion of the religion was through the Mastership of Ali ibn
Abu Talib (p.b.uh.). Then the Messenger of Allah (pb.uh.ah.p.) said
together with this (verse): "My community has recently experienced the
jahiliyyah (the period of ignorance before Islam), and whenever I inform
them of this concerning my cousin, one speaker will say this and another
will say that.

I say (this) to myself without my tongue speaking out: a decisive
obligation came to me from Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, with
finality; He threatened me that if I did not make (this) reach (the
people), He would punish me." Then was sent down: O Messenger, deliver
that which has been sent down to thee from thy Lord; for if thou cost
not, thou wilt not have delivered His Message.

Allah will protect thee from men. Allah guides not the people of the
unbelievers (al-Matidah, S :67). Then the Messenger of Allah
(p.b.uh.a.h.p.) took the hand of Ali (pb.uh.) and said: "O people, there
was no prophet among the prophets who were before me to whom Allah did
not grant a span of life, then tie called him and he answered Him. The
time is now near when I shall be called and I will answer. I shall be
questioned and you will be questioned, and what will you say?" They
said:

"We bear witness that you have delivered (what you had to deliver) and
advised sincerely, and conveyed what you had. May Allah reward you with
the best of the rewards of those who were messengers.

" He said: "O Allah, I call you to witness"-three times -then he said:
"O assembly of believers, that this man is your Master (wall) after me.
Let the one among you who witnesses this convey (what he has seen) to
the one who is absent." ' Abu Ja'far (p.b.u.h.) said: 'By Allah,
(Ali-p.b.u.h.) was the one trusted by Allah over His creation, His
unseen (commands), and His religion which He Himself accepted (for His
creatures).

Then came to the Messenger of Allah (p.b.uh.ah.p.) that which came (his
death), and he called Ali and said: "O Ali, I wish to entrust you with
what Allah has entrusted me both of His unseen (commands) and of
knowledge of llim, and of His creation and His religion which He Himself
accepted (for ITis creatures).

"' (Abu Ja'far-p.b.u.h.-said:) 'By Allah, O Ziyad, (ibn Mundhir Abu
'I-Jarud), he (the Prophet-p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) has not given any share in
this to anyone. Then came to Ali (p.b.u.h.) that which came, and he
called his sons, and they were twelve males. lie said to them: "O my
sons,Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty, willed that He bring about
in me one of the particularities (He established) with Ya'qub (see
alBaqarah, 2:132 - 133): and Ya'qub called his sons, and they were
twelve males.

He informed them of the one in authority among them. Indeed, I shall
inform you of the one in authority among you. They are these two sons of
the Messenger of Allah ( p.b.u.h.a.h.p. ), al-Hassan and al-Husayn
(pb.u.t.). Listen to them, and obey and support them. I entrust them
with what the Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h. a.h.p.) entrusted me of what
Allah entrusted him of His creation and His unseen (commands) and His
religion, which He Himself accepted (for Ills creatures).

" Allah made obligatory for them through Ali (p.b. u h.) what he made
obligatory for Ali through the Messenger of Allah (pb.uh.ah.p.). Neither
of them had any excellence over the one in authority over him except on
account of his age. When al-Hassan (p.b. u.h.) was present, al-Husayn
(pb.u.h.) said nothing in a session, until (al-Hassan-pb.uh.) rose (to
leave).

Then came to al-Hassan (p.b.u.h.) what came to him, and he handed it
(the Imamite) to al-Husayn. Then came to al-I.lusayn (pb.uh.) what came
to him, and he called his eldest daughter, Fatimah hint al-Husayn
(pb.uh.) and handed over to her a rolled up writing and an open
testament (for Ali ibn al-Husayn-p.b.u.h.).

Ali ibn al-Husayn (pb.uh.) was ill with a gastric complaint which
(everyone) thought he would die of, so Fatimah handed the writing to Ali
ibn al-Husayn (p.b.uh.). Thereafter, by Allah, this writing has come
down to us.' " \*al-Husayn ibn Muhammad from MuAliah ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Muhammad ibn Isma'il ibn Bazi' from Mansur ibn
Yunus from Abu 'I-Jarud from Abu Ja'far (pb.u.h.), the same tradition.

H 763, Ch. 64, h 7

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Safwan ibn Yahya from Sabbah al-Azraq that Abu Basir said:

"I said to Abu Ja'far (p.b.uh.): 'A man from the Mukhtariyyah1 met me
and claimed that Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah (one of the sons of Ali ibn
Abu Talib-p.b.u.h.) was an Imam.' Abu Ja'far (pb.uh.) became angry, then
he said: 'Did you not say any 1. i.e. the Kaysaniyyah -Nlukhtar ibn Abu
'Ubayd ath-Thaqafi (1/622 - 67/687) was the leader of the uprising to
avenge the slaying of al-Husayn (p.b.u.h.) at Karbala' and Kaysan Abu
'Amra was then his leading supporter among the rnaw~li .

thing to him?' " He said: "I said: 'No, by Allah! I did not know what
to say.' He said: 'Did you not say to him: "The Messenger of Allah
(p.b.uh.ah.p.) appointed Ali, al-Hassan and al-Husayn as his successors.
When Ali (p.b.uh.) passed away, he appointed al-Hassan and al-Husayn as
his successors, and if he (Ali) had tried to withhold it from them, they
would have said to him: 'We are successors like you.' But he would never
have done this. al-I.lasan appointed al-l.

lusayn as his successor, and if he had tried to withhold it from him,
he would have said: 'I am a successor like you of the Messenger of Allah
(p.b.u.h. ah.p.) and of my father.' But he would not have done this.
Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, said: Some of those bound by
blood are nearer (to each other) than others (al-Anfal,8:75; al-Ahzab,
33 :6)." This is about us and about our sons.' "

**APPENDIX**

There are some matters in the ahddith nos. 687 and 689 which need
clarification in order to solve their apparent contradiction.

1. The root gh-b-r is one of those which in Arabuc are called added,
that is, they have two contrary meanings. One meaning of this word,
which is "to have remained" or "to have lasted", is opposite to its
second meaning, which is "to have passed" or "to have gone away".

Thus the nomen agentis, ghdbir, can take either of these two meanings,
both of which are well recorded in original linguistic sources, and
there is thus a kind of homonymy in which the two meanings oppose one
another. ( See al -Asma'i, al-Addad,p. 58; as- Sijistani, al-Adddd,
pp.153 - 154; Ibn Sikkit, al-Adddd, p. 240; al-Anbari, al-Addad, p. 129;
Abu 't.-Tayyib al- Halabu, al-Adddd f' kalami '1-'Arab, vol. 2, pp.
527 - 530; Lisdau '1- Arab, vol. 5, pp. 3 - 7; Tdju '1-'arus, vol. 3,
pp.436 - 439).

2. The description of knowledge ('ilm) can be made according to three
divisions: the knower, the known, and the cause of knowledge. In the
second and third divisions, there are three subdivisions:

past, present and future. Thus knowledge may be described as, for
example, past in two senses: past according to the cause, for example, I
know now because I learnt it yesterday; or past according to what is
known, for example, I know what happened yesterday.

Similarly with present and future knowledge.

3. In the first of the two ahddith (no. 687), knowledge is divided into
three categories: mddin, ghibir and hddith. Since ghdbir is here
contrasted with mddin (past), it clearly has the sense we first
mentioned, that is, that of continuation. In the second hadith (no.689),
knowledge again has a three-fold division, this time into gEdbir, mazbdr
and that "which has been pricked in (our) hearts. . ."; hddith was
defined in this way in the first hadith.

As for gEdbir and mazbdr, in the first hadith they are given as
equivalents, but in the second they are two separate divisions. From
the-explanations given it is clear that mazbdr has the same sense (i.
e., written down) in both abddith,
thus we must conclude that ghdbir is used in the first hadith with the
sense of mazbdr, and in the second with the sense of mddin. Since we
already know that gEdbir has two meanings, this difference can be
accounted for by its homonymity.

4. The sense of mddin in the first hadith is given as that which has
been explained (mufassar), and thus refers to the cause of the knowledge
being in the past, while the more obvious sense, that is, knowledge of
what has happened, was probably too clear to require explanation. In the
second hadith, ghdbir is explained as that which was before, which must
mean "before" in both senses, that is, by cause, and of previous
events.

Thus mddin in the first and ghdbir in the second hadith have the same
sense, that is, knowledge through what preceeded and knowledge of what
preceeded. In the second kind of knowledge, that is, gEdbir in the first
hadith and mazbdr in the first and second, the explanations given show
that the cause of this knowledge is its being written down (marbdr);
this is the definition given in the first hadith,

but in the second, mazbdr is itself explained as being knowledge of
what will happen to us (md ya'tind), which is a description according to
what is known.

Thus it is clear that this second kind of knowledge has been caused
previously, but is of events which are going to happen in the future. It
is also clear that this written knowledge is precisly what was mentioned
in the ahidith in chapter 40, which concerned such things as the scroll
(mu~haf) of Fatimah, peace be upon her.


