Chapter 66 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony As Proof of Al-hassan Ibn Ali's (a.s.) (a.s.) Divine Authority Over the People After Amir Al-mu'minin Ali (a.s.) H 773, Ch. 66, H 1
=============================================================================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn 'Isa from
Ibrahim ibn 'Umar al-Yamani and 'Umar ibn 'Udhayna from Sulaym ibn Qays
who has said the following.
"I witnessed Amir al-Mu'minin Ali's (a.s.) will made before me in which
he appointed his, al- Hassan (a.s.) as the executor. He called al-Husayn
(a.s.), Muhammad and all his other sons, all the leaders among his
followers and his whole family to bear testimony to his will. He then
delivered the Book and the Armament to his son al-Hassan (a.s.) and
said, "My son, the Messenger of Allah commanded me to appoint you as the
executor of my will.

(He commanded me) to deliver to you my books and my Armament just as
the Messenger of Allah did. He made his will in which he appointed me as
the executor, delivered to me his books and his Armament and commanded
me to command you to deliver them to al-Husayn (a.s.) when you will be
about to leave this world.

Then he turned to his son, al-Husayn (a.s.) and said, "The Messenger of
Allah has commanded you to deliver them to your son, this one. Then he
held with his hand Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) and said to him, "The
Messenger of Allah has commanded you to deliver them to your son,
Muhammad ibn Ali and convey to him the Islamic greeting of the Messenger
of Allah and my Islamic greeting."

H 774, Ch. 66, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr
from''Abd al-Samad ibn Bashir from abu al-Jarud from abu Ja'far (a.s.)
who has said the following. "When Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) was about
to leave this world, he called his son, al-Hassan (a.s.) saying, " Come
very close to me so I can speak to you secretly just as the Messenger of
Allah did to me and entrust you with all that he entrusted me with and
he did so."

H 775, Ch. 66, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from Sayf ibn 'Amayra from abu Bakr al-Hadrami who has said
that al-Ajlah, Salamah ibn Kuhayl, Dawud ibn abu Yazid and Zayd
al-Yamami from Shahr ibn Hawshab who has said the following.

"When Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) was about to leave for Kufa he left
in 'Umm Salama's trust his books and his will. When al-Hassan (a.s.)
returned to Madina she delivered all of them to him."

The above hadith is as follows in the book of al-Safwan:

H 776, Ch. 66, h 4

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ali ibn al-Hakam from Sayf from
abu Bakr from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "When
Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) was about to leave for Kufa he left in 'Umm
Salama's trust his books and his will. When al- Hassan (a.s.) returned
to Madina she delivered all of them to him."

H 777, Ch. 66, h 5

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Hammad ibn 'Isa from 'Amr ibn Shimr from Jabur
from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "Amir al-Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.) made his directive will to al-Hassan (a.s.) and asked al-Husayn
(a.s.), Muhammad, all his sons, the leaders among his followers and the
whole of his family to bear testimony. He then delivered to him the Book
and the Armament.

He then said to his son, al-Hassan (a.s.), "My son, the Messenger of
Allah commanded me to entrust you with my directive will. (He commanded
me) to deliver to you my books, and my armament just as the Messenger of
Allah entrusted me with his directive will and delivered his books and
armament to me. He commanded me to command you to deliver them all to
your brother, al-Husayn (a.s.) when time for you to leave this world
will come.

Then he turned to his son, al-Husayn (a.s.) and said, "the Messenger of
Allah has commanded you to deliver it all to your son, this one. He then
held with his hand Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) and said to him, "My son,
the Messenger of Allah has commanded you to deliver it all to your son,
Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) and convey to him the Islamic greeting of the
Messenger of Allah and my Islamic greeting.

" He then turned to his son, al-Hassan (a.s.) and said, "My son, you
are the Leader with Divine Authority and the authority in the matter of
the spilled blood. Were you to forgive it would be for you. Were you to
retaliate then one strike for an strike you would not be in sin."

H 778, Ch. 66, h 6

Al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan al-Hassani has narrated in a Marfu' manner,
rafa'ahu, and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Ahmari
has narrated in a marfu' manner, rafa'ahu, the following. "When Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) was injured the visitors crowded around him
saying, "O Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.), (please, grant us) your
directive will." The Imam (a.s.) then said, "You must fold the pillow
for me (so I can speak).

" He then said, "All praise belongs to Allah as He is worthy of it. We
follow His commands. I praise Him jus as He has loved it. There is no
lord except Allah, Who is One, the only One, the selfsufficient is His
own description of His genealogy. O people, every man, in his running
away, comes face to face with what he runs away from.

The appointed time (to die) is the driver of the soul to it (the time
of death). Running away from death is rushing to find it. How many days
have come and gone in which I search for the secret of this matter,
however, Allah disdains to do otherwise, but to keep it secret. It
certainly is beyond comprehension; it is a hidden knowledge.

"My directive will to you is that you must not consider any thing like
Allah, Great is Whose praise. You must not disregard the Sunnah
(traditions) of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.). Keep these two pillars straight
and light these two beacons. You will not face any blames until you do
not disperse ( remain united). Every man is held responsible for what
assiduously gains.

Ignorant, (the lay) people's burden has been reduced. The Lord is
Merciful, the Imam is knowledgeable and religion is a constructive
system. Yesterday I was your companion, today (I am) a lesson for you
and tomorrow I will depart you. If one can remain steadfast at this
slippery position then that is the goal.

However, if the foot would waver it is because we live under the
shadows of the branches, in the blowing winds, under the shadow of
dissipating clouds in the air and disappearing traces on the land. I was
your neighbor that lived along you with my body for a number of days.
You will soon follow my dead body (to the grave).

It will be a motionless body that moved, a silent one that spoke (so
sweet). My silence, my closed eyes and my motionless lambs must be held
as the best preachers. They are far better preachers to than an eloquent
orator.

I have said farewell to you as the one who expects reunion. Tomorrow
you see my days and Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, will reveal my
secrets and you will know me better when will not find me in my place
and the holding of others my position. If I will survive I will be the
authority for my own-self but if I will die then death is my
destination. If I will forgive (my assassin) then forgiveness is a means
of getting closer (to Allah) and for you it is good deed. You must
forgive and ignore.

Do you not like that Allah will forgive you? How great is the sorrow
for the neglectful ones whose life will testimony for his own
condemnation or lead him his days to misfortune. May Allah place us and
you among those who do not fall short in life from obedience to Allah
because of his desire (to obey Him) or that he may not suffer after
death. We are only for Him and with Him."

Then he turned to al-Hassan (a.s.) and said, "My son, one strike for
one strike you will not be in sin."

H 779, Ch. 66, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ali ibn al-Hassan from Ali ibn
Ibrahim al-'Aqili, in a marfu' manner, yarfa'uhu, has said the
following. "When ibn Muljam injured Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) he
(Ali) said to al-Hassan (a.s.), "My son, when I will die, eliminate ibn
Muljam, dig the ground for him in al-Kunasa (name of a place) and throw
him therein. It is a valley of the valleys of Hell." (According to
'Aqili's description al-Kunas is at the gate called 'Taq al-Mahamil'
where people cook animals's legs and heads for food)


**Chapter 67 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony as proof of al-Husayn ibn
Ali's (a.s.) (a.s.) Divine Authority over the people after al-Hassan
(a.s.) H 780, Ch. 67, h 1**

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Bakr ibn Salih
(alKulayni has said) and a number of our people from ibn Ziyad from
Muhammad ibn Sulayman al-Daylami from Harun ibn al-Jahm from Muhammad
ibn Muslim who has said that he heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the
following.

"When al-Hassan (a.s.) ibn Ali (a.s.) was about to leave this world he
said to al- Husayn (a.s.), "O my brother, I want to entrust you with my
directive will (please) safeguard and preserve it. When I will die
prepare and help me towards (the Shrine of) the Messenger of Allah so I
can renew my covenant with him then help me towards my mother (a.s.).

Thereafter return me back for burial in Baqi' graveyard. You must know
that 'A'isha will create problems for me. Allah and the people know her
deeds and her hostile attitude towards Allah and His Messenger and her
animosity towards us Ahl al-Bayt (family) of the Holy Prophet.

When al-Hassan (a.s.) passed away his body was placed on the stretcher
and then the procession was lead to the place where the Holy Prophet
prayed for the dead for burial. Al- Husayn (a.s.) performed the prayer
therein and then the body was taken to the Mosque. When (the procession)
paused on the grave of the Messenger of Allah Dhul 'Aynayn (spy) went to
'A'isha and told her, "They have brought al-Hassan's body to bury with
the Holy Prophet."

She them came out quickly on the mule with saddle. She was the first
woman in the Muslim community to ride on the saddle.

She then said, "Take your son away from my house. He will not be buried
in my house to disregard the privacy of the Messenger of Allah.
Al-Husayn (a. s.) said to her, "A long time ago you and your father had
disregarded the privacy of the Messenger of Allah. You brought to his
house those whose nearness he did not love. Allah will held you
responsible for this O 'A'isha."

H 781, Ch. 67, h 2

Muhammad ibn al-Hasan and Ali ibn Muhammad have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Muhammad ibn Sulayman al-Daylami from one of our people from
al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. (a.s.), "When al-Hassan ibn Ali (a.s.) was about to leave
this world he said, "O Qanbar, see if you there is any believer (in
Islam) other than the members of the family of Muhammad (s.a.) behind
the door.

" He (Qanbar) said Allah, His Messenger and the grand son of His
Messenger know better than I do." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Call to me
Muhammad ibn Ali. I (Qanbar) then went to him and when I was in his
presence he said, "I hope nothing but good has happened." I said,
"Answer the call of abu Muhammad. He quickly wore his shoes and did not
even wear it properly. He came out with me running. When he arrived in
the presence of al-Hassan (a.s.) he offered his greeting.

Al- Hassan (a.s.) said to him, "Please, sit down. A person like you
must not remain absent from hearing the words that can bring the dead to
life and cause death to the living. You must be the container of
knowledge and the beacon of guidance. Some of the lights of the day are
brighter than others.

Have you come to know that Allah made the sons of Abraham the Imams
('A'imma) and granted to some of them more excellence than the others.
He gave psalms to David and you know what kind of preference He granted
to Muhammad (s.a.). O Muhammad ibn Ali, I fear for you of envy. Allah
has said it to be of the characteristics of the unbelievers. Thus,
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, ". . . out of envy, turn
you back to disbelief, even after the Truth has become evident to them.
. ." (2:109).

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has not given your control in the
hands of Satan, O Muhammad ibn Ali. May I relate to you what I heard
your father say about you?" He said, "Yes, I like to hear it." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "I heard your father say on the day of Basra, "Whoever
likes to do good to me in this and the next life he should do good to my
son, Muhammad.

O Muhammad ibn Ali if you would like I can inform you of the time you
were only a potential person in the back of your father I can do so. O
Muhammad ibn Ali, have you come to know that al-Husayn ibn Ali (a. s.)
after I will die and my spirit depart my body will be the Imam (Leader
with Divine Authority) afret me before Allah, Most great Whose name is,
in the Book as the inheritance from the Holy Prophet.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has added it to the inheritance
from his father and mother. You are the choosen ones from His
creatures.

He selected Muhammad from among you and Muhammad (s.a.) selected Ali
and Ali (a.s.) selected me for Imamat (Leadership with Divine
Authority). I have choosen al-Husayn (a.s.) as the Imam (Leader with
Divine Authority) after me." Muhammad ibn Ali then said, " You are the
my Imam (Leader with Divine Authority) and you are my connectio to
Muhammad (s.a.). I swear by Allah, I wish I was dead before hearing
these words from you.

Certainly there is a great deal of facts in my head (about your
excellence and virtues) that even with buckets can not be drained and by
the songs of the winds can not be changee. It is like an encyclopedia
with decorated pages. I ready myself to speak them out but I find others
have preceded me like the preceding of a heavenly book or what the
messengers have have brought.

It is a book that exhausts the speaking tongue and the writing hand. I
do not find enough pens to complete writing and it can turn all papers
to ashes. Thus, there is no reach to your excellence and virtues. This
is how Allah rewards those who do good and there is no power without
Allah.

Al-Husayn (a.s.) is the most knowledgeable among us and his
forebearance is the greatest among us in gravity. He is the closest to
the Messenger of Allah among us in his relationship. He was a Faqih
before he was created. He has read the messages of the Divine revelation
before he would speak. Had Allah known any good in anyone He would not
have choosen Muhammad (s.a.).

Since Allah has choosen Muhammad (s.a.) and Muhammad (s.a.) choose Ali
(a.s.) and Ali choose you as the Imam (Leader with Divine Authority )
and have choosen al-Husayn (a.s.) we accept and agree. Who is he that
accept a person other than him (al- Husayn (a.s.)) Who is he that would
seek assistance in his difficulties from a person other than him
(al-Husayn (a.s.) )?"


H 782, Ch. 67, h 3

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Sahl from
Muhammad ibn Sulayman from Harun ibn al-Jahm from Muhammad ibn Muslim
who has said that he heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the following. "When
al-Hassan (a.s.) ibn Ali (a.s.) was about to leave this world he said to
al-Husayn (a.s.), "O my brother, I want to entrust you with my directive
will (please) safeguard and preserve it.

When I will die prepare and help me towards (the Shrine of) the
Messenger of Allah so I can renew my covenant with him then help me
towards my mother (a. s.). Thereafter return me back for burial in Baqi'
graveyard. You must know that al-Humayra will create problems for me.

The people know her deeds and her hostile attitude towards Allah and
His Messenger and her animosity towards us Ahl al-Bayt (family) of the
Holy Prophet. When al-Hassan (a.s.) passed away his body was placed on
the stretcher and then the procession was lead to the place where the
Holy Prophet prayed for the dead for burial. Al- Husayn (a.s.) performed
the prayer therein and then the body was taken to the Mosque.

When (the procession) paused on the grave of the Messenger of Allah new
reached 'A'isha and she was told, "They have brought al-Hassan's body to
bury with the Holy Prophet." She them came out quickly on the mule with
saddle. She was the first woman in the Muslim community to ride on the
saddle. She stood and then said, "Take your son away from my house.

Nothing will be buried in my house and the privacy of the Messenger of
Allah. Al-Husayn (a.s.) said to her, "A long time ago you and your
father had disregarded the privacy of the Messenger of Allah. You
brought to his house those whose nearness he did not love. Allah will
hold you responsible for this O 'A'isha.

My brother commanded me to place him near his grandfather the Messenger
of Allah so can renew his covenant with him. You, O 'A'isha, must know
that my brother is the most knowledgeable person. He is by far the most
knowledgeable one in interpreting the book of Allah than to cause
disregard the privacy of the Messenger of Allah.

Allah says, ". . . do not enter the houses of the Prophet for a meal
without permission.. . ." (33:53) but you have admitted into the house
of the the Messenger of Allah men without his permission. Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, has said, ". . . do not raise your voices
above the voice of the Prophet,. . ." (49:2).

It is you have consrtucted a barking place for your father and his
Faruq (discerning) near the ear of the Messenger of Allah. Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, has said, "The hearts of those who lower their
voices in the presence of the Messenger of God are tested by God through
piety. . ." (49:3) By my life that your father and his Faruq have brough
trouble forthe the Messenger of Allah due to coming so close. The two of
them did not maintain the respect for the Messenger of Allah that He had
commanded them through the words of the Messenger of Allah to do so.

What Allah has made unlawful about a believer who is dead He has also
made unlawful about a living believer. I swear by Allah, "O 'A'isha, if
the burial that you dislike to take place near the Messenger of Allah
would have been permissible in or view and from Allah, you would have
learned about it to have taken place despite your opposition."

The narrator has said that Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiya then spoke and
said, "O 'A'isha, one day you ride a mule and the other day rode a
camel. You do not control yourself. You can not own the earth for your
animosity against banu Hashim" The narrator has said that she then
turned to him and said, "O ibn al-Hanafiya, these are the sons of Fatima
who speak.

What for do you speak?" al-Husayn (a.s.) then said to her, "To what
direction do you want to distance Muhammad from the sons of Fatima
(a.s.). I swear by Allah that he has three Fatima in his lineage from
the mothers side. 1. Fatima daughter of 'Imran ibn 'A'idh ibn 'Amr ibn
Makhdhum (b) fatima daughter of Asad ibn Hashim (c) Fatima daughter of
Za'ida ibn al- Asamm ibn Rawaha ibn Hijr ibn 'Ad Mu'is ibn 'Amir."

The narrator has said that she then said, "Move your son and take him
away. You are a quarrelsome people." The narrator has said that the
al-Husayn (a.s.) went tothe grave of his mother and then took the body
of al- Hassan (a.s.) out (of the shrine of the Messenger of Allah) and
buried him in al-Baqi'."


