Chapter 68 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony As Proof of Ali Ibn Al-husayn's (a.s.) Divine Authority Over the People After Al-husayn (a.s.) H 783, Ch. 68, H 1
===========================================================================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn and Ahmad
ibn Muhammad from Muhammad ibn Isma'il from Mansur ibn Yunus from abu
al-Jarud from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "When
al-Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.) was about to leave this world he called his
eldest daughter, Fatima and gave her a sealed document and openly before
the people his directive will.

Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) was ill with some internal illness and the
people would see as dying. Fatima then gave the document to Ali ibn al-
Husayn (a.s.). Thereafter, that document, by Allah, came to us, O
Ziyad." The narrator has said that he asked the the Imam (a.s.).

"What is in that document, May Allah take my soul in service for your
cause?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "In it there is all that the children of
Adam needed from the day Allah created Adam to the end of the world. In
it there is the law of penalties and even the rules of compensation for
an scratch on a victim's body."

H 784, Ch. 68, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from ibn Sinan from abu al-Jarud from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following. "When al- Husayn (a.s.) was about to
leave this world he gave his directive will to his daughter, Fatima in a
sealed document before the people onpenly.

When what had to happen to al-Husayn (a.s.) did happen she gave it to
Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.." The narrator has said that then he asked the
Imam (a.s.). "What was in it, may Allah grant you blessings?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It contained all that the children of Adam would need from
the beginning of the world until it will end."

H 785, Ch. 68, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from Sayf ibn 'Amira from abu Bakr al-Hadrami from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "When al-Husayn (a.s.) was
about to leave for Iraq he entrusted 'Umm Salama (may Allah be pleased
with her) with the books and directive will. When Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.
s.) returned (to Madina) she delivered them to him.

According to the manuscript of al-Safwan the hadith reads as follows:

H 786, Ch. 68, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hanan ibn Sadir from
Falih ibn abu Bakr al- Shaybani who has said the following. " I swear by
Allah, I was sitting in the presence of Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) whose
sons also were there when Jabur ibn 'Abdallah al-Ansari came.

He offered his greeting then he held the hand of abu Ja'far (a.s.) and
took him aside for privacy and said, "The Messenger of Allah informed me
that I would find my self with a man from Ahl al-Bayt (family the Holy
Prophet (s.a.) who would be called 'Muhammad ibn Ali' also called abu
Ja'far (father of Ja'far). When abu Ja'far returned to the meeting he
sat near his father, Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) and his brothers.

When the Imam performed the Maghrib prayer (the prayer at sun set, Ali
ibn al-Husayn asked abu Ja'far (a.s.), "What did Jabut ibn 'Abdallah
al-Ansari say to you?" He (abu Ja'far ) said, "Jabur said that the
Messenger of Allah said to him the following, "You will soon find
yourself with a man from my Ahl al- Bayt (my family) whose name is
Muhammad ibn Ali also called abu Ja'far (father of Ja'far). Convey that
offer him greetings.

" His father (abu Ja'far's father) then said, "Success for you, my son,
for what Allah has granted to you exclusively from His messenger from
among the members of your family. Do not tell it to your brothers lest
they may plan against you a plot as his brothers plotted against
Joseph."


**Chapter 69 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony as proof of abu Ja'far's
(a.s.) Divine Authority over the people after Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) H
787, Ch. 69, h 1**

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from abu
al-Qasim al-Kufi from Muhammad ibn Sahl from Ibrahim ibn abu al-Bilad
from Isma'il ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn from abu
Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"When Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) was about to leave this world he took
out a basket or a box that was with him. He then said, "O Muhammad take
this box. " The narrator has said that then he (Muhammad) took the box
with four people. When The Imam (a.s.) died his sons came asking for the
box and said, "Give us our share from the box.

" He (Muhammad) then said to them, "By Allah, there is nothing for you
in it. Had there been anything for you he would not have given it to
me." In the box there were the Armament of the Messenger of Allah and
his books."

H 788, Ch. 69, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from 'Imran ibn Musa from Muhammad ibn
al-Husayn from Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from 'Isa ibn 'Abdallah from his
father that his grandfather who has said the following.

"Ali ibn al-Husayn looked at his sons when he was about to leave this
world and they had all gathered around him. He then looked at his son,
Muhammad ibn Ali and said, "O Muhammad, take this box to your house." He
said, "It was not full of Dirhams and Dinars (valuable properties), it,
however, was full of knowledge."

H 789, Ch. 69, h 3

Muhammad ibn al-Hasan has narrated from Sahl from Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Fadala ibn Ayyub from al-Husayn ibn abu al-'ala' who has said that
he heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following.

"'Umar ibn 'ad al-'Aziz wrote ibn Hazm to send him the endowment
documents of Ali, 'Umar and 'Uthman. Inb Hazm sent a person to Zayd ibn
al-Hassan (a.s.) who was the eldest among them and asked him about the
documents.

Zayd said, "The high authority after Ali was al-Hassan and after him
al-Husayn and Ali ibn al-Husayn was after al-Husayn and after Ali ibn
al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ali was the high authority. Send to him. Ibn Hazm
then sent to my father and my father sent me with document to him and I
went and delivered it to ibn Hazm."

The narrator has said that some of our people asked The Imam (a.s.),
"did the sons of al- Hassan (a.s.) know this." The Imam (a.s.) said,
"They knew it just as they know that this is night but envy influences
them. Had they sought truth with truth it would have been better for
them but they seek the worldly things.

\* Abu Baker ibn Muhammad ibn 'Amr ibn Hazm al-Ansari
(37/657 -120/738), the judge of Madina from 87/706 appointed by 'Umar
ibn 'Abdi al-'Aziz when he was governor of Madina. When 'Umar became the
Caliph he also appointed ibn Hazm governor of Madina.

(al-Tabari, vol.2, pp.ll91, 1255, 1305, 1346, 1372 - 1375, 1437, 1452;
vol.3, p.2460; ibn al- Athir, vol.5, pp.55,67; Tahdhib al-Takdhib,
vol.l2, pp.38 -40.

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha' from 'Abd al-Karim ibn 'Amr from ibn abu
Ya'fur who has said that he heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the
following.

" 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz wrote ibn Hazm. He then have narrated a
hadith similar to the above one except that he has said, "Ibn Hazm sent
to Zayd ibn al-Hassan who was older than my father."

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' a similar hadith.


