Chapter 70 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony As Proof of Abu 'abdallah Ja'far Ibn Muhammad Al-sadiq's (a.s.) Divine Authority Over the People After Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn Al-husayn (a.s.) H 790, Ch. 70, H 1
=========================================================================================================================================================================================================

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Aban ibn 'Uthman from abu al-Sabbah al-Kinani who has
said the following. "Abu Ja'far (a.s.) looked at abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
who was walking. The Imam (a.s.) said, 'Do you see this (person)?

This is of those about whom Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has
said, "However, We have decided to grant a favor to the suppressed ones
by appointing them leaders and heirs of the land," (28:5):

H 791, Ch. 70, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn abu
'Umayr from Hisham ibn Salim from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. "When myfather was about to leave this world he said, "O
Ja'far, I recommend you to be good to my companions."

I then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, by
Allah, I will educated them as such that in any city where any of them
would live he would not need to ask others for knowledge (of
religion)."

H 792, Ch. 70, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Hisham ibn al- Muthanna from Sadir al-Sayrafi who has said that he heard
abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the following. "It is part of the success of a man
to have a child who is similar to his father physically, ethically and
in good characters. I do not know anyone more similar to me physically,
ethically and in good characters than this son of mine, (meaning thereby
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.).

H 793, Ch. 70, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from Tahir who has said the following. "Once I was in the
presence of abu Ja'far (a.s.) when Ja'far (a.s.) came. Abu Ja'far (a.s.)
said, "This (Ja'far ) is the best of the people or the best of best
among them."

H 794, Ch. 70, h 5

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Khalid from some of
our people from Yunus ibn Ya'qub from Tahir who has said the following.
"Once I was in the presence of abu Ja'far (a.s.) when Ja'far (a.s.)
came. Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said, "This (Ja'far ) is the best of the
people."

H 795, Ch. 70, h 6

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Fudayl ibn
'Uthman from who has said the following. "Once I was in the presence of
abu Ja'far (a.s.) that Ja'far (a.s.) came. Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said, "This
(Ja'far) is the best of the people."

H 796, Ch. 70, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from Hisham ibn Salim from Jabur ibn Yazid al-Ju'fiy who has said the
following. "A question was asked (from abu Ja'far (a.s.) about al-Qa'im
(the twelfth Imam (a.s.). He (abu Ja'far) tapped (at the shoulder of)
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and said, "This, by Allah, is the Qa'im (one who
will establish the kingdom of Allah) of the family of Muhammad (s.a.).

" 'Anbasa has said, "when abu Ja'far passed away, went to see abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) and told him of what I had heard (from Jabur). The Imam
(a.s.) said, "Jabur has spoken the truth." He then said, "You perhaps
think that the every succeeding Imam after a preceding Imam is not
al-Qa'im (also meaning the one who obeys and serves Allah)."

H 797, Ch. 70, h 8

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus ibn 'Abd
al-Rahman from 'Abd al-A'la from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following. "My father entrusted me with all that is there (the sacred
objects inherited from the prophets such as directive wills etc.). When
he was about to leave this world, he asked me to call for him a few
people to bear testimony.

I then called for him four people from Quraysh among them was Nafi'
Mawla 'Abdallah ibn 'Umar. He then said, "Write down: This is (like)
what was the directive will of Jacob to his sons, "My sons, God has
chosen this religion for you. You must not leave this world unless you
are a Muslim (submitted to the will of the Lord of the Universe)."
(2:132).

Muhammad ibn Ali has recommended Ja'far ibn Muhammad in his directive
will and commands him to shroud him with his gown with which he would
[erform his prayers on Fridays and prepare a turban for him out of his
own turban. That he should shape his grave squirely and raise it four
inches from the ground and open the knots of from all ends of his shroud
when it is to bury him.

Then he said to the testimony bearers, "You may go now, may Allah bless
you." I then asked him after they had left, "O father, you did not need
to make a will for such matters." He said, "My son, I did not like when
you will be over come they would say, "No directive will was made in his
favor." I just wanted to establish a defence authority in your favor."


**Chapter 71 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony as proof of abu al-Hassan
Musa's (a.s.) Divine Authority over the people after abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) H 798, Ch. 71, h 1**

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from 'Abdallah
al-Qalla' from al- Fayd ibn al-Mukhtar who has said the following. "I
said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Please, take my hand out of fire. Who is
for us after you (leave this world)?" Then abu Ibrahim (Musa ibn Ja'far
(a.s.) came and he was a young boy in those days. The Imam (a.s.) said,
"This is your companion hold fast to him."

H 799, Ch. 71, h 2

A number of our people has narrated Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn
al-Hakam from abu Ayyub al-Khazzaz from Thubayt from that Mu'dh ibn
Kathir who has said the following. "I said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'I
pray to Allah who has granted your father because of you such a high
position to grant you also such high position through your successor
before you will leave this world.

" He then said, "Allah has already granted such favor." The narrator
has said that he then asked the Imam (a.s.), "Who is he, 'May Allah take
my soul in service for your cause?" He pointed out towards the pious
servant (of Allah), who was asleep, saying this man who is asleep." He
was a young boy."

H 800, Ch. 71, h 3

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad who has said the following. "Abu Ali al-Arjani al-Farisi
narrated to me from 'Abd al-Rahman al- Hajjaj in the year ( 179 AH /795
AD) in which former abu al-Hasan, Imam Musa (a.s.) was detained. I
(Hajjaj) said to him ('Abd al-Rahman), "This man (abu al-Hassan Musa
(a.s.) has been detained in his (Mansur, current ruler) hands. We do not
know how his conditions are.

Have you heard anything from him about his sons?" He ('Abd al-Rahman)
said to me, "I did not think anyone would ask me about this issue. Once
I went to see Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) in his home. He was in such and
such a room at the prayer area. He was praying to Allah and on his right
side was Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) saying Amen for his prayer.

I said to him, 'May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, you
know my having cutoff from all others to serve you, who will be the Wali
Leader with Divine Authority for people after you?" He replied, "Musa
has dressed up in this coat of arms and it has perfectly fitted him." I
then said to him, "I will not need anything after this."

H 801, Ch. 71, h 4

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Musa
as.-Sayqal from al- Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has said the following. "Once
I was in the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) that abu Ibrahim came and
was a young boy. He (abu 'Abdallah ) said (to me), "Accept my directive
will about him (Musa ibn Ja'far) and discuss his task (Leadership with
Divine Authority) with your reliable companions." :

H 802, Ch. 71, h 5

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Ya'qub ibn
Ja'far al-Ja'fari who has said that Ishaq ibn Ja'far (a.s.) said to me
the following. "One day I was in the presence of my father that Ali ibn
'Umar ibn Ali asked him this question. "'May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, "from who should we seek help and the people
seek help and assistance after you (leave this world)?

" He (The Imam (a.s.) said, you must seek refuge and guidance from the
man who has two yellow clothes on him and a twine bunch of hair who will
shortly appear to you from this door, opening the both halves of the
door with his hand together." We did not wait very long that there
appeared two palms holding both halves of the door and opened them.
Thereafter came to us abu Ibrahim (a.s.)."

H 803, Ch. 71, h 6

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu Najran from
Safwan al-Jammal from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). Safwan has said the
following. "Mansur ibn Hazim said to him, 'May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, the (human) souls pass through mornings and
evenings if that (death for you) comes then who (will be the Imam)?

" Abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) then said, "If that happens then he is your
companion." He tapped the right shoulder of abu al-Hassan with his hand,
as I know. He was five (feet tall or years old) at that time and
'Abdallah ibn Ja'far was also present with us."


H 804, Ch. 71, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from 'Abd
al-Rahman ibn abu Najran from 'Isa ibn 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad ibn 'Umar
ibn Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) who has said the following. "I said to abu
'Abdallah (a.s.). "If something would happen (death of Imam), may Allah
will not make me experience it, then who must I follow as my Imam?" The
narrator has said that he pointed to his son Musa (a.s.).

I then asked, "What if something will happen to Musa (a.s.) then who
must I follow as my Imam?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Follow his sons. Then
he said, "In this way for ever." I then asked, "What if I will not know
him and will not know his place?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Say, 'O Lord, I
love and take as my guardian whoever is left (on earth) as your
authority of the sons of the preceding Imam. This will be enough for you
if Allah would so will."

H 805, Ch. 71, h 8

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from 'Abdallah
al-Qalla' from al- Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has said the following. "Abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) spoke of abu al- Hassan (a.s.) and he was a young boy
in those days. He said, "This is a child that no other child born to us
has been of such a greater blessing to our followers than him." The Imam
(a. s.) then said to me, "Do not be harsh with Isma'il."

H 806, Ch. 71, h 9

Muhammad ibn Yahya and Ahmad ibn Idris have narrated from Muhammad ibn
'Abd al- Jabbar from al-Hassan ibn al-Husayn from Ahmad ibn al-Hassan
al-Maythami from Fayd ibn al-Mukhtar, in a lengthy hadith on the affair
of abu al-Hassan (a.s.).

In it abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said to the narrator. "He is your Master
of who you asked. Stand up for him and acknowledge his rights." I then
stood up and kissed his head and hand and prayed to Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, for him." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then said, "Keep in
mind that permission is not given to us to speak about him to anyone
before you.

" The narrator has said that he then said to the Imam (a.s.), "'May
Allah take my soul in service for your cause, can I inform any one about
him?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, you may inform your family (wife) and
sons." With me there were my family (wife), sons and friends and of my
friends there was Yunus ibn al\_Zabyan.

When I informed them they all thanked Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High. Yunus said, "No, by Allah, I must hear that from him. He was in a
hurry. He went and I followed him. When I reached the door I heard abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) say to him,- he had reached him before I-, "What Fayd
has said to you is true." The narrator has said that he (Yunus) then
said, "I have heard it and I have obeyed." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then
said, "Take him with you, O Fayd."

H 807, Ch. 71, h 10

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Ja'far
ibn Bashir from Fudayl from Tahir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). He has said
that abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) would blame 'Abdallah, show him his anger and
advise him saying, "What is the matter that you are not like your
brother (Musa) By Allah, I observe light inhis face." 'Abdallah
thensaid, "Why is it? Is my and his father and mother not the same?" Abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) then said, "He from my soul and you are my son."

H 808, Ch. 71, h 11

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Muhammad ibn Sinan from Ya'qub al-Sarraj who has said
the following. "Once I went to see abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who was standing
by the cradle of abu al-Hassan. He began to speak secretly to him for a
long time.

I sat there until he was free. I then stood for him and he said to me,
"Come close to your Mawla (master and Leader with Divine Authority)." I
went close and said greetings. He answered my greetings very clearly and
then he said to me, "Go and change the name of your daughter that you
named just yesterday.

It is a name makes Allah angry." A girl was born to us and I had named
her al-Humayra'." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said to me, "Follow his command
you will have the right guidance." I then changed her name."

H 809, Ch. 71, h 12

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan from ibn Muskan from Sulayman ibn Khalid who has said the
following. "Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) one day called abu al-Hassan (a.s.)
while we were in his presence and said to us, "You must take hold of
this man. He, by Allah, will be your Master after me."

H 810, Ch. 71, h 13

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl or an other person, from
Muhammad ibn al-Walid from Yunus from Dawud ibn Zurbi from abu Ayyub
al-Nahwi who has said the following. "Abu Ja'far, al-Mansur summoned me
in the middle of the night and I went to see him. When met him he was
sitting in a chair.

Before him there was a candle and a letter in his hand. The narrator
has said that I greeted him and he threw the letter to me while was
weeping. He said, "This is a letter of Muhammad ibn Sulayman in which he
has informed us that abu Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) has died. We are for
Allah and to Him we will all return. He said it three times. Where is
anyone like Ja'far? " Then he said to me, "Write down.

" The narrator has said that I then wrote. I wrote the introduction of
the letter. He (Mansur) said, "Write to ask if he has left a directive
will to any man particularly, if so summon him and kill him." He has
said that reply to hisletter came back that said the Imam (a.s.) has in
fact, left a will to five people and one of them is abu Ja'far
al-Mansur, Muhammad ibn Sulayman, 'Abdallah, Musa and Hamida."

H 811, Ch. 71, h 14

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd
has narrated a similar hadith as the above except that he has said, "He
left a will to abu Ja'far, al-Mansur, 'Abdallah , Musa, Muhammad ibn
Ja'far and Mawla of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). Abu Ja'far then said, "There
is no way to kill these people."

H 812, Ch. 71, h 15

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Ali ibn al-Hassan from Safwan al-Jammal who has said
the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the in charge of this
matter (Leadership with Divine Authority) nad he said.

" The in charge of the task does not trifle or play. At this time abu
al-Hassan, Musa came. He was very small. With him there was a baby goat
of Makka and he was saying to her, "Prostrate before your Lord. Abu
'Abdallah then took him and hugged him and said, "May Allah take my soul
and the souls of my parents in service for the cause of one who does not
trifle and engage in amusement."

H 813, Ch. 71, h 16

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from one of our people from 'Ubays ibn
Hisham that 'Umar al-Rummaniy narrated to from Fayd ibn al-Mukhtar the
following. "Once when I was in the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) that
abu al-Hassan Musa (a.s.) came and he was a young boy. I held and kissed
him. Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, "You are the ark and he is the captain."
The narrator has said that he wen to perform Hajj next year and I had
two thousand Dinars.

I sent one thousand toabu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and one thousand to him (abu
al-Hassan). When went to see abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) he said, "You have
considered him equal to me." I said, "I did so because of your words."
He then said, "I swear by Allah, I did not do so, in fact, Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, has done it for him (abu al-Hassan Musa
(a.s.)."


