Chapter 70 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony As Proof of Abu 'abdallah Ja'far Ibn Muhammad Al-sadiq's (a.s.) Divine Authority Over the People After Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn Al-husayn (a.s.) H 790, Ch. 70, H 1 Chapter 72 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony As Proof of Abu Al-hassan Al-rida's (a.s.) Divine Authority Over the People After Abu Al-hassan Musa (a.s.) H 814, Ch. 72, H 1
==================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yabya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from al- Husayn ibn Nu'aym al-Sahhaf who has said the following. "I,
Hisham ibn al-Hakam and ali ibn Yaqtin were in Baghdad.

Ali ibn Yaqtin said, 'Iwas in the presence of the pious servant (of
Allah) and his son Ali came. He then said to me, "O Ali ibn Yaqtin, this
the sayyid (leader) of my children and have gifted him with my own
Kunya.

(the Arabic expression used to address people, 'O father of so and so,
etc.). Hisham tapped his forehead with his palm and said, "fie up on you
how did you say that? Ali ibn Yaqtin said, "I heard, by Allah, from him
just as I said." Hisham then said, "I can tell you that the task
(Leadership with Divine Authority) will be with him after him."

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from al-Husayn ibn
Nu'aym al- Sahhaf who has said the following. "Once I was in the
presence of the pious servant (of Allah).In al-Safwani manuscript it
says, "I was then he relates the rest of the above hadith."

H 815, Ch. 72, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
Mu'awiya ibn Hakim from Nu'aym al-Qabusi from abu al-Hassan (a.s.) who
has said the following. "My son, Ali is the eldest of my sons and the
most virtuous among them to me and the most beloved of them to me. He
looks into the Jafr (a secret source of knowledge) with me. No one looks
into it except a prophet or the executor of the will of a prophet."

H 816, Ch. 72, h 3

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Muhammad ibn
Sinan and Isma'il ibn 'Abbad al-Qasri, all from Dawud al-Raqqi who has
said the following. "I said to abu Ibrahim (a.s.), 'May Allah take my
soul in service for your cause, I have become old, take my hand out of
fire." The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.) pointed to his son,
abu al- Hassan (a.s.) and then said, "This is your guardian after me."

H 817, Ch. 72, h 4

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from al-Hassan from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn 'Ammar who has said the following. "I said to abu
al-Hassan the 1st (a.s.) Would you guide me to a person from whom would
learn my religion.

" He said, "This is my son Ali. My father took my hand until we were in
the shrine of the Messenger of Allah and said, "My son, Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, has said, ". . . I am appointing someone as my
deputy on earth,. . ." (2:30) When Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
says a word He keeps His word."

H 818, Ch. 72, h 5

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
al-Hassan ibn al- Husayn al-Lu'lu'i from Yahya ibn 'Amr from Dawud
al-Raqqi who has said the following. "I said to abu al-Hassan aMusa
(a.s.), 'I have grown old and my bones are weakening. I asked your
father (a.s.) and he informed me about you. Would you also inform me
(about the Imam after you)." The Imam (a.s.) said, "This abu al-Hassan
al-Rida."

H 819, Ch. 72, h 6

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Ziyad ibn
Marwan al-Qandi, from the Waqifa sect who has said the following. "Once
I went to see abu Ibrahim at that time his son abu al-Hassan al-Rida was
with him. The Imam (a.s.) said to me, "O Ziyad, this is my son so and
so. His writing is my writing, his words are my words, his messenger is
my messenger and the true words are his words."

H 820, Ch. 72, h 7

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Muhammad ibn
Fudayl who has said that al-Makhdhumi whose mother was one of the
children of Ja'far ibn abu Talib has narrated the following.

"Abu al-Hassan Musa (a.s.) once called all of us to see him. We all
gathered and then he said to us, "Do you know why have I called you?" We
said, "We do not know." He then said, "Bear testimony that this my son
is the executor of my will, the director of my affairs and the
succeeding Imam (a.s.). Whoever has a loan due on me should demand from
my son, this one. To whoever I may have promised anything should also
acquire from him. Whoever must see me must not come to see me with
writing from him."

H 821, Ch. 72, h 8

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Muhammad ibn
Sinan and Ali ibn al-Hakam all from al-Husayn ibn al-Mukhtar who has
said the following. "Certain tablets came out to us from abu al-Hassan
(a.s.), when he was in jail, that said, "My instructions and directives
to my eldest son to do so and so. As far so and so is concerned, do not
give him anything until I will meet you or Allah will decree
otherwise."

H 822, Ch. 72, h 9

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from 'Abdallah ibn al-Mughirah from al-Husayn ibn
al-Mukhtar who has said the following.

"In Basra (wherein the Imam (a.s.) was imprisoned) certain tablets came
out to us from abu al- Hassan (a.s.) on which, it was written
horizontally, 'My instructions and directives to the my eldest son (Ali
ibn Musa al-Rida (a.s.) who should give such and such to so and so. As
far so and so is concerned do not give him anything until I will come or
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, will decree that I must die, Allah
certainly does what He wills."

H 823, Ch. 72, h 10

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from ibn Muhriz
from Ali ibn Yaqtin who has said the following. "Abu al-Hassan (a.s.)
wrote to me from prison that so and so my son is the master and guardian
of my children and I have gifted my own (Kunya, Arabic) surname."

H 824, Ch. 72, h 11

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Abu Ali
al-Khazzaz from Dawud ibn Sulay who has said the following. "I said to
abu Ibrahim (a.s.), "I am afraid that an incident may take place and I
will not be able to see you, inform me who will be the Imam after you?"
The Imam (a.s.) said, "My son, so and so, meaning thereby abu al-Hassan
(a.s.)."

H 825, Ch. 72, h 12

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Sa'id ibn abu
al-Jahm from al- Nasr ibn Qabus who has said the following. "I said to
abu Ibrahim (a.s.), 'I asked your father, "Who will be (the Imam) after
you? He informed me that you will be (the Imam after him).

When abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) left this world people went let and right and
I said that I with my people are with you. Inform me who will be (the
Imam) after you from your sons." He (the Imam (a.s.) said, "My son so
and so."

H 826, Ch. 72, h 13

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from ad-Dahhak ibn
al-Ash'ath from Dawud ibn Zurbi who has said the following. "Once I went
to deliver some property to abu Ibrahim (a.s.). He accepted some of it
and left the others. I asked him, "May Allah keep you well, why have you
left it with me?" He said, "The in charge of this task (Leadership with
Divine Authority) will demand it from you." When we heard the news of
his (abu Ibrahim's) death, abu al-Hassan sent his son to me asking for
that property and I delivered it to him."

H 827, Ch. 72, h 14

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from abu al-Hakam
al-Armani said that 'Abdallah ibn Ibrahim ibn Ali ibn 'Abdallah ibn
Ja'far ibn abu Talib narrated to me from Yazid ibn Salit al-Zaydi. Abu
al-Hakam has said that 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad ibn 'Ammara al-Jarmi
narrated to me fromYazid ibn Salit.who has said the following.

"Once I met abu Ibrahim (a.s.) on our way to al-'Amrah, and I said,
"'May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, is the matter with
which we deal established?" He said, "Yes, but are you established
firmly?" I said, "Yes, I and my father met you at this place with abu
'Abdallah (a. s.) with his brothers present.

My father said to him, "'May Allah take my soul and the souls of my
parents in service for your cause, you all of you are purified Imams.
However, no one immune from death. Say to me few things that I may say
to my predecessors so that they may not go astray." The Imam (a.s.)
said, "Yes, O abu 'Abdallah, these are my sons and this one is their
master. He pointed to you. He has been taught laws, understanding,
generosity and the knowledge of what people need, and how to settle
their disputes in the matters of religion and the worldly matters.

In him there are good moral qualities and good answers. He is a gate of
the gates of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, and in him there is
another quality that is better than all of these.

" My father asked, "What that quality is, may Allah take my soul and
the souls of my parents in service for your cause?" The Imam (a.s.)
said, "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, will bring about from him
the savior of this 'Umma and her blossom, her knowledge and her
excellence and her wisdom. He will be the best new born and the best
flourishing. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, will spare through him
lives, bring peace among the hostile parties, harmonize the
divisiveness, fill up the gap of differences, clothe the naked, feed the
hungry and give protection to the frightened.

Through him Allah will send down rain and mercy to the servant (of
His). He will be the best as an aged man and the best of the flourishing
ones. His words are rules and his silence is knowledge. He clarifies for
people their differences and he will administer his relative
(associates) before his age of puberty." My father asked, "May Allah
take my soul and the souls of my parents in service for your cause, is
he yet born?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, he is born and several years
have passed." Yazid has said, "At this point a person came with whose
could speak."

Yazid has said, "I then said to abu Ibrahim (a.s.), 'Inform me just as
your father informed you." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, I can do so. My
father lived in a time that was not like this time." I said , " Whoever
would agree with what you said may Allah's condemnation be up on him."
He (Yazid) has said, "The Imam (a.s.) laughed quite intensely." Then he
said, "O abu 'Umara, I can inform you that when I came out of my house,
I gave my will to my son, so and so and in public.

I allowed my other sons to take part in my instructions with him but I
gave my directive will to him in private and wanted him to be alone. Had
it been up myself I would have placed my directive will with my son
al-Qasim because of my love for him and sympathy. However, it is up to
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, who places it ((Leadership with
Divine Authority) wherever He wants.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.) has brought me this information. He showed him
to me as well as his the people of who would be with him. Such it is
with us. No one of us places his directive will to any one until the
Messenger of Allah brings its news and so would my great, great, great,
great grandfather Ali (a.s.). With the Messenger of Allah I saw a ring,
a sword, a staff, a book and a turban. I asked, "What is it, O the
Messenger of Allah ?" He replied, "The turban is the authority of Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High,.

The sword is the majesty of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,. The
book is the light of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. The staff is
the power of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. The ring consists all
of the above matters." Then he said to me, "The task has left you for
one other than you." I then asked, "O the Messenger of Allah, show me
which of them is he?" The Messenger of Allah said, " I have not seen any
of the Imams more impatient for the departure of this task from them
more you are. Had Imamat been based on love, Isma'il had been more
beloved to your father than you were.

However, that is from Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High." Then abu
Ibrahim said, "I saw all of my sons, the living and the dead. Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.) said to me, "This one is their master, and he pointed
to my son Ali, thus, he is from and I am from him and Allah is with the
people of good deeds."

Yazid has said, "Then abu Ibrahim said, "O Yazid, this a trust with
you. Do not inform about it anyone other than a person of reason or a
servant (of Allah) who you know is truthful. Would you be asked to
testify to it you must do so as Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has
said, "God commands you to return that which had been entrusted to you
to the rightful owners.. . ." (4:58) He also has said, "Who is more
unjust than one who refuses to testify to the truth that God has given
to him?

. . ."(2:140) He has said that abu Ibrahim then said, " I then went
close to the Messenger of Allah and asked, 'May Allah take my soul and
the souls of my parents in service for your cause, you have mentioned
them in a polural form. Which one of them is them is he (the Imam)?" The
Messenger of Allah said, "It is he who sees with the light of Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, hears with His undesrstanding and speaks with
His wisdom. He finds the truth without making mistakes, he knows ,thusm,
he is not ignorant. He is taught the rules and knowledge.

He is this, and he held the hand of my son , Ali. Then he said, "How
little is (the time) you will be with him! When you will return from
your journey (of Makka) prepare your directive will, organizes your
affairs and complete whatever you intended to complete. You are about to
move away from them to become the neighbors of people other than them.
When you will make such a dicision call Ali to give a bath, shroud you
because it will cleanse you and any thing otherwise will not be
acceptable. This is a well established tradition of the past.

Thereafter lie back before him and line up his brothers and uncles
behind him and then command him to say Allahu Akbar (Allah is the Most
Great) nine times over you. This estblishes his position as the executor
of your will and as your guardian when you still are alive. Then call
all of your sons after them to bear the testimony and ask Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, to bear testimony aand Allah is a sufficient
witness." Yazid has said that abu Ibrahim (a.s.) then said to me, "In
this year I will be take (to the next life) and the task (of Leadership
with Divine Authority) will blong to my son Ali synonymous with Ali aand
Ali.

The first Ali is Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) and the othe Ali is Ali ibn
al-Husayn (a.s.). He has received the and intelligence like the first
Ali a forebearance like him, a victory like him and sufferings like his
suuferings. He also received a suffering like the other Ali, a patience
like him against diappointments and he must not speak soon after the
death of Harun at least for four years."

"The the Imam (a.s.) said, "O Yazid, when ever you will pass through
this place and meet and you will soon meet himgive him the glad news of
the birth of trust worthy son to him, a protected and holy one. He will
inform you of your meeting with me. You then inform him that the girl
from whom this boy will be born is a girl from the family of Mary
(Maria), the maiden girl of the Messenger of Allah, mother of Ibrahim.
If will be able to convey my greetings to her you may do so.

" Yazid has said, "After the death of abu Ibrahim I met Ali (al- Rida)
(a.s.) and he began to speak to me." He said, "O Yazid, "What do you say
about performing 'Umra (visit to Makka out of Hajj season)?" I said,
"May Allah take my soul and the souls of my parents in service for your
cause, it is up to you. I do not have the means to journey." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "Glory belongs to Allah, We would not have asked you
without first taking the rsponsibility for your exoenses.

" We then left for 'Umra until we reached that place. The Imam (a.s.)
began to speak and he said, "This is the place wherein you would meet
your neighbors and uncles very often." I said, "Yes, it is true and then
I related to him the story." He then said to me, "The girl has not come
as yet. When she will come I will convey his greetings to her." Then we
left for Makka and he bought her that year. Shortly afterwards she give
borth to the that boy." Yazid has said, "Brothers of Ali (al-Rida)
wanted to have a part in the leadership and they became my enemies for
no good reason. Ishaq ibn Ja'far told them, by Allah, I have seen him
sit so near to abu Ibrahim that even I could sit so close."

H 828, Ch. 72, h 15

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from abu al-Hakam
who has said that 'Abdallah ibn Ibrahim al-Ja'fari and 'Abdallah ibn
Muhammad ibn 'Umara from Yazid ibn Salit who has said the following.

"When abu Ibrahim prepared his directive will he called the following
people to bear testimony. They were Ibrahim ibn Muhammad (ibn Ali ibn
'Abdallah ibn Ja'far ibn abu Talib) al-Ja'fari, (his brother) Ishaq ibn
Muhammad al-Ja'fari, Ishaq ibn Ja'far ibn Muhammad (the brother of
al-Imam Musa (a.s.), Ja'far ibn Salih (ibn Mu'awiya ibn 'Abdallah ibn
Ja'far ibn abu Talib), (his brother) Mu'awiya al-Ja'fari, Yahya ibn
al-Husayn ibn Zayd ibn Ali (Zayn al-'Abidin (a.s.), Sa'd ibn 'Imran
al-Ansari, Muhammad ibn al-Harith al-Ansari, Yazid ibn Salit. al-Ansari,
and Muhammad ibn Ja'far ibn Sa'd al-Aslami.

Sa'd al-Aslami recorded the text of the first directive will. " I ask
them to witness and bear testimony that he testifies that there is no
Lord except Allah Who is the only Lord Who has no partner and that
Muhammad is His servant and His Messenger. The coming of the Hour (of
judgment ) after death is true. The warning is true and that all people
will be held responsible for their actions is true.

The decree is true and the standing of people before Allah for judgment
is true. All (guidance) that Prophet Muhammad has brought is true. All
that the (great) trust worthy spirit has descended with is true. With it
(such beliefs) I live, up on such beliefs I die and with such beliefs, I
will be resurrected if Allah would so will.

I ask them (witnesses) to bear testimony to the fact that this is my
directive will with my own hand writing. I have copied the directive
will of my great, great, great, great, great grandfather Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) and the directive will of Muhammad
ibn Ali before it I had copied word for word, and the directive will of
Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) similarly. I have directed my will to my son
Ali and my sons afterwards with him if he would so will, find
understanding in them and like to confirm them for the task. It will all
be up to him.

However, if would dislike them and wanted to remove them it will also
be up to his discretion and there is no say for them against him. I have
said in my will that all my charities, properties, my Mawali (slaves),
my children that I leave behind and my sons are for him and Ibrahim,
al-'Abbass, Qasim, Isma'il. Ahmad and mother of Ahmad and up to Ali is
the affairs of my ladies not up to them. One third of the charities of
my father and two thirds of my charities will be at his (Ali's) disposal
to deal with as he may deem proper just as an owner place in them
whatever he may like.

He may, if he would so decide, sell, gift, grant or give as charity to
those I have specified or others it will all be up to him. He is just as
myself in my will, property, my family and my children. He may confirm
his brothers whom I have specified in this my document he may do so.
However, if he would dislike he can remove them from the task without
being any offense or unacceptability on his part.

If will find any changes in their attitude which would be other than
those in which I left them and he would want to return them as in charge
of a certain task it will up to him to do so. If any one of them would
want to give in marriage to someone his sister he may not do so without
his permission because he is the most knowledgeable one in the matters
of the marriage of his people, his relatives.

If any authority or other individuals from the people would refuse him
a thing or create an obstacle for him in the matters I have mentioned in
this my document of will or in the matters of any of the people I have
mentioned in it then such person will become far away from Allah, His
Messenger and the later ones will become far away from him. Such a
person will be subject to condemnation and anger of Allah, those who
(have the right to) condemn, the angels close to Allah, the prophets,
the messengers and all the believers.

The mothers of my children will be maintained just as they were in my
life time provided they observe Hijab (Islamic way of dressing) if he
would consider it proper. If any of them would go out to her husbands
then she will have no right to return to my place except if Ali would
decide otherwise. The same conditions would apply to my daughters.

No one of the brothers, real or half will have the right to give any of
my daughters in marriage. Also no authority or uncle will any such right
without his (Ali's) approval and agreement. If they would do otherwise,
they have opposed Allah and His Messenger and they rebelled against Him
in His own dominion. He knows best about the marriage of his people, his
relatives.

If will decide to give in marriage he may do so and if will decide to
refuse he may refuse. I have recommended my daughters with a likewise
recommendations as I have recorded in this my document of directive
will. I have appointed Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, as the
witness to bear testimony to this fact (about my daughters). He and the
mother of Ahmad are two witnesses to bear testimony to this fact. No one
has the right to open the document of my will or publicize it when it
would be different from what I have said and specified.

Whoever would do evil it would be against his own self and whoever
would do good it would for his own good. Your Lord is not unjust to any
one. May send blessings up on Muhammad and his family. Be it an
authority or individuals, must not open or tear this document of my will
which I have signed herein below.

Whoever would do so will be subject to the condemnation and anger of
Allah and those who condemn of the angels close to Allah, all the
messengers of Allah, all the believers and Muslims. This would apply to
those who would open forcefully this document of my will. Written and
seal by abu Ibrahim. May Allah send His blessings up on Muhammad and his
family."

Abu al-Hakam has said that abu 'Abdallah ibn Adam al-Ja'fari narrated
to me from Yazid ibn Salit the following. "Abu 'Imran al-Talhi was a
judge in Madina. When Musa (a.s.) His brothers summoned him before the
judge, Abu 'Imran al-Talhi. Al-'Abbass ibn Musa said, "May Allah keep
you well and allow people to benefit from you. At the bottom of this
document there is (mentioned) treasures and pearls and he wants to hide
and keep them for himself without us.My father, may Allah grant him
blessings, have left nothing that is free from being referred to him. He
has left us all poor.

Had I not controlled my self I would told you something in public. At
such time Ibrahim ibn Muhammad rushed towards him saying, "Will you
speak up about a thing that no one of us will accept it or believe you?
You will then be blamed and defeated among us. We know that you have
been lying when still young and when you grew up. Your father knew you
very well. If there was any thing good in you even though he knew you
inside and outside. He would trust you even with two pieces of date.

" At this time Ishaq ibn Ja'far, his uncle rushed towards him and
grabbed both sides of his collar saying, ":You are a fool and feeble
minded. Pick up this all and what you did the day before and all others
also helped him." Abu 'Imran, the judge then said to Ali (a.s.), "Stand
up O abu al-Hassan (a.s.).

The condemnation of your father is enough for me today. He has
certainly given you a wide range of authority. By Allah, no one knows a
person better than his father does. By Allah, abu 'Abdallah to us was
not a light minded person or weak in his opinions." Al-'Abbass then said
to the judge, "Open the document and read what is below therein. " Abu
'Imran said, "I will not open it. The condemnation of your father is
enough for me today."

Al-'Abbass said, "I will tear it down." He said, "That is up to you."
Al-'Abbass then removed the seal and therein they found themselves all
removed from their being executors of the will and the confirmation of
Ali as the sole executor of the will. They found out therein the
appointment of Ali as their guardian (with Divine authority) whether
they would like or dislike it.

They also found out therein that they were all removed from the list of
the recipients of charities and other benefits. Opening the document
turned to become a misfortune, disgrace and humiliation to them. It
proved very good for Ali (a.s.). In the directive will that al-'Abbass
removed its seal the following names were the signatories.

Ibrahim ibn Muhammad, Ishaq ibn Ja'far, Ja'far ibn Salih and Sa'id
(Sa'd) ibn 'Imran were the ones who uncovered the face of the mother of
Ahmad (who was brought) in the presence the judge, qadi, excusing that
it was not mother of Ahmad, until they had uncovered her face and
recognized. She where up on said, "By Allah, my master (husband) said,
"You will be coerced to go before a judge." Ishaq ibn Ja'far admonished
her saying,, "Be quite, women suffer from weakness. I do not think he
has said any such thing.

" Ali (a.s.) then turned to al-'Abbass and said, "My brother, I
understand that debts and liabilities up on you have forced you to this.
O Sa'id come with me so we can help them pay for them. By Allah, I will
ignore to help you and cooperate with you as long as will walk on earth.
You may say whatever you like.

" Al-'Abbass then said, "You are not giving us anything other than the
extra of our own properties which are with you. In fact, our properties
with are more than." He (The Imam (a.s.) said, say whatever you want.
Honor is your own honor. If you do good it will for your own selves
before Allah and if you do evil Allah is forgiving. By Allah, you know,
that today I have no son and heir other than you. If I will keep
anything think I might away from you or store it in hiding it will be
for you and will return to you. By Allah, from the day your father, may
Allah be pleased with him, left this world I have not owned anything but
that I have disposed of it as have seen.

" Al-'Abbass moved forwards and said, "By Allah, it is not so. Allah
has not imposed any of your opinions on us. Only our father was jealous
against us. His decisions are not justifiable before Allah and nor is
your decisions. You know that I know Safwan ibn Yahya who sells
al-Sabiry (fine fabrics) in Kufa. If you admit I can make it very
difficult for both of you to swallow your Saliva." Ali (a.s.) then said,
"There is no means and no power except with Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most Great.

My brothers I am very keen to see you happy. Allah knows it. O Lord, if
you know that I love to see them prosper, do good to them, maintain good
relations with them, show kindness to them then help me day and night
and reward me for my efforts. Otherwise, you are the One who know the
hidden facts, then reward me for what i deserve, good for good and evil
for evil. O Lord, grant them well being and grant well being through
them.

Make Stan to despair about us. Help them to obey you and grant them the
opportunity to learn your guidance. My brothers, I wish and work to make
you happy and strive for your well being. Allah guards whatever we say."
Al-'Abbass then said, "I know your language very well. Your shovel can
not find any soil with me to pick up." The people dispersed at this
point. May Allah send blessing up on Muhammad and his family.

H 829, Ch. 72, h 16

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad
ibn Ali and 'Abdallah ibn al-Marzuban from (Muhammad) ibn Sinan who has
said the following. "Once I went to see abu al-Hassan Musa (a.s.) one
year before he would leave for Iraq. His son Ali (a. s.) was also in the
meeting. He looked at me and said, "O Muhammad, during this year a
movement will take place do not be disturbed in it." The narrator has
said that he then asked the Imam (a.s.), "'May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, what that will be? What you said has made me
very anxious." The Imam (a.s.) said, "I will journey to the tyrant. From
his and one after him I will not suffer any serious harm.

" The narrator has said that he then asked The Imam (a.s.), "'May Allah
take my soul in service for your cause, what then will happen?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, " Allah causes the unjust to go astray and He does whatever
He wills." The narrator has said that he then asked the Imam (a.s.),
"'May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, what is that will
happen?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Whoever will do injustice to my son this
one, reject his Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority) after me it
would like doing injustice to Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) and reject his
Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority) after the Messenger of
Allah.

" The narrator has said that he then asked The Imam (a.s.), "By Allah,
if Allah will grant me long life I will acknowledge his right and will
affirm his Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority)." The Imam (a.s.)
said, "You have spoken the truth, O Muhammad.

Allah will grant you long life.You will acknowledge his right and
affirm his Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority) and the Imamat of
the one after him." The narrator has said that he then asked The Imam
(a.s.), "Who will he be?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Muhammad, his son." The
narrator has said that he then asked The Imam (a. s.), "From me it is
agreed and accepted."


