Chapter 73 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony As Proof of Abu Ja'far Al-thani's (the Second) (a.s.) Divine Authority Over the People After Abu Al-hassan Al-rida (a.s.) H 830, Ch. 73, H 1
======================================================================================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn
al-Walid from Yahya ibn Habib al-Zayyat who has said the following. "A
man who was present in a meeting (of people) with abu al-Hassan al-Rida
(a.s.) spoke to me of the information herein below.

"When people readied themselves to leave the meeting the Imam (a.s.)
said to them, "Meet abu Ja'far (a.s.), (before you leave), offer to him
greeting and renew your covenant with him." When left, he (the Imam)
said to me, "May Allah grant well-being to al-Mufaddal, he would have
believed (in the succeeding Imam) without it (the command to renew their
covenant)".

H 831, Ch. 73, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Mu'ammar
ibn Khallad who has said the following. "I heard (abu al-Hassan) al-Rida
who said something (leadership with Divine Authority) and then said, "I
do not think you need what I just said. This is abu Ja'far (a.s.). I
have placed him in my own place to assume my position. We are of the
family Ahl al-Bayt whose younger ones inherit from elder everything
exactly measure to measure."

H 832, Ch. 73, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
his father, Muhammad ibn 'Isa who has said the following. "Once I went
to see abu Ja'far al-Thani's (a. s.). He debated me in several issues.
He then said, "O abu Ali, there is no (reason for) doubt; I am the only
son that my father had."

H 833, Ch. 73, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ja'far
ibn Yahya from Malik ibn Ashyam from al-Husayn ibn Bashshar who has said
the following. "Ibn Qiyaman wrote a letter to abu al-Hassan (a.s.) in
which he had said the following.

'How can you be an Imam when you do not have a son?" Abu al-Hassan
al-Rida (a.s.) replied him with signs of anger, "How do you know that I
will not have a son? By Allah, not many days and nights will pass before
Allah will grant me a male child through who He will make the truth
distinct from falsehood."

H 834, Ch. 73, h 5

One of our people has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Mu'awiya ibn
Hakim from ibn abu Basir who has said the following. "Al-Najashi once
asked me, "Who will be the Imam after your master? I wish you ask him so
I will know." I then went to see Ali al-Rida (a.s.) and informed him (of
al-Najashi's wish)." The narrator has said that the Imam said, "The Imam
will be my son." Then he said, "Can any one say that my son will be the
Imam when he has no son?"

H 835, Ch. 73, h 6

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Mu'ammar ibn
Khallad who has said the following. "Once in the presence of abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) we spoke about an issue, Imamat, (Leadership with
Divine Authority). It was after the birth oof abu Ja'far (a.s.). The
Imam (a.s.) said, "You do not need any such thing (thinking who the Imam
will be). This is abu Ja'far (a.s.). I have placed him in my own place
and made him to assume my position."

H 836, Ch. 73, h 7

Ahmad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from ibn Qiyama al-Wasiti who
has said the following. "Once I went to see Ali ibn Musa (a.s.). (During
the meeting) I asked him, "Can there be two Imams?" He replied, "No, but
that one of them must remain silent." I then said to him, "This applies
to you.

You are the Imam and there is no silent Imam with you." At that time
his son abu Ja'far was not yet born. He said to me, "By Allah, Allah
will make an Imam from me to establish the truth and the people of truth
and banish falsehood and the people of falsehood. One year thereafter
abu Ja'far (a.s.) was born. Ibn Qiyama belonged to the Waqifi sect."

H 837, Ch. 73, h 8

Ahmad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali From al-Hassan ibn al-Jahm who
has said the following. "Once I was in the presence of abu al-Hassan
(a.s.). He called his son who was a small (boy). The Imams (a.s.) placed
him in my lap and said to me. " Move his shirt aside." When I did so.
The Imams (a.s.) said, "Look in between his shoulders." I look and I
found in the skin of one shoulder something like an imprint of a seal."
The Imams (a.s.) then asked, "Do you see this.? Similar to this there
was one in the shoulder of my father."

H 838, Ch. 73, h 9

It is narrated from him (Ahmad ibn Mihran) from Muhammad ibn Ali from
abu Yahya al- San'ani who has said the following. "Once I was in of abu
al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) . Someone brought his son, Ja'far (a.s.) to him
and he was a small (child). The Imams (a.s.) said, "This new born is one
the like of whom with such great holiness and blessing has not been born
for our Shi'a (followers)."

H 839, Ch. 73, h 10

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Safwan ibn
Yahya who has said the following. "Once I said to al-Rida (a.s.), before
Allah's granting you the blessing of the birth of abu Ja'far (a.s.) we
would ask you and you would say, "Allah will grant me a son and He has
granted you one. His birth is the delight of our eyes.

May Allah spare us from showing your (sad) day. However, if something
will happen to who then (will leadership with Divine Authority) will
go?" The Imam (a.s.) pointed out with his hand towards abu Ja'far (a.s.)
and he was standing before him. I then asked, " May Allah take my soul
in service for your cause, a child of three years?" The Imam (a.s.)
said, "That will be of no harm to him. Jesus rose with Divine authority
when he was a three years old child."

H 840, Ch. 73, h 11

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Mu'mmar ibn Khallad who has said the following.
"I heard 'Isma'il ibn Ibrahim say to al-rida (a.s.), 'My son feels
heaviness in his tongue. I intend to sent him tomorrow to you. Pass you
your hand over his head and pray for him. He is your Mawla (slave).'"
The Imam (a.s.) said, "He is a Mawla (slave) of abu Ja'far (a.s.). send
him tomorrow to him (abu Ja'far (a.s.)."

H 841, Ch. 73, h 12

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Nahdi
from Muhammad ibn Khallad al.-Sayqal from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn
'Ammar who has said the following. "Once I was in a meeting with Ali ibn
Ja'far ibn Muhammad in Madina, - I stayed with him for two years to
write from him what he would hear from his brother, abu al- Hassan
(a.s.),- at such time abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Rida (a.s.) came in
the mosque, the mosque of the Messenger of Allah.

Ali ibn Ja'far rushed towards him bare foot and without his gown. He
kissed his hand and showed great respect for him. Abu Ja'far said to
him, "Uncle, please sit down, may Allah grant you well being." He said,
"My master, how can I sit when you are standing." When Ali ibn Ja'far
returned to his place his companions began to blame him saying, "You are
the uncle of his father, how can you act as such before him?" He said to
them, "Be quite, When Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has
not qualified this beard -holding his beard in his hand- but has
qualified this young man and has given him such position, should I deny
his excellence and virtue? I seek refuge before Allah from what you say.
In fact, I am a servant for him."

H 842, Ch. 73, h 13

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Khayrani, from his father
who has said the following. "Once I was standing before abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) in Khurasan and someone said tp him, "O my master, if something
will happen to who (will go Leadership with Divine Authority)?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "It will go to abu Ja'far (a.s.), my son." The person
asking the question thought of abu Ja'far (a.s.) as very young for such
task. Abu al-Hassan (a.s.) said, "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
sent Jesus, son of Mary as a messenger prophet, the owner of a whole
legal system. He began his task when he was smaller in age than abu
Ja'far (a.s.)."

H 843, Ch. 73, h 14

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father and Ali ibn Muhammad
al-Qasani from Zakariyya ibn Yahya ibn al-Nu'man al-Sayrafi who has said
the following. "I heard Ali ibn Ja'far speaking to al-Hassan ibn
al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn as, "By Allah, Allah has supported abu
al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.)." Al-Hassan then said, "Yes, by Allah, may
Allah take my souls in service for your cause, his brothers have
rebelled against him." Ali ibn Ja'far then said, "Yes, by Allah, and we,
his uncles, rebelled against him.

" Al-Hassan said to him, "May Allah take my souls in service for your
cause, how did you dealt it, I was not present with you." He said, "His
brothers said to him and so did we, "there has never been a blackish
Imam from us" The Imam (a.s.) al-Rida said to them, "He is my son." They
said," Messenger of Allah did judge on the basis of physiognomy , thus,
we can also have a judgment on the basis of physiognomy .

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "You may call one who has said the following
knows physiognomy but I will not do so. You should not give information
as to for what reason you have called them. You must stay home. When
they will come, we should, all of us, be in the garden. His uncles,
brothers and sisters should all line up.

They dressed al-Rida (a.s.) in a gown made of wool with a hat of wool
on his head and a shovel in his hand. The Imam should be asked to act as
the gardener in the garden. Then abu Ja'far should be brought in and
they should be asked to find his father in the people present.

They said, "His father is not present among these people, but this is
his uncle, this is the uncle of his father, this is his uncle and this
is his aunt. If his father is here he is the gardener because his foot
print and his foot print match." When abu al-Hassan (a.s.) returned,
they said, "This is his father." Ali ibn Ja'far has said, "I stood up
and kissed abu Ja'far and his saliva came in my mouth. Then I said, "I
testify that you are my Imam before Allah. Al-Rida (a.s.) wept and said,
"O uncle, did not hear my father say,

"The Messenger of Allah has said, "May Allah take my souls and the
souls of my father in service for the cause of the son of the best slave
girl, the son of al-Nawbiya (a town in Sudan) lady with a fresh smelling
mouth, the lady of who will give birth to a purified one. May Allah
condemn the 'U'aybiss (the 'Abbassides) and their descendents, the
mischief makers who murder them (the Imams) for years, months and days,
cause them huge sufferings and cause them to endure bitter
frustrations.

He (abu Ja'far (a.s.) he live exiled, away from home and suffering the
pain of the murder of his father and grandfather. One who is has
disappeared (from the eyes of his loved ones). About whom it will be
said, "His is dead or perished. No one will in which valleys he will
travel. Can such a person, O uncle, be anyone other than my own son?" I
then said, "You have spoken the truth, may Allah take my souls in
service for your cause."


**Chapter 74 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony as proof of abu
al-Hassan's, al-Thalith (the third) (a.s.) Divine Authority over the
people after Muhammad ibn Ali al-Rida (a.s.) H 844, Ch. 74, h 1**

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father that 'Isma'il ibn Mihran
who has said the following. "When abu Ja'far (a.s.) left Madina for
Baghdad the first time of his two journeys on his leaving I said to him,
"May Allah take my souls in service for your cause, I am afraid about
you in this condition. To who, after you, will belong the task
(Leadership with Divine Authority)?" He turned to me laughing and said,
"The disappearance, as have thought, will not take place this year.

When he was about to be taken to al-Mu'tasam (179/795 -became caliph
218/833 - 227/841), for the second time I went to him and said, "May
Allah take my souls in service for your cause. You are leaving. To who,
after you, will go this task Leadership with Divine Authority)?" He wept
until his beard become soaked. He then turned to me and said, "This time
you should be afraid about my life. The task (Leadership with Divine
Authority) after me will go to my son Ali (a.s.)."

H 845, Ch. 74, h 2

Al -Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from al -Khayrani who has narrated
from his father the following. "My father was to watch the door of the
house of abu Ja'far (a.s.) to serve the task for which he was assigned.
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa would come every day at dawn for information
about the health of abu Ja'far (a.s.). There was a messenger that would
come and go between abu Ja'far (a.s.) and my father.

When he (the messenger) would come Ahmad would leave and my father
would remain with him privately. One night I went out and Ahmad also
left the meeting and my father remained in privacy with the messenger.

Ahmad, however, wlaked around the meeting place as such that could hear
the conversation. The messenger said to my father, "You master sends you
greetings and says to you, "I am leaving and the task ((Leadership with
Divine Authority) goes to my son, Ali (a.s.). His rights up on you after
me will be as much as my rights up on you after my father." The
messenger then left and Ahmad came back to his place and said to my
father, "What did he say to you?" My father said, "He said good." Ahmad
said, "I heard what he just said to you. Why do hide it?"

He then stated all that he had heard. My father said to him, "Allah has
made unlawful for you what you just did, because Allah, the Most High,
has said, "Do not spy. . ." (49 :12) However, you must bear this
testimony, perhaps we my need it one day but you must not make it public
until the proper time. In the morning my father wrote dawn the text of
the message in ten, sealed and sent them to the leaders of the
community. He said to them, "If my death may take place before I will
ask you for this message you may open it to learn about it.

" When abu Ja'far (a.s.) left this world, my father has mentioned that
he did not come out of his home until about four hundred people had
faith expressed their faith with certainty in the abu al- Hassan, Ali
ibn Muhammad (a.s.) as their Imam (Leader with Divine Authority). The
leaders in the community gathered together in the house of Muhammad ibn
al-Faraj consulting each other about this task (Leadership with Divine
Authority). Muhammad ibn al-Faraj then wrote to my father to inform him
of the gathering with him.

He had said that had it not been for fear of publicity he would
personally come to my father and ask him to join (them). My father rode
and went to him. He found the community gathered at his place and they
said to my father, "What do you say about this issue (Leadership with
Divine Authority)?" My father those to whom he had sent a copy of the
text of the message to bring them.

They were brought and he said, "This is what I was commanded to do."
Some of them then said, "We would have loved if you would have asked
another person also to bear witness and testimony to this fact." He then
said, "Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious, has, in fact,
brought for you such witness. This is abu Ja'far al-Asha'ari can testify
to my hearing this message." He asked him to testify but Ahmad denied
his hearing the message as such.

My father then asked him for a mubahala (disputing party's asking Allah
to condemn the untrue party). He has said that when the case was proved
against Ahmad he then said, "Yes, I did hear the message and it is an
honor. I loved that it should go to a Arab man not to a none Arab
person. Up on this the people there acknowledged the truth
altogether."

In the copy of al-Safwan the above Hadith is recorded as follows:

H 846, Ch. 74, h 3

Muhammad ibn Ja'far al-Kufi has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn
'Ubayd from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Wasiti who has said the following
"I heard Ahmad ibn abu Khalid, stating that he (The Imam (a.s.) had
appointed him as witness to bear testimony to this documented will in
the following words. "Ahmad ibn abu Khalid, the slave of abu Ja'far,
bears testimony that abu Ja'far, Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja'far
ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) is asked
to bear testimony.

Testimony to the fact that he has appointed his son, Ali, the executor
of his directive wills about himself and bout his sisters. He has placed
the affairs of Musa in his charge when he would attain maturity. He has
appointed 'Abdallah ibn al-Musawir as the over seer to his legacy, his
estate, property, expenditures and slaves etc., until Ali ibn Muhammad
will reach the age of maturity.

At such time 'Abdallah ibn al-Musawir will transfer the overseeing
position to him (Ali ibn Muhammad (a.s.)). He thereafter will take
charge of his own affairs and sister. The management of the affairs of
Musa will also be left to him. Musa will take charge of his own affairs
after the two (overseers) according to the conditions set forth by the
father of the two of them in the matters his charitable charities.

This has been documented on Sunday 3rd dhu al-Hijja, in the year two
hundred twenty. Ahmad ibn abu Khalid has transcribed his own testimony
with his own hand writing. He has asked al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn
'Abdallah ibn al-Hassan ibn ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn abu Talib
(a.s.).

He is also known as al-Jawani has a testimony just like the testimony
of Ahmad ibn abu Khalid at the beginning of this document. He als has
written his testimony with his own hand and the witness to bear
testimony in the document is Nasr, the servant and he has written his
bearing testimony with his own hand."


