Chapter 75 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony As Proof of Abu Muhammad Al-hassan 's (a.s.) Divine Authority Over the People After Ali Ibn Muhammad (a.s.) H 847, Ch. 75, H 1
========================================================================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Nahdi from
Yahya ibn Yasar al-Qanbar who has said the following. "Abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) prepared his directive will to his son, al-Hassan four months
before his leaving this world. He appointed me to bear testimony to his
will as well as a group of the follower friends."

H 848, Ch. 75, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Kufi from
Bashshar ibn Ahmad al-Basri from Ali ibn 'Umar al-Nawfali who has said
the following. "Once I was with abu al-Hassan in the compound of his
house and at that time his son, Muhammad passed by. I said to him, "may
Allah take my souls in service for your cause, will he be our master,
Imam, after you?" The Imam (a.s.) said, " No, your master, Imam, after
me will be al-Hassan (a.s.)."

\* This abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali, is the eldest son of the Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.).He died before his father (230/845 - 252/866). His shrine
is near Balad which is near Baghdad, and the place is now known as
al-Sayyid Muhammad. In the following ahadith his name is frequently
mentioned.

H 849, Ch. 75, h 3

From him has narrated from Bashshar ibn Ahmad from 'Abdallah ibn
Muhammad al-Isfahani who has said the following. "Abu al-Hassan (a.s.)
said, "Your master (Imam) after me will be the one who will perform
prayer for me (prayer for burial)." The narrator has said that we did
not know abu Muhammad (a.s.) before this. Abu Muhammad came out and
prayed (for his burial)."

H 850, Ch. 75, h 4

From him who has narrated from Musa ibn Ja'far ibn Wahab from Ali ibn
Ja'far who has said the following. "I was present with abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) when his son Muhammad died. The Imam (a.s.) said this to (his
son) al-Hassan (a.s.), "Son renew your thanks to Allah because He has
just granted you the matter (Leadership with Divine Authority)."

H 851, Ch. 75, h 5

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad, from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah ibn Marwan al-Anbari who has said the
following. "I was present at the time of abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali's
(leaving this world).

Abu al-Hassan (a.s.) came and a chair was set for him. He sat on it and
his family around him. Abu Muhammad was standing on one side. When he
was free from the matters about abu Ja'far he then turned to abu
Muhammad (a.s.) and said, "My son, renew thanks to Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High, because He has just granted you a task (Leadership with
Divine Authority)."

H 852, Ch. 75, h 6

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Qalanisi from
Ali ibn al- Husayn ibn 'Amr from Ali ibn Mahziyar who has said the
following. "Once I said abu al- Hassan (a.s.), "If something will
happen-I seek refuge before Allah - to who then will go (Leadership with
Divine Authority)?" He said, "My covenant (directive will) is for the
eldest of my sons."

H 853, Ch. 75, h 7

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from abu Muhammad al-Asbarqiniy from Ali
ibn 'Amr al-'Attar who has said the following. "Once I went to see
al-Hassan al-'Askari (a.s.) when his son abu Ja'far (Muhammad ) was
still alive and I thought he will be the Imam after his father.

I then asked the Imam (a.s.), "May Allah take my souls in service for
your cause, which of your sons I will consider (my Imam)?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "do not consider any of them (your Imam) until my command
will come to you." The narrator has said, "I wrote to him afterwards
asking, 'To who will go this task (Leadership with Divine Authority)"
The narrator has said, "He wrote to me, "(It will go) to my eldest son."
The narrator has said, "Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was older then abu
Ja'far."

H 854, Ch. 75, h 8

Muhammad ibn Yahya and others have narrated from Sa'id ibn 'Abdallah
from a group of banu Hashim, among whom was al-Hassan ibn al-Hassan
al-Aftas, the following. "They were present on the day Muhammad ibn Ali
ibn Muhammad, at the door of abu al-Hassan to offer condolences. A place
in the compound of his house was prepared for him and people were
sitting around him. They said, "We estimated that at that time from the
descendents of abu Talib, Hashim and Quraysh there were about fifty men
besides his slaves and other people. At such time he look at al-Hassan
ibn Ali coming and the front of his shirt was torn.

He stood at the right of his father and we did not know him. Abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) looked at him after a while and said, "My son, renew
your thanks to Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, because He
has granted you a new task (Leadership with Divine Authority)." The
young man wept, praised Allah, and said, "We are for Allah and to Him we
shall return. He then said, "All praise belongs to Allah, Lord of the
worlds.

I pray to Allah for completion the blessings for us in you. "We are for
Allah and to Him we shall return." We asked about him and it was said
that he was al-Hassan, the son of the Imam. We estimated his age at that
time around twenty years or more. On that day we learned and came to
know that he had tacitly made a statement about the succeeding Imam and
(the Leader with Divine Authority)."

H 856, Ch. 75, h 9

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ishaq ibn Muhammad from Muhammad ibn
Yahya ibn Daryab who has said the following. "I went to see abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) after the death of abu Ja'far and offered condolences
for this reason. Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was also present. He wept and abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) turned to him and said, "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, has made you to succeed (the Imam) instead of him. You must thanks
Allah."

H 856, Ch. 75, h 10

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ishaq ibn Muhammad from abu Hashim
al-Ja'fari who has said the following. "I was in the presence of abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) after the death of his son, abu Ja'far. I thought to my
self like wanting to say, "The two; abu Ja'far and abu Muhammad at this
time are like abu al-Hassan Musa and 'Isma'il, the sons of Ja'far ibn
Muhammad (a. s.)." At such time abu al-Hassan turned to me before I
would say anything and said, "Yes, O abu Hashim, Allah applied Bada' (a
change in the current natural conditions) in the case of abu Muhammad
after abu Ja'far, a fact that was not known for him.

In the same He applied Bada' in the case of Musa after the death of
'Isma'il as an issue that through which his condition came to light.
That is what you thought to yourself. Even though people of falsehood
may dislike, abu Muhammad, my son will be the succeeding Imam after me.
With him is the knowledge that he will need and with him is the means of
Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority)."

H 857, Ch. 75, h 11

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ishaq ibn Muhammad from Muhammad ibn
Yahya ibn Daryab from abu Bakr al-Fahfaki who has said the following.
"He wrote to me as herein below. "My son, abu Muhammad instinctively is
the most considerate in the family of Muhammad (s.a). He possesses the
strongest authoritative supporting evidence above them and he is the
eldest of my sons. He is the succeeding Imam and to him go the rings of
Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority) and its rules. Whatever you
wanted to ask me ask it from him. With him is whatever he may need."

H 858, Ch. 75, h 12

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ishaq ibn Muhammad from Shahwayh ibn
'Abdallah al- Jallab who has said the following. "Abu al-Hassan wrote to
me in a letter as herein below. "You wanted to ask about the succeeding
Imam after (the death) of abu Ja'far and you were anxious about it. Do
not feel sad; "God does not misguide a nation after having given them
guidance until the means of piety are made known to them. . . ."
(9:115)

Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, does not neglect the
people whom He has granted guidance to go astray until He clarifies for
them the means with which they can maintain piety. You master (Imam)
after me will be, my son, abu Muhammad (a.s.). With there is whatever
you would need. Allah allows to precede whatever He wants and Allah
allows to succeed whatever He wants. "For whatever sign We change or
eliminate or cause to recede into oblivion, We bring forth a better
sign, one that is identical.. . ." (2:106). I have written enough
convincing facts for the people of reason with awareness."

H 859, Ch. 75, h 13

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from the person he mentioned from
Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-'Alawi from Dawud ibn al-Qasim who has said the
following. "I heard abu al-Hassan (a.s.) saying, 'The succeeding (Imam)
after me will be al-Hassan. How will your dealing be with the succeeding
(Imam) of the succeeding (Imam)?" I then said, "Why will that be so, may
Allah take my souls in service for your cause?" He said, "You will not
see him in person. It will not lawful for you to pronounce his name." I
then asked, "How then will we speak of him?" He said, "Say, 'The Divine
Authority from the family of Muhammad (s.a)."


Chapter 76 : Tacit and Explicit Testimony as proof of the owner of the
House's (a.s.) Divine Authority over the people abu Muhammad al-Hassan
(a.s.) H 860, Ch. 76, h 1

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Bilal who has
said the following. "Two years before his leaving this world, abu
Muhammad (a.s.)sent out information to me about the succeeding Imam
after him. Just three days before his leaving this world he again sent
out information to me about the succeeding Imam after him."

H 861, Ch. 75, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Ishaq from abu Hashim
al-Ja'fari who has said the following. "I said to abu Muhammad (a.s.),
'Your grace causes shyness to me to ask you questions. May I ask you a
question?" He said, "Yes, you may ask." I said, "My master, do you have
a son?" He said, "Yes, I do have a son." I then said, "If anything will
happen to you, where would I ask him (about my religion)?" He replied,
"Ask him in Madina."

H 862, Ch. 75, h 3

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Kufi from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Makfuf from 'Amr al-Ahwazi who has said the
following. "Abu Muhammad (a.s.) showed me his son and said, "This will
be your master (Leader with Divine Authority) after me."

H 863, Ch. 76, h 4

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Hamdan al-Qalanisi who has said the
following. "The narrator has said, 'I said to al-'Amri, "Has abu
Muhammad (a.s.) left this world?" He said, "He has left this world but
has appointed for (a Leader with Divine Authority) whose neck is like
this. He made a sign with his hand." (The hand gesture was an indication
of Imam's good health or perhaps age).

\*1. Al-'Amri was the first of the twelfth Imam's representatives.

H 864, Ch. 76, h 5

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah who has said the following. "(A letter) came
out from abu Muhammad (a.s.) when al-Zubayri, may Allah condemn him, was
killed. It said, "This is the recompense for those who disregard Allah
in the matters of the people whom He has appointed as His authority over
the cratures. He thought he could murder me and I do not have a son. How
did he experience the power of Allah in the matter.

A boy was born to him and he named him M.H.M.D. in the year two hundred
fifty six. (Abbreviation stands for the name of the Imam because of the
prohibition to pronounce it in a complete word.)."

H 865, Ch. 76, h 6

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Husayn and Muhammad, the sons of
Ali ibn Ibrahim from Muhammad ibn Ali ibn 'Abd al-Rahman al-'Abdi -from
the tribe of 'Abd Qays- from Daw' ibn Ali al-'Ijli from a man of the
people of Fars whose name he mentioned and who has said the following.
"I went to Samarra and devoted myself to the gate (of the house) of abu
Muhammad (a.s.). The Imam (a.s.) called me. I went to him and offered
greetings.

He asked me, " What brings you here?" The narrator has said that he
said, "My wish to serve you has brought me here." He then said, "(Help
us) as a devoted (security guard) at the gate.)" The narrator has said
that he then stayed at the gate with other servants. Once then he went
to buy the needed items from the market. He would inter the house
without formal permission when man were in the house. The narrator has
said, "One day I interred the house and he (The Imam (a.s.) was in the
men's quarters.

I heard some movement in the house and the Imam (a. s.) said to me,
"Stay wherever you are and do not move." I felt shy of going both inside
and outside. A maiden came out to me with something under a cover with
her. Then the Imam (a. s.) called me to come in. I went inside. He
called the maiden and she came back to him. He said to her, "Remove the
covering from (the face of) who is you.

She removed the cover from the face of a white a complexion beautiful
boy. The Imam (a.s.) then removed the covering further aside. There was
greenish black hair between his neck and belly. The Imam (a.s.) said,
"This is you master (Leader with Divine Authority). Then he ordered her
to take him and she obeyed. Ever since I did not see him until abu
Muhammad (a.s.) left this world."


