Chapter 77 : the List of the Names of Those Who Saw the Twelfth Imam (a.s.) H 866, Ch. 77, H 1
==============================================================================================

Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah and Muhammad ibn Yahya, all have narrated from
'Abdallah ibn Ja'far al-Himyari who has said the following. "I and
shaykh abu 'Amr, may Allah grant him blessings met each other before
Ahmad ibn Ishaq. Ahmad ibn Ishaq made an eye gesture to me to ask him
about the succeeding Imam.

I said to him, "O abu 'Amr, I like to ask you a question about a
matter, although, I do not any doubts in the question I am about to ask.
It is my belief and religion that the earth is not left without a
Leadership with Divine Authority except if would be just before the
coming of the Day of Judgment by forty days because in such a period
Leadership with Divine Authority will take away. The door to repentance
will be closed. No soul will benefit from the faith with which it has
not achieved any good deeds.

". . . the belief of any soul will be of no avail to it unless some
good deeds have been done with it, or it has been formed before the
coming of such a day. . ." (6:158) Such people would be of the evil
creatures of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, and it is
these people on whom the Day of Judgment will be established.

However, I wanted to strengthen my faith further just as Abrahm (a.s.)
asked his Lord, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, to show him how
would He will bring the dead to life again. He said, "When Abraham
prayed, "Lord, show me how you bring the dead back to life," the Lord
said, "Do you not yet believe?" Abraham replied, "I believe but want
more confidence for my heart.. ." (2:260)

Abu Ali Ahmad ibn Ishaq has inarrated to me from abu al-Hassan (a.s.)
who has said that he asked the Imam (a.s.), "With who should I deal and
ask questions about my faith and religion and whose words should I
accept (after you)?" The Imam (a.s.) said to him, "Al-'Amri is
trustworthy to me. Whatever he will deliver to you is from me. From me
he delivers.

Whatever he would say is from me, from me he saays it. Listen to him
and obey him because he is reliable and trustworthy.

Abu Ali has said to me that he asked abu Muhammad (a.s.) a similar
question and he said to him, "Al-'Amri and his son are trustworthy
people. Whatever they would deliver to you is from me from they
deliover. Whatevet they say to you from they say it. Listen to them and
obey them because they are trustworthy and reliable people. These are
the words of the Imams spoken about you.

Abu 'Amr fell down on his face in prostration and wept. Then he said,
"Ask what you need to ask." I said, "Did you see the succeeding Imam
(Leader with Divine Authority) after abu Muhammad (a.s.) ?" He said,
"Yes, by Allah , his neck was like that-making a gesture with his hand."
I then said, "Onne more question is left.

" He said, "Say, whaever is is it." I said, "What is his (succeding
Imam) name?" He said, "It is unlawful for you to ask about it. I do not
say this because abu left this world without a surviving son. His legacy
is distributed and is taken away by one who has no right in it. He is
(that prson).

His family is despersed and no one has the courage to learn about them
or recieve any thing from them. When the name is mentioned search for
him will take place. Have fear of Allah and abstain from it."
Al-Kulayni, may Allah grant his soul blessings, has said, ":A shaykh
from our people narrated this to me - his name I have forgotten- that
abu'Amr asked Ahmad ibn Ishaq a similar question and received a similar
answer."

H 867, Ch. 77, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il ibn Musa ibn
Ja'far, the most senior (in his time) of the descendants of the
Messenger of Allah, in Iraq has said the following. "I saw him (the
twelfth Imam (a.s.)) between the two mosque while he was a boy."

H 868, Ch. 77, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from al-Husayn ibn Rizqillah abu
'Abdallah 'Abdallah who has said the following. "Musa ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Qasim ibn Hamzah ibn Musa ibn Ja'far narrated to me that Hakima, the
daughter of Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) and the paternal aunt of his (the
twelfth's) father, said to me that she had seen him on the night of his
birth and afterwards."

H 869, Ch. 77, h 4

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Hamdan al-Qalanisi who has said the
following. "I asked al-'Amri, "Has abu Muhammad (a.s.) passed away?" He
said, "Yes, he has passed away but has left behind among you a person
(the succeeding Imam) whose neck is like this. He made a sign with his
hand (meaning thereby good health and beauty)."

H 870, Ch. 77, h 5

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Fath, Mawla (slave) of al-Zurari who
has said the following. "I heard abu Ali ibn Mutahhar saying that has
seen him (the twelfth Imam) and would describe his (Imam's) figure."

H 871, Ch. 77, h 6

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Shadhan ibn Nu'aym from
Ibrahim ibn 'Abdahu al-Naysaburi's house maid who has said the
following. "I was standing with Ibrahim on al-Safa' that he (the twelfth
Imam) came and stood higher than Ibrahim, took his Hajj guide book and
spoke to him about a number of things."

H 872, Ch. 77, h 7

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Ibrahim from
abu 'Abdallah ibn Salih who has said the following. "I saw him (the
twelfth Imam) near the Black Stone while people were clinging over it.
The Imam (a.s.) would say, "They are not commanded in this condition (
to kiss the Black Stone."

H 873, Ch. 77, h 8

Ali has narrated from abu Ali Ahmad ibn Ibrahim ibn Idris from his
father who has said the following. "I saw him (the twelfth Imam) after
the death of abu Muhammad (a.s.) when he had reached adolescence. I
kissed his hand and head."

H 874, Ch. 77, h 9

Ali has narrated from abu 'Abdallah ibn Salih and Ahmad ibn al-Nadr
from al-Qanbari, one of the descendants of Qanbar al-Kabir (great), the
slave of abuu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) who has said the following. "Once
Ja'far ibn Ali was mentioned and he reproached him. I said to him,
"Well, there is no one (in his family) besides him. Have you seen him?"
He said, "I have not seen him (the twelfth Imam) but other people have
seen him." I then asked, "Who has seen him?" He said, "Ja'far has seen
him twice and he has quite a story about it to tell."

H 875, Ch. 77, h 10

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from abu Muhammad al-Wajnani who has said
the following. "He narrated to me from a person who had seen him (The
Imam (a.s) in the words below. 'He (the twelfth Imam) came out the house
ten days before his father would leave this world and said, "O Lord, You
know that this is the most lovely place to me, had there been no
expulsion." Or that he spoke a similar expression."

H 876, Ch. 77, h 11

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ali ibn Qays from one of the
security men jalawiza, plural of jilwaz, from the (al-Sawad) rural area
of Iraq who has said the following. "I saw Sima'(a man) soon after the
death of abu Muhammad (a.s) in Surra man ra'a (a city in Iraq) who had
just broken the door (of the tenth Imam (a.s.).

He (the twelfth Imam) came out to him with an ax in his hand and said,
"What are you doing to my house?" Sima said, "Ja'far thinks that your
father has passed away with leaving any son behind. If it is your house,
I then get out." He went out of the house. Ali ibn al-Qays has said, "A
servant of the servants of the house came out to us and I asked about
this new. He asked me, "Who has told you a such thing.?" I said, "A
security man of rural area has told me." He then said, "Almost nothing
remains hidden from people."

H 877, Ch. 77, h 12

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Kufi from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Makfuf from 'Amr al-Ahwazi who has said the
following. "Abu Muhammad (a.s.) showed him (the twelfth Imam (a.s.) to
me and said, "This will be your master (Leader with Divine
Authority)."

H 878, Ch. 77, h 13

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Naysaburi
from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah ibn Musa ibn Ja'far from abu
Nasr Zarif, the servant (of abu Muhammad (a.s.) who has said that he saw
him (the twelfth Imam (a.s.) .

H 879, Ch. 77, h 14

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad and al-Hassan, two sons of
Ali ibn Ibrahim narrated to him in the year two hundred seventy nine
from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rahman al-'Abdi from Daw' ibn Ali al-'Ijli
from a man from the people of Fars whose name he mentioned has that abu
Muhammad (a.s.) him (the twelfth Imam (a.s.) ) to him.

H 880, Ch. 77, h 15

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from abu Ahmad ibn Rashid from one of the
people of al- Mada'in who has said the following. "I and a friend of
mine were in Makka to perform Hajj. When we arrived in 'Arafat (a famous
place) we found a young man sitting on the ground. He had a piece of
clothe on him for the lower part of the body called 'Izar and another
piece for the upper part of the body called Rida' wearing on his feet a
yellow footwear.

I estimated the 'Izar and Rida' for about a hundred and fifty Dinars.
No sign of journey was visible on him. A beggar approached us and we
turned him down. He then approached the young man and asked him for
help. He picked up something from the ground and gave it to him. The
beggar prayed for him. He assiduously prayed and prolonged it.

The young man stood up and disappeared from our eyes. We went closer to
the beggar and said, "Fie up on you! What did he gave you?" He showed us
pebbles of gold with marks on them. We estimated them to value about
twenty Mithqal (a certain unit of weight). I then said to my companion,
"Our master was with us and we did not know.

" We then went to searched him in the whole of station but we could not
find him. We then asked every one around the area where we had seen him
earlier, of the people of Makka and Madina and they said, "He is a
'Alawi (descendent of Ali (a.s.) young man and he performs Hajj every
year on foot."


**Chapter 78 : The Prohibition on Mentioning his Name H 881, Ch. 78, h
1**

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from the person whose name he mentioned
from Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-'Alawi from Dawud ibn al-Qasim al-Ja'fari who
has said the following. "I heard abu al-Hassan al-'Skari (a.s.) saying,
'The succeeding Imam after me will be al-Hassan (a.s.). How will it be
for you in the case of the succeeding Imam after the Imam succeeding
myself?" I then asked, " May Allah take my souls in service for your
cause, why will that be so?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "You will not see his
person and it will not be permissible for you to mention his name." I
then asked, "How then will we speak of him?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Say,
al-Hujja, (th Leader with Divine Authority) from the family of Muhammad
(s.a)."

H 882, Ch. 78, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from abu 'Abdallah al-Salihi who has said
the following. "After abu Muhammad had passed away certain individuals
of our community asked me to ask about the name (of the twelfth Imam
(a.s.) and his place. The following came as the reply. "If you would
guide them to the name they will publicize it. If they would know the
place they will show it to others."

H 883, Ch. 78, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad from ibn
Faddal from al- Rayyan ibn as-Salt who has said the following. "I heard
abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) say, when asked al-Qa'im (the one who will
establish the kingdom of All), 'He will not be seen physically nor his
very name will particularly be mentioned."

H 884, Ch. 78, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
al-Hassan ibn Mahbub from ibn Ri'ab from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has
said the following. "No one will pronounce the exact name of the in
charge of this task (Leadership with Divine Authority), except an
unbeliever."


