Chapter 79 : Precious Ahadith On Conditions of Disappearance From Public Sight of (the Twelfth Imam (a.s.) H 885, Ch. 79, H 1
=============================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Muhammad ibn Khalid
from the person who narrated to him from al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar, and
Muhammad ibn Yahya from 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from his father
from certain people of his friends from al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"People are nearer to Allah, Majestic is Whose mention, and He is more
pleased with them when the leader who possesses authority from Allah,
Majestic is Whose mention, will be out of their sight.

He would not publicly appear among them and they would not know his
place. Despite this they would know that the leader who possesses
authority from Allah, Majestic is Whose mention, is not invalidated nor
is His covenant as such. In such a case, they expect relief and
happiness through his reappearance in public mornings and evenings.

Allah's anger on His enemies is most intense when the leadership with
Allah's authority would be out of public sight and would not appear to
them. He (Allah) knows that his friends do not have doubts. Had it been
in His knowledge that they would doubt He would not have caused the
leader with His authority to disappear from public sight not even for a
blinking of an eye.

The reappearance of the Leader with Divine Authority will only take
place over the heads of the evil ones among the people."

H 886, Ch. 79, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has narrated from from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from Ali ibn Mirdas from Safwan ibn Yahya and al-Hassan ibn
Mahbub from Hisham ibn Salim from 'Ammar al-Sabati who has said the
following. "Once I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Is the worship in
secrecy with an Imam from you under the government of falsehood more
virtuous or the worship during the dominance and government of the truth
with an Imam from you in public sight more virtuous?'" The Imam (a.s.)
said, "O 'Ammar, charity in secrecy, by Allah, is more virtuous than the
charity given in public sight.

The same is true when you worship in secrecy with your Imam out of
public sight under the government of falsehood. (Worship) with your fear
from your enemies under the government of falsehood in peace time is
more virtuous than worshipping Allah, Majestic is Whose mention, during
the dominance of the truth distinctly under the government of the truth.
Worship with fear under the government of falsehood is not like the
worship in peace under the government of the truth.

You must know that if one of you would perform his obligatory prayer in
congregation maintaining secrecy from the enemy, in time and complete
it, Allah will record it as equal to fifty obligatory prayers performed
in congregation. If one of you would perform an obligatory prayer
individually maintaining secrecy from the enemy, in time and complete it
Allah, Majestic is Whose mention, will record it as equal in virtue to
twenty five obligatory prayers performed individually.

If one of you would perform an optional prayer in time and complete it,
Allah will record it as equal to ten optional prayers. If one of you
would do one good deed, Allah, Majestic is Whose mention, will record it
as equal to twenty good deeds. Allah, Majestic is Whose mention, will
grant multiple rewards for the good deeds of a believer among you when
he would make his deeds good.

Allah will grant him good reward in multiples for maintaining secrecy
in his religion, about his Imam (a.s.) and his own life and would
control his tongue. Allah, Majestic is Whose mention, is generous.

"I then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, you
have certainly given me courage to do good deeds and have given me much
exhortation. However, I love to know how would we today be of more
virtuous deeds than the followers of the Imam (a.s.) from you who would
be among them in public sight under the government of the truth while we
all have the same religion?

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "You have become the winner in this in
accepting the religion of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious,
in prayer, in fasting, in performing Hajj in every good deed, in
understanding and in the worship of Allah, Majestic is Whose mention, in
secrecy. (You have maintained) secrecy from your enemies when your Imam
does not live in public sight, but you obey him in patience on his side,
waiting and expecting the establishment of the government of truth while
you are afraid for your Imam and your own lives from the unjust kings.

You wait for and expect to receive your rights and the right of your
Imam that are usurped by unjust ones. They have denied your rights and
have forced you towards the worldly gains and means of living with
patience in performing your religious duties, your worship, your
obedience to your Imam and fear from your enemies. For this reason
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, will grant you the reward
for your good deeds in multiples.

May it be handsome and graceful for you. "I then said, 'May Allah take
my soul in service for your cause, what would your holiness say in the
following cases? Would our deeds as the companions of the al-Qa'im (the
one to establish the kingdom of Allah), when the truth would become
dominant, be more virtuous or now that we are your followers and obeying
you? Would our deeds be more virtuous now or those during the dominance
of the government of the truth and justice?

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Glory belongs to Allah. Do you not love to to
see Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, grant dominance to the truth
and justice in all lands, unit ideologies, bring together the differing
hearts so no one would disobey Allah, the Most Majestic,

the Most gracious, on His earth? (Do you not love to see) His laws are
practiced among His creatures and Allah would make the rights to return
where they belong and over come so nothing of the truth would be kept
secret for fear of any of the creatures? By Allah, O 'Ammar, no one of
you will die in the condition that you live now but that is more
virtuous than the conditions of the martyrs of Badr and 'Uhud. It is a
glad news for you all."

H 887, Ch. 79, h 3

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from from Sahl ibn Ziyad from ibn Mahbub
from abu 'Usamah from Hisham and Muhammad ibn Yahya from AHmad ibn
Muhammad from ibn Mahbub from Hisham ibn Salim from abu Hamza from abu
Ishaq who has said the following. "Trustworthy reliable men of the
companions of Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) have said that they heard Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.) say in one of his sermons as herein below.

"Lord, I know that knowledge will not be erased and its sources will
not discontinue altogether and You will not leave your earth without a
Leader with Your Authority over Your creatures. (A Leadership with Your
Divine Authority over your creatures) who lives among the people well
known but is disobeyed or is afraid and in obscurity so that proofs of
Your authority are not invalidated and your friends would be mislead
after You have granted them guidance.

Where, in fact, are they (friends of Allah) and how many are they? They
are very few in number but are of great respect before Allah, Majestic
is Whose mention. They follow the leaders (Imams) of religion. (They
follow) the guiding Imams leaders establish in their own selves the
discipline of the Imams and practice their way of life. In such
conditions knowledge will lead them to the true faith and their souls
then accept the call of the leaders of knowledge.

The statements of the leaders (The Imam (a.s.) that are difficult to
understand for others are soft an easy for them to understand. They feel
comfortable with what is frightening to those who reject (truth) and is
disregarded by the transgressors. They are the followers of the
scholars. They only accompany the worldly people in obedience to Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High, and His friends. They maintain secrecy to
be part of their religion for fear from their enemies. Thus, their souls
are clung to the high position (of the realm of existence).

Their scholars and their followers live quite and silently in the rule
of the government of falsehood waiting for government of the truth.
Allah will soon establish truth with His words and banish falsehood. Ha
ha , how fortunate it is for them due to their patience in the matters
of their religion in their peace time.

How strong is the desire to see them in the time of the dominance of
their government. Allah will soon bring us together with them in the
gardens Eden along with those of their parents, children and spouse who
had been of good deeds."


**Chapter 80 : The Issue of Disappearance (of the twelfth Imam (a.s.)
from Public Sight H 888, Ch. 80, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya and al-Hassan ibn Muhammad both have narrated from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Kufi from al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Sayrafi from
Salih ibn Khalid from Yaman al-Tammar who has said the following. "Once
we were in the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and he said to us, "The
in charge of this task (Leadership with Divine Authority) will disappear
from public sight.

At that time following one's religion would like wiping the thorns of
cactus plant with one's bare. The Imam (a.s.) made certain hand
gestures. Who among you is ready to hold in his hands a branch of
cactus? He then remained quite for a little while and then said, "The in
charge of this task (Leadership with Divine Authority) will disappear
from public sight. A servant (of Allah) must maintain piety before Him
and hold fast to His religion,"

H 889, Ch. 80, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Hassan ibn 'Isa ibn Muhammad ibn
Ali ibn Ja'far from his father from his grandfather from Ali ibn Ja'far
from his brother, Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"When the fifth descendant of the seventh (Imam) will disappear from
the public sight at that time for the sake of Allah, for the sake of
Allah protect your religion so no one can strip off of it. My son, it is
necessary that the in charge of this task (Leadership with Divine
Authority) must disappear from the public sight.

Even those who believe in it would turn away from their belief. It will
certainly be a trial from Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious,
to test His creature. Had your fathers and ancestors know any other
religion more correct than this they would certainly have followed it.

" I then asked, "My master, who is the fifth from the descendants of
the seven?" He said, "My son, you intelligence falls shorter to reach it
and your understanding remain narrower to accommodate it but if you
would live you will soon comprehend its being."

H 890, Ch. 80, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn abu
Najran from Muhammad ibn al-Musawir from al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has
said the following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say as herein below.
"Beware of publicity. By Allah, your Imam will disappear from the public
sight for years of your time and you will be sifted until the only thing
that could be said about his would be, "He is dead, killed, destroyed
and no one would know in which of the valleys he may have travelled.

The eyes of the faithful ones will weep for him and you will be turned
upside down just the ships face the rough seas and choppy waters. No one
will survive this except those from whom Allah has taken a covenant,
written faith in his hear and has supported him with an spirit from His
self. You will come to know of twelve similar flags and one would not be
able find which is which.

" The narrator has said, "I then wept and then said, "Whatshall we do?"
The Imam (a.s.) then looked to the sun (light) on the deck and said, 'O
abu 'Abdallah, our case, (Leadership with Divine Authority) is more
clear than the sun (light) on the deck."

H 891, Ch. 80, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from ibn Abi
Najran from Fadalah ibn Ayyub from Sadir al-Sayrafi who has said that he
heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following. "In the (case) of the
person in charge of this task (Leadership with Divine Authority, the
twelfth Imam (a.s.)) there is a similarity to Yusuf (Joseph) (a.s.)." I
then said, "Are you, O Imam, speaking of his life time or his
disappearance.

" The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.) then said, " What then is
it that certain swine-like people of this nation refuse to acknowledge?
The brothers of Yusuf were grand children of the prophets. They did
business with Yusus, conducted traded with him and spoke to him. They
were his brothers and he was their brother but they could not recognize
him until he said, I am Yusu and this is my brother.

" Why should then (certain people of) this condemned nation refuse to
accept if Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious, in a certain time
would do to the possessor of His authority what He did to Yusuf? Yusuf
was the in charge of Egypt and there was a distance of twenty eight days
of journey between him and his father.

If he wanted to inform him (his father) he could have done so. Jacob
and his sons journeyed after they heard the good new for nine days from
their Bedouin home to Egypt. Why then this nation would refuse to accept
if Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious, would do to the person
who possess His authority what He did to Yusuf? That he would walk in
their market place and step on their furnishings until Allah will grant
him permission to reappear in public as He did to Yusuf as they said,
"Are you really Yusuf?" He said, "Yes, Yusuf I am ."

H 892, Ch. 80, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from al-Hassan ibn Musa al-Khashshab from
'Abdallah ibn Musa from 'Abdallah ibn Bukayr from Zurarah who has said
the following. "The young boy will disappear from the public sight
before his rise (with divine power)" The narrator has said, "I then
asked, "Why (would that has to take place)?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "He
will be afraid.

" He pointed out with his hand to his midsection. Then he said, "O
zurara, "He is the one whose reappearance is expected. He is the one
whose coming to this world through birth will be doubted. Certain people
will say, "his father died without leaving any son behind." Certain
others will say, "Just before the dead of his father his mother
conceived him." Still others will say, "He was born two years before the
death of his father." He is the one whose reappearance is expected.

The fact is that Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, loves to
try and test the Shi'a (his followers). It in such a condition that
people of falsehood will raise doubts, O Zurara)."

The narrator has said, "I then said, May Allah take my soul in service
for your cause, if will be alive at the time of his rise with divine
power what should I do?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "O Zurara, if you will
live up to such time then say the following prayer. "O Lord make me know
You for if you would not make me know You I will not know Your
prophet.

O Lord, make me know Your Messenger, for if You would not make me know
your Messenger I will not know the one who possesses Your authority over
the creatures. O Lord make me know the one who possesses Your authority
over the creatures for if You will not make me know him I will stray
away from my religion." Then he said, "O Zurara, it is necessary that a
young boy must be murdered in the city of Madina.

" I then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, would
he not be killed in the hands of the army of al-Sufyani?" He said, "No,
but the army of the tribe of so and so will kill him. They will come to
inter Madina, thus, they take hold of the young boy and kill him. When
they will murder him in transgression, animosity and injustice they will
not then be given respite. At such time good news will be expected, if
Allah would so will."

H 893, Ch. 80, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad from Ishaq ibn
Muhammad from Yahya ibn al-Muthanna from 'Abdallah ibn Bukayr from
'Ubayd ibn Zurara who has said the following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) say as herein below. "People will miss their Imam (a.s.). He will
attain Hajj and see them but they will not see him."

894 - 7

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
who has said that Mundhir ibn Muhammad ibn Qabus narrated to us from
Mansur ibn al-Sindi from abu Dawud al-Mustariq from Tha'laba ibn Maymun
from Malik al-Juhanni from al-Harith ibn al- Mughirah from al-Asbagh ibn
Nubata who has said the following.

"Once I went to see Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and found him thinking and
he drawing lines on the ground. I then said, "O Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.)
I can see you thinking and drawing lines on the ground. Have you become
interested in it (worldly things) ?" He said, no, by Allah, I have not
become interested in it and the whole world not even for a day but I
thought about a baby from my descendants, the eleventh generation. He
will be al-Mahdi who will fill the earth with justice and fairness after
its being filled with suffering and injustice. He will disappear from
the public sight and in confusing conditions.

Certain people will deviate and others find the path of guidance." I
then asked, "O Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.), how long will be the duration of
confusion and the disappearance?" He said, "Six days or six months or
six years." I then said, "Will this really come to pass?" He said, "Yes,
just his creation will be necessary (so also will be his
disappearance).

However, O Asbagh, this is not your concern. Those people will of the
best in this nation with the best virtuous ones of this family (Ahl al-
Bayt)." I then said, "What then will happen afterwards?" He said, "Allah
will do whatever He will so decide. He possesses, Bada's, (seemingly
change of plan) wills, goals and ends."

H 895, Ch. 80, h 8

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hannan ibn Sadir from
Ma'ruf ibn Kharrabudh from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.
"We are only like the stars in the heavens. Whenever one star disappears
(from sight) another one comes in view until you will point out with
your fingers and make a gesture with your necks. Allah will cause your
star to disappear from your sight. The descendants of 'Abd al-Muttalib
will all look similar as such that one would not know which is which.
When your star will reappear then you must give thanks to Allah."

H 896, Ch. 80, h 9

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan
ibn Mu'awiya from 'Abdallah ibn Jabala from 'Abdallah ibn Bukayr from
Zurara who has said the following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say as
herein below. "The person who will rise to Divine power on earth will
disappear from the public sight before he will do so." I then asked,
"Why, will happen so?" He said, "He will be afraid." He then pointed to
his midsection meaning thereby being murderd."

H 897, Ch. 80, h 10

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from from his father from ibn abu "Umayr
from abu Ayyub al- Khazzaz from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the
following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) say, "I the person in charge
of this task (Leadership with Divine Authority) will disappear from
public sight you must not reject it."

H 898, Ch. 80, h 11

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn Yahya have narrated from Ja'far
ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan ibn Mu'awiya from 'Abdallah ibn Jabala from
Ibrahim ibn Khalaf ibn 'Abbad al-Anmati from Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has
said the following.

"Once I was in the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and there other
people also were present so I thought the Imam (a.s.) meant people other
thanme when he said, "By Allah, the in chrage of this task (Leadership
with Divine Authority) will disappear from your sight and this (case)
will become so obscure that people will say, "He is dead, destroyed or
no one knows in which valley has he traveled. You will be shaken just as
the ship is shaken in the rough seas and choppy water.

No one will remain safe except those in whose hear He has written faith
and has supported with an spirit from Him. You will raise twelve
identical flags so much so that one would not know which is which." The
narrator has said, "I then wept." The Imam (a.s.) asked, "what has
caused you to weep, O abu 'Abdallah ?" I then said, "May Allah take my
soul in service for your cause,

"How can I stop weeping when you say, "Twelve identical flags. . . "
The narrator has said that the place of gathering sun light had come in
through a whole. The Imam (a.s.) said, "Is this (sun light on the spot)
clear?" I said, "Yes, it is clear." The Imam (a.s.) said, " our case is
clear even more than this."

H 899, Ch. 80, h 12

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad from
al-Qasim ibn 'Isma'il al-Anbari from Yahya ibn al- Muthanna from
'Abdallah ibn Bukayr from 'Ubayd ibn Zurara from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
who has said the following. "Al-Qa'im (the one who rise with Divine
Authority) will disappear from the public sight twice. In one of them he
will attain Hajj. He will see the people but they will not see him."

H 900, Ch. 80, h 13

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad and Muhammad ibn
Yahya and others from Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Ali ibn Ibrahim from his
father, all three of them from ibn Mahbub from Hisham ibn Salim from abu
Hamza from abu Ishaq al-Sabi'Isma'il from a reliable one of the
companions of Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) once spoke the words herein below from the
pulpit in Kufa and I memorized them. "O Lord it is certain that You must
have a person with Your Authority on Yaour earth. Such persons would
come one after the other whith Your authority over the creatures who
would guide people in your religion and teach them your knowledge so
that your friends would not scatter.

They can be in the public sight but disobeyed or out of public sight
whose reappearance would be expected. Even though their persons will be
hidden form the people in peace time but their knowledge that has spread
before will not be hidden from the people. Their discipline will firmly
be established in the hearts of people and they will act up on them."

In another part of this sermon he has (a.s.) said, "Who would it be to
have such discipline?" For this reason knowledge becomes obscure when it
does not find any one to bear, protect and narrate it to others just as
they have heard it from the scholars and speak truthfully from them in
it. O Lord, I know that all the knowledge will not become obscure and
all of its sources will not banish. You will not leave your earth
without a person with Your authority over Your.

He may either live in public sight but is not obeyed and followed or is
afraid and hidden from public sight so that Your authority is not
invalidated and Your friends are not mislead after You have granted them
guidance. In fact, where are they and how many are they? They are very
few in number but of very great honor and respect before Allah."

H 901, Ch. 80, h 14

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Musa ibn
al-Qasim ibn Mu'awiya al-Bajali from Ali ibn Ja'far from his brother,
Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following about the words of
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. "Say, "Have you not thought
that if your water was to dry up, who would bring you water from the
spring?" (67:30).The Imam (a.s.) said, "When your Imam would disappear
from your sight then who will bring for you a new Imam?"

H 902, Ch. 80, h 15

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from abu Ayyub al-Khazzaz from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has
said the following. "When you would hear about the disappearance of your
companion (Leader with Divine Authority) from public sight do not reject
it."

H 903, Ch. 80, h 16

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al- Washsha' from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu Basir
from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "It is necessary
for the person in charge of this task (Leadership with Divine Authority)
to disappear from the public sight and in his disappearance form public
sight he must remain away from public. How good is Tayba, the city of
Madina, for dwelling and living with thirty people is not frightening
isolation."

H 904, Ch. 80, h 17

through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from al-Washsha'
from Ali ibn al-Hassan from Aban ibn Taghlib who has said the following.
"How would it be with you when an lagre scale attack would take place
between the two mosques. Thereafter, knowledge will become obscure as
the snake goes in to its hiding place.

The Shi'a (Muslims) will hold differences and one group will call the
group liars and one group will spit onto the faces of the aother." I
then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, there will
be nothing good in such conditions." The Imam (a.s.) said, "All goodness
will be there." He said it three times.

H 905, Ch. 80, h 18

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from his father, Muhammad ibn 'Isa from ibn Bukayr from Zurara
who has said the following. " AlQa'im (the one who will rise with Divine
Authority) will disappear before he will rise with divine power. He will
suffer fear. The Imam (a.s.) pointed to his midsection, meaning thereby
being murdered."

H 906, Ch. 80, h 19

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from ibn
Mahbub from Ishaq ibn 'Ammar who has said the following. "Abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) has said, Al-Qa'im ((the one who will rise with Divine Authority)
will have two disappearances. One of them will be for a short time and
the other for a longer time. No one would know his place during the
shorter disappearance except the special persons from his Shi'a. During
his longer disappearance no one will see him except very special persons
from his friends."
H 907, Ch. 80, h 20


Muhammad ibn Yahya and Ahmad ibn Idris have narrated from al-Hassan ibn
Ali al-Kufi from Ali ibn Hass'an from his paternal uncle, 'Abd al-Rahman
ibn Kathir from Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has said the following. "I heard
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, "The in charge of this task (Leadership with
Divine Authority) will disappear from the public sight twice. From one
them he will return to his family but in the other one it will be said
that he is dead or no one knows in which of the valleys has he
traveled." I then asked, "What shall we do in such conditions?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "If any one would claim to have such authority you then
should ask him about several things in which he must answer like him
(Leader with Divine Authority)." H 908, Ch. 80, h 21 Ahmad ibn Idris has
narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad from Ja'far ibn al-Qasim from Muhammad
ibn al-Walid al-Khazzaz from al-Walid ibn 'Uqba from al-Harith ibn Ziyad
from Shu'ayb from abu Hamza who has said the following. " Once I went to
see abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) and said to him, "Are you the in charge of
this task ((to rise with divine power)?" he said, "No, I am not he.

" I then asked, "Is he your son?" He said, "No, my son will be he
either." I then asked, "Will the son of your son be he?" He said, "No,
my grandson will not be he." I then asked will your great grandson be
he?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "No, my great grandson will not be he also.

" I the asked, "Who then be he?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "He will be the
one who will fill the earth with justice after its being filled with
injustice and cruelty. (He will come) at a time when the Imams will be
absent just as the Messenger of Allah was raised (to preach) when for a
long time there had come no messengers."

H 909, Ch. 80, h 22 Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from from Ja'far ibn
Muhammad from Musa ibn Ja'far alBaghdadi from Wahab ibn Shadhan from
al-Hassan ibn abu al-Rabi' from Muhammad ibn Ishaq from 'Umm Hani who
has said the following. "I asked abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali (a. s.)
about the meaning of the words of Allah.

"I do not (need to) swear by the orbiting (81:15) stars which are
visible during the night (81:16) and sit during the day,. . ". (81:17)"
She has said that then he said, "It refers to the Imam who will
disappear in the year two hundred sixty then he will rise like a
shooting star that shines during the dark night. If you would attain
such time it will brighten your eyes with happiness."

H 910, Ch. 80, h 23

A number of our people has narrated from Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah from Ahmad
ibn al-Hassan from 'Umar ibn Yazid from al-Hassan ibn al-Rabi '
al-Hamdani who has said that Muhammad ibn Istaq narrated to us from
'Usayd ibn Tha'laba from 'Umm Hani who has said the following. "Once I
met abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) and asked him about he meaning of
"I do not (need to) swear by the orbiting (81:15) stars which are
visible during the night (81:16) and sit during the day,. . ". (81:17)

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Al-Khunnas, refers to the imam who will
disappear in his time when the knowledge about him will be cut off from
people in the year two hundred sixty. Then he will reappear like a
shooting star in the dark night. If you will attain such time it will
light up your eyes with delight."

H 911, Ch. 80, h 24

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from certain ones of our people from
Ayyub ibn Nuh from abu a1-Hassan, the third, (a.s.) who has said the
following. "When your knowledge that is with you will banish then expect
glad news to emerge beneath your feet."

H 912, Ch. 80, h 25

A number of our people has narrated from Sa'd ibn 'Abdallah from Ayyub
ibn Nuh who has said the following. "I said to abu al-Hassan al-Rida
(a.s.), 'Isma'il hope that you will become the inchrge of this task
(Leadership with Divine Authority). Allah will drive it to your control
with the sword now that the pledge of allegiance is offered to you and
currency coins are printed in your name.

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "There has been no one from us with whom
letters had been exchanged, being pointed out with the gesture of
fingers, questions asked and properties delivered to him but that he was
murdered or died in his bed. (It will be as such) until Allah will raise
for this task (Leadership with Divine Authority) a young boy from us
whose birth place and upbringing would be unknown (to people) but not
his ancestors."

H 913, Ch. 80, h 26

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad and others have narrated from Ja'far ibn
Muhammad from Ali ibn al-'Abbass ibn 'Amir from Musa ibn Hilal al-Kindi
from 'Abdallah ibn 'Ata', fron abu Ja'far (a.s.) the following. "I said
to him, 'Your Shi'a (followers) in Iraq are many. By Allah, there is no
one like you in your family. Why do you not rise (for leadership)?" The
narrator has said that he said, "O 'Abdallah ibn 'Ata', you have began
to open your ears to silliness.

Yes, by Allah, I am not your companion (the one who will rise with
Divine Authority)." The narrator has said that I said to him, "Who then
is our companion (the one who will rise with Divine Authority)?

" The Imam (a.s.) then said, "Find out whose time and place of birth is
unknown to people, such person will be your companion (the one who will
rise with Divine Authority). There is no one among us towards whom
people point out their fingers so much and tongues will mention him so
much, but that has died in frustration or due sorrow for being
neglected."

H 914, Ch. 80, h 27

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from ibn abu 'Umayr from Hisham ibn Salim from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Al-Qa'im (the one who will rise with
Divine Authority) will rise and he will not be obliged to any one under
any covenant, agreement or oath of allegiance."

H 915, Ch. 80, h 28

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Faddal
from al- Hassan ibn Ali al-'Attar from Ja'far ibn Muhammad from Mansur
from the person he mentioned the following from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) "I
askked him, "If I passthe day and night and do not find Imam to follow
then what should I do?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "love those whom you love
and hate those whom you hate until Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious, will grant him permission to reappear."

H 916, Ch. 80, h 29

Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad has narrated from from Ahmad ibn Hilal who has said
that 'Uthman ibn 'Isa narrated to us from Khalid ibn Najih from Zurara
ibn A'yan that abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said the following. "It will be
necessary for the young boy to diappear from the public sight." I then
asked, "Why it will be necessary?" He said, "Because he will have fear-
he then pointed towards his midsection.

He will be the one whose reappearance will be intensely expected. It
will be he in whose being born people will have doubts. Certain people
will say, "His mother has just conceived him." Others will say, "His
father died but left no surviving son." Certain others will say, "He was
born two years before the death of his father.

" Zurara has said, "I said to him, 'What do you command me if will
attain that time?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Pray to Allah in the following
words. "O Lord, make me know You for if you would not make me know You I
will not know You.

O Lord, make me know Your prophet, for if You would not make me know
your Messenger I will never know him. O Lord, make me know the one who
possesses Your authority over the creatures for if You will not make me
know him I will stray away from my religion." Ahmad ibn Hilal has said,
"I had heard this hadith fifty six years ago."

H 917, Ch. 80, h 30

Abu Ali al-Ash'ari has narrated from Muhammad ibn Hassa'n from Muhammad
ibn Ali from 'Abdallah ibn al-Qasim from al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following about the words of Allah.
"When the trumpet is sounded," (74:8) From us there will be a triumphant
Imam. behind the cover. When will want to grant him permission to (rise
with Divine Authority and power He will place a dot in his heart. He
will then reappear in public sight and will rise (with divine power) by
the command Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High."

H 918, Ch. 80, h 31

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad from Ahmad ibn
al-Husayn from Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Muhammad ibn al-Faraj who has
said the following. "Abu Ja'far (a.s.) wrote to me, 'when Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, is angry with His creatures He keeps us away
from their neighborhood."


