Chapter 48 : the Imams (a.s.) Do Have the Knowledge of What Was and Will Be, and That Nothing Is Unknown To Them (a.s.) H 678, Ch. 48, H 1
==========================================================================================================================================

Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn Yahya have narrated from Muhammad
ibn al- Husayn from Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Ahmar from 'Abdallah ibn Hammad
from Sayf al-Tammar who has said that he with a group of Shi'a were in
the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) in Hijr and the Imam (a.s.) said
the following.

"An eye is watching over us." We then looked right and left and did not
see anyone. We said, "No eye is watching over us." The Imam (a.s.) said,
"I swear by the Lord of the Ka'ba. I swear by the Lord of the House." He
said so three times. "Had I been with Moses and al- Khidr I would have
told them that I had more than they did and would have informed them of
what they had no knowledge.

This is because Moses and al-Khidr were given the knowledge of what was
in the past and they were given the knowledge what will be in future or
what will exist up to the Day of Judgment while we have inherited all of
them from the Messenger of Allah as heirs."

H 679, Ch. 48, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Sinan
from Yunus ibn Ya'qub from al-Harith ibn al-Mughirah and a group of our
people, among whom were 'Abd al-A'la', abu 'Ubaydah and 'Abdallah ibn
Bishr al-Khath'ami, who have said that they heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
say the following.

"I certainly know what is the heavens and what is in the earth. I know
what is in paradise and what is the fire. I know what was there and what
will be there."

The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.) paused for a while and found
that what he had just said was much heavy for the audience then he
(a.s.) said, "I learned all of it from the book of Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, "In it
there is the clarification of all things."

H 680, Ch. 48, h 3

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Aabu Nasr from 'Abd al-Karim from Jama'a ibn Sa'd al-Khath'ami who has
said that al-Mufaddal was in the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.).
Al-Mufaddal asked the Imam (a.s.) the following. "May Allah,

take my soul in service for your cause, does Allah command (his)
servants to obey a servant and hide the news of the heavens from him?"
The Imam (a.s.) said, Allah is by far much honorable, kind and caring
towards His servants than to command them to obey a servant (of His) and
then hide form him the news of the heavens mornings and evenings."

H 681, Ch. 48, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from ibn Ri'ab from Durays al-Kunasi who has said that he heard abu
Ja'far (a.s.) the following to an audience of his companions.

"What an strange case is the case with a group of followers! They
acknowledge us as the Divine authority over themselves, accept us as
their Imam and say that obedience to us is obligatory just as is the
case with the Messenger of Allah.

They then destroy the veracity of their belief as such and dispute
against their own selves due to weakness of their hearts. They then
diminish our right and blame those whom Allah has granted evidence to
know us as it should be and the (abulity) to submit themselves to our
Divine authority. Do you not consider that how would Allah, the Most
Holy,

the Most High, make it obligatory to obey those who possess Divine
authority over his servants and then hide from them (people who possess
Divine authority) \`the new of the heaves and the earth? How would He
cut them off of the sources of knowledge that might come to them to
maintain their religion?" Humran then said to the Imam (a.s.),

"May Allah, take my soul in service for your cause, how would you
explain the case of the uprising of Ali ibn abu Talib, al-Hassan and al-
Husayn (a.s.)? They came out and rose up for the cause of Allah, Whose
mention is so Majestic. How much they suffered and how mercilessly were
they murdered at the hands of the rebels? They were defeated, murdered
and over powered." Abu Ja'far (a.s.) then said, "O Humran, Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High, had determined it on them. He had decreed,
approved and made it unavoidable though the voluntary manner.

He then allowed to take place. It, thus, happened with a pre-existing
knowledge that had come to them from the Messenger of Allah. Ali
al-Hassan and al-Husayn (a.s.) rose up for the cause of Allah with full
knowledge of the consequences and remained silent from us those who
remained silent. Had they, O Humran, when facing what Allah, the Most
Holy,

the Most High, made them to face and suffer defeat at the hands of the
rebels, asked Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, to remove their
suffering and would implore Him to destroy the government and kingdom of
the rebels He would have answered their prayers and would grant them
relief. In such case the destruction of the governments of the rebels
and the ending of their time would take place quicker than the dispersal
under a great pressure, of beads threaded together.

The suffering, O Humran, that befell them, because of the sins that
they might have committed or the punishment for their opposition to
Allah. It was because of the high marvelous position that Allah had
prepared and wanted them to reach. Do not let people's opinions take you
away from the right path."

H 682, Ch. 48, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Ali ibn Ma'bad from
Hisham ibn al-Hakam who has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) at Mina five hundred letters from al- Kalam (theology).

I asked the Imam (a.s.), "They say that he has said so and so." Then he
says, "You say so and so." I then said to the Imam (a.s.), "May Allah,
take my soul in service for your cause, "This is lawful and that is not
lawful.

I know that you are the authority in this and you are the most
knowledgeable person in it and this is al-Kalam." The Imam (a.s.) said
to me, "O poor, Hisham, Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, does not
require any duty from His creatures without first availing them all that
they need to comply with the command."

H 683, Ch. 48, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from 'Umar ibn
'Abd al-'Aziz from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from abu Hamzah who has that
he heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the following. "No, I swear by Allah, the
scholar (who possesses Divine authority) is never ignorant or
knowledgeable in something and ignorant of other things.

The Imam (a. s.) then said, "Allah, the Most Holy, Most High and Most
Gracious, is far exalted and above imposing the obedience of a servant
(of His) on the others and then hide the knowledge of things in the
heavens and on earth from him and then say, "Do not hide that from
him."


**Chapter 49 : Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, did not teach
anything to His Messenger but that He commanded him to teach such
knowledge to Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and he was his partner in Knowledge
H 684, Ch. 49, h 1**

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
ibn 'Udhayna from 'Abdallah ibn Sulayman from Humran ibn A'yan from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Once Jibril came to the
Messenger of Allah and brought him two pieces of pomegranates.

The Messenger of Allah ate one of them and broke the other one into two
pieces. He then ate one half and fed the other half to Ali (a.s.). The
Messenger of Allah said, "O my brother, do you know what those pieces of
pomegranates were?" He said, "No, I do not know." He then said, "The
first one was prophet-hood.

There is no share in it for you. The other one is knowledge in which
you're my partner." I then said, "May Allah keep you well, how was
that?" He would be his partner in it?" He said, "Allah did not teach any
knowledge but that He commanded him to teach it to Ali (a.s.)."

H 685, Ch. 49, h 2

Ali has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from ibn 'Udhaynah
from Zurarah from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Once Jibril brought from Paradise two pieces of pomegranate to the
Messenger of Allah and brought him two pieces of pomegranates. The
Messenger of Allah ate one of them and broke the other one into two
pieces. He then ate one half and gave the other half to Ali (a.s.) who
also ate it (a.s.). The Messenger of Allah said, "The first one that I
ate was prophet-hood. There is no share in it for you. The other one is
knowledge in which you are my partner."

H 686, Ch. 49, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from
Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Hamid from Mansur ibn Yunus from ibn 'Udhaynah from
Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said that he heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the
following. "Once Jibril descended to Muhammad (s.a) (and) brought two
pieces of pomegranate from Paradise.

Ali (a.s.) meet him and asked, "What (kind of ) pomegranate are those
in your hands?" He replied, "As to this one, it is the Prophet-hood in
which there is no share for you. As to this one, it is knowledge.

Then the Messenger of Allah broke it into two halves. He then gave one
half and the Messenger of Allah kept the other half and then said, "You
are my partner in it and I am your partner in it." The Imam (a.s.) then
said, "I swear by Allah that there was nothing of all the knowledge that
was taught to the Messenger of Allah but that he taught them to Ali
(a.s.) and thereafter knowledge was transferred to us. He then placed
his hand over his chest."


