Chapter 81 : the Criterion To Discern the Truthful and False Claims of Entitlement To Imamat (leadership With Divine Authority) H 919, Ch. 81, H 1
==================================================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim has narrated from his father from ibn Mahbub
from Salam ibn 'Abdallah and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan and Ali ibn Muhammad
from Sahl ibn Ziyad and abu Ali al-Ash'ari from Muhammad ibn Hassa'n.
All of them have narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from Ali ibn Asbat from
Salam ibn 'Abdallah al-Hashimi.

Muhammad ibn Ali said, "I heard him (Salam) narrate that abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) said the following.

"Once Talha and al-Zubayr sent a man called Khidash from the tribe of
'Abd a1-Qays, to Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.). Before he would leave they
spoke to him as herein below. "We are sending you to a man who and whose
family are known to us since a long time as magicians and soothsayers.
You are more trusted to us, than those in our presence, not to listen to
any of such thing from him.

You must debate him in our support until you will learn the well-known
matter. Bear in mind that his claim is the greatest that people can have
and it should not discourage you. Of the ways of his deceiving people
are his offering food, drinks, honey, oil and to speak with one
privately. Therefore, do not eat any food that he might offer, or drink
anything. Do not touch any of the honey or oil that he might present to
you and do not sit with him alone. Beware of all such things that might
come.

Go to him with the blessings of Allah. When you see him read 'Aya
al-Sakhra, verse 45 of chapter 7 and ask Allah to protect you against
his plots and the plots of Satan. When you will sit near him do not make
eye contacts and do not become friendly with him. Thereafter say to him,
"Two of your brethren in religion, the two sons of you uncle as
relatives urge you not to cut off (good) relations.

They say to you, "Do you not know that we left people just for you and
opposed our tribes people for your sake soon after Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious, took Muhammad (s,a) from this world? Now
that you have achieved a little status you have disregarded our honor
and destroyed our hopes. Despite this, you have already experienced our
ability to stay away from you and find a vast land before you. Those who
would isolate you from our relations and us were of much less advantage
to you and weaker than us to defend you. Now the dawn has made very
clear to those who have eyes.

It has come to our notice that you disrespect us and pray against us.
What causes you to do so? We had seen you to be the bravest of the
strong man of the Arabs. Has your condemning us become part of your
religion? You know well that it breaks you away from us."

When Khidash came to Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) he did exactly what they
had told him to do. When Ali (a.s.) looked at him, as he spoke under his
breath, the Imam (a.s.) laughed and said, "O brother, from 'Abd Qays,
pointing to him to sit closer to his place." Khidash, then responded,
"There is enough room around. I am here only to deliver a message to
you.

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "First you must eat, drink change your cloths
and use fragrance then deliver your message. O Qanbar, provide him
accommodation." He said, "I do not need any of the things you mentioned"
The Imam (a.s.) then said, "I want to speak to you privately." The man
said, "All secrets are public to me.

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "I urge you, on oath by Allah, Who is closer to
you than yourself, Who is between you and your heart, Who knows the
stealth looks of the eyes and what the hearts hide, (to tell the truth).
Had al-Zubayr spoken to you of all that I just offered and said to you?"
He replied, "By the Lord, yes, he did so." The Imam (a. s.) then said,
"I urge you, on oath by Allah, did he teach you certain words that you
were saying when you came to me?" He replied, "By the Lord, yes, he did
so.

" Imam Ali (a.s.) said, "It was 'Aya al-Sakhra, (7:45)." He said, "Yes,
that was it." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Read it." He read it and Ali would
repeat along with him, make him read again and correct his mistakes
until he read it seventy times.

The man asked, "What is the reason for Amir al-Mu'minin's (a. s.)
ordering me to repeat them seventy times?" The Imam (a.s.) then asked
him, "Do you feel you heart is comforted?" He said, "Yes, by the One in
Whose hand is my soul, it is." The Imam (a.s.) then asked, "Say what
they told you to say." He then informed him of their message.

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Say to them, "What you have spoken is sufficient
evidence against you, however, Allah does not guide the unjust people.
You think that you are my brothers in religion and the sons of my uncles
in family relations. I do not deny the family relation even though it
must be disregarded except what Islam requires to be continued.

Also it is your statement that you are my brothers in religion. If it
is true and you really mean it then you must know that you have already
distanced yourselves from the book of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious, and have disobeyed Him practically in the affairs of your
brother in religion. Otherwise, you have just lied and have created
false statements to claim that you are my brothers in religion.

You have also said that you did not join other people (against me) soon
after the Allah took Muhammad (s.a) out of this world. If what you did
was the for sake of the truth then you must know that you have just
destroyed that truth in your leaving me lately in disregard as your
brother in religion.

If you did not join the others for the sake of falsehood you will be
held responsible for such (sinful) matters that you have created.
Besides, the way you have mentioned your not joining others after the
death of Muhammad (s.a.) shows that you did so only for the sake of
worldly gains and greed. As you thought and these are your own words,
you have destroyed our hopes. I offer many thanks to Allah that you have
not blamed me in the matters of my religion.

On the other hand, what has distanced me from you is what has distanced
you from the truth and causing you to discard your oath of allegiance
(with me) from your necks just as a recalcitrant beast would discard its
harness.

He is Allah, my Lord. I do not consider anything to be like Him. Do not
say, "He is less advantageous and weaker to defend" for you may deserve
to be called polytheists along with hypocrisy. You have also said that I
am the bravest of the strong Arab men and that you run away from my
condemnation of you and my prayers against you.

You must consider that every event requires a certain action. When the
spears would cress cross, the mane of horses flutter and your lunges
swell inside you at such time Allah suffices me with a calm and perfect
heart. You have said that you dislike my praying to Allah against you.
You should not be disturb because of the prayers of a magician man who
belongs to a magician people that you think they are.

O Lord, do away with al-Zubayr in the worst way of getting killed and
make him bleed to death in mis-guidance. (O Lord,) make Talha know he is
humiliated and store for them even worse than this in the next life, if
they have done injustice to me, accused me falsely and have withheld
their testimony (in my support), disobeyed You and Your Messenger in my
affairs." The Imam (a.s.) then said, "Say Amen!" Khidash then said,
"Amen!"

Khidash then said to himself, "I have never seen a bearded man with a
more clear mistake than yours. A man who would carry a message in which
one part would contradict the other part. Allah has placed nothing in it
to hold it together. I, therefore, disdain both of them before Allah."

Ali (a.s.) asked him to go back and inform them of what he had said in
response. He said, "No, by Allah will not go to them until you will ask
Allah to return me back to you quickly and grant me the opportunity to
please Him in the matters of your support. He did so and very soon he
came back and afterwards was murdered when (supporting the Imam (a.s.)
on the day of Jamal. May Allah grant him blessing.

H 920, Ch. 81, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad and abu Ali al-Ash'ari from Muhammad ibn Hassa'n, all of them from
Muhammad ibn Ali, Nasr ibn Muzahim from 'Amr ibn Sa'id from Jarrah ibn
'Abdallah from Rafi' ibn Salama who has said the following.

" On the day of al-Nahrawan I was in the presence of Ali ibn abu Talib
(a. s.). As we were sitting with the Imam (a.s.) a horse man approached
and said, "al-salamu 'Alayka ya Ali (peace be with you O Ali)." Ali
(a.s.) said, "'Alayka al-salam (with you also be peace). May your mother
weep over your dead body, why did you not addressed me as the Leader
with Divine Authority?" He said, "Yes, I like to inform you about it. I
was present in al-Siffin when the truth was on your side. However, when
approved the arbitrator to settle the warring parties I disregarded you
and I called a polytheist.

Ever since I do not know where should I turn to pledge allegiance to
the Leadership with Divine Authority. If I can find a way to know
whether you are on the right side or on wrong side it will be better for
me than the world and all that is therein." Ali (a.s.) said to him, "May
your mother weep on your dead body. Come and stand up near me I will
show the signs of the right and the signs of the wrong side. As the man
stood near him, a horse man approached running until he came to Ali
(a.s.) and said, "O Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.), I have the glad news of
victory. May Allah make it brightness to your eyes (out of joy). It is
certain, by Allah, that all men of the enemy are killed." Ali (a.s.)
asked him, "Did it happen before or after their crossing the river?" He
said, "Before or after crossing.

" Ali (a.s.) said, "You have lied. I swear by the One Who makes the
seed to germinate and causes the fetuses to develop, that they (enemy)
will never cross the river until they are all killed." The man has said
that it added to my understanding." Another horse man came running and
said just as what the one before had said and Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.)
refused to accept his words as those of the one before. The man who had
doubts about Ali (a.s.) has said that he wanted to attack Ali (a.s.)
with his sword and chop his head with the sword. Two other men came
running on horses soaked in sweet.

They said, "May Allah brighten your eyes with the joy of victory O Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.). We have the glad news of victory for you. It is
certain, by Allah, thatall of the people are killed." Ali (a.s.) then
asked, "Did it happen before or after their crossing the river?" They
said, "It happened before their crossing the river. When they tried to
cross it and water reached up to the mane of their horses they turned
back and there they all were killed." Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) said, "You
have spoken the truth." The man then climbed down his horse and held
Amir al-Mu'minin's (a.s.) hand and feet and kissed them." Ali (a.s.)
said, "This is the sign (my being on the right side for you) for you."

H 921, Ch. 81, h 3 Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from abu Ali Muhammad
ibn 'Isma'il ibn Musa ibn Ja'far from Ahmad ibn al-Qasim al-'Ijli from
Ahmad ibn Yahya, also known as Kurd from Muhammad ibn Khudahi from
'Abdallah ibn Ayyub from 'Abdallah ibn Hashim from 'Abd al-Karim ibn
'Amr al-Khath'ami from Hababa al-Walibiyyah who has said the
following.

"I saw Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) in the (market) place of the elite
forces with a two pronged whip in his had. With it he would scare the
sellers of inedible fish such as eel, moray and angler etc., and say, "O
sellers of metamorphosed Israelites and the army of the descendants of
Marwan, do not sale (inedible fishes)." At this time Frat ibn Ahnaf
camme to him and said, "O Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.), 'What is the army of
the descendants of Marwan?" She has said that Ali (a.s.) said to him,
"They groups of people who shaved their beards and crinkle their
mustache and then they were metamorphosed.

" I had not heard any one speak better than him, I followed him without
missing his traces until he sat down at an open space of the Mosque (of
kufa). I then asked him, "O Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.), what are the signs
of Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority) may Allah grant you
blessings? " She has said that he said, "Bring to me that pebble." He
pointed with his hand. I then got the pebble for him and he set for me
his seal on it.

He then said to me, 'O Hababa, if any one would claim to be the Imam
(Leader with Divine Authority) and can set his seal as you just saw then
acknowledge that he is the Imam that must be obeyed. The Imam does not
miss what he would want." She has said, "I then left him until Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.) was taken out of this world. Thereafter I went o
al-Hassan (a.s.) who was sitting in the place of Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.)
and people around would ask him questions. He said to me, "O Hababa
al-Walibyya." I said, "Yes, my master." He then said, "Give to me what
is with you." I then gave it to him.

He set on it (his seal) just as Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) had done. She
has said, "Afterwards I went to al-Husayn (a.s.). He was in Mosque of
the Messenger of Allah. He welcomed warmly and then said to me, "There
is no doubt that in the proof ( to support the true Imam) there is
already enough proof for what you want. Do you want the proof to know
the Imam?" I said, "Yes, my master." He then said, "Bring to me what
have with you." I gave him the pebble and he printed (his seal) on it.

She has said that afterwards I went o Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) but at
that time I had become very old and my hands were shaky. I could count
one hundred thirteen year of my lifetime. I found him in Ruku' (kneeling
in prayer) and Sujda (prostration) or busy in some form of worship. I
became despaired about the proof (of Leadership with Divine Authority).
He pointed out with his forefinger and my youth came back. She has said
that she asked, "My mater, how much of the world is passed and how much
is left?" He said, " Of how much is passed yes (I can tell) but not of
how much is to come.

" She has that he then said to me, "give to me what is with you." I
then gave him the pebble and he printed on it (his seal) for me.
Thereafter I went ot abu Ja'far (a.s.) and he printed on it (his seal)
for me. Then I went ot abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). He printed on it (his seal)
for me. Then I went to abu al-Hassan Musa (a.s.) and he printed (his
seal) for me. Then I went to al-Rida and printed for me." According to
abu Muhammad Hababa lived thereafter an other nine moths."

H 922, Ch. 81, h 4

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah and Ali ibn Muhammad have narrated from
Ishaq ibn Muhammad al-Nakha'Isma'il from abu Hashim Dawud ibn al-Qasim
al- Ja'fari who has said the following. "Once I was in thepresence of
abu Muhammad (a.s.) that permission was requested for a man from Yemen
to see the Imam (a.s.).

A chubby, tall and heavy man then came in and greeted the Imam with the
greeting for Wilaya, the Leader with Divine Authority and received the
acceptance response. The Imam (a.s.) asked him to have a sit and he sat
just next to me. I then said to myself, "I wish not to have been so
close to him." Abu Muhammad (a.s.) then said, "This is of the children
of the Arab lady for whom my ancestors had been printing their seals on
a pebble for her and the print would take place. He has brought it with
him and wants me to print my seal on it also. He then asked the man to
give it to him. The man took out a pebble and on one side of there was a
smooth space.

Abu Muhammad (a.s.) then took it, brought his seal out, printed on it
and the print took place. Even now it is as if I see the print of his
(al-Hassan ibn Ali's) seal on the pebble it. I then said to the man from
Yemen, "Had you ever seen him (abu Muhammad (a.s.) before?" He said,
"No, by Allah, I had always was anxious to see him until at this time a
young man came to me whom I had not seen before and said, 'Stand up and
come in and I came in.

" The man from Yemen then left saying, "May Allah's grace and blessings
be with you people of Ahl al-Bayt whose each generation is just the
other generation. I testify before Allah that it is obligatory to
preserve your rights just as it was the case with Amir al-Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.) and the Imams after him, may Allah grant all of them blessings."
He then left and thereafter I never saw him. Ibn Ishaq has said that abu
Hashim al-Ja'fari has said, "I asked him his name.

He said, "My name is Mahja' ibn al-Salt ibn 'Aqaba ibn Sam'an ibn
Ghanim ibn 'Umm Ghanim. She was the Arab lady from Yemen that had the
pebble on which Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) had printed his seal and also
his descendants up to the time of abu al-Hassan (a.s.)."

H 923, Ch. 81, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from Ali ibn Ri'ab from abu 'Ubayda and Zurara from abu Ja'far (a.s.)
who has said the following. "When al-Husayn (a.s.) was martyred,
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiya asked Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) for a private
meeting. In the meeting he said, "O son of my brother, you know that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a) delivered the task of al-Wasiyya, (the
executor-ship of the will) and al-Imamat, (Leadership with Divine
Authority) thereafter it was delivered to al-Hassan (a.s.) and then to
al-Husayn (a.s.). Your father, may Allah be pleased with him has been
murdered, may Allah grant blessing up on his soul, and he did make any
will.

I am your uncle and equal in status to your father and I am a son of
Ali (a.s.). Because of being older in age I am more deserving of the the
position of Imamat considering that you are younger than me. Therefore,
you should not dispute with me about al-Wasiyya, the will and Imamat,
leadership and should argue with me about it." Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.)
said, "O uncle, be pious before Allah and do not claim in what you have
no right. I advise not to be of the ignorant people. In fact, my father
(a.s.), O my uncle, appointed me as the executor of his will before his
leaving for Iraq. He made such covenant with me just an hour before his
becoming a martyr.

This is the Armament of the Messenger of Allah with me. You then should
not dislocate them. I am afraid for you of a shorter life and quandary
of conditions. Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has placed
al-Wasiyya, and Imamat in the descendants of al-Husayn (a.s.).

If you would like to know it we can go near the Blackstone and fro
judgment and ask it about the issue." Abu Ja'far (a.s.) has said that
the issue came up between them in Makka and they went near the
Blackstone. Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) said to Muhammad al-Hanafiya, "You
begin first and pray to Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, and
ask Him to make the Blackstone speak to you and then ask your
question.

" Muhammad then pleaded in his prayer and asked Allah and then ask the
Blackstone about the disputed issue but there was no answer. Ali ibn al-
Husayn (a.s.) said, "O uncle, had you been the Executor of the will and
the Imam it would have answered your question. Muhammad then said, "Now
you pray to Allah, O son of my brother and ask your question. Alin ibn
al-Husayn (a.s.) prayed to Allah for what he wanted then addressing the
Blackstone said, "I ask you for the sake of the One Who placed the
covenant of the prophets in you, as well as the covenant of the
executors of the will and the covenant of all the peole.

You must tell us who the Wasiyy and Imam after al-Husayn (a.s.)?" The
narrator has said that the Blackstone began to shake so much that it
almost camme out of its place. Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious, then made it to speak in clear Arabic language and said, "O
Lord, al-Wasiyya and Imamat after al-Husayn (a.s.) ibn Ali is for Ali
ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali aibn abu Talib and ibn Fatima (a.s.) daughter of
the the Messenger of Allah." The narrator has said that Muhammad Ali
(a.s.) returned back and he acknowledged Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) to be
his Wali (Leadership with Divine Authority)."

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn 'Isa from
Hariz from Zurara from abu Ja'far (a.s.) the same hadith.

H 924, Ch. 81, h 6

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Ali who has said that Sama'a ibn Mihran narrated to me that
al-Kalbi al-Nassaba narrated to him the following. " I went to Madina
and I had no knowledge of this matter (Leadership with Divine Authority,
Imamat ). I went to the Mosque where I found a group of people of
Quraysh. I asked them, "Can you give me information about the scholar of
this family?" They said, "'Abdallah ibn Hassan is the one.

" I went to his house and asked permission to see him. A man came out
of the house that I thought was his slave. I said to him, "Ask your
master to grant me permission to see him." He went inside and then came
out saying come in." I entered the house and found an old man devoted to
worship and hard work. I greeted him and then he asked, "Who are you?"I
then said, "I am a Kalbi (from the tribe of Kalb) and a genealogist."

He then asked, "What is it that you need?" I said, "I have come to ask
certain questions." He then asked, "Have you visited my son Muhammad?" I
said, "I have began with you." Then he said, "you may ask your
questions." I then said, "Explain to me the case of a man who says to
his wife, "You are divorced as many times as the number of stars in
heavens." He said, "It becomes irrevokeable at the beginning of the
month of Jawza' (the third moth of a particular calendar). The rest are
sins and penalties for him." I said to myself, "This is one.

" Then I said, "What does the honorable Shaykh say about rubbing over
the shoe for Wuzu' (a formal washing before prayer)?" He said, "A
virtuous group would wipe over the shoe but we, Ahl al- Bayt do not
wipe.

" I then said to myself, " This is the second." I then asked, "What do
you say about consuming eel for food, is it edible or not edible?" He
said, "It is lawful, but we, Ahl al- Bayt leave it alone." I then said
to myself, "This is the third." Then I said, "What do you say about
drinking al-Nabidh, a certain kind of wine?" He said, "It is lawful but
we, Ahl al-Bayt do not drink it." I then left him saying to myself,
"This group of people lie about this Ahl al- Bayt (family)."

I then entered the Mosque and I looked at the group of people of
Quraysh (a particular tribe) and other people. I greeted them and said
to them, " Who knows this Ahl al-Bayt (family)?" They said, "'Abdallah
ibn al-Hassan knows." I then said, "I just visited him and did not find
anything with him." One person from the people raised his head and said,
"Go to Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.). He is the most knowledgeable one in
this Ahl al-Bayt (family).

" Certain individuals blamed that person for what he said. I then said,
"People out of jealousy did not tell me about him when first I asked
them." I then said, "What is the matter with you! He is the one I want."
I then walked until I reached his house. I knocked the door and his
slave came out and asked me, "Come in O brother from the tribe of Kalb."
He, by Allah, amazed me. I went inside but I was shaken. Up on looking I
found a gentleman on the prayer rug with no pillow or blankets.

He began to talk after I saluted him, "Who are you?" I then said to
myself, "Glory to Allah, "His slave at the door said to me, "O brother
from the tribe of Kalb, come in and his master asks me, "Who are you?" I
then said, "I am a Kalbi, a genealogist." He then tapped his forehead
and said,

"The devious people lie about Allah and they go stray faraway and
suffer a great loss. O brother from Kalb, Allah, the Most Majestic, the
Most gracious, says, "To each of the tribes of 'Ad, Tham7 d, the
settlers around the well and many generations in between," (25:38) Can
you tell their genealogical relations?" I said, "No, May Allah take my
soul in service for your cause." Then he said, "Can you tell your own
genealogical relations?" I said, "Yes, I so and so son of so and so and
I went on and on." He said, "Hold it there. It is not the way you say.
What is the matter with you! Do you know who so and so son of so and so
is?" I said, "Yes, so and so son of so and so." He said, " so and so son
of so and so was a Kurdish shepherd. So and so Kurdish shepherd was on
the mountain of the people of so and so.

He went to so and so the wife of so and so that lived on the mountain
on which he grazed his sheep. He feed her something and overwhelmed her.
She gave birth to so and so and so and so son of so and so. And so and
so daughter of so and so and so and so. Then he said, "Do you know these
names?" I said, "No, May Allah take my soul in service for your cause,
if you would not mind allow us to disregard this." He then said, "It is
because you said, then I said." I then said, "I will not repeat.

" He said, "Therefore, we will not repeat. Ask of what you have come
for." I then said, "Explain to me the case of the man who has said to
his wife, "You are divorced as many times as the number of the stars of
the heavens." He said, "What is the matter with you! Have you not read
the chapter, Al-Talaq (divorce)?" I said, "Yes, I have read it." He then
said, "Read it." I then read, ". . .divorce them at a time after which
they can start their waiting period.

Let them keep an account of the number of the days in the waiting
period. . . ."(65:1) He then said, "Do you find any of the stars of the
heavens there?" I said, "No, I do not find." Then I asked, "A man has
said to his wife, "Your are divorced three times." He said, "You must
refer it to the book of Allah and the sunna of His Prophet (s.a)." Then
he said, " Divorce is only valid in a menses free period of time in
which no carnal relation may have taken place between the wife and
husband and there must be two acceptable witnesses present." I then said
to myself, "This is one." Then he said, "Ask." I then said, "What do you
say about rubbing over the shoe for Wuzu'?

" He smiled and said, "On the Day of Judgment when Allah will return
everything to its thing and returned the skin to the sheep then you will
see the rubbing people where their Wuzu' will go." I then said to
myself, "This is the second." He then turned to me and said, "Ask." I
then said, "Tell me about eel, is it lawful to consume it for food?" He
said, "Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, caused certain group
of Israelites to metamorphose. Whatever from them was taken by the ocean
turned into eel, such as hagfish, moray and anglefish etc., and whatever
from them was left on land they turned into swine, and wild cats and
lizards etc.," I then said to myself, "This is the third." He then
turned to me and said, "Ask.

" I said, "What do you say about al-Nabidh, (extracts from dates)?." He
said, "It is lawful'. I said, "We mix with it al-'Akr (residue) and
other things and drink." He said, " Shu, shu, that is foul smelling
wine." I then said, May Allah take my soul in service for your cause,
what kind of Nabidh do you mean?" He then said, "Once the people of
Madina complained to the Messenger of Allah about a change in their
water and their feeling ill. He ordered them to make Nabidh. Thus, a man
would ask his servant to throw a handful or so of dates in their
water-sack. They would then drink from it and use for cleansing.

" I then said, "How many pieces of date would come in a handful?" He
said, "As much as a handful could be." I then said, "One handful or
two?" He said, " Perhaps one or perhaps two handfuls." I then said, "How
big would have been the sack?" He said, "Big enough for a forty to
eighty or more." I then said, "Is it Artal (a certain measurement)?" He
said, "Yes, Artal (about three hundred gram each) according to
measurement of Iraq." Al- Kalbi has said that he (a.s.) left and I also
came out and I would tap my one hand with the other and say to myself,
"If there is anything he it is." Ever since al-Kalbi would follow the
religion of Allah with the love of Ahl al-Bayt until he died."

H 927, Ch. 81, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
abu Yahya al- Wasiti fromt Hisham ibn Salim who has said the following.
"We were in Madina after abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) left this world. People
had gathered around 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far thinking that he was the in
charge of this task (Leadership with Divine Authority) after his
father.

I and Sahib al-Taq went to see him while people were around him because
of a hadith that they would narrate from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) that said,
"The in charge of the task (Leadership with Divine Authority) will the
eldest son if he would not suffer any defects. We went to see and ask
him what we used to ask his father. We asked him about Zakat to find out
on how much property it becomes due. He said, "It becomes as five on
every two hundred." We askked, "What if it would one hundred?" He said,
"It will be two and a half.

" We then said, "By Allah, al-Murji'a sect does not say so." The
narrator has said that he raised his hands to the sky and said, "By
Allah, I do not know what the al-Murji'a group says." The narrator has
said that we then left his with a feeling of loss and did not know where
to go. I and abu Ja'far al-Ahwal were together. We sat down on an street
corner of the city of Madina weeping and confused and did not know where
and to who should we go saying to each other,

"Where would go now. Should we go al-Murji', al-Qadria, (belief in
predestination), to al-Zaydiaya sect, al- Mu'tazila or the al-Khawarij
sect?" at this time I saw a gentleman who I did not know, gesture
towards me with his hand. I became afraid and though he might be a spy
of the spies of abu Ja'far al-Mansur. He had his spies in Madina to see
who the Shi'a would follow abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and then they would cut
his neck off. I was afraid thinking that he might be one of them. I then
said to al-Ahwal, "Get away from here because I am afraid for both of
us. He only waants me and not you. Move away from mme not to get
destroyed and become an instrument against yourself.

He moved a little away and I followed the gentleman. I did so thinking
that will not beable to set myself free form him. I continued following
him. I had become certain of dying until we reached the door of abu
al-Hassan (a.s.). He then left me there and went away. At that time the
servant came out of the house and said, "Come inside, may Allah grant
you blessings." I went in and found abu al-Hassan (a.s.) therein.

He begun talking to me, "Not to al-Murji'a, or al-Qadria, or al-Zaydiya
nor to al-Mu'tazila or al-Khariji group, but come to me, come to me." I
then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, has your
father left this world?" He said, "Yes, he has passed away. I then
asked, " Did he die a natural death?" He said, "Yes, he did so." I then
ask, "Who will be for us after him?" He said, "If Allah would will to
guide you he will do so." I then said, "May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, 'Abdallah thinks that he is the one after his
father." He said, "'Abdallah wants that Allah not be worshipped.

" I then said, May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, who
will be for us after him?" He said, "If Allah would will to guide you he
will do so." I then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your
cause, is that you?" He said, "No, I do not say that to you." He has
said that I then said to myself, "Perhaps I could not ask in the right
way." Then I said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, is
there any Imam above you?" He said, "No, there is no Imam above me.

" He has said that then something struck my mind in away that no one
would know except Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. It was a
feeling of his greatness and awe greater then what I would feel in the
presence of his father. Then I said, "May Allah take my soul in service
for your cause, may I ask what I used to ask your father?" He said,
"Ask, you will have the answers but do not make them public. If you
would do so it will be slaughtering." I asked him and found him to be
like an ocean of knowledge there does not dry up. I then said, "May
Allah take my soul in service for your cause, your Shi'a, followers and
the followers of your father are in loss and false guidance.

Thus, can I meet them and call them to you? I will keep it secret." He
said, "If you will find intelligent people inform them but make him to
promise secrecy. If they would make it public it will be slaughter, he
pointed with his hand to his throat. He has said that I than left him
and met abu Ja'far al-Ahwal. He asked me, "What is behind you." I said,
"It is guidance." I then informed him of the whole story. We then met
al- Fudayl and abu Basir. They both went to see him, heard his words,
asked him and became certain of his Imamat (Leadership with Divine
Authority).

Thereafter we met people in groups. Whoever would go and see him he
would become certain of his Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority)
except the tribe of 'Ammar and his companions. 'Abdallah was left alone
and no one would go to see him except a very few people. When he found
out about the conditions he said, "What is the matter with the people?"
They told him ('Abdallah) that Hisham has prevented people from visiting
you." Hisham has said that he('Abdallah) made many people to ambush and
beat me up"

H 926, Ch. 81, h 8

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn so and so al-Waqifi ( a certain sect) who has said the
following. "I had a son of uncle. He wascalled al- Hassan ibn 'Abdallah
. He was Zahid (restricted himself from worldly pleasures). He was the
foremost in worship of his time. He king would also observe cautions due
to his assiduousness and seriousness in the matters of religion.

He would even demand the king to respect and maintain the lawful and
the unlawful rule with strictness. The king would bear with him due to
his virtuousness. It continued as such every day until one day abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) went to him while he was in the mosque and called him
with a hand gesture. When he came near abu al-Hassan (a.s.). The Imam
(a.s.) said, "O abu Ali, I like your practice very much and it makes me
happy. However, you do not have any understanding. You must seek
understanding." He said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your
cause, what is understanding?" he said, "Go and try to understand and
learn hadith.

" He then asked, "From who must I learn hadith?" The Imam (a.s.) said,
'Learn from the law specialist of Madina. Then read them before me to
check." The narrator has said that he went, wrote (some hadith), came
back and read them before him. The Imam (a.s.) deleted all of them and
said to him go and learn how to understand." The man was very serious in
his religion. He kept watching abu al-Hassan (a.s.) until one day he
went out to find something that was missing and the man met him on the
way. He said, May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, I will
debate you before Allah unless you teach me how to have understanding."
The Imam (a.s.) explained to him about Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) and had
happened after the the Messenger of Allah.

He also explained to him about the two men and he agreed. Then he
asked, "who was (Leadership with Divine Authority) after Amir
al-Mu'minin (a.s.)?" He said, "al-Hassan (a.s.) was the (Leadership with
Divine Authority), then al-Husayn (a.s.). He mentioned (the Imams one
after the other) up to his own self and remained silent." The narrator
has said that the man then asked, "May Allah take my soul in service for
your cause, who is (Leadership with Divine Authority) today?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "were I to tell you would then accept?" he said, "May Allah
take my soul in service for your cause, yes, I will accept.

" He sad, "I am the one (Leadership with Divine Authority)." He then
said, "Is there any evidence I can use as proof?" The Imam (a.s.) said,
"Go to that tree. He pointed out with his hand to 'Umm Ghaylan and say
to it, "Musa ibn Ja'far says, 'Come to me." He has said that I then went
to the tree and saw it, by Allah, it cutting the earth a real cut until
it stood before him. Then he made a gesture and it returned." The
narrator has said that he acknowledged the his Imamat (Leadership with
Divine Authority). He remained silent and devoted himself in worship and
no one thereafter saw him speak."

Muhammad ibn Yahya and Ahmad ibn Muhammad have narrated from Mutammad
ibn al- Hassan from Ibrahim ibn Hashim a similar hadith.

H 927, Ch. 81, h 9

Muhammad ibn Yahya and Ahmad ibn Muhammad have narrated from Muhammad
ibn al- Hassan from Ahmad ibn al-Husayn from Muhammad ibn at-Tayyib from
'Abd al-Wahhab ibn Mansur from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-'Ala' who has said
the following. "I heard from Yahya ibn Aktham, the judge in the city of
Samarra, Iraq his words herein below. It happened only after serious
debates, conversations, maintaining good relations and asking him about
the knowledge of the members of the family of Muhammad (s.a). He said,
"Once when was walking around the grave of the Messenger of Allah I saw
Muhammad ibn Ali al-Rida (a.s.) also walk around the grave of the
Messenger of Allah.

We debated over the issues that I needed to understand. He explained
them to me. I then said, "By Allah, I want to ask you a question, but I
swear by Allah that I feel shy." He then said, "I can tell you what you
want to ask before you will ask me about it. You want to ask me about
Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority)." I then said, "By Allah, this
is it?" He said, "I am he." I then asked, "Is there any evidence and
proof to support it?" He had a staff in his hand and it spoke, "My
master certainly is the Imam of this time and he is the Hujja (Leader
with Divine Authority)"

H 928, Ch. 81, h 10

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad, or a person
other than him from Ali ibn al-Hakam from al-Husayn ibn 'Umar ibn Yazid
who has said the following. "Once I went to see Ali al-Rida (a.s.). At
that time I was a memebr of Waqifi sect. My father had asked his
(al-Rida's) father seven questions. He had replied to six of them and
had refrained from answering the seventh. I said to my self, "By Allah,
I will ask him what my father had asked his father if his answers will
like those of his father it will serve as a good proof. I asked him
those questions and hiis answers were just like the answers of his
father to my father in the six questions.

He did answer any more questions beyond six even not a letter 'waw' or
letter 'ya'' and refrained from answering the seventh question. My
father had said to his father, "I will debate you before Allah on the
Day of Judgment for your belief that 'Abdallah is not an Imam. He then
had placed his hand over my father's neck and said, ""Yes, you may
debate me about it before Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious.
If there will any sins in it will be on my neck."

When I said farewell to him he said, "Whoever of our Shi'a would suffer
from any kind of afflictions or complains and he bears it patiently,
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, will record for an
entitlement to a reward equal to the rewards of a thousand martyrs." I
then said to my self, "By Allah, there was no mention of this (in our
conversations)." I then left and on the way a vein in my began to feel
very soar and the pain intensified. Next year when I went for Hajj I
went to see the him. My leg was still slightly painful. I complained
before him of the pain and requested him to say a prayer on it and I
stretched it before him." He said, "There is nothing wrong with this leg
but show me your leg that is not ill. I then stretched it before him and
he said a prayer. When I left little later on my leg began to feel the
pain in a vein but it was very little."

H 929, Ch. 81, h 11

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from ibn Qiyama
al-Wasiti who was a member of the waqifa, sect has said the following.
"Once I went to see Ali ibn Musa al- Rida (a.s.) and I said to him, "Can
there be two Imams (at the same time)?" He said, "No, except if one of
them would be silent." I then said, "What about your self? There is no
silent Imam with you." His son, abu Ja'far (a.s.) was not yet born. He
said, "By Allah, Allah will create from me someone to establish the
truth and the people of truth and banish falsehood and the people of
falsehood." After a year therefrom abu Ja'far (a.s.) was born. It was
said to ibn Qiyama, "Does this sign not convince you?" He then said, "By
Allah, the sign is great but what would I say about the words of abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about his son."

H 930, Ch. 81, h 12

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
(al-Hassan ibn Ali) al-Washsha' who has said the following. "I came to
Khurasan when I was a member of the Waqifa sect. I had certain goods
with me. In these goods there was a printed piece of fabric in one of
the bundles. It was misplaced and did not know where it was.

When I arrived in Marv and found a lodging a man who was born in the
city of Madina came by and said to me, "Abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.)
said to you, "send to me the piece of printed fabric that is with you."
He has said that I then said, "Who has told abu al-Hassan (a.s.) about
my arrival here? I have just arrived. There is no printed fabric with
me." He went back to the Imam (a.s.) and returned to me saying, "The
Imam (a.s.) says, "It is in such and such place and in such and such
bundle." I then looked for it as he had said and found it at the bottom
of the bundle and then I sent it to him."

H 931, Ch. 81, h 13

Ibn Faddall has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn al-Mughira who has said the
following. "I was a member of Waqifa sect and I wen to Hajj with the
same belief. When I arrived in Makka an idea began to prick my chest. I
got hold of al-Multazam (the wall next to the door of Ka'ba) and said,
"O Lord, You know what I ask for and my intention. Guide me to the best
of the religions. It then occurred to me to see al-Rida (a.s.). I went
to the city of Madina and stood in front of his door and said to his
slave, 'Tell your master that a man from Iraq is at the door.'" He has
said that I heard his voice saying, "O 'Abdallah ibn Mughira, come in."
I then went inside and when he looked at me he said, "Allah has answered
your prayer and has guided you to His religion." I then said, "I testify
that you possess Divine Authority and you are the trustee of Allah over
His creatures." :

H 932, Ch. 81, h 14

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah who has said the following. "'Abdallah
ibn Hulayl believe in 'Abdallah (ibn Ja'far (a.s.) ) to be the Imam). He
went to the army head quarters in Samarra, Iraq and thereafter he
changed his belief. I asked him about the reason for such change.

He said, "I thought (while in Samarra) I should discuss it with abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) and ask him about it. Accidentally I came across him
when passing through a narrow alley. He came closer and when parallel to
me, he spitted out on me something from his mouth and it was placed on
my chest. I then picked it up. It was a leaf with a writing on it that
said, "He was not there (position of Leadership with Divine Authority)
and he was not qualified for it (Leadership with Divine Authority)."

H 933, Ch. 81, h 15

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from one of our people whose name he
mentioned. He said that Muhammad ibn Ibrahim narrated to us, that Musa
ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il ibn 'Ubaydallah ibn 'Abbass ibn Ali ibn abu
Talib narrated to us from Ja'far ibn Zayd ibn Musa from his father, from
his forefathers the following. "One day 'Umm Aslam came to the Holy
Prophet (s.a) when he was in the house of 'Umm salama. She asked about
the Messenger of Allah.

'Umm Salama relied that he had just went out for some thing and that he
would return soon. She then waited with 'Umm Salama until he (the
Messenger of Allah) came. 'Umm Aslam then said, "May Allah take my soul
and the souls of my parents in service for your cause, Messenger of
Allah, I have read the books and have learned about all the prophets and
the executors of the their will. Moses had an executor for his will even
in his life time and an executor of the will after he died. So also was
Jesus. Who then is the executor of your will, O the Messenger of Allah?"
He then said to her, "O 'Umm Aslam, the executor of my will in my
lifetime and after I will is the same person.

" Then he said to her, "O 'Umm Aslam, "Whoever would be able to do what
I intend to do just now he is and will be the executor of my will." He
then picked up a pebble from the floor and crushed it with his fingers
into something like flour. He then turned it into a piece of clay and
then printed his seal on it and said, "Whoever would be able to do what
I just did he will be theexecutor of my will in my lifetime and after I
will die." She then left him.

She has said that she went to Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) and said,
"May Allah take my soul and the souls of my parents in service for your
cause, are you the executor orf the will of the Messenger of Allah?" He
said, "Yes, I am, O 'Umm Aslam." He then picked up a pebble, crushed it
into powder like flour, turned it into clay and printed his seal on it.
He then said, "O 'Umm Aslam, whoever would be able to do what I just did
he will be the executor of my will.

" I them went to al-Hassan (a.s.) while he was a young boy. I asked
him, "My master, are you the executor of the will of yourfather?" He
said, "Yes, I am, O 'Umm Aslam." He picked up a pebble and did exactly
what his father had done. I left him and went ot al-Husayn (a.s.) and
considered him very little because of his young age. I asked him, "Are
you the executor of the will of your brother?" He saaid, "Yes, I am. O
'Umm Aslam bring me a pebble." He then did exactly what they had done.

She has said that she lived until she met Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.)
after the martyrdom of his father, on his return from Iraq. I asked him,
"Are you the executor of the will of your father?" He said, "Yes, I am.
He then also did exactly what they (a.s.) had done."

H 934, Ch. 81, h 16

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from al-Husayn ibn al-Jarud from Musa ibn Bakr ibn Dab from
the one who narrated to him from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the
following. "Once Zayd ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn went to see abu Ja'far,
Muhammad ibn Ali. He carried with him letters from the people of Kufa
who invited him to their (city) and informed him of their coming
together and asking him to rise.

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) then asked him, "Are these letters their initiative
or as response to what you had written to them and ask them to do?" He
said that it was their initiative because they acknowledge our rights
and because of our being from the family of the Messenger of Allah. It
is also because of what they read in the book of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious, about the obligation to love us and must
obey us. Also it is because of the suffering, impediments and
afflictions that we had been through."

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said to him, " Obedience is an obligation from Allah,
the Most Majestic, the Most gracious. It is a tradition Sunna that He
had established in the people of the past and in the same way it will
continue in the later generations of the people. Obedience is only for
one of us and to love is for all of us.

The command of Allah applies to His friends because of the rules
already made available and because of the decision already made
distinct, because of the finalized decision and of the measurement that
has already taken place and because of the appointed time on a certain
date. Do not be hasty because Allah does not become hasty because
hastiness in the people. Do not try to surpass Allah because in your
doing so misfortune will defeat and destroy you." The narrator has said
that Zayd became angry and said, "The Imam from us is not the one who
would sit in his home, draw the curtain around him and lag from struggle
(jihad).

The Imam from us is the one who safeguards his dominion, fights for the
cause of Allah a real fight, defends those who hold high regards for him
and his rights." Abu Ja'far (a.s.) then said, "O brother, do you really
find any of the things that you mentioned about your self? If so, then
can you show a supporting proof from the book of Allah or and evidence
from the Sunna of the Messenger of Allah or give a similar example?
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, made things lawful and
unlawful.

He has sanctioned the obligations, provided examples and has set up
traditions Sunan. He has not made the Imam who would rise with Divine
authority on His command engulfed in doubts in the matters of the
obligation to obedience to him.

He has not made him as such that he would act up on an issue before its
proper place, struggle for something before it is there yet. Allah, the
Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has said, " Believers, do not hunt
when you are in the holy precinct. ." (5:95) Is hunting an animal that
has been made prohibited during Hajj more serious or the killing of a
person that Allah has prohibited? Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious, has assigned a place for everything. "Once the restrictions of
iz r2 m are over, you may hunt. . ." (5:2). Allah, the Most Majestic,
the Most gracious, has said, "Believers, do not disrespect the reminders
of God, the sacred months,. . ." (5:2)

He has made the number of months wellknown of which four are sacred
ones. He has said, ". . . during the four sacred months, they (pagans)
may travel peacefully through the land. Know (pagans) that you cannot
make God helpless. .." (9:2) Then Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious, has said, "When the sacred months are over, slay the pagans
wherever you find them.. ." (9:5) He has assigned a place for it. He has
also said, "Do not decide for a marriage before the appointed time is
over.. ." (2:235) He has assigned a time for everything and for evry
period of time there is a (Kitab) a rule. If you may have the necessary
evidence from you Lord, certainty from your self in your affairs and you
know well about it then you may act accordingly. Otherwise, do not aim
at an issue in which you have doubts and uncertainty.

Do not act to end a kingdom the sustanance of which is not yet
exhausted, its time has not ended and its (Kitab) rule has not reached
its time. When its timme comes, its sustanance deminish and its rule
reaches its time the gap will be removed and the system will follow and
Allah will make the followers (of falsehood) and those followed to
suffer humiliation. O brother, do you want to revive the wasy of a
people who has rejected the signs of Allah,

disobeyed His Messenger, followed their desires, (those have followed
their dessires) without guidance from Allah, claimed the Khilafa
(Leadership with Divine Authority) without authority and evidence from
Allah, or a covenant from the Messenger of Allah ? I ask Allah to grant
you refuge, from being crucified tomorroow in al-Kunasa. Then his eyes
became flooded with tears that flowed down and then said, "Allah is
between us and the people who disregarded our honor, ignored our rights,
made our secrets public and have ascribed us someone other than our
grandfather. Those who have said about us we oursellves do not say.".

H 935, Ch. 81, h 17

One of our people has narrated from Muhammad ibn Hassa'n from Muhammad
ibn Ranjawayh from 'Abdallah ibn al-Hakam al-Armani from 'Abdallah ibn
Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Ja'fari who has said the following.

"We went to Khadijah, the daughter of 'Umar ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn
Ali ibn abu Talib (a. s.) to offer our condolences for the death of the
son of her daughter. We met at her place Musa ibn 'Abdallah ibn
al-Hassan. She was to one side near the ladies. We offered them our
condolences to all of them. We then turned to him and he said to abu
Yashkur's daughter, the reader of lamentations, "Say it." She then read
the following lines.

Evaluate the Messenger of Allah,
Evaluate those after him, the loin of the Lord, (Hamrza) and 'Abbass as
the third of them
Evaluate Ali the embodiment of goodness and also evaluate Ja'far
Evaluate 'Aqil after him all leaders.
He said, "Very good, it was very moving. Say more lines." She was
encouraged and said:

From us is the leader of the pious ones, the Holy Prophet And the chief
of his army that purified Imam (Ali (a.s.)

From us is Ali his son in-law and cousin And from us is Hamza and the
well disciplined Ja'far. We stayed with her until it was almost night.
Khadija said, "I heard my uncle Muhammad ibn Ali (a.s.) say that a
lady's reading lines of lamentation is good only if her tear would flow.
It is not proper for her to say meaningless things. When night falls
then you should disturb the angles with your lamentations.

We then left her house and went to her next day and discussed with her
about moving her residence from the house of abu 'Abdallah, Ja'far ibn
Muhammad. He (Musa) then said, "This is called the house of theft." She
then said, "This is what our Mahdi has chosen, meaning thereby 'Abdallah
ibn al-Hassan, she would jock with him." Musa ibn 'Abdallah then said,
"By Allah, I can tell you a very strange matter that I experienced with
my father. When my father, may Allah grant him mercy, became involved in
theaffaairs of Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah and gathered his companions to
meet him he decided to go and he would lean on me. I went with him until
we came to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). We met him out side when he wanted to
go to the mosque.

My father stopped him and spoke to him. Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said,
"This is not a proper place to talk. We Allah willing will meet again.
My returned very happy. He waited until morning or the next day and then
we went to see him. I and my father met him and he began to speak and
among other things he said to him, "May Allah take my soul in service
for your cause,

you know already that I am older than you and that among your people
there are those who are older than you but Allah, the Most Majestic, the
Most gracious, has granted you priority and excellence that is not found
in any of your people. I have come to you, relaying on your virtue and
knowing, May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, that if you
would agree with me others will not differ. None of your companions will
disagree with me and no one from the people of Quraysh or others will
dispute me."

Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) thensaid to him, "You can certainly find other
people more obedient to you than I then you will not need me. You know
that I, by Allah, want to move to an empty land or think about it but I
feel heavy in doing so. I want Hajj but I can not attain it without hard
work and exhaustion and hardship for my self. You should find others to
support you but do not say that you have met me."

He then said, "The people look up to you. If you would support me no
one will disagree with me. You do not have to suffer fighting or
hardships." The narrator has said that then people surrounded us aand
our talks were discontinued. My father said, "May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, what do you say?" He said, "You will meet me,
Allah willing.

" He then said, "Will it be the way I love?" He said, "It will, Allah
willing, be the way you love in your favor." He came home and sent a
messenger to Muhammad in the mountains at Juhayna, called al-Ashqar two
nights journey from Madina. He gave him the glad news and informed him
of his success in the task that he had asked for (support from Ja'far
ibn Muhammad (a.s.) for his uprising).

After three day we went again and stood before the door. We would not
have been stopped before. The messenger delayed but then gave us
permission. We went inside and I sat on one side of the room. My father
went close to him, kissed his head and said, May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, I have come again with hopes and expectation
expanding with a wish to achieve what I need.

" Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then said, "O son of my uncle, I beseech Allah's
protection for you and ask you not to become involved in this matter
(political uprising). I am afraid for you from evil. The talks continued
between them and they ended to what he did not want. He said, "For what
reason al-Husayn (a.s.) was more deserving than al- Hassan (a.s.) (in
leaving Imamat to his descendants)?" Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, "May
Allah grant blessings to al-Hassan and al-Husayn (a.s.).

How would you mention this?" He said, "Were al-Husayn to act with
justice, he should have left it (Imamat) to the eldest son of al-
Hassan." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, "When Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, sent revelations to Muhammad (s.a) He did so what He wanted. He
did not ask any one else for consultation. Muhammad commanded Ali for
whatever he wanted and he obeyed the order.

We say nothing else in it except what the Messenger of Allah has said
in his (al-Husayn's) praise and affirmation. Had al-Husayn to transfer
it (the will) to the eldest or to the sons of both of them he would have
done so. He is not accused of anything before us such as keeping for
himself. He could have done anything he wanted but he did only what he
was commanded to do. He is your grandfather (from mother's side) and
your uncle. It would have better for to speak good of him.

If you would say meaningless thins about him, then may Allah forgive
you. Son of my unlce, obey me and listen to my words. By Allah, besides
Whom there is no Lord, that I do not refrain from giving you good
advise. How is it that you not act accordingly. There is no escape from
the commands of Allah." My father became happy at this point. Abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) then said to him, "By Allah, you know that the oblique
eyed with few hairs on his forehead will be killed at the doorway of
al-Ashja'. Near the the bottom of the water bed." My father said, "That
is not him. By Allah, he will fight them day for day, hour for an hour
and a year for a year. He will revenge for all of the descendants of abu
Talib."

Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then said, "How much I fear of applicability of
the this line to him: "Your soul in private gave you false hopes" No, by
Allah, he will gain more the walls of Madina and can not reach Taef no
matter how hard he may try. What must happen happens. Be pious before
Allah and have mercy on your self and on the sons of your father.

By Allah, I consider him to be the most unfortunate seed that man have
ever deposited in the wombs of women. By Allah, he will be killed at the
doorway of al-Asha' among their houses. By Allah, it is as if I see him
dropped dead and looted and a brick placed between his legs. Nothing
that is said to him benefits this boy" Musa ibn 'Abdallah has said that
I was meant by these words. He will take part in the uprising but will
be defeated and his friend will be killed.

He the take will takke part in another uprising under another banner.
Their leader will be killed and their soldiers will disperse. If he will
obey me immunity for him could be achieved from the descendant of
'Abbass until will grant relief. You already know that matter will not
become successful. You know and we know that your son, the oblique eyed
with few hair on his forehead will be killed at the doorway of
al-Ashja', near their house in the bottom of the water bed.

" My father stood up saying, "In fact, Allah will make us needless of
you or you will change or He will make come back with the others. You
only in this way keeping others from helping us or a reason for it."

Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then said, "Allah knows that I only want to give
good advise and guidance and that is all I can try." My father then
left, with his clothes dragging behind him due to anger. Abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) reached him out and said, "I heard you uncle who also is maternal
uncle mention that you and the sons of your father will be killed. If
you can obey me and do what is good then do it.

By Allah beside Whom there is no Lord, Who knows the unseen and what is
present, the Beneficent the Merciful, The Most Great, the Most High that
you are important to me. Nothing is important to me than you. I would
loved to sacrifice the most beloved of my sons and most beloved person
in my family to protect you. Do not think that I have cheated you." My
father left with anger and regrets. Thereafter we did not wait for more
than twenty nights or so.

Then the messengers of abu Ja'far (the Abbasside ruler) came and
arrested my uncles, Sulayman ibn hassan, Hassan ibn Hassan, Ibrahim ibn
Hassan, Dawud ibn Hassan, Ali ibn Hassan, Sulayman ibn Dawud, Hassan,
Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hassan, Hassan ibn Ja'far ibn Hassan, Ta ba ta ba
Ibrahim ibn 'Isma'il ibn Hassan and 'Abdallah ibn Dawud.

They were tied in chains and place on camel backs without covering.
They placed on display in the Musalla area, (open space for
congregational prayer) so that people would condemn them. People did not
do so. In fact, they sympathized with them because of their poor
conditions. Then they were released. They stood before the door of the
mosque of the Messenger of Allah.

'Abdallah ibn Ibrahim al-Ja'fari has said that Khadija daughter of
'Umar ibn Ali said to us, "When they were made to stand before the door
of the mosque called the Gate of Jibril, abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) came to
them, while his gown dragged behind him in a hurry. He came out of the
door of the mosque saying,

"May Allah condemn you, O people of Madina -three times. The Holy
Prophet did not covenant with you for this nor had you pledged
allegiance to for such thing. By Allah, I was hopeful, but I am defeated
and there is no escape from the decision of Allah. He then left one shoe
on his foot and one in his hand with his gown dragging behind. He went
home and suffered from fever for twenty days weeping day and night and
became very afraid for him. This is the narration of Khadija.

Al-Ja'fari has said that Musa ibn 'Abdallah ibn Hassan narrated that
when they appeared on the backs of the camels came out of the mosque and
bent over 'Abdallah ibn Hassan to speak to him. He was harshly stopped
and the security man pushed him aside saying, "Get away from him. May
Allah soon suffice you and others like you." They then were taken to the
streets and abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) went home. Before they would reach the
grave yard al-Baqi',

the security man faced a sever misfortune. His camel hit him at his leg
and crushed it and he died very soon. The people were taken away. After
a while Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah ibn Hassan came and told that his father
and his uncles were killed. Abu Ja'far (Abbasside ruler) killed them.
Only Hassan ibn Ja'far , Ta ba ta ba, Ali ibn Ibrahim, Sulayman ibn
Dawud, Dawud ibn Hassan, and 'Abdallah ibn Dawud were not killed.

At that time Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah rose and called people for pledge
of allegiance to him. The narrator has said that he was one of the three
people to pledge allegiance to him. No one from Quraysh, from Ansar
(people of Madina or a Arab opposed him. He consulted 'Isa ibn Yazid, a
trusted person to him and a commander of his army. He consulted him in
the matter of sending a message to the leaders of his people.

'Isa ibn Yazid said to him, "If you would just call them may not
respond. You must become strong and strict with them. Thus, allow me to
handle it for you. Muhammad agreed and said, "Do what you like." He then
said, "Send to their leader and the greatest among them, namely
'Abdallah Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.). If you become strict with him all
will learn that they also will experience what he has been through." The
narrator has said, "In a very little time they brought abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) and made him to stand up before him (Muhammad)'Isa ibn Yazid
said, "Submit and you will be safe.

" Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then said, "Have you invented a prophet-hood
after Prophet Muhammad (s.a.)?" Muhammad then said, "Pledge allegiance
your life, property and children will be protected and you will not have
to fight. Abu 'Abdallah then said, "I have nothing to do with war and
fighting. I advised your father and warned him against what went through
but warning does not help what is already measured. Son of my brother,
find the young ones and leave the elderly alone." Muhammad said, "There
is not much difference between my and your age." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
said, "I am not here to defeat you or compete you in what you do."
Muhammad said, "By Allah, you must pledge allegiance.

" Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, "Son of my brother, I do not want a war,
or gain any worldly thing. I want to go out in the open land but it is
heavy for me. Even my family have asked me several times. Only weakness
holds me back. By Allah, and for the sake of family relations save us
from misfortune from your hands." He then said, "O abu 'Abdallah (a.s.),
by Allah, abu Dawaniq (Abbasside ruler) has died." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
said, What that has to do with me?" He said I wanted honor through
you.

" He then said, "There is no way for you to that. By Allah, abuDawaniq
has not died, except in (your) dreams." He said, "By Allah you must
pledge allegiance to me, voluntarily or by force but then it will and by
force your pledge will lose its value." He refused it strongly. He was
sent to prison. 'Isa ibn Yaziid said, "There is not enough security in
the prison and without tying him up he may run away." Abu 'Abdallah (a.
s.) laughed and said,

"There is no means and power without Allah, the Most High, the most
Great. Will you imprison me?" He said, I swear by the One Who honored
Muhammad (s.a) that I will imprison you severely." 'Isa ibn Yazid said,
"Keep him in stable that belong to Rita." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then
said, "By Allah will soon say it and I will be confirmed." 'Isa ibn
Yazid said, "Be quite or I will break your mouth." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
said, "You blue eyed and bald say this. I can see you looking for a hole
to hide. You are not even worthy to be mentioned. On meeting (the enemy)
even if one would clap his hands behind you, you will run away like an
ostrich. Muhammad ordered 'Isa ibn Yazid to imprison him and be strict
with him.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, "By Allah as if I see you coming out of the
doorway of al-Ashja' to the bottom of the water bed in the valley and a
marked horse man has attacked with a spear in his hand, half white and
half black, riding a brown horse with a white forehead. He hits you but
it does not kill you. You hit the nose of his horse and it is injured.
Another man attacks you from the alley of Al 'Ammar al-Diliyinn. He has
two band of hair coming out of his helmet with thick mustache.

He, by Allah, is your adversary. May Allah have no mercy on his bones."
Muhammad said, "O abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), you have calculated but have a
mistake. Al- Suraqi ibn al-Salkh came to him and pushed him into the
prison. They looted his properties and the properties of those of his
people who did not come out with Muhammad. After this they brought
'Isma'il ibn 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far ibn Abu Talib who was very old and
weak. One of his eys was gone and both of his legs would not work. He
had to be carried. He was asked to pledge allegiance for him. He said,
"Son of my brother, I am an old man and weak.

I need your kindness and support." He said, "You must pledge
allegiance." He saaid, "What is the benefit of my pledge of allegiance?
By Allah, my name will only waste the space for the name of a man." He
said, "You must do so." He used strong language with him. 'Isma'il then
said, "Call for me Ja'far ibn Muhammad (a.s.) perhaps we both pledge
allegiance for you." The narrator has said that when Ja'far ibn Muhammad
(a.s.) was brought 'Isma'il said to him, May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, if you could explain to him we perhaps will all
be spared." He said, "I have decided not to talk to him. Let him do
whatever he wants." 'Isma'il said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), "By Allah,
tell me if you remember the day I came to see your father, Muhammad ibn
Ali (a.s.) and I had two pieces of yellow cloths on me.

He looked at me for a long time and wept. I asked for the reason. I
wept because you will be killed when very old for no reason and not even
two goats will fight for you (no one will ask justice for you). I said,
"When is that? He said, it will happen when you will be called to follow
falsehood and you will refuse. When you will see the abusive oblique
eyed person whose people from the family of al-Hassan (a.s.) on the
pulpit of the Messenger of Allah call people to follow him and would
give himself a name that he does not deserve. At such time you must
renew your covenant, make your will because you will be murdered on that
day or the next day.

" Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, "Yes, by the Lord of the Ka'ba he will not
fast in the month of Ramadan except few days. I leave in the trust of
Allah, O abu al-Hassan. May Allah grant us great reward for loosing you.
May He grant well being to those whom you leave behind. We are for Allah
and to Him we will return." The narrator has said that 'Isma'il was
carried away and 'Abdallah (a.s.) was sent to prison. He has said, "By
Allah, only that evening the sons of his brother, the sons of Mu'awiya
ibn 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far went on him and crushed (his bones) under their
feet. Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah released Ja'far (a.s.).

The narrator has said when it was the month of Ramadan 'Isa ibn Musa
began his uprising to occupy Madina. He has said that Muhammad ibn
'Abdallah came with Yazid ibn Mu'awiya ibn 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far leading
his army. In fron of the army of 'Isa ibn Musa there were the sons of
al-Hassan ibn Zayd ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Hassan ibn al-Qasim and Muhammad
ibn Zayd, Ali and Ibrahim sons of al-Hassan ibn Zayd. Yazid ibn Mu'awiya
was defeated and 'Isa ibn Musa came to Madina. Fighting took place in
Madina.

'Isa camped at mount Dhubab. The blacks (army of Abbassides) came from
the backside. Muhammad with his people went up to the maket place. Then
followed them to the mosque of al-Khawamin. There he looked around.
There was no black or white (people opposed to Abbassides) soldiers. He
advanced to ShaKa'ba Faraza then to Hudhayl then he went to al-Ashja'.
Here a horse man about whom abu 'Abdallah had spoken came out from the
doorway of Hudhayl and struck him a blow. It did not do anything to him.
He attacked the horse man and cut the nose of his horse with sword. The
horse man hit him that penetrated in the coat of arms Muhammad bent on
him and hit him killed him.

Then Hamid ibn Qahtaba came on him when he was turning away from the
horse man. He was hit from the alley of al-'Ammariyin. One hit of the
spear penetrated in his coat of arms but the spear broke. He attacked
Hamid and hit him with the spear. Hamid then with the iron part of the
broken spear hit him fatally he them came down hit him until he was
dead. He took his head away. The soldiers came from all sides and Madina
was taken and we were exiled all over the places."

Musa ibn 'Abdallah has said, "I then left until I met Ibrahim ibn
'Abdallah. I found 'Isa ibn Zayd hiding. I told him of his bad
management and left with him until he died. I then continued with the
son of my brother, al-Ashtar 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah ibn
Hassan until he also died in Sind. I then came back with no place to go
to and afraid I remembered what abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) had said.

I came to al-Mahdi (an Abbasside ruler) in Hajj where he was speaking
to people in the shadow of the walls of Ka'ba. He did not notice when
stood up below the pulpit. I said, "Can I have immunity, O Amir
al-Mu'minin if would give you a good advise?" He said, "Yes, but what is
it?" I said, "I can show you where Musa ibn 'Abdallah ibn Hassan is." He
said, "Yes, you will have security. I said, "I ask for guarantees. I
then asked for covenant and affirmation until I was certain of the
security then I said, "I am Musa ibn 'Abdallah. He said, "you are
respected and you will live.

" I then asked to show one of his people who would support me for
living. He said, "Look whoever you like. I said your uncle, Abbass ibn
Muhammad should support me. He refused. I begged him then he agreed.
Al-Mahdi asked, "Who knows you?" Most of them, our people were around
him. I said, "This al-Hassan ibn Zayd, knows me. This Musa ibn Ja'far
(a.s.) knows me. This al- Hassan ibn 'Abdallah ibn 'Abbass knows me.
They said, "Yes, O Amir al-Mu'minin we know him as if he was not absent
from us.

" I then said to al-Mahdi, "O Amir al-Mu'minin, the father of this man
had told me of this position. I pointed out to Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.).
Musa ibn 'Abdallah said, "You have lied against him." I said, "He
commanded me to convey greetings to you." He said, "He is a just and
generous Imam." He has said, "Then he ordered to give five thousand
Dinars to Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.).

Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) ordered to give me two thousand out of it. He
introduced me to his people and his people to me. As the sons of
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn are mentioned you should say, "May Allah
and His angels, the carriers of His throne, the angels writing the deeds
send blessing up on them specially abu 'Abdallah. May Allah grant Musa
ibn Ja'far on behalf good rewards. I, by Allah, am servant after being
the servant of Aallah."

H 936, Ch. 81, h 18

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from 'Abdallah ibn
Ja'far ibn Ibrahim al- Ja'fari has said that 'Abdallah ibn al-Mufaddal
the slave of 'Abdallah ibn Ja'far ibn abu Talib narrated the following.
"When al-Husayn ibn Ali who was killed in al-Fakhkh, began his uprising
he controlled the city of Madina and called Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) to
pledge allegiance for him. When he was brought before him (al-Husayn he
Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) ) said, "Son of my uncle, "Do not impose on what
the son of your uncle imposed on your uncle abu 'Abdallah (Ja'far ibn
Muhammad (a.s.) ) and then you will experience from me what I do not
want as it happened with abu 'Abdallah (a.s.).

" al-Husayn said to him, "I just proposed the matter to you if you like
you may take part in it, if you would dislike it I will not impose on
you, Allah is the supporter. He then said farewell to him. Abu
al-Hassan, Musa ibn Ja'far (a. s.) said to him when saying farewell,
"Son of my uncle, you will be killed, fight good. The people are
transgressors. They call themselves believers but they hide in them
atheism.

We are for Allah and to Him we return. I leave request justice for you
as my people from Allah." Al-Husayn then went to fight. His case took
shape the way it did. All of them were killed as the Imam (a.s.) had
informed."

H 937, Ch. 81, h 19

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from 'Abdallah ibn
Ibrahim al-Ja'fari who has said the following. "Yahya ibn 'Abdallah ibn
al-Hassan wrote to Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) as herein below. "Therafter, I
recommend my self to maintain piety before Allah as I like to recommend
you also because it has been the recommendation of Allah to the people
of the past as well as to the latr generations.

Of the reliable and God fearing people who have come to me have
informed me about your sympathy towards us and your refusal to support
us. I consulted about calling people to pledge allegiance to such person
from the family of Muhammad (s.a) who is acceptable to people. You
disagreed and your father had disagreed before you. Since a long time
you had claimed what was not for you. You expanded your hopes towards
what Allah did not grant you. You followed your desires and strayed. I
warn you of what Allah has warned about."

Abu al-Hassan, Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) wrote to him as herein below,
"From Musa ibn abu 'Abdallah , Ja'far (a.s.) and Ali (a.s.) who both
will share the rewards for their humbleness before Allah and obedience
to Him, to Yahya ibn 'Abdallah ibn Hassan. Thereafter, I warn you of
being mindless about Allah as I warn myself about as such about Him. I
ask you to know about His painful torments, severe punishments and His
complete penalties.

I recommend you as well as my self to be pious before Allah. Piety
before Allah is the beauty in speech and the establishmmen of the
blessings. I received your letter in which you have said that I and my
father have the claim (for leadership) from long before and that you
have not heard it from me (personally). "Their testimony will soon be
recorded and they will be questioned about it. The greed for worldly
gains have left nothing to gain from the benefits of the next life, in
fact, their gains and the benefits of the next life are destroyed for
their worldly desires. You have mentioned that I keep people from
following you because of my desire to achieve what you have achieved.

In fact, weakness in the (knowledge of) Sunna or lack of understanding
of the authoritative evidence are not holding me back from what you are
involved in. The fact of the matters is that Allah has created people
diffeent from each other in instincts. I like to ask just about two
letters.

What are called al-'Atra and al-Sahlaj in human body? Write your answer
to me. About yourself, I warn you about disobeying the Khalifa and
exhort you to be good to him and obey him. I ask you to request immunity
for yourself from him before the paws will catch you and the pressure
squeeze everywhere. Then you will try to find relief but you will not
find it. Try until Allah will grant you from His blessings na generosity
and make Khalifa (may he live long) to sympathize you, be kind to you
and preserve in you the relation with the Messenger of Allah . With best
regards and peace for those who follow guidance. To us it is revealed
that punishment is for those reject and turn away (from the truth).

Al-Ja'fari has said that it has come to my knowledge that this letter
Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) had reached to Harun. When he saw it he said,
"People exhort me to act against Musa ibn Ja'far (a. s.) while he is
clean of what they accuse him of."

End of the Second Volume of the book al-Kafi followed by, through the
wish of Allah and his support, the third volume and that is
'detestability of setting time limits. All praise belong to Allah, Lord
of the worlds. May peace and blessing be up on Muhammad and his family
all of them.


