Chapter 84 : the Rise of Al-mahdi With Divine Authority Earlier Or Later Will Not Affect One Who Has Learned Who His Imam Is H 951, Ch. 84, H 1
===============================================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn 'Isa from
Hariz from Zurara who has said the following. "Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has
said, 'Learn who your Imam is. When you learn who he is then it will
have no affect on you whether this matter (the rise of al- Mahdi with
Divine Authority) will take place earlier or later."

H 952, Ch. 84, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Safwan ibn Yahya from Muhammad ibn Marwan from
al-Fudayl ibn Yasar who has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, "On the
day when We call every nation with their leaders, Imams. . ." (17:71).

He said, "O Fudayl find out who your Imam is because when you will find
out who your Imam is then whether this matter (the rise of al-Mahdi with
Divine Authority) will take place earlier or later will not affect you
at all. One who finds out who his Imam is and then dies before the rise
of al-Mahdi with Divine Authority he will be just as those who are
positioned in his army.

In fact, just like those who have placed themselves under his banner."
The narrator has said that certain persons from his companions said, "He
will be just like the martyrs in battle supporting the Messenger of
Allah. "

H 953, Ch. 84, h 3

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from in a Murfu' manner from Ali ibn
Hamza from abu Basir who has said the following.

"I said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), "May Allah take my soul in service for
your cause, when will relief will come?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "O abu
Basir, are you after the worldly gains? In fact, one who has established
faith in this matter (the rise of al- Mahdi with Divine Authority) he
has already experienced relief of expecting his (coming with Divine
Authority)."

H 954, Ch. 84, h 4

Ali Ibrahim has narrated from Salih ibn al-Sindi from Ja'far ibn Bashir
from 'Isma'il ibn Muhammad al-Khuza'Isma'il who has said the following.
"Abu basir askked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and I was listening. 'Do you
think I will meet Al-Qa'im (a.s.) ?

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "O abu Basir, 'Do you not know who your Imam
is?" He said, "By Allah, your are my Imam while holding his hand." The
Imam (a.s.) said, "Then you must worry for not leaning against your
sword in the shadow of Al-Qa'im's tent."

H 955, Ch. 84, h 5

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Ni'man from Muhammad ibn Marwan from al-Fudayl ibn Yasar who has
said the following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'One who would
die without having an Imam his death would like the death of
ignorance.

One who would die and would know who his Imam is then the coming of
this matter (the rise of al-Mahdi with Divine Authority) earlier or
later will not affect him at all. One who would knowing who his Imam is
he would be like the one present with Al-Qa'im in his tents."

H 956, Ch. 84, h 6

al-Husayn ibn Ali al-'Alawi fromSahl ibn Jumhur from 'Abd al-'Azim
Ibrahim 'Abdallah al- Hassani fro al-Hassan ibn al-Husayn al-'Arni from
Ali from Ali ibn Hashim from his father from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has
said the following. "One who would expecting the coming of our task (the
rise of al-Mahdi with Divine Authority) he his not suffered any loss of
not dying in the tents of al-Mahdi and in his army."

H 957, Ch. 84, h 7

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyadfrom al-Husayn ibn
Sa'id from Fudala ibn Ayyub from 'Umar ibn Aban who has said the
following. "I heard abu'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'Find out (who the) sign
(of Allah, the Imam) is. When you will find out and learn who he is then
it will not harm you whether this matter (the rise of al-Mahdi with
Divine Authority) will take place earlier or later.

Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, has said, ""On the day
when We call every nation with their leaders, Imams. . ." (17:71). One
who knows who his Imam is he would be just like the one who would
present in the tents of al- Mahdi (a.s.)."


**Chapter 85 : The case of those who would claim to be the Imam but is
not qualified, the case of those who would reject all or some of the
Imams and the case of those who argue in support of one who is not a
qualified Imam H 958, Ch. 85, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Sinan from abu Salam from Sawra ibn kulayb who has said the
following. "I asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious, 'On the Day of Judgment you will see the
faces of those who had invented falsehood against God blackened. . . ."
(39:60).

The Imam (a.s.) said, "It refers to whose who claim to be the Imam but
in fact, is not the Imam." I then asked, "Even if he would of the
descendants of Ali (a.s.)?" He said, "Even if he would of the
descendants of Ali (a.s.),." I then asked, "Even if he would of the sons
of Ali ibn abu Talib (a.s.) ?" He said, "even if he would be."

H 959, Ch. 85, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
fromAli ibn al- Hakam fromAban from al-Fudayl from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
who has said the following. "Whoever would claim to be the Imam and in
fact he would not be the Imam he would be a unbeliever."

H 960, Ch. 85, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from mmd
ibn Jumhur from 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd al-Rahman from al-Husayn ibn
al-Mukhtar who has said the following. "I said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, what is the meaning of
the words of Allah, 'On the Day of Judgment you will see the faces of
those who had invented falsehood against God blackened. . . ."?

(39:60). He said, "Itrefers to whoever would claim to be the Imam and,
in fact, is not the Imam." I then asked, "Even if he would a descendant
of Fatima and Ali (a.s.)?" He said, "Yes, even if he would a descendant
of Fatima and Ali (a.s.)."

H 961, Ch. 85, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Dawud al-Himar from ibn abu Ya'fur who has said the
following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) say, 'On the Day of Judgment
Allah will not speak to them, He will not purify them and for them there
will be painful suffering.

He said it three time. (He added) they are those who claim to be the
Imam with Divine authority and, in fact, he is not so, those who reject
the Imam who possesses Divine authority and those who think that the two
has a share in Islam."

H 962, Ch. 85, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Sinan
from Yahya brother of 'daym from al-Walid ibn Subayh who has said the
following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, "No one claims this matter
(Leadership with Divine Authority) other than one who possesses Divine
authority except that Allah will cut his life short."

H 963, Ch. 85, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from
Muhammad ibn Sinan from Talha ibn Yazid from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following. "Whoever would share the leadership of a Lead
with Divine Authority without Divine authority is a polytheist."

H 964, Ch. 85, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn 'Isma'il from Mansur ibn Yunus from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said
the following. "I said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), "A man said to me, "You
must know the last of the Imams and it does not matter if you would not
know the first of the Imams." The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.)
said, "May Allah condemn this. I am angry with him and I do not know
him. How can the last Imam be recognized except through the first
Imam?"

H 965, Ch. 85, h 9

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn mmd from Muhammad
ibn Jumhur from Safwan from ibn Maskan who has said the following. "I
the Shaykh (Musa al-Kazim (a. s.) about the Imams. He said, 'Whoever
would reject any of the living Imams he has rejected the Imams who have
passed away also."

H 966, Ch. 85, h 9

A number of our people has narrated Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan
ibn Sa'id from Wahab from mmd ibn Mansur who has said the following. "I
asked (the Imam (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the
Most gracious, 'When (The faithless) commit indecent acts they say, "We
found our fathers doing this and God has commanded us to do the same."
(Muhammad) tell them that God does not command anyone to commit
indecency.

Do you speak for God, saying things of which you have no knowledge?
(7:28) The Imam (a.s.) said, "Have you come across any one who would
think that Allah has commanded to commit indecent acts, drink wine or
other such unlawful things?" I said, "No, I have not done so." He then
said, "What is this indecent act that they claim to have committed
because of the command of Allah?" I said, "Allah knows best and His
deputy also knows.

" He said, "This is found in the unjust Imams. They claim that Allah
has commanded them to lead their people and, in fact, Allah has not
given them any command to follow them. Allah, thus, has refuted them and
has informed (others) that they have spoke lies against Him and their
act as such is called an indecent one."

H 967, Ch. 85, h 10

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Wahab from Muhammad ibn Mansur who has said the
following. "I asked the virtuous servant of the Lord about the words of
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, "(Muhammad), tell them, "My
Lord has only prohibited indecent acts committed in public or in
secret,. . ." (7:33) The narrator has said that the Imam (a.s.) then
said, "The Quran has an apparent essence and a hidden essence.

All that Allah has made unlawful in the Quran is apparent and hidden
facts in this (category) are the unjust Imams. All that Allah has made
lawful in the book is apparent and the hidden facts in it (category) are
the Imams of the truth (Leaders with Divine Authority)."

H 968, Ch. 85, h 11

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
al-Hassan ibn Mahbub from 'Umar ibn Thabit from Jabir who has said the
following. "I asked abu Ja'far (a. s.) about the words of Allah, the
Most Majestic, the Most gracious, "Some people consider certain things
equal to God and love them just as one should love God. . . ." (2:165)
The Imam (a.s.) said, "They, by Allah, are the friends of so and so and
so and so whom they have taken as their Imams and not the Imam, Leaders
with Divine Authority, who are appoint for people as such.

For this reason He has said, ". . . Had the unjust been able to reflect
about their condition, when facing the torment, they would have had no
doubt that to God belongs All-power and that He is stern in His
retribution. (2:165)

When the leaders see the torment and lose all their resources, they
will denounce their followers (2:166). The followers will say, "Had we
had the chance we also would have denounced our leaders." That is how
God will show them their regrettable deeds. They will not be able to
escape from hell fire." (2:167).) Then abu Ja'far (a.s.) said, "By
Allah, O Jabir, they are the unjust Imams and their followers."

H 969, Ch. 85, h 12

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from abu
Dawud al- Mustariqq fromAli ibn Maymun from ibn abu Ya'fur who has said
the following. "I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'There will be three
kinds of people to whom Allah will not look on the Day of Judgment, will
not purify them and they will suffer pain full punishments.

They are those who claim to be the Imam with authority from Allah,
those who would reject the Imam, Leader with Divine Authority and those
who think that for the two there is a share in Islam."


