Chapter 86 : the Case of Those Who Would Accept the Religion of Allah But Without Accepting the Imam, Leader With Divine Authority H 970, Ch. 86, H 1
=====================================================================================================================================================

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad (from) ibn
abu Nasr from abu al-Hassan (a.s.) who has said the following. "The
words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, "Who strays more
than one who follows his desires without guidance from God?. . .
"(28:50) The Imam (a.s.), "It refers to those who take their own
opinions as their religion without an Imam from the Imams of guidance
(Leadership with Divine Authority)."

H 971, Ch. 86, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Safwan
ibn Yahya from al-'Ala' ibn Razin from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said
the following. "I heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) say, 'Whoever follows the
religion of Allah worshipping assiduously without an Imam, Leader with
Divine Authority his toil will not be acceptable.

In fact, he is lost and confused and Allah disdains his deeds. Such
person's case and example is like a sheep that has lost the shepherd and
the flock that runs back and forth the whole day. As the night would
fall that sheep would see a flock of sheep with a shepherd. The (lost)
sheep would then join the flock affectionately that in fact is only a
deception.

The sheep would pass the night in their shelter but when the shepherd
would lead the flock to the pasture the lost sheep would feel lost and
away from the flock and the shepherd,. thus, run back and forth in
search of the flock and the shepherd. Then it would find a flock of
sheep with a shepherd and affectionately join them but, in fact, suffer
a deception.

This shepherd would shout at the lost sheep saying, "Go and find your
own flock and shepherd you are lost, confused and without a flock and
shepherd. The lost sheep then would run back and forth in confusion,
fear and frustration without a shepherd to guide to the pasture and to
the shelter.

While the lost sheep is in such confusion a wolf would seize the
opportunity and would kill the lost sheep for food. Thus, by Allah, O
Muhammad is the case of a person from this 'Umma (nation) who would live
without an Imam (Leader with Divine Authority) from Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most gracious, who is clearly supported with evidence and
is just in his dealings.

A person without such Imam is lost and confused and if he would die in
such condition his death would be like dying in disbelief and hypocrisy.
O Muhammad, bear in mind properly that the unjust Imams and their
followers are far away from the religion of Allah.

They are lost and misleading. Their deeds that they do are like the
dust blown by the winds away in a windy day which, would go out of hand
without benefits. Thus is straying far away from the truth."

H 972, Ch. 86, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
ibn Mahbub from 'Abd 'Aziz al-'Abdi from 'Abdallah ibn abu Ya'fur who
has said the following. "I said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.).

'Isma'il meet people and it increases my wonders when I find people who
do not consider you as their guardians and Imams but they consider so
and so as their Imam. However, they are trustworthy, truthful and loyal.
I also find people who consider you as their guardian and Imam but are
not that trustworthy, loyal and truthful.

" The narrator has said that abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then sat in an
upright position and turned to me as if with anger and then said, "One
follows the religion of Allah under the guardianship of an unjust Imam
who possesses no Divine authority, he has no religion.

One who follows the religion of Allah under the guardianship of an Imam
who just in his dealings (possesses Divine authority)." I then said,
"These have no religion and these will face no destruction." The Imam
(a.s.) said, "That is correct "these have no religion and these will
face no destruction.

" Then the Imam (a. s.) said, "Have y0ou not heard the words of Allah,
the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, "God is the Guardian of the
believers and it is He who takes them out of darkness into light. . ."
(2:257) It means that He takes them out of the darkness of sins to the
light of repentance and forgiveness because of their love for and their
being under the guardianship of the just Imams who possess Divine
authority.

He has also said, "The Devil is the guardian of those who deny the
Truth and he leads them from light to darkness.. . ." (2:257) It means
that they were in the light of Islam but when they accepted the
guardianship and the leadership of every unjust Imam who possessed no
authority from Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, their
guardianship took them out of the light of Islam to the darkness of
disbelief.

Allah then made it necessary for them to suffer in fire along with the
unbelievers. "These are the dwellers of hell wherein they will live
forever." (2:257)

H 973, Ch. 86, h 5

He has narrated from Hisham ibn Salim from Habib al-Sajistani from abu
Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following. "Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High, has said, 'I will cause to suffer punishment all those who
live a religious life in Islam under the guardianship of unjust Imams
who possesses no authority from Allah even though such followers would
be virtuous and pious in their deeds.

I will forgive all those who live a religious life in Islamunder the
guardianship of an Imam who is just in his dealings and possess
authority from Allah even though such followers in their dealings would
be unjust sinners."

H 974, Ch. 86, h 5

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from ibn Jumhur from his father from
Safwan from ibn Maskan from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Allah will not be ashamed to punish
an 'Umma (nation) who has lived a religious lile under the guardianship
of an unjust Imam who has said the following.

would possess no authority form Allah even though such people would be
virtuous and pious in their deeds. However, Allah will be ashamed to
punish a people who lived a religious life under the guardianship of an
Imam who is just in his dealings and possesses authority from Allah even
though they would be unjust in their dealings and have committed
sins."


**Chapter 87 : The Case of those who would Die without having an Imam
from the Imams of Guidance Part of Previous Chapter H 975, Ch. 87, h
1**

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha' from Ahmad ibn 'Aidh from ibn 'Udhayna
from al-al-Fudayl ibn Yasar who has said the following. " One day abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) initiated to speak to us and said, 'The Messenger of
Allah has said, "Whoever would die and is not under the (guardianship)
of the Imam his death would be like a death in ignorance.

" The narrator has said that I asked, "Is that what the Messenger of
Allah has said?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, by Allah, he has said so."
I then said, "Do all who die without acknowledging the Imam die as if
died in ignorance (without religion)?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, that
is right."

H 976, Ch. 87, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' who has said that 'Abd al-Karim ibn 'Amr narrated to me from
ibn abu Ya'fur who has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
about the words the Messenger of Allah. ""Whoever would die and is not
under the (guardianship) of the Imam his death would be like a death in
ignorance.

" The narrator has said I then asked, "Is it death in disbelief (in
religion)?" He said, "It is death in error ." I then said, "Thus,
whoever would die today and would not have an Imam would his death be
considered as if he has died in ignorance (without religion)?" He said,
"Yes, that is true."

H 977, Ch. 87, h 3

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan from al- Fudayl from al-Harith ibn al-Mughira who has said the
following. "I said to abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) , 'the Messenger of Allah
has said, "Whoever would die without knowing who his Imam is he would
die as if has died in ignorance (of religion)." The Imam (a.s.) said,
"That is true.

" I then said, "Is it the ignorance of uneducated people or ignorance
of ones not knowing his Imam?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "It means the
ignorance that is disbelief, hypocrisy and error?" H 978, Ch. 87, h 4

Certain persons of our people have narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim ibn
'Abdallah al-Hassani from Malik ibn 'Amir from al-Mufaddal ibn Za'id
from al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has said the following. "Abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) has said, 'Whoever would follow the religion of Allah without
hearing (instructions) from a truthful (Imam) person Allah will cause
him, inevitably, to suffer hardships.

Whoever would claim to have heard from a source other than the one
Allah has opened for him, he will be considered as polytheist. The
source and door that Allah has opened is the one that trustworthy in the
matters of the hidden secrets of Allah."


