Chapter 88 : the Case of Those Who Have Recognized Ahl Al-bayt and Those Who Have Ignored Them H 979, Ch. 88, H 1
=================================================================================================================

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Ali ibn al- Hakam from Sulayman ibn Ja'far who has said the
following. "I heards al-Rida (a.s.) saying, "Ali ibn 'Abdallah (or
'Ubaydallah)ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn abu Talib
(a.s.), his wife and childred are of the people of paradise.

" He then said, "Whoever would recognize this matter (Leadership with
Divine Authority) in the descendants of Ali and Fatima (a.s.) he would
not be like the people."


H 980, Ch. 88, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad who has
said that al- Washsha' said Ahmad ibn 'Umar has narrated to us the
following. "Inform me about those who have opposed you and has ignored
your rights as a descendant of Fatima (a.s.) would his suffering be the
same as the other people?" He said, "Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) would say
that their suffering will twice as much."

H 981, Ch. 88, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Rashid who has that reported to us Ali ibn 'Isma'il
al-Maythami who has said that narrated to us Rabi'i ibn 'Abdallah who
has said that said to him 'Abd al-Rahman ibn abu 'Abdallah the
following.

"I said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'are those who are ignorant of this
matter (Leadership with Divine Authority) of the descendants of Hashim
and others the same?" He said to me, "Do not say, "al-Munkir" (ignorant)
but say al-Jahid (rejecter ) of the descendants of Hashim and other
people."

Abu al-Hassan has said I thought about it and then I recalled the words
of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, about the brothers of
Yusuf (Joseph) "He recognized them but they were ignorant about him."
(12:58)

H 982, Ch. 88, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
abu Nasr who has said the following. "I asked al-Rida (a.s.), 'Are those
who reject you from your own people and other such people the same?

" He replied, "Those of our own people who would reject us (our
Leadership with Divine Authority) would be considered as having
committed twice as much sin and the good deed from our own people who
are virtuous would also considered as of twice as much value."


**Chapter 89 : The Obligation and Duty of the People at the Time of the
Passing away of the Imam (a.s.) H 983, Ch. 89, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from from Muhammad ibnlh from Safwan
from ya'qub ibn Shu'ayb who has said the following. "I asked abu
'Abdallah (a.s.), 'If something would happen to the Imam what should
then the people do?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Where are the words of
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most gracious, 'Not all believers have to
become specialists in religious learning.

Why do not some people from each group of believers seek to become
specialists in religious learning and, after completing their studies,
guide their group so that they will have fear of God.'" (9:122) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "They will good reason to be excused as long as they are
searching also those who wait for them until they complete their
religious education and return back to them."

H 984, Ch. 89, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus ibn 'Abd
al-Rahman who has said that narrated to us Hammad from 'Abd al-A'la' who
has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the
statement of Sunni Muslims (al-'Amma) that says the Messenger of Allah
has said, "If a person would die without having an Imam his death would
be as if he has died as the death of ignorance (pre-Islamic age of
darkness)" The Imam (a.s.) said, " That is very true, by Allah." I then
asked, "what if the Imam would pass away and a person is in Khurasan and
does not know who the executor of the will of the Imam (a.s.) is, is
this good excuse for him?" He (the Imam (a.s.) said, "No, that is not a
good reason. When the Imam leaves this world the authority of the
executor nof his applies to those would live in the area.

Also the obligation search and learn about one's duties apply to those
who are not in area but who learned about the passing away of the Imam.
Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious, has said, "Not all
believers have to become specialists in religious learning.

Why do not some people from each group of believers seek to become
specialists in religious learning and, after completing their studies,
guide their group so that they will have fear of God." (9:122) I then
said,

"What if they did went out to find out but some of them would die
before they could find out?" He said, "Allah, the Most Majestic, the
Most Gracious, has said, ". . . and one who dies, after having abandoned
his home to get near to God and His Messenger, will receive his reward
from God. . . ." (4:100) I if some of them would reach your town but
would find out that you have closed your door and the curtains are drawn
closed. You would not call them to yourself and there is no one to guide
them to you. How then the will know about you?" He said, "They would
know about me through the book that Allah has revealed.

" I then asked, "How Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Gracious, has
said it?" He said, "I know that you have spoken to me about before this
day also." I said, "That is right." He then said, "Recall what Allah has
said about Ali (a.s) and what the Messenger of Allah said to him about
Hassan and Husayn and What Allah has specially said about Ali (a.s) and
what the Messenger of Allah has said about him about his will to him and
hid appointing him and their sufferings and the acknowledgements of
al-Hassan and al- Husayn of such facts.

Recall the will of al-Hassan and his delivering it to al-Husayn. Allah
has said, "The Prophet has more authority over the believers than
themselves. His wives are their mothers. The relatives are closer to
each other, according to the Book of God, . ." .(33:6)

I then said, "People speak about abu Ja'far'far (a.s) and say, "How is
it that Imamat (leadership with Divine authority has stepped out for him
from among all the sons of his father even though they are all relatives
and older than him and those younger than him did receive it just
because they were younger?"

He said, "The one would possess this matter (Leadership with Divine
Authority) can be recognized through three evidence that are not found
with other people. He must have greater priority to the preceding Imam
and that he would be the executor of the will of the preceding Imam.
With him there must be the Armaments of the Messenger of Allah and the
document of his will. This document is with me and no one disputes it.

" I then asked, "Is that kept secret and hidden for fear from the
rulers?" He said, "There is nothing secret and hidden for which there is
no clear evidence available. What is there my father entrusted to me.
When he wasw about to leave this world he asked me to call people to
bear testimony for him.

I then called four people from Quraysh among them was Nafi' salve of
'Abdallah ibn 'Umar. My father said, "Write down, 'This is how the will
of Jacob to his children reads, "God has chosen this religion for you.
You must not leave this world unless you are a Muslim (submitted to the
will of the Lord of the Universe)." (2:132)

Muhammad ibn Ali made the same kind of will to his son, Ja'far ibn
Muhammad annd commanded him to shroud him in his own gown which he would
use during his Friday prayers. That his own turban must be used for him,
that the surface of his grave should be given a square shape, raised
three inches from the ground and thereafter leave it that much only.
Thereafter he wrpped up the document of the will and asked the witnesses
to leave saying, "May Allah grant you blessings.

When they left I asked, "What was in it O father, that asked them to
bear testimony to?" He said, "I did not like that you will be defeated
and people will say, 'He left this world without a will. I wanted it to
be a supporting authority for you. This the fact that help one who comes
to the town and asks, "To who did so and so made a will? And it is said
to him, "The will was made to so and so." I then asked, "What he (Imam)
would partners in the will?" He said, "You must ask him. He will explain
it to you."

H 985, Ch. 89, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Muhammad ibn Khalid from Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from Barid
ibn Mu'awiya from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the following. "I
said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), "May Allah grant you good health, we heard
that you were not feeling good and it caused us great anxiety. Would
that you inform or teach us who will be the succeeding Imam.

" The Imam (a. s.) said, "Ali (a.s.) was the scholar and knowledge is
inherited. No scholar dies except that leaves behind a scholar whose
knowledge is of the same level or whatever Allah would will."

I then said will people be excused for not knowing the succeeding Imam
after the death of the preceding Imam?" He then said, "The people of
this area (city of Madina) will not be excused. People of other areas
will dealt with according to their abilities.

Allah has said, "Not all believers have to become specialists in
religious learning. Why do not some people from each group of believers
seek to become specialists in religious learning and, after completing
their studies, guide their group so that they will have fear of God."
(9:122)

The narrator has said that he then asked the Imam (a.s.), "What if some
of them would die before completing their education and search.?" He
said, "such people will be of the ones mentioned in the words of Allah
herein below. ". . . and one who dies, after having abandoned his home
to get near to God and His Messenger, will receive his reward from God.
. . ." (4:100)

The narrator has said that he then asked the Imam (a.s.), "If people
would come to the Imam then by what means would they recognize him?" He
said, "The Imam is granted serenity, dignity and an awesome presence."


**Chapter 90 : When the Imam learns that Leadership with Divine
Authority has come to him? H 986, Ch. 90, h 1**

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya from abu Hariz al-Qummi who has said the following. "I
said to abu al-Hassan (a.s.), 'May Allah take my soul in service for
your cause, you know how devoted I have been towards your father and
after him to yourself.

I then swore before him up on the rights of the Messenger of Allah and
the rights of so and so and so and so (Ali, al-Hassan, al-Husayn . . .
(a. s.) until his own self trying to assure him that whatever you would
tell me will not be made public and spread to other people. I asked him
about his father to find out if he alive or dead." He said, "by Allah,
he that his father had passed away.

" I then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, your
followers (Shi'a) narrate that in him the traditions of four prophets
are found." He then said, "In certainty by Allah, besides whom there is
no Lord that he (my father) has passed away." I asked, "Is his passing
away in the form of disappearance or in the form of death?" He then
said, "It is in the form of death.

" I then said, "Perhaps you are observing cautious fear from me." He
said, "All glory belongs to Allah, (that is not the case)." I then
asked, "Did he deliver his will to you?" He said, "Yes, he did so." I
then asked, "Has he made others as your partners in executing his will?"
He said, "No, he has not done so.

" I then asked, "Is there any Imam over you among your brothers?" He
said, "No, there is no one from them." I then asked, "Are you the Imam
(a.s.)?" He said, "Yes, I am the Imam (Leadership with Divine
Authority)."

H 987, Ch. 90, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Asbat who has said the following. "I said, 'A man troubled your
brother, Ibrahim and said to him, "Your father is still alive." You know
of this case what he knows.'" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Glory belongs to
Allah. The Messenger of Allah dies.

How is it that Musa (Imam Musa al- Kazim) does not die? Certainly, by
Allah, he passed away just as the Messenger of Allah passed away.
However, Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, ever since that He took
his Prophet from this world has continued granting favors through this
religion up on the descendants of A'ajim (pl. of 'Ajam, meaning the
Persians or none Arabs) and abstains it from the people of His
Prophet.

Ever since He has continued granting such favors to these and
abstaining it from them. In the month of Dhu al-Hajj I paid off a
thousand Dinar for his debts because of which he (his brother Ibrahim)
was in great difficulties. He was about to divorces his wives, free his
slaves and servants. You have heard the case of Yusuf and his
brothers."

H 988, Ch. 90, h 3

al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' who has said the following. "I said to abu al-Hassan (a.s.),
'They have narrated from you about the death of abu al-Hassan (Musa
al-Kazim (a.s.) that a man said to you, "You have learned that (the
death of your father) through the report of Sa'id." He said, "Sa'id came
after I learned about that (death of my father) before his coming.

" The narrator has said that he asked the Imam (a.s.), "I heard from
him that you divorced mother of Farwa, daughter of Ishaq, in the month
of Rajab one day after the death of abu al-Hassan (a.s.). Did you
divorce her when you knew that abu al-Hassan (a.s.) has died?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "Yes, I did so." I asked him, "Did you do so before Sa'id
came to you?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Yes, I did so before Sa'id came."

H 989, Ch. 90, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from al-Husayn from Safwan who has said
the following. "I requested abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.), 'Enlighten me
when an Imam comesto know that he is the Imam (a.s.)? Does it take place
when the preceding Imam has already passes away or when he is about to
leave this world?

For example abu al-Hassan (a.s.) passed away in Baghdad and you were
here (in the city of Madina)?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "He comes to know
it at the time his companion (the preceding Imam) is about to leave this
world." I then asked, "By what means does he come to know it?" He said,
"He comes to know it through inspiration from Allah."

H 990, Ch. 90, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from abu al-Fadl
al-Shahbani from Harun ibn al-Fadl who has said the following. "I saw
abu al-Hassan Ali ibn Muhammad on the day abu Ja'far (a.s.) passed away.
He said, "To Allah we belong and to Him we return. Abu Ja'far (a.s.)
passed away." He was asked, "How do you know that he passed away?" He
said, "A form of humbleness before Allah that I had never experienced
overwhelmed me."

H 991, Ch. 90, h 6

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Musafir who
has said the following. "Abu Ibrahim commanded -at the time he was taken
out to Baghdad- abu al- Hassan (a.s.) to sleep every night at his (abu
Ibrahim's) house until the coming of the news of his death.

The narrator has said narrator has said that we would prepare the bed
for abu al- Hassan every night in the terrace and he would come after
the 'Isha (late evening) to rest and in the morning he would leave for
his own house. He has said that it continued for four years.

One night he delayed and the bed was prepared for him. He did not come
as usual and the family was alarmed and deeply saddened. His delay was a
very great matter that overwhelmed us. In the morning he came to the
house and went to the family room to 'Umm (mother of) Ahmad and said to
her, "Bring me the things that my father had entrusted you with." She
began to cry, beat up her face and tear her clothe over her heart
saying, "My master, by Allah, has passed away.

" He stopped her and said, "Do not say any thing to any one and do not
make it public before the news of his death comes to the governor." She
then brought a package, a two thousand and a four thousand Dinar and
gave all of it to him and to one else. She said, "He had told me when
there were only two of us (She was beloved to him), "Keep this trust
well protected with you and do allow anyone to know it before I will
die.

When I will die whichever of my sons will come to and ask you to
deliver this trust to him give it to him and know that I have passed
away. The sign that my master had informed me of has exactly come." He
took charge of the package and money from her and commanded everyone to
keep it secret until the coming of the news. He left the house and
thereafter did not come to rest at night as before.

After a few days only the news of the passing away of abu Ibrahim reach
the city. We calculated the time and found out that it was exactly the
time abu al-Hassan had done those things; his delaying to come for rest
at night and taking charge of the trust with ('Umm Ahamd)."


