Chapter 48 : the Imams (a.s.) Do Have the Knowledge of What Was and Will Be, and That Nothing Is Unknown To Them (a.s.) H 678, Ch. 48, H 1 Chapter 50 : Aspects of the Knowledge of the Imams (a.s.) H 687, Ch. 50, H 1
=======================================================================================================================================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Isma'il from his paternal uncle Hamzah ibn Bazi' from Ali as-Sa'I
from abu al-Hassan, the first, Musa (a.s.) who has said the folloowing.
"The totality of our knowledge is of three aspects.

Knowledge of the past, future and that coming into being. The knowledge
of the past is that which is interpreted. The knowledg eot he future is
that which is written and the knowledge of that which come into being is
the kind that is thrown into the hearts and is heard by the ears and
this is best aspect of our knowledge and there is no prophet after our
Holy Prophet (s.a.)."

H 688, Ch. 50, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated Ahmad ibn abu Zahir from Ali ibn Musa
from Safwan ibn Yahya from al-Harith ibn al-Mughirah who has said that
he asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the following. "Tell me about the
knowledge of your scholar."

He said, "It is inherited from the Messenger of Allah and from Ali
(a.s.)." The narrator has said that he asked him, "We narrate that it is
thrown into your hearts and is dotted in your ears." He then said, "Is
that so?"

H 689, Ch. 50, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from the person who
narrated (it) to him from al- Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has said that he
said to abu al-Hassan (a.s.) the following. "We narrate from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) that he has said, 'Our knowledge consists (of the
knowledge of the things) of past, of the written nature, that which is
dotted in the hearts and that which is struck against the ears.

He then said, "As for that about the matters of the past is that which
is passed our knowledge. That which is written is the kind that will
come in future. That which is dotted into the hearts is the inspired
kind and that which is struck against the ears is the order of the
angel."


**Chapter 51 : If Secrets would be kept the Imams (a.s.) can tell
everyone what is for and against them H 690, Ch. 51, h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Fadala ibn Ayyub from Aban ibn 'Uthman from
'Abd al-Wahid ibn al-Mukhtar who has that abu Ja'far (a.s.) has said the
following. "Had there been a thing (zip) to contain (to sack) your
tongues I would have spoken to everyone about what is for or against
him."

H 691, Ch. 51, h 2

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from ibn Sinan from 'Abdallah ibn Muskan who has said that he
heard abu Basir say that he said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the
following.

"What made the supporters of Ali (a.s.) suffer the troubles despite the
fact that they knew about their deaths and (causes of their) suffering?"
the Imam (a. s.) replied me in a way as if he seemed angry, "from who
could it come except from their own selves.?" I then asked, "What
prevents you, may Allah take my soul in service for your cause, from
telling it all (to your friends).

The Imam (a.s.) said, "It is a door that is closed door except that
al-Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.) opened it to a small degree (told a few things
about future to his supporters just before their martyrdom)." The Imam
(a.s.) then said, "O abu Muhammad, those people had a tie (zip) over
their mouths."


