Chapter 52 : Giving Charge of the Religious Matters To the Messenger of Allah (s.a.) and To the Imams (a. S.) H 692, Ch. 52, H 1
================================================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn abu Zahir from Ali ibn
Isma'il from Safwan ibn Yahya from 'Asim ibn Humayd from abu Ishaq
al-Nahwi who has said that he went see abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and heard
him say the following. "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,

discipline and education His Messenger with His and said, "You
certainly possess a great degree of moral discipline and education."
(64:4) He then let him be in charge as He,

the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, ". . .whatever the Messenger
brings to you, you must take it (obey) and whatever he prohibits you,
you must desist from. . ." (59:7) Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
has said, ". . . whoever obeys the Messenger, he has obeyed Allah. . ."
(4:80)" The narrator has said that then the Imam (a.s.) said,

"The Prophet of Allah then let Ali and the Imams be the in charge (of
the religious matters) and you then acknowledged it while others denied
it. I swear by Allah, we love you to say when we say and remain silent
when we remain silent. We are between you and Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High. Allah has not placed any goodness in the opposition to us."

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from abu
Najran from 'Asim ibn Humayd from abu Ishaq who has said that heard abu
Ja'far (a.s.) say the following. He cited a hadith similar to the above
one.

H 693, Ch. 52, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Yahya ibn abu 'Umran
from Yunus from Bakkar ibn Bakr from Musa ibn 'Ushaym who has said the
following. "I was in presence o abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) a man asked him
about a verse of the book of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. The
Imam (a.s.) explained it to him.

Then another person came to see the Imam (a. s.) and asked him about
the same verse. The Imam (a.s.) gave him a different explanation. This
made as many things to my mind as Allah willed, as if my heart would
have been shredded with knives. I then said to myself, "I left abu
Qatada in Syria who would not make a mistake in even the letter 'waw'
and now I have come to this man who makes all this mistake. At this
another person came in to see him and asked him about the same verse.

He then explained to him completely different from what he had
explained to me and to the man just before. My soul relaxed at this
point and I came to know that it was because of fear. He has said that
then he (the Imam (a.s.) turned to me and said, "O ibn 'Ushaym, Allah,

the Most Holy, the Most High, made Solomon son of David in charge (of
religious matters) and said, "This is our gift to you, you may do with
it favors to others or with hold without being held responsible for
anything. . ." (38:39).

He also made His Prophet the in charge and said, ". . . what the
Messenger (of Allah) you, you must take (obey) and what he prohibits
you, you must desist from. . ." (59:7) Of whatever the Messenger of
Allah is made in charge he has made us the in charge thereof."

H 694, Ch. 52, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Hajjal from Tha'labah that Zurarah who has said that he heard abu
Ja'far and abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following. "Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High has made the Holy Prophet in charge of the affairs
of His creatures to see how their obedience is. He then recited this
verse of Holy Quran, ". . .what the Messenger (of Allah) you, you must
take (obey) and what he prohibits you, you must desist from. . ."
(59:7)

H 695, Ch. 52, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
'Umar ibn 'Udhayna from Fudayl ibn Yasar who has said that he heard abu
'Abdallah say the following to some of the companions of Qays al-Masir.
"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, discipline and education His
Messenger. He then made his discipline and education to be the best.

When his discipline and education was complete He said, "O Muhammad,
you certainly possess a great degree of moral discipline and education.
(64:4). Then He made him in charge of the affairs of the religion and
the nation (Muslim) so he would manage the social matters of the His
servants with wisdom. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, said, ". .
.what the Messenger (of Allah) you, you must take (obey) and what he
prohibits you, you must desist from. . ." (59:7) The Messenger of Allah
was protected, successful and supported by the Holy Spirit.

He (the Messenger of Allah) does not slip, make a mistake in any of the
matters of the management of the social matters of the creatures. He is
educated with the education of Allah. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, commanded to perform the prayer in two and two Rak'at form
totalling ten Rak'ats. The Messenger of Allah added two more Rak'ats to
each prayer and only one Rak'at to the Maghrib prayer (the prayer at sun
set).

Such additions became just as the obligatory ones and it is not
permissible to disregard them. They are obligatory at home and on a
journey. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, granted him permission in
all of it.

Thus, the obligatory prayers became seventeen Rak'ats. The Messenger of
Allah then setup the tradition of optional prayers totaling thirty four
Rak'ats which is double the number of the optional prayers.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, granted him permission for this.
All the optional and obligatory prayers total fifty one Rak'ats of which
there is two Rak'ats in a sitting position after (al-'atma) 'Isha prayer
which is counted as one Rak'at in place of Witr. Allah made fasting of
the month of Ramadan obligatory which comes only once in a year.

The Messenger of Allah set up the tradition of fasting in the month of
Sha'ban and three days fasting of every month and the number of days in
it totals twice as much as the obligatory fast. Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High, granted him permission for all of this.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, made just wine unlawful to
consume. The Messenger of Allah pronounced all intoxicants drinks
unlawful. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, granted him permission in
this case also. The Messenger of Allah pronounced certain things as
permissible and pronounced other things as detestable but did not
declare them prohibited as unlawful.

He only pronounced them prohibited in a permissible prohibition and
detestable. He then spoke of such prohibitions as permissible but then
such permissible matters became obligatory for the servants (of Allah)
like the obligation of abiding by what is prohibited and determined.

The Messenger of Allah did not grant permission in the matters that
were prohibited as unlawful (to violate) prohibitions or what he
pronounced as an order to follow as an obligation and binding.

A great deal of the intoxicants drinks he pronounced as unlawful to
consume and he did not grant permission to any one to consume them. The
Messenger of Allah did not grant permission to anyone to further shorten
the prayers tha consisted of two Rak'ats that were added to what Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High, had made obligatory. In fact, He made them
binding and necessary like an obligation.

He did not grant permission to anyone in this matter except those on a
journey. No one has the right to give permission in such issues until
the Messenger of Allah grants permission. Thus, the order of the
Messenger of Allah concord the orders of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High. The prohibitions of the Messenger of Allah concord the prohibition
of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.

It has become obligatory for the servants (of Allah) to submit to his
commands as it is obligatory for them to submit to the command of Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High."

H 696, Ch. 52, h 5

Abu Ali al-Ash'ari has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
ibn Faddal from Tha'laba ibn Maymun from Zurarah who has said that he
heard abu Ja'far (a.s.) and abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following.
"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, made His Prophet the in charge of
His creatures to se how their obedience is. They then recited the
following verse of the Holy Quran. ". . .what the Messenger (of Allah)
you, you must take (obey) and what he prohibits you, you must desist
from. . ." (59:7)"

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hajjal
from Tha'laba ibn Maymun from Zurara a similar hadit.

H 697, Ch. 52, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Sinan from Ishaq ibn 'Ammar from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following. "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, disciplined and
educated His Prophet to the level that He wanted and said, ""O Muhammad,
you certainly possess a great degree of moral discipline and education.
(64:4).

The He made him the in charge of His religion and said, ". . .what the
Messenger (of Allah) you, you must take (obey) and what he prohibits
you, you must desist from. . ." (59:7) Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, declared the laws of inheritance and did not assign any part for
the grandfather.

The Messenger of Allah assigned one sixth for him. Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, granted permission in the matter in His words as
follows. "This is our gift to you, you may grant it others or keep it
without being held responsible (38:39)"

H 698, Ch. 52, h 7

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'ala ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from Zurarah from abu Ja'far (a.s.)
who has said the following. "The Messenger of Allah (s.a.) sanctioned
the compensation for a damaged eye and the bloodmoney for the slain
person. He pronounced the consumption of Nabidh (a beverage from dates)
and all intoxicants as unlawful."

A man asked the Imam (a.s.) said, "Did the Messenger of Allah sanction
this law without receiving any thing (from Allah)?" the Imam (a.s.)
said, "Yes, so it could be founnd out who obeys the Messenger and who
disobeys him."

H 699, Ch. 52, h 8

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan who has
said the following. "I found in the Nawadir (works) of Muhammad ibn
Sinan narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan who has said that abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) has said the following. "No, I swear by Allah, that He has no
made anyone of His creatures the in charge except the Messenger of Allah
and the Imams (a.s.).

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, " We have sent down to
you the Book with the truth, so that you may judge between the people by
that which Allah has shown you (4:105) and it is continued to be valid
and in full force with the executors of his will."

H 700, Ch. 52, h 9

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from Ya'qub
ibn Yazid from al-Hassan ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan
al-Maythami from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.
"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, disciplined and educated His
Messenger until he was well established in whatever He wanted.

Then He made him the in charge as He, the Most Holy, the Most High, has
said, ". . .what the Messenger (of Allah) you, you must take (obey) and
what he prohibits you, you must desist from. . ." (59:7) Of whatever
Allah has made His Messenger the in charge He has made us also the in
charge of it."

H 701, Ch. 52, h 10

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from some of our people from al-Husayn
ibn 'Abd alRahman from Sandal al-Khayyat from Zayd al-Shahham who has
said that he asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the meaning of the the
following words of Allah.

"This is our gift to you, you may grant it others or keep it without
being held responsible (38:39)" The Imam (a. s.) said, "Solomon was
given a great kingdom. This verse continued to apply to the Messenger of
Allah. He had authority to grant whatever he wished to whomever he
wished and withhold from whomever he wished. Allah granted him a favor
greater than what He had granted to Solomon as He has said, ". . .what
the Messenger (of Allah) you, you must take (obey) and what he prohibits
you, you must desist from. . ." (59:7)"


