Chapter 55 : the Spirits That Exist in the Imams (a.s.) H 714, Ch. 55, H 1
==========================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from Hammad ibn 'Isa from Ibrahim ibn 'Umar al-Yamani from
Jabir al-Ju'fi from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "O
Jabir, Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High has created th e creatures in
three categories as mentioned in the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High.

"On that day, you (mankind) will be divided into three groups: (56:7)
The people of the right hand - those whose books of records will be
placed in their right hands. How happy they will be! (56:8). The people
of the left hand - those whose books of records will be placed in their
left hands. How miserable they will be! (56:9). The foremost ones (in
faith and virtue) - the foremost ones in receiving their reward."
(56:10).

The foremost group is the messengers and the people of special status
with Allah among His creatures. Allah has placed in them five spirits
and has supported them with the Holy Spirit. Through this spirit they
recognize things. He has supported them with the spirit of faith because
of which they maintain fear of Allah (in their souls).

They are supported also with the spirit of power because of which they
are able to obey Allah. They are also supported with the spirit of
desires with which they maintain their desire of worshipping and obeying
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High and dislike disobedience. He has
placed in them the social spirit to socialize and establish proper
relations among people.

In the believers and the people of the right hand He has placed the
spirit of faith because of which they maintain fear of Allah. He has
placed in them the spirit of power with which they obey Allah. He has
placed in them the spirit of desire. With it they desire to obey Allah.
He has also placed in the social spirit and because of this they
maintain social relations."

H 715, Ch. 55, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Musa ibn
'Umar from Muhammad ibn Sinan from 'Ammar ibn Marwan from al-Munakhkhal
from Jabir who has said that when I asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) about the
knowledge the scholar he said the following.

"O Jabir, in the prophets and in the executors of their will there are
five spirits. They are the Holy Spirit, the spirit of faith, the spirit
of life, the spirit of power and the spirit of desire. Through the Holy
Spirit, O Jabir, they receive the knowledge all that is below the Throne
all the way to under the land.

" He then said, "O Jabir, these four spirits are the kind of spirits
that may become affected by the events that take place. Only the Holy
Spirit is that which does trifle and wander around."

H 716, Ch. 55, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from al-Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
'Abdallah ibn Idris from Muhammad ibn Sinan that al-Mufadal ibn 'Umar
who has said that I asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) the following.

"I asked him about the knowledge of the Imams of the regions of the
earth when he is in his house secluded behind the curtains. The Imam
(a.s.) said, "O Mufuddal, Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has place
five spirits in the Prophet.

Of such one is the spirit of life with which is movement and
activities. There is the spirit of power with is uprising and
assiduousness and the spirit of desire with which is consumption of
nutrients and reproduction in lawful ways. There is the spirit of faith
with which is peace and justice.

There is the Holy Spirit with which prophet-hood is carried. When the
prophet passes away the Holy Spirit transfers and comes over to the Imam
(a.s.). The Holy Spirit does not sleep or become unaware. It does not
trifle or maintain false hopes. The other four spirits sleep, become
unaware, may maintain false hope or trifle. With the Holy Spirit things
are seen."


**Chapter 56 : The Spirit with which the Imams (a.s.) are Protected H
717, Ch. 56, h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from
abu 'al-Sabah al-Kinani from abu Basir who has said the following. "I
asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High.

"Thus, We have revealed a Spirit to you, (Muhammad), by Our command.
Before, you did not even know what a Book or Faith was, . . ." (42:52)
The Imam (a.s.) said, "He is a creature of the creatures of Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High greater than Jibril and Mika'il. He was with
the Messenger of Allah to give him news and protected him and he is with
the Imams after the Messenger of Allah."

H 718, Ch. 56, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Ali
ibn Asbat from Asbat ibn Salim who has said the following. "Once a man
from Hayt (a town in Iraq) asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), -when I was
present also-, about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.
"Thus, We have revealed a Spirit to you, (Muhammad), by Our command.

Before, you did not even know what a Book or Faith was, . . ." (42:52)
The Imam (a.s.) said, "From the day Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
sent that Spirit to Muhammad (s.a.) he did not ever since ascent and he
is present with us."

H 719, Ch. 56, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from ibn
Muskan from abu Basir who has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "They ask
you about the Spirit. Say, "The Spirit comes by the command of my Lord.
. . ." (17:85). The Imam (a.s.) said, "He is a creature greater than
Jibril and Mika'il. He was with the Messenger of Allah and he is present
with the Imams. He is from the realm of the angels."

H 420, Ch. 56, h 4

Ali has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from abu Ayyub
al-Khazzaz from abu Basir who has said the following. "I heard abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) say, '"They ask you about the Spirit. Say, "The Spirit
comes by the command of my Lord. . . ." (17:85). The Imam (a.s.) said,
"He is a creature greater than Jibril and Mika'il. He was present with
anyone before except Muhammad (s.a.). He is present with the Imams
(a.s.). He protects them. It is not that whatever is desired is
found."

H 721, Ch. 56, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from 'Imran ibn Musa from Musa ibn
Ja'far from Ali ibn Asbat from Muhammad ibn Fudayl from abu Hamzah who
has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the
knowledge.

Is it a knowledge that the scholar learns from the mouths of the people
or it is in the with you from which you read and then learn therefrom."
The Imam (a.s.) said, "The issue is greater and more urgently needed.
Have you not heard the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
"Thus, We have revealed a Spirit to you, (Muhammad), by Our command.

Before, you did not even know what a Book or Faith was, . . ."
(42:52)?" The The Imam (a.s.) said, "What does your people say about
this verse? Do they read that he was as such that he did not know what
the or the was?" I said, "I do not know, "May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, what they say." The Imam (a.s.) then said, "Yes,
he lived in a condition wherein he did not know the book and the faith
untill Allah, the Most High, sent the Spirit who is mentioned in the
book.

When the Spirit was inspired (sent) to him he learned through him the
knowledge and understanding. He is the Spirit whom Allah, the Most High
grants to whoever He wants. When He grants him to a servant he teaches
him understanding."

H 522, Ch. 56, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Ali
ibn Asbat from al-Husayn ibn abu al-'Ala' from Sa'd al-Iskaf who has
said the following. "Once a man came to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.)
asking him about the Spirit. "Is he not Jibril?" Amir al- Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.) then said, "Jibril is of the angels.

The Spirit is not Jibril. He repeated it to the man. The man said, "You
have said something very much extraordinary. No one other than you
thinks that the Spirit is somme one other than Jibril." Amir al-Mu'minin
Ali (a.s.) said to him, "You are mislead and narrate from the mislead
people.

Allah, the Most High has said to His Prophet (s.a.), 'Allah's help will
certainly support (the believers), so pagans do not (seek) to hasten it.
Allah is far Glorious and Exalted than to be considered equal to idols."
(16:1) He sends the angels with the Spirit. The Spirit is (a creature)
other than the angels (a.s.)."


