Chapter 57 : the Time When the Imam Learns the Knowledge of the Imam Before Him (a.s.) H 723, Ch. 57, H 1
=========================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from Ali ibn Asbat from al-Hakam ibn Miskin from certain
persons of our people who has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.), 'When does the succeeding one (Imam) come to know of what the
one preceding him knew?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "At the last minute of
the life of the Imam before him."

H 724, Ch. 57, h 2

Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Ali ibn Asbat
from al-Hakam ibn Miskin from 'Ubayd ibn Zurarah and a group with him
who has said the following. "We heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say, 'The
succeeding Imam comes to know of the knowledge of the preceding Imam in
the last minute of the time left from his life.'"

H 725, Ch. 57, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Ya'qub
ibn Yazid from Ali ibn Asbat from certain persons of his people who has
said that I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the following. "When does the
Imam come to know that he has become the Imam and position is
transferred to him?" The Imam (a.s.) replied, "At the last minute of the
life of the preceding Imam (a.s.)."


**Chapter 58 : The Imams (a.s.) are all Equal in Knowledge, Courage and
Obedience H 726, Ch. 58, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn abu Zahir from
al-Khashshab from Ali ibn Hass'an from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "The offspring of the
believers will also follow them to Paradise. So shall We join their
offspring to them because of their faith.

We shall reduce nothing from their deeds.. . ."(52:21) The Imam (a.s.)
said, "Believers refers to the Holy Prophet and Amir al- Mu'mini (a.s.)
.

Offspring refers to the Imams and the executors of the wills (a.s.) We
make them follow means that We will not reduce anything from the Divine
authority of their offspring. It will be the same as that which Muhammad
(s.a.) had transferred to Ali (a.s.). Their authority is one and the
same and obedience to them is the same."

H 727, Ch. 58, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah has narrated from his father from
Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Dawud al-Nahdi from Al,i ibn Ja'far who has
narrated the following from abu al-Hassan. "In knowledge and courage we
all are equal. In benefaction and grants we do to the degree we are
commanded."

H 728, Ch. 58, h 3

Ahmad ibn Muhammad has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from Ali
ibn Isma'il from Safwan ibn Yahya from ibn Muskan from al-Harith ibn
al-Mughirah who has narrated the following from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.).
"We in the matters of commands, understanding, lawful and unlawful all
are alike and the same. However, the Messenger of Allah and Ali (a. s.)
have their own virtue and excellence."


**Chapter 59 : Each Imam knows the succeeding Imam (a.s.) The words of
Allah, the Most High, "Allah commands you to deliver the trust to its
people,"(4:58) is a reference to the Imams (a.s.) H 729, Ch. 59, h 1**

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha' from Ahmad ibn 'A'idh from ibn 'Udhayna
from Burayd al-'Ijli who has said that I asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) about
the following verse of the Holy Quran.

"Allah (God) commands you to return that which had been entrusted to
you to the rightful owners. Be just when passing judgment among people.
. . ." (4:58) The Imam (a.s.) said, " We are intended thereby. The
preceding Imam must transfer to the succeeding Imam the books, the
knowledge and the armaments. 'Be just when passing judgment among
people' means what is in your possession.

Then Allah has said to people, "Believers, obey God, His Messenger, and
your leaders (who possess Divine authority). . . ." (4:59) This is how
it was revealed. How Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, would command
them to obey the people who possess authority and then allow people to
dispute them? This is said to those who are commanded by the command of,
"Believers, obey God, His Messenger, and your leaders (who possess
Divine authority). . . ." (4:59)

H 730, Ch. 59, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha' from Ahmad ibn 'Umar who has said that I
asked abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a. s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High. "Allah (God) commands you to return that which had
been entrusted to you to the rightful owners.

Be just when passing judgment among people. . . ." (4:58) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "They are the Imams (a.s.) from the family of Muhammad
(s.a.) who are commanded to deliver the trust to the succeeding Imam
(a.s.) exclusively and to no one else and that the succeeding Imams must
not be deprived of this trust."

H 731, Ch. 59, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from Muhammad ibn Fudayl from abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.)
about the following words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. "Allah
(God) commands you to return that which had been entrusted to you to the
rightful owners.

Be just when passing judgment among people. . . ." (4:58) The Imam
(a.s.) said, "They are the Imams (a.s.). The Imam (a.s.) must deliver
the trust to the succeeding Imam (a.s.) exclusively and to no one else
and that the succeeding Imams must not be deprived of this trust."

H 732, Ch. 59, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Sinan from Ishaq ibn 'Ammar from ibn abu Ya'fur from Mu'alla ibn
al-Khunays who has said that I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the
words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.

"Allah (God) commands you to return that which had been entrusted to
you to the rightful owners.. . ." (4:58) The Imam (a.s.) said, "it is
the command of Allah that the preceding Imam (a.s.) transfer to the
succeeding Imam (a.s.) every thing that is with him."

H 733, Ch. 59, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from ibn
Mahbub from al-'Ala' ibn Razin from 'Abdallah ibn abu Ya'fur from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "The does not die until he
learns who the succeeding Imams is so he would deliver his will to
him."

H 734, Ch. 59, h 6

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya from (ibn) abu 'Uthman from al-Mu'alla ibn Khunays from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following "The Imam (a.s.) knows
the succeeding Imam and delivers his will to him."

H 735, Ch. 59, h 7

Ahmad has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from abu 'Abdallah
al-Barqi from Fudalah ibn Ayyub from Sulayman ibn Khalid from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "No scholar (Imam) has ever
died before Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, would grant him the
knowledge of to who must he deliver his will."


