Chapter 60 : the Imamat (leadership With Divine Authority) Is a Covenant From Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, Delivered As Such By the Preceding Imam To the Succeeding Imam (a.s.) One After the Other H 736, Ch. 60, H 1
===============================================================================================================================================================================================================================

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha'who has said that 'Umar ibn Aban has
narrated to me from abu Basir who has said the following. "Once I was in
the presence of abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). People mentioned the executors of
the will and I mentioned Isma'il.

The Imam (a.s.) said, "No, I swear by Allah. O abu Muhammad, it is not
up to us. It is up to no one except Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.
He makes them descend one after the other."

H 737, Ch. 60, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from ibn abu 'Umayr from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from 'Amr ibn
al-Ash'ath who has said that I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the
following.

"Do you think that a testator of us chooses whoever he wants as the
executor of his will? No, I swear by Allah, it is not so. It is a
covenant from Allah and His Messenger to a man and then to next man
until the matter is delivered to its rightful owner."

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from Hammad ibn 'Isa from Minhal from 'Amr ibn
al-Ash'ath from abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) a similar hadith.

H 738, Ch. 60, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Muhammad from Bakr ibn Salih from Muhammad ibn Sulayman from 'Aytham
ibn Aslam from Mu'awiya ibn 'Ammar from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has
said the following.

"Imamat (leadership with Divine authority) is a covenant from Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High, pledged to particularly known man. The
Imam does not have the right to divert it from the succeeding Imam.
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, sent inspiration to David to
appoint the executor of his will from among your family.

It is has occurred in My knowledge that shall not sent any prophet
except that he will have the executor of his will from among the members
of his family. David had several children. Among the members of the
family members of David there was a son whose mother lived with David
and he loved her very much. David came to her when the Divine
inspiration came to him and he said to her, Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High, has sent me inspirations and He wants me to appoint the
executor of my will from among the members of my family.

His wife asked him to appoint her son for this task. He said, "I also
want what you said. " In the foregone knowledge of Allah it was already
decisively existed that executor of the will of David is Solomon. Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High, sent inspiration to David commanding him
not to made hasty decisions before the coming of His order.

It was not long after that two man came to David to settle a dispute
over the sheep and grapes among them. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, sent inspiration to David to gather all of his sons together and
let them judge the case. Whoever of your sons then would judge the case
rightly he will be the executor of your will. David gathered all his
sons. When the case was stated Solomon said, "O owner of grapes, when
did the sheep of this man enter your vinyard?" He replied, "They entered
at night."

Solomon said, "O owner of sheep, I have judged against you. You must
give the young and the wool of your sheep to him this year." David then
said, "Why did you not judge giving away of the very sheep as the
because the Israelite scholars have already evaluated them and the price
of sheep is the value of grapes?" Solomon answered, "The vines are not
consumed from their roots but only the fruit is consumed that will come
back in future.

" Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, sent inspiration to David that
the judgment in this case is the judgment of Solomon. O David, "You
wanted one thing and We had wanted other than that. David came to his
wife and said, "We wanted one thing but Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, wanted a thing other than that.

Nothing happened other than what Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
had wanted. We accept the command of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, and submit (to His will)." The Imam (a.s.) then said, "And so are
the executors of the wills. They have no right to go beyond the limit to
avail it to the other people."

Al-Kulayni has said, "The meaning of the first hadith is that had the
sheep have entered the vineyard during the day the owner of the sheep
did not have to pay anything. The sheep owner must let them graze during
the day and vineyard owner must guard his vineyard. The owner of sheep
must guard his sheep at night and the owner of vineyard can rest at
home."

H 739, Ch. 60, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn abu
'Umayr from ibn Bukayr and Jamil from 'Amr ibn Mu'ab who has said that I
heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) say the following. "Do you think that a
testator of us chooses whoever he wants as the executor of his will? No,
I swear by Allah, it is not so. It is a covenant from the Messenger of
Allah to a man and then to next man. Until the Imam (abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) ended up to his self." The Imam (a.s.) six times said, "To the
next man."

1. The case with David and Solomon (a.s.) is referred to in the Holy
Quran (21:78 - 79) .


**Chapter 61 : The Imams (a.s.) never did and would not do anything
except because of the covenant of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
and a command from Him and they did not go beyond such limits H 740, Ch.
61, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya and al-Husayn ibn Muhammad have narrated from Ja'far
ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali from Isma'il ibn Mihran from
abu Jamilah from Mu'adh ibn Kathir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has
said the following.

"The will came from the heavens to Muhammad (s.a) in a book (written)
Nothing came to Muhammad (s.a) from heavens in a written sealed document
form except the will. Jibril (a.s.) said, "O Muhammad (s. a) this is
your will about your followers with your family. The Messenger of Allah
asked, "Which family of mine O Jibril.

" Jibril replied, "The noble of Allah among them (your family) and his
descendents so they inherit your knowledge as Abraham left it
(knowledge) as his legacy. This legacy of Abraham is for Ali (a.s.) and
your descendents from his lineage." The Imam (a.s.) has said, "The
document had several seals on it.

" The Imam (a.s.) has further said, "Ali (a.s.) opened the first seal
and followed what the instructions therein. Then al- Hassan (a.s.)
opened the second seal and followed the commandments and instructions
therein. When al-Hassan (a.s.) passed away then al-Husayn (a.s.) opened
the third seal and found therein instruction to fight to do away with
the enemy and be murdered and rise up (against the enemy) with a group
of people for martyrdom.

There will be martyrdom for them without you." The Imam (a.s.) has
said, "Al-Husayn (a.s.) followed the instructions (entirely) and when he
left this world he delivered it to Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) just before
his martyrdom. Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) opened the fourth seal and found
in it instruction to remain silent and gaze in your front because of the
concealment of knowledge.

Just before his passing away he delivered it to Muhammad ibn Ali
(a.s.). He opened the fifth seal and found therein instructions to
interpret the book of Allah, the Most High, affirm veracity of your
father and leave it as your legacy for your son. Do good to the 'Umma
(nation), stand up for right of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, say
the truth in fear and in peace and do not be afraid of anyone except
Allah.

He did as he was instructed and delivered it to the succeeding Imam."
The narrator has said that he said to the Imams (a.s.), "May Allah take
my soul in service for your cause, are you then the succeeding Imam?"
The narrator has said that the Imams (a.s.) then said, "There is nothing
wrong in a positive answer to your question except if then you would go,
O Mu'adh, and narrate to people thing that would harm me." The narrator
has said that he then said to the Imams (a.s.), "I pray to Allah who has
granted you this through your noble ancestors this high position to
grant to your successor the same high position before you will die.

" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah has already done so, O Mu'adh." The
narrator has said that he then asked the Imams (a.s.), "Who then he is,
"May Allah take my soul in service for your cause?" The Imam (a.s.)
replied, "This sleeping one. He pointed with his hand to the righteous
servant of Allah who was asleep (Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.)."

H 741, Ch. 61, h 2

Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn Yahya have narrated from Muhammad
ibn al- Husayn from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from abu al-Hassan al-Kinani from
Ja'far ibn Najih al- Kindi from Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn 'Ubaydallah
al-'Umari from his father from his grandfather from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
who has said the following.

"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High sent a document to His prophet
(s.a) before his death. He then said, "O Muhammad, this is your will to
the noble ones in your family." He asked, "Who are the noble ones in my
family, O Jibril?" He then said, "They are Ali ibn abu Talib and his
sons (a.s.)."

On the document there were several seals of gold. The Prophet (s.a)
delivered it to Amir al- Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) and commanded him to open
one seal and follow the instructions for him therein. Amir al-Mu'minin
Ali (a.s.) then opened one seal and followed the instruction in it.

Then he delivered it to his son al-Hassan (a.s.). He opened a seal and
followed that which was therein. He then delivered it to al-Husayn
(a.s.). He opened one seal and found therein instruction that asked him
to rise for martyrdom with a group of people. That there will be no
martyrdom for them except along with and sale yourself to Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High. He followed all the instructions. Then he
delivered it to Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.).

He opened one seal and found therein instructions therein that asked
him to fix his gaze just before him and remain silent, secluded in your
house and worship your Lord until your death will arrive. He did as he
was instructed and then delivered it to his son Muhammad ibn Ali (a.
s.).

He opened one seal and found therein instructions that asked him to
speak to people and make them learn. Do not fear anyone except Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High because no one can harm you. He followed
the instructions and then delivered it to his son Ja'far (a.s.).

He opened one seal and found therein instructions that asked him to
speak to people, make them learn, propagate the knowledge of your family
(Ahl al-Bayt) and affirm the veracity of your righteous ancestors. Do
not be afraid of anyone except Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High
because you are secure and safe. He did as was instructed and then
delivered it to his son Musa (a.s.).In the same Musa (a.s.) will deliver
it to the succeeding Imam and so on up to the appearance of al-Mahdi
(s.a) "

H 742, Ch. 61, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from ibn Ri'ab from Durays al-Kunasi from Humran who has said that once
Humran asked abu Ja'far (a.s.) the following. "May Allah take my soul in
service for your cause, 'Why the cases of Ali al-Hassan and al-Husayn
(a.s.) come about the way they did?

Their rising and coming out for the religion of Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High their suffering and being murdered at the hands of the
rebellious devils and their defeat until they all were murdered and
defeated.'" Abu Ja'far (a.s.) then said, "O Humran, Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High had destined it for them. So it was decreed,
approved and was made unavoidable.

Then He executed it but it all happened with the prior knowledge of the
same through the Messenger of Allah. Ali al- Hassan and al-Husayn (a.s.)
all rose for the cause of Allah with knowledge of the consequences
remained silent whoever of us that remained silent."

H 743, Ch. 61, h 4

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Harith ibn Ja'far from Ali ibn
Isma'il ibn Yaqtin from 'Isa ibn al-Mustafad, abu Musa al-Darir who has
said that Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) narrated to me the following.

"I said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Was Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) not
the writer of the will, the Messenger of Allah dictating, Jibril and the
prominent angels as witness?" The Imam (a.s.) has said that he remained
silent for quite a while and then said, "O abu al-Hassan what you said
was true, however, when the command descended up on the Messenger of
Allah, the will also came in the form of a sealed document.

Jibril brought it along with the trustees of Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High, from among the angels. Jibril then said, "O Muhammad (s.a)
order every one to leave you except the executor of your will so he can
take possession of the same and make us to bear witness that you
delivered it to him and he (Ali (a. s.), take charge of the same in our
presence.

The Holy Prophet (s.a) ordered everyone else, except Ali (a.s.). Fatima
was present between the door and the curtain. Jibril then said, "O
Muhammad, your Lord declares peace and safety to you and says, "This is
the documentation of My covenant that I had made with you, the
conditions that I had set up and I had made My angels to bear witness to
it. In fact, O Muhammad, I Myself am sufficient as a witness.

" The Imam (a.s.) has said, "At that time all the joints in the body of
Muhammad began to shake and shiver. He then said, "O Jibril my lord
Himself is peace, from Him comes peace and to Him returns peace. He,
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has spoken the truth and has
granted favors. Please allow me to have the document." Jibril then
delivered it to him and commanded him to deliver it to Amir al-Mu'minin
Ali (a.s.). He asked Ali (a.s.) to read it. He then read it word by
word. The Prophet (s.a) then said, "O Ali (a.s.), this is the covenant
of my Lord, the Most Holy, the Most High, to me and His conditions upon
me and His trust with me.

I have now delivered it, given good-advise and fulfilled my
responsibility." Ali (a.s.) then said, "I testify in your favor, may
Allah take my soul and the souls of my parents in service for your
cause, for delivering the trust, granting good advise and affirmation of
your speaking the truth.

My ears, my eyes, my flesh and my blood all bear witness to this."
Jibril then said, "I also am of the witnesses to this fact for both of
you." The Messenger of Allah (s.a) then said, "O Ali, have you taken
possession of my will, learned its contents and offered a guarantee to
Allah and to me to follow the instructions therein?

" Ali (a.s.) then said, "Yes, 'may Allah take my soul and the souls of
my parents in service for your cause, it is my responsibility to follow
the instructions therein and from Allah comes support for me and my
success in the fulfillment of my responsibility."

The Messenger of Allah then said, "O Ali, I would like to ask you to
bear testimony to my promise of rewarding for it (your executing my
will) on the Day of Judgment." Ali (a.s.) said, "Yes, I do bear such
testimony." The Prophet (s.a) then said, "Jibril and Mika'il are between
us now and with them present are the prominent angels.

Would you agree if I would ask them to bear testimony to this fact?" He
then said, "Yes, they may bear testimony and I, may Allah take my soul
and the souls of my parents in service for your cause, also ask them to
bear testimony.

" Then the Messenger of Allah made them to bear testimony. Of the
matters that the Messenger of Allah set as condition up on Ali (a.s.) on
orders from Jibril of the commands of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, were the following. He said, "O Ali, you must follow the
instruction in the will about loving those who love Allah and His
Messenger and to disdain and maintain unfriendly attitude towards those
who are enemies of Allah and His Messenger.

It requires patience on your part and control over your anger for the
usurpation of my right and the usurpation of one fifth that belongs to
you and for the disregard of your respect and honor." Ali (a.s.) then
said, "Yes, O the Messenger of Allah, I accept it (this condition).

Ali (a.s.) has said, "I swear by the One Who helps the seed to burst
open and shapes the fetuses that I heard Jibril say to the Prophet (s.a)
this. "O Muhammad, explain to him that people will disregard his respect
and honor which is the respect and honor of Allah and His Messenger and
that his beard will be tainted with fresh blood (from his head)." Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) has said, "A loud sigh came out of my mouth when
I understood the very words of Jibril, the trustworthy one.

I fell up on my face to the ground and I said, "Yes, I accept and agree
even if it will end up to the disregard of respect and honor. (I agree)
even if (people) will disregard the noble traditions, insult the Book,
destroy the Ka'ba and taint my beard with fresh blood from my head. (I
accept it) with patience and leave to Allah for judgement for all times
until I will arrive to meet you."

The Messenger of Allah then called Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Husayn to
his presence and informed them of what he had explained to Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.). They all said just like what Ali (a.s.) had
said. The will was then sealed with the seals of gold that fire had not
touched. It was delivered to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.).

" The narrator has said that he asked the Imam abu al-Hassan (a.s.),
"May Allah take my soul and the souls of my parents in service for your
cause, would you please describe what was there in the will?" The Imam
(a. s.) said, " It contained the traditions of Allah and the traditions
of His Messenger." I then asked, "Was there anything about their
attacking and opposition to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a. s.)?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, " Yes, I swear by Allah, all and every thing was there
letter by letter.

Have you not heard the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
"It is We who bring the dead to life and record the deeds of human
beings and their consequences (of continual effects).

We keep everything recorded in an illustrious Imam (Book)." (36:12) I
swear by Allah that the Messenger of Allah said to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.) and Fatima, "Did you understand well my presentation of the
matter to you and did you agree to and accept it? They replied, "Yes, we
did so. We will exercise patience to face what will disappoint us and
cause us anger."

In the script of al-Safwan there is the following addition.

H 744, Ch. 61, h 5

Ali in Ibrahim has narrated from his father from 'Abdallah ibn 'Abd
al-Rahman al-'Assam from abu 'Abdallah al-Bazzaz from Hariz who has said
the following. "I said to abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), "May Allah take my soul
in service for your cause, why is it that you members of the family of
the Prophet (s.a) live such a short lives? Your deaths are so close and
soon after the other Imam even though people need you so much?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, "For everyone of us there is a document that contains what
he needs to do within his time.

When his assignment according to the commandments therein is complete
he learns that his time of death has arrived. The Prophet (s.a) comes to
him to give the news of his death and informs him of all that is for him
with Allah.

Al-Husayn (a.s.) read the document that was given to him and the news
of his death was explained to him, however, certain things were not yet
complete. He came out to face the enemy and of the matters that were not
yet complete was that the angels had asked Allah to grant them
permission to support al-Husayn (a.s.) against his enemies which He
granted them.

They delayed to ready themselves and prepare to fight until he was
murdered. They descended but his time was over and was killed already.
The angels said, "Lord, You granted us permission to descend and to help
him. We descended but You have already taken his soul away. Allah then
sent them inspiration that said, "Remain on his grave until you see him
come out then help him.

Weep for him and for your loss of the opportunity to provide him help
and support. You were certainly assigned for his support and help and to
weep for him. The angels then wept in mourning and sadness for their
loss of the opportunity to help and support to him. When he will come
out they will be of his helpers."


