Chapter 62 : Evidence of Imam's Possessing Divine Authority H 745, Ch. 62, H 1
==============================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn abu
Nasr who has said that he asked abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) the
following. "When the Imam dies through what means one would know the
succeeding Imam (a.s.)?" He said, "For the Imam there are certain signs.
Of such sign one is that he must be the eldest son of his father.

The will and excellence must be found in him and when people come to
ask who is appointed the executor of the will in answer it can be said
that so and so is appointed the executor of the will. The Armament with
us is like the Ark in the Israelites. Imamat (leadership with Divine
authority) is always with the Armament wherever it may go."

H 746, Ch. 62, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Yazid.
Sha'ar from Harun ibn Hamza from 'Abd al-A'la who has said that he asked
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the following.

"In the case of those who rush to hold control of this matter
(leadership) and who claim to be for it, how would one verify their
possessing Divine authority?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "They are asked
about the rules of lawful and unlawful matters." The narrator has said
that the Imam (a.s.) then turned to me and said, "There are three
evidence that are not found in one person except the rightful owner of
this status.

He must be the closest person to the preceding Imam that the Armament
must be with him and he would be the appointed executor of the will in a
public manner. So much so that if one would come to the town and ask the
common people even the children as to who the executor of the will of so
and so is? They would say so and so is the executor of the will of so
and so."

H 747, Ch. 62, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Hisham ibn Salim and Hafs ibn al-Bakhtari who has said the following. "
Once a certain person asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), "By what thing the
Imam is recognized?" He said, "He is recognized through a publicly
established will, through excellence in perfection.

In the case of Imam no one must be able to raise objections in matters
words, of his consumption and sexual matters so that people would say,
"He is a liar, usurping other's properties and such similar things."

H 748, Ch. 62, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn Isma'il from Ali ibn
al-Hakam from Mu'wiya ibn Wahab who has said that asked the following
from abu Ja'far (a.s.), "What is the sign of being A number of our
people has narrated from Imam after the preceding Imam (a.s.)?" The Imam
(a.s.) said, " Being of pure birth, good up bringing and that he would
not trifle or engage in amusement."

H 749, Ch. 62, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from
Ahmad ibn 'Umar who has said that he asked the following from abu
al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.), "What is the proof that establishes one's
possessing Divine authority or the his ownership of leadership?" Such
proofs are being the elder, possession of superior moral achievements
and one being appointed as the executor of the will.

So much so that people would come to the town and ask who is appointed
as the executor of the will of so and so it would be said to them so and
so son of so and so and these go along wherever the Armament would go.
Asking questions does not establish any authority."

H 750, Ch. 62, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from abu Yahya
al-Wasiti from Hisham ibn Salim from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following. "The leadership is with being the elder as long as he is
free of defects."

H 751, Ch. 62, h 7

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali from abu Basir who
has said that he asked the following from abu al-Hassan (a.s.) , "May
Allah take my soul in service for your cause, what is the proof to know
the Imam (a.s.) ?" He said, "Through several qualities.

The first thing is that his father must have said to this effect about
him so that it could be considered a proof up on him. And that when
asked he would answer and if one remain silent he would begin to speak
on the issue and inform of the things that would happen the next day
that can speak to people in everyone's own language.

" Then he said to me, "O abu Muhammad, allow me to give you a sign
before you stand up to go. Not very long after this a man from Khurasan
came in. The man from Khurasan spoke to the Imam in Arabic but abu al-
Hassan (a.s.) answered him in Persian. The man from Khurasan said, "I
swear by Allah, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, the
only thing that stopped from speaking to you in Persian was I thought
you might not know Persian.

" He then said, "Glory belongs to Allah, If would not b e able to
answer you (in Persian) than how would have any excellence over you?" He
said to me, "O abu Muhammad, "No one's language is unknown to the Imam
(a.s.) nor the language of birds, animals and any living things. Whoever
would not have these qualities he is not A number of our people has
narrated from Imam."


**Chapter 63 : Proof that Imamat (leadership with Divine Authority)
Continues in the Descendents of the Preceding Imam but not through his
Brother or Paternal Uncle or other such Relatives H 752, Ch. 63, h 1**

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from
al-Husayn ibn Thuwayr ibn abu Fakhita from abu'Abdallah (a.s.) who has
said the following.

"Imamat (Leadership with Divine Authority) will never go to two
brothers after al-Hassan and al- Husayn (a.s.). It has continued from
Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) as Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High has
said, "The relatives are closer to each other, according to the Book of
God, . . ." (33:6) After Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) will only be
found in the descendents one after the other."

H 753, Ch. 63, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn
Walid from Yunus ibn Ya'qub who has said that he heard abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) say the following. " Allah has disdained to place Imamat in two
brothers after al-Hassan and al-Husayn (a.s.)."

H 754, Ch. 63, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Muhammad ibn Isma'il ibn Bazi' who has said the following. "Abu
al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) was once asked, "Can Imamat continue in
uncles?" He replied, "No, it can not happen." The narrator has said that
he asked the Imams (a.s.), "Can it continue in a brother?" He replied,
"No, it can not happen." I then asked, "With who then it can continues?"
He replied, "It will continue with my children." In those days he hadd
no children."

H 755, Ch. 63, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al Husayn from 'Abd
al-Rahman ibn abu Najran from Sulayman ibn Ja'fari from Hammad ibn 'Isa
from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Imamat
(Leadership with Divine Authority) does not take place in two brothers
after al-Hassan and al-Husayn (a.s.). It only continues in the
descendents of the Imam (a.s.) generation after the generation."

H 756, Ch. 63, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from ibn
abu Najran from 'Isa ibn 'Abdallah ibn 'Umar ibn Ali ibn abu Talib
(a.s.) who has said that he asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) the following.
"Would there happen what is to happen, may Allah would not show me such
a day (death of the Imam (a.s.) who then must I follow as my Imam?" The
Imam (a.s.) pointed to his son Musa (a.s.).

The narrator has said that he asked the Imams (a. s.), " What if
something will happen to Musa (a.s.) who then must I follow?" The Imam
(a.s.), "Follow a son.

" I then asked, "What if something would happen to the son and the Imam
would leave behind an elder brother or a small son then who must I
follow?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Follow his son and so on one after the
other." In the script of Sawan it says, ". . .and so on forever."


