Event 5
=======

Amr Ibn Saeed, after getting the news, went up the pulpit and within a
speech conveyed the news to the people. Bani Hâshem became very sad by
this news and they arranged mourning. Zainab, daughter of Aquil bin Abi
Tâlib127 recited a dirge and said: "What will you reply when the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) asks you, "Being the last Ummah what did you do to my
progeny after my departure?" Some of them were imprisoned and some were
drowned in their own blood. Had I willed you to misbehave with my
household, you would not have done worse than what you did. O you, who
killed Husain under utmost oppression, takes news of a painful
chastisement. Everyone who is in the heaven and every prophet and
messenger and every martyr (witness) wept over him. You are the cursed
ones who have been cursed by the tongues of Soloman, Moses, and
Jesus."

- Amr Ibn Saeed was the governor of Mecca and Medina under Muawiyah and
Yazeed. He went to Syria, co-operated with Marwân for getting the
caliphate. After Marwan, Abdul Malik, gave temporary governorship to
him. During his caliphate Abdul Malik intended to remove Amr from
governorship and Amr fled. Abdul Malik was after him until he caught and
killed him in 70 A.H. [Al-Isâbah Part 6850; Al-Elâm 4/78]

- In Ansâbul Ashraf, p.221, it is mentioned: Zainab was with Ali bin
Yazeed from Bani Muttalib bin Abde Manâf who brought forth children for
him. She was among slave girls and the mother of Wahab bin Wahab Abul
Bakhtari Qâzi.
\*\*\*\*

When the letter of Ibn Ziyâd reached Yazeed Ibn Muawiyah, and he got
acquainted with the story, he wrote a reply and ordered that the heads
of Husain (a.s.) and the martyrs, the women and family members, and bags
of Imâm be sent to him. Ibn Ziyâd called Mahaffar Ibn Thalaba and handed
over the heads and the slaves to him. The evil-hearted Mahaffar drove
the slaves savagely towards Syria.

Ibn Laheeah128 has narrated, from which we are quoting the required
parts as follow: He has said that he was praying round Ka?ba when he met
a man who was wailing, "O Allâh, forgive me, but I do not see to be
forgiven." I told him, "O servant of Allâh! Fear Allâh and do not say
so! Even if your sins are more than drops of rain, or leaves of all
trees, and you pray Allâh for pardon, Allâh will forgive you. He is the
All- forgiving and the Most Merciful." He told me, "Come close to me so
that I may tell you my story." I went close to him. He said, "We were
fifty men who carryied the holy head of Husain to Shâm. Every night we
put the head in the midst of a coffin and engaged in wine drinking
nearby. That night my friends were drunk. But I did not drink. As the
curtain of darkness fell on us and lightning began I saw that the gates
of the - Ibn Laeeah: Abdullâh Ibn Laheeah Ibn Marghan al-Hazrami Misri
Abu Abdur Rahmân was a Muhaddith of Egypt and a judge. He was among the
writers and compilers of hadith and one who had traveled a lot for
gaining knowledge. He died in 174 A.H. [Al-Wulat wal Quzat: 368]

sky opened and Ad?m, Noah, Abraham, Is?hâq, Ismaeil and Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) came down along with Gibrael (Gabriel- Spirit) and a
group of angels." "Gibrael approached the coffin, took out the holy head
from it, embraced and kissed it. All the prophets did likewise. The holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) wept by the side of the blessed head, and the other
messengers consoled him." Gibrael submitted the proposal, "O Muhammad!
Allâh, the Almighty, has commanded me regarding your nation that I
should do as you like. If you order, I may shake the earth severely, and
make it topsy-turvy, as I did to the nation of L?t."

The holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied: "No, Gibrael! Because I have made
an endowment with Allâh about them."129

- In the manuscript "B? it is mentioned: Then he offered prayer on the
holy head. Then a group of angels came and said: Allâh has ordered us to
kill these fifty fellows. The Prophet replied: Carry out your duty. They
inflicted blows by weapons on those fifty. One of them thought of
hitting me. I said: O Prophet of Allâh! Al-aman. He said: Go away. Allâh
will not pardon you. Next morning I saw that all of my fellow travelers
were finished on ground. In manuscript "A? after this story it is
mentioned: In the footnotes of Muhammad Ibn Najjar Shaykhul Muhaddithine
Baghdâd in the description of Ali Ibn Nasr Shabuki I saw an addition
that he wrote in this hadith with proofs: As they carried the holy head
of Hussain (a.s.) they sat for drinking wine. One of them brought the
head when suddenly a hand appeared and it wrote with a pen of iron on
the wall: Does the Ummah that killed Husain have any hope for the
intercession of his grandfather on the day of accounting? When the
people heard this they left the head and ran away.

The narrator says, "When the caravan of the slaves came near Damascus,"
Umme Kulthum approached Shimr and said, "I have a request."

He asked, "What do you need?"

She replied, "When you intend to make us enter the city, usher us from
a gate where there are less people and issue order to take the heads of
the martyrs out of the camel-litters, and to keep them away from us.
Because we have been much disgraced in the eyes of the people." Shimr,
due to his natural malice, gave an opposite order! The heads were placed
on the top of the spears, and put in the midst of camel-litters, and the
prisoners were thus paraded upto the gate of Damascus and thenceforth to
the gate of the Grand Mosque. Then they were confined to the detention
quarter.

It is mentioned in a tradition that when an elderly Muslim saw the holy
head of Hussain (a.s.), he hid himself from the people for one month.
Thereafter when people saw him they asked the reason. He replied: "Did
you not see what happen to us?" Then he recited the following prose:

O son of the daughter of Muhammad! They brought your head drenched in
your blood; Thus, O son of the daughter of Muhammad! They have openly
and intentionally killed the Prophet; They killed you, keeping you
thirsty, and did not pay attention to the Quran and its interpretation;
While killing you they said Allâho Akbar. Verily by killing you they
have killed Takbeer (Allâho Akbar) and Tahleel (Lâ ilâha illa Allah).

An old man approached the womenfolk and household of Husain (a.s.) when
they all were in the same place. Then he said, "Praise to Allâh Who
killed and destroyed you, and relieved the cities from your men, and
imposed the order of Amirul Momineen (Yazeed) on you!" Ali Ibn Hussain
(a.s.) told him, "O old man! Have you recited Quran?" He replied: "Yes."
Ali Ibn Hussain (a.s.): Did you understand the meaning of this vrese
that, "(O' Prophet) Say: I do not expect from you anything as wage (for
my Prophethood) except friendship with my close relatives?"(Quran
42:43)130 He replied: "I have read this verse!"

Ali Ibn Husain said: "We are "Zilqurba? (the close relatives of the
Prophet). O old man! Have you read in Bani Israel chapter this verse:
Observe the rights of Zilqurba (the close relatives)?"131 (Quran 17:26)
The old man: I have read it! Imam (a.s.): "We are the "Zilqurba"! Have
you read this verse," And know that whatever you may earn from
everything, then truly one-fifth of it is for Allâh, and Prophet, and
Zilqurba?132 (Quran 8:41) The old man: "Yes."

The Imam: We are the "qurba? O Shaykh! Have your read this verse,
"Indeed Allâh intended to remove - Surah Shoora 42:23
- Surah Bani Israel 17:26

- Surah Anfal 8:41

impurity from you Ahle Bayt, and to purify you, in the best
purification?"133 (Quran 33:33) The old man: "I have read it!" The Imam:
"O Shaykh! We are the Ahle Bayt whom the Almighty Allâh has identified
through this verse." The narrator has added: The old man kept quiet. He
felt ashamed for what he had said. Then he asked: "Tell me, by Allâh,
are you those persons?"

Sajjâd (a.s.): "By Allâh, we are those. I swear by our grandfather
that, without any doubt, we are the same people." The old man wept,
threw his turban on the ground. Then he raised his head towards sky and
said: "O? God! I hate the enemies of the ?le Muhammad, either jinns or
human beings." Then he asked, "Is there any scope of repentance for me?"
The Imam replied: "Yes. If you repent, Allâh will accept your
repentance, and you will be with us." The old man said: "I repent."

The story of that old man reached Yazeed. He ordered for his execution,
and he was killed. The narrators have said that thereafter the family
and womenfolk of Hussain (a.s.) were brought to Yazeed bound in ropes.
They stood before Yazeed in that condition. Ali Ibn Hussain (a.s.) said
to Yazeed, "By God, what do you think about the holy Prophet, if he
would see us in this condition?" Yazeed ordered to open their hands.

- Surah Ahzab 33:33

Then Yazeed placed the holy head of Hussain (a.s.) in his front, and
asked the womenfolk go behind so that they may not see the face of
Yazeed. Zainul ?bedin looked at the head and grief overtook him. When
Zainab saw the head of her brother she tore her collar and cried in a
sorrowful voice that influenced human hearts. Then she said, "O Husain!
O the beloved of the Prophet of Allâh! O son of Mecca and Medina! O son
of Fâtima Zahra, the lady of the women of Paradise! O son of the
daughter of Mustafa!"

The narrators said, "By Allâh, everyone in the audience wept, andYazeed
remained silent." A woman of Bani Hâshim who was in the palace of
Yazeed, began to mourn and said: "Ya Husain, Ya Habib, Ya Sayyad, Ya
Sayyade Ahle Bayt, Ya Ibne Muhammad, O hope and shelter of the
guardianless women and orphan children! O the one who has been killed by
the bastards!" All wept loudly.

Then Yazeed asked a whipper, and whipped the front teeth of Husain
(a.s.) Abu Barzah Aslami134 looked at Yazeed and said, "Woe unto you
Yazeed! Do you whip the lips and teeth of Husain, son of Fâtima (s.a.)?
I bear witness that I have seen the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) kissed the
lips and teeth of - The name of Abu Barzâh is Fazallâh bin Ubaid bin
Hârith Aslami and his nickname is more famous than his proper name.
There is a diversity of opinion about his name. He was a Sahâbi,
(Prophet's companion) a resident of Medina and later of Basra. He was
with Ali (a.s.) in Nahrawan. He died in Khorasan in 65 A.H. [Tahzibut
Tahzib 10/446; Al-Isâbah (trans.) Part 8718; Al-Elâm 8/33]

Husain and his brother Hasan (a.s.) and said that they two were the
leaders of the youths of Paradise. Allâh will kill their killers, and
will curse the killers, and He has prepared hell for their killers. What
a bad end!" The dirty-hearted Yazeed frowned and ordered him to be
dragged out harshly. A narrator has said, "Then Yazeed began to sing the
poems of the anti-Islam poet Ibnu Zabari:135 Alas for my forefathers who
were killed in Badr, who had heard the wailing of Khazraj, due to the
pain of spear wound;

So now you rise up and glance and say: O Yazeed! May your hand not be
paralyzed; We killed their heads and chiefs and took the revenge of
Badr; Hâshimites played with the kingdom! Neither (divine) news nor any
revelation had come to them! I may not be considered as a person of my
tribe, if I do not take the revenge from the sons of Ahmad, for what
they did."

Narrators have said that, Zainab, daughter of Ali (a.s.) got up and
said, "Praise to Allâh, the Lord of the worlds! And blessings on
Muhammad and on all the members of his family. Allâh told the truth
that, "The end 135 - Abdullâh bin Zabari bin Qais Sahmi Quraishi, Abu
Sa?ad was a poet of Quraish in the days of ignorance. He was a bitter
enemy of the Muslims and he fled to Najran when Mecca was liberated. He
died in 15 A.H. [Al-Elâm 4/87] 146 of those who did bad deeds is bad,
because they denied the verses of Allâh and mocked them."136 "O Yazeed!
Do you think that it is a matter of pride for you that you captured us,
and made us to move like slave maids, and that it is a disgrace to us?
Does all this make you rejoice as you have prepared the world for
youself? You imagine that everything has been arranged properly for you
and that the kingdom and the country is now in your favor! Take respite
for a while. But you have forgotten the Word of Allâh Who has said, "And
do not let the disbelievers think that our respite, [The postponement of
their punishment] is good for them [and they will enjoy life through
it]. We postpone the punishment only for that they may increase their
sinfulness; and for them there is a Disgraceful Torment [because of
their sins]."137

"Is this just, o son of the liberated slaves that your wives and slave
girls remain covered from the public, and the daughters of the Prophet
of Allâh being remained as captives? You tore their veils, revealed
their faces, and drove them from town to town like enemies! You degraded
them in public view. You made people look at them, while their guardians
and helpers were not with them."

"What can one expect from the son of the one who chewed the liver of
pious persons, and whose flesh was nourished by the blood of martyrs?"
"Due to enmity towards us, Ahle Bayt, how much harshness can one
display? And then, without realizing, - Rome 30:10
- Quran - ?le Imrân (3:178)


you utter such sinful words: (your elders) rise and dance and tell you:
O Yazeed! May your hand not be paralyzed whereas you whip on the teeth
of Abi Abdullâh (a.s.)!" "Why should you not say so. By shedding the
blood of the progeny of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.), who were the shining stars
of the earth, you have driven his family to extremities and now you are
remembering your ancestors and, in your imagination, calling them!" "O
Yazeed! Very soon you will join them and on that day, you will wish (and
say): Alas, I wish, I had been paralyzed and would not have uttered what
I uttered and should not had done what I did."

"O Allâh! Restore our rights and take revenge from those who oppressed
us, and send Your wrath on those who shed our blood and killed our
supporters." "(O Yazeed!) By Allâh, you have skinned none but yourself,
and have cut only your own flesh. No doubt, you will be brought before
the Prophet of Allâh (s.a.w.s.) was having shed the blood of his
progeny, and tore the curtain of the honor of their progeny and that
will be the time and place when Allâh will gather them and remove their
anxieties and restore their rights. Do not consider that those who are
killed in the path of Allâh are dead.

They are alive, getting provision near their Lord."138 "O Yazeed! It is
sufficient for you that Allâh is the Judge, and Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) is
your enemy and avenger of blood, with Gibrael as his supporter. The one,
who deceived you and imposed you as the head of Muslims, will soon know
that how bad has been his - Quran - ?le Imrân (3:157)

selection of succession! And whose place and position is worse and
weaker!" "O Yazeed! Though I have suffered many calamities from you, I
consider you valueless! You have caused a great tragedy, and you should
be always blamed. But, the eyes are tearful and the hearts are burning
now." "I Wonder, I wonder! (It has been the) Killing of the members of
the party of Allâh by the members of the party of Damn Satan. Our blood
is dripping from your dirty hands. Your unclean mouths are devouring our
flesh. Those holy and pious bodies are facing the attacks of rapacious
wolves. And the hyenas leave no trace of them. If you have caught us as
war booty, then very soon it will prove to be a fine instead of booty.
On that day, you will not get anything except what your hands sent
forth, your God is not cruel to His servants, and all complaints are
before Allâh."

"Carry out whatever fraud or betrayal and effort is in your mind! By
Allâh, you will never be able to erase our name and fade out our
revelation as you did not perceive our time. This shameful blot will not
be removed from you. It is just your own viewpoint and it is wrong; your
days (time) are limited and your group shall soon scatter. Yes, it will
be soon the day when it will be proclaimed: Now, the curse is upon the
unjust people!" "So, all praises are for Allâh Who destined salvation
and bless for the first group of us and martyrdom and mercy for the last
among us."

"We appeal to Allâh so that He may complete their rewards, and multiply
causes (of such rewards), and may duely bless the caliphate to us; as He
is Kind and Merciful. Allâh is sufficient for us. He is the best of the
executors!" "Yazeed (may the curse of Allah be upon him)! Wailing of the
wailing women is nice; and how insignificant if they die."

The narrator said that Yazeed consulted the Syrians regarding the
affairs of Ahle Bayt. The Syrians (may the curse of Allah be upon them)
said: "Deal with them like dogs." Nomân Ibn Bashir: "Do with them as the
holy Prophet behaved with them." A Syrian man looked at Fâtima, daughter
of Husain, and said: "O Amir! Give this girl to me!" Fâtima told her
aunt: "I became an orphan and now a slave girl!" Zainab (a.s.) said:
"No! Such greatness is not for this lewd fellow!"

The Syrian: "Who is this girl?" Yazeed (may the curse of Allah be upon
him): "She is Fâtima, daughter of Husain and this one is also Zainab,
daughter of Ali." The Syrian: Husain, the son of Fâtima and Ali bin Abi
Tâlib? Yazeed: "Yes!" The Syrian: "May Allâh curse you, O Yazeed! You
are killing the progeny of the Prophet and imprisoning their offspring?
By Allâh, I had thought that they are disbelieving prisoners of war!"

Yazeed: "By Allâh, I will add you with them." Then he ordered and the
Syrian was killed. Then Yazeed called a speaker and ordered him to
imprecate Husain and his father (p.b.u.t.). The speaker went up the
pulpit and condemned Amirul Momineen and the martyr Hussain (a.s.), and
praised Muawiyah and Yazeed extensively. Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.) cried
out: "O speaker! You have purchased pleasure of the created, by causing
the wrath of the Creator. Verily your abode will be in Hellfire."

"How true has Ibn Sinân Khafaji139 said in his poems in the praise of
Amirul Momineen and his son (a.s.), Are you Abusing Ali from top of the
Pulpit? Though this pulpit has been raised by the sword of Ali (a.s.)!"
It was on that day that Yazeed (may the curse of Allah be upon him) gave
a promise to Ali bin Husain (a.s.) that he would accept three requests
from him. Then Yazeed ordered to settle the Ahle Bayt in a place where
they were not sheltered from heat and cold of day and night. They were
kept therein for such duration that their holy faces were cracked. Yet
they went on mourning on Husain (a.s.) during their staying in
Damascus.

- Abdullâh bin Muhammad bin Sinân, Abu Muhammad Khafaji Halabi. He was
a poet and learnt literature from Abil Ula and others. He was poisoned
to death in 466 A.H. [Al-Elâm 4/122, Fuwâtul Wafiyât 1/233, An Nujumuz
Zahira 5/96]

Sakina has said that on the fourth day of their stay, she has seen in a
dream, "There was a lady in the camel litter. She had placed her hand on
her head." I asked about her. It was said, "She was Fâtima daughter of
Muhammad." I said that I should go to her and tell her what had happened
to us. So I rushed to meet her, stood by her, wept and said, "O my
mother! By Allâh, they denied our rights and scattered our community. O
mother! They considered the violation of our honor permissible. O
mother! By Allâh, they killed my father."

She said: "O Sakina! Keep quiet my dear! Your story has torn my heart,
and wounded my liver. This is the shirt of your father, Husain that will
not get separated from me until I meet Allâh."

Ibn Laheeah has narrated from Abi Aswad Muhammad Ibn Abdul Rahmân,140
that he met Ra?s-ul- Jâloot, the chief of Jews. He said, "I am in the
seventieth generation from Dâwood (a.s.). Yet the Jews honor and pay
respect to me. Between you and your Prophet the distance is not more
than one generation, and you killed his sons?" Zain-ul-?bedin (a.s.) is
reported to have said, "When they brought the head of Husain (a.s.) to
Yazeed (may the curse of Allah be upon him), he arranged several - He is
Abul Aswad Muhammad bIn Abdur Rahmân Ibn Naufal Ibn al-Aswad Ibn Naufal
al-Qarshi al-Asadi. He was living in Egypt and had narrated Kitâb
Maghazi to Urwah Ibn Zubair. He has quoted from Imâm Sajjâd and An-Nomân
Ibn Ayyash and some more persons. A group of people like Habwah Ibn
Shuraih and… have quoted him. He expired around three hundred thirty
A.H. [Seer A'lamun Nubla 6/150, Part 62]

drinking parties, placed the holy head near him, and drank." Once, the
Roman ambassador, who was from the nobles of Rome, who was present in
the ceremony told Yazeed, "O king of Arabia, whose head is this?"
Yazeed: "It has nothing to do with you." The ambassador: "When I return
to my country, the king will inquire about everything. I would like to
narrate the story of this head, so that he may also share your joy!"
Yazeed: "This is the head of Husain, son of Ali Ibn Abi Tâlib." The
ambassador: "And who is his mother?" Yazeed: "Fâtima, daughter of the
Prophet of Allâh!"

The ambassador: Damn with you and your faith! My faith is better than
yours since my father is from the descendants of Dâvid and from his
race, and there is a lengthy time span between them and me. Yet the
Christians respect me and pick up dust from beneath of my footsteps, as
an auspicious gift, only because I am a descendant of Dâvid. But you are
killing the son of the daughter of your Prophet; whereas, the distance
between him and your Prophet is only of one mother. What kind of a
religion do you follow? Then he asked, "Have you heard the story of the
Church of Hafir?" Yazeed: "Tell me."

The ambassador: There is a sea between Oman and China. It takes six
months to cross it. There is no habitation therein except for an island
in the midst of the sea, which has an area of eighty farsakh in length
and eighty in width. No city on the surface of earth is greater than
that. Camphor and ruby are exported from there. It is under the control
of Christians, and their king is a Christian too. There are many
churches in it, and the biggest one the Church of Hafir. On its altar is
a small golden box having a hoof mark. It is said that it is the hoof of
the donkey that Jesus (a.s.) had rode. They have decorated it in a
golden frame and brocade. Every year a large number of Christians visit
it, go round it, kiss it, and standing near it, pray to Almighty Allâh
for the fulfillment of their needs. This honor and tradition is for the
hoof of the donkey of Jesus (a.s.) and it is for a place, where
according to them, is the mark of the hoof of the donkey on which their
Prophet used to ride. And you are killing the son of the daughter of
your Prophet. Allâh will not bless either you or your religion.

The hostile Yazeed: "Kill this Christian so that he may not disgrace us
in his country!" When the Christian perceived his intention, he asked,
"Do you intend to kill me?" Yazeed: Yes!

The Christian: Know that last night I saw your Prophet in my dream and
he told me, "O Christian! You are a man of Paradise." I became very
surprised by his word. Now I witness that there is no God except Allâh,
and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allâh.

Then he rushed towards the head of Husain, embraced it and began to
kiss it, and while doing so became a martyr! It is said that once Zainul
?bedin went to the Market of Damascus, where Minhal bin Amr141 rushed to
welcome him and said, "O son of the Prophet! How did you pass the
night?" He replied: "Like the children ofIsrael (arrested) in the hands
of the people of Pharaoh, who killed their sons and kept their daughters
alive." "O Minhal! The Arabs always used to take pride over the
non-Arabs since Muhammad was from them; and the Quraysh used to take
pride over other Arab tribes telling them that Muhammad was from them.
Yet we, the family of the holy Prophet, are homeless, tortured, and
killed. So "Inna lillâhe wa inna ilaihe raajeoon" over whatever has
happened to us, Minhal!" How nice has Mahyar142 composed the couplets:
They honoured the wooden pieces of the Prophet's pulpit

- He is Minhal bin Amr al-Asadi. The Shaykh has mentioned him by the
same name sometimes among the company of Ali (a.s.). By adding the words
"Maulahum" among the companions of Bâqir and Sâdiq (a.s.). By mentioning
"Minhal bin ……? said that he had quoted from Sajjâd, Bâqir and Sâdiq
(a.s.). Some consider him as a companion of Sajjâd. There is a narration
from Asbagh that Ali bin Abbas has quoted him. [Mojam Rijâlul Hadith
19/8]

- Mahyar Ibn Marzuyah, Abul Hasan or Abul Hussain Dailami was a great
poet. His poems are innovative and style powerful. Mahyar was originally
from Iran who lived in Baghdâd. He became a Muslim at the hands of
Sharif Razi who was his Guide and teacher. He expired in Baghdâd in 428
A.H. [Al-Elâm 7/317, Târikh Baghdâd 13/276, Al- Muntazam 8/94: Al-Bidaya
wan Nihaya 12/41 and other sources]

but tossed beneath their feet the Prophet's children;

On what basis should the Prophet's children follow you, while you take
pride in being his companions and followers!? Yazeed said to Ali Ibn
Husain: "Tell me the three needs for fulfilling, which I have promised."
Imâm Sajjâd: First show me the head of my father so that I may look at
it and bid him good-bye. Second, whatever has been looted from us should
be returned third, if you intend to kill me, and then ask someone to
accompany the women and to take them to the city of their grandfather
(Medina). The spiteful Yazeed said: "You will never see the face of your
father. I do not want to kill you. And none except you will take the
women to Medina. I am ready to give the value of the property seized
from you, plus equal to it as a fine!"

Imâm (a.s.) Sajjad: "I do not need your money, it is important only in
your eyes. I demanded only what has been looted from us, because it
included some thing knitted by Fâtima daughter of the holy Prophet, and
also the veil, the shirt, and the manacle spun by her." Yazeed ordered
that the property snatched from the Ahle Bayt be returned to them plus
200 dinars to Imâm Sajjâd. Imâm distributed the money among the poor.
Thereafter Yazeed ordered that the prisoners should return to Medina
(from Syria).

It is narrated that the holy head of Imâm Husain (a.s.) was sent back
to Karbala where it was buried with his body. The Shia people act
according to this narration. There are other narrations besides to the
one we mentioned here. However, we overlode them, because we have
decided to write this book in brief. It is said that when the women and
family members of Hussain (a.s.) returned from Syria and reached Iraq
they asked the caravan guide to lead them via Karbala. When the holy
family reached the grave of Imâm Husain (a.s.), Jabir Ibn Abdullâh
Ansâri143 and a group of Bani Hâshim men were also there in order to
visit the holy grave…All of them began to recite the mourning poems
together in an extremely sorrowful manner. Women of that area also
joined them. They stayed there for a few days. It is narrated from Abi
Janab Kalabi144 that plasterers narrated to him that they used to go to
the place where Imâm Hussain (a.s.) was slaughtered and during the night
they heard the mourning of jinns who were reciting: The holy messenger
puts his hand on his forehead; verily his face was radiant;

- Jabir Ibn Abdullâh Ibn Amr Ibn Hizam al-Khazraji al-Ansâri as-
Salami. He died in 78. A.H. and was a companion of the Holy Prophet. He
has narrated many hadiths from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). A group of
Sahâbis have quoted him. He fought in nineteen wars. In his last days he
used to lecture in the mosque of the Holy Prophet and people used to
learn from him. [Rijâlush Shaykh: 72, Al- Elâm 1/213, Al-Isâbah 1/213,
Tahzibul Asma 1/142]

- Yahya Ibn Abi Dayh al-Kalbi Kufi has narrated from his father and
Shobi and Abi Ishâq Sabiee and… And Abdur Rahmân Maharabi has narrated
from him. [Al-Akmal 2/134]

His parents were from the high class of the Quraysh; and his
grandfather was the best Grandfather. Then the Ahle Bayt left Karbala
for Medina. Bashir bin Jazlam145 has said, "Ali Ibn Hussain (a.s.)
stopped the caravan near Medina and erected the tents and said: "O
Bashir! Your father (may Allâh have mercy on him) was a poet. Are you
also able to recite poetry?" I said: "Yes, O son of the holy Prophet! I
am a poet!"

Imâm (a.s.) said: "Go to Medina, and announce the martyrdom of Aba
Abdillâh (a.s.)." Bashir says: I rode a horse, and rushed to enter
Medina. When I reached the mosque of the holy Prophet, I raised my
weeping voice and recited: O people of Medina! Medina is no more your
place; Husain has been killed making me weep all the time; His bleeding
body was left in Karbala; And his holy head was moved from place to
place on a spear.

Thereafter I said: "Here is Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.) who has come to you
near Medina with his aunts and sisters. I am his messenger informing you
of their arrival." It is said that all the ladies and veiled women came
out with unveiled faces and bare heads, and they scratched their faces
and slapped their cheeks. They wept loudly in 145 - Bashir Ibn Khadim or
Jazlem. But we could not find his life story nor the record of his name.
Those who have written about him have relied on Lohoof.

mourning. After the death of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) it was not
seen so much weeping and mourning of men and women in the muslim
society. I saw a girl who was mourning on Hussain (a.s.) reciting: "The
messenger of doom gave of death of my leader, that was so painful that
it made me sick; O my eyes! Pour out all your tears incessantly; This
mourning is for the dear one, whose prayer made the throne tremble;

Now the honor and greatness of religion has been badly damaged;

Go on weeping for the son of the messenger and the son of his heir;
even though he was very far from us." Then she told me: "O the messenger
of doom! You have renewed our grief by the news of martyrdom of Abi
Abdullâh (a.s.). You put salt on our wounds, which were not yet healed.
May Allâh have mercy on you, who are you?" "I am Bashir Ibn Mazlam. My
master Ali bin Husain has sent me, and he is at such and such place with
his family members." I said.


People left me alone and rushed to the outskirts of Medina. I drove my
horse after them to reach them. I saw that people had jammed the road
and surrondings. So I dismounted and went on foot to reach the entrance
of the tent. Imâm Sajjâd (a.s.) was still in the tent. Then he came out
with a handkerchief in hand, wiping his tears with it. A servant holding
a chair was also behind him. He placed the chair on ground and Imâm sat
on it. He was not able to prevent tears rolling from his holy eyes. The
voice of weeping of men and women rent the whole atmosphere. Everyone
from every side was consoling the Imâm. It is seemed that piece of earth
had turned into a mourning land.

Imâm signaled with his hand for silence. All of them stopped weeping.
Then Imâm Sajjâd (a.s.) said: "All praise is for Allâh, the Lord of the
worlds. The Most Merciful and the Most Beneficent. Allâh is the Master
of the Day of Judgment. He is the Creator of all creatures, the One Who
is so far that His Height surpasses the highest skies, and He is also so
near that even the noise of humming bee is not inaudible to Him. We
praise Him over great affairs, and over tragedies of time, and over
bitterness of scoldings, and over crushing difficulties and hardships!"
"O people! Praise is for Allâh; we have been affected by great hardship
and a split in Islam. They have martyred Abu Abdillâh (a.s.), his
household, and companion. They imprisoned his wives and daughters. They
have carried his holy head on a spear from place to place, and so this
is a calamity unparalleled."

"O People! Now who among you can ever be joyful after this? Or who is
able to stop tears rolling from the eye and who will be stingy in
weeping?" "Truly the seven heavens wept over his martyrdom, the oceans
through their waves, skies with their pillars, the earth with its
tracts, the trees with their branches, the fish in the depths of seas,
and all the angels of Allâh and all in the heavens became tearful." "O
people! Which heart is so hard that has not been shoked by his
martyrdom, and which soul has not inclined towards him and which ear has
not deafened after hearing this blow on Islâm?"

"O People! We spent in such a condition that we were expelled,
scattered, and driven off away from cities and villages, as if we were
slaves. And all this happened to us without any fault or mistake, or any
harm to Islâm on our part. We have not heard such a thing in the
predecessor histories."

"By Allâh, even if the holy Prophet had declared war against us
(instead of recommendation), our state would not have been worse than
what we have faced till now. Inna lillâhe wa inna ilaihe râjeoon. We
forward our complain to Allah, in over such a terrible calamity, so
troublesome, so cruel… Verily He is Mighty and powerful to take
revenge." It is said that Sauhan Ibn Sa?saeh Ibn Sauhan,146 who was
bedridden and paralyzed, apologized before Imam for his inability of
being present at Karbala. Imâm accepted his excuse, and thanked him for
his good intention, and prayed for his father. I, the editor and
compiler of this book, Ali Ibn Musa Ibn Ja?far Ibn Muhammad Ibn Tâwûs
say that thereafter Imâm Sajjâd (s.a.) marched towards Medina with his
household, and looked at the homes of his own people. He realized that
even the buildings could not hide their feelings, and hence were
mourning and expressing grief over the loss of their men and
sympathizers and helpers. They weeped just like a woman who has lost her
child, and cried in grief.

- His father is Sa?asa? bin Sauhan. Most of the historians have
considered him among the companions of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) But we did
not find anything about his son Sauhan in reliable biographies and
whoever has said anything about him has relied on Lohoof.

O people! Assist me in mourning and help me in these terrible
calamities. Because, those people for whom I am weeping, were such that
my heart and mind look for their high moral virtues. They continue to
come to my mind day and night. They are lights in my dark environment.
They are my pride, strength and success. How often (their honour)
dispelled the clouds of horror from me, and how often their generosity
made strong the foundation for my honor. How often in the nights my ears
used to hear their soul-stirring supplications, which enriched me with
their secrets. How nice were the days when they enlivened and beautified
my house by their gatherings, made fragrant my nature, and removed my
misfortune by their auspiciousness. How many saplings of good character
did they implant for me, and safeguarded my place from awful events.

How many nights, which I wholly passed in their service, while I used
to take pride over mansions overtaken by joy and happiness! "Hence
destiny targeted me and time envied me. Those dear ones have been hit by
the arrows of enmity when they came among them like aliens. With cutting
off the fingers of those dear ones, virtues have been discarded. With
the disappearance of their radiant faces heights have fallen down. With
the dissection of their organs merits have fallen down. So for God sake,
respect his blood, which has been shed in those battles, and as a result
of which, respect his dignity.

If I have missed the assistance of the wise people, and if the unwise
people have left me, then I do have good luck in the forgotten
traditions. So they may weep like me. And their grief and sorrow will be
like my own grief and sorrow.

So if you could hear that how the prayers, are mourning for them, and
how many hermits are weeping over them. Indeed its hearing will cause
you full of grief. So care your any shortcoming in this matter. Alas;
how earnestly they chose their abodes and the inns where they lodged and
made them their land. I wish, I were a man who could have protected them
from the swords, spears and arrows. I wish I would had stood between
them and the wicked ones and would have warded off the arrows of the
enemies from them. Now that I have missed the opportunity of
cooperation, I should be capable of preserving the characters and
rememberances of those dear ones from calamitie.

If I were with those brave and bountiful personalities, I would utilize
all my talents to ensure their safety. I would fulfill the old promise
of loyalty. I would fulfill my duties towards them. With my strength, I
would protect them from any awful events, and like a loyal servant would
continue to serve them wholeheartedly and enthusiastically. I would
embrace them and their spiritual insights to illuminate the darkness of
my soul and spirit. In my eagerness to attain the said aspirations I
have worded all these things. The absence of my beloved leaders has
grieved me so much. I do not see any improvement, despite all my
patience and forbearance.

Hence my hopes remained only on the promised Day of Resurrection." How
nice is the poem of Ibn Qattah,147 when he passed by the said holy place
(Karbala): I passed by the dwelling places of ?le Muhammad; And did not
find them like other houses; May Allâh not keep these houses and their
inhabitants far off; Though they are now vacant against my wish;
Certainly those who killed the martyrs of Karbala from the progeny of
Hâshim; Were themselves disgraced;

Those chiefs were sheltering others; But now they are in trouble, and
the trouble is very great; Did not you see that the sun has become sick?
And the cities are trembling for death of Husain. And now, you, the one
who hear! Follow the path of the holders of the holy book in this
calamity. It is narrated that our master Zainul ?bedin (a.s.), who is
the master of forbearance, wept on this calamity very much and
complained very much. It is narrated from Imâm Sâdiq (a.s.) that truly
Imâm Zainul ?bedin (a.s.) wept over his father forty

- He is Sulaimân bin Qattah al-Adavi Teemi belonging to Bani Teem Ibn
Marrah. He died in Damascus in 126 A.H. He was in the service of Bani
Hâshim.

years. He used to fast during the days and stand to worship during the
nights. When the servant brought food and water for the breaking of his
fast, and would request him to eat, Imam (a.s.) would have said, "They
killed the son of the holy Prophet when he was hungry; they killed the
son of the messenger, when he was thirsty. He continued to repeat this
complaint and went on weeping till his food became wet with his tears.
This was the state of Imâm till the end of his life." One of his
servants has said, Once, Imâm went out of the city. I followed him. I
found that he was prostrating, and had put his head on a hard rock. I
stood near him and heard the noise of his weeping and counted that he
repeated these words in his prostration one thousand times (La Ilaha
illallaahu haqqan haqqa, la ilaaha illallâhu ta- abbudan wa riqqan; la
ilaaha illallâhu imaanan wa Tasdeeqa).

Then he raised his head from the ground, while his face and beard had
become wet with tears. I requested him, "O? my master! Has not the time
yet come that you end your grief and tears?" He replied, "What has
happened to you. Jacob Ibn Issac Ibn Abraham was a messenger, as well
as, the son of a messenger, the grandson of a messenger, and father of
twelve sons. The Almighty Allâh kept one of his sons out of his sight.
His hair became white due to grief and sorrow. His back also curved, and
he became blind because of constant weeping, though his son was alive.
However, I saw, with my own eyes, that my father, brothers, and
seventeen members of my family were martyred. Then how will the grief in
my heart end, and how can I stop to cry?"

\*\*\*\*

I cite the following prose while referring to them: They ask me to
discard the dress of grief and sorrow; While it never turns old; There
was a time when their nearness made us to smile; Now their separation
causes us to weep; Those whose absence has made our days dark; Once our
nights were illuminated like days, due to their presence.

This was the conclusion of everything that I desired to write. Everyone
who becomes aware of its arrangement and structure will find that this
book, despite its briefness, has distinction over other similar books.
Praise be to Allâh, the Lord of the worlds, and peace and blessings be
upon Muhammad and his purified Progeny. Praise to Allâh for this success
that under the special attention of Hazrat Waliullâh al-Azam Maulana
Sahibul Amr (may God accelerate His appearance).


