Signs and Incidents That Became Appeared After the Martyrdom of Imam Hussain (a.s.)
===================================================================================

Praise be to Allâh the Lord of the worlds and blessings be upon the
Messenger, the Prophet, the Warner, the Trustworthy and upon his
Progeny, the blessed descendants, and curse be upon all their enemies.
No matter how powerful the tyrants are and no matter how long their rule
lasts, it is of no use because Allâh the most High is All-Powerful
against them. Thus, Allâh, the Almighty, always lies in wait for the
tyrants and the sinners. He punishes them and sends different types of
chatisement on them in this world and the Hereafter. The same rule
applies to those who did injustice to Imâm Hussain (a.s.). They martyred
him and insulted the ladies of his family. Allâh punished them in
different ways and made them taste the bitterness of different
calamities, although their chastisement would be much more in the
hereafter. The Almighty Allâh always helps those who defend the truth
and those who have to face injustice in the way of exalting the truth.

Those who endeavored to keep the name of Allâh alive and bore the
injustice patiently for defending the truth, have become famous in this
world and their enemies shall dwell in the Hell forever; an unfortunate
destiny! After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the Almighty Allâh
showed many signs and miracles that prove the veracity of Imâm Hussain
(a.s.) and his high and esteemed position near Allâh. For this reason
their name and remembrance will remain alive forever, and all those
freedom-loving people have followed him and shall continue following him
till the uprising of Qaem ?le Muhammad (a.s.) when he would finally take
the revenge of the holy blood of Imâm Hussain (a.s.). Here we mention
some of the signs and clear proofs mentioned in different Islamic
sources that became apparent after the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.).
1. The severed head of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) recited Quran and
supplications while it was held aloft on the point of a lance.

Miftâhun Najâh fi Manâqibe ?le Ab?: P.145; Al- Khasâisul Kubra 2/127;
Al-Kawâkibu Durriya: P.57; Isâfur Râghebeen: P.218; Nûrul Absâr: P.125;
Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/452-453 2. Imâm Hussain (a.s.) threw his holy blood
towards the sky and not a drop of it fell back on the earth.

Kifâyatut Tâlib 284; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 454 3. On the day of the martyrdom
of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) blood rained from the sky and whatever the people
had was smeared with blood and the effect of the blood remained on the
clothes till they became old and this redness on the sky was such that
anything like it was never seen before. Maqtale Husain 2/89; Zakhâirul
Uqba, p.144, 145, 150, Târikh Damishq (Selections from the same) 4/339;
As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa p.116 & 192; Al- Khasâisul Kubra: 126; Wasilatul
Mâl: 197; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 320, 356; Nûrul Absâr: 123; Al-Ittehâf be
hubbil Ashrâf: 12; Târikhul Islâm 2/349; Tadkeratul Khawâs: 284; Nazm
Durarus Simtain: 220; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/458, 462 4. On the day of the
martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) whenever a stone was lifted gushed out
blood underneath it.

Tadkeratul Khawâs: 284; Nazm Durarus Simtain: 220; Mawaddâh: 320, 356;
Târikhul Islâm 2/349; Kifâyatut Tâlib: 295; Al-Ittehâf be hubbil Ashrâf:
12; Isâfur Râghebeen: 215; As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa 116 & 192; Miftâhun Najâh
fi Manâqibe ?le Aba (Manuscript); Tafsir Ibne Kathir 9/162; Ehqaq- ul-
Haq 11/262, 281, 283 5. When the severed head of Imâm Hussain (a.s.)
reached Dârul Imârah (the royal palace) blood could be seen flowing from
the walls of the palace. Zakhâirul Uqba: 144; Târikh Damishq (Selections
from the same) 4/339; As- Sawâiqul Mohreqa 192;

Wasilatul Maâl: 197; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 322; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/463 6.
At the time of the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the sky became deep
red, and for several days it seemed that it was smeared with blood and
as if it had become sick. Al-Mojamul Kabir: 145; Majmâuz Zawâid 9/196;
Al-Khasâisul Kubra 2/127; Ehqâq-ul- Haq 11/464 7. For seven days after
the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) when people saw the sun after Asr
prayers they used to see the walls red, due to the deep redness like red
clothes and veils, and they used to see that stars are crashing against
each other. Al-Mojamul Kabir: 146; Majmâuz Zawâid 9/97; Târikhul Islâm
3482; Seer Alâmun Nubla 3/210; Târikhul Khulafa: 80; As-Sawâiqul
Mohreqa: 192; Isâfur Râghebeen: 251; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/465,

8. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) for two or three months,
people saw that, as if the walls were smeared in blood from sunrise to
sunset. Tadkeratul Khawâs: 284; Al-Kâmil fi Târikh 3/301; Al-Bidâya wan
Nihâya 8/171; Al-Fusoolul Muhimma 179; Akhbârud Dul: 109; Ahqâqul Haqq
11/466, 467 9. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the horizons
of the sky became deep red, and this redness was the weeping of the sky
upon the tragedy of Imâm Husain (a.s.): The camel that was looted from
them was slaughtered but when it was cut, they saw that its flesh was a
fire and its meat was bitter. Maqtale Husain 2/90; Târikhul Islâm 2/348;
Seer Alâmun Nubla 3/311; Tafsir Quran Ibne Kathir 9/162; Tahzibut Tahzib
2/353; Damishq 4/339; Al- Mahâsin wal Masâwi: 62; Târikhul Khulafa: 80;
Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/467, 469

10. Till Six months after the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the
horizon was deep red, as if something like blood was visible in it.
Târikhul Islâm 2/348; Seer Alâmun Nubla 3/210; As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 192;
Majmâuz Zawâid 9/197; Târikhul Khulafa: 80; Miftâhun Najâh (Manuscript),
Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 322; Isâfur Râghebeen: 215; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/269,
270 11. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) for three days the
world was pitch dark and at that time redness appeared, and no one
touched the lifeless body of Hazrat (a.s.) unless he was burnt.
Tadkeratul Khawâs: 283; As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 192; Nazm Durarus Simtain:
220; Miftâhun Najâh (Manuscript); Nûrul Absâr: 123; Târikh Damishq
4/339; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/274-275

12. The sky did not weep for anyone except for two: Yahya bin Zakariya
and Imâm Hussain (a.s.). The weeping of the sky is such that it turns
red like hot oil. Târikh Damishq 4/339; Kifâyatut Tâlib: 289; Seer
Alâmun Nubla 3/210; Tadkeratul Khawâs: 283; Nazm Durarus Simtain: 220;
As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 192; Miftâhun Najâh (Manuscript); Yanâbiul
Mawaddâh: 322; Nûrul Absâr: 123; Tafsirul Quran Ibne Kathir 9/162;
Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/476-478

13. At the time of the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the sun became
eclipsed, and stars became visible in the afternoon. People thought
that -Last Day- had arrived! Al-Mojamul Kabir: 145; Kifâyatut Tâlib:
296; Maqtalul Husain 2/89; Nazm Durarus Simtain: 220; Majmâuz Zawâid
9/197; Al-Ittehâf be hubbil Ashrâf: 12; Isâfur Râghebeen: Yanâbiul
Mawaddâh: 321; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/479-480 14. At the time of the
martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the sky became pitch dark and the stars
became visible during the day, such that the Gemini star could be seen
even at afternoon. Red dust rained for seven days and the sky looked as
if it were colored with blood. Târikh Damishq 4/339; As-Sawâiqul
Mohreqa:

15. On the day of the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) no stone was
lifted in Damascus and Baitul Maqdas but that fresh blood was found
below it. Al-Mojamul Kabir: 145; Zakhâirul Uqba: 145; Al- Unsul Jaleel:
252; Wasilatul Mâl: 197; Tahzibut Tahzib 2/353; Kifâyatut Tâlib: 296;
Târikhul Islâm 2/348; Seer Alâmun Nubla 3/212; Maqtalul Husain 2/89 and
90; Al-Iqdul Fareed 2202; Al-Khasâisul Kubra 2/126; Majmâuz Zawâid
9/196; Târikhul Khulafa: 80; Miftâhun Najâh (Manuscript); Nûrul Absâr:
123; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 321; Isâfur Râghebeen: 215; Ehqaq- ul- Haq
11/484

16. On the day of ?shura the fowls refused to eat. Maqtalul Husain
2/91; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/490 17. A beam of light emerged from the furnace
containing the holy severed head of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) and shot up to
the heavens. The white birds were seen circling it.

Maqtalul Husain 2/101; Al-Kâmil fi Târikh 3/296; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/491
18. When Imâm Hussain (a.s.) was martyred a crow threw itself in his
blood, soaked itself in it, and sat on the high wall of the house of
Fâtima, the daughter of Hussain (a.s.) in Medina.

Maqtalul Husain 2/92; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/492-493 19. When Imâm Hussain
(a.s.) was martyred, many people heard the following lamentation recited
by a Jinn with regards to Imâm (a.s.): O the eyes! Weep as much as you
can, and who will weep upon the martyrs after me? On a group with whom
death walks hand in hand towards a strange land, a kingdom of the
people. O those who killed Imâm Hussain (a.s.) out of ignorance. You are
informed about a terrible chastisement.

All the creatures of the heavens, the prophets and the tribes shall
curse you. You certainly are cursed by the tongue of the son of Dâwood;
(Suleiman) and Musa and Isa (a.s.).

The best of the female Jinns are dressed in black and they weep in
sorrow and slap their beautiful faces.

\*\*\*\*

By Allâh! I did not come near you until I saw Hussain (a.s.) rubbing
his forehead on the dust at Karbala. And the young men circled him with
blood oozing from their necks like the lamps that brighten the darkness.
Hussain (a.s.) is a glowing lamp and his luminosity is beneficial. Allâh
knows that I have not uttered anything false. Hussain (a.s.) was
martyred alone in an alien land. His heart and soul burnt due to severe
thirst. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) caressed his forehead and it became
shining bright. His parents were from Quraysh grandfather the best of
grandfathers.

and his They killed you o, son of the Messenger and now they all would
abide in the Fire forever. The Thamud were destroyed as they killed the
she- camel and their happiness turned into grief. The respect for the
Prophet's Progeny is much more than the she-camel of Sâleh (a.s.). It is
a wonder that the killers of the Messenger's son were not metamorphosed
and Allah gives respite to the transgressors. Asmâur Rijâl 2/14; Seer
Alâmun Nubla 3/214; Akâmul Marjân: 147; Nazm Durarus Simtain: 217,

223 & 224; Al-Isâbah 1/334; Majmâuz Zawâid 9/199; Al-Bidâya wan Nihâya
2316, 8/197 and 200; Târikhul Khulafa: 80; As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 194;
Wasilatul Ma?l 197; Miftâhun Najâh: 144; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 320, 323,
351, 352; Ashrâful Mobad: 68; Kifâyatut Tâlib 294 and 295; Al- Maqtal
2/95; At-Tadkerah: 279 & 280; Târikh Ibne Asâkir 341/4, Al-Khasâisul
Kubra 2/126 and 127; Muhâsiratul Abrâr 2/160; Târikh Umam wal Muluk
4/357; Kâmil fi Târikh 3/301; Tahzibut Tahzib 2/353; Al-Bada wat Târikh
6/10; Akhbârud Dul: 109; Nûrul Qabas al-Mukhtasar Minal Maqtabas: 263;
Tâjul Uroos 3/196; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/579-580

20. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the following
inscription was found on a stone: It is a must that Fâtima will come in
Qiyamat while her dress is smeared with Hussain's (a.s.) blood, Woe be
to those whose intercessors are their enemies in Qiyamat when the
trumpet is blown. At-Tadkerah: 284; Nazm Durarus Simtain: 219; Yanâbiul
Mawaddâh: 331; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/569 21. The following was written on
the wall of a monastery:

Does the Ummah that killed Husain have any hope for the intercession of
his grandfather on the day of accounting? They asked the monk regarding
this couplet as to who had composed it. He said: This couplet was
written here five hundred years before the advent of your Prophet.
Hayatul Haiwan 1/60; Nûrul Absâr: 122; Kifâyatut Tâlib: 290; Ehqaq- ul-
Haq 11/567-568 22. A man from Najran dug into the ground and found a
gold plate on which the following was inscribed: Does the Ummah that
killed Husain have any hope for the intercession of his grandfather on
the day of accounting?

Miftâhun Najâh: 135; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/566

23. A wall cracked revealing a palmar on which the following was
inscribed in blood: Does the Ummah that killed Husain have any hope for
the intercession of his grandfather on the day of accounting?

Târikhul Khamis 2/299; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/567 After the martyrdom of
Imâm Hussain (a.s.) and after he was beheaded, the carriers of his
severed head sat down at the first stage of the journey to drink. A hand
came out of the wall and wrote with an iron pen in blood: Does the Ummah
that killed Husain have any hope for the intercession of his grandfather
on the day of accounting?

Al-Mojamul Kabir: 147; Zakhâirul Uqba: 144; Maqtalul Husain 2/93;
Muhâsiratul Abrâr: 2/160; Kifâyatut Tâlib: 291; Târikh Damishq 4/342;
Târikhul Islâm 3/13; Majmâuz Zawâid 9/199; Al- Bidâya wan Nihâya 8/200;
As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 116; Al-Khasâisul Kubra 1/23; Majmâul Fawaid 2/217;
Wasilatul Mâl: 197; Al-Arâisul Wâzeha: 190; Isâfur Râghebeen: 217;
Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 230-351; Jaliyatul Qadar: 198; Ehqaq- ul- Haq
11/561/565

24. On the stone is the inscription dating one thousand years before
Be'sat (Proclamation of Prophethood): (Or it is written 600 years before
Be?sat according to an inscription in a church in Rome): Does the Ummah
that killed Husain have any hope for the intercession of his grandfather
on the day of accounting?

Al-Mojamul Kabir: 147; Maqtalul Husain 2/93; Kifâyatut Tâlib: 290;
Al-Bidâya wan Nihâya 8/200; Majmâuz Zawâid 9/199; Târikh Damishq 4/342;
At-Tadkerah: 283; Nazm Durarus Simtain: 291; Ma Asârul Anafata fi
Malimul Khilâfata: 117; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 331; Mukhtasar Tadkeratul
Qurtubi: 194; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/557-

25. One of the soldiers of Ibn Ziyâd saw the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) in
the dream who drew across his eyes with the blood of Hussain (a.s.) and
the soldier became blind. Nûrul Absâr: 123; As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 117 and
194; Isâfur Râghebeen: 192; At-Tadkerah: 291; Maqtalul Husain 2/104;
Rishfatul Sâdi: 291; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 330; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/552

26. Abu Raja? said: Do not abuse Ali and the Ahle Bayt (a.s.). A man
from Bani Hajim (neighbor of Bil Hajim) came to Kufa and said: Did you
not see this transgressor, the son of transgressor? How did Allah kill
him? He actually meant Husain Ibn Ali (a.s.). And Allâh put an obstacle
between the black and white of his eyes and he became blind.

Al-Manâqib Ahmad bin Hanbal (Manuscript); Al- Mojamul Kabir: 145;
Târikh Damishq 4/430; Kifâyatut Tâlib: 296; As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 194;
Majmâuz Zawâid 9/196; Akhbârud Dul: 109; Al- Mukhtâr: 22; Tahzibut
Tahzib 2/353; Seer Alâmun Nubla 2113; Târikhul Islâm 2/348; Nazm Durarus
Simtain: 220; Miftâhun Najâh: 151; Rishfatul Sâdi: 63; Yanâbiul
Mawaddâh: 220; Wasilatul Mâl: 197; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/547-550

27. The killers of Imâm Hussain (a.s.), no matter where they were; they
all were punished in this world. Either they were murdered or they
became blind, or were degraded, lost their power and kingdom and were
arrested in a short time.

At-Tadkerah: 290; Nûrul Absâr: 123; Isâfur Râghebeen: 192; Yanâbiul
Mawaddâh: 322; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/513

28. A man who prevented Imâm Hussain (a.s.) to get water was cursed by
Imâm (a.s.) in the following words: O Allâh, keep him absolutely
thirsty! The man was afflicted with the heat of the stomach and the
coldness of the back. He began to plead and scream till his stomach
burst like that of a camel.

Maqtalul Husain 2/91; Zakhâirul Uqba: 144; As- Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 195;
Mujabiad Dawa: 38; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/514-515

29. When a man said to Imâm Hussain (a.s.): I give you news of the
hell. Imâm (a.s.) cursed him and said: O Allâh, throw him into fire. The
horse of this man began to move and crashed into a ditch and the man's
leg got caught in the stirrup and the horse began to gallop while the
head of the wretched man crashed against trees and stones till he
finally died.

Târikhul Umam wal Muluk 4/327; Al-Mojamul Kabir: 146; Maqtalul Husain
2/94; Zakhâirul Uqba: 144; Al-Kâmil fi Târikh 2/893, Kifâyatut Tâlib:
287; Wasilatul Mâl: 197; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 342; Ehqaq- ul- Haq:
11/516-519

30. When they deprived Imâm Hussain (a.s.) of water a man said: Look at
the water, it is like the heart of the sky and you cannot even taste a
drop of it until you die of thirst. Imâm (a.s.) said: O Allâh! Kill him
due to thirst. The man drank as much water as he could but his thirst
was not quenched and finally he died. As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 195; Ehqaq-
ul- Haq 11/520

31. A man who deprived Imâm Hussain (a.s.) of water was himself (a.s.)
killed by thirst by the curse of Imam (a.s.).

32. A man who wanted to snatch the string of Imam's trousers, turned
blind and his hands and legs were dismembered. This occurred after he
had seen Fâtima (s.a.) in a dream and she had cursed him.

33. The hand of the person who had looted the turban of Imâm Hussain
(a.s.) was severed from the elbow. He fell into poverty and misfortune
till he died.

34. One who said: "I am the killer of Husain", lost his sense and
became dumb.

Al-Bidâya wan Nihâya 8/174; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 348; Maqtalul Husain
2/34, 94, 103; Târikh Damishq 4/340; Al-Kâmel fi Târikh 3/283;
Al-Mojamul Kabir: 146; Zakhâirul Uqba: 144; Kifâyatut Tâlib: 287;
Wasilatul Mâl: 196; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/522, 527, 528 & 530

35. The man who looted the trousers of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) became
paralyzed; the one who had taken the turban of Imâm Husain (a.s.) became
a leper and the one who had robbed the chain armor became insane. A dust
storm, which was dark, arose with a red storm in which nothing could be
seen till the people thought that Divine punishment had descended on
them.

Maqtalul Husain 2/37; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/526

36. When the holy severed head of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) was brought to
Yazeed and kept before him, a hand came out from the wall and wrote:
Does the Ummah that killed Husain have any hope for the intercession of
his grandfather on the day of accounting? Ghurarul Khasâisul Wâzeha:
276; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/546

37. When the severed heads of the evil Ibne Ziyâd and his friends were
presented to Mukhtâr, a snake emerged among the heads and while passing
over the heads, entered the mouth of Ibn Ziyâd and came out of his
nostril. Then it entered the nostril and came out of the mouth and it
kept on repeating this; and people said, "Ubaidullâh Ibn Ziyâd and his
companions are losers", then their wailing on Husain, his sons and his
followers echoed in the atmosphere.

Sahih at-Tirmidhi 13/97; Maqtalul Husain2/84; Usdul Ghaba 2/22;
Al-Mojamul Kabir: 145; Zakhâirul Uqba: 128; Seer Alâmun Nubla 3/359;
Mukhtasar Tadkeratul Qurtubi: 192; Jameul Usool 10/25; As-Sawâiqul
Mohreqa: 196; Nazm Durarus Simtain: 220; Umdatul Qari 16/241; Yanâbiul
Mawaddâh: 321; Isâfur Râghebeen: 185; Nûrul Absâr: 126; Ehqaq- ul- Haq
11/542-545

38. Harmala came out with the ugliest and the darkest face, and not a
night passed on him, but that he was thrown in the flaming fire.

At-Tadkerah: 291; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 330; Isâfur Râghebeen: 192; Nûrul
Absâr: 123; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/531-532 39. A person said: "None
co-operated in the slaying of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) except those who faced
calamities before death." At that moment a very old man said: "I was in
Karbala (being a part of the infidel army) but till now I have not
suffered any calamity. Just then, the lamp went out. The old man got up
to rekindle the lamp and while he was lighting it, fire engulfed him. He
ran towards the Euphrates and threw himself into it. But the flames
increased and he was reduced to ashes. Maqtalul Husain: 62; Tahzibut
Tahzib 2/353; Al- Mukhtâr: 22; Târikh Damishq 4/340, Kifâyatut Tâlib:
279; At-Tadkerah: 292; Wasilatul Mâl: 197; Nazm Durarus Simtain: 220;
Seer Alâmun Nubla 3/211; As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 193; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh:
322; Miftâhun Najâh(Manuscript); Isâfur Râghebeen: 191; Ehqaq- ul- Haq
11/536-

40. A tree had blossomed by the miracle of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
and after the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) blood flowed from its
stems and all its leaves dried and puss began to ooze from them. Rabiul
Abrâr: 44; At-Tohfatul Aliyyatul Adab al- Alamiyya: 16; Maqtalul Husain
2/98; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/296-297

41. A bowl looted in the battlefield from Imâm Hussain (a.s.) turned to
ash (dust). Al-Mojamul Kabir: 147; Seer Alâmun Nubla 3/211; Târikhul
Islâm 2/348; Tahzibut Tahzib: 2/353; Maqtalul Husain: 2/90; Zakhâirul
Uqba: 144; Majmâuz Zawâid: 9/197; As-Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 192; Nazm Durarus
Simtain: 220; Al- Khasâisul Kubra 2/126; Yanâbiul Mawaddâh:

321; Ahqâqul Haqq 11/503-505 42. The meat of the camel looted from the
camp of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) was distributed among the people of the
tribes but fire engulfed the pot in which it was cooked. Nothing from
the looted property of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) was kept on the pot but that
it turned into fire. The camel meat of the camel looted from Imâm
Hussain (a.s.) became as bitter as colocynth. Nazm Durarus Simtain: 220;
Al-Mahâsin wal Masâwi: 62; Al-Mojamul Kabir: 147; Majmâuz Zawâid: 9/196;
Târikh Damishq: 4/340; Târikhul Islâm: 2/348; Seer Alâmun Nubla: 3/211;
Tahzibut Tahzib: 2/353; Al-Khasâisul Kubra: 2/126; Târikhul Khulafa: 80;
Maqtalul Husain: 2/90; At- Tadkerah: 277; Nûrul Absâr: 123; Ehqaq- ul-
Haq 11/506-510

43. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) his blessed severed head
was brought to Ibn Ziyâd. He asked: Who has killed him? A man arose and
said: "I." At that very moment his face turned black. Zakhâirul Uqba:
149; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/540 44. At mid-night a light arose from the place
where the blessed head of Imâm (a.s.) was kept and it spread upto the
sky and due to it the monk converted to Islâm. At-Tadkerah: 273;
Maqtalul Husain: 2/102; As- Sawâiqul Mohreqa: 119; Rishfatul Sâdi: 164;
Yanâbiul Mawaddâh: 325; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/498-502

45. The next morning after the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the
food in the pots and water in the vessels turned into blood. Nazm
Durarus Simtain: 220; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/502 46. Any woman that used the
perfume looted from Imâm Hussain (a.s.) was afflicted with leprosy.
Al-Iqdul Fareed 2/220; Uyoon Akhbâr 11/212; Ehqaq- ul- Haq 11/511

Whatever we have mentioned so far in the book is only a part of
whatever is recorded in the numerous books of Ahle Sunnat. As for the
Shia sources there are many more signs and proofs that became apparent
after the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.). We shall mention a few of
them here. 47. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the owls took
an oath that they would not make nests in inhabited places; and make
them in ruins and lonely spots.

They fasted during the day and lamented on Imâm Hussain (a.s.). Though
before the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the owls lived in habitated
houses and palaces. When people ate they used to fly out and share the
food and drinks then returned to their nests.

48. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the melodious pigeons
used to curse his killers.

49. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the sky rained blood and
dust.

50. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) red dust rained from the
sky.

51. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) when people in Baitul
Maqdas picked a stone, a clod or a rock, they saw blood underneath. The
walls were red as if smeared with blood, and for three days blood rained
from the sky.

52. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) four thousand angels
descended. They would be smeared in dust and disheveled till the day of
Qiyamat -the advent of Qaem- (a.t.f.s.) and shall weep. The chief of
them is named Mansoor.

53. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) a redness arose from the
east and another from the west till they nearly joined in the middle of
the sky.

54. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) for forty days the
people said they witnessed the sun to be deep red at the time of sunrise
and sunset and that was its lamentation.

55. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) blood rained from the
sky and dewdrops turned to blood and when camels were taken to drink
water, blood was found in the watering places.

56. The sky did not weep for anyone except Yahya Ibn Zakariya (a.s.)
and Imâm Hussain (a.s.). It?s weeping was such that wherever it came in
contact with a cloth it seemed as if blood of flea was smeared on it.

57. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) the seven heavens and
the seven earths with whatever is in them and the Gardens and the Hells
and the seen and the unseen wept upon him.

58. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) everything wept for him.
Even the beasts of the forests and the fishes of the seas and the birds
of the sky, the sun and the moon and the stars and the sky and the earth
and the believers among the men and the jinn and all the angels of the
heavens and the earth and Rizwan and Malik and the bearer of the Arsh
(throne).

59. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) wild animals surrounded
his holy grave since nightfall till the morning and with lowered heads
lamented for him.

60. After the martyrdom of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) for forty mornings the
sky was blood red, the earth was black and pitch dark and the sun was
crimson and the mountains split and spread and the seas were stormy and
the angels beside the blessed grave wailed and due to their lamentation
the angels of the sky, the earth and the atmosphere also wailed.

61. When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) recited the verse: So the heaven and
the earth did not weep for them, nor were they respited.148 Hussain
(a.s.) came near him. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: Husain will be slain
in the near future and the sky and the earth will weep upon him.

62. Fâtima (s.a.) lamented upon Husain (a.s.). 63. At the time of the
martyrdom of Imâm Hussain

(a.s.) the jinns recited the following Nauha (Lamentation): Indeed the
arrows shot towards Hussain (a.s.) actually were aimed at the Quran.

And by killing you, they have killed the Tahleel (There is no Allâh
except Allâh) and Takbeer (Allâh is the Greatest).

Then, as if they killed your grandfather Muhammad, upon whom Allâh and
Jibraeel send blessings.

O son of the martyrs. O the martyr who had the best of Uncles, Ja'far
at-Tayyâr, Who was also a martyr. It is surprising of the swords that
arose in the dust and their sharp edges fell on you. O eyes do not stop
weeping and weep on the chief of the martyrs. He was martyred in Karbala
and we are his mourners. The female jinns weep with a deep sorrow and
like the Hashemite ladies recite mournful elegies. Surah Dukhan 44:29

Dressed in black they recite elegies for the great tragedy that struck
Imâm Hussain (a.s.) and they slap their beautiful faces in grief.
"Al-Manâqib" of Ibn Shar ?shub Vol. p.4/754, Kâmiluz Ziyarât: 75; Amâli
of Sadooq, Majlis no. 27; Ilalush Sharze 1/217, Amâli of Mufid; Bihârul
Anwâr 45/201-241 and other sources which are present in large numbers.


