Introduction
============

In the Name of Allâh, the Beneficent, the Merciful

All praise belongs to Allâh Who shows His Magnificence through the
horizon of wisdom; Who removes the veils from His Intentions, through
the logic of the Holy Quran and Sunnah; Who has lifted His friends from
the filths of the house of deception (this world), and raised them to
the heights of shining happiness. This bliss to His friends is not by
the way of granting them a higher status among His creation, nor is it
to shelter them through nice paths; but He considered them worthy of
Graceful Rewards and good morals. Therefore, He did not like that they
should treed the absurd path. Rather, He granted them the good sense of
adopting perfect deeds and actions.

This was until all souls became dejected from everyone except Allâh,
and their hearts got adorned by the ornaments of His Pleasure. So their
hearts turned towards His light, and their ambitions got tied up with
His Mercy and Grace. You can observe their happiness in reaching the
eternal life, and their sympathetic desire of meeting their Lord.

Invariably, they have an increasing urge toward the goals put by their
God; their faces shine up by traversing towards their Lord, and their
ears are attentive for listening to His secrets, and their souls enjoy
the sweetness of His remembrance. Allâh bestows on them His Greetings
proportionate to their acknowledgement, and rewards them with His gifts
and mercy.

Hence everything, which prevents them from the area of His Majesty, is
worthless in their eyes. How easy is it for them to give up everything
that takes them away from His path until they taste and enjoy the
pleasure and happiness due to this Bounty and Perfection? Then Allâh
adorns them with a dress of dignity, grandeur and reverence.

As they realize that their (worldly) lives act as an obstacle in
attaining their noble ambition, and that their stay in this world keeps
them away from His Grace, they discard their dress of worldly life and
put on the apparel worthy of meeting Him. On this way, they found
pleasure by giving away their life, and receiving wounds of swords and
arrows.

This is the lofty grandeur which raises the souls of the martyrs of
Taff (Karbala) to such an extent that they compete with each other in
sacrificing their lives, and their holy bodies turn into targets of
arrows and swords. How beautiful has Seyyed Murtaza Alamul Huda (r.a.)
praised of such noble men:1 Their bodies lie in the sands of desert
Whereas their souls are enjoying the hospitality in the vicinity of
Allâh It is, as if those who wanted to harm them have benefited them And
those who had killed them with swords were those who made them alive
(immortal)

Had it not been incumbent upon us to put on the dress of mourning, as
ordered by the Book and the Islamic Tradition, over the vanishing of the
"standards of guidance" and establishment of the rule of misguidance and
deviation of Umayyides, and to grieve over such losses of bounties, and
the martyrdom of such great personalities, it was good to rejoice over
such great bliss.

And since in this mourning is concealed the consent of Allâh and the
goal of His good servants, we - Abul Qâsim Ali bin Husain bin Musa bin
Muhammad Musa bin Ibrahim Ibne Imâm Kâzim (a.s.) is a chief of the
Tâlibiyyin and one of the leading writers and poets and orators. He was
born and died in Baghdâd. He has narrated from people like Shaykh Mufid,
Husain bin Ali Babawayh. People like Sallar and Abi Salâh Hilli and
Khatib Baghdâdi and Qâzi ibne Qudâmah have narrated from him.

He has written books like Ash Shafi fil Imâmah...He expired in the year
433 or 436 A.H. [Riyâzul Ulama 4/14, Wafyâtul Ayân 3/313, Al-Kunni wal
Alqâb 2/439, Mizânul Etedâl 2/223, Lisânul Mizân 4/223, Jumhiratul
Ansâb: 56, Al-Elâm 4/278] invariably and regularly put on the dress of
mourning and bring tears in our eyes. We ask our eyes to go on weeping
continuously and also ask our hearts to cry like a mother who has lost
her son.

The precious trusts of the compassionate Prophet were destroyed on the
day of ?shur?, and many of his wills regarding his household and sons
were thrown away by his Ummah and by his enemies. For Allâh?s sake, how
difficult were the calamities which made hearts sick, brought so much
hardship and destruction, those troubles which were so terrible that
rendered all other troubles insignificant; the events wherein the fear
of Allâh was driven away and those arrows which made the blood of the
holy Prophet flow on earth and those hands which arrested and imprisoned
the noble Ahle Bayt (a.s.); those tragedies which rolled the heads of
devotees; those catastrophes which took the lives of the best families;
the trouble whereof reached even to Jibrael; those atrocities that
raised the wrath of Almighty Allah.

Why should it not be so when, on that day, the flesh of the holy
Prophet of Allâh (i.e. the body of Imam Husain a.s.) fell on sandy land,
and his holy blood flowed on the soil by the swords of the deviated
people, and when the holy faces of his daughters were exposed to the
eyes of people who were condemnable, and rejoiced at the misfortune of
others, and those who (the holy women) were disrobed before both the
talking and the dumb, when the holy bodies were stripped and when those
holy bodies were strewn on ground!

These calamities dispersed the holy family of the Holy Prophet, and
arrows were pierced in the hearts of the guided ones. There were the
troubled ladies the plight of whom makes the flames of sorrow and grief
rise high. I wish Fâtima and her father had dared to see the plight of
their daughters and sons, who were seized, wounded, chained,
decapitated; the daughters of the holy Prophet with their collars rent,
had none to care them, were grieved for having lost their relatives and
dear ones.

Their hairs strewn and veils torn, they were slapped on their faces.
They were crying and complaining with a painful feeling, and there was
none to help and protect them.

And you, O men of wisdom and reason, O intelligent people, narrate to
yourselves these calamities which fell on the holy household, and recite
elegies for them in solitude and in public for the sake of Allâh.
Accompany them by shedding tears on the plight of these dear ones, and
sit in mourning for having lost the opportunity of helping them.

It is so because these precious lives are the valuable trusts of the
holy Prophet, and the fruits of his holy heart, and the light of the
eyes of Zahra-e-Batool. They are the ones who were kissed by the holy
Prophet, and their parents were granted superiority over the Ummah
(Islamic nation).

If you have any doubt about their superiority in grace Then ask the
holy Quran regarding their distinction The holy Book which is the most
just witness to their gracefulness for the men of reason Therein is also
the will, which Jibrael brought regarding them How did they compensate
all the favors of their grandfather? How did they devastate the fruits
of his heart and the repository of his soul by shedding the blood of his
precious son so disgracefully?

How is the place and location of fulfilling the will of the holy
Prophet regarding his family? What will be the answer of the Ummah in
this regard? The Ummah destroyed all that the holy Prophet had
established, and the wailing of the oppressed Islâm is raised high; O
Allâh! What a heart which does not melt by the remembrance of these
events? How strange is the negligence of an Ummah and what is the excuse
of the people of Islâm regarding this tragedy?

Do not they know that the holy Prophet is injured and he is claiming
revenge? That his beloved has been slain, and his blood is boiling?
Those angels are giving him condolence over this calamity and prophets
have shared these tragedies?

Then, O loyal followers of the Prophet Mohammed! Do not you join him in
this weeping? O, follower of the son of Zahra; mourn and recite the
poems of grief, and weep over the princes of Islâm for the sake of
Allah. Maybe by participating in the sorrow of this great tragedy you
may proceed on the Day of Judgment.

Verily, it has been narrated from Imâm Bâqir (a.s.) that Imâm Zainul
?bedin (a.s.) said, "whenever a tear drops from the eyes of a believer,
While mourning for Husain (a.s.), and rolls down his cheek, Allâh will
grant him a permanent home in Paradise. And for every believer, who
sheds a tear because of the oppression and injustice to us by the enemy,
when that tears rolls down his cheek, Allâh grants him a high position
in Paradise. And when a faithful person suffers harm in our way, by our
enemy, Allâh turns away the trouble from him and saves him from Hell on
the Day of Judgment."

Imâm Sâdiq (a.s.) is reported to have said that anyone who remembers
us, and tears, even as little as a fly?s wing rolls from his eyes, Allâh
will forgive his sins, even if they are equal to the bulbs of the seas.
And it is reported that he said; "One who weeps over us and causes one
hundred people weep, is entitled to Paradise; one who weeps over us and
causes fifty people weep over us, heaven will be his abode; one who
weeps and causes twenty persons weep for us will go to Paradise; and one
who weeps for us and also causes ten men weep for us will be entitled to
Paradise; one who weeps for us and causes one person weep for us will
also go to heaven; and the one who weeps for us and makes his face
sorrowful will also get Paradise."

The author, Ali Ibn Musa Ibn Ja?far Ibn Muhammad Ibn Tâwûs Husain says;
"The noble impulses which inspired me to adopt the manner and method of
this book, was that after the compilation of the book Misbâhuz Zaer wa
Jannatul Musâfir2, I felt that various appealing aspects of Ziyarats
have been collected therein and hence one who carries it does not need
to take with him heavy books to the holy tombs during the Ziyarat
time."

I also wished that a person visiting the holy shrine should not be
required to carry Kitâb-e-Maqtal during the Ziyarat of ?shura in
Karbala.

- Misbah is the first work of the author, having 20 sections: the first
section is about formalities and preliminaries of the journey and the
last contains the Ziyarats of the Holy Imâms and their sons.

Therefore, I wrote this book so that a visitor needs not to carry any
other book along with Misbâhuz Zaer; Moreover I have tried to save his
time by avoiding details and repetitions. Yet various chapters about
Karbal? have been included for the faithful people, as we have infused
the words with an appropriate spirit, given the title Al- Malhoof ala
Qatlat Tafoof to it, and have arranged it in three parts; we seek help
from the Merciful Lord.


