Preface
=======

A . About the Author
--------------------

Sayyid Razi - Uddin Ali bin Musa, knows as Ibn Tawus (589-664 A.H.,
equal to 1150- 1225 A.D.) is one of the greatest Shia scholars in the
13th A.D. century. He was born in Hella city in South of Iraq. He learnt
different Islamic science from his father Sadussin Musa, his grand
father Warram bin Abi Furas, and some Shia and non- Shia scholars.

The grand family of Ibn Tawus was interested at scholarship and
knowledge fields. Some of them have written books, and have their names
in the history. For more information about them, you may refer to
"Encyclopedia of Tashayyo", P. 339, and Vol: 1, title Ibn al-Tawus.

During his 75 years old life, Ibn Tawus traveled to different cities. He
wrote more than 50 books in many fields of Islamic studies, such as
commentary of Quran, history, hadith, prays, astronomy, ethics,
bibliology, biography, Shia thoughts. Half of them are preserved and
available. Even after the long time of about 800 years, most of them are
reliable and unique.

In addition to his scientific position, he had the social leadership of
Shia community at his chaotic period. And it is interesting that with
such occupations, he grew very polite, well educated, and learned
children, so that all his sons and daughters were among the scholars of
their age.

B. The book
-----------

Sayyid Ibn Tawus had prepared the book "Mesbah-u-Zaer" with the subject
of visiting (Ziyarat) the holy shrines of the prophet Muhammad (S), and
the infallible Imams (a.s.). Then he thought and found it wise to write
a small book about the biography of Imam Husayn (a.s.), the Ashura
calamity, and the tragic events thereafter; so that those who go on
pilgrimage of that innocent martyred Imam may get the necessary
knowledge about the subject, the holy respected Imam, and his brutal
enemies.

Sayyid Ibn Tawus has divined the book of Lohoof in to 3 parts.

1- The events and happenings before the day of Ashura (10th of Muharram
of 61 A.H.);

2- The events occurred in the evening before Ashura, and during the day
of Ashura;

3- The events after the day of Ashura, with regards to Imam Husayn
(a.s.), his family, and his enemies;

What we can see in these parts, are very exact and accurate narrations
which from one side, show the clear, humanistic, and infallible view
from Imam Husayn, and on the other hand, reveals the tyranny, cruelty,
and crimes of the enemies of the family of the prophet of Islam (a.s.).

C . The importance of the Book
------------------------------

There are thousands of books written about Imam Husayn (a.s.), and the
Ashura calamity. However, those words, which have been narrated and
transmitted by the wise and learned scholars, through a correct and
clear way, are credited and reliable.

At the same time, we should know that the life and history of Imam
Husayn (a.s.), just like other infallible Imams (a.s.) is like an open
book of guidance that should be studied and considered. It is obvious
that when we are going to introduce our noble Imams (that the holy
prophet has called them as the "Lights of Guidance", and the "Ships of
Rescue"), if we refer to uncredited and unknown references, we will not
get a fair result from our efforts.

The importance of the books such as Lohoof lies in its right, just and
authentic references and accurate narrations, which reveal the aspects
of the 14 centuries old history.

Now, let us read the book of Lohoof, which is the book of life, and
guidance, and is like a light that would enlighten the roads of lives of
the people.

This book should be read more than once! And we should keep it not only
in our memory, but also in our mind, and spirit.

We should read the words and teachings of Imam Husayn and his beloved
friends at the pages of this book, and hear them from the stars of the
sky of Karbala, that witnessed the nights of Muharram of the year 61
A.H.

We should take in to the "Ship of Rescue" in order to reach the safe
shore. And we should walk through the light of this "Light of Guidance"
in order to depart from the darkness of the world.

Lohoof is a favorite partner in a spiritual journey for the respected
reader, and we invite you to pay due attention to every word of this
noble book.

**Muhammad Husayn Shahri**


