Events Preceding the Battle
===========================

The holy birth of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) took place on the 3rd or 5th of
Shabân, 4 A.H. It is also said that he was born3 at the end of Rabiul
Awwal in 3 A.H. some other dates are given too. Ummul Fazl, 4 the wife
of Abbâs5 (r.a.) said, "Before the birth of Hussain I saw in a - In the
copy of "A? it is said: When Hussain was born Jibraeel came with a
thousand angels to congratulate. Fâtima (a.s.) took Hussain to the Holy
Prophet who became very happy and gave the newborn child its name.

Ibne Abbâs says in Tabaqât: Abdullâh bin Bakr bin Habbeb as-Sahami
informed us: Khatam bin Sanat related from Ummul Fazl… - Lubâbah,
daughter of Hârith al-Hilâliyah, who is well known by the name of Ummul
Fazl, was the wife of Abbâs bin Abdul Muttalib and she had seven
children. She embraced Islâm in Mecca after Khadija (a.s.). The Holy
Prophet used to visit her regularly and he also used to take rest in her
house. She expired in 30 A.H. [Al-Isâbah No: 942 and 1448; Zailul
Mazeel: 84; Al-Jam Baina Rijâlus Sahihain: 612; Al- Elâm 5/239] - Abbâs
bin Abdul Muttalib bin Hâshim, Abul Fazl, was one of the chiefs of
Quraish both during the period of ignorance and also after the advent of
Islâm. He did much good to his community and was held in high esteem due
to his wisdom. He used to supply water to Hajj pilgrims and was also a
participant in the construction of Masjidul dream that a piece of flesh
of the holy Prophet was cut off, which fell in my lap."

I narrated the dream to the holy Prophet. He said, "It is a true vision
and a good dream. Very soon, Fâtima will give birth to a son and she
will give him to you for nursing." It happened as the holy Prophet had
said. Narrators of traditions have narrated that when Hussain (a.s.) was
1 year old, twelve angels came down to the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). They
had sorrowful faces and tearful eyes. They opened their wings, and said,
"O Muhammad! Very soon, your son Hussain Ibn Fâtima will get what Habeel
had got from Qabeel, and his killer will get the reward just as Qabeel
had got as punishment. All the angels in the heavens came to the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and after salutation gave him condolence about
Hussain. They also told him about his reward, and gave him Hussain?s
holy dust (dust of his grave)."

The holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said, "O Allâh! Degrade the one who would
degrade Hussain; kill his killer, and do not give him (the killer)
success."

When Hussain was two years old, the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) went on a
journey. He halted on the way and recited with tearful eyes, "Inna
lillaahe inna ilaihe raajeoon (Verily we belong to Allâh and to Him we
return)". When asked for the reason, he said, "Now Jibrael informed me
of a land called Karbal?,6 on the bank, of Harâm. He became a Muslim
before Hijrat but kept it a secret. He become blind in the last days of
his life and expired in the year 32 A.H. 32. [Sifatus Safwa 1/203;
Al-Mahbar: 63; Zailul Mazeel: 10; Al- Elâm 3/ 262]

6- Kerbala is the place of Hussain?s martyrdom. It is near Kufa towards
the desert. According to a narration the Holy Imâm (a.s.) river
Euphrates, that my son Hussain Ibn Fâtima will be martyred there." One
of them asked, "O? Prophet of Allâh! Who will kill him?" He replied, "A
man named Yazeed. As if I am looking at the place of Husain?s martyrdom
and burial."

Then he returned from the journey in a very sorrowful mood, climbed the
pulpit and gave a speech while Hasanain (a.s.) were with him. After
concluding his speech he put his right hand on the head of Hasan (a.s.)
and his left hand on the head of Hussain (a.s.). He raised his head
towards the sky and exclaimed; "O Lord! Muhammad is Your worshipper and
messenger, and these two youth are from my pious kinsfolk and good
progeny, and the founders of my family whom I am leaving in my place.
Jibrael informed me that this son of mine will be killed and forsaken. O
Allâh! Make his martyrdom sanctified for him, make him the leader of the
martyrs, and do not bless his killers and his forsakers." Then the
people cried.

The holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: "Would you just weep and not help
him?"

Then he returned and gave another (short) sermon, with tearful eyes,
and said: "O people! I am leaving among you, two valuable things, i.e.
the Book of Allâh, and my progeny; who are my origin, my essence, and
the fruits of my life. These two things will not separate, until they
meet bought the land for six hundred Dirhams from the people of Nainawa
and Daziriyah and then donated it with a condition that the visitors to
the Holy grave should be provided hospitality for three days. [Mojamul
Buldân 4/249; Majmâul Bahrayn 5/641-642] me at the Hauz (in paradise) in
the Last Day. I will be waiting for them, and I do not expect from you
anything except what Allâh has ordained, that is kindness and (love for
my near and dear family). So beware, do not be of those who will not see
me at the Hauz, tomorrow, as a result of enmity against my household,
harassing and killing them."

Be aware that on the Day of Judgment, three banners will be offered to
me from this Ummah: A dark black flag, which will frighten the angels.
Its bearers will halt near me. I will ask them: Who are you? They would
have forgotten my name.

They will say: "We are believers in God and we are Arabs." I will say:
"I am Ahmad, the Prophet for both the Arabs and non-Arabs". They will
say: "O Ahmad: We are from your Ummah."

I will ask them: "What did you do, after my death, to the Book of God
and to my progeny?" They will reply: "We left and wasted the Book and we
totally destroyed your progeny with enmity." I will turn away from them.
And they would be driven to Hell extremely thirsty and black-faced. Then
the second flag bearers with a darker flag will come.

I will ask them: "What did you do with the two valuables I left (i.e.
the Holy Quran, and the holy progeny)?" (In response) they will say: "We
opposed the Book, and humiliated and destroyed the holy family." I will
say, "Go away from me." And they would be driven to Hell with dark faces
and thirsty too. Then the third group will arrive with bright and
shining flags and faces. I will ask: "Who are you?"

They will reply: "We are believers in Oneness of God and righteous. We
are the followers of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). We are the survivors of the
rightful nation. We respected the holy Book of God and obeyed whatever
was mentioned as permissible or forbidden in it. We befriended the
progeny of the holy Prophet. We willfully helped them and fought against
their enemies." I would tell them: "Congratulations! I am Muhammad, your
Prophet. You lived in the world as you described." Then I will give them
water from the Hauz of Kauthar, and then they will happily enter
Paradise and enjoy there forever.

\*\*\*\* In the year 60 A.H., when Muawiya7 Ibn Abi Sofyân died, his
son Yazeed8 Ibn Muawiya, wrote a letter - Muawiyah Ibn Abi Sufyân Sakhr
bin Harb Ibn Umayyah Ibn Abd Shams Ibn Abd Manâf is the founder of the
Umayyad rule in Syria. He was born in Mecca and had converted to Islâm
after the conquest of Mecca. During the caliphate of Abu Bakr, under
order of his brother, he got the command of the army. He became the
governor of Jordan in the time of Umar. Thereafter Umar gave him the
governorship of Damascus. During the caliphate of Uthmân he acquired the
governorship of Syria bringing all other administrators under his rule.
After killing of Uthmân and during the rule of Ali (a.s.)

to the governor of Medina, Walid Ibn Utbah,9 and ordered him to get
allegiance from the people of Medina,10 especially from Hussain ibn Ali
(a.s.) and if Hussain refused, he should cut off his head and send it to
Yazeed. he was at once removed from the governorship by Ali (a.s.).
Before the dismissal order reached him, Muawiyah raised the bogey of
taking revenge from the killers of Uthmân and alleged that Ali (a.s.)
had killed him, thus creating an excuse for war. Muawiyah is notorious
for taking undue advantages through treachery and deceit. [Târikh Ibne
Athir 4/2 Târikh Tabari 6/180; Al-Badu Wat Târikh 6/5; Al-Alâm
7/261-262]

- Yazeed bin Muawiyah bin Abi Sufyân was the second Umayyad ruler of
Syria. He was born in Matroon, brought up in Damascus and in the year 60
A.H. took over caliphate after his father. The people headed by Hussain
(a.s.) did not pay allegiance to him because of his indulgence in
debauchery, fornication, and pleasure games. In the year 63, people of
Medina de-recognized him as a caliph. Yazeed sent Muslim bin Aqabah to
crush them and allowed Medina to be devastated, looted, dishonored and
massacred for three consecutive days and forced people to declare that
they were servants of Yazeed.

Shameful sins took place in Medina and many companions of Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) and Tabein were killed. He died in 64 A.H. [Târikh Tabari:
Events of the year 64; Târikhul Khamis 2/300; Târikh Ibne Athir 4/94;
Jumahartul Ansâb: 103; Al-Alâm 8/ 189]

Walid bin Utbah bin Abi Sufyân Umayyad is one of the chiefs of Bani
Umayyah. He became the governor of Medina in the year 57 during the days
of Muawiyah. After the death of Muawiyah, Yazeed wrote to him to obtain
allegiance from people in his favor. He relieved him in the year 60,
recalled him and took advice from him and in 61 reappointed him as the
governor of Medina. He confronted the revolt raised by Abdullâh bin
Zubair in Mecca and died of plague in Medina in the year 64. He had
performed Hajj with people in 62. [Mirâtul Jinân 1/140; Nasabu Quraish
/133 & 433; Al-Alâm 8/121]

Medina: which is also known as Yathrib? Its area was about half of
Mecca. It was situated in the hot salty land with abundant water and
date trees. The Masjid is in the middle of the city and the holy grave
in the east. Medina has many other names like Taybe and Yathrib and
Mubarakah. [Majamul Buldân 5/82]

Walid called Marwân Ibn Hakam11 for consultation regarding Hussain
(a.s.). Marwân said, "Hussain will not give allegiance, and if I were
you, I would have cut off his head." Walid said, "I wish my mother had
not given birth to me and I had not existed!" Then he summoned Husain
(a.s.). Hussain approached him with thirty members of his family. Walid
informed him about the death of Muawiya, and asked him to give
allegiance to Yazeed.

He said, "O? Sir! Since allegiance is not a secret affair whenever you
invite the people, you may call me too." Marwân said, "O Amir! Do not
accept his excuse and if he refuses, cut off his neck." Hussain (a.s.)
became angry and said: "Woe unto you, O son of bustard! You order my
beheading! You are a liar and you have, by Allâh, shown meanness." Then
he turned towards Walid, and said: "O Amir! We are the members of the
Holy family of the prophetic mission. We

Marwân bin Hakam bin Abil Aas bin Abd Manâf, Abu Abdul Malik, is an
Umayyad caliph and is at the head of the dynasty of ?le Marwân (Umavi)
whose kingdom is known as Marwânian. He was born in Mecca, brought up in
Tâif and lived in Medina. Uthmân made him one of his closest confidant
and also his scribe. After the murder of Uthmân he participated in the
disturbance in Basra with ?isha and was with Muawiyah in Siffeen. He was
appointed governor of Medina during Muawiyah?s reign. Ibne Zubair drove
him out of Medina. He went to Syria and died of plague in the year 65.
According to our narration his wife, mother of Khâlid bin Yazeed, killed
him. [Usdul Ghâbah 4/348; Târikh Ibne Athir 4/74; Târikh Tabari 7/34;
Al-Elâm 7/207]

are the mines of prophethood, and our house is the thoroughfare of
angels. Allâh initiated and concluded with us (the divine knowledge)
Yazeed is a debauchee, a drunkard; a murderer, and has shed much holy
blood. All these factors have made him unworthy of caliphate. A man like
me cannot give allegiance to him; however, tomorrow morning I will study
about this matter, and will see who is worthy of being caliph."

Then the Imâm (p.b.u.h.) left there. Marwân said to Walid: "You didn?t
act as I advised you?" Walid said: "Woe unto you. Through your advice,
you wished to destroy my world and the Hereafter? By Allâh! I do not
like to get the worldly kingdom by shedding the blood of Hussain. By
Allâh! I don?t think that one meets Allâh with the sin of murdering
Hussain (a.s.) except that his balance (of deeds) is light, and Allâh
will not be kind to him, and will punish him in Hell." Next morning
Hussain (a.s.) came out of his house to get news, and he came across
Marwân. Marwân said: "O Aba Abdillâh! I want to give you an advice.
Rather hear me and accept it."

He said: Tell me, so that I may hear it. Marwan said: "I tell you to
give allegiance to Yazeed, Amirul Momineen. It is better for your world
and your Hereafter."

Hussain (a.s.) said: "(Inna lillâh wa inna ilaiheh Râjeoon) Indeed we
belong to Allâh, and to Him is our return." When the Ummah (society)
falls into the leadership of men like Yazeed, it would mean an end to
Islâm. Verily, I have heard from my grandfather the holy

Prophet who said, "Caliphate is forbidden for the household of Abi
Sofyân." The conversation between Hussain (a.s.) and Marwân went on
until the latter became furious and went away.12

- After this, as per the copy "A? there is a lengthy narration, which
is not found in the copy of "R?. Possibly it is a marginal (or footnote)
written by the author on the book. Anyway we produce here the exact text
of the copy of "A?: Ali bin Musa bin Ja?far bin Muhammad bin Tâwûs, the
author of this book, says: Our research reveals that Hussain (a.s.) knew
very well the consequence of his uprising and action and that it was his
duty to do what he did. Groups, with their evidences-their names have
been mentioned by me in the book Ghayâs Sultânul Wara A Sukhanas
Sara-upto Abi Ja?far Muhammad bin Babawayh al-Qummi, who has in his book
Amâli, quoted from Mufaddal bin Umar from Sâdiq (a.s.) and he from his
father and grandfather that they informed me: One day Hussain came to
Hasan (a.s.). When his eyes fell on his brother he wept. He asked: Why
are you weeping? He replied: It is due to what is going to happen to
you.

He said: What will happen to me in that I will be martyred through
poison. But, O Aba Abdillâh! There is no day like your day when thirty
thousand people who consider themselves as the followers of our
grandfather and who call themselves Muslims, will gather around you,
shed your blood, dishonor you and capture your sons and women, and
plunder your property. Then cursing of Bani Umayyah will be lawful. Dust
and blood will rain from the sky. Everything including wild animals and
fish in the sea will weep over you.

A group of those at whom I have hinted…As is mentioned at the end of
the book Shâfi, his grandfather Muhammad bin Umar narrates that: My
father Umar bin Ali (a.s.) talked about Dais from ?le Aquil and said: As
my brother Hussain (a.s.) refused to give allegiance to Yazeed in
Medina, I went to him in private and told him: May I be thy ransom, O
Aba Abdillâh! Hasan Mujtaba, your brother (a.s.) has narrated from his
fathers: At this moment weeping stalled my talking and I wept loudly.
Hussain embraced me and said: Did he tell you that I would be killed? I
said: Alas, O son of the Prophet. He said: By your father, did he inform
you about my murder. He said: Yes, if you did not give allegiance. He
said: Brother my father narrated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that I
would be killed and my grave would be near his grave. Do you think that
I do not know what you know? No. By Allâh, I will never accept
humiliation. It is Fâtima who complained to her father about what her
progeny received from the Ummat. Those who tormented her progeny will
not be taken to Paradise. I say:

Maybe some who have not recognized the gracefulness in martyrdom may
understand that devoutness to Allâh is not like this, as if they have
not heard the True Quran saying that sometimes devoutness lies in self
killing: Then repent before your Creator by killing yourselves as it, in
the sight of your Creator, is better for you. Perhaps they have relied
on the verse: Do not destroy yourselves by your own hands and imagined
that in this ayat the word Tahlakah means killing whereas the question
is not like that. Tabbud (devoutness means man should make himself reach
the stages of Sa?adat (bliss of salvation). The author of Maqtal, while
explaining this verse, narrates from Imâm Sâdiq (a.s.), which conforms
to intelligence. Aslam narrates that: We went to the battle of Nahavand
and perhaps to other battles too. We arranged our rows and so also the
enemy. They had unprecedented lengths and widths. The army of the
Byzantines had their back to the city wall and their face towards us.

One of us attacked. People exclaimed: La Ilâha Illallâh. This man is
throwing himself into destruction (halakat). Abu Ayyub Ansâri said:

Perhaps you have taken a wrong meaning from this verse and thereby you
have mistaken the desire for martyrdom of this man as jumping into
halakat. This verse is revealed in connection with us because we,
instead of rushing to help the Prophet of Allâh remained stuck with our
women and children and property and consequently refrained from
assisting the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and this ayat has been revealed by
way of admonishing and denouncing us. Its meaning is: By violating the
command of the Holy Prophet and by remaining in the house with women and
children you have thrown yourselves into halakat (destruction). This
verse is for refuting our dead and for inspiring us to fight against the
enemy in Jihâd. Thus the action of the said man was either for getting
martyrdom or for inspiring the army against the enemy to get its reward
in the Hereafter.

We say: We have brought these reminders in the Preface and in the
discourse of this book and the same will also be repeated henceforth.

The next morning, 3rd of the month of Shabân, 60 A.H. Imâm (a.s)
departed for Mecca. He stayed the rest of Shabân, Ramadân, and Zilqada
in Mecca.13 Abdullâh Ibn Abbâs14 and Abdullâh IBn Zubair15 came to him
and proposed him to reside in Mecca. He said: "Indeed the holy Prophet
has ordered me to fulfill a task, which I am carrying out." Ibn Abbâs
went out exclaiming: "Wa Hussaina!"

Thereafter Abdullâh Ibn Umar16 came and invited Imâm Hussain (p.b.u.h.)
to ally with the deviated government to keep away from war and
bloodshed.

- Mecca has many other names like: Ummul Qura, Annisasah, Umme Raham.
It is called Baitullâhil Harâm.

- Abdullâh bin Abbâs bin Abdul Muttalib Quraishi, Hâshmi, Abul Abbâs
who was a chief of the Community and a great companion of the Holy
Prophet. He was born in Mecca and was brought up during the initial days
of prophethood and became a servant of the Holy Prophet. He has narrated
hadiths and he was with Ali (a.s.) during the battles of Jamal and
Siffeen. He had become blind during the last days of his life; He
resided in Tâif and expired in the year 78 A.H. there. [Al-Isâbah Part
4772: Sifatus Safwa 1/314, Hilyatul Awliya 1/314; Nasabu Quraish 26;
Al-Mahbar: 98; Al-Alâm 4/95]

- Abu Bakr Abdullâh bin Zubair Al-Awâm Quraishi, Asadi became Caliph
after the death of Yazeed in 64. He got control over Misr, Hijaz, Yaman,
Khorasan, Iraq and most of Syria and he made Medina his center. He had
encountered hard events with Bani Umayyah; Hajjâj Thaqafi went to fight
him in the days of Abdul Malik bin Marwân. Ibne Zubair went to Mecca
when Hajjâj was with his army in Tâif. There was a fight between them,
which resulted in the killing of Ibne Zubair in the year 73, A.H. He
ruled as a Caliph for 9 years. [Târikh Ibne Athir 4/135; Târikh Tabari
7/202; Fuwâtul Wafiyât 1/210; Târikhul Khamis 2/301; Al-Alâm 4/87]

- Abdullâh Bin Umar Bin Khattâb Adavi, Abu Abdur Rahmân, had become
blind in the last days of his life and he is the last Sahâbi

Imâm (a.s.) said: "O Aba Abdul Rahmân! Don?t you know that it is a
dirty world which caused people so lowthat the holy head of Yahya Ibn
Zakariya is sent to one of the bastards of the children of Israel? Don't
you know that the Jewish people killed seventy prophets, from dawn to
sunrise, during a day? Yet they went to their work in market, as if
nothing had happened at all. Allâh did not make haste in punishing them,
but gave them respite. Thereafter, He chastised them severely, which was
a very hard chastisement from the Almighty God. O Aba Abdul Rahmân! Fear
Allâh and do not refrain from assisting me."


