Event 1
=======

The narrator says, "The people of Kufa heard the news of the dignified
arrival of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) in Mecca and his denial to give
allegiance to Yazeed.17 Many people gathered in the house of Sulaimân
Ibn Surad Khozâei."18

Sulaimân stood up, gave a sermon and at the end of his speech said: "Oh
Shias! You know that Muawiyah has died and is getting the recompense of
his deeds. He has (companion of the Holy Prophet) to die in Mecca. He
was born and died in Mecca. The date and year of his death is unknown
and under dispute. [Al-Isâbah 4825; Tabaqât Ibne Sa'ad 4/105-138;
Tahzibul Asma 1/278; Al-Alâm 4/108]

- Kufa is the same city, which is well known and situated in the land
of Babel (Babylon). It is one of the cities of Iraq. It is called Kufa
because it is circular. [Majamul Buldân 4/322]

- Abu Muttaraf Sulaimân bin Sard bin Abi al-Jun Abdul Uzza Manqaz
as-Saluli al-Khuzâi was a Sahâbi and a Shia leader. He was by the side
of Ali (a.s.) during Jamal and Siffeen. He was a resident of Kufa. He
owned the State of Tawwâbeen during Alwardah and was martyred by Yazeed
bin Haseen. [Al-Isâbah Part 3450; Târikh Islâm 3/17; Al-Alâm 3/127]

nominated his son, Yazeed, on the throne of kingdom." Here is Hussain
(a.s.) who has refused to confirm him, and he has migrated to Mecca, due
to the rebellious Ommayides. You are the followers of him and his
father. Today he needs your help. So think over. If you can fight with
him against his enemy, then inform him. Otherwise if you are lazy,
disunited, and fearful then do not capture him in deception and
complacency.

Then they wrote the following letter to Imâm Hussain (p.b.u.h.) and
dispatched it: In the name of Allâh, the Beneficent, the Merciful
Submitted respectfully to Imâm Husain Ibn Ali Amirul Momineen (a.s.),
from Sulaimân Ibn Surad Khozâei, Musayyab Ibn Najbah19, Rafah Ibn
Shaddâd20, Habib Ibn Mozâhir,21 and Abdullâh Ibn Vail22 and his other
Shias (followers):

- He was Musayyab bin Nujbah bin Râbiah bin Riyâh al-Fazari, Tabei, a
chief of his community. He had participated in the battles of Qadisiyah
and in the conquests of Iraq. He was also present in the wars fought by
Ali (a.s.). He became a resident of Kufa and was one of the Tawwabeen
and among those who demanded the revenge for the killing of Hussain
(a.s.). He attained martyrdom with Sulaimân bin Sard in the year 65. He
was a man of courage, struggle and devotion. [Al-Kâmil Fi Târikh
4/68-71; Al-Isâbah Part 8424; Al-Elâm 7/225- 226]

- Rafah bin Shaddad al-Bajli, Qari was one of the invading and
courageous Kufians who were friends (Shias) of Ali (a.s.). Martyred in
66 A.H.

- Habib bin Mazahir or Mazahhar bin Riyab bin Ashtar bin Najwan
al-Asadi al-Kandi Fiqasi is one of the brave Tabei leaders. He lived in
Kufa. He had served Imâm Ali (a.s.) during all of his battles. He was
from Shartat al-Khamees. He led the left wing of Imâm Hussain?s (a.s.)
army in Kerbala. He was 75 years old. He had tried to obtain the

Peace of Allâh be upon you. Praise is for Allâh Who defeated the enemy
of you and your father, i.e. one who was selfish, arrogant and jealous
oppressor, who forcibly snatched the right of this Ummah, and deprived
them from their rights; one who became sovereign without the consent of
the community, who killed the good people and kept the evil ones and
mischief-mongers alive and handed over the public treasury to the rebels
and dictators, and thus we wish that he would have been driven away from
the mercy of Allâh, like the people of Tham?d. Now we do not have any
leader except you. So please come to us, so that Allâh may gather us for
truth through you.

Here, Nomân Ibn Bashir23 (the governor) has remained assistance of Bani
Asad but before they could join the army of Hussain, the enemy came in
the way. He was honorable and respectable in the eyes of Imâm Hussain
(a.s.). He was held in high esteem in the society of Kufa. After his
martyrdom Husain (a.s.) had condoled himself. His killer was Badil bin
Hareem al-Gafqani. [Târikh Tabari 5/352-440; Rijâlush Shaykh: 72;
Tasmiya min Qatli ma al-Husain: 152; Lisânul Mizân 2/173; Al-Kâmil Fi
Târikh, Events of the year 61; Al-Elâm 2/166; Ansârul Husain: 81-82]

- Apparently his correct name was Abdullâh bin Vail Tamimi as it is
mentioned in Rijâlush Shaykh: 55. He is one of the companions of Amirul
Momineen. His name comes after that of Qambar and this is a mistake. In
the manuscript of Rijâlush Shaykh his name is mentioned before that of
Qambar and that too before a number of other names. His name is
mentioned in Sharhun Nahj and at other places also. [SharhunNahj
3/133]

23- Nomân bin Bashir bin Sa?ad bin Thalaba al-Khazraji al-Ansâri is
from Medina. Nailah, wife of Uthmân had sent her shirt to him through
Nomân to Syria. He was with Muawiyah in Siffeen. He had become the Qâzi
(judge) of Damascus and thereafter governor of Yemen then of Kufa and
thereafter of Hims. He was there when Yazeed died. Then Nomân gave
allegiance to Ibne Zubair and people of Hims rose against him. So he
fled. Khâlid bin khilli al-Qalai alone in the government palace, and we
are not on his side in Friday pray and other ceremonies.

If we come to know that you are coming toward us, we shall drive him
out to Syria (Shâm)24. Blessings and greetings to you inadvance, O son
of the holy Prophet, and may Allâh have mercy on you and on your father,
and there is no strength and might except that of Allâh, the High and
the Great. They sent this letter. After two days, the people dispatched
through another group 150 letters, which were signed by one, two, three,
or four persons… all of them requested the arrival of the Imâm to Kufa.
The Imâm delayed response and did not reply to those letters. Then once
he got 600 letters. Letters came constantly, and exceeded to 12000
letters. The latest Kufian couriers were Hâni Ibn Hâni as Sabiee,25 and
Saeed Ibn Abdullâh al- Hanafi,26 who brought the following letter and
it, was the last letter from the people of Kufa:

pursued him and killed him in 65 A.H. [Jumharatul Ansâb: 345; Usdul
Ghâbah5/22; Al-Isâbah No. 8730; Al-Elâm 8/36]

- Shâm having pronunciation with or without hamaza is the plural of
Shâmmat. It is named so because of its dense population and due to the
situation of villages close to one another. Its area from Euphrates to
Areesh is lower than the locality of Egypt. Its width being from Dokuh
towards Qibla to the territory of Byzantine. Its major cities include
Halb, Manbaj, Bamat, Hams, Damascus, Baitul Maqdas and Magrat. Seashore
being that of Antioch and Tarablus... [Majamul Buldân 3/311; 315]

- Hâni bin Hâni Hamadâni al-Kufi. He has narrated from Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and Abu Ishâq from him. [Tahzibul Tahzib 11/ 22-

26- Saeed- Sa?ad from Bani Hanifah bin Majeem…He was a powerful epic
singer. He was one of the couriers for the Imâm. [Târikh Tabari 5/419; &
353; Maqtalul Husain Khwârizmi 1/195 & 2/20; Al-

In the name of Allâh, the Beneficent, the Merciful To Hussain son of
Amir- ul- Momineen Ali (p.b.u.h.) from his Shias, and the Shias of
Amir -ul- Momineen (a.s.) Now, all people are waiting for you, and they
have none other than you, in their mind, for leadership. So please
hurry. Make haste, O? son of the holy Prophet. The gardens and field are
green and full of fruits. The ground is full of grass and trees with
sprouting branches and leaves. When your intention accrues, do come here
so that you may lead the army which is ready. Salutation on you and your
father in advance. Hussain (a.s.) asked Hâni and Saeed, "Whose letter is
this?"

They replied: Shabas Ibn Rabaee,27 Hajar Ibn Abjar,28 Yazeed Ibn
Harith,29 Yazeed Ibn Raveem, Urwah Manâqib 4/103; Al-Bihâr 45/21, 26 &
70; Tasmiya min Qatli ma al- Hussain: 154; Ansârul Hussain 90 & 91]

- Shabas Rabaee Tamimi Yarbooi, Abu Quddoos was a Misri chief and a
Kufian. In his days he had seen the period of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.). Thereafter he claimed prophethood along with Sajah. Then he
returned to Islâm. He asked for punishment for the killers of Uthmân.
Despite inviting Hussain he went to fight against Imâm and got killed in
the year 70. It is said: After his capture, Ibrahim asked him: Tell the
truth, what did you do in Kerbala. He said: I hit the face of Imâm with
my sword. He was told: Woe unto you o cursed one! Did you not fear Allâh
and his grandfather? Then Ibrahim incised the flesh of his thigh to such
an extent that he died. [Al-Isâbah No: 3950; Tazibut Tahzib 4/303;
Mizânul Etedâl 1/440; Al-Elâm 3/154] 28- Hajar-Pronounced like "katan?
or "katab? bin Abjar was a Kufian. It is said he had narrated from
Amirul Momineen, and that Sammak bin Harb had narrated from him. [Ar-
Rijâl fi Tajul Uroos 2/25]

Ibn Qais,30 Umar Ibn Hajjâj,31 and Muhammad Ibn Amir Ibn Atarad.32 It
is narrated that, at that time, Imâm got up and prayed between Rukn and
Maqâm, and wished good affairs from Allâh. Then he called Moslem Ibn
Aquil33 and acquainted him with the situation. He sent the reply to Kufa
through him, wherein he had mentioned his intention to go to Kufa.

The text of the letter was: "I am dispatching my cousin Moslem Ibn
Aquil to you, so that he may convey to me your opinion and views."

- In some manuscripts he is mentioned as Yazid bin Hârith or Yazeed bin
Raveem. But what appears to be correct is that there should have been a
man by the name Yazeed bin Hârith bin Raveem and he must have converted
to Islâm by Amirul Momineen. He was present in the battle of Yamâmah. He
resided in Basra. He was killed in Ray in 68 A.H. [Al-Kâmil; 4/111;
Al-Isâbah No: 9398; Tahzibut Tahzib 8/163, Jumharatul Ansâb 305; Al-Elâm
8/180-181]

- Apparently the correct name is Urwah bin Qais. [Târikh Tabari 5/353;
Ansâbul Ashraf 3/158] - What is mentioned at P. 38 in Irshâd of Mufid is
Hajjâj Zubedi. - Muhammad bin Amir bin Atarad bin Hajib bin Zurârah
at-Tamimi ad Darimi is a Kufian. His name is mentioned in stories of
Hajjâj and other rulers. He was one of the commanders in the army of Ali
(a.s.) in Siffeen. He died around 85 A.H. [Al-Mahbar: 154, 338 & 339;
Lisânul Mizân 5/330; Al-Elâm 6/319]

- Muslim bin Aquil bin Abi Tâlib bin Abdul Muttalib bin Hâshim was a
Tabei and a man of wisdom and courage. His mother was Umme Walad bought
by Aquil from Syria. Imâm sent him to Kufa so that he may take
allegiance for him from the people over there. He left Mecca in the
middle of Ramadhân and reached Kufa on the 6 th of Shawwâl. He is the
first man to be martyred for Hussain (a.s.). [Maqâtilut Tâlibiyyin: 80;
At-Tabaqâtul Kubra 4/29; Tasmiya min Qatli ma al-Hussain: 151; Al-Kâmil
fi Târikh 4/8-15; Al-Akhbârut Tiwâl 233; Târikhul Kufa: 59; Al-Elâm
7/222; Ansârul Husain: 124; Ziyâul Ainain 13-29]

Moslem went with the Imâm?s letter and reached Kufa. As the people knew
about the Imâm?s letter and his program, they were pleased with the
arrival of Moslem.They invited Moslem to stay in the house of Mukhtâr
Ibn Abi Ubaidah Thaqafi,34 and the Shias began to come to that place.
When the people gathered around Moslem, he read the Imâm?s letter. 18000
persons paid allegiance to him. Abdullâh Ibn Moslem al-Bahili, Ammârah
Ibn Walid, and Umar Ibn Sa?ad35 wrote a letter to Yazeed, informing him
about Moslem Ibn Aquil and the situation in Kufa. They advised him to
dismiss Nomân Ibn Bashir and replace him by someone else.

- Mukhtâr bin Abi Ubaidah bin Masood Thaqafi, Abu Ishâq, a man from
Tâif was one of the outstanding avengers of the blood of Hussain from
Bani Umayyah. He had marched to Medina with his father and had relations
with Bani Hâshim. Abdullâh bin Umar married Mukhtâr?s sister Safiyah. He
was with Ali (a.s.) in Iraq. Thereafter he began to reside in Basra.
Ubaidullâh bin Ziyâd arrested him in Basra.

He was extradited to Tâif by the recommendation of Ibne Umar. After
Yazeed died he went to Kufa and rebelled to avenge the blood of Hussain
(a.s.). He captured Kufa and Mosul and killed the killers of Hussain
(a.s.) and got killed in the war with Mus?ab bin Zubair in the year 67
A.H. [Al-Isâbah No: 8547; Al-Farq Bainal Garq: 31-37; Al- Kâmil fi
Târikh 4/82-108; Târikh Tabari 7/146; Al-Elâm 7/192] 35- Umar bin Sa?ad
Abi Waqqâs Zahri Madani, Ubaidullâh bin Ziyâd gave him the command of
4000 men and sent him to the battles of Dailâm. He had with him the
order appointing Umar bin Sa?ad as the governor of Ray. Then when
Ubaidullâh knew about Hussain?s (a.s.) movement towards Iraq he wrote to
Umar bin Sa?ad to return with his army and ordered him to fight against
the Imâm. He made an excuse. Ibne Ziyâd threatened him that he would
take back the governorship of Ray. So he submitted. Umar bin Sa?ad was
killed by the powerful hand of Mukhtâr. [At-Tabaqât 5/125; Al-Kâmil fi
Târikh 4/21; Al- Elâm 5/47]

Yazeed wrote to Ubaidullâh Ibn Ziyâd,36 the Governor of Basra,37 "We
gave you the governorship of Kufa (in addition to Basra)." He informed
him about Moslem Ibn Aquil?s affair, and ordered that he should be
arrested and killed. Ubaidullâh prepared to move towards Kufa.

Hussain (a.s.) wrote a letter to the nobles of Basra, and sent it
through one of his friends, Sulaimân Abârzin38, and invited them to
assist him. He reminded them of their responsibility to obey the Imâm.
This group included Yazeed Ibn Masood Nahsali and Munzir Ibn Jârood
Abdi.39

- Ubaidullâh Ibn Ziyâd Ibn Abih was born in Basra. He was in Iraq when
his father died. He went to Syria and Muawiyah sent him to Khorasan as
Amir in 55 A.H. and Yazeed confirmed him in 60. The event of Kerbala
took place in his time and by his hand. After the death of Yazeed, the
people of Basra gave him allegiance and then revolted against him. He
secretly fled to Syria. Then he went to Iraq and there was a fight
between him and Ibrahim Ashtar. His army scattered and Ibrahim killed
Ubaidullâh at Khazar in Mosul. He was called Ibn Marjâna and was
notorious as a womanizer. [Târikh Tabari 6/166 and 7/18 and 144; Al-Elâm
4/193]

- Basra is an Islâmic city built during the caliphate of Umar. It was
named as Basra in 18 A.H. as soft stone (Basra) was found there. Basra
and Kufa jointly are known as Basratân. [Majmâul Bahrain 3/225-226]

- Sulaimân was a friend of Hussain (a.s.) who was sent to Basra by
Imam. He was asked to meet one of the chiefs of Basra who handed over
Sulaimân to Ubaidullâh. Ubaidullâh killed him. Some historians say he
was martyred in Kerbala with Hussain (a.s.). Apparently the man named
Sulaimân who was martyred in Kerbala was another person. [Târikh Tabari
5/357-358; Maqtal of Khwârizmi 1/199; Bihâr 44/337-340; Ansârul Hussain:
74; Ziyâul Ainain 39-40]

- Munzir Ibn Jârood was born in the time of the Holy Prophet and was
with Ali (a.s.) and was made the governor of Istakhar by the Imâm. When
the Imâm got news about his undesirable affairs he was

Yazeed Ibn Masood gathered Bani Tamim, Bani Hanzala, and Bani Sa?ad and
told them, "O Bani Tamim! How do you find my character, condition, and
family, and nobility among you?" They said, "Well, very good! You are
the pillar and head of every excellence, the center of nobility, and in
the forefront of eminence." He said, "I have called you for obtaining
your opinion and assistance in my affairs." They replied, "By Allâh! We
will do our best to express our view. Tell us, so that we may know."

He said: "Certainly Allâh has dragged Muawiyah into disgrace and
destruction, and has removed his mark. It was he who opened the
floodgates of sin and oppression, and it was he who laid the foundation
of tyranny. He imposed the allegiance of his son on the people by force,
and imagined that he had established him firmly state. Woe unto what he
intended. He made an effort and failed. He called for advice and did not
get support. Now his son, Yazeed, the drunkard and he who heads every
evil and sin, claims to be the caliph of Muslims, and wants to be their
ruler without their consent and approval. This is, while he does not
know the path of truth, because of his being weak in knowledge and
tolerance. I believe that war and fight against Yazeed is more urgent
than war against polytheists."

And here is Husain Ibn Ali, son of the dear daughter of the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.), who enjoys dismissed. Ubaidullâh made him the
governor of the borders of India in 61 A.H. and died at the end of the
same year. [Al-Isâbah Part 8336; Jumharatul Ansâb: 279; Al-?ghâni
11/117; Al-Elâm 7/292] nobility, dignity, and wisdom. His distinction is
beyond the ability of the pen to write, and the tongue to speak. He is
an ocean of knowledge, which has no shore. He is the suitable person for
the post of caliphate. He enjoys a brilliant record, an age full of
experience, a glorious background, and honorable kinship. He is very
affectionate to the youngsters and kind to the elders. How nice it would
be if people had a leader like him, and if he had become the Imâm of the
Ummah. Allâh has made his plea incumbent and his sermon very audible.

Do not run away from the Divine Radiance, and do not grope in darkness
of falsehood. It was Sakhr Ibn Qais40 who brought on you the disgrace of
not participating in Jamal war. Today you may clean that blot by rising
help to the son of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). By Allâh anyone who
refrains from helping him, Allâh has prepared humiliation and shortage
for him and his family. And now behold! I am the one who has worn the
dress of war and have put on the armor. Now the one who is not martyred
will die, and the one, who flees, will certainly meet death.

May Allâh have mercy on you. Give me a good response. Banu Hanzala
said, We always have been the arrows of your bow, and the horsemen of
your family. If you come out for a fight along with us you will be
victorious and conqueror. If you see difficulties, again we will be with
you, and will help you with our swords - He was known as Ahnaf because
of a defect (crookedness and lameness) in his leg. There is a dispute
regarding his name. Some say it was Sakhr and according to some his name
was Zahak. He was born in Basra and had seen the time of the Holy
Prophet, but not the Holy Prophet himself. He isolated himself from the
battle of Jamal and died in Kufa. [At-Tabaqât 7/66; Jumharatul Ansâb:
206; Târikhul Islâm 3/129; Al-Elâm 1/276 & 277]

and will protect you at the cost of our lives. So rise up for whatever
you wish. The Banu Sa?ad got up to speak and said, "O Aba (father of)
Khâlid: The most inappropriate deed, in our eyes, is to oppose you and
to disobey your command and opinion. If Sakhr Ibn Qais has ordered us to
give up war he has eulogized us, and our honor, and pride has remained
intact as before. Please permit us to consult one another so that we may
convey to you the outcome." Thereafter Banu Amer Ibn Tamim spoke, "O,
Aba Khâlid! We are sons of your father, and your confederates. If you
become angry then we do not like to remain happy and silent. If you
march we shall not sit at home. Every command of yours is right. So call
us up so that we may respond, and give order to us so that we may obey.
Issue order whenever you wish. It is only up to you." He said, "O Banu
Sa?ad! If you will obey the command, then Allâh will not deprive you
from power and the sword. It will always remain in your hand."
Thereafter, a letter was written accordingly (unanimously) to the Imâm
(a.s.):

Bismillâhir Rahmânir Raheem

I have been honored by your graceful letter and I have come to know
about its contents; wherein you have summoned me, and have invited me
that I should profit from your obedience and become fortunate by helping
your honor. The Almighty Allâh never keeps the world without the one who
does well and who guides towards salvation. You are Allâh?s perfect Sign
for the entire creation and His Trust on earth. Yes, you are the
fruitful branches of the Prophetic Olive tree, which was planted by the
holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). The highflying bird acquires its graceful
flying through your holy hand. I have made Bani Tamim subservient to
you, and they are your total and perfect followers. They are rushing to
you for obeying you, just as a thirsty camel rushes towards water. I
hand over to you the obeyance of Bani Sa?ad and have washed away the
internal dirt from their souls so thoroughly that it shines nicely
before every eye to observe.

After reading this letter Imâm Hussain (a.s.) said: May Allâh protect
you on the Frightful day (Hereafter), and gratify you on the Day of
terrible thirst. Ibn Masood Nahsali had just made preparations to move
towards Imâm Hussain (a.s.) when he got the news of Hazrat?s martyrdom.
As he could not get the opportunity of helping the Imâm, he got
restless. Munzir Ibn Jârood handed over the message of Imâm Hussain
(a.s.) and the messenger to Ubaidullâh Ibn Ziyâd because he feared that
he could be a spy of Ubaidullâh and Bahriya, daughter of Munzir, was
wife of Ubaidullâh. Ubaidullâh hanged the messenger, and gave a speech
warning the people against revolting and fanning troublesome news. The
next morning Ubaidullâh assigned his brother Uthmân Ibn Ziyâd in his
office in Basra, and he himself rushed to Kufa.

Spending that evening near Kufa, he entered the city at night. People
imagined that Hussain (a.s.) had arrived. So they became happy and
rushed to greet him. But on seeing Ibne Ziyâd they dispersed. Ibne Ziyâd
went to the Government House. He stayed there overnight. Next morning he
went to the mosque and through his speech warned people against
disobeying the ruler, and promised rewards for obedience.

When Moslem Ibn Aquil got this news he feared identification. So got
out of Mukhtâr?s house and went to the house of Hâni bin Urwah. Hâni
gave him a good welcome. Shias began to meet him at the house of Hâni.
Ibn Ziyâd planted his spies over them. When Ibn Ziyâd came to know that
Moslem was in Hâni?s house, he summoned Muhammad Ibn Ash?ath41, Asma Ibn
Kharja42, and Amr bin Hajjâj and asked, "What is the matter? Why is Hâni
not coming to meet me?" They said, "We do not know. It is said that he
is ill."

He said: "I have heard that he has now recovered and that he sits at
the door of his house. If we know that he is not well we may go to see
him. Go to him and remind him not to ignore our due right. Since he is a
noble Arab, I do not like that he should be charged with corruption."
They went to Hâni, stayed there with him and asked him: "What happened,
why not you go to see the Amir (Ibn Ziyad)? He has remembered you
saying, If I know that he is ill. I may go to see him." Hâni said:
Illness prevented me.

- Muhammad bin Ashath bin Qais Kandi is one of the companions of Musab
bin Zubair. He got killed in 67 A.H. [Al-Isâbah No: 8504; Al- Elâm
6/39] - Asma bin Kharja bin Haseen Fazari was a Tabei and one of the
first class personalities of Kufa. He died in 66 A.H. (lunar). [Fuwâtul
Wafiyât 1/11; Târikhul Islâm 2/372; An Nujoomuz Zahira 1/179; Al- Elâm
1/305]

They said, "He has heard that you have recovered and that you sit at
the door of your house in the evening. The ruler will not tolerate this
drawback and disloyalty, especially from someone like you. You are a
nobleman of your community. We ask under oath to get up, take a ride and
come along with us to him."

Hâni put on his dress and rode on his animal. On reaching the palace,
Hâni was fearful and said to Hassân bin Asma Ibn Khâriji, "O my nephew!
By Allâh, I fear this man. What do you think?" He said: "O uncle! Do not
be afraid. I do not feel worry about you." (Hassân did not know what was
going on behind the curtain and why Ibn Ziyâd had sent him to Hâni).
Hâni went to Ubaidullâh along with other companions. Seeing Hâni,
Ubaidullâh said: Dishonesty has dragged him to you (it is an Arabic
proverb). Then he looked at Qâzi Shureih43 who was sitting by his side,
pointed towards Hâni and recited the following couplets of poet of Madi
Karb Zubedi.44 I desired life for him, and he wanted death for me. This
is meant by the excuse of your friend.

Hâni said: What has happened to the Amir? - Shureih bin Hârith bin Qais
Al-Kindi - Abu Umayyah - was originally from Yemen. He died in the year
78 A.H. He was the Qâzi (Judge) of Kufa during the days of Umar, Uthmân,
Ali, Muawiyah and even Hajjâj. He resigned 77A.H. and Hajjâj accepted
his resignation. [At-Tabaqât 6/90-100; Wafyâtul Ayân 1/224; Hilyatul
Awliya 4/132; Al-Elâm 3/161] - Amr bin Madi Karb Zubedi (Faras, Yemen).
He came to Medina in 9 A.H. along with 10 persons and accepted Islâm.
His Kunniyyat was Abu Thaur. He died near Rey in 21 H. [Al-Isâbah No.
5972; At- Tabaqât 5/383; Khizânatul Adab 1/425]

Ibn Ziyâd said, "Shut up, O Hâni! What is going in your house against
Amir-ul- Momineen and the Muslims? You brought Moslem Ibn Aquil in your
premises, and you are gathering fighters and arms for him there?" Hâni
said: I have done nothing. Ibn Ziyâd: Call my servant, Ma?qqal. This
Ma?qqal was a spy of Ibn Ziyâd who knew many secret of Hâni?s house.
Ma?qqal came and stood near Ibn Ziyâd. When Hâni saw Ma?qqal, he
understood that he was Ibn Ziyâd?s spy, said, "By God! Neither I had
called him to my house nor did I invite him to rise in revolt. But he
took shelter in my house. I felt ashamed in refusing shelter. This
sheltering made me responsible for him. I gave him protection. Now since
you have known this matter let me go and relieve him from my house so
that he may go wherever he likes and that my responsibility is over."

Ibn Ziyâd said: "No, by Allâh. You cannot leave here until you hand
over Moslem to me." Hâni: "No, by Allâh. I will never do such a
shameless thing. I cannot hand over my guest to you so that you kill
him." Ibn Ziyâd: "By Allâh, you must deliver him." Hâni: "I will never
do so."


