Event 2
=======

Dialogue between them prolonged. Moslem Ibn Amr Bahli got up to say: If
the Amir allows I may talk to Hâni in privacy. Both went aside in such a
way that Ibn Ziyâd could see them. When their talk became loud Ibne
Ziyâd also heard it.

Moslem told Hâni: "O Hâni, I administer oath of Allâh to you. Do not
kill yourself, and do not put your tribe in trouble. I am afraid you
will be killed. This man, Moslem Ibn Aquil is the cousin of Ibn Ziyad.
He will never be harmed or killed by them. Hand him over to them as this
deed will not cause any disgrace or loss to you, since you will be
handing him over to the ruler." Hâni said: By Allâh, it is disgrace on
my part if I hand over my refugee, my guest, and the representative of
the son of the holy Prophet to his enemy, shile my hands are powerful
and I have many friends. Even if I were alone and without helpers, I
would not hand him over until I sacrifice my life for him.

Bahli administered him an oath. But Hâni declined emphatically. Ibn
Ziyâd, who heard these words said, "Bring him to me. So he was brought
near him." Ibn Ziyâd said: "By Allâh. I say, hand him over. Otherwise I
will behead you." Hâni replied: "Then light of the edges of swords will
light up around your palace." Ibn Ziyâd said: "Woe unto you. Do you
threaten me with your sword?" Hâni thought that his tribesmen had heard
his voice. Ibn Ziyâd said: Bring him close to me. Then he beat him up on
his head, face, nose and cheeks with his whip so much that his nose
broke and flesh fell off his face, and blood rolled over his clothes.
The whip was also broken.

Hâni stretched out his hands and took hold of the handle of the guard?s
sword to snatch it and to attack. The guard caught him. Ibn Ziyâd
shouted: Hold him. They grabbed him and dragged and imprisoned him in
one of the palace rooms, and closed its door. Ibn Ziyâd also ordered
posting of warders to watch him.

Asma Ibn Kharja or Hassân Ibn Asma rose up and said: "Deceptive indeed
was today. O Amir! You asked us to bring this man to you. Now when he
arrived you broke and disfigured his face, and colored his beard with
blood and tried to kill him." Ibn Ziyâd became angry at his words and
said: You are also from him. On his order, they beat him up, chained him
and jailed him in a corner of the palace. He exclaimed: Inna lillâh wa
inna ilaihi Râjeoon. O Hâni! I offer you condolences.

The narrator says: Amr bin Hajjâj heard that Hâni was killed. Raviha,
daughter of Amr was Hâni?s wife. Amr came to government Palace along
with the entire tribe of Mizhaj. He shouted: I am Amr Ibn Hajjâj, and
all these are the warriors of Mizhaj, and its leading personalities. We
have not left obedience and we do not want disintegration in the
community. We have got news that our chief Hâni has been killed. Ibn
Ziyâd understood the reason of the assembly of those people. He asked
(Judge) Shureih to call on Hâni, and to inform the community about his
being safe. Shureih (who was a liar Judge) did so, and the gathering
became glad and returned.

Moslem Ibn Aquil got this news. So he stood up along with his friends
to fight against Ibn Ziyâd. They surrounded the palace of Ibn Ziyâd. Ibn
Ziyâd was beseiged in his palace. The battle began between the army of
Ibn Ziyâd and the army of Moslem.

The companions of Ibn Ziyâd who were with him inside the palace, warned
the friends of Moslem against war and asked them to fear the Syrian
army. This condition continued till nightfall. When night fell, the
friends of Moslem left him and talked to one another: "What can we do
for this sedition that has come on us so rapidly? It is better to remain
in our houses, and leave these two parties to themselves until Allâh
improves their affairs." Except ten persons from his friends no one
remained with Moslem. He went to the mosque to offer evening prayers.
The last ten also dispersed.

When Moslem saw such a situation, he moved alone in the Bazar and
streets of Kufa, until he reached and halted at the door of the house of
a lady named Tooa. He asked for water and she provided it. Then he
sought shelter which also she extended. Tooa?s son knew this and he
informed Ibn Ziyâd. Ibn Ziyâd summoned Muhammad Ibn Ashath and sent him
with soldiers to arrest Moslem. As Moslem heard the noise of the horse
hooves, he put on the war dress, mounted a horse and proceeded to fight
with the enemy.

Moslem, who was a brave man, killed a number of enemies. The sword in
his hand moved in such a way that people remembered the wielding of
Zulfiqâr in the hand of Haider Karrar Ali (p.b.u.h.). Muhammad Ibn
Ashath cried. "O Moslem. You are given amnesty." Moslem replied: "The
amnesty offered by you liars, and misdoers does not have any value."

Then he renewed fighting and recited the lyric poem of Humran bin Mâlik
Khasami: I have vowed not to die but as a free man, even if death looks
ugly. I dislike cheat and fraud or the mixture of cool and palatable
drink with hot and bitter substance. Every man must once meet with
hardship and trouble. I shall strike you, I am not afraid of harm and
loss. They said: "Our words are not deceitful." Moslem did not care. He
continued his constant attacks. Then the enemy rushed to him
collectively. He became very weak due to frequent wounds. A man hit him
with his spear from behind, whereby Moslem fell down and was captured.

When they took him to Ibn Ziyâd, Moslem did not salute him. The guard
said: Salute the commander. Moslem replied: You shut up. Woe unto you.
He is not my commander. Ibn Ziyâd said: Salute me or not, you will be
killed. Moslem told him: "It is no wonder if you kill me, as there were
people worst than you who killed men better than me. If you cut my body
in the worst way, it would only expose your inner dirt and meanness; as
such crimes have been imbibed in your nature."

Ibn Ziyâd said: "O disobedient and mischief- maker! Having left the
chief, you have broken the power of the muslims and are now creating
trouble." Moslem: "O Ibn Ziyâd! You have lied. It was Muawiyah and his
son Yazeed who broke the strength of the muslims. With regards to
trouble, it is you and your father Ziyâd, bondsman of Bani Allâj of
Thaqeef,45 who is the real germ of every hypocrisy and mischief. I hope
Allâh will grant me martyrdom through the hand of the most corrupt
person!"

Ibn Ziyâd said: You desired something which Allâh withdrew it from you
and granted it to the deserving one. Moslem asked: "O son of Marjâna!
Who deserves it?" Ibne Ziyâd: "Yazeed bin Muawiyah." Moslem replied:
"Thanks to God! I am pleased with Allâh?s Judgment between you and us."
Ibn Ziyâd said: "Do you think that you have a right in caliphate?"

Moslem replied: "No doubt, I am certain of it." Ibn Ziyâd: "Tell me,
why did you come to this peaceful city and caused conflicts among its
residents and disturbed their affairs?" Moslem said: "I did not come to
do anything like that. But it is you who uplifted evils, buried virtues,
and imposed yourself on people without their consent. You dragged people
against Allâh?s commandments. You are ruling the people like those
dictators. We came to order - Sayyid Khui says: Ziyâd bin Ubaid… is the
same Ziyâd bin Abih whose mother is Sumayya, notorious for adultery. Her
attachment with Abu Sufyân is known to all and their bastard son is
Ubaidullâh, the killer of Husain (a.s.) cursed son of the cursed, and
the father of the cursed in the first is the same Ziyâd who is known by
the name of his mother. [Mojam Rijâlul Hadith 7/309]

good and prohibit evil, and make people to follow the Book of Allâh
and, as averred by the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) this responsibility suits
us." Ibn Ziyâd (may God?s curse overtake his soul) began to curse
Moslem, Ali, Hasan and Husain. Moslem said: "It is you and your father
who are the worst of the people. O enemy of Allâh! Do whatever you
like."

Ibn Ziyâd ordered Bukair Ibn Umrân, the malicious and the accursed one,
to take Moslem to the top of the palace and kill him. They took Moslem
upstairs, who engaged himself in words of prayers and seeking Allâh?s
rewards for the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). Then they decapitated him and
came down fearful and trembling. Ibn Ziyâd asked: "What is happening to
you?" He said: "While killing him, I saw a black colored and ugly faced
man standing in front of me, who was biting his nails - or biting his
lips -I was not afraid like that ever before."

Ibn Ziyâd: "Perhaps you are frightened." Then he ordered for killing of
Hâni Ibn Urwah. They took him for execution while he was shouting: O
Mazhaja, where are Mazhajis? And where are our tribesmen and relatives?
The executers said: Raise your head. Hâni said: I am not generous in
giving away my own life and will not help you in assassinating me. Ibn
Ziyâd?s slave, Rashid, hit at his neck and killed Hâni.

About the martyrdom of Moslem and Hâni, Abdullâh Ibn Zubair Asadi46
(according to another statement, Farazdaq47 recited thus: If you do not
know what death is, then look at Hâni and the son of Aquil in the market
field; That brave man whose face was disfigured with a sword and another
one who was fell from the top of a wall; These two were crushed under
the feet of oppression and yet their names are on the tongues of
everyone; You see a body that death changed its color and blood that
continues to gush from it; This is the young courageous man, whose
modesty is higher than the modesty of a chaste young girl; His power
stronger than the power of a double edged sharpened sword;

Is there anyone else who sits so comfortably on a horse? Now Mizhaj
forgets him totally; The one whom everyone was ready to obey; If you
have no guts to avenge the blood of your brothers; Then play music for a
while, with the bastards. 46 - Abdullâh bin Zubair bin A?shi. His name
is Qais bin Bajrah bin Qais bin Munqaz bin Amr bin Qaen Asadi. [Adabut
Taff 1/146] 47 - Farazdaq Humam bin Ghaib, Abu Faras was a noted poet, a
linguist and a noble personality in his community. His father and
grandfather were also among generous noblemen. He died at the age of
about 100 years. [Khizânatul Adab 1/105-108, Jumharat Ashârul
Arab/3/163, Al-Elâm 8/93] 55 The narrator says: Ubaidullâh Ibn Ziyâd
conveyed to Yazeed the news about Moslem and Hâni. In response, Yazeed
appreciated his job and thanked for it. He also informed Ubaidullah
about Husain's intention of moving towards Kufa, and ordered him to
arrest, imprison and kill any suspicious person.

Imâm Hussain (a.s.) left Mecca on Tuesday, the 3rd or 8th of Zilhajj 60
A.H., that is, on the day of Moslem?s martyrdom. Abu Ja?far bin Muhammad
bin Jurair Tabari Imâmi in his book Dalâil Al-Imâmah49 says; "Abu
Muhammad Sufyân Ibn Waqee50 from his father Waqee,51 - Shaykh Tehrâni,
in Az-Zariah 8/241, says: Abu Ja?far Muhammad bin Jurair bin Rustam
Tabari Amoli Mazandârâni had come after Muhammad bin Jurair Tabari
Kabir. He is a contemporary of Shaykh Tusi (d. 460 A.H.) and he
corroborates this matter…

- Dalail Al-Imâmah or Dalail ?immah was compiled after 411 A.H. Shaykh
Tehrâni says: Sayyid Tâwûs was the first person to quote from this book…
It may be remembered that in the year 405 A.H., there were 1500 books in
library and from among all those books it was the complete manuscript of
this books to which the Sayyid had been quoting along with the author?s
name during his initial, middle and last days in his books in various
contexts. But that copy reached the latter only in an incomplete form.
[Az-Zariah 8/244]

- In Mustadrakât Ilme Rijâl 4/95, it is mentioned: Sufyân bin Waqee has
not been mentioned by his name Abu Muhammad. Muhammad bin Furât Vahhan
has narrated from him and he from his father and his uncle. Muhammad bin
Jurair has narrated from him and from his father and uncle from Amash in
Dalâilul Mojizât.

- Waqee bin Jarah bin Maleeh Rawâsi, Abu Sufyân was a Hâfiz of Hadith
and a Muhaddith of Iraq in his time. He was born in Kufa and died at
Feed while returning from Hajj in the year 197-199. [Tadkeratul Huffâz
1/282; Hilyatul Awliya 8/368; Mizânul Etedâl 3/270; Târikh Baghdâd
13/466; Al-Elâm 8/117]

from A?mash52(his uncle), from Abu Muhammad Wâqidi and Zurârah Ibn
Khalaj53 We met Husain (a.s.) three days prior to his movement towards
Iraq.54 We informed him about the weakness of the Kufians, and that
their hearts were with him, but their swords were against him." Imâm
Hussain (a.s.) pointed his blessed hand towards the sky. The gates of
the sky opened and innumerable angels, whose number is not known to
anyone except the Almighty Allâh, came down.

Imâm (a.s.) said: If it was not for the causality in this world and had
not the fixed time (death) arrived, I would fight them with these
powers. But I know, with certainty, that the place of the martyrdom of
me and my companions is there, from where none, but my son Ali would be
saved.

It is mentioned in narrations that when Imam Husain (p.b.u.h.) wanted
to proceed towards Iraq, he stood up and gave a sermon and said: All
praise is for the Almighty Allâh, and only His - Amash, Sulaimân bin
Mehran Asadi Valai, Tabei from Rey. He was brought up in Kufa where he
died also. He transmitted around 1300 hadiths. He died in 148 A.H.
[At-Tabaqât 6/238; Al-Wafiyât 1/213 Târikh Baghdâd 9/3; Al-Elâm 3/135]

- Mustadrakât Ilme Rijâl 3/425 has considered that Zarrah bin Khalaj
and Zurârah bin Sâleh were two persons. Perhaps it was one who saw a
Mojizah (miraculous vision) wherein the Hazrat informed him about his
martyrdom and also of his friends. Quoting Ibne Sâleh he says: He had
the honor of meeting Husain (a.s.) three days before he revolted.

- Iraqain: Kufa and Basra. Iraq is known as Suwad due to its being
covered with date trees and other vegetation. Its length was from Hadisa
in Mosul to Abadas and its breadth from Azeeb in Qadisiya to Halwan. Yet
the known length of Iraq is less than the length of Suwad. [Mojamul
Buldân 3/272; 4/93-95]

will prevails; power and strength is not available except from Allah
(sustenance too is only from Him); may Allâh?s mercy be upon His revered
messenger (and his progeny), may Allâh shed His peace on him. The
adoration of death on the son of Adam is like the adoration of a
necklace on the neck of a maiden. My longing to meet my predecessors (my
grandfather, father, mother, and brother) is like the longing of Jâcob
to meet Joseph. A place for my killing has already been selected where I
must reach. As if I see those wild wolves tearing apart pieces of my
body between Nawawees55 and Karbala.

How many stomachs shall be filled with me (my flesh and blood) and how
many leather bags stuffed with my stuff? There is no escape from what
has been inscribed on the state of destiny. We, the holy Ahle Bayt have
considered the happiness of Allâh as our happiness, and we perform His
tests patiently. He grants us the reward of the patient ones. Part of
the prophet gets separated from him but that it returns to him in
Hazeerat-ul-Quds, whereby his eyes become bright and His promise
fulfilled. Whosoever wished to shed and sacrifice his life on our path
and feels gratification of soul in meeting Allâh may get ready to march
with us, as we are to move next morning, Insha Allâh.56

- Nawawees was a public tomb of Christians before the Islâmic victory.
It was situated near the Husaini Lands. [Turâthi Kerbala: 19] 56- In the
copy of "A?, it is mentioned: Muammar bin Musannus has written in
Maqtalal Hussain that: when the Day of Tarviyah (8th of Zilhajj) dawned,
Umar bin Sa?ad arrived in Mecca with a huge army, Yazeed had ordered him
to fight and kill Hussain (a.s.) and Hussain (a.s.) had left Mecca on
that very day of Tarviyah. This writing does not appear in the copy of
R.B. and we have mentioned in the footnote considering it probable that
perhaps it was from the comments of the Muhammad Ibn Dâwood Qummi57
narrates from Abi Abdullâh (a.s.) who said: During the night by the end
of which Husain (a.s.) decided to leave Mecca, Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya58
went to the Imâm and said: O my brother! The disloyalty of the people of
Kufa to your father and your brother is known to you. I am afraid they
will do to you what they had done earlier. If you stay in holy city-
Mecca- your respect, honor, and magnanimity would be apparent.

Imâm replied: "My brother! I fear that Yazeed Ibn Muawiyah may
assassinate me in the limits of the holy Sanctuary, thereby violating
its sanctity." He said: "In view of it you may go towards Yemen or
proceed towards the desert. As your dignity is higher than everyone,
nobody will touch you." He replied: "I consider your proposal."

Next morning Hussain (a.s.) became ready to move. Muhammad Ibn Hanafiya
got the news. He rushed to Imam, and held the rein of his camel saying:
Didn?t you promise to think over my suggestion? author on the work and
thereafter he might have got into the text while producing copies.

- Muhammad Bin Ahmad Bin Dawood Bin Ali Shaykh at-Tâifa Abul Hasan
Qummi (d. 368), the author of Al-Mazâr is one of the excellent works of
Mufid from whom Husain Bin Ubaidullâh al- Fazairihas has also narrated.
[At-Tabaqât Al-Qarn Ar- Rabe: 236] - Abul Qâsim Muhammad al-Akbar is a
son of Ali (a.s.) and Hanafiya is the Kunniyyat of his mother Khaula
daughter of Ja?far. He was a very intelligent and learned man and also
extremely strong. His debates on Imâmate, with Imâm Sajjâd (a.s.) and
consequently his acknowledgement of Imâmate of Imâm Sajjâd (a.s.) and
his bowing before Imâm Sajjâd is well known. He expired in 80 or 81 A.H.
[Tanqihul Maqâl 3/115; Wafyâtul Ayân 5/91; At-Tabaqât 5/91]

He said: "Yes, I did." He submitted: "Then why are you so hurry for
moving?" Imâm said: When you left, the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) appeared
to tell me, "O Hussain! Leave this place. Allâh certainly Wills to see
you slain." He exclaimed: "Inna lillâhe inna ilaihe râjeoon. If it is so
what is the use of taking the womenfolk with you?" Hussain (a.s.): "The
holy Prophet said: Allâh desires to see them in the apparel of captives.
Then he said farewell and departed."59

- In the manuscript of "A? after the phrase [said farewell and
departed] the following words are found: Muhammad bin Yâqub Kulayni, in
his book ar-Rasâil says quoting Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin
Husain, from Ayyub bin Nuh, from Safwân, from Marwân bin Ismail, from
Abi Abdullâh (a.s.) that: We have word regarding the uprising of the
Imâm (a.s.) and the opposition of Muhammad Hanafiya, about which Imâm
Sâdiq (a.s.) said: I shall narrate to you something which you should
never again raise before me in this assembly. While proceeding, Hussain
(a.s.) called for a paper and wrote therein: Bismillâhir Rahmânir Raheem
From Hussain bin Ali to Bani Hâshim:

Those who join me shall attain martyrdom and who oppose not succeed.

Was Salâm

In his book Mulâdunnabi wa mulâd Al-awsiya, Shaykh Mufid quotes his
teacher Imâm Sâdiq (a.s.) saying: When Hussain (a.s.) left Mecca and
proceeded towards Medina (It should be Medina to Mecca - Translator)
armies of angels covered with armaments came riding heavily on horses to
Hussain (a.s.) and said: O Proof (Hujjat) of Allâh for the creation
after the grandfather and father and brother, Allâh had helped His
messenger through us and now He has sent us to help you.

Imâm (a.s.) said: My venue is in the land of my martyrdom and it is
Karbala. When I reach there, you may come to me. They said: O proof of
Allâh! Truly Allâh has ordered us to remain in the range of hearing and
obeying you. Do you feel fear from the enemy? In that case we are with
you.

The Imâm replied: They cannot reach me until I reach my mausoleum. Then
battalions of faithful jinns (genies) turned up before the Imâm and
said: O our master! We are your Shias and your helpers: Order us to do
whatever you like. If you issue a command, we shall destroy all of your
enemies even before you move from your place. The Imâm wished them well
and said: Have you not read in Allâh?s Book revealed to my grandfather:
"Say: Had you remained in your houses, those for whom slaughter was
ordained would certainly have gone forth to the places where they would
be slain." If I stay put here, then how will this inner creation be
tested and who will, except me, will recline in the grave for which a
particular ground has already been selected? That place which will
become the sanctuary of our Shias and friends: it is where their deeds
and prayers will be accepted, they shall reside therein and which will
be the abode of peace for them in both this world and the Hereafter. All
of you may remain present in Kerbala on Saturday - as per another
narration, on Friday - because, by the end of that day, I and all of my
friends will achieve martyrdom, and my head will be carried towards
Yazeed bin Muawiyah.

The jinns replied: O friend of Allâh and the son of His friend! By
Allâh, had we not considered your obedience compulsory and had we not
known that your disobedience is not permissible we would have done quite
opposite and would have annihilated all you enemies even before you
could apprehend them.

The Imâm said: By Allâh, we are stronger than you, but till one is
dead, he dies with clarity and knowledge and one who remains alive lives
with arguments. (This footnote is not found in the manuscript of R. & B.
We are setting forth here because probably the author had brought it in
the margin of his book and thereafter it was included in the text.).

Thereafter Husain (a.s.) continued his journey until he reached
Tanim.60 There he came across a caravan led by Baheer Ibn Ressan Hamiri,
the governor of Yemen, who was carrying gifts for Yazeed. Hussain (a.s.)
took the gifts in the authority of Wilayat and told the cameleers:
Whosoever wishes may come to Iraq with us and enjoy our company. We will
completely pay his fare. Those who do not want (to accompany us) their
fare will be paid [by us] upto this place.

A group accompanied the Imâm. The rest of them refrained from doing so.
Imâm (a.s.) went on until he reached Zât-e-Irq61 and saw Boshr Ibn
Ghâleb,62 who had arrived from Iraq and inquired about the situation
over there.

- Tanim [on the scale of Takreem] is a locality in Hill in Mecca. It is
between Mecca and Sirf at a distance of about two Farsakh [12 km] from
Mecca - some say four Farsakh - It is called Tanim because it has a hill
by the name "Naum? on its left and also another mountain called Naim. A
desert village is called Naiman. In Tanim there are mosques in the
precincts of Masjid-e-Aisha. It is the Miqat for the Meccans for the
purpose of Umrah. [Mojamul Buldân 2/49]

- Zat-e-Irq is the place of Tahleel (praising God) for the Iraqis. It
is between the borders of Najd and Tahamah. It is said: Irq is a
mountain on the road to Mecca and hence it is named Zat-e-Irq. Asmaee
says: the ground raises high from Batl ar-Rama upto the heights of
Zat-e-Irq and Irq is a mountain close to Zat-e-Irq. [Mojamul Buldân
4/107-108]

- It is mentioned in Mustadrakât Ilmur Rijâl 2/33 that Bashar bin
Ghalib Asadi Kufi is one of the companions of Hussain and Sajjâd (a.s.).
Shaykh, in his Rijâl, and Baraqui have considered him among the
companions of Amirul Momineen and Hasnain and Sajjâd (a.s.). He and his
brother Bashir are the narrators of Dua Arafa of Imâm Hussain. He has
some narrations, which I have quoted in Oddatud Dai. Abdullâh bin
Shuraik has narrated from him.

He said: "When I left them their hearts were with you while their
swords were serving Bani Umayyah." The Imâm (a.s.) said: O brother
Asadi! You are right. Verily Allâh does what He wants, and He commands
what He intends. The narrator says, "Imâm continued to move till he
reached Thalabiya,63 and it was noon time. Imâm put his blessed head
down, took a light sleep and got up and said: I dreamt that a secret
voice was telling me, "You are en route and death will take you to
Paradise." His son Ali said: "O dear father! But are we not on the right
path?"

He replied: "Why not my son? By the One to Whom all have to return, we
are." He replied: "Then we have no fear from death." Hussain (a.s.):
"May Allâh gives you the best reward, which He gives to every child from
his father." Imâm passed that night there. Next morning a Kufian man,
Abu Hirra Azdi, came to Imâm and saluted him. Then he said: "O son of
the Prophet of Allâh! What did bring you out of the Sanctuary of Allâh
and the Sanctuary of your grandfather, the Prophet of Allâh?"

Hussain (a.s.) said: "O Aba Hirra! When the Umayyides grabbed my
property I remained patient. When - Thalabiya [with first Fatha for
pronunciation] is one of the stations on the Mecca-Kufa road after
Shuqooq but before Khuzemiya. It was at the 2/3rd distance (road). At a
lower level was a water stream at a distance of one mile called Zaweeja.
Thalabiya is named so because Thalaba bin Amr had been there. It is said
that Thalaba bin Dudan bin Asad was the first person to camp there.
[Mojamul Buldân 2/78] they attacked my honor, I tolerated it. Now as
they demanded my blood I fled. By Allâh, this traitor and rebel group
will definitely kill me, and Allâh will surely make them wear clothes of
disgrace, and will make the sword rule over them."


