Event 3
=======

Then Imâm (a.s.) marched forward. Narrating the event, some people of
Bani Fazarah and Bajilah said, "We were returning from the journey of
Mecca with Zohair bin Qain.64 We met Imam Hussain (a.s.) on the way and
were not pleased to see some women accompanying Imam (a.s.). Whenever
Imâm intended to camp, we put our camp with a distance. Once Imâm
descended at a place where we were also obliged to stay at the same
spot. When we were eating lunch, the emissary of Imâm Hussain (a.s.)
arrived and saluted us.

Then he told Zohair Ibn Qain, "Imâm has called you." All of us left the
food and became motionless. Zohair?s wife, Delam, daughter of Amr65 told
him: "All praise is to Allah. How strange! The son of the Holy - Zohair
bin Qain Bajali. Bajliya is a branch of Qahtaniyas. Zaheer was a
distinct personality of Kufa. It seems he was quite old when he joined
Imâm. In reciting 'Ziarat', he has been honored exceptionally. Though,
initially, he was not inclined to this meeting, before the battle, he
delivered a speech against the army of Kufr (blasphemy). Thereafter he
became the commander of the right wing of the Imâm?s army. [Târikh
Tabari, 5/396-397; 6/42 and 422; Rijâlush Shaykh: 73; Ansârul Husain:
88]

- This is the lady who told the slave of Zohair after his martyrdom: Go
and shroud your master. The slave went and found the body of Hussain
shroudless. So he asked himself: Shall I shroud my master and leave
Hussain (a.s.) shroudless? So I shrouded Hussain (a.s.) and told the
lady about it. She said: Well done and gave me another shroud with which
I shrouded him (Zohair). [Translated from Al-Imâm al- Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
summons you, and you do not respond? What would happen, if you go and
listen to Imam?" Zohair approached Imâm and soon returned with a happy
and bright face. Then he gave instructions for pulling down the tent and
stable, and then joined Imâm Hussain (a.s.) with his luggage tent.

Then Zohair told his wife: "You are divorced my dear wife, because I do
not want you to see in our common life anything but welfare and comfort.
I have decided to remain in the service of Imâm, and to sacrifice my
body and soul for him. Then he gave his property to her, and dispatched
her to her family with one of her cousins." While leaving her husband,
the woman got up and said, "Allâh may grant good to you. I request you
to remember me when you meet the grandfather of Hussain (a.s.) in the
Hereafter."

Then he (Zohair) said to his friends, "Anyone wants to be with us may
do so. Otherwise, this is our last meeting." When Hussain (a.s.) reached
the terminal of Zubala the news of the martyrdom of Moslem reached him.
When this news spread, the materialists and those who were seeking money
and were greedy left Imâm, and Hussain from the book At-Tabaqât that was
printed in Issue no. 10, p. 190. Elamunnisa al-Mominat: 341] - Zubala is
a halt on Mecca-Kufa Road. It was a populous village with a market
situated between Waqasa and Thalabiya. Sakooni says: Zubala comes after
Kufa and before Shaqooq. It also has a city wall and a Jame Masjid for
Bani Gazaria of Bani Asad. [Mojamul Buldân 3/129] those who were the
faithful and wise companions, remained with him. The narrator said that
the news of the martyrdom of Moslem was shocking and tears rolled from
the eyes of onlookers.

Then Hussain (a.s.) moved towards the place where Allâh had summoned
him and encountered Farazdaq. After saluting Imâm, Farazdaq asked: "O
son of the Prophet! How do you trust the Kufi people who killed your
cousin?"

Tears rolled from the holy eyes of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) when he said:
"May Allâh have mercy on Moslem. He made his way towards Allah?s
pleasure and paradise. He fulfilled his duty, and our responsibility
still remains." Thereafter he recited the following couplets: If the
world is considered a Precious thing; Then the reward from Allâh is more
precious and valuable;

And if bodies have been created for death; Then martyrdom in the path
of Allâh is higher and better; And if provision has already been
destined; Then how nice is it to be less greedy in searching it; And if
the treasured property has to be left behind; Then why man should be
stingy in spending the wealth which has to be left?

It is narrated that Husain (a.s.) wrote a letter to Sulaimân bin Surad,
Musayyab bin Najba, Rafaah bin Shaddâd, and some of the Shias of Kufa,
and sent it through Qais bin Mosahar Saidawi.67 When Qais approached
Kufa he was stopped by Ibne Ziyâd?s official Haseen bin Namir.68 He
began to inquire of him. Qais tore the letter of Imâm and destroyed it.
Haseen sent him to Ibne Ziyâd.

When he was taken to Ibne Ziyâd he asked, "Who are you?" Qais said, "I
am one of the friends of Amirul Momineen and his son." Ibne Ziyâd said,
"Why did you tear the letter?" Qais replied, "So that you may not know
what was written in it." Ibne Ziyâd: "Who had written it and to whom?"
Qais: "From Hussain (a.s.) to a group of Kufis whose names I do not
know."

- Qais bin Mosahar Asadi from Adnân, is a young man of Kufa who
belonged to the nobles of Bani Asad. He is also one of the couriers of
the Kufis to Husain (a.s.). After getting the news of the Imâm?s refusal
to pay allegiance to Yazeed and after seeing Imâm, he returned to Kufa
with Muslim. He delivered Muslim?s letter to Imâm wherein it was
mentioned that people had paid allegiance to Imam (a.s.) and that they
had invited him to come to Kufa. [Târikh Tabari 5/394-395, Rijâlush
Shaykh 79; Tasmiyah min Qatli ma al-Husain: 152; Ansâr-ul Husain:
123-124]

- Haseen bin Namir Shooni was one of the cruel and stonehearted
colonels in the days of Bani Umayyah. He was from Hams. He had stoned
Ka'ba with catapult and finally he was the commander of the right wing
of Ibne Ziyâd?s army during war with Ibrahim Asht near Mosul in the year
68. He went to hell in that war. [At-Tehzib Ibne Asakir 4/371 and
Al-Elâm 2/262]

Ibn Ziyâd became angry and said, "By Allâh. I will not let you go until
you give me their names, or stand up on the pulpit and curse Hussain and
his father and brother. Otherwise I will cut you into pieces." Qais
replied, "I will never tell their names. But with regards to
condemnation, I have no objections." Then Qais went to pulpit, praised
Allâh, gave salutations to the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), pleaded for
mercy of Allâh on Ali and his sons, and condemned Ibn Ziyâd, his father
and likewise all the stubborn fellows of Umayyids upto the last of
them.

Thereafter he said: "O people! I am the messenger of Hussain (a.s.) to
you. I left him at such and such point. Accept him and respond to his
call (invitation)." This news reached Ibn Ziyâd. He ordered that Qais to
be thrown away from the top of his palace wall. Thus he was martyred.

The news of the martyrdom of Qais reached Imâm Husain (a.s.). Tears
rolled from his blessed eyes. He said: "O Lord! Provide holy and
honorable abodes for our companions and us and bring them and us under
the cover of Your mercy, as You are Mighty over everything." The
narrator says: Hussain (a.s.) traveled upto a place two stations from
Kufa, when he confronted Hurr Ibn Yazeed,69 who was with one thousand
riders.

- Hurr bin Yazeed bin Najiyah bin Saeed from Bani Riyah bin Yarhoo?. He
was one of distinguished personalities of Kufa and a leader among the
nobles of Tamim. He was also one of the commanders in the Umayyad army
in Kerbala. He was leading the tribes of Tamim and Hamadân. He
confronted Hussain (a.s.) at the Hussain (a.s.) said to Hurr: "Are you
with us or against us?" Hurr replied: "Rather, O Aba Abdillâh, against
you."

Hussain (a.s.): "La Hawla wala quwwata illa billâhil a?liyyil a?zeem
(There is no Power nor Strength but what is granted by the Almighty
Allah.)" There was a lengthy conversation between them and at the end
Imâm Hussain (a.s.) said: "Now that you are acting different from your
writings and messages, I would return to the place from where I have
come." Hurr and his army opposed this proposal and prevented him. Hurr
said: "O son of the Prophet! Take a route, which would lead neither to
Kufa nor to Medina, so that I may say to Ibn Ziyâd, as an excuse, that
your way was different from us."

Imâm (a.s.) continued his journey towards left till he reached
Azib-ul-Hajanat.70

It is said that at that place, the order of Ibn Ziyâd reached Hurr,
rebuking Hurr for his soft attitude towards foot of Mt. Hasam. On
Ashura, before the battle intensified, between the Imâm and the army of
blasphemy, he repented and joined the Imâm and fought fiercely until he
was martyred. [Târikh Tabari 5/422 and 400 and 427; Tasmiyah min Qatli
ma al-Husain: 153; Rijâlush Shaykh: 73; Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya 8/172;
Al-Kâmil fi Târikh 4/19; Ansârul Husain: 84-85 and Al-Elâm 2/172

- Azeeb al-Hajanat is near Azeeb al-Qawadas and it is a river or stream
between Qadisiya and Maghshiya. The distance between them from Qadisiyah
is four miles. Something more is also said about it. [Mojamul Buldân
4/92]

Hussain (a.s.), and he was ordered to harass and inconvenience the Imâm
(a.s.). Hurr came in the way of Imâm and prevented him from proceeding
further. Hussain (a.s.) said: "Did you not demand a change in my route?"
Hurr replied: "Of course, but here is the letter of the Amir, which
orders me to tighten the path for you. He has appointed spies over me so
that I should obey his command."

The narrator says: Hussain (a.s.) stood up in front of his friends to
give an address. After praising Allâh, he mentioned his grandfather and
invoked blessings on him and said, "You can see the situation. The world
has changed. It is showing its ugly face to us, and holding back its
goodness. Nothing has remained from it, but just a sip at the bottom of
a glass. Life appears to be mean and baseless, just like unpalatable
grassland. Don't you see that truth has been deserted, and falsehood is
practiced? How nice if a faithful would long to meet his God (through a
martyrdom in His path). It is so because I do not see death but
prosperity, and living with the oppressors nothing but condemnation."

Then Zohair Ibn Qain stood up and said, "May Allâh keep us steadfast on
the path of guidance and in your service. We heard your words. If we are
to continue living in the world, we prefer to follow you in any
situation."

Hilâl bin Nâfe Bajli71 rose from his place and said, "By Allâh, we do
not see meeting our God unpalatable, and we are always steadfast in our
intentions and insight. We are friends of your friend, and enemies of
your enemy."

Then Burair Ibn Haseen72 Khuzâir stood up and submitted: "O son of the
holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)! By Allâh, He has favored us by keeping us in
your company, so that our bodies get torn into pieces, and your
grandfather may be the intercessor for us in the Hereafter." Thereafter
Hussain (p.b.u.h.) rode and moved on. The army of Hurr sometimes
obstructing him and sometimes moving with him until Imâm reached
Karbala. It was the 2nd of Muharram. Then he asked: "What is the name of
this place?"

It was said: "Karbala." Imâm said: "Get down because this is the place
for our camping, and for the flowing of our blood. This is the -
Apparently he should be Nâfe bin Hilâl bin Nâfe bin Jamal bin Sa?ad
al-Ashirah bin Mazhaji, not Bajli. He was a noble leader who was
courageous and also a reciter of the Holy Quran as well as an honest
reporter of hadith. He was a companion of Amirul Momineen (a.s.). He had
attended three battles including Kerbala, which are mentioned in books
of Maqtal. [Absârul Ain 86-89, Tabari 6/253, Ibne Athir 4/29, Al-Bidaya
4/184]

- In some sources he is mentioned as Badeer bin Hafeer. Obviously it
ought to be Burair bin Khuzair as it is more probable. He used to recite
the holy Quran in the Jame Masjid of Kufa. He was enjoying much respect
in the eyes of the Hamadânis. He is a Hamadâni coming from Kahlan. His
native place was Kufa. He had tried to prevent Umar bin Sa?ad from
accepting the post of governor in the government of Bani Umayyah.
[Tabari 5/421; Mojam 3/289; Al-Manâqib 4/100 and Bihâr 45/15]

land of our shrines. By Allâh, this is the place where our womenfolk
will be taken captives, and my grandfather has given this news to me."
All came down. Hurr also descended aside along with his army. Hussain
(a.s.) sat to sharpen his sword and said:

Woe unto you O world! What a bad friend you are; And how much was for
you every night and every morn! ; How many of your seekers have been
killed; But it is this world, which does not show contentment; Verily
every affair is with the Lord, and every living one has a path before
him; How near is the promised time for moving towards Allâh's
Paradise!

It is narrated that Zainab,73 daughter of Fâtima (a.s.), heard those
words and exclaimed, "O my brother! These are the words of one who is
certain about his death!" Hussain said: "Yes, my sister." Zainab: "O?
God! Hussain gives me news of his own death." It is said that the women
wept and beat their faces.

- Zainab daughter of Ali (a.s.) sister of Hasan (a.s.) and Hussain
(a.s.), a wise lady of Bani Hâshim, wife of her cousin Abdullâh bin
Ja?far. She was with her brother Husain (a.s.) in Karbala. From Karbala,
she went to Kufa and thence to Syria as a prisoner. She was forbearing
with a werwing heart. She was a high-class orator. For more details
please refer to Zainab al-Kubra by Shaykh Ja?far Naqvi which gives
information about the unique personalities of Zainab and her mother
Zahra (s.a.).

Umme Kulthum74 cried out: "O? Muhammada…!" Hussain (a.s.) tried to calm
his sister and said, "My sister, be calm by relying on Allâh, since the
residents of the sky do die, and the residents of the earth also do not
remain in their place, and all will die, except Allah." Then he said:
"O? my sisters Umme Kulthum and Zainab, and you Ruqaiyah75, Fâtima,76
and you Rubâb!77

- Umme Kulthum, daughter of Amirul Momineen (a.s.). Her mother was
Fâtima (s.a.) and Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) were her brothers and
Zainab her sister. She is a noble lady of Bani Hâshim. The matter of her
marriage with Umar is one of those matters in which there is a
difference of opinion between Muslims. Some of the instances regarding
her sister Zainab the Kunniyyat of both of whom are same have confused
the historians. [Ajoobatul masail as-Sarviyah: 226; al- Istighâsah: 90;
Al-Istiâb 4/490; Al-Elâmun Nisa al-Mominât 181-120 and others]

- Historians have not mentioned Ruqaiyah. Sayyid Amin, in Ayân, 7/34
has said: In a street called Mahalla al-Imârah of Damascus, there is a
grave and a martyr?s tomb which is a place of pilgrimage and is named
after her. Mirza Ali Asgar Khân, the premier of Iran, had renovated it
in 1323 A.H.

- Fâtima, daughter of Imâm Hussain (a.s.), was a scholar of Hadith and
a narrator also from her grandmother Fâtima (s.a.) by way of
transmission. She has narrated Hadith from her father. She had gone as a
prisoner to Syria with her aunts Zainab and Umme Kulthum and her sister
Sakina. Then she returned to Medina and got married with her cousin
Hasan bin Hasan. After his death she married Abdullâh bin Amr bin
Uthmân. After the death of the latter she did not remarry until she died
in the year 110 A.H. [At-Tabaqât 8/347; Maqâtilut Tâlibiyyin; 119 and
120 and 202 and 237 and Al-Elâm 5/130]

- Rabâb, daughter of Amr al-Qais bin Adi, wife of Hussain (a.s.) as-
Shaheed. She was with him in Kerbala and after the martyrdom went to
Syria with the prisoners. From there she returned to Medina. A number of
nobles sought her hand in marriage but she excused herself. She did not
repose under roof for a year after the martyrdom of Hussain (a.s.), fell
ill and died of terrible sorrows. She was a poetess Do not rend your
collar; do not scratch your face, and do not utter unjust words after my
martyrdom."

As per another narration when Zainab heard the couplets, she was alone
in her place without any lady besides her. Barefooted, with her clothes
sweeping the ground, she reached her brother and said, "O? God! I wish
death had liberated me from this life. It seems that today I have lost
my mother Fâtima Zahra, my father Ali Al- Murtuza, and my brother Hasan
al-Mujtaba. O? you the successor of the deceased, and the shelter of the
rest (Hussain)."

Hussain (a.s.) had a glance at his sister and said: "O my sister, do
not lose patience." She replied: "May my father and mother be sacrificed
for you, and so may I be sacrificed for you! Are you to attain martyrdom
soon? However she swallowed choking worries." His holy eyes became
tearful. Then he said: "Alas. If they had left the bird alone in repose
during night, it would have fallen slept." She said: "Ah, do you put
yourself in danger. Do you still injure my heart? It is very unpleasant
to me. Then she rent her collar and fainted."

Imâm (a.s.) got up, poured water on her face until she regained
conscious. Then he assured her, and reminded her of the death of her
father and grandfather (s.a.w.s.). and sung elegies bewailing Hussain
(a.s.). [Al-Mahbar 3/13; Elâmun Nisa 1/378 and Al-Elâm 1/378]

One of the probable motives which caused Hussain (a.s.) to take his
family members and womenfolk with him, was that if Imâm had left his
family in Hijaz or in any other city, Yazeed (the cursed) would have
come to know about it, and would had sent a group to arrest them, and
had behaved very harshly with them. It could have prevented Hussain
(a.s.) from jihâd and martyrdom. It was likely that for taking care of
his family and womenfolk, he might have missed attaining lofty
martyrdom.


