Event 3 Part Two : the Battle and Its Related Events
====================================================

The narrator says that Ibn Ziyâd called his companions for fighting
against Husain (a.s.) and they accepted. Though he held them in a low
esteem they carried out his order. He offered Umar Ibn Sa'ad the command
of the army, which he accepted blindly. Umar bin Sa?ad left Kufa with
four thousand riding soldiers for fighting against the Imâm. Ibn Ziyâd
sent many armed groups to support him till their number became twenty
thousand on the night of the 6th Muharram of 61 A.H. Ibn Sa'ad
surrounded Husain (a.s.), putting him in an extremely difficult
situation. He cut off water supply from him, his families, and his
companions. They all suffered a terrible thirst.

Then Imâm (a.s.) stood up, leaned on his sword and proclaimed in a loud
voice: I administer an oath on you. Do you know me? They said: "Yes! You
are the son of the holy Prophet."

Hussain: "I administer the oath of Allâh. Tell me, do you know that the
Prophet of Allâh is my grandfather?" They replied: "By Allâh, yes." He
then asked: "I administer the oath of Allâh to you. Do you know that my
mother Fâtima is the daughter of Muhammad?" They said: "Yes." He said:
"I administer the oath of Allâh to you. Do you know that my father is
Ali Ibn Abi Tâlib?" They replied: "By Allâh, yes." He said: "I
administer oath of Allâh to you. Do you know that my grandmother is
Khadija, daughter of Khuwailid,78 the first Muslim lady of the
nation?"

- Khadija daughter of Khuwailad bin Asad Abdul Uzza, Quraishi, the
first wife of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) who was 15 years elder than
him in age. She was born in Mecca. She was very wealthy and used to
export goods to Syria and a number of men were in her service. When the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was 25 he went on a trade journey with the
capital of Khadija and came back with good profit. He married her before
his prophethood. Then he invited her to accept Islâm and she is the
first Muslim lady to pray with the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) secretly. She
expired three years before Hijrat. [At- Tabaqâtul Kubra 8/7-11;
Al-Isâbah Qisamun Nisa-Sifwatus Safwa 2/2; Târikh Khamis 1/301 and
Al-Elâm 2/302]

They said: "Yes." He said: "I administer oath of Allâh to you. Do you
know that Hamza79, Chief of the martyrs, is the uncle of my father?"

They replied: "It is true." Hussain (a.s.) said: "I administer the oath
of Allâh to you. Do you know THAT Ja?far80, who can fly in Paradise, is
my uncle?" They said: "By Allâh, yes." Hussain (a.s.) then said: "I
administer oath of Allâh to you. Did this sword, which I have unsheathed
and which is now in my hand, belong to the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)?"

- Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib bin Hâshim Abu Ammârah, the leader of
martyrs attained martyrdom in 3 A.H. He was the uncle of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and a chief of the Quraish both during the pre-
Islâmic time of ignorance and also in the days of Islâm. He migrated to
Medina with the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), was present with him in the
battle of Badr and also in other wars, was martyred in Uhad and was
buried in Medina. [Târikhul Islâm 1/99; Sifatus Safwa 1/144 and Al-Elâm
2/278]

80- Ja?far Ibn Abi Tâlib, Kunniyyat: Abu Abdullâh, Abul Masâkin, Sahâbi
(companion of the Holy Prophet [s.a.w.s.]), Hâshimi was from the
courageous people named Bani Hâshim. He is one of the first martyrs
among the seekers of Islâm. After Tâlib and Aquil, he was third son of
his father, and Ali (a.s.) was younger to him. Their mother was Fâtima
binte Asad bin Hâshim. He was martyred in the battle of Muta wherein he
had come down from his horse and fought. Holding the flag on his
shoulder he remained in the front row of the Muslim army. When his right
hand was cut off he held the flag in his left hand. That hand was also
cut; he held the flag against his chest until he was martyred. There
were nearly 90 injuries of arrows and spears on him. [Maqâtilut
Tâlibiyyin 6/18; Al-Bidâya wan Nihâya 4/255; Tahzibut Tahzib 2/98; Usdul
Ghâbah1/286 and Al-Isâbah 1/237]

They said: "Yes." Hussain then said: "I administer the oath of Allâh to
you. Is this turban which is now on my head, the turban of the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.)?" They replied: "By Allâh, yes it is." Hussain (a.s.)
then said: "I administer oath of Allâh to you. Do you know that Ali
(a.s.) was the first man who accepted Islâm, his knowledge was deeper
than that of everyone else, and his patience and tolerance was higher
than that of anyone else, and that he is the Master of every Muslim man
and woman?"

They replied: "By Allâh, yes." Hussain (a.s.) then asked: "How do you
allow yourself to shed my blood when on the Last Day, my father (a.s.)
will be the master of Kauthar Pool, who will drive away people from that
Pool, as camels are hushed away from water, and that the flag of Praise
(Liwaul Hamd) will be in the hands of my father on the Day of Judgment?"
They replied: "We know all of this, and yet we will not leave you until
you taste death in thirst." When the women heard the speech of the Imâm
they wept and wailed and lamented, slapped their faces and their voices
arose.

Imâm (a.s.) sent his brother Abbâs81 and his son Ali82 towards them and
said: "Make them quiet. By my life, how much wailing they would have in
the future!"

- Abbâs bin Ali bin Abi Tâlib. His mother is Ummul Banin, daughter of
Hizam bin Khâlid bin Râbia bin Wahid Amiri. He is the son of The
narrator says: Umar Ibn Sa?ad received a letter from Ibn Ziyâd. He had
ordered Umar to start fighting immediately and had warned him for any
delay. It made Ibne Sa?ad and his army to launch an attack on Husain
(a.s.).

Shimr Ibn Ziljushan (may Allâh curse him)83 rushed ahead and cried:
"Where are my nephews Abdullâh,84 Ja?far,85 Abbâs, and Uthmân."86 Ummul
Banin and had the Kunniyyat "Abul Fazl?. He was extremely handsome with
a high stature. When he rode a horse his feet touched the ground. He was
give the title of "Qamar-e-Bani Hâshim? (Moon of Bani Hâshim) and
"Saqqa? (water carrier). He was the flag bearer on the day of Ashura. He
is the last brother of Imâm who attained martyrdom at the hands of Zaid
bin Raqad Janabi and Hakim bin Tufail Tai and he also inflicted much
wounds on the bodies of both of them. [Maqâtilut Tâlibiyyin: 84-85;
Tasmiyah min Qatli ma al- Husain; 149; Rijâlush Shaykh: 76; Ansârul
Husain: 131] It is said that his name has appeared in Ziyarat and
Irshâd.

- Ali bin Hussain al-Akbar. Kunniyyat Abul Hasan. He was among the
chiefs and brave men of Tâlibiyan. His mother was Laila daughter of Abi
Marrah (Qarrah) daughter of Urwah (Amr) bin Masood bin Mughith (Mo?bad)
Thaqafi. Mother of Laila is Maimuna daughter of Abi Sufyân bin Harb. He
attained martyrdom by the spear of Marrah bin Maqaz bin Nomân Abdi. The
companions of the Imâm then attacked Murrah and cut him into pieces with
their swords. It is said: He was born during the caliphate of Uthmân. He
is called Ali Akbar to differentiate him from Zainul Abedeen (a.s.).
[Maqâtilut Tâlibiyyin: 80-81; At-Tabaqât 5/156; Tasmiyah min Qatli ma
al-Hussain: 150; Rijâlush Shaykh; 76 (wherein he is mentioned Ali
Asghar) Nasbu Quraish: 57; Al-Bidâya 8/185; Al-Elâm 4/277; Ansârul
Hussain: 129. His name also appears in Irshâd and Tabari and Khwârizmi
and Masudi]

Shimr bin Ziljaushan. His name was Sharhbeel bin Qart Zababi Kalabi
Abus Sabigha. He is one of those who carried out killings in Karbala and
was a staunch enemy of Hussain (a.s.). In his earlier days he was one of
the chiefs of Hawazan and was regarded as courageous.

He was with Ali (a.s.) in the battle of Siffeen. Abu Ishâq Sabeei heard
that he said after offering prayer: O Allâh! You know that I am noble.
Forgive me! He was asked: How will Allâh forgive when you assisted in
the killing the child of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)? Shimr said: Woe
unto you. What can I do? It is our Amirs (commanders) who ordered to do
a thing, which we did not disobey. Had we opposed them our condition
would have been worse than these donkeys. During the uprising of Mukhtâr
he fled from Kufa and took shelter in one of the villages of Khuzistan
named Kaltaniyah. The army of Mukhtâr surrounded it in a surprise
attack. Shimr came out in defence but before he put on his dress he came
into an encounter wherein Abu Umrah overpowered him, killed him and they
threw his dirty body before the dogs. [Al-Kâmil fi Târikh 4/92; Mizânul
Etedâl 1/449; Lisânul Mizân 3/152; Jumheratul Ansâb 72; Safinatul Bihâr
1/714; Al-Elâm 3/175]

- Abdullâh bin Ali bin Abi Tâlib. His mother was Ummul Banin. He was 25
at the time of martyrdom. His brother Abbâs told him: Remain in front of
me so that I look at you and may hope for Allâh?s reward… Hâni Sabeet
Khazrami killed him or he was brought down by an arrow of Khuli and
someone from Bani Tamim killed him. [Maqâtilut Tâlibiyyin: 82; Târikh
Tabari 6/89; Tasmiyah min Qatli ma al- Husain: 149; Rijâlush Shaykh: 76;
Ansârul Husain: 129-130] His blessed name appears in Ziyarat, Irshâd
Tabari, Isfahâni Masudi and Khwârizmi 85- Ja?far bin Ali bin Abi Tâlib.
His mother was Ummul Banin. He was 19 at the time of martyrdom. He was
martyred at the hands of Khuli or Hâni bin Thabit. [Maqâtilut
Tâlibiyyin: 83; Tasmiyah min Qatli ma al-Husain: 149; Rijâlush Shaykh:
72; Ansârul Husain: 130] His blessed name appears in Ziyarat, Irshâd
Tabari, Isfahâni Masudi and Khwârizmi.

- Uthmân bin Ali bin Abi Tâlib. His mother was Ummul Banin. He was 21
at the time of martyrdom. He was also hit by Khuli?s arrow and a man
from Bani Abab bin Daram attacked him and severed his head. Regarding
this Uthman, Ali (a.s.) said: I named him after my brother Uthman bin
Mazun. In a narration by Habirah bin Maryam it is mentioned: We were
close to Ali (a.s.) when he called his son Uthman and said: O, Uthman!
Then he said: I did not name him after that old Kafir. Indeed I named
him after Uthman bin Mazun. [Maqâtilut Tâlibiyyin: 84; Tasmiyah min
Qatli ma al-Husain: 150;

Hussain (a.s.) said to the sons of Ummul Banin: "Though he is a fasiq
and evil- doer, give him a response." The sons of Ummul Banin replied:
"What do you want?" Shimr said: "O? sons of my sister! You are under
protection (amnesty). Do not get killed with your brother Hussain, and
come to the service of Yazeed bin Muawiyah, the Amirul Momineen!" Abbâs
Ibn Ali (a.s.) shouted in response: "May your hands be cut! May your
offer of amnesty be cursed! O? enemy of Allâh! Are you asking us to
leave our brother and master Hussain Ibn Fâtima (a.s.), and to come
under the command of the rejected, the cursed, and sons of those
condemned by Allâh?"

Shimr returned angrily to his army. The narrator says: "When Husain
(a.s.) saw that the effect of his admonition was less, and the enemy was
very eager to begin fighting he told his brother Abbâs, If you could get
a period, and delay the war, it will be nice. We may offer prayers
during this night for Allâh, as He knows that I am very fond of prayers
(Salat) and of reciting His holy Book."

Abbâs put up his proposal before them. Umar bin Sa?ad kept quiet. Amr
bin Hajjâj Zubedi said to Sa?ad: "They are the family members of
Muhammad; even if they were poor and low class people, their requests
would have been accepted." Taqreebul Ma'rif (Manuscript); Ansârul
Husain: 130] His blessed name appears in Ziyarat, Irshâd Tabari,
Isfahâni Masudi and Khwârizmi.

Thus, their demand was accepted. The narrator says: Hussain (a.s.) who
was in a sitting position fell asleep, and then woke up and said: "O
sister! During this hour I saw in a dream my grandfather, Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.), my father Ali (a.s.), my mother, Fâtima (a.s.), and my
brother, Hasan (a.s.)." They said to me, "O? Husain! You are coming to
us very soon."

According to another narration they said: "You?ll be with us tomorrow."
The narrator says: "Zainab slapped her face and screamed." Hussain
(a.s.) said: "Be quiet and calm. Do not make the enemy rejoice."

Then came the night of ?shura. Husain (a.s.) gathered his companions.
After praising Allâh he turned towards them and said: "Now, verily, I do
not find companions better than you, nor any family more righteous than
my family! Allâh may give you the best rewards. Now the darkness of the
night has covered you. So make its use. Each one of you may hold the
hand of one of my family members and get dispersed in this darkness, and
leave this place because they do not want anyone except me!" His
brother, sons and the sons of Abdullâh bin Ja?far said in one voice:87
"Why should we do like that?

- Abdullâh bin Ja?far bin Abi Tâlib, a Sahâbi, (prophets companion) was
born in Habasha (Abyssinia). He was the first child of any Muslim who
had migrated to Abyssinia. He was a generous man and was called "Bahral
Jood? (ocean of generosity). Poets have sung songs To remain alive after
you? May Allâh never bring such a day." The first one to speak thus was
Abbâs Ibn Ali (a.s.), and others also spoke one after another. The
narrator says: Husain (a.s.) looked at the sons of Aquil88 and said:
"The martyrdom of Moslem is sufficient for you. All of you may leave. I
permit you." According to another narration: "At that moment all the
brothers and family members of Husain (a.s.) spoke up unanimously: "O
son of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)! What will people say about us, and
what should we say to the people? That we left our elder, chief, Seyed,
the Imâm, the son of the daughter of the Prophet, and did not threw an
arrow along with him? Nor held a spear in our hands nor did our sword
fall on the enemy. No, by Allâh! O son of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.),
we would never leave you. Rather our lives will guard your life until we
die before your eyes. Whatever befalls you, will fall on us too. How
wretched is the life after you!"

of praise for him. In Siffeen, he was one of the commanders of the
army. He expired in Medina in the year 80. Also more than this has been
written about him. [Al-Isâbah 4582, Fuwâtul Wafiyât 1/209; Tahzib Ibne
Asakir 7/325; Al-Elâm 4/76]

- Aquil bin Abi Tâlib bin Abdul Muttalib Hâshimi, Quraishi, Abu Yazeed.
He is the wisest Quraishi of a noble Arab descent. He was a very good
orator, a companion of the Prophet (s.a.) and a quickwitted gentleman.
He is the brother of Ali and Ja?far who was elder to them by two years.
He migrated to Medina in the 8th year. He became blind in his last days
and died during the caliphate of Yazeed or perhaps Muawiyah. [Al-Isâbah:
5630; Al-Bayân wat Tabyeen 1/174; At- Tabaqât 4/28; At Taj 8/30; Al-Elâm
4/242]

Thereafter, Moslem Ibn Awsajah89 stood up and said: "Shall we leave you
alone, and return so that the enemy may surround you? No, by Allâh!
Allâh may never allow such situation until I plunge my spear in the
chest of your enemy till the time only its handle may remain in my hand,
and I may crush the enemy under my feet. Even when I was unarmed I will
fight with them. I will stone them, and will not separate from your
honor until I drink the cup of martyrdom by your side."

It is said that Saeed Ibn Abdullâh Hanafi got up and said: "No, by
Allâh! O son of the Messenger of Allâh! I will never leave you alone,
unless Allâh sees that we have remembered and acted upon the will of His
messenger Muhammad regarding you. If I come to know that I were injured
in your path and then will be burnt alive, and my ashes were dispersed
in the air, and if this would be repeated for seventy times, even then I
will not leave you until I see death and embrace martyrdom in front of
you. Why not? This is only one death and - Muslim bin Awsijah Asadi, a
hero in the earlier days of Islâm is the first martyr on Ashura after
the initial attack. He is a Sahâbi who had known the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.). In Kufa, he took allegiance from the people for Hussain
(a.s.). He was imprisoned when Muslim bin Aquil had stood up against
Mazhaj and Asad (8th Zilhajj). He had become quite old during the event
of Kerbala. He was a well-known personality of Kufa. Shabas bin Rabaee
had expressed sorrow at the martyrdom of Muslim bin Awsijah [Rijâlush
Shaykh: 80; Târikh Tabari 5/435 and 469; Al-Bihâr 45/69; Al-Akhbârut
Tiwâl: 249, 250, 252; Al-Kâmil fi Târikh: 4/28; Al-Elâm 7/222; Ansârul
Hussain: 108; Tasmiyah min Qatli ma al-Husain: 52] wherein it is
mentioned that Muslim bin Awsajadah Asadi is from Bani Sa?ad bin Thalaba
who was killed by Muslim bin Abdullâh and Ubaidullâh bin Abi
Khaskarah.

thereafter, I will gain the eternal and everlasting generosity of
Allâh." Thereafter Zohair bin Qain Bajali stood up and said: "By Allâh!
O son of the messenger of Allâh! How much do I like to be killed one
thousand times and to return to life so that, by this deed, Allâh may
protect you, your brothers, and the young members of your family from
any damage."

A group of companions also uttered such words: "May our lives be
sacrificed for you. We shall protect you by our entire beings, and if,
we get martyred in your path, we would have fulfilled our promise of
loyalty and would have kept our words." In the meantime news came to
Muhammad Ibn Bashir Hazrami that his son was captured in the territory
of Ray.

Muhammad said: "I like to get its compensation from Allâh. I did not
like to see him caught during my lifetime." Hussain (a.s.) heard his
words and said: "May Allâh have mercy on you. I take back my allegiance
from you for freeing your son. So go and so on." Muhammad said: "May
wild animals eat me up alive if I ever leave your company." The Imâm
(a.s.) then said: "Take this gift to your other son so that he may use
it for freeing his captive brother." Then he gave him something tht
valued 1000 dinars.

The narrator says that during that night, the night of ?shura, Husain
(a.s.) and his companions remained busy (in Ruku, Sujood, Qiyam, and
Quood) in worship. The collective sound of their worship resembled the
noises of a beehive. On that night 32 men from the army of Ibne Sa?ad
came and joined the camp of the Imâm. Next morning, Abd-ur-Rahmân90 told
to Burair Ibn Haseen Hamdani: "Burair! Are you laughing! This time is
not for laughing and joking!" Burair said, "My people know that in my
youth and my oldage I disliked false things and jokes. At present my
smiling is only because of this course that we have chosen. By Allâh!
The distance between us and the heavenly fairies is not more than an
hour of fighting against this community and their swords." The narrator
says that the soldiers of Ibne Sa?ad mounted their horses. Hussain
(a.s.) sent Burair towards them so that he may admonish them. But his
admonition was useless.

Hussain (a.s.) mounted his horse or camel, and stood before the army of
enemy and asked them to be quiet. They became silent. Then he praised
Allâh and remembered His virtues and attributes, and invoked blessings
on Muhammad (p.b.u.h.) and the angels, and the messengers, and gave an
impressive speech,

- Abdur Rahmân bin Abde Rabbihi-rab-Ansâri is from Khazraj. Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) had trained him and taught him the Quran. He is one of
the people of Kufa who had obtained allegiance in favor of Husain
(a.s.). It seems he was an outstanding person. [Târikh Tabari 5/423;
Tasmiyah min Qatli ma al-Husain: 153; Bihârul Anwar 45/1;; Ansârul
Husain: 97]

"Be you destroyed O group of the people! May you remain constantly in
sorrow and grief! You sought justice from us with extreme distress and
called upon us to help you. We speedily rose to help you. These swords,
which are now in your hands, should have swung in our favor, not against
us. This fire, which you have ignited to harm us, should have engulfed
our enemies and your foes. Now you have befriended your foes without
getting any justice or any usefulness from them!"

"Beware! Woe unto you. You left us even before the battle begins, and
the storm of tyrannycould stop. This is absurd and crazy. Yet you
attended them like the forest locusts and gathered around them like
moths!" "Go away, you slaves of bondmaids, the evil sects, those who
have banished the Book, those who have changed the Word, you germs of
sin and students of devil, and destroyers of the traditions." "Have you
imagined that the enemy is strong and so you turned away from us?"

"By Allâh! Your trickery and unfaithfulness is indeed old. You shall be
the worst sorrow for one who sees and the most unpalatable case for the
tyrant." "Behold! Verily the bastard, and the son of bastard, has
cornered me between two options, either battle or death with honor, or
accepting disgrace and contempt! How far is disgrace from us? Allâh does
not like dishonor for us. Similarly His messenger, the faithful people,
the poor bodies and souls, and the high personalities who are most
precious always prefer martyrdom to slavery by the mean people."

"Now, verily, I am proceeding towards Allâh and martyrdom alongwith my
family members and insufficient friends." Then Imâm added the following
poem of Farwah Ibn Masik Murâdi:91 If we win, we have been among the
winners from the past; And if we fail, we would never be actually
defeated; Fear has no room in our souls; However, our death would
precede the kingdom of others; Whenever death spares someone it does
grab another one; Death of the brave nobles destroyed my community; As
was the case with the predecessors; Were the kings everlasting, we too
would have lasted forever;

And were the good people immortal; we also would have been alike; Tell
the evil wishers to rest assured regarding us; As what has befallen us
shall come to you also. Then he added: "By Allâh! You will not be given
except a short time before you will be pressed by the passage of time.
Yes, this is a promise from my father and my grandfather. So resolve
upon your affair and (gather) your associates, and let not your affair
remain dubious to you. Then have it executed against me and give me no
respite."92

- Farwah bin Maeek or Masik bin Hârith bin Samah Salmah Ghatifi Muradi,
Abu Amr was a Sahâbi. He was an eminent Yemeni poet, a well-wisher of
rulers during the days of (pre-Islâmic) ignorance. He had migrated to
Mecca in 9th or 10th year and converted to Islâm. In his last years he
came to reside in Kufa and expired in 30 A.H. 92 - Surah Yunus 10:71 90
"Rightfully, I have relied on the One Who is My Lord and your Lord.
There is no living thing, out of His control. Justly, my Lord is on the
right path." "O Allâh! Prevent the clouds from raining on them and make
them suffer a famine like that of the time of Joseph. O Lord! Impose the
child of Thaqif (Hajjâj Ibn Yusuf) on them so that he may make them
taste all kinds of disgrace, indignity, injustice, and oppression as
they have refuted me, and they have left me without friends. O? God! On
you do we rely, and to you do we turn, and to you is the eventual
coming."93 Then Imâm came down and called for the horse named Mortajaz.
He rode it and prepared his friends for the battle.

It is reported from Imâm Bâqir (a.s.) that the total number of Imam?s
army was 45 horsemen and 100 persons on foot. Otherthing have also been
reported. The narrator says: Umar Ibn Sa?ad rushed forward and threw an
arrow towards the army of Hussain (a.s.) and said: "Bear witness before
the Amir that I was the first person to shoot!" Then arrows began to
fall like raindrops. Imâm (a.s.) told his companions: "May Allâh have
Mercy on you. Get ready for death, the death from which there is no
escape, because these arrows are the enemy?s war couriers for you."

On the day of ?shura, for some hours, there was a heavy collective war,
which rendered a number of companions martyred. At that moment holy Imâm
Hussain (a.s.) placed his hand on his holy beard and said: "Allâh?s -
Surah Mumtahena 60:4

anger became severe against the Jews when they attributed a son to
Allâh; and on the Christians when they considered God to be a trinity;
and on Zoarastarians when they worshipped the sun and the moon. The
wrath of Allâh became harsh on my community when they united to kill the
son of the daughter of His Messenger." "No, by Allâh! I will never
submit to them until I meet my God when I get bathed in my blood." Imâm
Sâdiq (a.s.) heard from his father that, "When Imâm Hussain (a.s.)
encountered Umar Ibn Sa?ad and the battle began, Allâh sent down His
Help. He caused shade over the blessed head of Hussain (a.s.). At that
moment Hussain was provided two options: To be victorious over his
enemies, or to meet his God. He opted for meeting Allâh."

It is said that at that time Hussain (a.s.) shouted, "Is there anyone
to help us for the sake of Allâh? Is there anyone prepared to defend the
Prophet's (s.a.) family?" At that moment Hurr Ibn Yazeed Riyahi turned
towards Umar bin Sa?ad and said: "Do you want to fight against this
man?" Umar Ibn Sa?ad replied: "Yes. By Allâh! The easiest form of it is
choping off heads and cutting off the hands."

Then Hurr went and stood between his fellowmen. He began to tremble
like a cane stick. Muhâjir Ibn Aus94 told him: "By Allâh! Your action is
very strange. If it were asked that who is the 94 - In the book Tasmiyah
min Qatli ma al-Husain (p. 155) it is mentioned that: Muhajirs of Aws
from Bajilah were martyrs. I do not bravest man in Kufa, I could not
have ignored you. But in what condition am I observing you?" Hurr
replied: "By Allâh. I am, at present, finding myself in the position of
opting for either Heaven or Hell. By Allâh! I will opt for nothing but
Paradise; even if I were cut into pieces and then burnt." Then he drove
his horse towards Husain (a.s.) and while placing his hands on his head
said: "O Allâh! I have turned towards You, and I have repented. Kindly
accept my repentance because I am guilty of causing unrest and anxiety
to Your friends and to the children of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)."

He requested Husain (a.s.): "May I be sacrificed for you. I am the same
man who prevented you from returning to Medina and made things difficult
for you. By Allâh! I never imagined that these people would behave like
this with you. I am repenting before Allâh. Do you think that my
repentance will be accepted?" Hussain (a.s.) replied: "Yes. Allâh will
pardon you. Please get down."

He submitted: "In my humble opinion, I can serve you better mounted
than on feet. My last coming down, as desired by me, is martyrdom." "Now
that it is I who had revolted against you, kindly permit me to be the
first martyr to be killed before your honor. Perhaps, tomorrow, on the
Day of Justice, I know whether two muhajirs from Aws were present there
or there was only one who, in the beginning, was in the army camp of
Ibne Sa?ad and afterwards joined the Imâm?s camp and got martyred along
with Imâm.

may be one of those who will warmly shake hands with the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.)." Hurr said. The compiler of the book says: What Hurr meant
by the "first? martyr, was to be the first after that moment, as per
narrations; a few persons had already been martyred earlier.

Imâm allowed him. So Hurr went forward to fight and waged a good war.
He killed many warriors of the enemy before getting himself martyred.
His pure body was brought to the Imâm (a.s.) who cleaned his face and
exclaimed; "You are indeed Hurr (Free) as your mother named you. You are
free both in this world and in the Hereafter."

The narrator says: Burair Ibn Haseen Khuzair who was a pious and
worshipper went to the battlefield and was confronted by Yazeed bin
Ma?qal. They both engaged in fighting and Burair sent Yazeed to hell and
continued fighting till he attained martyrdom. May Allâh be pleased with
Burair. Wahab bin Habbâb Kalabi95 rushed out and exhibited nice
firmness, waged a perfect jihâd. His wife and mother were with him. He
returned to them and asked: "O mother! performance)?" Are you pleased
(with my His mother said: "No. I will be pleased when you are martyred
before Husain (a.s.)."

- It is mentioned in Ziyâul Ainain on p. 25: Wahab bin Abdullâh Kalabi
was born of a woman named "Qamari?. While writing (referring) to Malhoof
and other books about Maqatil his name has appeared a number of times.

His wife said: "I give you an oath of Allâh. Please do not give me your
bereavement." His mother said: "End this talk here. Go and wage the
battle by the side of the son of the Prophet's daughter, so that you may
win the intercession of his grandfather on the Day of Judgement." Wahab
went back to the battlefield, fought constantly until both his hands
were cut. His wife held up the mace and rushed to her husband and said:
"May my parents be sacrificed for you! Continue battling to protect the
family of the Prophet of Allâh." Wahab looked at his wife so that she
may return. The lady held the clothes of her husband and said: "I will
never return until I also get killed along with you."

Hussain (a.s.) said: "May Allâh give good rewards to your family.
Please return to the womenfolk. May Allâh have mercy on you." Then she
returned to the womenfolk. Kalabi went to battlefield as before, and
fought until he was killed. May Allâh be pleased with this martyr.
Thereafter Moslem Ibn Awsajah went to war. He, too, exhibited perfect
jihâd against the enemy and remained steadfast during the calamities of
battle until he fell. He was still breathing when Husain (a.s.) went
towards him alongwith Habib Ibn Mozâhir. Hussain (a.s.) said:

"O? Moslem! May Allâh have mercy on you." Tnen Imam recited a Quranic
verse: "Then some of them (believers) carried out their responsibility,
while others awaiting and they have not changed in the least;" (33:
32)


