Event 4
=======

Habib went close to him and said: "O Moslem! This condition appears
unpleasant to me. Congratulations to you for Paradise!" Moslem responded
in a very weak voice: "May Allâh also give you good rewards." Habib
said: "Though I am also following you in this path, I like to hear every
wish from you so that I may carry it out." Pointing to Husain (a.s.), he
(Moslem) said: "Wage jihâd in the service of this master until death
takes you up."

Habib said: "I accept your will wholeheartedly." At that moment he
expired. May Allâh?s pleasure be with him. Thereafter Amr bin Qarzatul
Ansâri sought permission of Hussain (a.s.), which was granted by the
latter. He waged a war like the war of the lovers. He continued
courageous fighting, killed many soldiers of Ibne Ziyâd. His battle was
excellent. He took and turned every arrow, which was shot at Husain
(a.s.) on his self. Similarly he bore every hit of the enemys? sword
wholeheartedly. Until Amr was on his feet, no harm reached Husain
(a.s.). Then the ever-increasing wounds made him fall down, bleeding
profusely. Then he looked at Hussain (a.s.) and asked: O son of the
Prophet of Allâh! Have I fulfilled my promise?

Imam replied, "Yes! You will be in the Paradise prior to me! Give my
regards to the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and inform that I am coming after
you. He got martyred soon. May Allah bless him." 96 Thereafter Jaun,96
the black slave of Abu Zarr sought permission for battle.

Hussain (a.s.) said: "You are at liberty and permitted to take a path
to safety. As you were restful with us, and you need not fall in the
troubles of our path." He submitted: "O son of the Prophet of Allâh! In
my life of ease and comfort I was extremely indebted to you. Now I will
bear the difficulties, which you are undergoing. By Allâh, my body?s
odor is bad, my race is low, and my skin is black. Do oblige me so that
by following the path to Paradise I may attain pleasant odor, pure race
and a white face. By Allâh, I will not leave you until my black blood
mixes with yours." Thereafter, he fought fearlessly and became a martyr.
May Allâh be pleased with him.

The narrator says: Then Amr bin Khâlid Saidavi97 got up for fighting
and said: "O Aba Abdillâh! May I be sacrificed for you. My intention is
to join my friends and I - Jaun is one of the Mawalis (slaves). He was
darkskinned and aged. He was the son of Hawa. In some sources his name
is mentioned as Javeen Ibne Malik. [Tasmiya min Qatli ma al-Husain: 152;
Rijâlush Shaykh: 72; Al-Manâqib 4/103; Al-Maqtal 1/237 and 2/19; Târikh
Tabari 5/420; Bihârul Anwar 45/82 and Ansârul Husain: 72]

- He is mentioned as Amr bin Khâlid Saidavi in most of the sources and,
in Rajabiyyah as Amr bin Khalaf. Probably it has been misspelled due to
error (instead of Khâlid) and Bani Saida is from Asad from Admaniyah.
Some scholars say he is the same fellow who is known as Amr bin Khâlid
Yazdi arguing that it is a mispronunciation of Asadi. However the
preferable opinion is that the two persons are different, though the
other opinion also exists. [Tasmiya min Qatli ma al- Hussain: 155;
Târikh Tabari 5/446; Al-Maqtal 2/24; Bihâr 45/72 and 23; Ansârul
Hussain: 102]

do not consider it proper to go against them and to see alone your
family and being killed." Hussain (a.s.) said: "Go ahead because we are
following you to meet you within hours." So he went forward, fought and
got martyred. May Allâh be pleased with him. The narrator says: Hanzala
Ibn Sa?ad Shabâmi98 came and stood in front of Hussain (a.s.) to protect
him with his chest, face and neck against the arrows, swords, and
spears. He shouted to the army of the enemy: "O People! I fear that what
chastisement had befallen on the communities of Nuh, ?ad, Thamud, and
others may befall you too. Allâh never desires to oppress His servants.
O people! I am afraid of what will happen to you on the Day of
Resurrection, when you will run away and will find no helper or refuge.
O people! Do not kill Husain (a.s.), otherwise you will be caught by the
chastisement of Allâh. Verily whoever makes false accusations would
cause more torment for himself."

- Shabâmi: Shabâm Batani from Hamadân Qahtaniyah. He was a Kufian. His
name appears differently in different sources. Some scholars doubt that
he and Hanzala bin Asad as-Shababi is one and the same person. They
argue that Ibne Shahr ?shob has not mentioned the name Hanzala which is
common. Preferred opinion is that Sa?ad is different from Hanzala
because others (other than Shahr ?shob) have mentioned Sa?ad and said
that he is Tamimi from northern Arabia whereas Hanzala Shababi is from
south Arabia. Some others have doubted that he and Hanzala bin Umar
Shaibani is one and the same fellow. This also is a distant probability.
[Rijâlush Shaykh: 73; Al- Maqtal 2/24; Târikh Tabari 5/443; Tasmiya min
Qatli ma al-Hussain: 156; Qamusur Rijâl 4/318; Mojam Rijâlul Hadith
6/306-307; Ansârul Hussain: 86, 89, 90 and 116-117]

Then he turned towards Hussain (a.s.) and said: "Should I not proceed
towards my God and join my friends?" Hussain (a.s.) said: "Go towards
what is better for you than the world and whatever is in it. Do proceed
towards the kingdom where there is no doom." Then he rushed forward and
fought a severe fight, like the great fighters, tolerated all troubles,
and attained martyrdom. May Allâh be pleased with him. Then it was the
time for noon prayer. Hussain (a.s.) ordered to Zohair Ibn Qain and
Saeed bin Abdullâh Hanafi to stand in front of them so that the
remaining companions may perform the "Prayer of insecure time."

Every arrow which was thrown at Hussain (a.s.) was defended by Saeed
Ibn Abdullâh on himself, and he continuously defended the life of the
Imâm, and did not step back until he fell down on the ground and said:
"O Allâh! Curse be on these people, as You cursed the people of ?ad and
Thamud. My God! Convey my salutation to Your messenger and let him know,
how we are bearing the wounds inflicted on us. I seek my reward in
helping the progeny of Your messenger." Then he attained martyrdom. May
Allâh be pleased with him. In addition to wounds inflicted by sword and
spears thirteen arrows were found in his body.

The narrator said: Suwaid Ibn Umar Ibn Abil- Mut?, who was a man of God
and always busy in - The name of Suwaid bin Amr bin Abil Muta Khash-ami
has appeared in many sources. He was gentleman and a constant
worshipper. He is one who had remained with the Imâm till last and who
attained martyrdom after his (Imâm?s) martyrdom. Thus he is the worship,
rushed forward and dashed like a lion freed from the cage. He bore
numerous hits with perfect patience, until he became unable to move. He
fell between the killed ones till he heard that Husain was killed. He
collected his latest energy and tried to fight the enemy, till he gained
martyrdom. May Allâh be pleased with him.

It is said: The companions of Husain (a.s.) went to battle in front of
him. They were as described by a poet: A group, which is called out for
crushing the calamity, Ought to be mounted on marked horses and in rows,
They have covered their armor by their chests, And they are competing
with one another in giving away their lives;

When all his companions were martyred and none except his household
remained, Ali Ibn Hussain (a.s.) who was more handsome than all the
companions, and most pious from the viewpoint of morals, sought
permission from his father. Imâm permitted him. Imâm hopelessly had a
glance at his son and wept with lowered eyes and then said: "O Allâh! Be
witness. Surely a youth has rushed to battlefield who is the most
similar person to your messenger in appearance, nature, and manners.
Whenever I longed to look at Your Messenger, I would to look at him."

Then he yelled and said: "O Ibn Sa'ad, may Allah cut off your
generation just as you cut off my kinsfolk." last martyr whom Hâni bin
Thabit killed. Khash-am bin Anmar bin Arash is from Qahtaniyah.
[Rijâlush Shaykh: 74; Al-Manâqib 4/102 wherein the name is mentioned as
Amr bin Abil Muta Ju'fi. Bihâr 25/24; Tasmiya min Qatli ma al-Hussain:
154 wherein the name is mentioned as Suwaid bin Amr bin Muta; Ansârul
Hussain 91-92]

Then Ali rushed to the battlefield and waged a furious war and sent a
number of unbelievers to the hell. Then he returned to his father and
said: "O dear father! Thirst has almost killed me, and the weight of the
armor has sapped my strength. Is any water available?" Hussain (a.s.)
wept and replied: "O my dear son! Wherefrom can I bring water? Put up
some more resistance. Very soon you will meet your grandfather Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) who will give you a drink, after which you will never feel
thirsty."

Ali went back to battlefield and gave the greatest fight. Manqaz Ibn
Marrah Abdi threw an arrow, which made Ali fall down. He cried: "O
father! Accept my Salâm (farewell). May Allâh protect you. Here is my
grandfather who sends greetings to you, and says: Hurry up to us." Then
a jerk ended his worldly life.

Hussain (a.s.) came and stood by the body of his son, placed his cheek
on his face and said: "May Allâh kill those people who killed you. What
made them bold enough to go against Allâh and violate the honor of His
Prophet? Life after you is but a spit." The narrator said: Zainab,
daughter of Ali (a.s.), came out of the tent and threw herself on his
body. Hussain (a.s.) came and asked her to return to the womenfolk.

Thereafter, one after the other from the holy household of Imâm rushed
to the battleground and won the honor of martyrdom.

Imâm cried: "O my cousins! O my family members! Be patient. Show
forbearance. By Allâh, after this day, you will never be dishonored or
humiliated." The narrator says: A moonlike radiant face100 youth came
out and went to war. Ibne Fuzail Azadi inflicted a wound on his holy
head. He fell down on earth and yelled: "O my uncle!"

Hussain (a.s.) rushed like a preying eagle or an angry lion and
stricked Ibne Fuzail with his sword. He took the blow on his hand, which
got cut off from elbow by the Imâm?s sword. Ibne Fuzail gave out a loud
yell. Hearing his yell his army rushed to save him. The horses crushed
the blessed body of that handsome youth and thus he was martyred. The
narrator says: Once the storm of war settled, I saw that Hussain (a.s.)
had stood by the head of the youth and he was hitting the ground with
his feet. Imâm said: "Far from the Mercy of Allâh are those who killed
you; those with whom your grandfather will quarrel on the Day of
Judgement."

"It is unpleasant for your uncle to hear your cry for help and he does
not respond. Or that he responds but without any benefit for you. By
Allâh, today his enemies are frequents, and his friends few." Then he
embraced the youth and carried him to the place of the martyrs of the
household of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.).

- He was Qâsim bin Hasan bin Ali brother of Abu Bakr al-Hasan. He is
his brother who was martyred prior to him. [Maqâtilut Tâlibiyyin: 50]

The narrator said that when Husain (a.s.) saw the slain bodies of his
companions he personally became ready for fighting with the enemy. He
cried: "Is there anyone to defend the family of the Prophet of Allâh? Is
there anybody who knows Allâh and fears Him regarding our rights? Is
there any helper to help us for the sake of Allah's mercy? Is there any
helper who would help us, seeking the Allâh?s Rewards?"

At that time, a wailing arose from the womenfolk. The Imâm came to the
entrance of the tent said: "O my sister Zainab! Bring my little son101
so that I may bid him goodbye." Imâm took him up to kiss him. Harmala102
threw an arrow, which pierced the neck of the little infant. Imâm asked
Zainab: "Hold him." Then he collected the child?s blood in his palms and
threw it towards the sky, saying: "How easy are these afflictions that
have befallen me in the Path and Presence of the Almighty Allâh!"

- He was Abdullâh bin Hussain bin Ali bin Abi Tâlib. His mother was
Rabab, daughter of Amr al-Qais bin Adi bin Aus. There is a difference of
opinion about the name of his killer. Some think his killer was Harmala
and according to some he was Aqba bin Bashar. [Maqâtilut Tâlibiyyin:
89-90]

- Harmala bin Kâhil was an ignoble fellow and a mean minded man. When
Harmala was caught and when Mukhtâr saw him he (the latter) wept and
said: Woe unto you! Was all this felony not enough that you killed even
this little babe-in-arms! O enemy of Allâh! Did You not know that he was
one of the sons of the prophets? Then as per Mukhtâr?s order he was
killed by arrows. As per another report when Mukhtâr saw Harmala he
said: O enemy of Allâh! Praise be to Allâh Who gave me control over you.
Then he called Jazar and ordered that Harmala?s hand and feet be cut
off, then lit a fire. Then put up an iron rod until it turned red and
then white. Then that burning rod was placed on the neck of Harmala
until his neck began to boil. He yelled and yelled until his neck was
cut off.

Imam Baqir (a.s.) has said, "Not even a drop of that blood fell back on
the ground." According to another tradition, which appears more
reasonable, it was not a normal situation and the Imâm, was so busy in
the battle, who should not had called for the child. It is said that at
that moment Zainab, sister of Imâm, brought the baby to him and said:
"This child of yours has not had water for the last three days. Please
ask water for quenching his thirst." Imâm (a.s.) took the child in his
arms and exclaimed: "O people! You killed my companions, friends, and my
household. And now only this infant has remained which is wailing for
water. Give him some water for quenching his thirst." While Imâm was
uttering those words, a man from the enemy army threw an arrow, which
pierced the infant's neck.

The narrator said: Husain (a.s.) became extremely thirsty. He rode a
horse and intended to reach the Euphrates river. This was so when his
brother Abbâs stood before him. The army of Umar bin Sa?ad blocked their
way. A man from Bani Daram threw an arrow towards Husain (a.s.), which
cut below his chin. Imâm placed his hands below the wound, and when his
both hands got filled with blood he flung it upwards and exclaimed: "My
God! I complain to You about what is happening to the son of the
daughter of Your Prophet."

Then the enemy separated Abbâs from Hussain (a.s.), encircled him, and
killed him - May his soul be sanctified. Hussain (a.s.) wept very much
over his brother?s death. The poet portrays it like this:

The worthiest of all the youths is one over whose death his brother
weeps; His martyrdom brought Husain to tears over; His brother and the
son of his father Ali, Abul Fazl who; became red-faced with the blood.
The one who did fellowship; with Husain To such an extent that he was
his partner even in his thirst. The narrator said: Then Hussain (a.s.)
challenged the enemy to come and fight with him. Then whoever came
forward to confront him was sent to hell by Husain?s (a.s.) hand. It
continued until he killed many of them. He said:

"Martyrdom is better than acceptance disgrace, and humiliation is
better than burning in (Hell) fire." One of the narrators says: "By
Allâh, I have never seen a man who had lost his family members and
companions, and bearing the sorrow of all calamities, yet showing so
much courage and bravery on the battle- field. The enemy continuously
launched collective attacks on him. He responded all of them as a
consequence of which they fled from him, like a flock of goats flee from
a wolf." Sometimes he attacked the crowded army of enemy, and scattered
them. Then the Imâm would return to his main place and said: La hawla wa
la quwwata illa billâhil a'liyyil a'zeem (There is no strength nor
power, except from the Almighty Allah).

The narrator said: The Imâm fought continuously till the time the enemy
came between him and the wowenfolk and separated them. The Imâm shouted
at them: "Woe unto you, o followers of the family of Abu Sufyân. If you
have no religion and do not fear the Hereafter and Resurrection, then at
least be free and noble in your world; and if you are Arabs, then return
to your race (in good behavior)." Shemr yelled: "O son of Fâtima! What
are you saying?"

Hussain (a.s.): "I say I am fighting you and you are fighting me. And
it is no fault of the women. So until I am alive, these rebels,
renegades and unwise people should not disturb my family." Shemr said:
"It is your right, O son of Fâtima." Then the enemies began to attack on
him, and he continued fighting. In the meanwhile, he sought water but
could not get it until he suffered seventy-two wounds and injuries.

Then Imâm (a.s.) halted for a moment to take rest, when a stone thrown
by the enemy hit his forehead. Imâm tucked up his shirt to prevent the
flow of blood from his head. Then a poisoned trident arrow pierced his
blessed chest. Imâm (a.s.) said: "In the name of Allâh, and by Allâh,
and according to the religion of the Messenger of Allâh (s.a.w.s.)."
Imam raised his blessed head towards the sky and said: "O Allâh! You
know that these people are killing a man who is the only son of the
daughter of Your messenger on the surface of the earth."103 Then he
fetched out the arrow from his back, and blood gushed through the wound
like a drainpipe, depriving Imâm from his battling strength. Every
person - The sphere threw a stone through the enemy's hand Which hit the
forehead of Allah's countenance.

from the enemy camp who approached the wounded Imâm (to kill him)
turned back fearing that he would have to meet Allâh as a partner
criminal in killing the Imâm. Then a man from Kandah, named Malik bin
Nasr (May Allâh?s curse him) came and uttered bad words to the Imâm, and
hit the Imâm?s blessed head with his sword. It cut the top of the helmet
reaching the skull. The helmet overflowed with the holy blood.

The narrator says: Hussain (a.s.) called for a robe and bound his head
with it. He put a mitre on his head and fastened his turban over it.
After a short pause the enemies returned to Imâm and encircled him. At
that time Abdullâh104 Ibn Hasan Ibn Ali, who was about twelve years old,
came from the camp of the women and rushed towards the Imâm. Zainab,
daughter of Ali (a.s.) went to him to stop him. Abdullâh forcefully
refused to turn back and said: "By Allâh, I will not leave my uncle."

Bahr Ibn Ka?b or Harmala Ibn Kahil - advanced towards Imâm with a sword
in hand. Abullah said: "Woe unto you, the offspring of malicious man!
Are you killing my uncle?"

The teenager shielded Imâm from the stroke of a sword whereby his hand
was cut and began to dangle. Abdullah cried: "O uncle!" Hussain (a.s.)
took hold of his nephew and drew him to his chest saying: "O? the son of
104 - Abdullâh bin Hasan. His mother was the daughter of Salil bin
Abdullâh, brother of Abdullâh bin Jurair Bajali or Umme Walad. He was 11
at the time of martyrdom. It is also said that his mother was Rabab
daughter of Amr al-Qais. [Tasmiya min Qatli ma al-Husain: 150; Maqâtilut
Tâlibiyyin: 89; Rijâlush Shaykh: 76; Ansârul Husain: 132]

my brother! Bear patiently what you have suffered, and consider it
good, because Allâh will make you meet your pious forefathers." Harmala
bin Kahil threw an arrow at Abdullâh and martyred him by the side of his
uncle.105 Thereafter Shimr Ibn Ziljushan attacked the tents of Hussain
(a.s.) saying: "Give me fire so that I may burn down these tents with
all the inmates."

Hussain (a.s.) said: "O son of Ziljushan! You are demanding fire to
burn my family? May Allâh burn you in fire." Then came Shabth whom Imâm
admonished. So he returned ashamedly. Then Husain (a.s.) asked his
family: "Give me an old cloth so that I may wear it as an undergarment,
and they may do not uncover my body." A tight shirt was brought. He
said: "Not this, because this is a disgraceful dress."

Then he took an old cloth, made some tears in it, and wore it beneath
his dress. But they stripped him after his martyrdom, and that cloth
looted too.

- Here are some couplets about the martyrdom of Abdullâh - Killing of a
motherless gazelle is not a laudable deed Such a killer is in fact a
denier, not a hunter What a strength with which you swing your sword?
What you are striking is Babe's hand, not a sword of iron With whose
blood are you coloring your hands? O oppressor! He is Abdullâh, not
Qasim the bridegroom. O cursed one! Even if you are bent upon killing
him Kill him not by the side of his uncle as such a cruelty Wasn't shown
even by Shaddâd the oppressor Thereafter Imâm (a.s.) called for "Hebari"
trousers and made holes therein so that they may not rob it from his
body, and wore it. Yet, after his martyrdom, a man called Bahr Ibn Ka?ab
stole it, and left Hussain (a.s.) bare bodied. After ?shura day, both
hands of Bahr Ibn Ka?ab became dry, like a couple of dry sticks during
winter.

During summer his hands used to become swollen with blood and puss
oozed therefrom till Allâh killed him. When many wounds were inflicted
on the holy body of Hussain (a.s.) and his body became like a
potcupine,106 a mean-minded cursed fellow called Sâleh Ibn Wahab al
Mazni (may Allâh curse him) inflicted a forceful hit on the flank of
Imâm which made Husain (a.s.) fall on the right side from his horse,107
and then he stood on his feet.

The narrator said: Zainab (s.a.) came out of the tent and yelled: "O my
brother! O my leader! O my household! Iwish the sky had fallen down on
earth. I wish the mountains had come down to the plains, scattered."
Shimr cried out to his soldiers, "What are you waiting for?" Thereafter,
they attacked Imâm from every side.

Zar?at Ibn Shuraik (curse of Allâh be on him), inflicted a wound on the
left shoulder of Imâm. The Imâm also gave him a blow killing him.

- This was because Imam's holy body had become like porcupine due to
numerous wounds.

- And Imâm exclaimed: Bismillâh wa billâh wa ala millate Rasoolillâh
and then stood on his feet.

Another fellow stricked his sword on the back of Imâm, which caused
Husain (a.s.) to fall down on earth headlong. After this he sat up with
much difficulty, and again fell on the earth and rose up and walked.
Sinân bin Anas Nakhai108 (curse of God be on him) inflicted a wound with
his spear on the cavity of Imam's (a.s.) pharynx and then pierced his
spear in the chest. Thereafter, Sinân shot an arrow, which pierced the
Imâm?s neck. He fell again and then sat up and pulled out the arrow from
his blessed neck. But thereafter he caught the lower part of his neck
with both of his palms, which were filled with his holy blood. He
colored his head and beard with it and said; "I am going to my God with
such a hair dye, while my rights have been violated."

Umar Ibn Sa?ad told to a man who was on his right: "Woe unto you. Come
down and relieve Husain." Khuli Ibn Yazeed Asbahi went forward to cut
off the head of Husain but began to tremble! Sinân bin Anas (may he be
cursed by Allâh) came down and struck his sword on the holy throat
saying: "By Allâh, I am cutting your neck despite knowing that you are
the son of Allâh?s Prophet, and the best offspring from the viewpoint of
parents. Then he cut off the holy head."

- Sinân bin Anas Nakhai, the killer of Hussain (a.s.). It is said that
Ibne Ziyâd told him: You have killed the best man from the aspect of
parentage. It is mentioned in the story of Mukhtâr, p. 45: After the
arrest of Sinân, Ibrahim told him: tell me the truth. What did you do in
Kerbala? He replied: Nothing except that I caught a piece of the pajama
of Hussain (a.s.)! Ibrahim wept and then ordered that a piece of flesh
be cut from Sinân?s thigh. It was roasted and Sinân was made to eat it.
Whenever he he refused to eat he was forced to do so with a dagger. When
he died he was slaughtered and his corpse was burnt.

The poet says about this:

Which calamity is harder than that of Hussain; On the day when Sinân
cut off his blessed head. Abu Tâhir Muhammad Ibn Hussain Bursi, in the
book Ma'alimuddin, quotes from Imâm Sâdiq (a.s.), that "After Hussain?s
martyrdom, angels arrived wept and said, "O Lord! This is Your Husain,
the chosen son of Your Messenger?s daughter." In response to these words
of the angels, the Almighty Allâh raised the holy shadow of the
Qaem-e-?le Muhammad and said, "I will take the revenge of Husain by his
hands."

The narrator said: After the martyrdom of Imâm (a.s.), a severe storm
blew and the sky was covered by red colors making everything invisible,
and people feared that the Divine Wrath had descended. So they paused
for hours until the storm passed away.

Hilâl said, "I separated from the two rows of soldiers and stood by the
side of Hussain (a.s.). His holiness was on the verge of death. By
Allâh, I have never seen a blood-covered body more beautiful than he,
nor any face brighter than his. The brightness of his face made me
doubtful about his death."

"In that condition Husain asked for water. Hilâl heard that someone
telling him, "By Allâh. You will not taste water until you drink the
boiling water in hell." Hussain (a.s.) said: "No! Rather I will approach
my grandfather, the Messenger of Allâh, and will take refuge in his
abode, on the platform of Truth, near the All Powerful Monarch (Allah),
and will drink pure water and will complain to him about your
atrocities."

He said: "They became very angry, as if Allâh had not put any kindness
in their hearts." When Imâm (a.s.) was talking with them they beheaded
him. Experiencing extreme wonder at this, stone heartedness and cruelty,
I said, "By Allâh I will never join you in any matter." Then, with a
view to steal the holy Imâm?s cloth, they came forward. Ishâq bin
Haubah109 Hazrami (May the curse of Allâh be upon him) pulled up the
holy Imâm?s shirt and wore it himself. Afterwards he suffered from
leprosy, and his hair also dropped off.

It is mentioned in traditions that there were one hundred and ten marks
of arrows and spears in it. Imâm Sâdiq (a.s.) said, "There were
thirty-three wounds of spears, and thirty-four of swords on the blessed
body of Husain (a.s.)."

Imâm's (a.s.) pyjamas was looted by Bahr Ibn Ka?ab Teemi (curse of
Allâh on him). It is mentioned in a tradition that he too had become
bedridden after both of his legs were paralyzed. His turban was snatched
by Akhnas bin Morthad bin Alqamah Hazrami,110 or Jabir bin Yazeed Oodi.
He also had become a lunatic thereafter. Imâm's shoes were looted by
Aswad Ibn Khâlid (l.a.).

- He was an illegitimate born who had driven horses on the body of the
Holy Imâm (a.s.) along with nine other fellows.

- He is one of those ten who had crushed the holy body of the holy Imâm
(a.s.) by driving their horses over it until the chest and back of the
Imâm had been pulverized. He was also born of adultery.

The robe of the Imâm, which was made of fur, was plundered by Qais Ibn
Ashath (the cursed one) and his coat of mail was snatched by Umar bin
Sa?ad (May God curse him). The sword of Imâm was seized by Jumeeh bin
Khalq Oodi. It is also said that a man from Bani Tamim named as Aswad
Ibn Hanzala killed him. In the narration of (the historian) Ibn Sa?ad
the sword of holy Imâm had been plundered by Falafas Nahshali.

Muhammad Ibn Zakariya111 added that the sword, later on, reached to the
daughter of Habib Ibn Badeel,112 and this plundered sword is other than
Zulfiqâr. Because Zulfiqâr is one of the relics of Prophethood and
Imâmat, which have been divinely protected. Narrators have testified
what we have mentioned. A narrator has said that a slave girl came out
from the direction of the holy Imâm?s tent. A man told her: "O the slave
girl of Allâh. Your master has achieved martyrdom."

The girl said: "I rushed towards the respected ladies and the womenfolk
while screaming," the chaste and veiled womenfolk stood up, cried and
wailed." It is - Muhammad bin Zakariya bin Dinar al-Ghalabi is from the
notable men of the companions of the Imâm in Basra. Death: 398 A.H.

- Details about the daughter of Habib bin Badeel could not be traced.
Habib is one of the narrators of traditions of Wilayat. [Al- Ghadeer:
251]
said, "The enemies took precedence over one another in looting the
tents and property of Hazrat Muhammad's household and the dear ones of
Fatemah (a.s.). They went to such extremes that they pulled off any
cover from their shoulders. The Prophet's (s.a.w.a.) daughters rushed
out screaming and wailing due to their separation from their defenders
and dear ones."

Hamid Ibn Moslem says: "There was a woman belonging to Bani Bakr bin
Vâ?eil, who was with her husband in the army of Umar bin Sa?ad. When she
saw how they had attacked and invaded the tents of the ladies, she took
a sword in her hand and rushed to those tents and cried: O ?le Bakr bin
Vâ?eil! Are you plundering the daughters of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)?
Command and kingdom belongs only to Allâh! Her husband caught her and
sent her back to her place."

The narrator reports: Thereafter, they drove out the honorable ladies
from their tents bareheaded and barefoot, arrested them and put their
tents to fire. The ladies said: "For Allâh?s sake, take us to the place
of slaughter." When the ladies saw the martyrs, they cried and slapped
their faces. A narrator has said, "By Allâh! I can never forget how
Zainab, daughter of Ali (a.s.), wept over Husain (a.s.) and wailed in an
extremely sorrowful voice: "O Muhammad! May the blessings of God be on
you. This is your Husain laid bare-bodied with bleeding dismembered
organs. Woe unto this calamity. Your daughters are enslaved. I convey my
complaints to Allâh, to Muhammad-el-Mustafa, to Ali-el-Murtuza, to
Fâtima-az- Zahra, and to Hamza Sayyed-e-Shuhad?."

"O Muhammad! Here is Husain killed by the bastards in this desert,
where wind covers him with sands. We seek safety from all this grief and
sorrow and all these hardships and calamities meted out to you Aba
Abdillâh! It is as if my grandfather, the Messenger of Allâh, has left
this world only today." "O companions of Muhammad! These are the progeny
of Muhammad, who are being carried like slaves."

" O Muhammad! Your daughters are captives, and your progeny
assassinated, on the bodies of which the desert wind is spreading sands.
Here is Husain whose head has been cut off from the nape of his neck,
without turban or cloak." "May my father be sacrificed for the dear one
whose army got routed on Monday, and his tent was destroyed. May my
father be sacrificed for the dear one, who did not go on a journey from
where there is a hope of returning. Nor is he ailing in such a way that
it can be cured. May my father be sacrificed for the one, for whom my
life is also ready to be sacrificed. May my father be sacrificed for the
grieved one, who has been martyred, a thirsty one who died with dry
lips. May my father be sacrificed for the esteemed one his own blood
drained from his beard. May my father be sacrificed for the honorable
one, whose grandfather was the messenger of Allâh. May my father be
sacrificed for the one who is the grandson of the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.)."

"May my father be sacrificed for Zahr?, the Chief of the Ladies, may my
father be sacrificed for the one, whom the sun returned so that he may
offer his prayer."

The reporter says, "By Allâh, Zainab cuased both friends and foes weep
through her sorrowful dirge." Thereafter Sakina113 drew the holy body of
his father to her lap. Some Arabs separated her from her father.

The narrator has reported that thereafter Umar Ibn Sa?ad cried out to
his army, "Who are volunteers to stampede horses on the body of Husain?"
Ten persons responded: Is?hâq Ibn Haubah who had robbed Hussain?s shirt;
Akhnas Ibn Marsad, Hakim Ibn Tufail Sab?ei, Umar Ibn Sabih Saidavi, Raja
Ibn Manqaz Abdi; Salim Ibn Khaisama Jo?fi, Sâleh Ibn Wahab Ja?fi, W?hiz
Ibn Gh?nam, Hâni Ibn Shabeet, and Usaid Ibn Malik (may Allâh curse them
all). These ten fellows trampled the holy body of Hussain (a.s.) under
the hooves of their horses and crushed the back and front of the body of
the holy Imâm (a.s.).114

A narrator said that those ten fellows went to Ibne Ziyâd (may Allah
curse him) and one of them, Usaid Ibn Malik, said:

"We crushed the chest and back of Husain by driving strong and jumping
horses on his body." Ibn Ziyâd asked: "Who are you?"

- Sakina, daughter of Husain bin Ali bin Abi Tâlib, a great and noble
lady. The chief of the woman of her time. She is supposed to have
expired in 117 A.H. [At-Tabaqât 8/348; Ad Durrul Mansoor: 244; Wafyâtul
Ayân 1/211; Al-Elâm 3/106]

- Many of our scholars are of the opinion that they (the enemies)
intended to pound the back and chest of the holy body but Allâh did not
allow them to do so. There are many narrations supporting this word -
Allâh knows best.

They replied: "We are those who crushed the back and chest of Husain
with the hooves of our horses." Ibn Ziyâd awarded them prizes. Abu Umar
Zâhid115 has said, "We have searched the biographies of these ten
fellows, and found that all of them were bastards." Ibne Riyah116 has
narrated, "I saw a blind man. He was present in Karbala. He was asked
about his blindness. He replied, "I was present in Karbala on the day of
?shura. I had not used any spear, sword, or arrow. After the martyrdom
of Imâm (a.s.) I returned home. I went to sleep after performing the
Isha (evening) prayer." He saw in hyis dream that someone asked him to
respond to the call of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).

He said, "I have nothing to do with him?" That person caught his collar
and dragged him to the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). He saw holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) sitting in wilderness. His shirt sleeves were rolled up to
elbows. There was a weapon in his hand. An angel had stood near him with
a red-hot sword in hand. He was killing my nine friends. Every one of
them who was hit by that sword caught fire and was in flames. He went
near and sat down on his knees and said, "As-Salâmu alaikum O Prophet
of - He was Muhammad bin Abdul Wahid bin Abi Hâshim Mattaraz Bawardi who
was known as slave of Sa?lab. He is one of the leading linguists who had
special association with Sa?lab and has written a number of books. He
was in Baghdâd in the year 345 A.H. [Wafyâtul Ayân 1/500; Târikh Baghdâd
2/356; Al-Elâm 6/254]

- He is one of Tabian. Ata bin Abi Riyah was a black slave born in
Yemen and brought up in Mecca. He was a wise jurist. Died in Mecca at
the age of 111. [Tadkeratul Huffâz; 1/92; Sifatus Safwa 2/119; Al- Elâm
4/135]

Allâh!" He did not reply. There was a long pause. Then he raised his
head and said, "O enemy of Allâh! You ended my respect, killed my
relatives, did not honor my rights, and did what you did." I submitted:
"O Messenger of Allâh! By Allâh! I did not use a sword, a spear, or an
arrow." He said, "You have told the truth. But you were a soldier of
that army. Come nearer to me." I went nearer. I saw a plate full of
blood. He said, "This is the blood of my son Husain." He dropped from
that blood in to my eyes. Then I woke up from my dream and from that
moment I could not see anything.

It is reported by Imâm Sâdiq (a.s.) that the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
said, "On the Day of Resurrection, a dome of light will be raised for
Fâtima (s.a.), and Hussain (a.s.) will arrive with his head in hand.
When Fâtima would see him she will shriek such a loud lament, which will
cause every proximate angel and prophet to weep. Then the Almighty Allâh
will bring Hussain (a.s.) in the most beautiful form. He will fight his
enemy without head.

Thereafter, Allâh will gather, for me, all those who cooperated and
were participants in the shedding of his holy blood. Then I will kill
all of them. They will be made alive and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will
kill all of them. Then they will be enlivened again to be killed by
Hussain (a.s.) and then the grief will end." Then Imâm Sâdiq (a.s.)
said, "May Allâh have Mercy on our Shias, who are, by Allâh, the
faithful, and who are partners with us in every calamity and grief that
engulfs us."

It is reported that the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Fâtima (s.a.)
will arrive in the midst of a group of women on the Day of Judgment. An
order will be issued: "Enter Paradise." She will say: "I will not enter
till I know what has been done to my sons after my death." She will
hear, "Just look in the midst of the resurrected people." Her eyes would
fall on Husain and would see that he is standing headless. Fâtima (s.a.)
gives out a cry. I also cry out for her complaint, and will cry all the
angels too."

According to another tradition Fâtima (s.a.) would cry, "O my son! O
fruit of my soul!" It is said that, at the moment, Allâh will became
angry. He will order a fire named "Habhab", a fire that had been fanned
for one thousand years turning it into black. Comfort can never be
within it, nor can grief go out of it.

Then comes a command: "take in the killers of Husain (a.s.)." That fire
sucks in all of them and as they reach the middle of that fire a
distressing shriek comes out and their collective shrieks also are
heard. The roar of fire and the shrieks of the burning ones fill up the
atmosphere. The killers of Husain (a.s.) will cry out: "Why are we being
burnt even before the idol-worshippers?" There comes a reply: "Those who
know are not like those who do not know."

Ibne Babawayh has recorded these two traditions in the book Iqâbul
Amâl.117

- Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain bin Musa bin Babawayh Qummi is known as
Shaykh Sadooq. He is a great Muhaddith. He had stayed in Rey where he
expired in 381 A.H. and buried there. He wrote many books. His book
Iqbal A'mâl is published with Sawâbul A'mâl [Riyâzul Ulama 5/119;
Al-Kuna wal Alqâb 1/212; Tanqihul Maqâl 3/154; Al-Elâm 6/274]

It is mentioned in manuscript (A) that: In the 30 th volume, I have
seen in the footnote of Shaykhul Muhaddithine Baghdâd Muhammad bin
Najjar (in the events of Fâtima, daughter of Abil Abbâs Azdi) that he
has reported, with documents, from Talha that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.): Musa bin Imrân said: O Lord! My brother Hârun has died.
Kindly forgive him. Came the Revelation: O Musa! If you appeal to me to
pardon all from first to last, I will forgive them all except the
killers of Husain bin Ali bin Abi Tâlib (a.s.).


