Part Three : After the Martyrdom of Hussain (a.s.)
==================================================

It is said that Umar Ibn Sa?ad (curse of God be on him), in the
afternoon of the Day of ?shura, sent the holy head of Imâm Hussain
(a.s.) to Ubaidullâh bin Ziyâd through Khuli bin Yazeed Asbahi and Hamid
Ibn Moslem Azdi118 (curse of God be on them), and ordered that the - It
is mentioned in Tanqihul Maqâl 1/380: I know not more about him except
that Rijâl-us-Shaykh has included him in the companions of Imâm Sajjâd
(a.s.), who it appears, is a Imâmi, though not perfectly identified.

It is mentioned in Mustadrakâte Ilmur Rijâl 3/289: Humaid bin Muslim
Kufi is among the unidentified companions of Imâm Sajjâd (a.s.) and it
is learnt from the transmitters of the news about Karbala that he was in
Karbala and he was among the soldiers of Sulaimân bin Surad on the side
of Mukhtâr in the event of Ainal Wardah in the fight against the Syrians
for avenging the blood of Hussain (a.s.). I say: it looks like that
there were two persons by the name of Humaid bin Muslim. One in the army
of Umar bin Sa?ad who had narrated some of the events of Kerbala and who
also was with those who heads of other holy martyrs be sent by Shimr bin
Ziljaushan, Qais bin Ashath, and Amr Ibn Hajjâj. So they moved with the
said holy heads and reached Kufa. Umar bin Sa?ad remained the rest of
?shura, and the next day till noon time in Karbala. Then he moved with
the remaining persons of the holy family of Imâm Hussain (a.s.) from
Karbala. He made the members of the holy family (who were the trust of
the best of the Messengers of Allâh) to sit on bare camels, while their
veils were removed in front of the enemies. In the midst of all these
sorrows and griefs, they were driven just as chained slaves.

How nice it is said:

How strange and wonderful that they were offering salutations on the
holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.); but fighting against his household! It is
mentioned in a narration that the number of the decapitated heads of the
companions of Hussain (a.s.) was seventy eight, which were distributed
by the tribes for winning favors of Ibne Ziyâd and Yazeed bin Muawiyah
(may Allah's curse be upon them). The distribution was:

1. Kandeh tribe - Headed by Qais Ibn Ashath = Thirteen heads

2. Havazan tribe - Headed by Shimr Ibn Ziljaushan = Twelve heads

3. Bani Tamim = Seventeen heads carried the holy head of Imâm Hussain
(a.s.) to Ibne Ziyâd and hence must have been among the friends of Umar
bin Sa?ad. The second is an Imâmi and a companion of Imâm Sajjâd (a.s.)
and among the soldiers of Sulaimân bin Surad.

4. Bani Asad = Sixteen heads

5. Mizhaj tribe = Seven heads

6. The rest of tribes and other people = Thirteen heads.

The narrator has said that: As Umar bin Sa?ad moved away from Karbala,
a group of people from Bani Asad arrived and after funeral ceremonies
for the holy bodies buried them as they are now. When Ibne Sa?ad reached
Kufa along with the prisoners, people came to see the scene.

A Kufi lady asked the noble prisoners from the window of her home,
"Where are you coming from? Who are you?" They said: "We prisoners
belong to the family of the holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.)." She came
out from her home and offered dresses and veils to the female prisoners,
so that they might cover up themselves. It is said that along with the
ladies were a few men. Ali Ibn Hussain (a.s.) who had become very lean
due to illness. Hasan Ibn Hasan Muthanna119, who had patiently - Hasan
bin Hasan bin Amirul Momineen Ali bin Abi Tâlib. He was known as
Muthanna and his son as Hasan Mosullas. He was very honorable, learned
and pious. In his time, he was the trustee of the charities of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.). He married his cousin Fâtima, daughter of Hussain
(a.s.). He was with his uncle in the event of Karbala, had fought and
got wounded. Allâh healed him. His mother was Khula, daughter of Manzoor
Farazi. He expired in Medina in 90 A.H. Neither did he claim to be Imâm
nor did anybody believe him to be an Imâm as was the case with his son
Hasan Mosullas.

[Tasmiya received serious wounds of the spear in support of his uncle
and Imâm. Zaid Ibn-el-Hasan120 and Amr bin al- Hasan121 were with them
too. The Kufians recited an elegy and wept. Zain-ul-?bedin (a.s.) said,
"Are you mourning and weeping for us? But then who killed us?" Bashir
Ibn Khuzâim Asadi said, "On that day I heard the speech of Zainab,
daughter of Ali (a.s.). I have not seen any modest and chaste lady with
such oratory. It was, as if, being delivered by Ali (a.s.)." She pointed
towards the people and said, "Silence please." People became almost
breathless.

She said, "All praise and applause fits only to Allâh. Salutation be
upon my grandfather, Muhammad and the noble people of his family." min
Qatli ma al-Husain: 157; Tahzib Ibne Asakir 4/162; Al-Elâm 2/187; Mojam
Rijâlul Hadith 4/301] The author of Al-Masâbih has written: Hasan bin
Hasan al-Muthanna had, in Ashura, while fighting along with his uncle,
killed seventeen persons. He also suffered eighteen wounds and had
fallen. His nurse Asma bin Kharjah brought him to Kufa and nursed him
until he recovered and then sent him to Medina.

- Zaid bin Hasan, Abul Hasan Hâshimi was from the companions of Imâm
Sajjâd (a.s.). He was a pious and a respectable personality. He was a
trustee over the trusts of the Messenger of Allâh (s.a.w.s.). Other
historians have written that he did not accompany his uncle to Kerbala.
He died in the year 120 A.H. Neither did he claim Imâmat nor did the
other Shias consider him an Imâm. [Mojam Rijâlul Hadith 7/339; Rijâlush
Shaykh and Irshâd of Mufid and Al-Umda of Sayyid Mahna; Bihâr 46/329]

- Amr bin Hasan came to Iraq with his uncle Husain and then went to
Damascus with Ali bin Husain. He had only one son by the name Muhammad.
He was a devout and wise man.

"Now, people of Kufa! People of deceit and disloyalty! Are you weeping?
Your tears may never stop flowing, and your mourning may not end. Your
affair is like the affair of that woman who unweaved whatever she had
woven. You always make your oaths a medium to make money. Do you have
anything except repulsive deadly contamination, vengeance and flattery
like the flattering of slave girls, and the grief and sorrow of enemies?
Do you have a grazing land as large as a ruined area, or a pot of
silver, hidden in your graves? What an evil thing you have forwarded to
Allâh, which has caused His wrath against you and you will receive
divine punishment forever?"

"Are you weeping and crying out from your hearts? Yes! By Allâh, you
will cry more and smile less. Verily, you have carried all shame and
disgrace with you, and not even a fragment of which will ever be washed
by you. How will you respond the guilt of the blood of the offsprings of
the seal of prophethood, and the mine of messengership, the leader of
the youth of Paradise, the shelter of the righteous, and the rescuer of
the deprived people, the symbol of divine reasoning for you, and the
follower of traditions?"

"What a serious crime you have committed! Damn with you! May your
efforts be fruitless; your hands perish, and may your merchandise causes
loss to you. You have reverted to the wrath of Allâh, and the blot of
disgrace and dishonor is now fixed on your forehead forever."

"Woe unto you Kufians! Do you know that you have injured the heart of
the Prophet of Allâh? What kind of pious ladies of the Messenger?s
household have you unveiled? What blood of the holy Prophet have you
shed?

How did you violate his honor and respect? Verily, how much fuel have
you added to the fire of dark calamities and troubles?" It is mentioned
in a narrative that she added "What large-scale foolish and ugly acts
you have committed? Did you wonder that the sky rain blood? Know that
the chastisement of the Hereafter is more disgraceful, and you will
never be helped. Do not be happy at the respite that you have got.
Because Allâh does not make haste in taking revenge, and that He
completes the task when its time arrives. Most surely your Lord is
watching."122 The narrator said, "By Allâh, I could see people weeping
like the bewildered ones, and who that they held their hands over their
mouths."

I saw an old man who was weeping, standing by my side, and his beard
drenched in tears. He was saying, "May my parents be sacrificed for you.
Your elders are the best elders; your youths are the best youth; your
women are the best women; and your race is the best race that will never
be disgraced. None can equal you." Zaid Ibn Musa123 has reported from
his father and grandfather that Fâtima Sughra (Daughter of Imam
Hussain(a.s.)) had said after returning from Karbala, "Praise for Allâh,
as many times as there are grains of sand, and as weighty as the weight
of all that extends from earth to sky. I praise Him and I believe in
Him, and I trust Him and I give witness that there is none worthy of -
Surah Fajr 89:14

- Zaid bin Musa bin Ja?far bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Hussain Alawi
Tâlibi, an avenger of Hussain?s (a.s.) blood, had defected with Abus
Sirya. He expired around 250 A.H.

worship except Him. And that Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger. And
that his progeny were slaughtered by the bank of river Euphrates, though
they were neither vindictive, nor did they claim or demand any land
(state)." "O Allâh! I seek Your refuge from the sin of saying any
untruth about You and anything other than what You have said regarding
the leadership (Imamat) of Ali Ibn Abi Tâlib; that they was killed
without any fault (in the same manner his son was martyred yesterday).

The martyrdom of Ali occurred in one of the houses of Allâh (Mosques),
in the presence of a number of so called Muslims. May they be destroyed!
Those who did not prevent oppressing him through his life, until You
took him up to You. He who had a praiseworthy character, whose talent
was famous, and whose guidance was well known. O Lord! No reproach of
any taunter ever deterred him from his goal, or the blame of any
ridiculer. My Lord! You guided him in his childhood to Islâm. You
praised his character when he grew up. He was a constant well-wisher and
concerned of Your religion, and of Your Messenger (s.a.w.s.) until you
took his soul. The soul of the one who was a devout abstinent in the
world. Who paid no heed to the world, but he was always inclined towards
the Hereafter, and tried in Your path. He was Ali, whom You loved,
selected, and guided to the right path."

"Now, O Kufians! The cheats, disloyal, and proud folk! Indeed we are
the members of Ahle Bayt. God has examined us with you, and you with us,
and it was a fair test. He granted us His knowledge and wisdom. Hence we
are the containers of His knowledge, wisdom, and metaphysics. We are His
guiding signs on the earth, for His nations. He has honored us with His
generosity, and has granted grace and superiority to His Messenger,
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) over many of His servants in a manifest manner."

"Then you tried to deny and refute us, and considered it correct to
fight us. You thought it was all right to roband appropriate our
property as if we were non- Muslims. Yesterday you killed my grandfather
(Ali). The blood of our youth is dripping from your daggers. All of
these are due to your old enmity (against us). After committing all
these felonious crimes your eyes have brightened and your hearts are
overjoyed. Strange indeed is your slander against Allâh and the
conspired planning, which you planned; while Allâh is the best of
planners."

"Lest you rejoice your deeds of shedding our blood, and plundering our
property! Whatever calamities have fallen on us were in the Book (of
destiny) even before we confronted them. This is easy in the Path of
Allâh. So you may not grieve over what you lost, and do not become
joyous on account of what you gained; and Allâh does not like the proud
and the boasting people."

"May you be destroyed! Await curse and chastisement, which will visit
you. Calamities will rain continuously from the sky, and (Allâh?s) wrath
will surround you. Some of you shall be treated harshly by some others,
and you will remain in a permanent chastisement as a result of the
atrocities inflicted on us by you. Beware that the curse of Allâh is on
the oppressors." "Woe unto you: Do you know those people you?re your
tribes who our bodies? How did your hearts incline to fight against us?
Howcould your legs rush on us, seeking war with us? By Allâh, your
hearts have become dark, and your soul, ears, and eyes have been sealed.
Satan made these crimes beautiful for you, and threw dark curtain on
your eyes. So you will never be guided rightly."

"Be destroyed O Kufians! What inheritance of the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) did you possess? Or for which vengeance you exhibited so much
enmity towards his brother Ali bin Abi Tâlib (a.s.), my grandfather, and
his two sons (Hasan and Husain) the noble progeny of the Prophet, that
the boaster poem from you said so proudly: "We killed Ali and his sons;
with Indian swords and the spears;

and we imprisoned their women like the non- Mulim slaves; What a war we
fought with them!" "O Poet! May you suffocate? Are you proud that you
have killed the people who have been purified by Allâh and impurity has
been removed from them? How do you take pride in this? Take care of
yourself and sit on your droppings like a dog, as was your father.
Verily for everyone is whatever he has earned and sent ahead." "Woe unto
you! Do you envy for what Allâh has granted us?

What is our fault if the ocean of our grace is roaring; while your
rivulet has no wave!" "This is a divine excellence, which will be given
to whoever He wishes, and Allâh is the Lord of the greatest graces. The
one whom Allâh does not grant light, for him there will be no light." It
is narrated that the noise of crying became loud, while the Kufians were
saying: "Oh daughter of the holy beings! It is now enough. Our hearts
have been burnt! You have burnt our necks and burnt our souls." She
became silent.

On the same day Umme Kulthum, daughter of Ali, spoke from behind the
cover of saddle of the camel-litter, while crying: "O Kufians! Woe unto
you! What happened to you that you left Hussain (a.s.)? You killed him
and destroyed and snatched his properties, and imprisoned the women from
his household and heaped calamities on them? Mau Allah kills you."

"Woe unto you. How many crimes you carried out? How many sins did you
commit? How much blood you shed? How many respected women you insulted
(arrested)? How many types of apparel did you plunder, and how much
property did you destroy? You killed the best people after the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.). Kindness has left your hearts." You caught my
brother and killed him; Woe unto your mothers! Very soon you will be
dragged into fire; The heat whereof gets inflamed; You shed the blood,
which Allâh, Quran, and Muhammad had disallowed to be shed;

Beware to you for drowning in the depths of Hell tomorrow on the Day of
Judgment; I will weep over my martyred brother throughout my life; Over
the one who was better than all after the Holy Prophet;

With the tears rolling relentlessly on the cheeks, which will never
dry. The narrators said that the weeping of the audience became loud.
Women tore their hair; threw dust on their heads; scratched their faces,
slapped their cheeks, and wailed in a very sad voice. Men also wept
profusely tearing at their beards. Never were seen such a crying people
like them in the past.

Then Zainul ?bedin (a.s.) asked them to be silent. All became quiet.
Imâm got up and praised Allâh; He sent blessings on the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) in the best manner and then said: "O people! One, who knows
me, has known. As for those who did not recognize me I am introducing
myself. I am Ali, son of Husain, son of Ali, son of Abi Tâlib (a.s.). I
am the son of the one who has been slaughtered by river Euphrates,
though he never killed any innocent person, nor he seized any heritage.
I am the son of the one whose honorable ladies and family, have been
disrespected; whose wealth and bounty has been plundered; whose children
have been arrested. I am the son of one who was caught and killed and
this is enough for me to be proud of."

"O people! I administer you oath of Allâh. Do you know that you wrote a
letter to my father and then cheated him? You gave your word to him and
extended allegiance to him. Then you left him and prepared yourselves to
kill him! Be you destroyed because of what you sent forth. Upon what you
have garnished. With which eyes will you look at the Messenger of Allâh
when he will say that you killed his household, and you insulted his
family; and you are not from his nation."

The narrator said that voices rose from all sides, while they were
telling one another, "You destroyed while not knwoing?" Imâm continued:
"May Allâh have mercy on him who accepts my admonitions and remembers my
advice regarding the command of Allâh, about His Prophet and his
household, Since he is the good pattern for us."

All responded: "O son of the holy Prophet! All of us listen to you and
obey you. We are guardians of your responsibility. We are prepared to
carry out your commands. We will not turn our face from you. Please give
command to us. May Allâh?s mercy be on you. We will fight against your
enemy, and we are with you in whatever you plan. We will arrest Yazeed.
And we declare our disconnection from your enemy and our enemy!" Then
Imâm replied: "Alas, alas. O disloyal conspirers! Is there any excuse,
which is not between you and your passions? Do you want to do with me
what you did with my father earlier? No, by Allâh, no! Because these
wounds have not yet healed. It was only yesterday when my father, along
with his household (a.s.), were martyred. I am unable to forget the
calamity of missing the holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and the calamity of
losing my father and his children. Its pain is in my mouth, and its
bitterness is choking me. His sorrow is squeezing my chest.

No wonder that Husain is martyred; His father was better and greater
than him (and he was also martyred) Do not be joyous O Kufians, over
what happened to Husain; as this calamity was more terrible; May my life
be sacrificed for the one who had been slaughtered near the river;

The punishment for those who killed him is the hellfire. I consider
this enough from you that you are neither for us nor against us."

\*\*\*\*

The narrator says: Thereafter Ibn Ziyâd sat in his palace and gave
audience to all. The holy head of Husain (a.s.) was placed before him.
His women and children also arrived. Zainab, the respected daughter of
Ali (a.s.) sat unknown and unrecognized. Ibn Ziyâd asked, "Who is this
lady?" It was said: "Zainab, the daughter of Ali." Ibn Ziyâd looked at
her and said: "Praise to Allâh Who disgraced you and failed you in your
efforts." Zainab (s.a.): "Verily, it is the libertine who becomes
disgraced and the debauchee who gets refuted, and they are other than
us." Ibn Ziyâd: "What did Allâh do to your brother and your family?"

Zainab: "Nothing but good! They, Husain and his friends, were a group
for whom Allâh has destined martyrdom. They rushed towards their place
of slaughter. Verily soon Allâh will gather you and them. Then you will
be interrogated harshly. Then you will see who wins. May your mother
mourn over you, O son of Marjâna!" The narrator said that Ibn Ziyâd
became furious, as if decided to kill her.

Amr Ibn Harees124 said, "O chief! She is a lady, and a lady cannot be
punished for her words!"

- Amr Ibn Harees Ibn Amr Ibn Uthmân Ibn Abdullâh al- Makhzoomi. He has
quoted from Abu Bakr and Ibne Masood and from his sons Ja?far and Hasan
Arni and Mughira Ibn Sabee? and others. His house was the base of the
enemies of Ahle Bayt. He got Ibn Ziyâd: "Truly, Allâh has cursed my
heart by killing your rebel brother and the criminal "family"!" Zainab:
You killed my leader, uprooted my branches, and destroyed my foundation!
If this was your healing then you have attained your aim. Ibn Ziyâd:
This woman talks like a poet. By my life, your father was also a poet.
Zainab: O Ibn Ziyâd! What has a woman to do with rhythm and poem?
Thereafter Ibn Ziyâd turned towards Ali Ibn-al- Husain and asked: "Who
is he?" He was told: "He is Ali Ibn-al-Hussain (a.s.)." Ibn Ziyâd: "But
did not Allâh kill Ali Ibn-al- Husain?" Zainul ?bedin (a.s.): I had a
brother by the name of Ali Ibn-al-Husain. People killed him. Ibn Ziyâd:
But Allâh killed him! Imam Sajjad: At the time of death, Allâh takes the
souls.

Ibn Ziyâd: You dare to answer me? Bring him and decapitate him. Zainab
heard the words of that filthy fellow and said: "O Ibn Ziyâd, you have
not spared anyone of us. If the governorship of Kufa from Ziyâd Ibn Abih
and his son Ubaidullâh. He died in 85 A.H. [Seer Alamun Nubla 3/417-419;
Al- Elâm 5/76]

- Surah Zumar 39:42

you have decided to kill him, then kill me along with him!" Sajjâd
(a.s.) told his aunt: "O aunt, please calm down so that I may tell him
something!" Then Imâm turned towards Ibn Ziyâd and said, "Are you trying
to frighten me with threats of death? Don?t you know that martyrdom is
our habit and greatness?" Then Ibn Ziyâd ordered that Ali bin Husain and
his family be lodged in a house near the main mosque. Zainab (a.s.): No
Arab woman should come to us. Only slave girls may come. Then Ibn Ziyâd
ordered that the holy head of Hussain (a.s.) should be taken in rounds
in the streets and localities of Kufa. The head of Muhammed's (s.a.w.a.)
grandson and his heir goes up on a spear for the onlookers. Muslims do
see and hear. But none could deny the situation, nor could anyone
sympathize with the victims of the tragedy. The terrible condition
blinded eyes and the calamity deafened every ear, which heard wails.

The narrator has said that then Ibn Ziyâd climbed the pulpit, uttered
words of praise of Allâh, and said in a part of his speech: "Praise to
Allâh Who revealed the truth and helped Amirul Momineen (Yazeed) and his
followers, gave them victory, and killed the liar, son of the liar!" He
had not yet ended that Abdullâh Ibn Afeef Azadi got up. He was a
righteous and pious Shia, who had lost his left eye in the battle of
Jamal, and the right one in Siffeen war. He used to attend the Grand
Mosque of Kufa, and worship therein all the day. He said, "Oh, son of
Marjâna! You are the liar, son of a liar, and also the one who gave you
government (Yazeed) and his father (Muawiyah)! Oh enemy of Allâh! You
are killing the sons of the Prophet and uttering such words from the
pulpit of Muslims!"

Ibn Ziyâd became angry and asked: "Who is speaking such words?"

Abdullâh: O enemy of Allâh! I am addressing you. Are you killing the
pious progeny of the holy Prophet and think that you are following the
religion of Islâm? "Help! Help! O sons of the Pioneers! Where are you?
Come up and take revenge from this cursed son of cursed (Yazeed and
Muawiyah) who were so described by the holy Prophet."

This doubled the wrath of the filthy Ibne Ziyâd to such extent that the
veins of his neck swelled and he said: "Bring him to me." The
executioners and guards rushed from all sides to capture him. The
noblemen of his tribe, Azd, and his cousins also stood up and freed him
from the clutches of the government servants, took him out of the mosque
and sent him to his house.

Ibn Ziyâd: Catch the blind - the blind man of Azd, whom Allâh has
blinded and bring him to me. A battalion went out and the news reached
to the tribe of Azd. They united with the tribes of Yemen to protect
Abdullâh.

Ibn Ziyâd heard this. He also gathered the tribes of Mazar in
association with the people of Muhammad Ibn Ashath and ordered for a
war. The narrator has reported that there was a fierce fight in which a
group of Arabs were killed. The men of Ibne Ziyâd went to the house of
Abdullâh bin Afeef, broke it open and attacked him. His daughter said:
"Those you feared from have come!" Abdullâh: You will not be in a loss.
Give me my sword.

He grasped his sword and began to defend himself chanting: I am the son
of Afeef Taher, the honourable; my father is Afeef and my mother is Umme
?mer. How many of your armored heroes have I dispatched to death? His
daughter said continuously: "Alas, I wish I were a man to fight with you
against this destructive community, who killed the honorable members of
the "holy family"!"

The enemy surrounded Abdullâh from every side and he continued to
defend himself single-handed. Nobody was able to dominate him. The
daughter was guiding her blind father, until finally he was encircled
closely. His daughter said: "May Allâh avoid disgrace. My father has
been surrounded and there is none to help him."

Wielding his sword Abdullâh said: "By Allâh, had I been able to see;
then my movements would have exhausted you." The narrator said that the
surrounded Abdullâh was, at last, arrested and taken to Ibn Ziyâd.
Seeing him Ibn Ziyâd said, "Praise to Allâh Who disgraced you." Abdullâh
Ibn Afeef: O enemy of Allâh! How did he disgrace me? Had I been able to
see with my eyes, I would have undoubtedly put you to trouble. Ibn
Ziyâd: What is your opinion about Uthmân bin Affan?

Abdullâh: O slave! O son of Marjâna! (He cursed him). What have you to
do with Uthmân? He did good or bad, improved the affairs or spread
corruption. Allâh is the guard over His servants. He will decide justly
between people and Uthmân. You should just ask about yourself and your
father, and about Yazeed and his father. Ibn Ziyâd: No, by Allâh! I will
not ask you anything till you taste death little by little! Abdullâh Ibn
Afeef: All praise to Allâh, the Lord of the worlds. Even before your
mother delivered you I had asked for martyrdom from Allâh and requested
Him that my martyrdom be carried out by the hand of the worst and the
most evil fellow among His creation. After becoming blind, I had lost my
hope for martyrdom. But now, praise be to Allâh, after disappointment I
have achieved this good luck and my prayer has been answered. The devil
Ibn Ziyâd: kill him and hang him publicly in Kufa.

It is said that Ubaidullâh Ibn Ziyâd (may the curse of Allah be upon
him) conveyed the story of Karbala and the martyrdom of Husain (a.s.) to
Yazeed bin Muawiyah (may the curse of Allah be upon him) and to Amr Ibn
Saeed Ibn Aas,126 who was the governor of Medina.


