Chap-i- the Returning (ma'ad)
=============================

Ma'ad is derived from the root word Aud which means to return. Hence.
the returning of the spirit (rooh) back to it's body is called Ma'ad.
Ma'ad is one of the fundamental principals of Islamic faith and belief
in it is incumbent upon all muslims. After death every soul shall arise
to see the reward or retribution (as the case may be) of their deeds.

Ma'ad consists of five stages - Death (Maut), Grave (Qap), Intermediate
Stage (Barzakh), Resurrection (Qayamat) and Paradise (Jannat) or hell
(jahannam). Ma'ad can not be perceived by the five senses of man, but
can be comprehended by reasoning alone. What happens after death? The
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) through the medium of Revelation (Wahy) has
explained to us in detail regarding it. Man's senses has it's own
limitations beyond which it is not possible for him to understand. For
example a child in the mother's womb can not perceive the vastness of
the outside world. In the same manner, a soul captivated by the
influences of matter cannot easily understand the hidden world and it's
realities. The knowledge of this unseen world is concealed from man and
he can only understand it through the medium of the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) and his Vicegerents, the Holy Aimmah (A.S.). Hence to have a
better comprehension of the hereafter, we have to rely totally upon
Them, because They are the Inheritors of the knowledge of Allah and His
Hidden Wisdom.

**Is a person's body effected after death?**

Many are of the opinion that after death man's body becomes an absolute
nothing like a dry wood, hence the question of reckoning in the grave
does not arise.Such doubts are the out come of sheer ignorance and lack
of belief in the unseen (Ghaib). Speech is the effect of the tongue and
movements are impressions of a living body. But the spirit (rooh) is
motionless and is hence independent of movements. Whilst dreaming a
man's tongue or his lips do not move, and a person awake will bear
witness to it. After awakening the person will narrate the discussions
he had with people, he will also claim to have travelled far off cities,
but his body in reality having laid motionless on the bed all throughout
the night.

**Dreams (Ru'ya)**

Imam Moosa-al-Kazim (A.S.) states that in the former part of creation,
man did not dream. Allah sent upon the people His Apostle to guide them
towards virtue and warn against evil. The Prophet advised them that if
they followed the Right Path as preached by Him, they would be
successful and be rewarded in Paradise. But if they erred and did not
avoid sin, they would face tribulation in hell. They asked the Prophet
as to how could they rely on something which they had never seen. They
said that they observed that after death a man's body become motionless
and turns into dust, how could then he be rewarded or chastised for his
actions. It is after this incident that they started dreaming in which
they witnessed Allah's rewards in Paradise and His wath in hell. They
went to the Prophet and narrated this to him. The Prophet replied that
as in the dreams they met people, conversed with them, and visited far
off places, after death even if their bodies would be reduced to dust,
they would still taste chastisement or reward (as the case may be) in
Paradise or hell.

**Death (Maut)**

Scholars differ regarding the explanation of death. Some call it a
continuous phenomenon (Amre Wujoodi, not the end of life), while others
opine that it is terminal one (Amre Adami, the end of life). But the
generally excepted fact is that it is purely a bodily affair. Regarding
death it is said that, “It is a continuous process and the vice versa to
life”. The Holy Qur'an says: “Blessed is He in whose hand is the kingdom
(of the heavens and the earth), and He has power over all things, Who
created death and life that He may try you, (to prove) which of you is
best in deeds”. (Surah-al-Mulk: 1-2) The above verse (Ayah) refers to
the purpose of the creation of life and death. Non existence is not the
essence of creation. If death had been an ending process, the word
“Khalq” (Creation) would not have been used. Death in reality is the
divorce of the spirit (rooh) from the body, and can be illustrated by
many examples. It can be compared to a sailor estranged from his wrecked
ship. The spirit is a light which illuminates the dark body and its
components derive benefit from it. Whereas death is the estranger of
this light from the body, leaving it again in darkness. It is not true
that the spirit enters the body, because it is free of enter and exit.
It shares a limited relation with the body, after which it leaves the
body for immortality. In short, the detachment of the spirit (Rooh) from
the body is called death (Maut). It is incumbent upon us to believe that
death is a phenomenon solely governed by the will and command of
Almighty Allah only, and He maintains the relation of the spirit to the
body from the mother's womb till the end.

He is the Creator (Khaliq) of all things, and the Giver of life and
death. The Holy Qu'ran says: “Allah takes the spirits (Rooh) at the time
of their death” (Surah-az-Zumar : 42). Some ignorant people are of the
opinion that the Angel of death (Izraeel) is an evil demon and an enemy
who estranges us from our children and orphans them. But the reality is
that he acts in accordance to the command of Allah only and has no
personal options.

**Seperation of the Spirit (Rooh) from the body :**

It is narrated in the tradition of Me'raj that a plank is placed in
front of Izraeel, on which names of all creatures are written. When
Allah wills death of any one of His creatures, the name on the plank
disappears, and Izraeel does the needful. It is possible that at one
time death of more than one creature may be ordained. Just as many
candles can be extinguished in a single puff, more than one spirit can
be removed together. Surely Allah is the giver of death as stated in the
Qur'an, “Say (O Prophet) the Angel of death who is given charge of you
shall cause you to die. (Surah-as-Sajdah: 11) In another verse it is
stated, “Those whom the Angels cause to die while they are unjust to
themselves”. (Surah-an-Nahl: 28)

Izraeel and his comrade Angels have been assigned the job of removing
the spirits of creatures. An army which follows the commands of their
king and conquers cities, it is said that the said army has conquered
the said cities, but in reality it is the result of the king's military
tacts & warfare. Many examples can be given to prove the above, but the
fact is that it is beyond comparision.

As Allah has created this world as a house of causes (Darul Asbab), He
has also created a cause for death. Disease, murder, accident etc. are
some of it's causes. These act as reasons for the approach of death, if
not there are instances of persons who recover even after a serious
illness, while some die in a blink of an eye. These causes also do not
have an independent option, unless attested by the command and will of
the Almighty.

Spirits of some men are removed with ease while some experience severe
difficulty. It is narrated in traditions (Ahadees) that during death
some people feel as if their body is being cut asunder by scissors, or
are being grinded in a mill, while some feel as if smelling the
fragrance of a rose. It is stated in the Qur'an: “Those whom the Angels
cause to die in a good state, saying - Peace be on you, enter the garden
(of Paradise) for what you did”. (Surah-an-Nahl: 32). It is not
necessary that the spirits of all believers (Mo'mineen) are removed
easily. Even a believer who has done good deeds in his life time
experiences difficulty during death. This acts as the punishment for
sins he committed for which he is atoned for in this very world. While
for a non -believer this difficulty is an extra punishment of Allah
followed by the ones to come in the Hereafter. “But how will it be when
the Angels cause them to die smitting their backs”. (Surah-al-Mohammad :
27) It is also possible that a non-believer may not experince difficulty
during death, this acts as reward for the good deeds he has committed
which is compensated in this very world, leaving their scrolls of deedof
any reward. In reality death is an unfortunate event for a non-believer
even though he dies in comfort, while it is a blessing and felicity for
a believer even though he experiences difficulty during it.

**Love of world:**

Hatred towards death and love of the world is the outcome of an
ignorant person's mind, who thinks that the happiness of this world is
his prosperity and good fortune. The world sated with numerous troubles
and anxieties is out to end in misery & does not enjoy eternity,
perpetuity and sincerity. A poet has referred to this in the following
words - “Do not give your heart to this world, for it's example is of an
unfaithful pide who has never loved you, even for a night”. The Holy
Qur'an says that the love of this world is one of the characteristics of
the disbelievers.” (the disbelievers) are pleased with this world's life
and are content with it”. (Surah -Yunus : 71) In another place it is
stated “Are you contended with the life of this world instead of the
Hereafter” (Surah-al-Bara'at : 38). For the jews it is said, “ (Every
one of them loves that he should be granted a life of a thousand years”
(Surah-al-Baqarah : 96) There are many traditions detesting the love of
world. The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) says, “Verily the love of this world
is the root-cause of every evile”.

**Friendship with death :**

It is of utmost importance that man should hold death dear and consider
it an oppartunity of meeting with his Almighty, and not hate it and
consider it as evil, but should take lessons from it. He should ask
forgiveness from Allah for his sins and tame the rebellious self (nafs).
When the call of his Lord comes, he should welcome it with open arms
accepting it to be a blessing from Allah. He should be contented with
the decree (Qadr) of Allah. He should also rejoice that shortly he would
be taken to the presence of Ahlulbait (A.S.) and meeet his deceased
companions and other believer pothers. He should also not be
disheartened by the delay in death but should consider it as an
opportunity afforded by Allah to him to repent. This delay would give
him a chance to gather provisions useful for his journey to the other
world, for the journey is tiresome and full of dangerous valleys &
difficult paths.

**Relating to the removal of the Spirit and it's hardships (Sakarat)
:**

“And the stupor of death will come in truth, that is what you were
trying of escape”. (Surah-al-Qaf : 19). This stage is full of
difficulties & troubles. On one hand a man feels pain, his tongue turns
motionless, his bodily components cease to function, while on the other
hand weeping & wailing of relatives, grief of their seperation,
orphanation of children, and the sorrow of leaving behind hardly earned
wealth and enormous property for others to feast upon. The wealth which
was sometimes gathered by usurpation or through illicit means. The dying
man remembers his sins and regrets, but alas, the time (to repent) has
passed and accounts closed. Amirul Mo'meneen (A.S.) says, “He (the dying
person) regrets over his wealth which he gathered bearing hardships, and
now he is being seperated from it, leaving it to be feasted upon by his
inheritors. His hard earned wealth is left for the use of others.” The
dying person feels scared, for he is about to enter an unknown &
unexplored world, and is all the more frighted when he witnesses those
things which are totally new to him. The Holy Qur'an says, “Certainly
you were heedless of it, but now we have removed from you your veil, so
your sight today is sharp”. (Surah-al-Qaf: 22) He feels the presence of
Angels around him and wonders about what is in store for him. It has
been narrated in traditions (Ahadees) that at the time of death, the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) and the Holy Aimmah (A.S.) come near the head of
the dying person, who is able to see them. It is narrated in third
volume of ‘Bihar-al-Anwar’ that once Imam Ali-ar-Reza (A.S.) went to
meet one of his companions (sahabi) who was about to die.

He looked towards the Imam (A.S.) and said, “I see the radiant faces of
your Grandfather (the Holy Prophet), Your Father 9the Commander of the
faithful), Your Mother (Hazrat Fatema), and the other Imams in Your
Ancestry. I also see your luminous face alongwith them”. It is a fact
that every dying man has a glimpse of the Aimmah (A.S.), according to
his love for and knowledge of them. For a believer 9mo'min) their sight
is a blessing from Allah, and for a hypocrite (munafiq) and disbeliever
it is a sign of Allah's wrath. In the Salutation (Ziarat) of Amirul
Mo'meneen Ali (A.S.) we utter these words:

السَّلامُ على نِعْمَةِ اللهِ على الأبْرارِ ونَقْمَةِ اللهِ على
الجَبَّارِ The dying man is confused, because on one hand satan
(shaitaan) with his companions tries hards to spoil his faith (Eeman),
and on the other hand the thought of the arrival of the Angel of death
makes him all the more puzzled. He wonders as to in what state would he
(the Angel of death) come and how would his spirit be removed. The
Commander of the faithful Ali (A.S.) says, “And when the signs of death
approaches, he knows not what will befall him.”

Shaikh Kulaini narrates from Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) who said that
once Hazrat Ali (A.S.) was suffering from the ailment of the eye. The
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) came to inquire about his health. He saw that
Ali (A.S.) was in intense pain and was restless because of it. The
Prophet asked him, “Is this anxiety the outcome of the ailment”? Hazrat
Ali (A.S.) replied that, “I had never witnessed such a pain before”. The
Holy Prophet (to console him) said, “O Ali! when the Angel of death
comes to take the spirit of the disbeliever,he pings along with him a
club of fire, by which he removes his spirit and the flames of hell
scream at the dying man”. The Commander of the faithful sat upright and
said, “O Prophet! Please explain to me the tradition (hadees), for I do
not fell the pain anymore. Will the spirit of anyone from among your
ummat be removed in the same manner”? The Holy Prophet replied, “Yes,
three types of persons from among my ummat too will be subjected to this
punishment (1) An oppressive (Zalim) ruler, (2) Those who unjustly usurp
the rights of orphans, and (3) The bearer of false witness”.

Man due to difficulty or ease during death also sees the effects of his
good or bad deeds which he committed. There are also some who turn
apostates during death due to some of their bad deeds. “Then evil was
the end of those who did evil, because they rejected the communications
of Allah and used to mock them”. (Surah-ar-Room : 10) It has also been
narrated that during death (sakarat) or afterwards, the following
persons should not be near the dying man: a woman in menses (Haiz) or
Istahaza (irregular period), and a polluted (Junoob) person, because the
Blessed Angels go away and the dying man falls in trouble. Shaikh Sadooq
in his book ‘Ilalush Sharaye’ quotes Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) as
saying, that woman in menses (Haiz) or a polluted person (Junoob) should
not remain near the dying person, because the Angels feel disgusted
because of it and go away.

In the book ‘Darus Salaam’, the great scholar Sayyed Murtaza Najafi
quotes: Once an extreme epidemic poke in Iraq and Arabia. I was seated
in the courtyard of the Shrine of the Commander of the faithful Ali
(A.S.) with a distinguished Scholar (Aalim) Sayyed Mohammad Baqir
Qazwini. He was distributing work for serving the effected people among
us, when we saw a youth who was standing in the last rank and was
struggling to come near the Sayyed, but could not do so because of
immense crowd. Suddenly he started wailing aloud, the Sayyed looked at
him and told me to inquire the matter from him. I went to him and asked
him the reason for weeping. He replied, “I desire that if I die in the
epidemic, the Sayyed should recite the Prayer (Namaze Mayyit) over my
dead body individually and not combined as he does (due to many deaths
in the epidemic). I returned to the Sayyed and narrated the matter to
him. He promised to fulfill his desire. Next day we saw an infant child
who came crying to us. When we inquired of him he answered that he was
the son of the youth who had come us yesterday with a desire. He told us
that he had become the victim of epidemic and was about to die, and he
was desirous of meeting the Sayyed. Some of us accompanied Sayyed
Mohammad Baqir to meet the dying man. On the way we met a pious man who
was coming out of his house. When he saw us he saluted us, and asked us,
as to where we were going. We answered that we were going to visit a
believer who was in his last moments. With permission he accompanied us
in order to share the reward (sawab). When we came to the house, Sayyed
Mohammad Baqir entered the room first, then one after the other we
entered there in. The dying man was pleased and signalled us to sit.
As soon as the pious man who had met us on the way entered, the dying
man’s colour changed. His face turned pale and in rage signalled him to
go away. He became restless as if some trouble had befallen him. We were
all the more surprised when we learnt that the dying man did not even
know him, whom we could assume to be his enemy. The man excused himself
and went out but returned back after sometime. This time when he
entered, the dying person was pleased and welcomed him. After sometime
we took permission to leave. On the way we asked the pious man the
reason for the sudden change in the attitude of the dying man. He
replied that he was in the state of pollution (Junoob), and was leaving
his house with the intention of performing ceremonial bath (Ghusle
janabat) in the public bath. He met us on the way, and not wanting to
miss the opportunity of performing this noble task accompanied us. He
said that when he first entered the house and saw the dying man's
restlessness, he understood and left. To make himself sure he returned
back after having performed the ceremonial bath (Ghusle Janabat). He
concluded that the dying man had come to know about his impurity because
the blessed Angels had left him and he felt immense pain. (Khazeenatul
Jawaher).

