Chapter -viii- Accounting (hisab)
=================================

Allah says in the our an “Their reckoning has drawn near to men, and in
heedlessness are they turning aside.” (Surah- al-Ambiya: l)

“And how many a town rebelled against the commandment of it s Lord and
His Apostles. So we called it account severely and we chastised it
(with) a sternchastisement. So it tasted the evil result of its conduct,
and the of its affair was perdition. Allah has prepared for them severe
chastisement, therefore be careful of (your duty to) Allah, o men of
understanding”. (Surah-at-Talaq: 8-10)

**Who will take the Accounting?**

According to the Qur’an and the traditions (Ahadeeth) it is proved that
Allah Himsalf will take account of all people. “And He is swistest in
taking account”. (Surah-al-An’am: 62). But also according to some
traditions this work will be assigned to the Angels. According to some
reports it is related that Allah will take account from His prophets
(Ambiya), while the prophets will take account from their Vicegerents
(Awsiya), while they in turn will take account from their Ummat.
“(Remember) the day when we will call every people with their Imam”.
(Surah-ul-Bani Israel :71) (Ehsanul Fawaed)

It is narrated from Imam Jafar-as-Sadiq (A.S.) in the third volume of
Bihar-ul-Anwar of Allamah majlisi and Amali of Shaikh Mufeed then he
said, “when the day of Qayamat will dawn, Allah will command us to take
account from our Shiahs (followers). We will question them about the
Rights of Allah (Huqullah) and Allah will forgive them (because of their
intimacy with us). Then we will also forgive them our rights (due on
them)”. Then Imam (A.S.) recited the following verse : “Surely to Us is
their turning back, then surely upon Us is the taking of their
accounts”. (Surah-al-Ghashiyah: 25, 26) In the same book it is related
from Ma soom (A.S.) that after the forgiveness of the Rights of Allah
and the Rights of Aimmah (A.S.), the rights still due on our Shiahs will
be compensated for by the Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.) Himself.

May Allah place us amongst the Ummat of the Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.) and
the Shi ahs of Ahlulbait (A.S.), and resurrect us with Them.

On the day of ayamat, when Allah will appoint over the ummat their
Imams to take accounts, it is a felicity for us Shiahs that our accounts
will be taken by no other than the Imam of our Age Hazrat mahdi
(A.T.F.S.). when we will be pought to His presence with heads bowed down
in shame and repentence, and with a blackened face, but with heads full
of their love (Walayah), we have faith that He will cause our accounts
to be scrutinized by a Benevolent Son of a Benevolent Father who Himself
holds a high status in the eyes of the Almighty. (ma’ad)

**Whose Account will be taken ?**

On the day of Qayamat people who will be accounted for their deeds will
be classified into four groups. The first group of people will be the
ones who will be made to enter paradise without accounting. They will be
the ones who loved Ahlulbait (A.S.) in their life-time and had not
committed any sins, or died after repenting and seeking forgiveness from
Allah.

The second group be will averse to the first one, they will be the
enemies of Ahlulbait (A.S.). They will be thrown head- long into the
fire of hell without taking their accounts. The following verse speaks
about such people: “These are they who disbelieve in the communications
of their Lord and His meeting, so their deeds become null, and therefore
we will not set up a balanca for them on the day of resurrection”.
(Surah-al-Kahf: 105).

Shaikh Kulaini relates from Imam Ali Zainul Abadeen (A.S.) that He
said, that the polytheists (mushreqeen)’s and unbelievers (kafereen)’s
deeds will not be weighed weighing of deeds (meezane A amal), accounting
(Hisab), and scroll of deeds are meant for the muslims only, while
according to the Qur’an the polytheists and unbelievers will remain in
eternal chastisement.

The third group will consist of people who will be made to wait for
accounting. They will be the ones whose evil deeds would be surpassing
their good deeds. When their sins will be compensated for (by waiting
long), they will find freedom. The Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.) said to
Abdullah ibne Abbas, “Some people will have to wait for a hundred years
for accounting, and only then will they be made to enter paradise”. But
for which particular sin will he be made to wait is not specified. Hence
a believer (mo’min) should keep himself away from all sins, so that he
may not have to wait that long. (ma’ad)

Shaikh Sadooq relates from Imam Ja’far –as- Sadiq (A.S.) that He said,
that on the day of Qayamat two types of people from the followers of
Ahlulbait (A.S.) will have to wait for long. One will be the indigent a
poor person, while other a rich a wealthy person. The poor man will cry
out, “o my Lord why do I have to wait so long. I swear by your Glory and
majesty that in the world you had given me no kingdom or empire so that
I may oppress anyone or commit injustice therein or usurp other’s
rights. And you had given me only that which You thought was enough for
me, and I remained patient and never grumbled’. Then Allah will reply,
“o believer surely you speak the truth”, thus he will be made to enter
paradise.

The rich man will have to wait so long that he will sweat profusely, so
much so that forty Camels could quench their thirst with it. Only then
will he be made to enter paradise. In paradise when they will meet each
other, the poor man will ask him the reason for having made to wait so
long. The rich man will reply, “I was made to wait for a long time
giving account of my enormous wealth, so to how I earned it (whether
lawfully or unlawfully), as how I spent it. Then the merciful Lord
blessed me, forgave my sins and accepted my repentence”. Then he will
ask the poor man as to who he was? He will reply that he is the same
indigent fellow who was with him in the plains of Qayamat. The rich man
will say, “Verily the blessings and bounties of paradise have
transformed you to such an extent that even I could not recognize you”.
(matalib)

The fourth group will consist of people whose bad deeds will be more
than their good ones. And only if Allah’s mercy, blessings a forgiveness
will give way, they will be made to enter paradise. If not they will be
punished at that very place, the punishment appropriate for them. They
will be chastised in that way till they become clean of all sins. Then
people in whose hearts even an atoms weight of faith (Eeman) exists,
will not have to stay long in hell, they will be pought back to
paradise. While only the polytheists a unbelievers will remain there.

**Wasting of Good deeds (Ehbat) and Expiation of sins (Takfeer)**

“And (as for) those who disbelieve, for them is destruction, and He has
made their deeds ineffective. That is because they hated what Allah
revealed, so He rendered their deeds null”. (Surah- al- Mohammad :
8-9).

“And (so for) those who believe and do good, and believe in what has
been revealed to mohammad (S.A.W.S.), and it is the very truth from
their Lord, He will remove their evil from them and improve their
condition”. (Surah-al – Mohammad: 2).

Ehbat (wasting of good deeds) : If a person was a muslim in the former
part of his life and did good deeds, but turned away from the Right path
(Siratal Mustsqeem) during death and died a non –believer, none of his
previous (good) deeds will benefit him and they will go waste. If anyone
argues that in the Qur’an it”. (surah-az-zilzal: 7). The answer to it is
that the person who died disbelieving himself wasted his (good) deeds.
It is impossible for Allah to accept a non - believer’s (good) deeds and
make him enter paradise. But the Just Lord gives them the reward for it
in this very world, like ease during death, healthiness, wealth etc. as
discussed earlier. But it is possible that there may be leniency in
their punishment, as in the case of Hatim Tai or Nawshirwane Adil who
were generous, they shall be made to enter hell, but the fire will not
harm them. As said in the Qur’an: “Nor (for) those who die while they
are unbelievers”. (surah-an–Nisa: 18)

In another place it is stated : “And (as to) those who reject our
communications and the meeting of the Hereafter, their deeds are null.
Shall they they be rewarded except for what they have done”. (surah-
al-A’araf : 147).

Many verses (ayah) of the Qur’an prove that disbelief (kufr) and
polytheism (shirk) wastes away all good deeds. Then there are also such
sins that obliterate good deeds astop shop them from being accepted. The
Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.) has said regarding a disobedient child: “o the
one shunned away by his parents do whatever you like, for none of your
(good) deeds will be accepted”. If a person has upon him the curses and
woes of his mother, he will be thrown into hell even if his good deeds
are equal to the size of a mountain. Also is the case with slander and
jealousy. Ma’soom (A.S.) says, “Jealousy consumes faith (Eeman) just as
fire consumes wood”. (ma’ad). Shaikh kulaini quotes Abu Baseer who
narrates from Imam Ja’far- as- Sadiq (A.S.) that he saod, “Disbelief
(kufr) has three roots (foundations) : greed, pride, and jealousy”. And
as these roots start gaining strength, faith starts moving away and good
deeds go waste. Thus man becomes a fuel for the fire of hell. Shaitaan’a
good deeds lay wasted because of his pride. But he was given a long span
of life in compensation for his (good) deeds. The whole narration is
stated in the Qur’an.

Takfeer (Expiation of sins): It means that the sins which a person
commits are compensated for Acceptence of faith (Eeman) destroys all the
sins committed in the past. If a person was a non-believer in the former
part of Iife, but later accepted Islam, then the sins which he committed
during that period will be forgiven and will not be taken he committed
during that period will be forgiven if he truly repents and seeks
pardon. It is stated in the Qur’an: “Allah changes the evil deeds to
good ones”. (surah-al-Furqan: 70)

It is written in the fifteenth volume Ubiharul-Anwaar’, that once a man
came to the presence of the Holy prophet mohammad (S.A.W.S.) and said,
“o master my sin is very big (in his pre-Islamic days he had buried his
daughter alive as was the custom then), you recommend to me a deed whose
performance would act as compensation for it, and Allah may forgive me”.
The prophet (S.A.W.S.) asked him, “Then is your maternal aunt (mother’s
sister) alive”? He replied “Yes, she is”.

The prophet (S.A.W.S.) told him to go and serve her (for she had a very
near relation with his mother, thus serving her would mean serving his
mother). Then He (S.A.W.S.) said, “Had his mother been alive, it would
have been the best compensation (for his sins). (ma’ad).

**Incident of Ehbat a Takfeer**

It is writtem in trustworthy narratives that in the former days there
lived two pothers. One was a believer in the unity of Allah (Tawheed)
and the other a polytheist and a worshipper of idols. They both lived in
the same house, the believer lived on the ground floor and his
(non-believer) pother on the top one. The non-believer was wealthy and
lived a lavish life, while the believer was poor and passed his days in
hunger and poverty. Sometimes the non- believer would tell his pother,
“If you prostrate before the idols and accept them as your Gods, I will
off half of my wealth with you. Why do you wish to live such a hard and
bitter life. Come and prostrate before my idols so that both of us may
enjoy life together”.
The believer would answer, “why do you not fear Allah and the day of
Qayamat. The idols happened many times and days passed by. Whenever they
met the same conversation took place between them. One night the
believer was sitting in the courtyard of his house when he smelt the
cooking of delicious food from his pother’s house. He said to himself,
“Till when will you keep worshipping Allah and glrifying His name? when
even after such a long time you have not had a good dress to wear, nor a
soft and comgortable bed to sleep on. You have turned old due to eating
loaves of dry pead, and your teeth cannot chew them ahymore.

Verliy my pother speaks the truth, let me go and protrate before his
odols and feast upon the delicious food and enjoy myself”. He got up and
started ascending the stairs leading to his pother’s place and accept
his pagan religion.

There his pother too was engrossed in deep thoughts and wondered, “I
fail to understand the reality of idol worship, and it has no benefit as
such. Verily my pother speaks the truth, I should go and accept his true
religion and worship only one Allah”. He too got up and started
descending the stairs to go to his pother’s place. Both pothers met each
other on the stairs and exchanged their thoughts. At that moment Allah
ordered the Angel of deeth (malekul maut) to remove the spirits of both
of them. Hence they both died, and whatever good deeds the believer
(pother) had performed in his life were transferred to the account of
the non-believer (pother) who had left his house with the intention of
professing the true faith. And whatever bad deeds the non-believer
(pother) had done in his life time were likewise transferred to the
account of the believer who had left his house with the intention of
abandoning the faith. The believer’s entire life was spent in performing
good deeds but died a death of infidelity, while the non-believer spent
his entire life sinning yet died a faithful. The above incident is the
best example of turning from the right (Ehbat) and expiating for sins
(Takfeer).

Hence oh believers, shaitaan is your sworn enemy. He is on the constant
move (till your last moment) to turn you away from the Right path
(siratal mustaqeem). Put yourself in the habit of righteouby perfoning
good deeds frequently worshipping Allah, so that you may not fall prey
to the evil intentions of shaitaan, and thus remain steadfast on the
Right path. (khazeenatul Jawahir)

**Questiong about deeds**

It is said in the Qur’an: “And most certainly we will also question the
Apostles”. (surah-al –A’araf : 6), that “we had sent you to guide”? They
will reply, “o our Lord we have not left even an atom’s weight of Your
message to be passed on to them”. They will be asked, “who are your
witness”? They will reply, “o Allah You are our witness and besides Thee
is mohammad (S.A.W.S.), as said in the Qur’an, “And thus we made you a
medium (just) nation that you may be the bearers of witness to the
people and (that) the Apostle may be abearer of witness to
you”.(surah–al–Baqarah: 143)

It the same way it will be asled to prophet Isa (A.S.), “o Isa son of
marium Did You say to men, Take and my mother for tow gods besides
Allah”? (surah-al-maidah : 116). Prophet Isa will tremble (with fright)
due to Allah’s Glory and reply, “o Allah, if I had ever told them I
would surely have known it. But I had always said that, “surely I am a
servant of Allah, He has given me the book and made me a prophet”.
(surah-al -marium : 30). He once worship Him who created me and you.

Then their people will be questioned, “Did your prophet not remind you
of this day of Judgement”? They all will reply, “surely rhey did so”.
Then they shall be questioned about the blessings sent to them by Allah
and as to how they spen it “Then on that day you shall most surely be
questioned adout the blessings”. (surah-al –Takasur: 8). Did you thank
Allah for His bestowing His blessings on you, or you rebelled? It is
stated that the blessings of Allah referred to here means the love of
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) and His progeny (A.S.).

Imam (A.S.) asked Qatada, “wgat do you (sunnis) interpret by the
following verse (Ayah), UThen on that day you shall most surely be
questioned about the blessings’. Surah-al –Takasur: 8) He replied, “It
means that on the day of Qayamat we will be questioned about the food
and drink that we consumed in this world”. Imam (A.S.) replied, Verily
Allah is far beyond this, so as to question anyone about this. If you
invite someone for food to your house do you then question him as to how
much he ate”? Qatada replied, “No, but then what does this blessing
mean”? Imam (A.S.) replied, “The blessing referred to here is the love
of us Ahlulbait (A.S.)”. It will be asked as to how did you treat the
Ahlulbait (A.S.), did you love them and follow them, or you disobeyed
Allah by bearing grudge towards them. “They recognize the favours of
Allah, yet they deny it”. (Surah-an-Nahl: 83)

Regarding sustenance it will only be asked as to how he earned it
whether lawfully or unlawfully. Why did he squander it or spend it on
unlawful means, “I kept asking from you but you ta deaf ear. The wealth
was my welth, and the poor were my childern, and their questiontin (from
you) was my questioning”.

Shaikh Sadooq relates that on the day of Qayamat man will not be able
to move an inch till he is questioned about four things it on: (1) the
way how he spent his life, (2) As to how did he wear out his youth, (3)
About the wealth, as to where he got it from and in what way he spent
it, and (4) And about the love of us the Household (Ahlulbait) of
prophet .

**Rights of Allah or the worship Acts (Haqqullah Ibadah)**

The first thing about which a person will be questioned is prayers
(Namaz). Did be say his prayers in time? Did be serve (rightly) this
pillar of Islam and the Legacy of prayers (A.S.), or did he recite it to
show off. After this people will be questioned about Fasting (siyam),
pilgrimage (Haj), zakat, khums, the Holy war (Jehad) etc. and then the
righful recipients will catch hold of their shirts (and ask for their
rights).

**Riqhts of people (Haqqun Naas)**

Allah will deal with His servants in tow ways, (1) with Justice (Adl),
and (2) with mercy (Fazl).

Allah’s Justice (Adl): If a person has upon him someone’s right (haq),
his good deeds (of equal weight or merit) will be haoded over to the
rightful owner. For example backiting (gheebat), defaming etc The good
deeds of a person who has bacldited or has defamed anyone, will be
transferred to the account of the person whom he backdited or defamed,
and in turn that person’s bad deeds will be transferred to the account
of the person who backdited and defamed him Many traditions (Ahadees)
are quoted to support this.

There is a lenghty tradition (Hadees) from Imam Ali zainul Abedeen
(A.S.) in “Rawzae kafi” that on the day of Qayamat people will be
questioned about the rights of men At the concluding part of this
tradition it is quoted that a person asked Imam (A.S.), “o son of the
prophet If a non-believer who has been thrown into hell owes something
to a believer, how will the deeds be exchanged when the non- believer
has no more good deeds left”. Imam Abid (A.S.) replied, “The punishment
aquivalent to the right that be owes will be incurred on him. Likewise
the good deeds of the oppressor will be transferred to the account of
the oppressed”. The person asked, “But if the Muslim oppressor does not
have any good deeds left”? He (A.S.) replied, “The load of sins of the
oppressed will be placed on the shoulders of the oppressor, and verily
this is true justice”.

It is narrated in “Lu’ali’Akhbar” that once the Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.)
asked His companions as to who was an indigent (muflis) person They
replied that, “That one of us is an indigent person who does not possess
wealth or property”. He (S.A.W.S.) replied, “The indigent from my ummah
on the day of Qayamat will be the one who even after having offered
Namaz, kept fasts, performed the Haj, paid the zakat, but simultaneously
abused anyone, or usurped the rights of anyone, or killed or physically
tortured someone. Hence the oppressed ones will be given the good deeds
of the oppressor and these deeds will be their’s. If the good deeds of
the oppressor are exhausted, the bad deeds of the oppressor will be
given to the oppressor, and he will be thrown into the raging fire”.
(Ma’ad)

Allamah Jazaeri quotes a Tradition in his book that if a person owes
someone even one dirham and returns it back to it’s owner, this act of
his is greater than worship of a thousand years, freeing one thousand
slaves in the way of Allah, and performing one thousand Haj and the
lesser pilgrimage (Umrah ).

In another tradition Ma’soomeen (A.S.) says, that whosoever pleases his
debtors (by repaying their loans), will be made to enter Paradise
without taking account, and in paradise they will be among the friends
of Prophet Isma’il (A.S.).

Allah’s mercy: on the day of Qayamat when a person owes some rights to
someone, and if Allah is drowning in their own sweat (due to fear).
Allah will reveal to the people the palaces of paradise and call out to
the persons who owes something from His servants: O people who owe
something from my servant, if you wish to enter paradise, forgive him
the rights that he owes you, and thus free him of this responsibility.
Fortunate is the person on whom Allah is Merciful. For verily if Allah
does not straighten his affair, his state will become bad. Imam Ali
Zainul Abedeen (A.S.) wept (in fear) with Thy Justice, O Merciful
Lord.

It is appropiate to quote here the Supplication (Du’a) of Abu Hamza
Sumali.

Abu Hamza Sumali says, that Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen used to recite the
following du’a every night at the time of ùSehar’in the month of
Ramazan. This du’a is quoted in many books of supplications and also in
the first volume of ùMahateehul Jinaan’ by the same author.

The recitation of Namaze Radde Mazalim (Namaz for expiation of rights
due) is also beneficial. It’s method is as follows: Recite four Rak’at
Namaz (two Rak’at each), in first Rak’at after Surah-al-Hamd recite
Surah-at-Tawheed Twenty five times, and in the second Rak’at after
Surah-al-Hamd recite Surah-at-Tawhed fifty times, in the third seventy
five times, and in the fourth hundred times. After ending Namaz ask
All’s forgiveness.

**Incident- 1:**

This incident is quoted in one of the writing of Shaikh Shaheed. Ahmed
bin Abil Hawaree says that I had a wish to see in my teacher Abu Salman
Duraani (vis. Abdul Rehman bin Aytiyyah, a virtuous person who died in
Dariyah in Damascus in 235 A.H. and his grave is renowned there). After
a year I saw him in my dream and asked him, “O dear teacher, how was
your treatment (after death)”? Abu Salman replied, “o Ahmed one day
while coming from Babe Sagheer I saw a Camel laden with hay. I casually
removed a straw from it. Now I do not remember whether I but in my mouth
or threw it away without chewing it. One year has passed and I am still
being accounted for it”.

This narration is not an imaginary work, but can be supported by the
following verse (Ayah) of the Qur’an: “o my son surely if it is the very
weight of the grain of a mustard seed, even though it is in (the heart
of) a rock, or (high above) in the heavens, or (deep down) in the earth,
Allah will ping it (to light)” (Surah-al-Luqman : 16)

Amirul Mo’meneen Ali (A.S.) in one of his sermons says, “Will not the
souls be accounted for their good or bad deeds on the day of Qayamat,
even if it be of the weight of a mustard seed”.

Hazrat Ali (A.S.) sent Mohammad ibn Abu Bakr with a pronouncement, “o
servants of Allah You should know that on the day of Qayamat Allah will
certainly question you about your actions, big or small, open or
concealed”.

Hazrat Ali (A.S.) wrote to Abdullah ibne Abbas, “Are you not afraid of
the Umanaqesha’ of accounting”? In reality Umanaqesha’means a thorn
pierced in the body. As a person faces great difficulty in removing a
(minute) thorn, in the same manner on the day of Qayamat people will
have to bear hardships. Some researchers say that on the day of Qayamat
on will be safe from the fear of the weighing scale (Mizan), except the
one who in his lifetime started taking account of all his good and bad
deeds. The Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.) says that, “o people take account of
yourselves before your account is taken (in Qayamat) , and weigh your
actions before they are weighed in Qayamat”.

**Incident- 2.**

It is said about Tawbah bin Samah that he daily took account of
himself. One day he calculated his age and concluded that sixty years of
his life had passed. Then he counted the days in sixty years and that
came to twenty one thousand six hundred. He was shocked and said to
himself, “Woe be to me Will I face Lord having committed twenty one
thousand six hundred sins”. After having uttered these words he fell
down unconscious and passed away (in grief).

It is also narrated that once the Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.) was sitting
on the barren ground with no grass on it. He ordered his companions to
gather fuel to lit a fire. They replied that they were in a place where
there was impossible to find dry grass for fuel. The prophet (S.A.W.S.)
told them to gather whatever they could. Each one of them collected a
small quantity and slowly it became a . The prophet (S.A.W.S.) looked at
the heap of grass and said, “In the same manner sins of people will be
collected on the day of Qayamat”.

The prophet (S.A.W.S.) wanted to tell his companions that as the dry
grass cannot be seen in that barren land, but when searched for can turn
out to be a heap. In the same manner the small small sins which a person
commits cannot be seen, but on the day of Qayamat when all sins will be
gathered they will amount to a large stock. Thus Tawbah bin Samah
calculated one sin (the least) committed in one day which amounted to
twenty one thousand six hundred sins in sixty years.
\<
