Chapter -ix-spring of Kausar (hawze Kauzar)
===========================================

The existence of the Spring of Kausar is found in the Qur’an and the
traditions, it is the abundance (Khayre Kaseer) which was bestowed on
the Prophet (S.A.W.S.). It is quoted in ‘Basaerud Darajat’, “Ma’alimul
Zulfa”, and the third volume of ‘Biharul Anwar’ that Abdullah ibne Sinan
asked Imam Ja’far –as- Sadiq (A.S.) regarding the Spring of Kausar. Imam
(A.S.) replied that it’s width is approximately equal to the distance
from Basra in Iraq to Sanaa in Yemen. Abdullah seemed astonished.

Then Imam Sadiq (A.S.) asked him, “Do you wish to have a glimpse of
it?” He replied, “Yes O son of the Prophet!” Imam (A.S.) escorted him
outside Madina, and struck his foot on the ground. Abdullah says that by
the Imam’s order the veils of the unseen were lifted off my eyes. I saw
a stream flowing beneath, and the place where we were standing was
surrounded by it. I saw on one side of the stream was flowing water
which was whiter than ice, and on the other side milk, and in between
was flowing the “pure Drink” (Sharabe Tahoora) coloured red like rubies
(Yaqoot). I have never witnessed such a beautiful view before, nor wine
(the wine referred to here is not the usual intoxicating liquid, rather
it is a pure drink reserved for the believers in Paradise) flowing
between water and milk. Imam (A.S.) said, “As is written in the Qura’an,
that in Paradise flows rivers of milk, water and wine, verily this
stream flows from it. There are beautiful trees on both sides of this
river, and between the trees the ‘houries’ of Paradise are standing with
their beautiful hair flowing in the air, the likeness of which cannot be
seen in this world”. Then the Imam (A.S.) went towards one of the
‘houries’ and asked for a drink.

The ‘houri’ saluted Imam (A.S.) and filled the cup with water from the
stream and presented it to Him. Imam (A.S.) gave the cup to me to drink.
I drank and was surprised for I had never tasted such a delicious and
tasty waer in may life, nor ever smelt such fragrance of musk. I said,
“May my life be Your ransom, the likeness of what I saw today can never
be imagined in my life”. Imam Sadiq (A.S.) replied, “Whatever you have
seen is quite less when compared to the blessings reserved for Our
Shi’ahs. When anyone among them dies, their spirits stroll in these
gardens, and drink and bathe in these streams, and thus gain pleasure by
consuming the delicious fruits”. (Ma’ad)

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) told Imam Ali (A.S.), “The Spring of Kausar
flows from beneathe the high heavens. It’s water is whiter than milk,
sweeter than honey, and softer than ghee. It’s pebbles are of tapaz
(Zapo Jad), rubies (yaqoot) and corals (Marjan). It’s grass of saffron
(Za’faran), and mud of musk (Mushke Azfar)”. Then the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) placed his hand on the side of Imam Ali (A.S.) and said, “O
Ali! This stream is for me and yourself, and those who love you”.
(Ehsanul Fawaed)

For the followers of Imam Husain (A.S.) there is an additional
blessing. Imam Ja’afer –as-Sadiq (A.S.) says, that the person who weeps
on the sufferings of Imam Husain (A.S.) will be happy and contented on
the Spring of Kawsar, and will be pleased after looking at it. (Ma’ad)

**Manifestation of the High Honour of Ahlulbait (A.S.):**

Allah will reveal His other bounties and blessings on the day of
Qayamat, one of them will be the manifestation of the high honour and
position of Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) and his Progeny.

**The Standard of Praise (Liwaul Hamd):**

Abdullah ibne Salam asked the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) regarding the
ùStandard of praise (Liwaul Hamd) to be presented to him in Qayamat. He
(S.A.W.S.) replied that, it’s length is equal to the distance of a
thousand years. It’s pillars will be of red rubies, and it’s handle of
white pearls.while it’s flag will be of green emeralds. One flag will be
swirling in the east, the second in the west, while the third one will
be swirling in the middle. On it three sentences will be engraved , “In
the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, Merciful”, “All praise be to Allah
the Lord of the worlds”, and “There is no God except Allah, Mohammad
(S.A.W.S.) is the Messenger of Allah, and Ali (A.S.) is the friend of
Allah”.The length of each of these sentences will be equal to the length
of a thousand years. Abdullah asked, “Who will be carrying this
standard”? The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) replied, “The same person who in
this world is my Standard-bearer viz. Ali the son of Abu Talib
(A.S.)”.Abdullah replied, “verily you speak the truth. But also inform
me as to who all will remain under the shelter of this standard”. He
(S.A.W.S.) replied, “The believers (mo’meneen) friends Shi’ahs of Allah,
my friends aShiahs, and the friends and Shi’ahs of Ali (A.S.).verily
this position is very high. And Allah’s wrath be on the one who belies
me, or argues over his (Ali’s exalted) creation by Allah”.

**Ali (A.S.) will be the Distributor of kausar (saqiye kausar)**

The Holy Porphet (S.A.W.S.) told Ali (A.S.) : “o Ali ! verily you are
the distributor of (the water of) kausar”. It is related in ukhisaal’ of
Shaikh Sadooq that the Commander of the faithful Ali (A.S.) said, “I
along with my progeny (Ahlulbait) will be standing besides the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.S.) near the spring of kausar.

Whoever wishes to meet us should strive to emulate our actions and
words. For every house has some generous and noble people. Intercession
(Shafa’at) is surely there for our friends. Hence strive to meet us
there. For we shall shun away our enemies from there and give our
friends to drink from it. And whoever drinks a sip from that blessed
water will never become thirsty.

It is written in the saheeh of Bukhari that when some of the companions
of the Prophet (S.A.W.S.) will be removed from the kausar, the Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) will say, “o my Lord! these are my companions”.

Allah will reply, “You do not know what they did after you.

They spread falsetradition and made changes irreligion (Bid at ) This
tradition is also quoted in the ninth volume of the usaheeh of Muslim.

**The pulpit of praise (Maqame Mahmood)**

In the Tafseer of Furat bin Ipahim kufi Imam Ja’far-as- Sadiq (A.S.)
quotes a Iengthy Hadees from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) that He said :
As Allah has promised me, He will surely fulfill it. “Maybe your Lord
will raise you to a position of great glory”. (Surah- al- Bani Israil:
79). He will gather all the people on the day of qayamat, and will erect
a Pulpit (Mimbar) for (zapo Jad), emeralds (zamrood), rubies (Yaqoot)
and gold. I will mount on it and sit on the highest step. At that moment
Jipa’eel will ping the Standard of praise (Liwaul Hamd), and handing it
over to me will say, “o Mohammad (S.A.W.S.)! verily this is the
praiseworthy position (Maqame Mahmood) about which Allah had promised
you”. Then I will tell Ali (A.S.) to mount the Pulpit, He shall do so
and sit one step after me. Then I will hand over the Standard to him.

**Ali (A.S.) will be the Distributor of Heaven & hell (Kaseemul Jannate
wan Naar)**

The the gate-keeper of Paradise (Rizwan) will birng the keys of
Paradise and hand them over to me. Likewise the Keeper of hell (Malik)
will also come and hand over the keys of hell to me. Then I in turn will
give the keys to Ali the son of Abu Talib (A.S.) [o Ali ! You are the
distributor of Paradise and hell –Holy Prophet]. And at that time
Paradise and hell will be obedient to me as a pide is to her groom. And
this is the interpretation of the Verse (Ayah): “Do cast into hell every
ungrateful, rebellious one”. (Surah-al-Qaf: 24).

**Intercession (Shafa’ah)**

It is written in Tafseere Qummi that Sama’ah says that I asked Imam
Ja’far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) that, “How will the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.)
intercede on the day of Qayamat? He (A.S.) replied, “When people will
become weary and tired and will be sweating profusely, they will go to
Prophet Adam (A.S.) and plead for his intercession. Adam (A.S.) will put
forth his ‘Tarke Ula’ (leaving the better work for a less desirable
thing) and excuse himself. He wil direct them towards Prophet Nooh
(A.S.). Nooh (A.S.) will also apologise and direct them to go to the
Prophet after him. Likewise each Prophet will direct them to the Prophet
after them till they reach Prophet Eesa (A.S.). Eesa (A.S.) will then
advice them to go to the Last Prophet Mohammad (S.A.W.S.).

Then the people will go to Him and plead His mercy and ask for His
intercession. The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) will accompany them till the
Gate of Mercy (Babur Rahmah) and will fall into prostration (sajdah)
there. At that moment Allah’s voice will come “o Prophet! Lift your head
up and intercede (for the people), for surely your intercession will be
accepted. And ask whatever you wish, for surely you shall be given”.
(The intercession by the Holy Imam A.S.) has already been discussed in
the Chapter of Accounting).

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) in ‘Khisaal’ that three
groups of people will intercede on the day of Qayamat, and their
intercession will be accepted (1) The Prophet (Ambiya), (2) The Scholars
(Ulama), and (3) The Martyrs (Shohada), (Ehsanul Fawaed).

It is written in the third volume of ‘Biharul Anwaar’ that the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.S.) said, “Do not underestimate the Shi’ahs of Ali
(A.S.), for each one of them will intercede for the people equal to the
tribes of Rabi’ah and Muzar” (two great tribes of Quraysh).

**Who will be Interceded for?**

In ‘Biharul Anwaar’ it is narrated from the Holy prophat (S.A.W.S.)
that He said, “Intercession (Shafa’at) will be for those of my Ummah who
have committed major sins (gunahane kabeera), while those who are
righteous will be in no need of it”.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) says: On the day of Qayamat I will surely
intercede for the following four types of people: (1) Those who respact
and honour My Progeny (Ahlulbait), (2) Those who fulfill the desires of
My Progeny, (3) Those who work for their cause, and (4) Those who love
them from their hearts as well as by the tongue (openly and in secret).
(Sawaeqe Muhriqa).

Imam Ja’far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) says that the one who considers Prayers
(Namaz) to be unimportant or lowly will not get Our Intercession.

Imam Mohammad-al-Baqir (A.S.) says that Our Shi’ah is the one who obeys
Us and does not go against our word.

If a person does not do what is obligatory (wajib) and does not keep
himself from sins and evil, he is not amongst the Shi’ahs, and will not
receive Intercession of Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) and His Progeny (Ahlulbait).
(Ensanul Fawaed)

In short a believer (mo’min) should always remain between fear (of
Allah’s wrath) and desire (of His Mercy), for these are the attributes
of a believer.

**Heights (A’araf)**

There are three different interpretations regarding A’araf.

(1) According to the reports of Ahlulbait (A.S.), A’araf is a height on
the pidge of Serat on which the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) will be standing
alongwith His Progeny (A.S.). The foreheads of the friends and Shi’ahs
of Ahlulbait (A.S.) will be emitting a light, and this will act as a
permit [of the love of Ali (A.S.)] pass over Poole Serat.

It is stated in ‘Sawaeqe Muhriqa’ that no one will be able to pass over
the Poole Serat unless he has a permit from Imam Ali (A.S.).

It is written in the Qura’an: “And on the A’araf there shall be men,
who know all by their marks”. (Surah-al-A’araf: 46).

(2) Another interpretation of A’araf is that it is a wall as said in
the Qur’an: “On that day you will see the faithful men and the faithful
women –their light running before them and on their right hand, good
news for you today: gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide therein,
that is the grand achievement”. (Surah-al-Hadeed: 12)

It is said in the interpretation of this verse that the light referred
to here is the Love of Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) and His Progeny (Walayah).
And this light will be (glowing more or less) according to the (extent
of) belief (Eeman) and love (Walayah), and it will be (shining) on the
right side. So will be emitting light such intensely that they will not
be able to look at their feet. Some will be emitting light which will be
infinite. While some will be emitting a weak light which will dim
semetimes and shine sometimes. They will become disturbed and cry out
“Our Lord! Make perfect our light, and grant us protection”.

(Surah-at-Tahreem: 8) During that moment the light of others will be of
no help. The hypocrites and simmers will try to gain benefit from the
light of the believers, but will not be able to do so, and a wall will
be erected between them and this is the very A’araf. “They will cry out
to them: Were we not with you? They shall say: Yes! But you caused
yourselves to fall into temptation, and you waited and doubted, and vain
desires deceived you, till the threatened punishment of Allah came,
which the arch deceiver deceived you about Allah”.(Surah-al-Hadeed:
14)

“One the day when the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women will
say to thoswho believe: Wait for us, that we my have light from your
light, it shall be said: Turn back and seek a light. Then seperation
will be pought about between them, with a wall having a door in it, (as
for) the inside of it, there shall be mercy int it, and (as for) the
outside of it, there shall be punishment”. (Surah-al-Hadeed: 13).

(3) A’araf is a place between Paradise and hell. The oppresed ones
(mustaz-afeen), idiots and insane people foolish women, children who
have died before attaining adulthood, people who have died between the
appearance of two Prophets (and did not meet either of them), and people
who were alive at that time but the Prophet’s message did not reach
them, will be made to dwell therein. There shall be no blessings and
pleasures of Paradise and no punishment and wrath of Allah.

Shaikh Sa’adi says: A’araf is (like a hell in the eyes of the
‘houries’, but for the people of hell it is equal to Paradise.
\<
