Chapter -x- Bridge of Serat (poole Serat)
=========================================

‘Serat’ in the grammatical sense means a way or a road, and it’s
meaning according to the Shari’ah is a pidge or a road which passes from
the top of hell. In a tradition from Ma’soom (A.S.) it is stated that
‘Poole Serat’ is a pidge thinner than a hair, sharper than a sword, and
hotter than fire (of this world). The true believers (mo’meneen) will
pass over it speedily like lightening. Some will find some difficulty
over it, bu will later find relief. While there will be some who will
slip and fall down in the pit of hell. The likeness of ‘Poole Serat’ is
of ‘The Righat Path’ (Seratal Mustaqeem) of this world, the path of Ali
(A.S.) and Aimmah (A.S.)’s obedience.

The person who in this world turned away frome the ‘Seratal Mustaqeem’
(The path of Ahlulbait) in word and deed, and was attracted towards
falsehood, on the day of Qayamat he will slip over the Poole Serat and
fall into hell. In Surah-al-Hamd, ‘Seratal Mustaqeem’ refers to both
these paths (The path of Ahlulbait and Poole Serat).

Allamah Majlisi in his book ‘Haqqul Yaqeen’ quotes from Shaikh Sadooq
that: Our belief concerning Qayamat is that the Passes (Aqabaat) have
each a specific name, some are called Farz (compulsory Acts), others Amr
(Commands), yet others Nahy (Prohibitions). So when a man will reach the
Pass of Farz, and he had neglected it (in his life), he will be stopped
there and imprisoned for a thousand years, and the dues of Allah will be
demanded of him. Now if he goes out of it by means of some good act
performed by him in the world, or by the Mercy of Allah, then he escapes
from it and goes on to another Pass. He will not cease to be sent from
one Pass to another, and be stopped and questioned regarding his
shortcomings in respest of each stage.

If he escapes safely from all the Passes, he will arrive at the abode
of Permanence (Darul Baqa). Here he comes upon everlasting life, and
perpetual, without any affliction whatsoever. He will reside in the
neighbourhood of Allah, with the Prophets (A.S.), and the Imam (A.S.),
the vercaious ones, the Martyres (Shohada), and the righteous ones from
among His slaves. And if he is stopped at a Pass, and is questioned
about a certain due in respect of which he is found wanting, and neither
a good action on his part nor the Mercy of Allah reaches him, his step
will stumbel and he will be hurled down in the fire of hell.
(E’teqadatul Imamiyah).

Imam Mohammad-al-Baqir (A.S.) says, that when the verse (Ayah) “And
hell is made to appear on that day” (Surah-al-Fajr: 23) was revealed,
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) was asked regarding it’s interpretation. He
replied, “Jipa’eel has informed me that when Allah will have gathered
everyone from the beginning to the end on the day of Qayamat, one
thouesand Angels will ping the hell pulling it with a thousand ropes
with great difficulty. Hell will be roaring and raging with anger and
the voice of peaking (of bones) will be heard from it. At that moment a
ferocious voice will erput from it, which Allah has reserved to take the
account of people, and every one will perish (with fear). Men, Angels,
and the Prophet will be wailing with fright. Man will cry out, “Our
Lord! save me, save me”, while the Prophets will cry out, “O Lord! save
my people (ummat)”. So each Prophet will take account from Their people
(ummat) and walk over the Poole Serat. No one will have any escape from
walking over it. Allah says in the Qur’an: “And there is not one of you
but shall come to it, this is an unavoidable decree of your Lord. And we
will deliver those who guarded (against evil), and we will leave the
unjust therein on their knees”. (Surah-al-Maryam: 71-72)”.

Then the Prophet (S.A.W.S.) said, “This pidge contains seven Passes
(Aqabat), and each Pass has got a station equal to seventy farsakh, and
seventy thousand Angels have be pogted on each station. All the people
will have to cross these Passes”.

**1 st. Pass: kindness (Sile Raham), Trust (Amanah), Love of Ahlulbait
(A.S.) (Walayah)**

The first station here is of kindness (Sile Rahm). The person who in
this world is not merciful towards his parents will have a short life.
He will not prosper (in wealth), and in the Hereafter will be stopped on
the first station on poole Serat, and no mercy will be shown towards
him. The Holy Qur’an admonishes us in the following words: “And be
careful of (your duty to) Allah, by whom you demand one of another (your
rights), and to the ties of relationship”. (Surah- an- Nisa: 1)

So when one of your relativet is sick visit him, if he is indigent help
him and fulfil his wants, and visit them (your relatives) on important
days (of Idd etc.).

The second station is of Trust (Amanah). Trust does not only include
welth, but also if someone confides in you and tells a secret requesting
you not to reveal it to anyone, this too is included in trust. If you
disclose it to another, you have committed peach of trust. If you
disgrace someone, you have committed peach. And also if someone keeps
some wealth with you as a trust and even after promising to return it,
you refuse to do so, you are said to have committed peach (of trust).
The same rule applies for hire. If you borrowed something from someone
for a fixed period, after the period having expired you do not return
it, it will be deemed as being a violation of trust.

Shaikh Husain bin Sa’eed al Ahwazi relates from Imam Mohammad –al-
Baqir (A.S.) that one day someone gave the good news to Abu zarr that
his sons had pought a huge stock of cattle, and that his Property had
increased. To which Abu zarr replied, “The increasment of property will
not make me happy, nor do I consider it to be a prosperity for I believe
in being moderate and little is sufficient for me. The guarding of this
property would have made me busy and being negligent (of my duty towards
Allah). I have heard the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W.S.) as saying that,
on the day of Qayamat when a person who is trustworthy and kind passes
over the upoole Serat’, kindness and trust will be on both the sides to
support him.

It is also related that the person who has committed peach of trust or
severed relations with his kith a kin, on the day of Qayamat when he
will walk over the poole Serat, none of his deeds will be of any help to
him, and he will fall flat into the pit of hell.

The third station is of Love of Ahlulbait (A.S.) (Walayah). Regarding
the love of Ahlulbait (A.S.) many traditions have been quoted in the
Shi’ah as well as Sunni books, that Walayah means the Love of Imam Ali
(A.S.). In Tafseere Sa’labi it is writren regarding the verse : “And
stop them, for they shall be questioned”. (Surah- al-Saffat : 24). It is
said that people will be Stopped and asked if they accepted the walayah’
of Imam Ali (A.S.) in the world and asid, “Aliyyun Waliyullah”, while
believing in it.

Allamah Huwainee and Tabari both great scholars of the Ahle Sunnat
quote the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) as saying that, “o Ali ! Whoever
denies your love will be stopped (from going further) over the poole
Serat”.

In Sawaeqe Muhriqa it is written that whoever has got the passport of
the Love of Ali (A.S.) will pass easily over the Serat. Many other
traditions aquoted which cannot be written here due to lack of space.

**2nd . pass- Namaz. (Salat)**

On this pass a person will be stopped and questioned regarding the five
daily prayers, the prayer of Signs (Namaze Ayaat), and elapsed prayers
(Namaze Qaza), about which it has been discussed in the chapter of
“Accounting”.

Imam Ja’far- as-Sadiq (A.S.) in his last will said, “Whoever consideng
Namaz to be unimportant (or lowly) will not receive our Intercession (in
Qayamat)”.

Allah says in the Qur’an, “Woe to the praying ones, who are unmindful
of their prayers”. (Surah- al-Ma’oon : 4- 5).

The person who does not offer Namaz dies thirsty, and will also arise
thirsty from his grave. People should themselves recite Namaz and advice
others to do so. We should adapt our children to offer Namaz before they
reach puberty, because parents of a child reciting Namaz too get a share
in their rewards. Parents who advise their children (while they are
still young) to do good deeds and their childern in turn follow them,
such parents receive the reward thereof. And after a child reaches
puberty the good deeds are recorded in his own scrolls.

Once a Prophet was passing from near a grave with his companions, when
suddenly he told them to pass away quickly for the person in the grave
was being chastised by Allah’s wrath. One year later when he passed by
that same grave, he sensed that the wrath of Allah had been lifted up
from the grave. He was astonished and asked Allah the reason for it.
Allah relied, “This person had left behind him a child who was sent to
school, his teacher taught him to recite “Bismillahir Rahmanir
Raheem”.Thus when his child addressed Me as being a Beneficent and
Merciful Lord, I forgave his parents, for they have been a medium for
his birth. I felt ashamed that inspite of their child addressing me
thus, I should punish them”.

“O you who believe ! save yourselves and your families from a fire
whose fule is men and stones”. (Surah- at- Tahreem: 6)

Then we should warn our relatives and friends (from the wrath of Allah)
by enjoining good (Amr bil Ma’roof) and forbidding evil (Nahy anil
Munkar).

**3rd. Pass- zakat**

If a person in his life has ont paid Uzakat or ukhums due on him (even
equal to a dirham) to the deseeving persons will be stopped at this
pass. The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) says, that on the day of Qayamat, the
non-payer of uzakat’ will be in a state that a python (called Aqra) will
be wound around his neck. (Aqra is the name of a python, the hairs of
whose body have fallen off due to intense poison in it). In another
tradition it is stated that if a person does not pay ukhums’ due on his
agricultural field, on his neck will be placed a chain of the seven
worlds on the day of Qayamat. It is also related that when Imam- al-
Mahdi (A.T.F.S.) reappeares, He shall put to death those who do not pay
zakat due on them. The person hoards large provisions of gold a silver
(will zakat due on them), on the day of Qayamat these dirhams and dinars
will be made red hot in fire and will be placed on their foreheads and
their sides.

As said in the Qur’an, “on the day when it shall be heated in the fire
of hell, then their foreheads and their sides and their backs shall be
panded with it, this is what you hoarded up for yourselves, therefore
taste what you hoarded”. (Surah- al – Bara’at : 35) There is on
difference between the uzakat of wealth and the uzakat of boody
(Fitrah).

Many harsh woads have been used regarding the non-payment of ukhums’,
and many traditions are found regarding it. One tradition needs to be
quoted here from UAl kafi’ that Imam Ja’far- as-Sadiq (A.S.) saya, that
on the day of Qayamat the most difficult time will be when the deserving
person of khums will catch hold of the end of the shirt of the one who
did not pay it They will ask for their right from them on this pass, and
will not allow him to move further until he gives them their due rights.
But the situation will become even worse when the Interceders
(Ahlulbait) themselves will ask for Their Rights (khums) from people.

**4tn. Pass- Fasting (Saum)**

On the fourth pass people will be questioned regarding fasting. It a
person has been fasting in this world, only then shall he be permitted
to pass over it easily, otherwise he shall be stopped there. The Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.S.) has said, “Fasts act as a shield against the flames
of the fire of hell”. The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) has said, “For the one
who fasts there are two good tidings for him, one at the time of peaking
the fast (Iftaar), while the second when he shall meet his Lord. He will
then pass over the poole Serat easily and enter the presence of his
Almighty.

**5th. Pass- pilgrimage (Haj)**

It the perfomance of Haj becomes obligatory (wajib) on a person in his
life- time, and he does not perform it, then he shall be stopped at this
pass. It is stated that during death it will be said unto him “You have
died the death of a jew or a christian. You are not associated with
Islam”. It is said in the Qur’an, “And pilgrimage to the House is
incumbent upon men for the sake of Allah, (upon) everyone who is able to
undertake the journey to it, and whoever disbelieves, then surely Allah
is Self-sufficient, above any need of the world”. (Surah-al-Aale Imraan
: 96)

**6th.pass- Cleanliness (Taharah)**

According to Ibne Abbas purification (Taharah) is of three types :
Ablution (Wuzu’), Bath (Ghusl), and Tayammum, while others consider it
to be absolute purification (of the body as well as the soul). If a
person does not take care of cleanliness (or purification), specially
those men and women who do not perform the ceremonial bath (Ghusle
Janabat) correctly or on it s prescribed time, shall be stopped at this
pass. Women should also take care about the performance of other baths
(viz. Qhusle Haiz, Nifaas, Iztahaza etc.), and not be negligent about it
as is the custom amoungst, ignorant people. It is related that a person
who does not keep himself away from impurities, he will safe the squeeze
in the grave (as has been discussed in the chapter of “Grave”).

**7th.pass- Rights (Mazalim)**

UMazalim is sometimes interpreted as justice while sometimes it refers
to the rights of oyhers. The Holy Qur’an says about this pass: “Most
surely your Lord is watching”. (Surah-al-Fajr : 14) In interpretation of
this verse Lord is said that some people will be passing over the poole
Serat in a manner that they will be clasping it by their hands. Others
will be walking in manner that one leg of their’s will be slipping and
they will be taking help of their second leg, while the Angels will be
standing on both sides. People will be falling into the fire of hell
like bats (falling on the ground). The person who is fortunate to get
the Mercy and Blessings of Allah will pass over the poole Serat easily
and will say, “All praise be to Allah, for verily He has completed my
good deeds with His Mercy and Blessings abd increased my reward. I thank
Him that He with His Beneficence and kindness gave me freedom, when I
had lost all hope”.

Without doubt Allah is the forgiver of sins of His servants and the
rewarder of their good deeds. If a person has troubled someone with no
fault of his, he will be imprisoned for five hundred years on this pass
so much so that his bones will peak. If a person has usurped someone’s
wealth, he will be imprisoned for forty years on this pass and then he
shall be thrown into the fire of hell. In traditions it is narrated that
in exchange for one (usurped) dirham, seven thousand (accepted) prayers
of the usurper will be given to the person whose dirham he acquired. (It
has already been discussed in detail in the chapter of Accounting).

**Incident**

Allamah Bahauddin Sayyed Ali bin Abdul karim Neeli Najafi (whatever
praise of his is done will be quite less, who was the student of Shaikh
Shaheed), in his book UAnwarul Maziyyah (written in praise of Imam Ali)
narrates an incident from his father who says that : In Neela (a village
in Abaee) there lived a person who was the superintendent of the Mosque.
One day he did not come out of his house, when people called him he
excused himself. People inquired about it and they found out that his
entire body was charred except his thighs, and he was groaning with pain
and sorrow. When people asked him how he burnt himsef he replied that,
“I dreamt that Qayamat has dawned, and people are in anguish because
majority of them are been thrown into hell, while a small minority was
going towards paradise. I was among those who were going towards
paradise. Suddenly I reached a large and lenghty pidge which was
referred to as upoole Serat’.

I started walking on it, and as much as I walked its peadth became
narrow and it’s length increased until I reached a place where it turned
sharper than a sword. Beneath was a large valley full of black and
roaring fire whose flames were spurting out like large mountain peaks.
Some people walked away easily while some slipped and fell down. And I
was so much scared that I had no other wish except to cross the pidge
rapidly. Suddenly I reached that place where I could no longer control
myself and I fell head- long into the pit of the blazing fire. It’s pit
had no end and the fire pulled me down. I could not even scream and my
mind went blank, and I reached down equal to the distance of seventy
years. Suddenly I was inspired and I called out

“o Ali ibne Abi Talib! O Amiral Mo’meneen! help me my Lord”.

At that moment I saw a person standing on the edge of the valley. I
recognised him to be no other than my Master Ali (A.S.). I called out to
Him and He commanded me to extend my hand. I did so and He pulled me out
of the blazing fire. Then He (A.S.) started extinguishing the fire from
my thighs with His blessed hands. I suddenly woke up from my dream and
found that my whole body was burnt, except my thighs where my Mmaster
had laid His hands”. This person treated his wounds for three months and
was cured.

Now whenever I relate this incident to anyone, he develops fever (due
to fear), while only some remain uneffected.

Those A’mal which Prove helpful to pass over the poole serat easily.

(1) Sayyed ibne Tawoos in his book UIqbal relates that whoever recites
twenty units (Rak’at) of prayers after Namaze Maghrib on the night of
the first of Rajab, such that in each Rak’at after Surah-al –Hamd
recites once Surah-al-Tawheed, then he and his family will be saved from
the punishment in the grave, and will cross the poole Serat like
lightening without any accounting

(2) It is related that whoever fasts for six days in the month of Rajab
will find peace in Qayamat, and will walk over the poole serat easily
without been accounted.

(3) It is related that a person who recites ten units of Namaz on the
night of twenty ninth Sha’ban, such that in each unit after
Surah-al-Hamd recites ten times Surah-at-Takasur, Surah-an-Naas,
Surah-al-Falaq, Surah-al-kaferoon, and Surah-at-Tawheed each, Allah will
give him reward equal to theologians, and will increase his good deeds,
will ease his accounting, and he will cross the poole Serat like
lightening.

As discussed in the earlier chapter, that whoever goes for pilgrimage
to the shrine of Imam Ali-ar-Reza (A.S.), Imam (A.S.) Himself comes for
his resque (in Qayamat) at three different places and saves him from the
terrors of that day one of which is the Upidge of Serat’
\<
