Chapter -xi- Hell (dozakh)
==========================

Hell is a valley whose depth cannot be imegined, and the fire of
Allah’s wrath is blazing therein. It can also be called the prison of
the hereafter. In it lies different types of punishments which cannot be
perceived by a man’s intellect. In fact it is opposite to paradise
wherein are different types of blessings and pleasures. But in hell
there is hardship, restlessness and humiliation.

We quote here some of the verses of the Qur’an which throw ligt on
these punishments.

**Food & Drink of the people of hell**

Allah says, “Then shall you, O you who err and call it a lie! Most
surely eat of a treeof zaqqom”. (Surah-al-Waqe’ah : 51,52)

It is tree which grows in the pit of hell, it’s fruits being ugly and
bitter. It is (poisonous) like the fang of a snake, and the touch of it
makes men fear. This is the food of the dwellers of hell. “And fill
(your) bellies with it, then drink over it of boiling water”.
(Surah-al-Waqe’ah : 53, 54)

It is related that one of the punishments by Allah for the people of
hell will be intense thirst. Then after a long time hot boiling water
mixed with pus will be given to them, and they will drink it because of
extreme thirst.

“And who are made to drink boiling water, so it rend their bowels
asunde”. (Surah-al- Mohammad : 15)

It is related that if a drop of that water be put on a mountain (in
this world), it will be reduced to dust. “And drink as drinks the
thirsty camels”. (Surah-al-Waqe’ah: 55). They will drink that water
liter like a camel who is thirsty from many days, and drinks whilst
shivering. Heem (the water referred to in this verse) is the plural of
Aheem’ which means a camel suffering from a disease. This disease is
equivalent to dropsy, which usually happens to a camel, in which it
keeps drinking water but is not satiated until it dies. this will be the
state of the dwellers of hell. “This is their entertainment on the day
of requital”.

(Surah-al-Waqe’an: 56) This ‘zaqqoom’ and ‘Hameem’ will be given to
them in Qayamat as an introduction to Allah’s wrath. And whatever is
destined in hell (for the disbelievers) is far more harsh and beyond
descriprion. “Surely the tree of the zaqqoom, is the food of the sinful,
like dregs of oil, it shall boil in (their) bellies, like the boiling of
hot water”. (Surah-ad- Dukhan : 43- 46).

And because of it the intestines and stomach will melt. This same
boiling water will be thrown on their heads, as a result of which their
whole body will melt. “Then pour over his head of the torment of boiling
water”.(Surah-ad- Dukhan: 48) Even after such state their punishment
will not be lessened. “ Their chastisement shall not be lightened nor
shall they be given respite”. (Surah-al- Baqarah: 162)

“So oft as their skins are thoroughly burned, we will change them for
other skins, that they may taste the chatisement”. (Surah-an- Nisa:
56)

“Surely with Us are heavy fetters and a flaming fire, and food that
chokes and a painful punishment”. (Surah-al-Muzzammil: 12,13)

Among the other foods of the dwellers of hell is ‘Ghasaleen’ as said in
the Qar’an, “Nor that food except refuse”. (Surah-al-Haqqah: 36) It is
written in ‘Majma’ ul Bahrayn that whatever is excreated from the
stomach of the people of hell, will be given to them for eating.

“Made to drink from a boiling spring. They shall have no food but of
thorns, which will neither fatten nor awail against hunger”. (Surah-al-
Ghashiyah: 5-7) “And he shall be given to drink of festering water”.
(Surah-al-Ipaheem: 16) The festering water referred to in this verse is
the blood and wastage which will be oozing out of the private parts of
fornicator women, and will be given to the dwellers of hell to drink.

“But boiling and intensely cold water”. (Surah-an-Nab’a: 25) The
interpreters say that ‘Ghassaq’ (the water referred to in this verse) is
a spring in hell which contains venom of poisnonous animls, and this
also shall be given to the people of hell to drink.

**Clothes of the people of hell**

“For them are cut garments of fire, boiling water shall be poured over
their head. With it shall be melted what is in their bellies and (their)
skins as well”. (Surah-al-Haj: 19,20)

“Their shirts made of pitch (Qatran) and fire covering their faces”.
(Surah-al-Ipaheem: 50) ‘Qatran’ is a black and stinking substance. Some
interpret it to be tar, but the reality is that nothing of the hereafter
can be compared to the things of this world. It is related that if a
dress of the people of hell is hung between the earth and the sky, then
all the people on the warth will scourch and die due to it’s heat and
evil odour.

**Hand Cuffs and Shackles of the people of hell**

“The guilty shall be recongized by their marks, so thay shall be seized
by the forelocks and the feet”. (Surah-ar-Rahman: 41) It means that some
of the evil doers will be seized by the hair of their fore heads and
flung into hell, while some will pulled by their legs and thrown into
the fire. When the fire of hell will see them, it will roar with rage
and will proceed to devour them.

“Surely it sends up spaks like palaces, as if they were towny camels”.
(Surah- al-Mursalat: 32,33)
“Then thrust him into a chain the length of which is seventy cubits”.
(Surah-al-Haqqah: 32)
“When the fetters and the chains shall be on their necks, they shall be
dragged”. (Surah-al-Mo’min: 71)
“And on the day of resurrection you shall see- those who lied against
Allah, their faces shall be blackned”. (Surah-az-aumar: 60)
“The fices shall scorch their faces, and they therein shall be in
severe affilction”. (Surah-al-Mo’menoon: 104)

**Beds of the people of hell**

“They shall have a bed of hell- fire and from above them coverings (of
it), and thus do we reward the unjust”. (Surah-al-A’araf: 41)

The people of hell will be sitting on planks of fire, and will cover
themselves with it.

**Keepers of hell**

“Over it are Angels stern and strong, they do not disobey Allah in what
He commands them”. (Surah-at-Tahreem: 6)
“And for them are whips of iron”. (Surah-al-Haj: 21)

The keepers of hell will have with them clubs of iron, with which they
will be striking the heads of evil- doers. The dwellers of paradise will
call out to the dwellers of hell and say, “Whatever Allah has promised
for us, He has surely fulfilled, and we have tasted the reward of our
good deeds. Have you also seen whatever chatisement Allah had promised
for the evil-doers”?

They will reply in the affirmative. Then a caller will call out by the
command of Allah: Allah’s wrath be on the oppressors.

“So today those who believe shall laugh at the unbelievers”.
(Surah-al-Mutaffefeen: 34), as they used to laugh and make fun of (in
the world) those who believe.

Shaitaan will be the companion of the dwellers of hell, while the
dwellers of paradise will meet one another and rejoice. The dwellers of
hell will bear animosity and hate one another.

“And whoever turns himself away from the remempance of the Beneficent
Allah, We appoint for him a shaitaan, so he becomes his associate. And
most surely they turn them away from the path, and they think that they
are guided upright, until when he comes to Us, he says: O would that
between me and you there were the distance of the east and the west, so
evil is the associate”. (Surah-az-zukhruf: 36-38) It is related that
both of them (the evil –doer and his comrade shaitaan will be bound
together in a single chain and thrown into the fire.

“When those who were followed shall renounce those who followed (them),
and they see the chastisement and their ties are cut asunder. And those
who followed shall say: Had there been for us a return, then we would
renounce them as they renounced us”. (Surah-al –Baraqah: 166,167)

Regarding the animosity between the people of the hell, it is said in
the Qur’an: “Then on the day of Qayamat some of you shall deny others,
and some of you shall curse others”. (Surah-al-Ankaboo: 25)

“The friends shall on that day be enemies one to another, except those
who guard (against evil)”. (Surah-az-zukhruf: 67)

It is related that the friendship which has been establiehed against
the will of Allah in this world, shall turn into enmity in the
hereafter. When the evil- doers will get exhausted by the punishment and
loose all hope, they will call out to the keepers of hell, as said in
the Qur’an, “And they shall call out: o Malik (name of the keeper of
hell)! let your Lord make an end of us. He shall reply: Surely you shall
tarry Certainly We have pought you the truth, but most of you are averse
to the truth”. (Surah-az- zukhruf: 77, 78)

**Gates of hell**

“It has seven gates, for each of those is a (special) class (of isnners
assigned)”. (Surah-al-Hijr: 44) It is related in “Anware No’maniyah” and
‘Biharul Anwaar’ that when Hazrat Jipa eel descended with the above
verse of the Qur’an, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) requested him to
explain to about the qualities of hell, Jipa’eel replied, “O Prophet of
Allah (S.A.W.S.)! verily there are seven gatse in hell. The distance
between each of these gates is equal to the length of seventy years, and
each one of them is hotterthan the other. The names of the gates are :
(1) Hawiyah (Lit. meaning a pit) – And this gate is for the hypocrites
(munafeqeen) and disbelievers (kuffar), (2) Jaheem- It is for the
polytheists (those who associate someone or something with Allah), (3)
It is for the sabians (star worshippers), (4) Lazza-It is for shaitaan
and his followers and the magians (fire worshippers), (5) Hutamah (Lit.
Meaning that which crushes to pieces) – It is for the jews, (6) Sa’eer
(Lit. meaning a blazing fire) – It is for the christians”. When Jipa’eel
came to describe the seventh gate he became silent. The Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) told him to describe the seventh gate, to which Jipa’eel
replied, “It is for the proud people of your ummat, who die without
repenting for their sins”.

The Prophet (S.A.W.S.) lifted his head and was so much grieved that he
became unconscious. When He regained consciousness. He said, “O Jipa’eel
verily you have made my trouble two-fold. Will my people also go to
hell”? Then He started weeping. After this incident He did not
communicate with anyone for some days, and whenever He recited Namaz, He
wept bitterly. Because of His intense weeping, all His companions too
wept. They asked Him the reason for His grief, but He did not reply.
Imam Ali (A.S.) was out on some mission, and so the companions went to
the persence of the Lady of Light Hazrat Fatema (A.S.). They went to Her
house at the time when She was grinding the millstone. She was reciting
the following verse of the Qur’an: “While the hereafter is better and
more lasting”. (Surah-al-A’ala: 17). The companions related to Hor the
state of Her Fater. When She heard it, she got up and wore her cloak
(chader) which had twelve patches sewed with the leaves of the date –
tree.

Salman –al- Farsi who was present amoungst those people was moved after
looking at the worn out cloak of Hazrat Sayyedah and said, “Alas! The
daughters of Qaiser (Caesars, the rulers of ancient Rome) and kusras
(rulers of ancient persia) sit on golden thrones, but the daugter of the
Prophet of Allah has no proper clothes to wear”. When Hazrat Fatema
(A.S.) reached the presence of Her Father, She saw His bad state and the
state of His companions and started weeping. She then said, “O Father!
Salman is astonished after looking at My worn-out cloak. I swear by the
Lord Who has chosenYou as the Prophet, since the past five years we have
got only one sheet of cloth in out house, during the day on which we
feed the camels, and during the night rest on it. And our childern have
got a mattress of a skin with dry leaves of the tree of dates”.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) turned towards Salman and said, “Do you pay
heed and take lesson”? Hazrat zahra (A.S.) saw that due to excessive
weeping the face of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) had turned pale, and His
cheeks had sunk in, and as relared by kashfi that the earth where He was
sitting had turned wet with tears. She (A.S.) told Her Father, “May my
life be Your ransom, why do you weep”? The Prophet (S.A.W.S.) replied,
“o Fatema Why should I not weep? For verily Jipa’ eel has revealed to me
a verse (Ayah) describing the qualities of hell, that it contains seven
gates, which in turn have seventy thousand fissures of fire. And in each
fissure there are seventy thousand coffins of fire, and each coffin
contains seventy thousand types of punishment.” When Hazrat Fatema
(A.S.) heard this She cried out, “Verily the one who is fed to this fire
is doomed”. Saying this She fainted.

When She regained consciousness, She said, “O the best of creatures!
Who is worthy for such a punishmet”? The Prophet (S.A.W.S.) replied,
“Those from my ummat who follow the passions of their self and neglect
Nama, and this punishment I quite less when compared to the other
punishments”. After hearing these words each companion of the Prophet
came out weeping and lamenting thus: “O sorrow! The journey (to the
hereafter) is quist far, while the equipment quite less”. While some
were crying, “O I wish my mother had never given birth to me, so I would
not have heard about this punishment”. AmmareYasir said, “I wish I were
a bird, so I would not be stopped (in Qayamat) for accounting”. Bilal
who was not there came and asked Salman the reason for the grief, to
which he replied, “Woe be upon you and me! For verily we will have a
dress of fire instead of this dress of cotton, and we will be fed with
the ùZaqqoom’ (a poisonous tree in hell)”. (Khazeenatul Jawahir)

**Related to the severity of the punishment in hell**

(1) Abu Baseer says that I told Imam Ja’ far-as-Sadiq (A.S.), “o son of
the Prophet! Please admonish me from the wrath of Allah, for my heart
has turned hard”. Imam (A.S.) replied, “o Abu Mohammad! Get ready for
the lengthy life, the life of the hereafter, which is eternal. So worry
about it and get ready for it. One gay Jipa’ eel came to the presence of
the Holy Prophet Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) in a sad serious mood. Wjile other
times whenever he came to the Prophet he came with a smiling face.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) looked at him and said, “o Jipa’ eel! what
has happened to you, for you look sad and angry”. To which Jipa’eel
replied, “The blower which was used to incite the flames of the fire of
hell has been stopped”. The Prophet asked him as to what the blower was?
Jipa’ eel replied, “o Prophet! According to the orders of Allah, the
fire of hell was given air with blower for a thousand years till it
turned white.

Then again it was given air for a thousand years till it turned red.
While again it was given air for a thousand years and lutimately it
turned dark and black. It one drop the zaree’ (liguid which is the
admixture of the sweat of the people of hell, and the wastage which will
be oozing from the private parts of the fornicator women, which will be
boiled in large vessels by the heat of the fire of hell, and the evil
doers will be given to drink it) be poured in the seas in this world,
the entire world would be ruined because of it’ s filthyness If one ring
of the seventy feet chain to be bound in the necks of the people of hell
be placed on the earth, it would melt because of intense heat And if one
shirt of the shirts of the people of hell be hanged between the sky and
the earth, the entire world would perish because of the bad odour
emitting form it”.

After saying this Jipa’eel and the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) both wept.
When Allah saw this, He sent one of His Angels to Him. The Angel said,
“o Prophet! Allah sends salutations to you, and says that surely He has
kept this punishment far away from you”. After this whenever Jipa’ eel
came to the Prophet, He was in a good mood”. Imam Sadiq (A.S.)
continued, “on that day the dwellers of hell will become aware of
Allah’s great chatisement, likewise the dwellers of paradise will also
become aware of Allah’s Mercy and Blessings. hen the evil-doers will be
thrown into the fire of hell, they will try hard for seventy years and
finally come to the mouth of hell. Then the Angels standing there will
strike their heads with iron clubs, and they will again fall into the
bottom of the pit. They will then be given new skins so as to repeat and
proling this punishment”. Then Imam (A.S.) asked Abu Baseer, “Is this
enough for you”? He replied, “verily it is enough”.

(2) A tradition has been narrated from Imam Ja’ far –as-Sadiq (A.S.)
that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) said, “on the night of my ascension
(Me’ raj) when I reached the first heaven, I saw all the Angels
rejoicing, but one of them was quite different from the others. His face
was fearful and showed signs of anger. He saluted me but unlike others
did not smile at me. I asked Jipa’ eel as to who he was. Jipa’ eel
replied, “verily You should fear him, for we all fear him. This Angle is
the keeper of hell. From the day Allah appointed him as the keeper of
hell his anger and wrath increases for Allah’s enemies. And when Allah
shall order him to take revenge upon His enemies, he shall do so with
harshness and severity. If he had ever met anyone joyously, he would
also have smiled at you”. I saluted that Angel and he answered me and
gave me good news of paradise. Ihen I told Jipa’eel, “o Jipa’eel! tell
him to let me have a glimpse of hell”.

Jipa’eel requested him and he lifted the veil off and opened one of the
doors of hell. Suddenly flames of fire erupted from it which reached the
sky and covered it entirely, and started roaring a raging and creating
terror. I told Jipa’ eel to request him to put back the vril. The keeper
of hell ordered the flames which had reached the sky to go down”.

(3) Imam Ja’far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) says that, “Allah has not created any
man but with tow places, one in paradise and the evil –doers in hell, a
caller will call out to the dwellers of paradise and say, “Look towards
hell”. They shall do so, and they will be shown their place in hell
which would have their’s if they had sinned. When they see it they will
be so much excited, that had there been death in paradise, they would
have died of happiness. Iheir happines will have no bounds for “praise
be to Allah, and thank Allah that He has saved us from this bunishment”.
In the same manner it will be said to the dwellers of hell, “lift your
heads up and see, this would have been your place (in paradise) if you
had believed”. They will become so much depressed, that had there been
death in hell, they would have died of grief. Then the places of the
people of hell (in pa-adise) will be given to the people of Paradise and
vise versa. This is the interpretation of the verse of the Qur’an,
“These are they who are the heirs, who shall inherit the Paradise, they
shall abide therein”. (Surah-al-Mo’meneen: 10, 11)

(4) The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) says, that when the good-dores will be
put into Paradise and evil-doers into hell, a caller will call out, “O
the people of Paradise! And O the people of hell! Will you recognise
death if we show it to you giving it a form”? They will reply, “No we
will not be able to recongise it”. Then death will be given the form of
a cattle and made to stand betwwen Paradise and hell, and it will be
said to them, “look, this is death”. Then the cattle (death) will be
sacrificed by the orders of Allah, and it will be said to the people of
Paradise: “Now you shall always remain in Paradise and death will not
harm you”, and it will be said to the people of hell: “You too shall
stay in hell forever and death will not relieve you”. “And warn them of
the day of intense regret, when the matter shall have been decided, and
they are (now) in negligence and they do not believe”. (Surah-al-Maryam:
39). Then the people of hell will regert and loose hople of mercy.

(5) Imam Ali-al-Murtaza (A.S.) says, that for the evil-doers there has
been created a borrough between the fire (of hell). There will be chains
bound in their feet, and their hands will be tied with their necks.
Their shirts will be of copper, and dresses of fire. They will be
chastised with intense heat. The doors of hell will be closed upon them
(so there is no escape), and will never be opened. Cool peeze will not
enter therein, and they will not find immunity from sorrow and grief.
Their punishment will be of different types and increase occassionally.
Their state there will no change, nor their age increase. They will
plead with Allah for death, but He will say, “You will ever remain in
this state and taste chastisement”.

According to trustworthy authorities, Imam Ja’afar-as-Sadiq (A.S.)
says, that in hell there is a well in which some of the people will be
imprisoned. This place is for the arrogant and proud people, the
stubborn evil-doers. It will also be reserved for the enemies of
Ahlulbait (A.S.). The least punishment here is that the person (having
the least punishment) will be floating in the sea of fire, his shoes
will be of fire and strings of the shoes will also be made of fire. And
because of intense heat his pain will be boiling inside his skull. He
will think that his punishment is quite severe, but in fact his
punishment will be the least when compared to the others.
\<
