Those Deeds Whose Performance Eases Death
=========================================

Shaikh Sadooq quotes from Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) that he said, “If
a person wishes that his last moments should be easy, he should maintain
cordial relations with his kith & kin, and be kind to his parents.
Whoever does so, death will be eased, and he will never fall prey to
misfortunes in his lifetime”.

It is narrated that once the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) went to see a
youth who was in his last moments. He told him to recite Kalamae Tawheed
(There is no God but Allah), but they youth could not utter it because
his tongue had turned speechless. The Prophet repeated his order but
with no awail. He repeated it twice but the youth could not answer. The
Prophet turned towards a woman who was sat near the youth's head and
asked her if she was his mother. She replied in the affirmative. He then
asked her if she was unhappy with her son. She answered that she was
certainly unhappy, but would forgive him if the Prophet commanded her to
do so. The Prophet told her to forgive him. As soon as she forgave, the
youth's speech returned and he recited the ‘Kalema’. The Prophet asked
him as to what he saw. He answered that he saw an ugly looking man who
had held him by the neck, and was trying to strangle him. The Prophet
told him to recite the following:

<p dir="rtl">
يا مَنْ يَقْبَلُ اليَسيرَ وَيَعْفُو عَنِ الكَثيرِ اقْبَلْ مِنّي
اليَسيرَ وَاعْفُ عَنّي الكَثيرَ إنَّكَ أنْتَ الغَفورُ الرَّحيمُ
</p>

When he did so, the Prophet asked him as to what he saw now. He
answered that he saw that a handsome man had come to his resque while
the ugly man had turned back. The Prophet ordered him to recite the
above du'a again and after having done so asked him what he saw. He
replied that the ugly man had left, and the handsome youth was there by
his side comforting him. He uttered these words and peathed his last.
The above narration should be understood well, and lesson should be
learnt that parents's displeasure becomes the reason for anguish in
death. Even after being a companion (Sahabi) of the Prophet, and the
Prophet being present besides him, the youth could not recite the
‘kalema’ and was in agony till his mother forgave him.

Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) says, “For a person who gives clothes to
his pother believer during the summer or in winter, it is incumbent upon
Allah to present the dress of Paradise to him, make his end easy, and
save him from the narrowness of the grave.” The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.)
says, “A person who offers to eat something sweet to his pother
believer, the pangs of death will be easy on him”.

Those A’mal which prove beneficial during death and eases it’s
tribulations:

Reciting Surah-al-Yaseen, Surah-as-Saffat and the following
supplication (du'a) eases the tribulation during death:

<p dir="rtl">
لا إلهَ إلاّ الله الحَليمُ الكَريمُ. لا إلهَ إلاّ الله العَلِيِّ
العَظيمُ. سُبْحانَ اللهِ رَبِّ السَّمواتِ السَّبْعِ وَرَبِّ الأرَضينَ
السَّبْعِ وَما فِيهِنَّ وَما بَيْنَهُنَّ وَما فَوقَهُنَّ وَما تَحتَهُنَّ
وَهوَ رَبُّ العَرشِ العَظيمِ وَالحَمدُ للهِ رَبِ العالَمينَ
</p>

Shaikh Sadooq narrates from Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) that he said,
“For the person who fasts on the last day of the month of Rajab, Allah
will save him from the after effects of death”. Fasting on the 24th of
Rajab carries great reward (Sawab). One of it's merits is that when the
Angel of death comes to remove his spirit (Rooh), he comes in the form
of a handsome youth carrying a bowl of the pure drink (Sharabe Tahoora)
and offers him to drink. The dying person does so and dies in peace.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) says that if a person recites four unit
(Rak'at) Namaz on the night of 7th Rajab in a manner that in each unit
(Rak'at) after Surah-al-Hamd recites thrice Surah-at-Tawheed, once
Surah-al-Falaq, and once Surah-an-Naas. After finishing the Namaz, sends
Salawat on Us and recites ten times Tabeehate Arba.

<p dir="rtl">
سُبْحانَ اللهِ وَالحَمدُ للهِ وَلا إلهَ إلاّ اللهُ واللهُ أكْبَرُ
</p>

Almighty Allah will offer him shelter under the Throne (Arsh), and give
him reward of a person fasting in the month of Ramazan. Till the time he
finishes the prayers, the Angels pray for his forgiveness. Allah will
ease the pangs of death on him, and save him from the squeeze in the
grave (Fishare Qap). He will not die until he sees his place in
Paradise, and will be safe from the hardships of Resurrection
(Qayamat).

Shaikh Kaf'ami quotes from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.), that he said
that a person who recites the following supplication (Du'a) 10 times
daily, Allah ill forgive four thousand major sins (Gunahane Kabeera) of
his, offer him refuge from one lac calamities at the time of death, the
squeeze in the grave (Fishare Qap) & Qayamat. Allah will also save him
from satan (shaitaan) and his army, will pay off his dues and save him
from troubles and anxieties.

<p dir="rtl">
أعْدَدْتُ لِكُلِّ هَولٍ لا إلهَ إلاّ اللهُ وَلِكُلِّ غَمٍّ وَهَمٍّ ما
شاءَ اللهُ وَلِكُلِّ نِعْمَةٍ اَلحَمْدُ للهِ وَلِكُلِّ رَخاءٍ الشُّكرِ
للهِ وَلِكُلِّ اُعْجُوبَةٍ سُبْحانَ اللهِ وَلِكُلِّ ذَنْبٍ اَسْتَغْفِرُ
اللهَ وَلِكُلِّ مُصيبَةٍ إنّا للهِ وإنّا إلَيْهِ رّاجِعونَ وَلِكُلِّ
ضَيْقٍ حَسْبِيَ اللهُ وَلِكُلِّ قَضاءٍ وَقَدَرٍ تَوَكَّلْتُ عَلى اللهِ
وَلِكُلِّ عَدُوٍّ اِعْتَصَمْتُ باللهِ وَلِكُلِّ طاعَةٍ وَمَعْصِيَةٍ لا
حَولَ ولا قُوَّةَ إلاّ بِاللهِ العَلِيِّ العَظيمِ
</p>

The recitation of the following du'a seventy times carries great
reward. The least of which is that he will be given glad tidings that he
will enter Paradise

<p dir="rtl">
يا أسمَعَ السَّامِعينَ وَيا أبْصَرَ المُبْصِرينَ ويا أسْرَعَ الحاسِبينَ
وَيا أحْكَمَ الحاكِمينَ
</p>

Shaikh Kulaini relates from Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) that he said
that the one who recites Surah-az-Zilzal in the Supererogatory Prayers
(Nafela), Allah will save him from earthquake, lightening and the
calamities of the land and sky. And during death He will send this Surah
in the form of a handsome youth who will sit besides him and request the
Angel of death (Malekul Maut to remove his spirit with ease.

**Turning away from the Right path during death.**

It means that a person should turn away from the Right Path
(Sirat-al-Mustaqeem) during death. At the time of death satan (shaitaan)
comes to the dying man adn tries his best to deceive him and puts him in
doubt, so as to turn him away from faith (Eeman). FakhrMuhaqqeqeen says
that, “A person who wishes to remain safe from the mischief of shaitaan
at the time of death should preserve five proofs regarding the
fundamental principals of faith (Usoole Deen) in his mind, and present
it to Allah's custody, so that during death these may come as a handy
against shaitaan's deceit. Then he should recite the following
supplication (du'a):

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّهُمَّ يا أرْحَمَ الرّاحِمينَ إنّي قّدْ أوْدَعْتُكَ يَقينِي هذا
وَثَباتَ دِيني وأنْتَ مُسْتَودع وقَدْ أمَرْتَنا بِحِفظِ الوَدائِعَ
فَرُدَّهُ عَلَيَّ وَقْتَ حُضُورِ مَوْتي
</p>

Fakhrul Muhaqqeqeen also says that those who wish to reamin safe from
shaitaan's mischief of abandoning faith during death, should recite
dua'e Adeelah with a pure mind and heart. (Du'ae Adeelah is found in all
the renowned books of du'as, and also in the first volume of Mafateehul
Jinaan by the same author).

Shaikh Toosi relates from Mohammad b. Sulayman Daylami that I asked
Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) that, “Some of your faithful followers
(Shi'ahs) say that faith (Eeman) is of two types: (1) Permanent & firmly
established, and (2) One which has been given to us as a trust, and also
can be ruined. Please give me a du'a by which my faith may also become
permanent and firestablished.” Imam (A.S.) told him to recite the
following du'a after every obligatory prayers (Wajib Namaz):

<p dir="rtl">
رَضِيتُ بِاللهِ رَبّاً وَبِمُحَمَّدٍ صَلّى اللهُ عَلَيهِ وآلِهِ
نَبِيَّاً وبِالإسْلامِ دِيناً وبِالقُرآنِ كِتاباً وَبِالكَعْبَةِ
قِبْلَةً وبِعلِيٍّ وَلِيّاً وإماماً وبِالحَسَنِ والحُسَينِ وعَلِيّ بنِ
الحُسَينِ ومُحَمَّدِ بنِ عَليٍّ وجَعْفَرِ بنِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَمُوسى بْنِ
جَعْفَرٍ وعَليِّ بْنِ مُوسى ومُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عليِّ وعَليِّ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ
والحَسَنِ والحُجَّةِ بْنِ الحَسَنِ صَلَواتُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِمْ أئِمَّةً
اللّهُمَّ إنّي رَضيتُ بَهِمْ أئِمّةً فارْضِني لَهُمْ إنَّكَ علي كُلِّ
شَيءٍ قَدير
</p>

Those acts which prove beneficial during death.

The best deed is to perform Prayers (Namaz) on time. It is related that
there is no person in the east or the west on whom the sight of the
Angel of death (Malekul Maut) does not fall atleast five times during
the time of Prayers. Whenever the time of death of that person comes,
the Angel of death (Malekul Maut) recognizes him and helps him to recite
Kalema and shuns away satan (shaitaan) from him. It is narrated that
once Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) wrote to a person: “Do you wish that
you may face death while on the Right path? And do you wish that your
spirit (Rooh) may be removed from your body while you be performing good
deeds? Then hold Allah's orders dear to yourself and obey them, and do
not waste the bounties offered by Him by being disobedient to Him, and
do not take undue advantage of His Mercy, nor become arrogant. Honour
those who follow Us and respect those who love Us”.

The recitation of Dua-e-Tamjeed (Du'a No. 11) of ‘Saheefae Kamelah’ is
beneficial, so as to die while on the Right path and to be saved from
turning away from it.

To recite the following supplication (dua) in the Namaz of sundays in
the month of Zilqad:

<p dir="rtl">
رَبَّنا لا تُزِغْ قُلُوبَنا بَعْدَ إذْ هَدَيْتَنا وَهَبْ لَنا مِنْ
لَدُنْكَ رَحْمَةً إنَّكَ أنْتَ الوَهّابُ
</p>

The other beneficial acts are: To always recite Tasbeehe Fatema (A.S.)
(34 times Allaho Akbar, 33 times Alhamdo Lillah, and 33 times
Sub-hanallah), to wear ar ring of Cornelian (Aqeeq, specially of red
colour), it is better if the following is engraved on it: “Mohammadun
Nabiyyullahe wa Aliyyun Waliyyullahe”. To recite Surah-al-Mo'menoon
every friday, to recite the following supplication (du'a) seven times
after morning (Subh)

and evening (Maghrib) Prayers:

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحيمِ لا حَوْلَ وَلا قُوَّةَ إلاّ بِاللهِ
العَلِيِّ العَظيمِ
</p>

To recite 8 units (Rak'at) Namaz on the night of 22nd Rajab, in each
unit (Rak'at) after Surah-al-Hamd recites 7 times Surah-at-Tawheed.
After ending Namaz, recite 10 times ‘Salawat’, and 10 times ‘Istighfar’
(Astagferullah Rabbi wa atoobo Ilayh).

Sayyed ibne Tawoos quotes the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) as saying, that
if a person recites 4 units (Rak'ats) Namaz in the month of Sha'ban,
such that in each unit (Rak'at) after Surah-al-Hamd recites 50 times
Surah-at-Tawheed, then during death his spirit will be removed with
ease, and his grave will become spacious, and on the day of Qayamat when
he comes out of his grave, his face will be shining pight like a full
moon and kalmae Shahadat will be on his lips”.

**The following Incidents will prove helpful for further
explanation:**

**Incident - 1**

Fuzail bin Ayaz who was one of the great Sufi Saints, says that he had
a pious and virtuous student. The student once fell ill, and when his
death approached, Fuzail came to visit him and started reciting
Surah-al-Yaseen. The student requested Fuzail to stop reciting it.
Fuzail then requested him to recite the Kalema, but he refused to do so
and said that he was sick of it (Allah's reguge). Fuzail was shocked and
felt sad at the attitude of one of his pious students, he returned home
and did not come out for some days. One night he dreamt that the same
student was being dragged to the fire of hell by the Angels of wrath.
Fuzail stopped them and inquired of his student as to why was he being
treated in that manner, when he was always a pious and devout student of
his. He asked him as to what was the reason behind his painful end. The
student replied that he had three bad habits in him: (1) Slander, (Woe
be on every slanderer & defamer) Surah-al-Humazah: 1), (2) Jealousy,
(Verily jealousy destroys faith (Eeman) in the same manner as fire
destroys wood. - Usoole Kafi), and (3) Creating mischief, (Ceating
mischief is graver than murder) - (Surah-al-Baqarah: 217). The student
also told Fuzail that he once committed an act which also proved harmful
for his Hereafter. He said that once he had a disease, and the doctor
had prescribed him to drink wine for it's cure. The doctor told him that
if he did not do so he would never be cured. He did as the doctor said.
Because of this and the other 3 bad habits his end was such painful, and
he died in the state of shame.

For further explanation of the above narrative, I state below an
incident quoted by Shaikh Kulaini, who quotes Abu Baseer as saying that,
Once I was seated in the presence of Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.), when
Umme Khalid binte Ma'badiyyah came and told the Imam (A.S.) that since
she knew the prohibition of it's use, she had come to the Imam (A.S.) to
take advice regarding it. Imam Sadiq (A.S.) asked her, “What stopped you
from using it”? She said that being one of His devout followers, she
wished to be saved from shame, and on the day of Qayamat if she be
questioned about it she could reply that it's use (or prohibition) was
ordered to her by the Imam (A.S.) himself. The Imam (A.S.) turned
towards me and said, “O Abu Mohammad! (referred to Abu Baseer), do you
pay heed to what this woman says”? Then Imam Sadiq (A.S.) answered, “By
Allah I never give you permission to consume even a drop of it, for if
you do so, you shall have to regret when your spirit reaches here”. and
Imam (A.S.) pointed towards his neck and repeated the sentence thrice,
and took the woman's assurance that she had understood it well.

**Incident - 2**

Shaikh Bahai states in his book ‘Kashkol’ that there was a person who
had spent his entire life in pleasures and luxuries of this world. When
he was about to die, the people gathered around him and requested him to
recite the ‘Kalema’. But instead of the ‘Kalema’ the dying man said:
Where is that woman who in a state of exhaustion came to me and asked me
the way to the public bath (named Manjab). He said so because one day a
virtuous and beautiful woman came out of her house to have bath in a
famous bath house named ‘Manjab’. She forgot her way and was exhausted
searching it. She saw this man standing near a door and asked him the
way to it. He pointed towards his house and said that the same was the
bath house named ‘Manjab’.As soon as the woman entered there in, the man
locked the door and indented to have illicit physical relation with her.
The virtuous woman sensed that there was no escape from his lustful
fold, and hence pretended to be interested in him. She said that she was
a state of uncleanliness and was proceeding for a bath. She told the man
to go and get some scent for her so that she may perfume and adorn her
self for him, and also to get something to eat as she was exhausted. The
man was deceived by her words and went to the market to buy things. As
soon as he stepped outside, the woman thanked Allah for preserving her
chastity and ran away. When the man returned, he understood his mistake
and regretted. Now when his end neared, her remembered this indecent act
and instead of reciting the ‘Kalema’ said the above words.

The Incident is to be reflected upon that when the person was about to
die, the sin (even though he had not committed it, but had intented)
stopped him from reciting the ‘Kalema’. Sheikh Kulaini quotes Imam
Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) as saying that, “One who does not pay even one
Qeerat of Zakat due on him (Qeerat is equal to 21 dinars), will die the
death of a jew or a Christian”. The same tradition (hadees) is also said
about the person who intentionally does not perform Haj even after being
capable of doing so.

**From Death till Grave**

After the spirit (Rooh) is separated from the body, it lingers on the
top for sometime. Thereafter the Spirit of the believer is taken to the
Heavens,

while that of a non-believer below. When a believer's bier is being
carried, he calls out: “Hasten me to my eternal destination”, while a
non-believer calls out: “Do not make haste to bury me in my grave,
making way for my chastisement”. During bath of the believer's dead
body, the Angels ask him if he desires to return to the world back to
his kith & kin, to which he replies that he does not intend to go back
to the world of miseries and misfortune.

The Spirit of the dead remains present and witnesses the bath given to
his body. It is also narrated that when the bath is being performed, the
dead person feels as if he is being thrown from height, and the rough
hands of the person performing the bath seems to be smiting him. Hence
it is necessary that bath should be performed with gentle hands.

The Spirit hears the voices of the people who have come to attend his
funeral. Hence it should be borne in mind that one should avoid talking
during funeral. A woman in menses or nifaas (blood discharge after child
birth), and a person in the state of pollution should avoid coming near
the dead body, because it becomes the reason for the displeasure of the
blessed Angels, who turn away in disgust. Such acts should be performed
for the dead person which become the reason for Allah's blessings, viz.
remembrance of Allah and Ahlulbait (A.S.), recitation of Qur'an etc.

It is also narrated that after the dead body is buried, the spirit
returns back and maintains relation with the body. When it sees that the
people are returning back, knows that from now on it is destined to live
alone. It becomes restless, and says: “Alas! Those children of mine whom
I pought up with love and care have abandoned me, and now my only
companions are my deeds (A'amal) which I performed while alive”. The
first glad tidings which a believer receives is in the grave: “Oh you
who believe! Allah has forgiven your sins and the sins of those who
attended your funeral”.

\<
