Chapter -iii- Intermediate Period (barzakh)
===========================================

**The state of the body in Barzakh**

One of the dreaded stages of the Hereafter is ‘Barzakh’. ‘Barzakh’
literally means a curtain or a separator which lies between two things
and does not allow them to meet each other. For example, sweet water and
bitter water both flow side by side, but Almighty Allah has set between
them a barrier so they do not intermingle. As Allah says in the Qur'an,
“He has made the two seas to flow freely (so that) they meet together,
Between them is a barrier which they cannot pass”. (Surah-ar-Rahmah :
19-20). But Barzakh in this context means that Allah has placed a
curtain between this world and the hereafter. Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq
(A.S.) says, “By Allah! I fear a lot for your state in Barzakh”. The
narrator asked Imam (A.S.) as to what was Barzakh? Imam Sadiq (A.S.)
replied that, It is a period starting from death till Qayamat. (Biharul
Anwar)

“And before them is a barrier (Barzakh) until the day they are raised”.
(Surah-al-Mo'menoon : 100)

**The period of Barzakh and the body**

Barzakh is also called a corporeal or a non-material world (Alame
Misali) because some what it seems like this world, but it's nature and
matter is totally different. After we die the other world seems quite
vast when compared to this world, seems quite vast when compared to this
world, and this world can be compared to the womb of the mother. In the
same manner the body of a human in Barzakh will be the likeness of the
one in this world. It means that in Barzakh the physical components of a
man will be the same as in this world, but will be independent of
matter. In fact it will be more pleasant and lighter (Lateef) than air,
and will be transparent.

Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) says, “If you look at the corpareal /
imaginal body (Badane Misali, in Barzakh), you will say that it the same
one (as in this world).

If one looks at one's dead father in a dream, he will surely say that
his appearence and bodily components were the same as when he was alive.
But the reality is that his body and matter lie buried in the grave.

The eyes remain the same but devoid of the shortage of sight which may
necessitate the wearing of spectacles. The other bodily parts also do
not become exhausted or weak, the teeth do not fall off, and a believer
rejoices in eternal youth, while a non-believer suffers the impediments
of old age, which act as Allah's chatisement.

Philosophers & thinkers compare this body (in Barzakh) to the image in
a mirror, but with two differences: (1) The Corporeal Body (Badane
Misali) is firm & free, and independent of the mirror, and (2) It is
intelligent, wise, and understanding as against the image in the mirror.
It can also be compared to a dream in which we travel from one place to
another in the twinkle of an eye. In Barzakh the body consumes variety
of food and drinks, and hears the music, the likeness of which can not
be found in this world. The spirit (Rooh) also rejoices in the pleasures
along with the corporeal body. In fact the food and drinks of that world
are more tasty and free from material dirt and uncleanliness as stated
in traditions (Ahadees).

One thing gets converted to another according to the wish of the
believer. Plums turn into grapes, and grapes into any other fruit, as
will be discussed in the incident of Hazrat Hamza (A.S.)

**Difficulty of Impression and Effects**

In the state of Barzakh the intellect of the corporeal body is very
strong. The pleasures which we derive in this world are nothing as
compared to those in that stage. Because the reality lies there whereas
here is the likeness of it. If a ‘Hoorie’ looks towards this world and
lifts up the veil an inch off her face, the light of the sun would seem
nothing in front of the light emanating from her glowing face. And the
eyes would turn blind, hence complete beauty lies there. “Surely We have
made whatever is on the earth an embellishment for it, so that we may
try them (as to) which of them is the best in deeds”. Surah-al-Kahf:7.

**Incident**

Allamah Naraqi relates in ‘Khazaen’ : In the days of my youth in
Isfahan, one day I accompanied my respected father and companions to a
friend's place on the day of ‘Naoroz’ to meet him. The friend lived near
a cemetary. To relieve ourselves of fatigue, and also with the intention
of getting reward, we stopped by the graveyard to recite ‘fateha’ for
the departed mo'meneen. One of our friends who was humorous turned
towards a grave and said, “O occupant of the grave! will you accept us
as your guests today on this day of Idd”? Back came the reply, “Sure,
next week on tuesday you all will be my guests”. We were horrified and
concluded that only some days of our lives were left. We started
performing good deeds and rectifying the bad ones.

We also started writing our wills. The day of tuesday dawned but none
of us died. We met together went to the cemetary. One of us went forward
and called to the grave, “O occupant of the grave! Please do as you had
promised”, and back came the reply, “Welcome”. Suddenly we realized that
the curtains of the hidden were lifted off our eyes, and we saw a green
and beautiful garden in which were flowing streams of cool and pleasant
water. The gardens were laden with colourful fruits, and beautiful birds
were praising Allah on the trees. We reached a mansion in the midst of
the garden. When he saw us he got up to welcome. Different types of
fruits and sweets were served, the likeness of which cannot be imagined
nor described.

We ate to our full, but were still not satiated, and wished to eat
more. After finishing the meals we sat for sometime, then we got up to
ask the person's permission to leave. He bade us farewell and came to
leave us till the door. My father asked him as to who he was, and why
did Allah bestow His blessings on him so that he had got the capacity to
feed the whole mankind, and also asked him as to what the place was. The
man replied that, “I am a native of your town, a butcher by profession,
and the reason for these blessings to be bestowed on me are: (1) I never
weighed less at the time of sale, and (2) I always recited the Prayers
(Namaz) on time all throughotu my life. As soon as the voice of
‘Takbeer’ reached my ears, I left my work and proceeded for Namaz in the
Mosque. Hence I am offered this position here.

Last week when you requested me for a feast, I had not obtained
permission for it, while this week I have got the permission and hence
invited you”. Then we individually asked him our ages and he answered. I
asked him my age and he said that I would live for another fifteen
years. Then he wished us farewell, and we reached the same place in the
cemetary. (Ma'ad)

**The pleasures in Barzakh are not perishable**

One of the peculiarities of ‘Barzakh’ is that it is eternal and
permanent. None of the things of this world are immortal. Youth is
overshadowed by the darkness of old-age. Till the time the morsel of
food remains in the mouth, a person derives pleasure and taste, and then
it disappeares. Flowers turn dry after a period, and hence nothing
remains eternal. But Barzakh and it's pleasures are eternal because it
is not made up of matter or elements like other things and hence does
not cease to exist.

This can be explained by a narrative in ‘Darus Salaam’, where in Shaikh
Mahmood Naraqi quotes from Shaikh Mahdi Naraqi. He says that: During my
days in Najaf, there poke a severe famine. I left my house leaving
behind my children who were crying with hunger and thirst so as to
search something for them. I passed through ‘Wadi-us-Salaam’, and
entered there in with the intention of reciting ‘Fateha’ for the
departed souls, and this act would pacify me and make me forget my
sorrow. I saw some people the graveyard with a bier, and they requested
me to join them in the funeral. Being an act of great reward I
accompanied them. They carried the bier and suddenly we entered into a
vast garden.

They took the bier in a huge and beatiful place there in, which had all
the emenities of luxury. I entered through the door and saw a handsome
youth wearing splendid attires seated on a golden throne. As soon as he
saw me, he addressed me by my name and saluted me. He signalled me to go
near him and I replied in the negative. He said “I am the same person
whose funeraly you are attending. I am a native of so and so town and
the people you saw in my funeral were the blessed Angels, who pought me
from my town to this Paradise for the Intermediate (Barzakh) period”.
When I heard these words from the lips of the person, I forgot my sorrow
and started adoring the beauties of the garden. When I came out of the
garden, I saw some other places, and when I observed carefully I saw my
departed parents and relatives standing at the doors. When they saw me,
they invited me to enter in. I entered there in and they invited me for
food, which was very delicious. While eating I suddenly remembered my
wife and children who were dying of hunger and thirst and my face turned
pale. My (father) undrstood and said, “O my son Mahdi! What is the
reason for your sorrow”? I replied, “O father! While was eating, I
suddenly remembered that my wife and children are dying of hunger at
home, and that made me sad”.

He pointed towards a stock of rice and told me to take as much as I
desired. I spread out my cloak and filled it to the full. And as soon as
I got up, I found myself standing in the same place in ‘Wadi-us-Salaam,
with my cloak filled with rice. I hurried towards my house and we ate to
our full. Quite some time passed, but the stock never got over. One day
my wife asked me as to where I got it from. She forced me to tell her,
and I had to narrate the whole incident to her. She got up in excitement
to take some rice from it so as to eat it, but it had disappeared.

Hence it can be concluded from this incident that the pleasures of
Barzakh are eternal and not perishable.

On the other hand if we hear the voices of those who are being punished
in Barzakh, we shall forget the sorrows of this world.

It is narrated in the third volume of ‘Biharul-Anwar’ that the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.S) said: Before the Proclaimation of Prophethood, once
when I was grazing the cattle, I suddenly saw that the cattle stopped
grazing and looked frightened. I wondered as to what was the reason for
such a change, because nothing unusual happened at that time. When
Jipa'eel came with the Revelation (Wahy) I asked him the reason for such
a change. Jipa'eel answered, “O Prophet of Allah! When the people who
are being punished in Barzakh scream with anguish & pain, their voices
are not heard by human-beings and geniis, but animals can hear it and
hence become tense. There are many incidents to support this.

It is written in ‘Darus Salaam’ that the great Scholar Allamah Sayyed
Hashim Husain Bahrani says: In Najaf there lived a shopkeeper who
counseled and adviced people daily at his shop after Namaze Zohr. At
that moment his shop would be full of people who gathered to hear the
guidance.

One day an Indian prince came to settle in Najaf, and planed to proceed
on a journey. He came to the shopkeeper to keep his ornaments and
valuables as a trust with him, because he thought the shopkeeper to be a
trust-worthy believer. After some days when he returned back from the
journey, he went to the shop-keeper to take back the things entrusted to
him. The shop-keeper totally denied having taken the valuables from him.
The prince was dejected and went to the Shrine of The Commander of the
faithful Ali (A.S.) and called out, “O Ali! I left my motherland and
came and settled here near your grave, and entrusted my wealth to the
shop-keeper believing him to be a trust-worthy person. But alas, now he
denies having my wealth and I have no witness to prove my claim except
you”. In the night he dreamt that Hazrat Ali (A.S.) came and told him to
go in the morning to the gate of the city. And when the gate opens, the
first person to enter there in would help him acquire his lost wealth.
He got up the next morning and went to the city-gate.

The first person to enter the gate was an old and feeble man, who
looked virtuous and was carrying a load of wood on his head. He entered
the city and sat down to sell the wood so as to earn some thing for his
family. The prince felt ashamed to ask for his help and returned to the
Shrine. He again dreamt the same, and the next day again went to the
city-gate and saw the old man and returned back. When on the third night
he dreamt the same, in the morning he went to the gate and finding the
old man related the whole incident to him. The man thought for a moment
and told the prince to come to the shop-keeper's place after (midday
prayer) Namaze Zohr, and he would get his wealth back if Allah desires.
After the Namaz people as usual gathered at the shop and the shop-keeper
got up to advice. Suddenly the old man got up and requested the
shop-keeper to let him say something, to which he agreed.

The old man said, “O people! I am so and so, the son of so and so, and
I am worried about the Rights of people (Haqqun Naas)/ Praise be to
Allah! For I have no lust for the wealth of this world, and am a
conented man and passing my days in solitude. I would like to narrate to
you an incident of my life and warn you about the wrath of Allah, and
the punishment of Hell, and the hardships of Qayamat. Once i was in
great debt and hence borrowed ten ‘Qiraat’ (equal to 21 dinars) from a
jew and promised him to pay half a ‘Qiraat’ daily. I fulfilled my
promise for ten days. On the eleventh day the jew was not to be found
anywhere. I inquired about his whereabouts and was told that he had
migrated to Baghdad. After some days I dreamt that Qayamat had dawned,
and I was being pought for reckoning alongwith others. After giving my
account, I was sent towards Paradise. While passing on the Poole Serat,
I suddenly saw the jew appearing from the raging fire below and he
stopped my way.

He asked me to return him back the five ‘Qiraats’ which I owed him. I
told him that I had no intention of usurping his money, and that I had
searched for him, but he was nowhere to be found. He said that he would
not permit me to go any further until I return his trust back to him. I
said that I did not have anything at that moment, to which he replied
that in that case I should allow him to place his finger on my chest.

I agreed to it. As soon as he placed his fingers on my chest, I felt
intense pain, and I woke up from my sleep. I saw that there was a wound
on my chest, which is not yet cured, and is still fresh. Whatever
treatment I do is of no avail”. Saying this the old man opened his shirt
buttons and showed the wound to the people. When the people saw the
wound, they started weeping and wailing and asked repentence from Allah.
The shop-keeper who was also hearing this was very much effected and
regretted his sin. He called the Indian prince and returned him his
wealth, and apologized sincerely for his sin. (Ma'ad)

**The effect of the spirit (Rooh) on the body and it's relation with
The grave**

The spirit receives reward or punishment (as the case may be) in the
grave. But due to it's long relation with the body, the body also feels
pain and is effected. Those people who say that it is of no use to visit
the graves, for the spirit (Rooh) of the believer is not present there
but is in wadi-us-Salaam, this is not true. The answer to this ignorant
talk is the tradition (Hadees) of Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) who says
that Verily the Spirit (Rooh) of the believer is in Wadi-us-salaam, but
it surely keeps an eye on what is happening in the grave. It also looks
at the people who have come to visit his grave. Imam (A.S.) compares the
spirit to the sun. Even though the sun is not on the earth but is on the
sky, the entire earth is illuminated by it's light, in the same manner
the spirit is in ‘Wadi-us-Salaam’ but it keeps contact with the body.

The great Traditionist Sayyed Ne'matullah Jazaeri narrates an incident
in his book “Anware No'maniyah” that once Shah Isma'il Safawi came to
Karbala. He heard the people denying and doubting the faithfulness of
Hurr bin Yazid-ar-Riyahi (one of the companions of Imam Husain, who was
martyred in Karbala). He gave the order to dig the grave of Hurr.

When the grave of Hurr was opened, people saw the corpse of Hurr lying
afresh. A kerchief was tied on his forehead, regarding which it is
related, that on the day of ‘Ashoora’ (the tenth of Moharram), Imam
Husain (A.S.) himself had tied a kerchief on the bleeding forehead of
Hurr. Shah Isma'il ordered that the kerchief should be removed and given
to him so as to be kept in his shroud. As soon as the kerchief was
removed, blood started oozing from the forehead of Hurr, hence it was
teid back. Shah Isma'il ordered another kerchief to be tied instead of
it. When this was done the blood ceased to stop flowing. The Shah was
helpless and ordered the kerchief to remain at it's original place. He
then acknowledged the faithfulness and high honour of Hurr. Then he
ordered a Shrine to be erected on the grave.

In the same manner Shaikh Kulaini and Shaikh Sadooq (two great Shi'ah
Ulamas)'s graves were opened, and their bodies were found fresh therein
as if sleeping in peace. The Henna applied on the hands of Shaikh Sadooq
also remained intact even after so much time. The signs of life were
visible from his body.

On the other hand, when the spirits of the non-believers are being
punished, their bodies are also effected. When Bani abbas gained victory
over Bani Abbas qained victory over Bani Ummayah and entered Damascus,
they started exhuming their graves. When the grave of Yazid ibne
Mu'awiyah was opened, only a lump of mud was found instead of his body.
When a person was being buried in a graveyard in the city of Qum, a
flame of fire erupted from his grave which destroyed all it's
surroundings. In Pakistan too many incidents have taken place which are
written in newspapers. (Ma'ad).

**The Valley of Peace (Wadi-us-Salam)**

Aquestion may arise in the minds of people as to where does such a vast
event of Barzakh take place. A human's intellect is beyond it's
understanding. In traditions (Ahadees) this universe is compared to the
mother's womb, and the state of Barzakh to the expansive world outside
it. If a child in the mother's womb is informed about a vast and
expansive world outside, it will be difficult for it to grasp it. In the
same manner human intellect cannot understand the state of the expansive
Barzakh. As is said in the Holy Qur'an: “So no soul knows what is hidden
for them of that which will refresh the eyes”. (Surah-as-Sajdah: 17)

Whatever as come down to us from the Holy Aimmah (A.S.) has to be
relied upon. It is related in traditions that whenever a believer
(Mo'min) dies anywhere in the east or the west, his spirit is taken to
the Valley of Peace (Wadi-us-Salaam) in Najaf near the grave of the
Commander of the faithful Ali (A.S.). In another tradition Najaf is
described as an assembling place for the high-honoured and blessed
Angels (Malaeka). And if the dead man is a believer in the Holy Aimmah
(A.S.), and is buried in Najaf, he rejoices abundant bliss. While if a
sinful person is buried in Najaf and his spirit is being punished in
‘Wadi-e-Barhoot’, his spirit strengthens it's union with the body and
hence is relieved of the punishment, as has been related in earlier
incidents. (Ma'ad).
\<
