Chapter -iv- Resurrection (qayamat)
===================================

Regarding Qayamat Allah says in the Qur'an, “It will be momentous in
the heavens and the earth, It will not come on you but of a sudden”.
(Surah-al-A'araf : 187) Allamah Qutubuddin Rawandi relates from Imam
Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) that once Prophet Isa (A.S.) asked H.Jipa'eel as
to when would Qayamat come? As soon as Jipa'eel heard about Qayamat, he
started trembling and fell down unconscious. When he regained
consciousness he said, “O Ruhullah! Verily you know more about it than
me”, and he recited the above Verse (Ayah).

Shaikh Ali bin Ipaheem Qummi quotes Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) as
saying that once H.Jipa'eel was seated in the presence of the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.S.) Suddenly he looked towards the sky and turned pale
because of terror. He asked the Prophet to give him refuge. The Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.S.) looked towards the sky where Jipa'eel had seen. He
saw an Angel whose wings spread from the east to the west as if covering
it. He looked towards the Holy Prophet and said, “O Mohammad (S.A.W.S.)!
I have come down with an order from Allah. Choose from among these two
any one, either kingdom and Prophethood, or Allah's slavery and
Prophethood”.

The Holy Prophet turned towards Jipa'eel and saw that he had regained
strength by then and asked for his advice. Jipa'eel told the Prophet to
choose Allah's slavery and Prophethood. The Prophet told the Angel that
he opted for Allah's slavery and Prophethood. Afeter getting the reply,
the Angel placed his right leg on the first heaven, then lifted the
second one and placed it on the second heaven. Likewise he started
climbing the heavens until he reached the seventh heaven. He became
smaller, the size equal to a bird. The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) turned
towards Jipa'eel and said, “I have never seen you so much frightened
before, what is the reason for it”? Jipa'eel answered, “O Prophet! do
you know who this Angel was?

He was Israfeel. From the day Allah created the heavens and the earth,
Israfeel never came down to the earth. When I saw him coming down I
assumed that he must have come down to announce the arrival of Qayamat.
Hence the color of my face turned pale due to fright of Qayamat as you
saw. But when I saw that he had come down to give you glad tidings, I
was relieved and regained my consciousness”.

It is related that there is no Angel in the heavens or the earth, skies
or mountains, seas or deserts who do not fear fridays. Because they
think that Qayamat may come on that very day. It is also narrated that
whenever the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) would talk about Qayamat, there
would be sternness in his voice, and his cheeks would turn red.

Shaikh Mufeed quotes in ‘Al Irshad’ that when the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) returned to Madina from the expedition of Tabook, Amr bin
Ma'dikarib came to visit him. The Prophet said to him, “Submit to Islam
Amr, then Allah will protecet you from the greatest terror”. “What is
the greatest terror”? he asked, “for I fear nothing”. It is said that
Amr was a very pave and strong man. His pavery can be proven by the fact
that he had conquered many areas. His sword was famous by the name of
‘Shamsheere Samsaam’. One stroke of his sword would cut asunder the neck
of a camel. During the caliphate of Umar ibne Khattab, Umar told Amr to
gift him his sword. Amr gave it to him. Umar hit it hard but it had no
effect.

He threw it in a rage saying that it was no good. To which Amr replied,
“O King! You asked for my sword, not my hands”. Umar became furious at
this reply and ordered him to be e. When Amr told the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) that I fear nothing, the Prophet said, “Amr, it is not as you
think and suppose. Indeed there will be one great shout among the
people. Not one person will remain who does not attend, nor a living
person who does not die, except as Allah wishes.

Then there will be another great shout among them, and those who are
dead will assemble and all get into ranks. The heavens will split open
and the earth will be crushed. The mountains will be cut asunder and
fire will hurl them like sparks. No one who has a soul will remain,
except his heart be stripped bare while he mentions his sins and is
occupied with his soul, except as Allah wishes. Then, where will you be,
Amr at this”? “Indeed I am hearing of a terrible event”, said Amr. Then
he believed in Allah and His Apostle. People from his tribe also
accepted Islam and returned back.

Verily Qayamat is full of fright and terror, so much so that even the
dead tremble in their graves. It is narrated through many great
personalities, that when the dead men where raised back to life by them,
they saw that their hair had turned grey. They asked them the reason. To
which they replied that, “When we were told to arise, we thought that
Qayamat had come, and our hair turned grey due to it's fright”.

**Those A'mal which eases the trouble of Qayamat**

I state hereunder ten such A'amals which eases the troubles and
difficulties of Qayamat:

(1) It is related that a person who recites Surah-al-Yusuf daily during
the day or night, will arise on the day of Qayamat with the likeness of
the beauty of Prophet Yusuf (A.S.), and will be saved from the fear of
Qayamat. Imam Mohammad-al-Baqir (A.S.) says that a person who recites
Surah-ad-Dukhan in Nafela Prayers or obligatory (Wajib) Namaz, will
remain safe from the fear of Qayamat. Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) says
that a person who recites Surah-al-Ahqaf on the day or night on friday,
will be safe from all fears of this world as well as the hereafter. In
another tradition Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) says that a person who
recites Surah-al-Asr in Supererogatory (Nafela) Prayers, will arise in
delight on the day of Qayamat. His face will be glowing, and his eyes
shining, and he will enter Paradise in this cheerful state.

(2) Shaikh Kulaini narrates from Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) who says
that the Holy Prophet Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) said, that whoever respects a
man with a white beard, Allah will grant him refuge from the fear of the
day of Qayamat.

(3) The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) says, that whoever dies while going to
Mecca or returning from there, will be saved by Allah from the fear of
the day of Qayamat. Shaikh Sadooq quotes the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) as
saying that whoever dies in the courtyard of the Ka'bah or Masjide
Nabawi (in Medina), will arise in a manner that he will be free from all
terror and fear.

(4) Shaikh Sadooq quotes Imam Sadiq (A.S.) as saying that whoever is
buried in the courtyard of the Ka'bah, will be saved from the fright of
Qayamat.

(5) Shaikh Sadooq narrates from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) that He
said, if a person guards himself from sins or the lustful passions (of
his self), only for the sake and fear of Allah, Allah will make the fire
of hell forbidden upon him and keep him away from the fear of Qayamat.

(6) The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) says that Allah will grant refuge from
the fear of Qayamat the man who keeps away from the passions of his
self.

(7) Shaikh Ali bin Ipaheem Qummi narrates from Imam Mohammad-al-Baqir
(A.S.) who said that whoever suppresses his anger even after having
power (to retaliate), Allah will fill his heart with faith (Eeman), and
save him from the terror of Qayamat.

(8) One of the reasons for a person to be free from the fear of Qayamat
is the Love (Walayah) of Ali (A.S.). The verdict of the Qur'an regarding
it is that it is the best deed. As said in the Holy Qur'an: “Surely as
for those for whom the good (Husna) has already gone forth from Us, they
shall be kept far off from it. They will not hear it's faintest sound,
and they shall abide in that which their souls long for. The great
fearful event shall not grieve them, and the Angels shall meet them”.

(Surah-al-Ambiyah: 101-3) The Holy Prophet Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) said, “O
Ali ! You and Your Shi'ahs will remain under the protection on the day
of Qayamat, and the (above mentioned) verse (Ayah) bears witness to it”.
The word ‘Husna’ used in the above verse (Ayah) means Love (Walayah) of
Ali (A.S.) and his Progeny (Ahlulbait). As the Holy Qur'an promises,
“whoever pings good, he shall have better than it, and they shall be
secure from terror on that day”. (Surah-an-Naml : 89) It is quoted in
many books of exegesis (Tafseer) of Qur'an viz. Kashaf, Sa'labi, Kabeer
etc. that whoever shall arise with the ‘Goodness’ (Husna) will be
secured on the day of Qayamat, and ‘Husna’ here means Ali (A.S.).
Whoever dies bearing love of Ahlulbait (A.S.) will become pure after
repentence, and when he shall arise on the day of Qayamat, a cloud will
give shelter on his head, and he will remain safe from the terror of
Qayamat and enter Paradise in this manner.

(9) Shaikh Sadooq quotes Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) as saying that if
a person helps a believer pother (mo'min), and free him from anxiety,
and fulfills his desires, Allah will offer him seventy two types
ofavours (ne'mat). One of them is that He will increase his sustenance
(Rizq) in this world, and seventy one are that He will guard him against
the terrors and hardships of Qayamat.

Many traditions (Ahadees) have been narrated in praise of fulfilling a
believer pother's wishes. Imam Mohammad-al-Baqir (A.S.) says that, “If a
mo'min goes to fulfill the desires of his pother believer, Allah orders
the angels to give shade of seventy thousand veils over his head, and
before he steps out (to go for help) Allah writes down many virtues in
his deed-sheet”. Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) says that, “Fulfilling a
pother believer's wishes is greater than the performance of Haj, Haj,
Haj (and repeated it ten times. It means that it is greater than the
performance of ten Haj).

It is also narrated that in the Bani Israil there was a pious
worshipper who had taken upon himself the obligation to fulfill the
wishes of others. Shaikh Shazan bin Japail quotes from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) that on the door of the second heaven he saw the following
written:

There is no God but Allah, Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) is His Apostle, Ali
(A.S.) is His friend. Verily everything has got a dress, and the dress
of the Holy Prophet on the day of Qayamat will be the following four
qualities: (1) To fondle with affection the head of an orphan (yateem),
(2) To show kindness towards widows, (3) To go to fulfill the wishes of
a believer pother, and (4) to take care of the poor and the needy.

Many Ulamas and great men strived to help the believer pothers, and
many incidents have been narrated which need not be quoted here for
pevity's sake.

(10) Shaikh Kulaini narrates from Imam Ali-ar-Reza (A.S.) that whoever
goes to the grave of a believer pother, places his hand on it and
recites Surah-al-Qadr seven times, Allah will keep him away from the
troubles of Qayamat. In another tradition it is narrated that while
reciting Surah-al-Qadr on the grave, one should turn towards the Qibla
and dig one's fingers in the mud (of the grave).

I have seen in the “Majmu'ah” of Shaheede Saani that when he went to
the grave of his teacher Fakhrul Muhaqqeqeen, he said that the buried
person (Fakhrul Muhaqqeqeen) related from his father (Allamah Hilli) who
related from Imam Ali-ar-Reza (A.S.) who said that whoever goes to the
grave of his pother believer and after reciting Surah-al-Qadr recites
the following du'a, both the dead person as well as the person reciting
it will be safe from the fear of Qavamat.

<p dir="rtl">
اللهم جاف الارض عن جنوبهم وصاعد اليك ارواحهم وزدهم منك رضواناً واسكن
اليهم من رحمتك ما تصل به وحدتهم وتؤنس وحشتهم انك على كل شيء قدير
</p>

**The Trumpet of Israfeel (Soore Israfeel)**

When Almighty Allah will intend to ping forth Qayamat, He will order
Israfeel to blow the trumpet (Soor). The trumpet is large and
illuminated, and has one mouth piece and two tubes, one pointing towards
the earth and other towards the sky. Israfeel will go to the Baitul
Muqaddas (in Je) and while facing the Qibla will blow the trumpet. When
the voice will come out from that side which is towards the earth all
living beings on it shall die, and when the voice will come out from
that side which is towards the sky all living being in it shall also
die. Then Allah will say to Israfeel “Die” and he too shall die. Allah
has described the end of the world in many verses (Ayah) of the
Qur'an.

“When the great event comes to pass, there is no belying its coming to
pass- Abasing (one party), exalting (the other), When the earth shall be
shaking with a (severe) shaking, And the mountains shall be made to
crumble with (an awful) crumbling, so that they shall be scattered
dust”. (Surah-al-Waqe'ah : 1-6)

“On the day when the earth shall be changed into a different earth, and
the Heavens (as well), and they shall come forth before Allah, the One,
the Supreme”. (Surah-al-Ipaheem : 48)

“When the Heavens becomes cleft asunder, And when the stars become
dispersed, And when the seas are made to flow forth, And when the graves
are laid open, Every soul shall know what it has sent before and held
back”. (Surah-al-Infitar : 1-5)

“When the sun is covered, And when the stars darken, And when the
mountains are made to pass away”. (Surah-at-Takwir : 1-3)

“So when the sight becomes dazed, And the moon becomes dark, And the
sun and the moon are pought together”. (Surah-al-Qiyamah: 7-8)

“It will not come on you but of a sudden”. (Surah-al-A'araf : 187)

People will be engrossed in their different activities, some will be
feeding the cattle, some busy in the factories, some weighing things,
while some will be absorbed in sins. But when the trumpet will be blown,
they all shall die as they are.

“So they shall not be able to make a bequest, nor shall they return to
their families”. (Surah-al-Yaseen: 50)

Then the angry voice of Allah will be heard “Where are those men who
walked arrogantly over the earth, where are the kings and the emperors
who prided upon their empires, where are the people who claimed to be
Gods, where are your so called kingdoms. Whose Kingdom is it today”? No
one will have the courage to answer. Then He Himself will say “Verily
Allah's, the Dominant (Qahhar), the Compelling (Jabbar)”. (Ehsanul
Fawaed)

**Resurrection (Qayamat)**

The entire universe will remain destroyed till Allah wishes. Someone
asked Ma'soom (A.S.) regarding this time gap. Ma'soom (A.S.) replied
that, “It will remain like that for forty years”. In another tradition
it is stated that “It will remain like this for four hundred years”.
Therefater it will rain consequently for forty days and all physical
matter will gather together and collect. Israfeel will be the first one
to come to life again. Allah will then command him to blow the trumpet
again, he shall do so and all dead will arise. A voice will then come “O
souls driven forth from the bodies! and the scattered flesh! and the
rotten bones! and the dispersed hairs, come and join together, come
forth to account (for your deeds)”.

The earth will be commanded by Allah to vomit all that lies buried in
it. “And the earth pings forth her burdens”. (Surah-az-Zilzal: 2)

All the matter buried in the earth will come out and join. And the
people will arise and stand together. But each one will have a distinct
state and different voices. The virtuous will be uttering Allah's
praises “Praise be to Allah who has fulfilled what He promised”. While
the sinners will be lamenting while coming out of their graves “O woe to
us! who has raised us up from our sleeping place”. (Surah-al-Yaseen :
52)

It is related in a tradition that one foot will be on the earth while
the other in the grave, and they will be standing in wonder so much so
that thirty thosand years will pass away. This will be the first part of
the punishments of Qayamat.

The believers will say: O Lord! Hasten us to our eternal abode, so that
we may delight in the blessings of Paradise. While the unbelievers will
say: O Lord! Let us remain here, for your wrath is less here (as
compared to the hereafter). (Ma'ad)

\<
