Chapter -v- Coming Out of the Grave
===================================

The time when people will come out of their graves is very horrifying.
Allah says in the Qur'an “Therefore leave them alone to go on with the
false discourses and to sport, until they come face to face with that
day of theirs with which they are threatened. The day on which they
shall come forth from their graves in haste, as if they were hastening
on to a goal, Their eyes cast down, disgrace shall overtake them, that
is the day which they were threatened with”. (Surah-al-Ma'arij :
42-44)

Abdullah ibne Mas'ood says, that once he was in the presence of the
Commander of the faithful Ali (A.S.) when He (A.S.) said, “For every man
there are fifty haulting stations in Qayamat, and each station will be
equal to the span of a thousand years. Here the first haulting place is
when coming out of the grave, where every man will have to wait bare
feet and naked. He will have to bear the agony of hunger and thirst. But
the person who believes in the Unity (Tawheed) of Allah, Proclamation
(Be'asat) of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.), Accounting (Hisaab) and
Resurrection (Qayamat), and bears testimony to the Prophethood
(Nubuwwat) of Prophet Mohammad (S.A.W.S.), and follows the instructions
which have been ordained unto him, will be safe from this agony (of
hunger & thirst)”.

The Commander of the faithful (Amirul Mo'meneen) Ali (A.S.) says in the
‘Nahjul Balagha’: That day would be such that Allah would collect on it
the anteriors and the posteriers, to stand in obedience for giving
accounts, and for reward or recompence of deeds. Sweat would flow upto
their mouths like reins while the earth would be trembling beneath them.
In the best condition among them would be he who has found a resting
place for both his feet and an open place for his peath. (Sermon 101)

Shaikh Kulaini narrates from Imam Jafar-as-Sadiq (A.S.) who said that,
“On the day of Qayamat people will be standing in the presence of the
Almighty like an arrow stretched on the string of the bow”. Just as when
we place an arrow on the bow and stretch it, no place remains, in the
same way on the day of Qayamat people will be standing besides each
other, and there will be no place left to move about for lack of space.
The accursed will be recognised by their faces.

It is appropriate to quote here the various states in which people will
arise out of their graves.

(1) Shaikh Sadooq quotes from Abdullah ibne Abbas who says that he
heard the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) as saying, that the one who doubts the
greatness and high honour of Ali (A.S.), will arise from his grave in a
manner that in his neck will be bound a collar with three hundred thorns
in it, and on each thorn satan will be seated who will be spitting on
his face with rage.

(2) Shaikh Kulaini narrates from Imam Mohammad-al-Baqir (A.S.) who said
that on the day of Qayamat a group of people will be ordered to come out
of their graves in a manner that their hands will be bound with their
necks such firmly that they would not be able to move even an inch. And
for each of them an Angel will be assigned who will be threatening and
ridiculing them, and will proclaim “These are the people who wre given
immense wealth by Allah, but they acted miserly and refused to spend in
the way of Allah”.

(3) Shaikh Sadooq narrates a lenghty tradition from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) in which he said that, “A person who backbites (ghibat) and
thus creates mischief and dissension among two people, Allah will fill
his grave with fire, which will keep burning him till the day of
Qayamat. And as soon as he comes out of his grave (on the day of
Qayamat), Allah will senhd a huge python who will keep biting his flesh,
and he will ultimately be thrown in hell”.

(4) The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) says that a person who looks at
non-intimate (na-mahram) woem nwith lust, Allah will make him come out
of his grave in a manner that he will be bound in chains of fire. After
being pought in this accursed state in front of all the people, Allah
will command him to be thrown into the blazing fire of hell.

(5) Prophet Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) says that on the day Qayamat drunkards
will come out of their graves with a blackened face. Their eyes will be
sunken into their skulls, faces shrunk, and puss will be oozing out of
them. Their tongues will have been pulled out from their necks. In an
authritative narrative in ‘Ilmul Yaqeen’ it is narrated by Mohsin Fayz
Kashani that on the day of Qayamat drunkards will be made to come out of
their graves in a manner that a goblet of wine will be hung in their
necks, and will be holding a glass in their hands. An obnoxious smell
worse than a corpse will be coming out of their bodies, and all those
passing by will be ridiculing them and invoking Allah's curse upon
them.

(6) Shaikh Sadooq relates from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) who said,
that on the day of Qayamat the person with two tongues will arise in a
manner that he will have two tongues in his mouth, one will have been
pulled from behind his neck and the other from the front. Fire will be
coming out of the, which will be burning his entire body. It will then
be proclaimed that this is the person who spoke with two tongues in the
world. (The person referred to here is the one who confronted people in
the world with two faces and spoke with two tongues).

(7) It is related that the person who consumes interest will arise on
the day of Qayamat in a manner that he will be having a large belly,
which will be lying on the ground. He will try to bend and pick it up,
but will not be able to do so. Because of this state of his, people will
recognise that he is an interest-eater.

(8) It is narrated in “Anwaare No'maniyah” from the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) that He said, that the Almighty Allah shall collect the one
who beats the tambour (a pass drum) with a tarnished face on the day of
Qayamat. And in his hand will be a tambour of fire which he will be
hitting on his own head. Seventy thousand Angels shall beat him in the
head and face with their clubs of fire. And the musicians & singers, and
those who beat the drum shall arise blind & deaf on that day.

“The guilty shall be recognized by their marks, so they shall be seized
by the forelocks and the feet”. (Surah-ar-Rahman 41) (Ma'ad)

Those A'mal which are useful for the people in Qayamat.

(1) It is related in a tradition, that for a person who attends a
funeral and walks alongwith the bier, Allah appoints Angels to accompany
him in his grave till Qayamat.

(2) Shaikh Sadooq quotes Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) as saying that a
person who relieves the troubles and helps a believer pother, Allah will
keep him safe from the troubles of the hereafter, and he will arise
contented and happy from his grave.

(3) Shaikh Kulaini and Shaikh Sadooq quote in a lenghty tradition from
Sadeer Sayrnee that Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) said that for all the
believers who arise from their graves on the day of Qayamat, Allah will
appoint a corporeal body (Jisme Misali) who will be walking in front of
him. Whenever the believer feels pain or is grieved, it will pacify him
and give glad tidings that Allah has forgiven him and blessed him, and
it will continue doing so till they reach the place for accounting.
Allah will take his account leniently and will order him to enter
Paradise. The (corporeal) body will still be walking in front of him.
The believer will tell the body, “My Allah bless you, you removed me
from my grave and gave me glad tidings about Allah's forgiveness and
mercy. You are indeed a sincere friend, for verily I have now witnessed
Allah's blessings & mercy (as you said). Now tell me who you are”? And
it will reply, “I am that very happiness which you presented to your
pother in faith in the world. Hence Allah appointed me to accompany you
in this difficult journey and give you glad tidings”.

(4) Shaikh Kulaini quotes Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) as saying, that
if a person gives clothes to his believer pother in the summer or the
winter, it becomes incumbent upon Allah to clothe him with the heavenly
attires, and to ward off difficulty during death and in the grave. When
he will come out of his grave on the day of Qayamat, the Angels will
come to greet him and give glad tidings of Allah's mercy.

Allah says in the Qur'an: “The great fearful event shall not grieve
them, and the Angels shall meet them: This is your day which you were
promised”. (Surah-al-Ambiya : 103)

(5) Sayyed ibne Tawoos writes in ‘Iqbal’ that the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) said, that the person who recites the following supplication
(du'a) one thousand times in the month of Sha'ban, Allah will write in
his account one thousand years of worship, and will forgive his sins of
one thousand years. And on the day of Qayamat when he will arise from
his grave, his face will be shining like a full moon, and his name will
be written among the truthful ones (Siddiqeen):

<p dir="rtl">
لا إله إلاّ الله وَلا نَعْبُدُ إلاّ إيّاهُ مُخْلِصينَ لَهُ الدّينَ
وَلَوْ كَرِهُ المُشْرِكون
</p>

َ (6) To recite Dua'e Jawshane Kabeer in the first part of the month of
Ramazan is also beneficial.

(7) Piety and Virtue are the apparels of the believer. And on the day
of Qayamat the pious and virtuous believers will come in their
clothings. These are the people for whom Allah promises that they shall
not arise naked.

**Facts reqarding Resurrection (Qayamat)**

Shaikh Tabarsi in “Majma'ul Bayan” quotes from Bara' bin Azib who said,
that one day Ma'az bin Jabal was seated in the presence of the Holy
prophet (S.A.W.S.) in the house of Abu Ayyub Ansari. Ma'az asked the
Holy Prophet regarding the eighteenth verse (Ayah) of Surah-an-Naba' :
“The day on which the trumpet shall be blown so you shall come forth in
hosts.” The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) replied, “O Ma'az! You have asked me
a very horrifying question”. Then he started weeping and said, “Some
people from my Ummah will arise from their graves in then different
states: Some will have the face of monkeys, while some pigs. Some will
be walking upside down on their heads. Some of them will be blind and
will not be able to walk. Some will be deaf & dumb and will not
understand anything. Some will be in a state that their tongues will be
hanging out of their mouths, filthy water will be coming out of their
mouths which they will be licking with their tongues. Some people will
arise with amputated hands and feet. Some will be hanging from the
panches of trees made of fire. Some will be more rotten than a corpse
and emitting a repugnant odour. And some will be wearing long garments
of tar which will have been stuck to their skins and flesh. Those having
the face of pigs will be the ones who ate unlawful (haram) property eg.
pibe etc. Those walking upside down on their heads and the blind ones
will be the unjust and oppressive rulers. The deaf & dumb will be the
ones who prided upon their knowledge (Ilm) and worship (Ibadah). The
ones licking their tongues will be the Scholars (Ulama) and Judges
(Qazis), who did not practise what they preached. The ones with
amputated hands & feet will be the ones who troubled their neighbours in
the world and oppressed them. The ones hanging from the tree panches
will be the ones who backbited alongwith the kings and rulers (to please
them), and instigated them by creating mischief. The ones emitting a
repugnant odour will be the ones who acted according to their lusts and
passions, and did not give Allah's Rights.

The ones wearing garments of tar will be the haughty and arrogant
people”.

Muhaddise Kashani writes in ‘Aynul Yaqeen’ that on the day of Qayamat
some people will arise in the manner that their faces will be even worse
than monkeys and pigs.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) once said that “On the day of Qayamat,
people will arise in three different conditions. Some will be riding an
animal, some will be walking on foot, while some will be walking on
their faces”. The narrator (rawi) asked him as to how could they walk on
their faces, to which the Prophet replied, “The Almighty who taught them
to walk on their feet certainly has the power to make them walk on their
faces”.

That day will be equal to 50000 vears.

“(that) day the measure of which is fifty thousand years”
(Surah-al-Ma'arij : 4).

It is written in the third volume of ‘Biharul Anwaar’ that Ma'soom
(A.S.) has said that Qayamat has fifty haulting stations, and each
station is equal to a thousand years. The evil doers will have to wait
for a thousand years in each station”. The calculation of years is
according to the time of this world, but there will not be any sun or
moon (for days and nights). Man will be able to see all those things
which he could not see in the world at night. And all the deeds which
men committed concealing from one another will be made apparent in front
of all. In another place Allah says: “And what they never thought of
shall become plain to them from Allah”. (Surah-az-Zumar: 47) This world
is a dark world, people are not aware of what is hidden in other's
minds, in fact he is not aware of himself. But Qayamat is a day of
righteousness.

The sun of reality will shine there for a thousand years, and we will
realize as to what we ourselves were, and what our companions were.

The first station here is of astonishment. As related earlier that man
will stand at the mouth of his grave in astonishment for years. At this
moment except humming no other voice will reach his ears.

“And the voices shall be low before the Beneficent God so that you
shall not hear aught but a soft sund”. (Surah-at-Taha : 108)
And they will try to call another, but their hearts will come to their
throats because of fear.
“When hearts shall rise up to the throats, grieving inwardly”.
(Surah-al-Mo'min: 18).
Then the second station will be of companionship where people will
inquire about the state of one another.
“And some of them shall advance towards others questioning each other”.
(Surah-at-Toor : 25)
In this way people will cross one station and another. They will be
scattered like moths.
“The day on which men shall be as scattered moths”. (Surah-al-Qare'ah :
4) And will flee from their own parents, pothers and children.
“They day on which a man shall fly from his pother, and his mother and
his father, and his spouse and his son”. (Surah-al-Abasa : 34-36)
It will be a day when people will have no escape because they will be
surrounded by the Angels from all sides.
“O assembly of the jinn and men! If you are able to pass through the
regions of the heavens and the earth, then pass through”
(Surah-ar-Rahman: 33).
“Man shall say on that day: Whither to fly to”. (Surah-al-Qiyamah : 10)
No way, none will be able to run away.
“By no means, there shall be no place of refuge. With your Lord alone
shall on that day be the place of rest” (Surah-al-Qiyamah : 11,12)

There is no other way except to stand in front of the Almighty. Then
they will reach the station of questioning. Everyone will ask their
friends and relatives to give them some of their good deeds. A father
will try to put an obligation on his son by saying that, “In the world I
bore troubles to get comforts for you. I remained hungry but fed you,
now atleast give me one of your good deeds in turn”. The son will reply,
“O father! At this moment I am more helpless than you are”. No one will
pay any heed to anyone's requests. (Ma'ad)
\<
