Chapter -vi- Scrolls of Deeds (name A'amal)
===========================================

Allah says in the Qur'an: “And when the books (of deeds) are spread”.
(Surah-at-Takweer : 10). It is one of the important stages of the
hereafter and belief in it is incumbent. It is stated in the Qur'an :
“And most surely there are keepers over you, Kiraman katebeen, they know
what you do”. (Surah-al-Infitar: 10-12). In another place the two Angels
are also referred to as Raqeeb and ‘Ateeb’. Whatever a man does, or
sees, or even intends doing, is noticed and written down by these two
Angels. Someone asked Imam (A.S.) as to how could ‘Kiraman-Katebeen’
know of the intentions (niyyah) of people (to perform good or bad
deeds), so as to record them.

The Imam (A.S.) replied that, “When a person intends doing a good deed,
sweet fragrance emits from his mouth. The Angels smell this fragrance
and come to know. Whereas when a person intends doing an evil deed, a
foul odour emits from his mouth, and the Angels become aware”. If a
person intends doing a good deed, one good deed is written down in his
scrolls, and if he performs that intended deed, ten good deeds are
written down. Whereas if a person intends doing an evil deed, the same
is not written down in his scrolls till he actually performs it. As
written in the Qur'an: “Whoever pings a good deed, he shall have ten
like it, and whoever pings an evil deed, he shall be recompensed only
with the like of it, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly.”
(Surah-al-An'aam : 161).

It is one of the countless mercies of Allah that when a person commits
a sin, ‘Ateed’ tries to enter it in his scrolls, but ‘Raqeeb’ tells him
to wait lest the person may feel ashamed and apologize for his act.

He does not record the deed for five or seven hours. And if within that
period the person does not repent, Ateed says: “Verily he is shameless”,
and then records one evil deed in his scrolls.

It is stated in traditions (Ahadees) that every man has two scrolls of
deeds, first in which are recorded all good and virtuous deeds, and
second in which are recorded all good and virtuous deeds, and second in
which are recorded all bad and evil ones. All the acts of men are
written in it, even to the extent that the air which he blows out of his
mouth to lit a fire is also recorded.

“And everything they have done is in the writings, And verything small
and bigis written down”. (Surah-al-Qamar : 52,53)

Shaikh Sadooq relates in “E'eteqadatul Imamiyah”, that once the
Commander of the faithful Ali (A.S.) passed by some youths who were busy
in vain and useless gossip, and wre laughing. He (A.S.) said, “Why do
you blacken your scrolls (of deeds) with such vain talks”?

They said, “O Master! are these also recorded”? Imam Ali (a.s.)
replied, “Yes, and even the peath that you exhale. The reward of
removing a thorn or a stone or a skin from the path of other people are
also recorded. These small deeds too do not go wasted”. (Ma'ad)

“Come and read my Scrolls”.

“Then as for him who is given his book in his right hand, he will say:
Lo! read my book, Surely I knew that I shall meet my account. So he
shall be in a life of pleasure, in a lofty position”. (Surah-al-Haqqah :
19-22). A child who secures first rank in his school is so excited and
happy, that he calls out to his friends “Come and see my result, that I
have passed in the first rank”. In the same manner, on the day of
Qayamat, a believer (mo'min) will be given his scrolls in his right
hand, and he will call out in excitement: “Lo! come and read my book. My
Prayers (Namaz), Fasts (Siyam), and other deeds are accepted by Allah.
Come and have a look at them. Surely I knew that I shall meet my
account. In the world I was always worried about what would be the
outcome of my deeds on the day of Qayamat. Today my accounting is over”.
So he shall be in a life of pleasure. Verily the person will be
fortunate, and will remain in eternal bliss in Paradise. While the
unfortunate child who has failed in his exams, passes through the narrow
lanes hiding from people's sight with his had bowed down in shame.
Sometimes he wishes that he had died, and sometimes pacifies himself.
This will be the state of the evil-doers on that day. “And as for him
who is given his book in his left hand he shall say: O would that my
book had never been given to me, And I had not known what my account
was, O would that it had made an end (of me), My wealth has awailed me
nothing”. (Surah-al-Haqqah: 25-28)

“And as for him who is given his book behind his back, he shall call
for perdition, and enter into burning fire”. (Surah-al-Inshiqaq :
10-12)

The (sinner) person will be given his scrolls from behind, in a manner
that his right hand will be tied with his neck, and his left hand will
be stretched behind. The scrolls will then be given in his left hand and
it will be said unto him “Read your scrols”. He will say, “How can I see
what's behind so as to read”. Then his neck will be twisted around. In
some narratives it is stated that his neck will be turned around pulling
him by the beard. And it will be said unto him, “Read your book, your
own self is sufficient as a reckoner against you this day”.
(Surah-al-Bani Israeel : 14)

He will read his scrolls of deeds and cry out “Sabbora” (perdition)

“Woe to us! What a book is this! It does nto omti a small one nor a
great one, but members them (all), and what they had done they shall
find present (there), and your Lord does not deal unjustly with anyone”.
(Surah-al-Kahf : 49) (Ma'ad).

Refusal to accept the Scrolls.

It is narrated that many people at that time will refuse to accept what
is written in the scrolls, and will say, “O Allah! the deeds and actions
written in these scrolls are surely not our's”

Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) says, that at that time Allah will ping
forth the Angels (who write the scrolls) to testify. They will say, “O
Allah! Verily these are Your own Angels and will testify in Your favour,
while the reality is that we have not committed these acts”, and they
will swear upon it.

As said in the Qu'ran: “On the day that Allah will raise them up all,
then they will swear to Him as they swear to you”. (Surah-al-Mujadilah:
18)

And when their shamelessness reaches this stage, Allah will set a seal
on their tongues, and their bodily parts will scream and testify against
them. “On that day We will set a seal upon their mouths, and their hands
shall speak to Us, and their feet shall bear witness of what they
earned. (Surah-al-Yaseen : 65).

In another place it is stated: “And on the day that the enemies of
Allah shall be pought together to the fire, then they shall be formed
into groups. Until when they come to it, their ears and their eyes and
their skins shall bear witness against them as to what they did”.
(Surah-al-HaMeem Sajda : 19-20).

“And they shall say to their bodily components, “Why have you borne
witness against us”? They shall reply, “Allah who makes everything speak
has given us speech”. (Surah-al-HaMeem Sajda : 21). At that time they
will be rendered speechless.

“Say, then Allah's is the conclusive argument”. (Surah-al-An'am: 150)
Their refusal (to accept their faults) at that time, will be the proof
of their ignorance. For if they accept their faults, surely Allah would
shower His mercy upon them and forgive.

It is narrated in “Anware No'maniyah”, that when a person's deeds will
be weighed, and his bad deeds will be more than his good ones, Allah
will command His Angels to throw him into hell fire. When the Angels
will be taking him, he will turn around and see. Allah will ask him,
“Why do you look behind”? He will reply, “O my Lord! I had never
expected that you would throw me to the flames.” Allah will say, “O my
Angels! I swear by my Honour and Grandeur, verily he in his life-time
never ever thought of what he now says. But now when he claims to have
thought so (of my mercy), I permit him to enter Paradise”.

Shaikh Ayyashi narrates from Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) that He said,
that on the day of Qayamat every person will be given his scrolls (of
deeds) and will be told to read it. At that time Allah will recollect
the person's strength of sight, speech and movement, and he will say, “O
regrets! What has happened to my scrolls, for there is no big or small
sin of mine which is not recorded in it”. Shaikh Ibne Quwailah narrates
from Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) that He said, that whoever in the month
of Ramazan goes for the Pilgrimage (Ziyarat) to the Shrine of Imam
Husain (A.S.) or dies on the way while going there, then on the day of
Qayamat there will be no accounting and reckoning for him, and he shall
enter Paradise without fear or anxiety. Allamah Majlisi narrates from
Imam Ali-ar-Reza (A.S.) in ‘Tohfatus Saemeen’ that He said, “Whoever
comes to visit my grave from far and near, on the day of Qayamat We
shall save him from three calamities: (1)

We shall give him refuge from the terrors of Qayamat, when the scrolls
of good doers will be given in their right hands, and evil ones in their
left hands,

(2) He will be safe from the punishment at the pidge (Pool) of Serat,
(3) During weighing of scales We will remain help him”.

It is written in ‘Haqqul Yaqeen’ that Husain bin Sa'eed in ‘Kitabuz
Zohd’ narrates from Imam Ja'far-as-Sadiq (A.S.) that He said, that when
Allah will wish to take account of a believer (mo'min), He will give his
scrolls (of deeds) in his right hand. And Allah Himself will take his
accounting so that no one else may come to know about his affairs. Allah
will then ask him, “O My valuable slave! Have you committed such and
such acts also”? The believer will answer (in repentence), “Yes my Lord,
I have committed them”. Then Allah will say, “I have forgiven your sins
and have replaced them with good deeds”. People will look at him with
awe in Paradise and exelaim : Glory be to Allah! Verily this person is
free from all sins.

A narrator (rawi) asked Imam (A.S.) regarding Allah's words : “Then as
to him who is given his book in his right hand, he shall be reckoned
with by an easy reckoning, and shall go back to his people joyfully”
(Surah-al-Inshiqaq : 7-9), as to who are the relatives of the believer
in Paradise. Imam (A.S.) replied, “His relatives will be the same as in
this world, provided they be believers”.

And when Allah will take account of the evil-doers, He shall do it in
the open and in front of all those present in Qayamat. And Allah will
end all correspondence with him, and give his scrolls in his left hand
from behind. The person will cry out: O what a catastrophe! And he will
falhead-long into hell. He will be the one who led a luxurious and
careless life with his family in the world, and disbelieved in the
hereafter. It is also a fact that in Qayamat Allah will tie the hands of
the hypocrites (munafeqeen) and disbelievers behind their necks. And in
the supplication (du'a) to be recited during Wuzu, these two punishments
are described:

<p dir="rtl">
اللّهُمَّ أعْطني كَتابِي بِيَميني والخُلْدَ في الجِنانِ بِيَساري
وَحاسِبْني حَساباً يَسيراً اللّهُمَّ لا تُعطِني كَتابِي بِشِمالي وَلا
مِنْ وَرائي ظَهْري وَلا تَجْعَلها مَغْلُولَةً الى عُنُقي وَأعُوذُ بَكَ
مَنْ مُقطَعاتِ النّيرانِ
</p>

Here I quote the narration of Sayyed Ibne Tawoos : When the month of
Ramazan would commence, Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (A.S.) would stop
punishing his male and female servants for their faults. But He would
note down their names and their faults (which they committed) in a book,
instead of punishing them at that very moment. On the last night of the
month of Ramazan He (A.S.) would gather all of them. He would then ping
the book and tell each of them, “Do you remember that on such and such
day you committed such and such crime, and I had not punished you for
it”? They would accept their mistakes and say, “O son of the Prophet!
Verily we have committed these crimes”. Thereby He would make everyone
accept their faults. Then He (A.S.) would stand in their midst and tell
them all to call out in a loud voice: “O Ali bin Husain! Your Lord has
also noted down your deeds as you have noted down ours. Surely Allah has
with Him a book that speaks and in which are recorded all deeds whether
big or small. And just as you desire that Allah may forgive your sins,
in the same manner you too forgive and overlook our's. O Ali bin Husain
! Ponder upon Your state in Qayamat when you will be standing in front
of the Almighty, for Allah is just and will not do injustice nor oppress
anyone even equal to the size of a mustard seed. Then you too overlook
our faults and forgive us so that Allah may forgive you on the day of
Qayamat. For Verily Allah says in the Qur'an: And they should pardon and
turn away. Do you not love that Allah should forgive you. (Surah-an-Noor
: 22). Thus Imam Abid (A.S.) requested His male and female servants to
repeat these words again and again, and they did so. He stood in their
midst and wept and asked for Allah's forgiveness, and say, “O Allah! You
have ordered us to forgive. O Allah we have forgiven all their faults
and mistakes, so You too forgive our sins, for You are the Best
Forgiver. O Allah You have commanded us not to let go any beggar
empty-handed from our doors, so You too do not turn us empty-handed from
Your door. O Allah You have commanded us not to let to any beggar
empty-handed from Your doors. O Allah! We have also come to Your door
like beggars, and crave for Your Mercy & Blessings. O Allah! do not
disappoint us”. Imam Zainul Aabedeen (A.S.) uttered these words and then
turning towards His servants say, “I have forgiven you all. Have you
also forgiven my faults which I have committed? For I am an oppressive
ruler and am a subject of a Just King”. Then the servants would reply,
“O our Master! we have forgiven you, but You have never ever wronged
against us nor oppressed us”. But He (A.S.) would tell them to say, “O
Allah! You forgive Ali bin Husain as He has forgiven us. O Allah save
Him from the fire as He has freed us from bondage (slavery)”. His
servants would say this, and then Imam (A.S.) would say:

<p dir="rtl">
اللّهُمَّ آمين رَبَّ العَالَمينَ اِذْهَبوا فَقَدْ عَفَوتُ عَنْكُمْ
وَاعْتَقتُ رِقابَكُمْ رَجاءً لِلعَفْوِ عَنّي وَاعْتِقُ رَقَبَتي
</p>

Then when the day of Eidul Fitr would pass away, Imam (A.S.) would
forgive all the things which His servants owed Him, and would make them
independent of others. And every year on the last night of the month of
Ramazan, He (A.S.) would free around twenty slaves in the way of Allah
and say, “Verily on each night of the month of Ramazan during the time
of the peaking of fast (Iftaar), Allah grants amnesty to seven lac
people from hell-fire, each one of whom is worthy of punishment. And on
the last night of the month of Ramazan, He grants liberty to the amount
of people He freed in the whole month. And I like this that Allah may
witness that I have freed the slaves in this world with the hope that He
too delivers me from the fire of hell”.

**Angels take the Scrolls to the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.) and the Holy
Aimmah (A.S.)**

The Angels first take the scrolls to the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.), and
then to the Holy Imams (A.S.). Lastly the scrolls are handed over to
Imam Mahdi (A.T.F.S.) for scrutiny. Imam (A.S.) looks at both (good as
well as bad) scrolls, and asks for forgiveness from Allah for the sins
of His Shi'ahs written in them. And those sins which can be written off
are done so. Hence Imam (A.S.) tells His Shi'ahs, “Beware! when your
scrolls come to me, your sins should be such that can be written off,
and should not be such that cannot be corrected or forgiven”. Then the
scrolls are taken to the heavens.

As said in the Qur'an: “And say: Work, so Allah will see your work and
(so will) His Apostle and the Believers (Holy Aimmah)”.
(Surah-al-Bara'at: 105)

\<
