Chapter -vii- Weighing Scales (meezan)
======================================

Every sect has interpreted the meaning of ùMeezan according to their
own views. Some opine that the deeds shall literally be weighed. While
some say that the deeds shall be given a physical form and then weighed.
The good deeds shall be given a beautiful face, while the evil deeds an
ugly one. Allamah Ne’matullah Jazaeri in “Anware No’maniyah” says, that
according to trustworthy and consecutively transmitted reports it
clearly proves that the deeds shall be given a physical form and then
they shall be weighed. (Ehsanul Fawaed).

In some traditions it is related, that ths deeds will be weighed with
the weight of the deeds of the prophets and Their successors. Hence in
one ziyarat it is stated: “peace be on you, o the weighing scale” Here
Imam Ali (A.S.) is referred to as the weighing scale. The prayers of all
mankind will be weighed with the weight of the prayers of Imam Ali
(A.S.). Imam Jafar-as-Sadiq (A.S) says, that the weighing scale (in
which the prayer and deeds of men shall be weighed) are the prophets
(Ambiya) and Their Successors (Awsiya). On the day of Qayamat our
prayers will be compared with the prayars of Imam Ali (A.S). Whether the
humility and Sincerity, which were present in the prayers of Imam Ali
(A.S.) are found in our prayers or no. Our generosity, pavery, mercy and
forgiveness are like His (A.S.) or no. Hence our deeds should not be
contrary to His, so as not to turn away from the righteous scale (Ali
A.S.) and turn towards His enemies mu awiyah and Yazid, and walk on
their paths. And our characters should not be like those who usurpsd the
garden of ufadak of Hazrat zahra (A.S.). (maad)

Allah says in the our an: “And the measuring out on that day they will
be just, then as for him whose measure (of good deeds) is heavy, those
are they who shall be successful. And as for him whose measure (of bad
deeds) is light, those are they who have made their souls suffer loss
because they disbelieved in our communications” (Surah-al-Aaraf: 9-10)

In another place He says: “The terrible calamity what is the terrible
calamity and what will make you comprehend what the terrible calamity
is?

The day on which men will be as scattered moths, And the mountains
shall be as loosened wool.

Then as for him whose measure of good deeds is heavy, he shall live a
pleasant life. And as for him whose measure of good deeds is light, his
abode shall de the abyss. And whose will make you know what it is? A
burning fire.” (Surah-al-Qare’ah: 1-11)

The best actions which help to increase the measure of good deeds in
the scales in Qayamat, are sending salawat on Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) and
His progeny, and good character. I state below some traditions on the
importance of Salawat, and later some incidents of good character.

**Merits of Salawat**

Shaikh Kulaini narrates from Imam Jafar-as-Sadiq (A.S.) or Imam
Mohammad-al-Baqir (A.S.) that he said, “For increasing the measure of
good deeds in the scales (meezan), no other deed carries mweight than
sending Salawat on Mohammad (S.A.W.S) and His progeny. A person s deeds
will be weighed, and when his good deeds will seem less, salawat will be
pought and kept, and lo the good deeds will increase.”

The Holy prophet (S.A.W.S) says, that on the day of oayamat when the
deeds shall be weighed, I will be present there, It a persons bad deeds
will be weighing more than his good ones, I will ping along the salawat
which he sent upon Me, and add it to the good deeds thereby increasing
its weight.

Shaikh Sadooq narrates from Imam Ali-ar-Reza (A.S.) that He said, that
if a person does not have the means to Iessen the stock of his bad
deeds, he should send salawat and salaam on Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) and His
progeny abundantly, doing so will decrease (the weight of) his sins.

Allamah Qutubuddin Rawandi narrates in “Dawaat” that Hazrat Mohammad
(S.A.W.S.) said, that if a person in my love and affection sends salawat
on me thrice every day and night, it becomes the right on Allah that He
should forgive his sins which he committed during the day and night.

The Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.) says, that one nioht I saw in a dream my
uncle ibne Abdul Muttalib and my cousin Ja far ibne Abi Talib. In front
of them was kept a tray full of plums. After sometime as they ate, the
plums turned into grapes. Then again as they ate, the grapes turned into
fresh dates. They again started eating them. I went towards them and
asked, “May my father and mother be your ransom which particular deeds
have you performed that has excelled all other deeds, and has mads these
blessings to be showered on you ?” They replied, “May our parents be
your ransom Those deeds are: sending salawat on You, feeding water to
the pligrims (of Haj), and Love (walayah) of Ali ibne Abi Talib
(A.S.).

The Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.) says that, if anyone writes my name in a
book and sends salawat on me, the Angels will seek forgiveness for him
till my name remains in that book.

Shaikh Kulaini narrates from Imam Jafar-as-sadiq (A.S.) that he said
that whenever you talk about the Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.), send salawat
on Him.

When a person sends salawat once on Him, Allah orders s thousand ranks
of His Angels to send a thousand salawat on the person himself. And
because of Allah and His Angels sending salawat, the whole ceration
sends salawat on him. And the person who does not do so, is an arrogant
and ignorant person. And Allah, His prophet, and the Holy Ahlulbait
(A.S.) leaves such aperson to himself.

It is written in “Ma aniyal Akhbaar” in the context of the meaning of
the verse (Ayah) of salawat from Imam Jafar-as-sadiq (A.S.), that the
meaning of salawat according to Allah is blessings (Rehmat), while to
the Angels it is safety and for the people it is a supplication (du a)
In the same book it is written that a narrator asked Imam (A.S.) as to
how should we recite salawat on Mohammad (S.A.W.S.) and His progeny Imam
(A.S.) erplied,:

<p dir="rtl">
صَلاةُ اللهِ وَصَلاةُ مَلائِكَتهِ وَأنْبيائِهِ وَرُسُلهِ وَجمَيعِ
خَلْقِهِ على مُحَمّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَالسَّلامُ عَلَيهِ وَعَلَيهِمْ
وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَركاتُه
</p>

ُ. The narrator continues, that I then asked Imam (A.S.) as to what was
the reward for this Salawat? Imam (A.S.) replied, “A person reciting
this Salawat becomes clean from the sins as if he was just born from his
mother’s womb”.

Shaikh Abul Futuh Razi narrates from the Hloy prophet (S.A.W.S.) that
He said, “on the night of me raj when I ascended to the heavens, I saw
an Angel who had a thousand hands. On sach of his hands there were a
thousand fingers, and he was counting some thing on them. I asked
Jipaeel as to who that Angel was, and what was he come thing? Jipaeel
replied that the Angel had been appointed by Allah to count the drops of
rain, so that it may be known as to how many drops have fallen down to
the earth. I turned towards the Angel and asked him, “Do you know the
total amount of the rain-drops which have fallen down on the earth from
the day Allah created this world till now”? To which he replied, “o
prophet of Allah I swear by my Lord who has chosen You (as a blessing)
for mankind, verily I know the total amount of rain-drops fallen on the
earth till now. Even to the extent that how many drops have fallen in
the wilds, in the properous lands, in the gardens, and also in the
cemetary”.

Then I toid him that I was vary much surprized by the power of his mind
and intellect and the ability to remember, to which he replied, “o
prophet of Allah verily this ability to count proves futile I try to
count only one thing”. I asked him as to what calculation was that. He
replied, “when people of Your Ummah gather at one place and send salawat
upon You, it is beyond my ability and capacity to count the rewards for
it”.

Shaikh Kulaini relates, that whoever recites the following salawat
seven times during Asr on Fridays, Allah gives him the rewards equal to
all His servants, and accepts his deeds and prayers of that day. It is
also related that the reward will be equal to the sight in the eyes of
all man:

<p dir="rtl">
اَلّلهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ الأوصِياءِ المَرضِيينَ
بِأفْضَلِ صَلواتِكَ وَبارِكْ عَليَهِمْ بِأفْضَلِ بَرَكاتِكَ وَالسَّلامُ
عَلَيهِ وَعَلَيهِمْ وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَركاتُه
</p>

It is related that whoever recites the following salawat after morning
aprayers, will not die untill he sees his Imame zamana (S.A.W.S.).

<p dir="rtl">
الّلهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَعَلى آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَعَجِّلْ
فَرَجَهُم
</p>

**Narration’s of Good character (Husne Khalq):**

**Narration: 1**

Anas ibne Malik says, that once I was in the presence of the Holy
prophet (S.A.W.S.) who had worn a Yemeni shawl, the edges of which were
shabby and torn. Suddenly a nomad came and pulled His shawl with such
severity, that the edges gave way. He then shouted, “O Mohammad! Load
all this wealth on the two camels, for verily this wealth is Allah s,
and not your father s”. The Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.) heard his words
silently, and then said. “Surely this is Allah s wealth, but I too am
Allah s servant. And O nomad, should I retaliate (for your harsh
conduct)”? The nomad replied in the negative. The Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.S.) asked him the reason. He said, “O Master! Because giving bad
in exchange of bad is not your nature”. The Prophet (S.A.W.S.) smiled
and gave order to load barley on one of his Camels and dates on the
other, and blessed him.

**Narration: 2**

Isam bin Mutlaqe Shaami says, that once when I went to madina, I saw
Imam Husain ibne Ali (A.S.) .I was very much influenced by His conduct
and manners, and thus envy overtook me .I thought of revealing the
enmity which I bore towards his father. I went upto Him and said, “Are
you the son of Abu Turab? You should know then, thet the inhabitants of
Syria attributed this name to Ali (A.S.), and thereby ridiculed and
insulted him. I again asked him, “Are you the son of Abu Turab”? Imam
(A.S.) answered, “Yes, I am”. Then I started abusing Imam (A.S.) and His
Father. He looked at me with kindness and said, “Take to forgiveness and
enjoin good and turn aside from the ignorant. And if a false imputation
from the shaitaan afflict you, seek refuge in Allah. Sureyl Hi is
hearing, knowing. Surely those who guard (against evil), when a
visitaation ftom the shaitaan afflicts them they become mindful, and lo
they see. And their pethren increase them in error, then they cease
not”. (surah-al-A araf- 199-202). In this verse, the Holy prophet
(S.A.W.S.) s good conduct is discussed. Allah ordered the prophet to
bear patiently the bad behaviour of the people, and stopped Him from
taking revenge by bad attitude in exchange of people, and behaviour. And
ordered Him to ignore foolish people, and to seek refuge of Allah from
the temptation of shaitaan. Then Imam Husain (A.S.) said, “(o Isam)
remain silent and thus lessen your burden (of sins) and seek forgiveness
for yourself and for me. If you seek my help, I shall give you a helping
hand, if you are desirous of gifts, I shall present you. And if you
desire consultation in any matter, I shall advise you”. Imam Husain
(A.S.) by his knowledge of the unseen (Ghaib) and wisdom (Hikmah)
understood that I was regretting my mistake and was repenting upon it.He
therefore said, “He said, (There shall be) no reproof against you this
day, (surah-al-Yusuf:92)

The above verse was said by prophet Yusuf (A.S.) to His pothers who
repented and asked me, “Are you a native of syria”? I Him. Imam Husain
(A.S.) then asked me, “Are you a native of Syria”? I answered in the
affirmative. Then He said, “verily the people of Syria are accustomed to
abuse and ridicule us, for mu awiyah has left this as his custom amongst
them, may Allah keep them alive as well as us too. Whatever desire you
may have ask of me frankly, that will surely be fulfilled, and you will
find me the best in it.” After hearing these words from the mouth of
Imam Husain (A.S.), I was very much ashamed and abuses, which I incured
upon Him and His Father. I was so much abashed that I wished the earth
would swallow me. I tried to sneak away from His sight and hide myself
amongst other people. But from that day onwards no one was more dear to
me that Imam Husain (A.S.) and His Father (A.S.).

The verse (Ayah) which Imam Husain (A.S.) recited in the context of
prophet Yusuf (A.S.) s tale is narrated that the pothers of prophet
Yusuf (A.S.) recognised him that the king who had mercy on them was no
other than their pother, whom they had tried to kill. Yusuf invited them
to come along with their Father (prophet Ya qoob). They said, “whenever
you invite us to your banquet every morning and evening, we feel ashamed
about what we had done with you”. To which prophet Yusuf responsible for
my present honour and glory. Even now I have ascended the throne of
Eygpt, people look at me with the same sight and say: Glory be to Him
who bestowed such honour to a slave puchased in twenty dirhams.
In reality it is because of you that I have gained this prestige and
have become respected in the eyes of men, because they now know that I
am your pother (and the son of prophet Ya qoop), and not a slave (as
they previously thought). In fact I am from the progeny of prophet
Ipaheem (A.S.). “It is also narrated that when prophet Ya qoob met
prophet Yusuf, He asked Him as to what befell Him, to which Yusuf
replied,” o father Do not ask me as to what (bad) my pothers did to me,
but ask me what (favour) my Lord did to me”.

**Narration- 3**

Shaikh Sadooq and others narrate, that in madina a person from the
progeny of Caliph Umar ibne khattab frequently to troubled Imam moosa-
al-kazim (A.S.). He insulted Imam (A.S.) and whenever he faced Him, he
would start abusing Imam Ali (A.S.). one day a person told Imam
–al-kazim (A.S.) that, “If you permit us we will kill this evil and
unchaste man”. The Imam (A.S.) was infuriated and told them not to take
such a step. Imam (A.S.) then inquired as to where would He find that
person now. They told Him that he had a field near madina and would be
there at that moment. Imam moosa-al-kazim (A.S.) sat on his mule and
proceeded to meet him. He entered the field mounted on his mule . The
person saw Him coming and shouted, “Do not spoil my field”. Imam (A.S.)
advanced further and went and sat near him and his field. He replied
that he had spent a hundred Ashrafis. Then Imam (A.S.) asked him as to
how much gain he expected from it. He said, “should I tell you expect”.
The man replied, “I expect tow hundred Ashrafis yield”.
Imam removed a bag containing three thousand Asjrafis and handing it to
him said, “Iake this, for your field still needs proper ploughing.
Almighty Allah will surely give you sustenance till you are alive”. The
man kissed the forehead of Imam (A.S.) and requested Him to forgive his
bad attitude. The Imam (A.S.) smiled and returned home. From that day
onwards people saw him coming to the mosque daily, and whenever he
looked at Imam moosa-al-kazim (A.S.). he would say: Allah best knows
where He places His knowledge –surah-al-An am : 125. His companions
asked him as to what was the reason for this sudden change. To which he
replied, “Till now you have listened to what (bad) I said, and from now
on listen to me what (good) I say”. Then he started praising Imam
(A.S.), on hearing this his companions started fighting with him and he
defended his claim. Imam turned towards His companions and said,
“whatever you wished about this man (to kill him) was appropriate or
what I did is right ? In exchange of some money I bought his friendship
and ended his enmity (by favouring him)”.

**Incidents of Good Character (Husne khalo):**

**Incident- 1**

Once malik ibne Ashtar was passing through a market of kufa wearing a
cloak and a turban of hand weaved cloth. A man who had not recognized
him, looked at him with contempt, and ridiculing him flung a sword. When
people saw this they came to the man and said, “Do you know who the
peron was whom you insulted thus”? He replied in the negative. To
Commander of the faithful Ali (A.S.). Hearing this the person started
trembling with fear and ran after malik to ask his pardon.
Malik at that moment was busy in prayers in the mosque. When he
finishned his prayers, the person fell on his feet and started kissing
them. Malik asked him the reason for it, to which he replied that he was
ashamed of his rude behaviour and bad attitude. Malik replied, “Do not
worry, for by Allah, before even entering this mosque I prayed to Allah
for your forgiveness”. Malik ibne Ashtar had learnt the lesson of good
charactefroImam Ali (A.S.) Himself, and hence even after being the
commander in chief of the army of Imam Ali (A.S.), and one of His pave
and valiant fighters, he did not retaliate, but instead forgave the
man.

Regarding the pavery and valour of malik, Ibne Abli Hadeed mu tazili
says that- if anyone in the Arabs or the non-Arabs swears that malik was
the second in pavery and chivalry after Imam Ali (A.S.), and none
equalled him, I shall bear witness to it. What else can I say regarding
this fabulous personality, except that his life destroyed the Syrians
and his death the Iraqis (meaning when alive he slayed the enemies of
Ali (A.S.), and when he died the friends of Ali (A.S.) suffered a great
loss)”. Regarding him Imam Ali (A.S.) said, “Malik holds the same status
near me, as I held near the Holy prophet (S.A.W.S.)” meaning he was a
source of my as I held near the Holy prophete. Then He turned towards
His companions and said, “I wish one or two persons from amongst you
could be like malik”. In short malik s pavery, chivalry, virtue a good
character earned him a very dignified position .
when the person insulted him he was hot the least effected, nor did he
become angry or retalite, but went to the mosque and prayed for the his
forgiveness. We conlcude from the above incident, that malik had control
over the passions of his self, and that this strength is more worthy of
praise than the physical strength. Imam Ali (A.S.) has said, “The pavest
man is the one who controls the passions of his selt”.

**Incident -2**

Allamah Husain Noori in the latter part of book umustadrakul Wasail
quotes an incident of the celepated Scholar khwaja Nasiruddin Toosi. One
day khwaja Naseer received a letter which contained abuses for him and
filthy language. One of the sentences was : “The dog (referred to khwaja
Naseer ) and the son of a dog”. When he read it he became serious, and
sat down to answer it. He used neither a bad word nor filthy language
and wrote: “You have addressed me as a dog, but it is not at all true.
For a dog walks on his four legs and its paw has large nails, whereas I
am a human who talks and laughs, and laughs, and my qualities are averse
to that of a dog”. After finishing he declared openly that the writer of
the letter was his friend from that day onwards and that he bore no
animosity towards him.

The presence of such a good character in the personality of khwaja
Naseeruddin Toosi is not strange. Allamah Hilli says regarding him that,
“khwaja Naseeruddin Toosi was the greatest Scholar (Aalim) of his age.
He has authored many books on Reason a Authority (Uloome Aqaliyah wa
Naqaliyah), wisdom a knowledge, principals of Islam the true Religion.
He was also the best in character among Ulamas”.

Khwaja Naseer had learnt the lesson of good character from the
illustrious lives of our Holy Aimmah (A.S.). As has beenarrated, that
once Imam Ali (A.S.) heard a person abusing oambar, tried to retalite in
the same manner when Ali (A.S.) stoped him and said, “o oambar Remain
silent, for verily the person will suffer because of our silence. Gain
Allah a happiness by your silence and let the person fall prey to the
mischief of Shaitaan. I swear by the Lord who split open the seed to
grow plant from it, and who created human beings, that no other quality
of a believer is more dear and who pleasing to Allah than controlling
one s temper, and no other quality of a believer is disagreeable to
shitaan than it. For verily silence all friends and foes alike praised
khwaja Naseer. Jurji zaidan in the translation of Uadabul Lughattul
Arabiyah writes that, “khwaja Naseeruddin Toosi s lipay contained four
lac books, and he was a master in the field of Astrology a philosophy.
He had under his care many endowment (waqf) properties of the mongols,
in short he was a tower of light in the darkness of this world”.

I have discussed about the life of this great personality in my book
ufawaede Razawiyah that his family was related to the uwasharah family
of the kings of Jahrood, situated at distance of 10 Farsakh from oum.
Khwaja Naseeruddin Toosi was born in Toos on 11 Jamadi ul Ula 597 A.
1201 A.D. and died on Sunday 18 zilhaj 672 A.H. / 1274 A.D. in kazmayn.
It is engraved on his grave: “while their dog (lay) outstretching it s
paws at the entrance”.(Surah-al-kahf: 18).

**Incident- 3**

It is narrated that one day the great Scholar shaikh Ja far kashifal
Ghita was distributing some money among the poor before going to recite
the Namaz After finishing distributing, he became engrossed in prayers.
“Give me the wealth of my Grandfather (referred to the Holy prophet a
Aimmah)”. Shaikh Ja far replied that he had exhausted all the money and
had nothing left to give him To which the Sayyed became enraged and
spitted on the face of Shaikh Ja far. The Shaikh got up, and of the
worshippers saying, “Those amongst you who hold my beard dear, please
help this Ssyyed”. It is to be pondered upon what a great character
shaikh Ja far had.
It is he who has authored ukaskful Ghita the famous book on
Jurisprudence (Fiqh) while in journey. He himself used to say that, “It
all the books on Jurisprudence (Fiqh) are compiled, I with my memory can
write down all the points from the chapter of purification (Taharah)
till the chapter on conpensation (for murder, Diyat)”.
There were many Ulamas from amongst his children. Allamah Noori says
regarding him that, if one looks at the morning supplications of Shaikh
Ja far, his virtues, piety a worship, will understand his high honour.
He addressed himself thus: previously you were a Ja eefar (small river),
then later became Ja far (a vast sea). Shaikh Ja far became a ship (to
guide) and an ocean (of knowledge), and the master of Iraq and it s
muslim inhabitants. His address to himself is because he says that even
after having bestowed with such a high rank, he never forgot the days of
his hardships. he is among from the battle of Jamal, Imam Ali (A.S.)
said to Ahnaf bin oays. After returning from the battle of Jamal, Imam
Ali (A.S.) started praising his companions and told Ahnaf bin oays, “If
you look at them at that time of the night when eyes become heavy with
sleep and voices fade away, when the birds are resting in their nests,
these people remain awake due to the fear of Resurrection and the
promised event (oayamat).
As Allah says in the our an: Do the people of that town think that they
are fast asleep. Sometimes they get up in the dark of the night and weep
and recite Namaz, and sometimes praise and glorify Allah in the niche of
the mosque. During the dark night they lament a wail and supplicate to
the Almighty Allah. O Ahnaf when you look at them during the night, you
will see that their backs have dent (due to excessive bowing, Ruku), and
they will be reciting the chapters of the our an in their prayers
(Nanaz).
And will be weeping and wailing as if they have been surrounded by the
fire from all sides, which has reached their throats. And when you hear
them cry, you will think that their necks are bound in chains. And if
you look at them during the day, you will find them men who walk slowly
and humbly upon the earth, having a courteous speech. And when they are
confronted with ignorant people they salute them, and when they pass by
vain and useless things, they pass away with honour.

They keep their feet away from slander, and their tongues become
speechless, so they do not speak against the honour of other people. And
they keep their ears away from listening to vain sounds, and have
applied in their eyes the collirium of refraining to see forbidden
things. And surely they wish to enter the City of peace (Darus Salaam),
the place where one remains free from doubts and anxieties”.

It is appropriate to quote here a saying of a monk. It is related from
Oasam zahid, that one day I saw a monk in a sorry state at the gate of
Baitul muqaddas in Jerusalem. I went towards him and toold him to advice
me, to which he said, animals. He is timid and dejected, and is afraid
that if he moves an inch, the beasts would devour him. And be like a man
whose night passes in fear (of his Almighty) whereas the liars sleep in
peace, and whose days are sogrrowfwhilethe powerful sit contented”. Then
the monk turned his back away from me and started going away. I told him
to advgice me further, to which he replied that , A thirsty man is
contented even with a small quantity of water”.

**Incident- 4**

It is related that one day the great Scholar (Aalim) sahib ibne Abbad
asked for a drink (sherbet). A servant pought it for him. As he was
about to drink, one of those present there told him not to drink it for
it contained poison. The servant who had pought the drink was also
present there. Sahib asked the informer as to what proof he had servant
to consume, and thus the matter would be clear. Sahib replied, “Then
give it to an animal to drink”. Sahib replied, “I do not even deem it to
be lawful”. Saying this Sahib ordered the drink to be thrown away and
told the servant to go away from his house, and not enter his house
again. But he ordered that he should not be banished from the town, nor
should people sever relations with him or despise him, because one
should not rely on doubts, nor should punish a person by stopping his
sustenance.

Sahib ibne Abbad was one of the viziers of the Buwaid kings, he helped
the common man and was a marja . He was honoured by the people and they
held him in high esteem. He was also a poet and an unequalled scholar of
Arabic. It is said regarding him, that when he sat down to write his
orthographies (amla), people gathered around him to heat at least six
persons would be appointed to read out his orthographies to the
people.

He had with him so many books on grammer that sixty camels could be
loaded with them. He gave due respect to the Scholars (Ulama), Jurists
(Fuqaha), Alids (Alawis) and Sadats, and encouraged them to write and
compile books. Shaikh Hasan bin mohammad Oummi wrote Tareekhe oum ,
Shaikh Sadooq Uyoonul Akhbarur Reza , and Sa labi compiled Yateematud
Dahr for his sake. Many Scholars, Jurists, Sadats and poets owe it to
him. Every year he sent five thousand Ashrafis to the Jurists (Fqaha) of
Baghdad. Whoever went to visit him after Namaze Asr in the month
Ramazan, he did not allow the person to go away wiay without peaking the
fast (Iftaar). Atleast a thousand people did Iftaar daily in his house
during the month of Ramazan. He gave the same quantity of alms (sadaaah)
in this one month, as he gave in the whole year. He has also written
many couplets (Ash’ar) in the praise of Imam Ali (A.S.) and vilifying
His enemies. He died on 24 Safar 358 A.H. in Ray , and is buried in
Isfahan. His grave still lies there.
\<
