Pure Economics and The Socioeconomic Policy -Making Process
===========================================================

*(Pure economists emphasize a theoretical and objective approach to the
existing conditions of an economy. In Islamic socioeconomic practice,
the existing conditions are not taken for granted and radical measures,
consistent with Islamic ideology, can be expected-Ed.)*

Both Islamic formulators of socioeconomic policy and non-Islamic
economists may be interested in a supply-demand -price situation. For
instance, a book on Arithmetic is priced at five Tomans in a market
governed by free competition. Subsequently, it is selected and
prescribed as, a text-book by the competent authorities. Then, its price
goes up simultaneously with an increase in the demand. This may be
viewed differently by the pure economists and Islamic policy-makers.

In the above case, pure economists tend to take it for granted that
prices under free competition are not susceptible to any control or
official measures for their stabilization. On this assumption, they
would proceed to investigate the relationship between the price and
demand increases and fluctuations in supply and demand. Yet, in all
probability, their scientific and objective assessments will not
basically alter the economic situation indicated in the above example.

On the other hand, formulators of an Islamic socioeconomic policy are
likely to evaluate any free market pricing, in terms of its social
'costs' or impact and social benefits. They may seek a just and
equitable solution to any problem created by any undue price increases.
They may take into consideration the relevant factors, such as supply
and demand, without necessarily determining their inter-relationship,
with their terms of reference often broader in scope than those of the
theoretical economists.

The question as to whether or not any concepts of justice and equity can
be reflected in a freely competitive market may be extraneous to the
realism of the knowledgeable economists. However, it is crucial to
formulators of Islamic economic policy. For they are bound by Islamic
principles to so regulate economic activities as to identify and uphold
all that is just and equitable for the transacting parties without
accepting any status quo in this regard.

On the other hand, economic theorists cannot determine as to whether or
not any transactions under free competition have been carried out on a
just and equitable basis of meeting the people's socioeconomic needs.
They can measure and quantify supply, demand and price trends, as a part
of an assessment of the existing free market conditions only. The
protagonists of Islamic school of economic thought may not be able to
assess the same in the manner of pure economists.

A classical economist, David Ricardo (1772- 1823), for instance,
theorised that a worker's wages, offered independently and not under any
government prescription, would not generally attain a level of
sufficiency (that leaves a surplus above his living wages - Ed.). Any
exception in this regard are said to be of a temporary nature, so that
these revert to their earlier state of equilibrium at a below
sufficiency level. If and when the normal wage level goes up, one
eventual consequence will be excessive supply of labour resulting from
earlier marriages of workers in favourable conditions of earning.

This, in turn, causes an inadequacy of the positions and wages offered.
Thus, according to Ricardo, the tendency of wages is to return always to
a lowest possible level. He implies that low wages increases the
mortality rate and eventually reduces the number of workers; so as to
raise the wage level before it comes down once again. He calls it the
"iron law" of wages.

Ricardo's theory of wages is based on the natural and social realities
that tend to stabilize wages at a low and insufficient level. He
theorized on the basis of what was happening in reality. He did not
propose any method to basically improve the situation. His investigation
was confined to the limited scope of classical economics. In contrast,
any socioeconomic policy-maker can be expected to conceptualize the
phenomenon in the overall regulatory context of meting out socioeconomic
justice.

Yet another case in point is that of production.

Economic theorists examine the factors of production, including the
relevant specialization and techniques. They try to identify the
positive and negative influences affecting production, in theoretical
terms such as of diminishing returns.

The socio-economic policy-makers, on the other hand, investigate the
very rationale of any free or unplanned production, specially the
question as to whether or not any production should be undertaken as an
aim in itself, or as a part of a socioeconomic plan seeking higher,
including moral, aims.

Furthermore, the policy-makers may, before setting any production
targets, resolve issues, such as whether or not any distribution needs
should be determined on the basis of actual production, or production
should be so planned as to serve the distribution requirements, all in
the context of bringing about mutually harmonious socioeconomic effects.

Then, it may involve the question as to how can an appropriate
distribution of wealth be achieved, so as to have a positive effect on
the productivity of the economy, also, if production is assigned primary
importance, it will be necessary to provide incentives for capital
investment in that sector, as 'well as for commercial loans, in any plan
that aims at regulating distribution of wealth and which considers the
interests pertaining to capital.

If not, they may formulate a distribution programme in keeping with the
needs of socioeconomic justice and determine the nature and extent of
production accordingly. All these considerations and qualitative or
other evaluations are possible within the framework of an appropriate
socioeconomic policy-making, and lie beyond the theoretical scope of
pure economists.

From the foregoing, we may draw two conclusions involving different
guidelines. Firstly, the pure economists' identification of the actual
economic realities, and recognition of the underlying laws and phenomena
present in economic life. Secondly, the socioeconomic policy-makers'
system of evaluating and regulating socio-economic life based on the
concept of justice. Thus, distinguishing between “knowledge of economy”
and “method of economy” is made easy for us.

The scientific method recognises the motives and achievements and
relationship between them, through the investigation of the realties
presented. Therefore, 'knowledge' is analogous to a Pair of glasses to
look at the actual economic life of a society. Just as a person puts on
glasses to look at the existing facts not desiring to add something to
it or alter in it any way, likewise, the scientific method plays the
role of the glasses in economic life, to reflect economic laws and their
dependency. Thus, the general foundation of scientific thought is for
discovery recognition.

But a school of thought cannot be compared to a pair of glasses for
looking at any existing facts. It represents an abstract concept
governing life under a just and equitable socio-economic system.

Therefore, "knowledge of economy" states "what is taking place in
reality", and ' method‟ states "what kind of system is the best to be
pursued".

We find similar differences between knowledge of history and moral
investigation, because knowledge scientifically viable facts of historic
or actual significance, as in the case of pure economics, and moral
investigation is similar to socio-economic policy-making and its
inductive and deductive, evaluations.

People, without doubt, realise that .knowledge of history is a separate
subject from moral investigation. They also know that historians will
inform them of historical events, and their causes.

Any branch of knowledge like history investigates the past events and
discovers their causes, and explains their relationship to other
historical events and the impact on human lives. History confines itself
to the discovery of causes and effects of historical events, and under
no circumstances does it evaluate these events from the moral point of
view.

History is not concerned with the morality of the crusades, or the
attack of barbaric Germans on the Roman Empire, and, as such, it does
not determine as to whether or not these actions were just or unjust. It
is only a moral investigation which can make this kind of judgement.

Moral investigation is able to evaluate these events and decide whether
they were just or unjust, correct or deviate, on the basis of a
philosophy of justice.

Just as knowledge of history introduces events as they happened, and
moral investigation evaluates these events, likewise knowledge of
economy introduces the phenomena of economic life, and the
socio-economic policy-making process evaluates the phenomena, and
produces a system worthy enough to constitute the basis of an economy,
which is just.

All branches of scientific knowledge have a duty to discover facts.
Thus, there is no difference between an economics professor and other
professors, except that the economist deals with the facts of an
economy, and other professors deal with their own subjects involving
facts.

For example, physicists investigate the different frequencies of light,
sound, etc, and discover the precise equations and relationships
concerning the natural phenomena. An atomic Physicist may discuss an
atom bomb from the purely scientific and technical point of view,
without showing any concern for the immorality of its use for genocide.

Clearly, the role of knowledge of economy is to discover the phenomena
of economic life, and the circumstances they depend upon, and the aim of
a socio- economic policy-making process is to arrive at a system that
can regulate economic life in order to make it just and equitable for
society.

Many groups make a mistake when they attribute a subjective difference
between pure economics and the socio-economic policy-making process.
These groups believe that economics, as a branch of knowledge, may
discuss topics, such as production and the factors involved in its
growth, and the socio-economic policy-making process involves primarily
the question of distribution in an equitable manner, and the
relationship which exists between the individual and society on one hand
and distribution system on the other.

The examples have shown that a purely economic investigation depends
upon the phenomena and facts of an economic situation. If the
investigation concerns itself with the concept of justice, and the
manner of regulating the economic situation, then it is an ideological
or moral investigation.

This can be further explained by referring again to the contexts of the
law of diminishing returns and that of wages, which concern 'production'
and 'distribution' situations, respectively. In the case of the law of
diminishing returns, it signifies mostly the realities of agricultural
production, in which land is a constant factor, irrespective of the
ownership and the kind of the overall socioeconomic system affecting the
same.

The Ricardian 'iron law' of wages, too, involves a scientific basis of
investigation. Unlike the law of diminishing returns, however, it is
predicated on a specific kind of-economy. Yet, it cannot be construed as
something resulting, exclusively from either scientific or ideological
considerations or investigations. While its validity depends solely on a
control free (capitalist) economy, it cannot-represent a sufficiently
comprehensive basis for any argument that it is more ideological than
scientific in nature and content.

A society which follows a free economy, not a society in which the price
of goods and wages are controlled by the government and where a fixed
wage has been determined for the workers. So we see that free capital
itself is the condition for the scientific law to be realised, and this
law, in the framework of a capitalist system can give certainty to
society. This is what we mean when 'we say the law from the point of
View of content is scientific, and the conditions which must be present
for it in actual practice could reflect an ideology.

It seems that by not emphasising the differences between the content of
the law, and the conditions it is realised in, led some people to say
that all investigations concerning distribution are ideological in
nature, and scientific investigations would never interfere in matters
concerning distribution.

Also, 'in view of the fact, that the scientific law concerning
distribution is only realised in a certain economic system caused some
groups of people to say that the law is an ideological law, not a
scientific one.

From the above discussion we may conclude that:

An economic (scientific) investigation in a purely theoretical framework
is different from an ideological assessment of an economic or
socioeconomic situation, so as to produce a system for regulating the
same in a just and equitable manner. The conclusion, therefore, is that
the duty of pure economics is to establish the facts, and the duty of an
ideological assessment of a socioeconomic situation is to indicate a
just solution to any problem.

Pure economics discusses both production and distribution, just as the
socioeconomic study does. Thus, their difference is one of approach to
the problem. It does not lie in the subject-matter itself. Accordingly,
it would be meaningless to say that their difference concerns
microeconomic factors like production and distribution.

Any factual analysis of production that does not take into consideration
the kind of the overall socioeconomic system and the regulatory policies
represents an academic approach of pure economists. Any extension of
this approach to a situational analysis of distribution remains oriented
to, the same assumption of a pure economist that any socioeconomic
policy regulation should be within the ideological framework of an
existing system, such as that of a free market economy. Thus, his
assessments can only be specific to the laws of distribution applicable
to that socio-economic system.

Further, the difference between the approach of it pure economist and
that of socio-economic policymakers is reflected in their means of
investigation. The former employs scientific method to identify facts
based on an existing situation, including subjective criteria such as
one's observation and experience. At the same time, the scientific
investigation is related to general economic laws and relationships.

In the event of finding a problem with no clear-cut definition or
decisive outcome, the pure economist will draw on his, experiences of
investigations of the past economic events. Then, he scientifically
evaluates the probabilities of certain phenomena and makes a judgement
with all his personal integrity as to what could take place in a given
situation. In this respect, his method is similar to that of a physicist
in discovering, say, the boiling point of water. An economist, when he
wishes to discover a solution to an economic crisis, which all
capitalist societies (cyclically) face, might investigate the relevant
events which may have been recurrent throughout man's economic life.

The approach of a socioeconomic policy-maker is completely opposite to
the above. It would be rather impossible for him to investigate and come
to conclusions in the manner of a pure economist. This is simply because
of his concern for socioeconomic justice.

No doubt, (the abstract concept of) justice is unlike the (empirical
reality of) water temperature, or even viewing an economic crisis in a
historical perspective without· involving any scientific basis of
measurement. Justice is neither a natural phenomenon to be susceptible
to the empirical method and/ or a scientific scale of measurement.

In the above context, let us consider a visualization of justice in a
distribution process. Many groups believe, justice in distribution would
only come about with a system such as Marxism, in which all members of
society have an equitable income and wealth. Also, there are others who
believe that justice in distribution can only be achieved when all
people have equal freedom (of economic opportunity), although this
freedom may yet result in differences of individual incomes and wealth
(assuming that all people use this freedom equally in the capitalist
system) .

Some groups believe that justice in distribution will come about when
all people are guaranteed a fixed income, with provision for earning
more, as indicated in Islam.

Now we would like to discover what could be a basis for a just or an
unjust distribution system. We would like to discover whether having a
system in which all people have an equal income and wealth is just, or
whether it is just to give freedom for people to behave as they wish,
and allow their incomes to remain at any level. Or is there a third path
between these two ways?

To find the most just among these three paths, it is impossible for us
to use the scientific method. Because justice is not a natural
phenomenon like the boiling point of water, which we are able to see and
verify. Also justice is not a historic or social phenomenon, like an
economic crisis in a capitalist society, which can be identified from
experience, through comparisons between people and recognition of the
extent of equality or inequality existing in their attributes and
physique.

A pure economist may measure and compare people’s income, yet, he will
not deem it proper to say: "Justice would be ensured if everybody had
equal incomes or unequal incomes". For equality and justice are not the
kind of attributes that can be measured on a scientific or physical
scale, in the same way as physical quantities and certain natural
properties.

A believer in a capitalist economy may say that it entitles its
constituent people to freedom and treats them equally, even if their
standard of living is not uniform. A believer in a communist society may
say that it enables its members to obtain virtually a uniform standard
of living. They both would be unable to answer a question as to whether
or not they can measure social justice in the same way as they do any
ambient temper true . For people’s rights are not to be measured in the
scientific manner of physical properties (such as measurement of sound
levels in decibels).

We may conclude, therefore, that neither the socioeconomic policy-making
process, nor any purely economic or social theory, can use scientific
means to investigate justice and rights of men. The concept of justice
can only be derived from the principles of a comprehensive: ideology, so
as to justly and wholesomely regulate a people's socioeconomic system.


