The Islamic System of Socioeconomic Regulation
==============================================

We may assume that the previous discussion has clarified the meaning and
practical significance of pure economics and the socioeconomic
policymaking process. Now, we may proceed with an explanation of Islamic
economy, and state our reasons for insisting on a specifically Islamic
economy.

As we have seen from the previous discussion, Islamic economy is based
on its ideological formulation of socioeconomic policy. It is not
amenable to a definition within the limited context of pure economics.
When we say Islam has a specific concept of an economy, we do not mean
that Islam has its own branch of knowledge called economics. For any
discovery of economic phenomena and identification of the relevant
causes, effects and the interrelationships need not necessarily be
specific to Islam, which seeks primarily to justly regulate the
socioeconomic activities and functions.

The economy of an Islamic society has much to do with Islamic ideology,
including the concepts of social economic justice. Islam does not
propound any economic law on the basis of any scientific discovery
pertaining to the actually existing or identifiable realities. Thus, any
Islamic economy can manifest a distinct socioeconomic policy, rather
than any specific branch of knowledge.

For example, if Islam were to discuss any increase of interest on money
among the people of Hejaz[^1] , it would then be a matter pertaining to
economics as a science. Without involving any scientific approach, Islam
evaluates the usurious practice and its socioeconomic effects and
recognises it as an unjust system to be proscribed. Then, it prescribes
the relationship between capital and ownership of capital on the basis
of 'Mozarebeh,[^2] not usury. Thus, Islam, when dealing with economic
matters, makes use of a moral, rather than purely scientific,
investigation.

When we are clear in our understanding of the meaning of Islamic economy
and we can recognise Islamic economy as a method, not knowledge, then,
it is possible for us to remove the most important obstacle that makes
one hesitant in his belief about existence of an Islamic economy. Many
groups deny the existence of an Islamic economy. In fact, they fail to
recognize the difference between pure economics and the socio-economic
policy-making process.

Then, the ask: how can Islam contain an Economic system, when in our
study of Islam, we find that Islam does not include any knowledge of
economics, such as indicated by the theories of supply and demand, or
the law of diminishing returns, and it does not postulate a law, such as
the "Iron Law of Wages"? Nevertheless, we are all aware that the
investigations of knowledge of economy only came into existence within
the last century or so, since economic investigators like Adam Smith
became famous.

The opponents to an Islamic Economy may harbour a wrong impression that
Islam originated economics of its own.

However, if we distinguish between economics as a branch of knowledge,
and Islamic Economy as an ideological system, any wrong impression can
be corrected. Furthermore, this clarification would mean that Islamic
Economy does not necessarily reflect the economic laws of supply and
demand in a control-free economy. What Islamic Economy can offer is a
specific program for regulating the socioeconomic conditions in a manner
harmonious with its ideology.

We will further discuss Islamic Economy in detail in this book bringing
in perceptible reasons and aims given in Islamic traditions. However,
the easiest way to prove the existence of something is to make it
readily perceptible.

Before we offer the proof of the existence of a socio-economic ideology
in Islam, we will only state one reason for its existence, which is
derived from the ideological comprehensiveness and structural integrity
of Islam so that a broad understanding of the Shari'a (Islamic laws) is
required.

One basic and inseparable feature of the Islamic laws (the Shari'a) is
their comprehensiveness and applicability to practically every aspect of
human life. The comprehensiveness is derived not only from the Islamic
Commandments themselves, but from the practical applications and
interpretations in the processes of jurisprudence and in the traditional
sources of Islamic knowledge. We may refer to some of these sources now.

Abi-Basir relates about Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that one day the latter was
explaining the comprehensiveness of the Islamic laws as imbibed by the
knowledgeable members of the Prophet's Household, by saying, inter alia,
that Islam has prescribed solutions to human problems encountered in
life. Islam has declared certain things to be lawful and prohibited some
other. It has prescribed penalties even for a slight abrasion inflicted
on a person's body by another person. And with that sentence Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) placed his hand on Abi Basir’s shoulder and said "Am I allowed"
Abi Basir answered: "By all means". Then Imam Sadiq (a.s.) increased the
pressure of his hand on the man's shoulder and exclaimed, “Even this
action has a price to pay in Islam”.

In another text from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) he said: All the matters man
faces in his life have been discussed in Islam, there is no matter which
is not spoken of, even a penalty for inflicting a scratch on another's
hand.

According to Nahjul Balagha, Imam Ali (a.s.) once recalled the advent of
the Prophet of Islam and the revelation of the Qur'an through him. The
last Prophet came after a long period without an apostle and at a time
when mankind had deflected from the right path and human values had
become obscure. About the Qur’an, Hadrat Ali (a.s.) is said to have
described it as a medicine to heal all human pains and a supremely
meaningful guide to living.

These are clear examples reflecting the proof that Islam concerns itself
with all aspects of human life even the smallest and most insignificant
matters are not forgotten. It must be clear that most certainly Islam
has presented a program to deal with socioeconomic difficulties and to
regulate the life of Man, presented a program to deal with socioeconomic
difficulties, and to regulate the life of Man.

If Islam were to ignore the vital socioeconomic aspects of human life by
prescribing no guidelines or programme concerning the same, we could,
not have legitimately attributed to it any comprehensiveness. It is
inconceivable that a religion, which takes care of the need to respect
human integrity to an extent that not even the slightest transgression
against a person does not go unrecognized and uncompensated, can ignore
human rights concerning man's economic activates, including those of a
developer of a plot of land for agriculture, or an excavator of a mine,
and the like. No wonder, the Islamic laws and traditions do cover the
socioeconomic aspects of human living.

In view of the foregoing, it is a mistake to say that the Islamic laws
prescribe a code of behaviour for an individual Muslim and not any
socioeconomic program me. This is simply because the Shari' a takes all
aspects of human life into consideration. Moreover, it is manifestly
wrong to view individual life in isolation from that of his society at
large.

The Islamic Laws regulate not only individual life but that of his
society. In fact what these envisage for an individual Muslim is equally
true for all Muslims in a community. This is something totally
consistent with the realities of human life. Accordingly, it is a great
mistake to harbour any notion that Islamic regulation is meant for (the
private) individual.

Any regulatory system, socioeconomic or political, deals with problems
of individual and social importance. This is a basic requirement for its
efficacy.

Capitalism, too, may be viewed as a societal regulation system; it
highlights freedom of enterprise as the basis of the society's economic
life, inevitably this freedom is reflected not only in the individual
behaviour of a capitalist but in the manner of contractual interaction
with his agent. This is similar to the nature and content of mutual
interaction between an userer and another who obtains a loan from him.

The same is true in case of many other societies, with their overall
regulatory or facilitation framework based on, and reflected in,
individual conduct of business, or approach to work. However, where
Islamic Laws emphasize promotion of wholesome individual procedures,
these do necessarily provide for a salutary basis of transactions, such
as loan financing and employing others, or getting oneself employed.
This implies salutary effects on the society, too. Thus, the laws affect
both the individual and his society.

Accordingly, if we wish to separate an individual program from the
social program, we will be definitely contradicting ourselves. Islam, in
stipulating and enhancing the quality of human behaviour, determines or
covers all aspects of Man's work, confirming the existence of a societal
regulatory system in its legal and ideological framework. I fail to
comprehend those who are skeptical about the existence of an Islamic
framework for economy and its suitability for solving the economic
difficulties. What do they say about the early Islamic period when the
socio-economic problems were successfully tackled by the Muslims, so as
to result in positive improvements?

Islam and the Prophet of Islam (S) were instrumental in bringing about
the congenial socio-economic (and political) conditions. They had
answers to the production and distribution aspects of the economy and
society.

It is impossible to imagine a society during the Prophet's time without
an economic system. It is impossible that the society did not possess a
system in order to improve economic life, and distribute wealth among
the people in a just manner. On the other hand, it is inconceivable to
imagine an economic system separate and unrelated to Islam and the
Prophet of Islam (S).

No doubt, Islam and the Prophet of Islam (S) found the solutions which
led to the Islamic socioeconomic system. In other words, they
established the basis of Islamic socio-economic policy.

The above explanations may be sufficient for anyone to accept the fact
of the Islamic coverage of economic matters. However, it is notable that
the Islamic commandments, principles, traditions and laws, although
clear in themselves, require to be collected, collated, analysed and
consolidated, so as to constitute a distinctive ideological and legal
framework for any socio-economic policy- making.

For, instance the Islamic commandments prescribe human brotherhood,
justice and equal rights for practice by Muslims in particular, even in
the socio-economic sectors of production and distribution of wealth.
Then, there are specific legal provisions concerning matters of detail,
such as reviving (cultivable) land, extraction of minerals, Rent.
Mozarebeh (capitalist-labour Joint enterprise), usury (or interest),
taxes (e.g. Zakat, Khoms, Kharraj), and public financing under Bait
al-Maal.

In the above context, it is quite possible that any Islamic researcher
may not find anything specifically opposed to economic freedom in
principle, as implied in capitalism. On the other hand, he will surely
find contrasting evidence (signifying moral conditioning of the
freedom), in terms of prohibition of usury, legal provisions against
owning land(with agricultural/mining potential) without making it
productive, and the Shari'a authority to fix commodity and other
prices,' among similar other legal provisions,

[^1]: Hejaz is the Name of a mountainous region along the greater part
of the Arabian Red Sea coast.

[^2]: Mozarebeh; a type of transaction, which takes place when a person
passes over his property as capital to another person to invest it for
him, on the understanding that both the persons will share the resultant
profit. It is necessary for the share to be divided on a percentage
basis right from the beginning of the agreement, eg., the owner of the
capital contracts with the agent that they share the profit equally, or
1/3 for the owner and the rest for the agent, or the other way round,
This is a revocable contract between the owner of the capital and the
agent.


