The Moral Basis Of Economics In Islam
=====================================

Sometimes it is argued that the socioeconomic aspects of Islam represent
only a part of its overall ethical code, rather than any specific
methodology of economic significance, since, morality constitutes the
basis of the Islamic teachings.

This argument treats the Islamic teachings as no more significant than
passive moralizations normal for all religions. It presupposes that the
practical significance of the Islamic teachings is confined to their
promotion of morality in and among individuals.

Further, it implies that the Muslims' sublime rapport with God and their
brotherhood with the co-religionists do not extend to any regulation of
the social welfare aspect. In short, the sceptics give an impression
that the Islamic teachings serve as mere recommendations. In their
judgment, these differ from any secular economic methodology, in the
same way as a moralist's exhortation of individuals towards mutually
establishing salutary human relationships does from a social reformers
planned improvement of his people's conditions and seeking to determine
their social rights!

In support of the above argument, the sceptics acknowledge that Islam
teaches Muslims to unite and practise human brotherhood. They recognize
that Islam enjoins its adherents from doing anything contrary to the
divine prescriptions of rectitude, truthfulness, honesty, moderation,
consideration, patience, and similar other virtues, on the part of the
individual Muslims, or even mankind as a whole.

The alleged absence of systematic content of economic significance in
Islam is not borne out by the actual position. The skeptical
interpretation in this regard seeks to reduce the idea of an Islamic
economy from its real position of a school of thought to an imaginary
level of recommendatory, moral exhortations.

No doubt, morality permeates Islam. It’s essentially moral teachings are
comprehensive enough to render the individual and societal conditions,
including the economic status, wholesome; this is made possible through
mutually salutary human relationships in the appropriate societal
conditions envisaged in Islam.

Islam commands its followers to abstain from and oppose any kind of
oppression, selfish exploitation and injustice. The socio-economic
aspect of Zakat, for example, is treated not only in quantitative terms
of taxation, but in the qualitative terms of its salutary effects on the
tax payer and the beneficiaries. What is more significant is the fact
that Zakat has been religiously prescribed as an obligatory act of
devotion to God, at par with Namaz (Prayer), the Ramadan fast and the
Haj. Moreover, the Islamic teachings repeatedly emphasize that .the rich
and the affluent must always support and enhance the status of the poor
and the needy.

Clearly, the Islamic teachings (commandments, exhortations and
guidelines) aim at strengthening the morale of individuals. These are
action-oriented and, as such, go beyond any passive moralizations.
Accordingly, their comprehensive scope and legal significance extends to
realization of a systematic Islamic economy, consistent with their
socioeconomic implications.

Yet, it does not mean that Islamic role is that of an advisor only, so
that it is incapable of formulating a method and system for society in
all its aspects, including the economic.

Islam forbids man's injustice to man, or any persecution arising from
violation of human rights. In doing so, it invites people to be
righteous and just in honouring each other's rights, This it does by
first conceptualizing justice (and human values) in its own ideological
perspective, so that the enlightened Muslims can clearly distinguish
between what is right and lawful in Islam and what is wrong and unlawful
or unjust. Thus, they are meaningfully induced not to exceed the (moral,
ideological and legal) limits determined by Islam.

Islam does neither allow others to interpret the moral concepts, human
values or rights , nor advocate any' existing ones, as advisers normally
do, Islam clarifies what it means by justice, and states the general
rules concerning matters, such as production and distribution of, and
transactions in, wealth. It also explains what it considers to be
unjust. or an oppression.

The foregoing indicates the difference between a moralist and an
economic school of thought. A moralist does no more than invite people
to act with justice, and discourages them from unjust acts. He does not
determine any standards of justice, nor does he establish any criteria
for determining injustice.

He leaves these up to any good sense of his listener or follower.

However, in Islam, any socio-economic methodology presupposes the
relevant standards and criteria of justice as applicable to an Islamic
economy. Had Islam allowed the people themselves to determine its
concepts of justice 'and injustice, and to come to an agreement on a set
of rights by taking into consideration the conditions of their living,
their needs, and contemporary values, it would have meant that Islam's
role was that of a moralist only. While Islam offers advice to people
and discourages them from being unjust, and invites them to justice, it
also states clearly its concept of justice and injustice. This is
independent of any individual opinions held on these matters.

Islam itself clarifies and distinguishes between the just and unjust
paths concerning production and distribution of wealth. For example,
Islam regards forcible ownership of (fallow) land, without rendering it
cultivable, is an act of oppression. On the other hand, if the land is
reclaimed and made cultivable, the, developer becomes entitled to own
the same. Further', Islam considers it an act of oppression to increase
wealth by means of usury, However any increase in one's wealth due to
legitimate earnings is treated as just and fair. In these and similar
other cases, Islam clarifies the limits of justice and injustice.

It is also true that Islam encourages the rich to help the poor, but it
does not stop there. The Islamic government concerned is religiously
obliged to upgrade the living standards of poor to a sufficient level.

According to a tradition attributed to Imam Musa Bin Ja'far (a.s.) a
Wali al-‘Amr[^1] has a specific responsibility concerning Zakat. The
Imam is reported to have said that it is incumbent on the Wali al-‘Amr
to collect Zakat and dispense it according to the divine commandments.
This would necessitate division of Zakat collection into eight parts,
including that of the poor and the needy.

The dispensation should be so made as to provide an allowance (to the
authorized person) that is sufficient to take care of his household
needs for one year. If, at the end of a year, it is found that some
amount of the Zakat allowance is still left, it should be returned to
the authority concerned. Then, if the poor continue to be in need, the
authority concerned has a duty to provide the necessary subsistence
allowances.

Clearly, the social responsibility and the necessity of securing a good
life for everybody is deemed to be an Islamic duty. This is definitely
more than mere advice. It involves compliance with a socio-economic
requirement as a matter of social responsibility, which is treated as
one of the major responsibilities of Wali al-‘Amr in Islam, so that the
Islamic authorities are duty-bound to look after the poor and the needy
by all means. This represents just a small part of the foundations of a
socioeconomic system in Islam,

Islam envisages appropriate practice of whatever it preaches. To
illustrate this point, let us consider an Islamic tradition and the
relevant Islamic practice. The tradition says: "Those who go to sleep,
after dining to their hearts' content, and in a state of insensibility
to the sufferings of their neighbour(s), who remain hungry and restless
through the next morning, do not actually believe in God and the Day of
Final Judgement."

The relevant Islamic injunction lays .down that a Wali al-‘Amr is
charged with the responsibility to under-take the maintenance of the
poor and the needy until the latter- are no longer in need of help.

While the above Islamic tradition may be construed as even a
moralization, the relevant practice cannot evidently be treated as such.
No doubt, the Islamic practice is action -oriented to a vital aspect of
socioeconomic welfare.

Furthermore, it may be recalled that Zakat has been treated as an
important act of worship (in that the tax-payer obeys not only the
divine commandment in this regard, but earns virtue in this world for
the hereafter), while its practical socio-economic implications, too,
are emphasized.

The foregoing explanation shows that the overall responsibility of Wali
al-‘Amr concerning Zakat and its dispensation is rendered practicable
through the relevant provisions, so that Zakat represents not only a
significant individual act of devotion, to God,' but a vital
.socio-economic methodology, of Islam, too.

[^1]: the highest authority dispensing justice under Islamic laws. --Ed.


