Concluding Remarks
==================

In conclusion, I reiterate my inability to understand how those who
dismiss the Islamic socio-economic methodology as no more significant
than a set of moral exhortations can bestow a distinctive importance to
capitalism and communism as socioeconomic system! Specially, we have a
right to ask how capitalism and communism are entitled to, or deserve to
be called "systems", while denying the same title to the socioeconomic
methodology of Islam?

The Shari'a laws of Islam are geared to improving the same conditions
which capitalism seeks to improve under its own rules. This is
notwithstanding the fact that the Islamic judgments differ from that of
capitalism. Then, how can anyone legitimately proclaim capitalism to be
an economic system, and the Islamic socioeconomic system to be only a
collection of moral orders and advices

In the above context, let us 'consider two' more examples to prove that
the Islamic views on the economic matters are at least as efficacious as
those of the other economic, schools of thought. The first example
concerns the question of private ownership, around which the main
differences between the economic or socioeconomic systems revolve. From
the point of view of capitalism, private ownership is the principal
consideration or the general rule, while public ownership is a
subsidiary or exceptional matter.

This can mean that all kinds of wealth and the natural resources, should
be privately owned, unless any exigency of circumstances demand public
ownership of some of these, On the other hand, Marxism favours public
ownership as the principal consideration, Moreover, it rules out private
ownership of natural wealth and industrial raw materials production,
unless and until private ownership becomes inevitable.

In contrast, Islam prescribes a different method, in that it allows
private-cum-public ownership, within clearly defined limits. The Islamic
treatment of the socioeconomic problems evidences at least as much
discernment as that of capitalism and communism. Even so, the
perspicacity of these three schools of socioeconomic thought has
resulted in the emphasis on private property in one, public ownership in
the other and private-cum-public ownership in the third one. The reasons
for which are rather intriguing!

The second example concerns profit, interest, or other income realized
through ownership and rental, or loaning, of real assets and means of
production, as in capitalism. Earnings of this kind involve no actual
work on the part of the earner and, as such, are prohibited in
communism.

Thus, what is admissible in capitalism is inadmissible in socialism or
Marxism, so that usury and rental are basic to capitalism and
antagonistic to Marxism, Islam chooses a third alternative, in the sense
that it considers income derived from ownership and rental of some real
assets and means of production as legitimate, and some others as
illegitimate. For instance, it prohibits usury and earnings derived from
it, while it treats some other income derived from rents as legitimate.

Thus, capitalism and Marxist Socialism (communism) are at loggerheads
with regard to endorsement of usury and rental (earnings without work).
Capitalism bases its approach on the principle of man's economic
freedom. Marxist Socialism, on the other hand, considers work to be the
determinant of the legitimacy of one's earnings, in as much as a
property-owner who does no work is not entitled to any wages or rental.
The Islamic approach, too, is based on its own ideology concerning
wealth production and distribution. While Islam prohibits a capitalist
from seeking an increase in his wealth through usury, it permits a
landowner rental from his tenants.

The Capitalist, Marxist (socialist, communist) and Islamic approaches,
explained above, involve different points of view, all concerning the
question of wealth distribution, Then, how come the capitalist and the
Marxist positions, and not that of Islam, are regarded as "systems"!

Notwithstanding what the sceptics say or do not say, the fact remains
that Islam does represent a socio-economic school of thought of its own
distinct from that of the others.


