A Study of Sunni and Shii Traditions Concerning Tahrif Part 3
=============================================================

The Shia and Tahrif
===================

Some explicit statements found in the works of major Shiah scholars
prove their faith in the Qur'an's remaining safe from every form of
alteration and deletion. These statements are a conclusive proof that
the Qur'an as it exists today is exactly what has been revealed by God
Almighty and that the Imamiyyah do not believe that any addition or
deletion has occurred in it. Here we mention the remarks of some leading
Shii scholars, along with some books and articles written by them to
prove the nonoccurrence of tahrif.

Al-Fadl ibn Shadhan al-Nishaburi is a Shii writer of the 3rd/9th
century. Anyone who reads his book al-'Idah will observe that he has
accused some Sunni sects of believing in tahrif of the Qur'an, often
referring to what they have narrated concerning the Qur'an's
incompleteness, with the words,"Among that which you have narrated"....
Now it is certainly a mistake to infer, as some have done, from his
reference to these traditions that he himself believed in tahrif.

Abu Ja\`far Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Babawayah al-Qummi,
known as al-Qummi (d.381/991), says:

It is our belief that the Qur'an revealed by God Almighty to His
prophet, Muhammad (S), is that which is present between the two flaps
and that which is in the people's hands and there is nothing in addition
to it, and anyone who ascribes to us the belief that it includes
something more, is a liar.1

Thus al-Sadibi, who is one of the greatest Shii scholars and an
authority on hadith and history, refutes the allegation that the
Imamiy­yah believe in tahrif

Al-Shaykh al-Mufid (d. 413/1022), who was the teacher of several eminent
Shii 'ulama', including al-Sayyid al-Radi and al-Sayyid al-Murtada - may
God's mercy be upon all of them - observes, 'Not a single word, verse or
surah has been deleted from the Qur'an, and that which was deleted from
Amir al-Mu'minin's mushaf was its interpreta­tion (ta'wil) and the
exposition (tafsir) of its meanings in accordance with the revelation.
Though it was itself an established revelation, it was not part of the
word of God which comprises the miraculous Qur'an...." He further adds,
"I hold this opinion and seek succor from God (for guidance) to the
truth." These words explicitly prove his belief in the absence of tahrif
in the Quran.2

Apart from this, al-Shaykh al-Mufid has also rejected that which has
been narrated concerning Ibn Masud mushaf, that it contained some
additions. He points out that these traditions are Odd and there­fore
unworthy of any credence.3

4. Al-Sayyid al-Murtada 'Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Mitsawl al-\`Alawi (d.
436/1044) in his set of replies to certain queries called
al-Tarabul­usiyat observes:

The knowledge of the authenticity of the Qur'an is like one's knowledge
of countries, important events, famous books, and recorded Arabic
poetry.

There existed an intensity of care and a plentitude of motives for
narrating and preserving it, and they reached a degree not reached in
respect of any example mentioned by us.... The Qur'an was collected and
compiled during the Prophet's (S) lifetime the way it existed at that
time. The Prophet (S) even chose a group of Companions to memorize it,
and it used to be presented to and recited before the Prophet (S).

A group of Companions, like \`Abd Allah ibn Mas\`ud, Ubayy ibn Ka\`b and
others, completed the recital of the Qur'an a number of times in the
presence of the Prophet (S). A little reflec­tion will show that all
this proves that the Qur'an was collected in an organized manner and
that it was not left in a fragmentary and scattered state.... As to
those among the Imamiyyah and the Hashwiyyah who oppose this view, their
opposition is of no significance. Their opposition, along with that of a
group of Ahl al-Hadith, is based on daif traditions that they narrate
and which they imagine to be authentic, and it is not possible to give
up on their basis something whose authenticity is known with certainty.4

Ibn Hajar writes concerning al-Shan't' al-Murtada that he considered
anyone who believed the Qur'an to have been altered or to have suffered
addition or deletion, an apostate. The same is true of two of his
con­temporaries, Abu" al-Qasim al-Razi and Abu Yala al-Tusi5

5. Shaykh al-Taifah Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Tusi (d.
461/1068) states: As to the discussion regarding addition to and
deletion from the Qur'an, such a thing does not befit it, because the
presence of any addition is negated by consensus, and as to deletion
from it, that which is evident from the beliefs of various Islamic
schools is a negation of it as well, and this position is best entitled
to authentication.

This view has been supported by al-Murtada - may God be pleased with
him - and the literal import of traditions, although many traditions
have been narrrated both by the Shi\`ah (al-Khassah) and Sunnis
(al-\`Ammah) which speak of deletions in many verses and the change of
their place from one location to another in the Qur'an.

But all these traditions are ahad and do not bestow certainty, and
therefore it is better to ignore them and to refrain from busying
oneself with them, considering that they are capable of being
interpreted (in a manner which is not critical of the purity of the
Quranic text), even if their authenticity be accepted, because the Quran
existing between the two flaps is of known authenticity, not having been
challenged or rejected by anyone from the Ummah.

Furthermore, our traditions urge its recitation, require adherence to
its contents, and command correlation of contradictory traditions
relating to precepts with it, so that that which agrees with it is
accepted and that which contradicts it is rejected. It has been narrated
from the Prophet (S) in a tradition that has not been contested by
anyone that he (S) said:

إني مخلف فيكم الثقليم ما إن تمسكتم بهما لن تضلوا، كتاب الله و عترتي
أهل بيتي و إنهما لن يفترقا حتى يردا علي الحوض4-15

I am leaving behind among you two precious things. As long as you adhere
to them you will never go astray. (They are) the Book of God and

my kindred, my Ahl al-Bayt. Verily, the two will never separate until
they meet me at the Pond.

This indicates that the Qur'an shall be present in all ages, because it
is not possible that the Prophet (S) should command us to adhere to a
thing which we are incapable of adhering to, considering that among the
Ahl al-Bayt (A) he whose word is to be followed is present at all times.
Hence, when that which we possess is of accepted authenticity, it is
incumbent that we devote ourselves to its exegesis and elucidation and
set aside anything apart from it.6

Abu 'Ali al-Tabrasi (6th/12th century), the author of the exegesis Ajma
al-bayan, observes:

...As to the issue of additions to and deletions from the Qur'an,
addition to it is negated by a consensus refuting it, and as to
deletions from it, a group of our companions (Shiis) and a group of the
Hashwiyyah from Sunnis have narrated occurrence of alteration in and
deletion from the Qur'an. The correct view in accordance with the belief
of our companions (Imamiyyah) is the opposite of it, and it is what has
been held by al-Murtada - may God sanctify his soul.7

Al-Shaykh \`Abd al-Jalil al-Razi al-Faritsi, author of the book al‑aqd
written around 560/1164, after mentioning the accusation against the
Shi\`ah that they have narrated the tradition describing the incident f
some domestic animal having eaten up the script of some verses assessed
by \`A'ishah (mentioned above in the tradition from Ibn rajah),
observes: "This tradition is present in the books of the Ahl al‑ Sunnah
Then he goes on to refute the view that the Shi\`ah believe in tabrit.8

8. Al-Sayyid Ibn Tawils (d.664/1265) writes in his book Sa\`d al­ Suud:
"The Imarni view is that there has been no tahrif "9 Then criticizing
some Sunni scholars, he adds:

I am surprised at those who argue that the Qur'an has been preserved
since the Prophet (S) and that it was he who compiled it, and then go on
to describe differences between the people of Makkah and Madinah,
between the people of Kufah and Basrah, and also hold that the besmalah
is not part of the surahs. More surprising is the argument they offer
that had it been part of the surahs, something else should have been
mentioned before it as an opening. Good Heavens! When the Qur'an is
secure against additions and deletions, as demanded by reason and the
Shari\`ah, why should it have something before it which is not a part of
it, and how is such a thing possible at all?10

9. Al Allamah Al-Hilli(648-726/1250-1326), when asked by Ibn Muhanna
this question concerning the Qur'an, "Do our scholars affirm the view
that something has been either deleted from or added to the Qur'an or
that its order has been changed?" replied: "The truth is that no change
of order nor any addition or deletion has taken place in it, and I seek
God's refuge from anyone believing in such a thing or something like it,
because this results in negating the miracle of the Prophet - upon whom
be peace - as well as the tawatur with which it has been narrated.11

10. Mulla Muhsin, known as al-Fayd al-Kashani (d. 1091/1680), after
mentioning a set of traditions hinting at the occurrence of tahrif,
states:

The main objection about these traditions is that if we accept them,
there will remain for us no surety concerning anything present in the
Quran, because then the possibility of tahrif and alteration will exist
in every verse and its being contrary to that which God had revealed.
Hence the Qur'an would lose its authority and utility, and the purpose
of commanding adherence to it would be lost. God Almighty says:

<p dir="rtl">
..وَإِنَّهُ لَكِتَابٌ عَزِيزٌ  لَّا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِن بَيْنِ
يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ..
</p>

***And surely it is a Mighty Book. Falsehood does not approach it from
before it nor from behind it (41:41-42)***

And He says:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ
</p>

***Verily We have sent down the Remembrance, and verily We are its
protector.(15:9)***

Now how is it possible for tahrif to find its way into it?

The tradition has also been extensively narrated from the Prophet (S)
and the Imams (A) that the authenticity of traditions is to be judged by
comparing them with the Qur'an so that their authenticity is known from
agreement with it and their falsity from their contradiction with it.
Hence if the Qur'an we possess be considered altered, what is the use of
making such a compari­son? Apart from this, the traditions entailing the
occurrence of tahrif contra­dict the Qur'an, and so it is necessary to
reject them on the basis of their falsehood, or to interpret them.12

Concerning the meaning of verse 9 of Stirat al-Hijr, al-Fayd ob­serves:

<p dir="rtl">
انا لحافظون من التحريف و التغيير والزيادة و النقصان
</p>

*[ It means,] 'We will protect it from tahrif, alteration, addition and
deletion'.* 13

He also refutes the occurrence of tahrif in some other of his works.14
This is al-Fayd's unambiguous view, which he states after citing some
traditions about tahrif that he considers contrary to the Qur'an and so
invalid. But some persons with dubious motives have imputed to al-Fayd
the belief in tahrif solely because of his mentioning some traditions,
without mentioning what he says about them, intend­ing thereby to create
doubts in the minds of people concerning the imamiyyah.15

Out of ignorance or bias, one writer ascribes the belief in tahrif to
other 'ulama' as well, such as al-Shaykh al-Saduq, despite al-Saduq's
explicit statement mentioned earlier of his belief in the absence of
tahrif.

11. Muhammad Baha' al-Din al-\`Amili, known as al-Shaykh al­ Baha'l (d.
1030/1620), observes:

They have differed regarding the occurrence of addition to or deletion
from it. The correct view is that the Great Qur'an is safe from it, be
it addition or deletion, and the words of God Almighty وَإِنَّا لَهُ
لَحَافِظُونَ  prove this.

As to the view popular among the people that the name of Amir
al-Mu'minin (A) has been deleted from some places, for example, the
verse

يا ايها الرسول بلِّغ ما اُنزل اليك من ربك في علي and other verses, it is
not considered credible by the Ulema.16

12. Al-Shaykh Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Hurr Amili(d. 1104/ 1692), the
author of Waseil al-Shiah, states in a treatise written by him in
Persian negating tahrlf:

Anyone having studied history and tradition knows for certain that the
authenticity of the Qur'an has been established through utmost tawatur,
being narrated by thousands of Companions, and that it had been
collected and compiled during the era of the Prophet (S).17

This is the unequivocal observation of al-Shaykh al-Hurr al-\`Amili, one
of the greatest of Shii scholars and traditionists. He confirms in this
treatise the absence of deletions from the Qur'an. Yet one finds some
slanderers imputing to him the belief in occurrence of tahrif.18

13. The eminent scholar Zayn al-Din al-Bayadi, author of al­Sirat
al-mustaqim, writes while elucidating the Quranic verse

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ
</p>

***"It implies that God will protect it from tahrif, alteration,
addition and deletion."*** 19

14. Al-Qari al-Sayyid Nur Allah al-Tustari states: "That which has been
ascribed to the Imami Shiis that they believe in occurrence of
alteration in the Qur'an is not something which the majority of the
Imamiyyah believe. Of course, a small number of them who have held such
a view are those to whom no importance is attached by them."20

15. Al-Muqaddas al-Baghdadi, in his book Sharh al-Wafiyah, narrates the
presence of Ijma' among the Imamiyyah on the issue of absence of any
deletion from the Quran.21

16. Al-Fadil al-Jawad says, "The Qur'an has been confirmed by tawatur
and anything narrated in the form of khabar al-wahid is not Qur'an. We
said it is mutawatir because there were plenty of motives for narrating
the Qur'an, and anything having this quality is ordinarily bound to be
narrated completely by tawatur."22

17. Kashif al-Ghita' negates belief in the occurrence of tahrif and
refutes its ascription to the Imamiyyah in his book Kashf al-ghita' 'an
mubhamat al-Sharrat al-gharra.

18. Al-Sayyid Muhammad Jawad al-Balaghi refutes in his exegesis Ala'
al-Rahman attribution of the belief in presence of tahrif to the
Imamiyyah.

19. Al-Sayyid Mandi al-Tabatabai known as Bahr al Ulum in the chapter on
the authority of the Qur'an of his book Fawaid Al-Usul denies the
occurrence of tahrif.23

20. Ayatullah Kuh-Kamari has also confirmed the nonoccurrence of tahrif,
as mentioned by his pupil in Bushra al-Usul 1411.

21. Al-Sayyid Muhsin al-'Amin Al-Amili(d. 1371/1951), in his work Ayan
al-Shiah on biographies of Shi\`i personalities, declares the absence of
tahrif in the Qur'an, and observes about the ascription of this belief
to the Shi\`ah: "This is a lie and a slander, with which Ibn Hazm has
associated himself.., and the greatest of Shi\`i scholars and
traditionists have expressly affirmed their opposition to it."

He writes at another place, "No Imami scholar, from the earliest times
to the present, has said that the Qur'an contains any minor or major
additions to it. All of them concur regarding the absence of any
addition, and those whose opinions are worthy of being taken into
account also con­cur that nothing has been deleted from it.... Anyone
who ascribes to them anything contrary to this is a liar and a slanderer
guilty of affront to God and His Prophet (S)."24

Other eminent Shi’i scholars who have affirmed the purity of the Quranic
text and absence of any tahrif in it are:

22. Mulla Fath Allah al-Kashani,author of the tafsir Manhaj
al‑sadaqien.25

23. Mirza Muhammad Hann al-'Ashtiyani (d. 1319/1901), in Bahr al-fawa
'id

24. Al-Shaykh \`Abd Allah ibn Muhammad al-Mamaqini (d. 1351/ 1932), in
Tanqih al-maqal

25. Al-Shaykh Muhammad al-Nahawandi (d. 129111874), in his tafsir
Nafahat al-Rahman.

26. Al-Sayyid Naqi al-Hindi (d. 1408/1988), in the book Tafsir
al-Qur'an.

27. Al-Sayyid Muhammad Mahdi Al-Shirazi.

28. Al-Sayyid Shihab al-Din al-Mar\`ashi al-Najafi.

29. Al-Sayyid \`Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din in his book Ajwibat masa'il
Masa Jar Allah. He says:

The Wise Qur'an (has been so preserved in all respects that) falsehood
cannot find a way into it, and it is what the people possess between the
two flaps, without a letter having been deleted, or added, or replaced
by another letter. All its letters are mutawatir, and in every
generation its tawatur is definite, reaching up to the era of the
Prophet (S) and its revelation.

It existed in a compiled form and in its present form in the earliest
period. Gabriel used to present the Quran before the Prophet (S) once
every year and presented it twice in the year of his (S) demise. The
Companions used to present and recite the Qur'an to him (S) and they
completed these recitals several times. All these necessarily known
facts have been in front of the researchers among the Imami scholars.26

30. Ayatullah al-Hajj Aga Husayn al-Tabatabai al-Burujerdi has spelled
out in some of his lectures on jurisprudence (as narrated by some of his
pupils) the falsity of the notion of occurrence of tahrif, and upheld
the purity of the Quranic text.

31. Allamah al-Sayyid Hibat al-Din al-Shahristani says:

The predominant view, held by the majority, is that the Qur'an revealed
by God to the Prophet (S) is the one which exists between the two flaps,
and there is sufficient evidence from history and tradition to
substantiate it. Some Hashwiyyah and pious literalists among the
tradionalists were misled by weak traditions, a part of which were
coined by leaders of heretical sects in the early Islamic era, into
imagining the occurrence of deletion in Qur'inic verses. And al-Murtada
'Alam al-Huda and other researchers among our predecessors have
unequivocally stated that the Qur'an has been secure from addition and
deletion.27

33. Al-Sayyid al-Khumayni, in Kashf al-Asrar.28

There are other explicit statements of Shii 'ulama' in refute of tahrif
which we have not mentioned here. Those interested may refer to Kashf
al-'irtiyab fi raddi Fas1 al-khitab or their books on jurisprudence and
especially the chapters in them on the legal authority of the Book.

The authors mentioned at the end of the above list have writings
indicating their belief in the absence of occurrence of tahrif, and the
author of Burhan-e roshan, Mirza Mahdi al-Burujerdi, has mentioned them
along with the names of other scholars not mentioned here.


