Imam 'Ali’s Mushaf
==================

It has been reported in books on history and tradition that 'Ali (A) had
compiled and memorized the whole Qur'an, and it is an estab­lished fact
that he was one of the scribes of the Revelation and the most eminent of
them.

Ibn Abi al-Hadid observes, "All have concurred that 'Ali (A) used to
memorize the Qur'an during the Prophet's era and at a time when no one
else had yet started doing so. Then, he was the first to compile it."33

Sulaym ibn Qays reports that after the death of the Prophet (S) 'Ali (A)
confined himself to his home to devote to the task of collect­ing and
compiling the Qur'an. He did not leave home until he had compiled it.34

Al-Kalbi reports, "On the death of the Prophet (5) 'Ali (A) sat at home
and compiled the Quran.”35

Al-Kattani reports," 'Ali (A) compiled the Qur'an in the order of its
revelation after the death of the Prophet (S)."36

Ibn al-Munadi reports from al-Hasan ibn al-'Abbas, from 'Abd al­Rahman
ibn Abi Hammad, from al-Hakam ibn Zahir al-Sadusi, from 'Abd Khayr that
"when 'Ali (A) saw ominous signs among the people on the demise of the
Prophet (S), he vowed not to wear his rida until he had compiled the
Qur'an. He then sat at home for three days compiling the Qur'an.

It was the first mushaf in which the Qur'an had been compiled from his
memory. "37 Considering \`Ali's closeness to the Proph­et (S) and his
constantly keeping his company, it was natural that his compilation
should have been done in the best manner. 'Ali (A) himself says:

<p dir="rtl">
ولقد كنت اتَّبِعه اتِّباع الفصيل اثر أُمهِ، يرفع لي في كل يوم من
اخلاقه علماً، و يأمرني بالاقتداء به. و لقد كان يجاور في كل سنة بحراء
فأراه، ولا يراه غيري. ولم يجمع بيت واحد يومئذ في الاسلام غير رسول الله-
صلَّى الله عليه و آله- وخديجة و أنا ثالثهما. أرى نور الوحي و الرسالة، و
أشم ريح النبوة. و لقد سمعت رنة الشيطان حين نزل الوحي عليه- صلى الله عليه
و آله- فقلت: يا رسول الله ما هذه الرنَّة؟ فقال: هذا الشيطان قد أيس من
عبادته. إنك تسمع ما أسمع، وترى ما أرى، إلا إنك لست بنبي، و لكنك لوزير و
إنك لعلى خير.
</p>

.. I used to follow him like a young camel following in the footprints
of its mother. Every day he would raise for me the banner of his
morality and command me to follow it. Every year he would go into
seclusion to the mountain of Hira', where no one else saw him except me.
In those days, Islam did not exist in any house except that of the
Messenger of Allah - peace and blessing of Allah be upon him and his
Descendants - and Khadijah, while I was the third after these two. I
used to see and watch the effulgence of divine revelation and message,
and breathed the scent of prophet hood.

When the revelation descended on the Messenger of Allah - peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him and his Descendants - I heard the scream
of Satan. I said, "O Messenger of Allah, what is this scream?" And he
replied,

"This is Satan who has lost all hope of being worshipped. O 'Ali, you
see all that I see and you hear all that I hear, except that you are not
a prophet, but you are a vicegerent and you are surely on (the path of)
virtue."38

It has also been narrated from Sulayman al-'A\`mash that 'Ali (A) said:

<p dir="rtl">
ما نزلت آية إلا عَلِمتُ فيما أُنزلت و أين نزلت وعلى من نزلت، إن ربي
وهب لي قلباً عقولاً و لساناً طلقاً
</p>

No verse has been revealed without my knowing about its subject, place
of revelation, and against whom it has been revealed. Certainly, God has
granted me a perceptive heart and a fluent tongue.39

He has been reported to have said:

<p dir="rtl">
سلوني عن كتاب الله فإنه ليس من آية إلا و قد عرفت بليل نزلت أم بنهار،
في سهل أم في جبل
</p>

Question me regarding the Book of God, for surely there is no verse
except that I know whether it was revealed at night or during daytime,
in a plain or on hilly ground.40

Sulayman ibn Qays reports 'Ali (A) to have said:

<p dir="rtl">
ما نزلت على رسول الله صلى الله عليه و آله آية من القرآن إلا أقرأنيها
"ع" و أملاها علي، فكتبتها بخطي، و علمني تأويلها و تفسيرها، و ناسخها و
منسوخها، و محكمها و متشابهما، و خاصها و عامها، و دعا الله أن يعطيني
فهمها و حفظها، فما نسيت آية من كتاب الله، و لا علما أملاه علي و كتبته
</p>

Not a verse of the Qur'an was revealed to the Messenger of God (S)
without his reciting and dictating it to me, and without my writing it
in my own hand. He taught me its (the Qur'an's) interpretation and
exposition, its nasikh and manasukeh, and its muhkam and mutashabih. He
prayed to God Almighty to teach me to comprehend and memorize it. Hence
I neither forgot a verse from the Book of God Almighty nor any knowledge
that he dictated to me and which I wrote.41

Now when the Imam (A) had a complete knowledge of all the verses and the
contexts of their revelation (sha'n al-nuzul)as per the fore­going
tradition, he must have written his mushaf in accordance with the
revelation and what the Prophet (S) had ordered him (A). He also wrote
in his mushaf the interpretation of verses as taught to him by the
Prophet (S). Therefore, his mushaf was the most complete among the
masahif in respect of exposition and shan al-nuzul of the verses.
Similarly, his compilation of the mushaf was in the order of the
revelation at different times.

Muhammad ibn Sirin reports from \`Ikrimah that at the beginning of Abu
Bakr's caliphate 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (A) stayed home to compile the
Qur'an. Ibn Sirin says that he asked \`Ikrimah whether anyone else had
compiled the Qur'an in the order of its revelation. He replied: "Had all
men and jinn joined hands to compile it in this manner, they would not
have been able to do so.”42

Al-Mufid observes regarding \`Ali's (A) mushaf, "He mentioned the Makki
verses before the Madani, and the mansukh before the nasikh, and placed
every part of it in its rightful place.”43 He also says: "That regarding
which there is no difference of opinion among Muslim exe­getes is that
deletion of the parts of Amir mushaf con­sisted of interpretations
(tawai1) and the exposition of its meanings in accordance with the
intent of the revelation.”44

This observation clearly shows that the claim that the Imam's mushaf
contained certain texts that established his right to the khilafah
pertains to ta'wai1 of the revealed text of the Qur'an.

Ibn Jazzi al-Kalbi is reported to have said, "Had \`All's (A) mushaf
been accessible, it would have been a source of much knowledge.'45

Regarding the difference present among the initial compilers con­cerning
the order of the surahs, al-Suyuti says, "Among them was 'Ali's mushaf,
which arranged the surahs in the order of their revelation. It began
with Iqra', followed by al-Muddaththir, Nun, al-Muzzammil, al-Takwir,
and so on till the end of the Makki and Madani (surahs)."46

Also, Ibn Shin, on the basis of Ibn Ashtah's report, said: "Ali (A) had
recorded in his mushaf the nasikh and the mansakh (verses)." Ibn Shin is
also reported to have said, "I sought that book and wrote to Madinah
concerning it, but was unable to find it."47 He is also reported to have
said, "Had I been able to find that book, it would have been a source of
knowledge."48

Now, did Ibn Sirin believe that \`Ali's mushaf contained some verses
which were not present in other masahif? It wasn't so; rather, those
additional material consisted of interpretations and facts revealed to
the Prophet (S) concerning the verses. This is exactly what the Imam (A)
has himself expressly affirmed:

<p dir="rtl">
ولقد جئتهم بالكتاب مشتملاً على التنزيل و التأويل
</p>

I surely brought them the Book comprising the revelation and the
inter­pretation.49

This explanation is affirmed by the traditions50 which explicitly
mention the presence of names of some hypocrites of Quraysh in the
Imam's mushaf, that these were part of the ta'wilat and sha'n al-nuzul
of the verses.

As this kind of compilation of the Qur'an was not done by anyone except
'Ali (A), al-Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A) remarked:

<p dir="rtl">
ما ادَّعى احد من الناس أنه جمع القرآن كُله كما أُنزل إلا كذّاب، وما
جمعه و حفظه كما أُنزل إلا علي بن أبي طالب و الائمة بعده
</p>

No one among the people, except a liar, can claim having compiled the
whole Qur'an as it was revealed and no one except 'Ali (A) and the Imams
succeed­ing him have compiled and preserved it as it was revealed?"51

As to the intepretation that \`Ali's compilation of the Qur'an meant his
compilation of it in his memory,52 it is contrary to what the traditions
clearly mention concerning its compilation in a codex (mushaf). Hence it
is clear that in the traditions there is nothing about 'Ali's (A) mushaf
that hints at the

presence in it of some verses not present in other masahif; rather it
only contained the interpretations and sha'n al-nuzil of some verses.


