Fasl al-Khitab and Tahrif
=========================

Some persons who seem to enjoy misleading people have written that the
book Fasl al-khitab by Mirza Muhammad Taqi al-Tabarsi on the topic of
tahrif contains traditions on tahrif narrated solely by the Shiah.
Mentioning two of the twelve arguments offered by al- Nile which are
based on Shii traditions, they ignore his ten other arguments nine of
which refer to Sunni traditions54 Here we will mention al-Nuri's
arguments one by one.

1. He mentions traditions narrated by the Ahl al-Sunnah and some Shiis
prophesying that developments similar to those which took place among
the earlier peoples, such as the Israelites, will also take place within
the Islamic ummah. In this regard he cites traditions from the, Sihah of
the Sunnis, concluding that since scriptural corruption has occurred
among the Israelites it has also occurred among the Muslims.

Overlooking the basic weakness of this argument - because that which the
traditions imply is developments and trends of a socio-his­torical
character, to which the Qur'an also alludes - the thing to be noted is
that most of these traditions have been narrated by the Ahl al-Sunnah
and some of them by the Shiah.

2. Al-Nuri cites Sunni traditions concerning the compilation of the
Qur'an and the fictitious tales related to it -such as the Qur'an's
being compiled on the testimony of two witnesses, or the exclusive
possession of certain verses by some persons, etc. From these he
concludes the absence of tawatur and the possibility of tahrif.

This story of the Qur'an's compilation in this form is something
particular to the Ahl al-Sunnah, because the Shi\`ah believe that the
Qur'an was compiled during the Prophet's lifetime, as pointed out by
al-Tabarsi in the preface of his exegesis Majma\` al-bayan.

In this argument mentions Sunni traditions concerning those verses and
chapters whose reading is said to have been abandoned. Then he refutes
the concept of abandonment of reading, observing, "These traditions
prove the existence of verses and surahs which were deleted by the
caliphs." As can be seen, this argument of al-Nuri is also based on what
the Ahl al-Sunnah have narrated.

We also reject the concept of abrogation or abandonment of reading
(naskh al-tilawah), and considering that the related traditions are
akhbar ahad and incapable of proving anything regarding the Qur'an, it
is incumbent upon all Muslims to reject them.

4. Al Nuri mentions changes made in the order of verses and cites the
traditions which indicate such changes in the revealed sequence of the
verses, or mention different orders in the masahif of the Compan­ions,
such as Ubayy, 'Ali (A) and Ibn Mas\`ud. He also cites the view held by
the Ahl al-Sunnah that the Qur'an has been arranged in accor­dance with
the subjective judgement (ijtihad) of the Companions. Here he also cites
Shii traditions as evidence.

We believe that the order of the surahs has been changed, but the order
of verses has remained unchanged, because some traditions explic­itly
mention that the Prophet (S) himself arranged the verses. However, a
change in the order of surahs does not amount to tahrif:

5. Al Nuri mentions the differences present in the masahif of the
Sahabah concerning certain words, verses and surahs. He then cites
traditions from such Sunni sources as al-Durr al-manthar, al-Kashshaf,
al­ Itqan and from al-Thalabi, al-Tabari and others, inferring from them
the occurrence of tahrif. Here again nearly all of the traditions
support­ing this argument are derived from Sunni sources, though some
tradi­tions which speak of differences amongst these masahif are derived
from Shii sources.

It may be observed concerning these differences that they are shadhdh
forms of readings that have been attributed to some Compan­ions. Also,
the traditions which indicate the existence of other verses and surahs
are all akhbar ahad and so incapable of proving anything regarding the
Qur'an.

6. Here Al-Nuri mentions traditions from Sunni sources stating that
Ubayy ibn Kaab is the best qari' of the ummah. Then he goes on to quote
Sunni traditions concerning his mushaf which claims that it contained
something in addition to the contents of the present Qur'an. From this
he argues that since the present Qur'an does not contain all that which
was present in his mushaf, it implies occurrence of tahrif. Most
traditions relating to this argument are from Sunni sources and only few
of them are from Shii sources.

However, we reject this argument of his on the same basis as men­tioned
above.

7. In this argument he mentions \`Uthman's burning of the masahif and
unifying the people on a single reading. This is something which the Ahl
al-Sunnah as well as the Shiah have narrated. Both of them have also
narrated Ibn Masud's criticism of \`Uthman in this regard. The author
again concludes the occurrence of tahrif from this incident after
discussing further details.

Here we point out that \`Uthman's act was supported by Imam 'Ali ibn Abi
\`Falb (A), and the criticism of Ibn Mas'ud has either been false­ly
attributed to him or was for some other reason, or was a result of Ibn
Mas\`ud's ignorance of the extent of divergence of reading amongst the
people, as noticed by Hudhayfah.

8. Here al-Nuri mentions traditions and statements from Sunni sources
regarding deletions from the Qur'an, like the narration from \`Abd Allah
ibn \`Umar concerning the deletion of verses from the Qur'an and the
loss of a large number of them, or the story of Abu Musa al- 'Ash\`ari
as mentioned in Muslim's Sahih regarding his gathering the qurra' of the
Qur'an and his remarks about one of al-Musabbihat, the matter of the
so-called surahs of al-Khal and al-Hafd,55 the tradition narrated by al
­Bukhari concerning the inclusion of the phrase \`salat al-\`asr in the
verse 2:238 and such similar instances mentioned about the mushaf of
\`A'ishah.

He cites al-Bukhari regarding the tahrif of other verses, and mentions
the purported inclusion of such phrases as مواسم الحج and إلى أجلٍ مسمى
in the verses 2:198 and 4:24 from al-Thalabi, Al-Suyuti, al-Itqan,
Malik's al-Muwatta; and al-Raghib al-Isfahani's al-Muhdadardt. That
which we said in relation to his argument relating to tradi­tions
concerning the abrogation of reading also applies here.

9. Al-Nuri bases this argument on certain Shii traditions in which there
is no mention of the Qur'an, or tahrif, or differences of readings, but
which state that the names of the Imams (A) had been mentioned in all
the heavenly scriptures. From this al-Nuri infers that if the Imams'
names were present in earlier scriptures, then their names must also
have been mentioned in the Qur'an as well, which is the scripture
speci­fied for the Islamic ummah. Since we do not find their names in
the Qur'an, it does not imply that they were not mentioned, but rather
that they were deleted by interested persons.

We do not accept this argument because its premises are refutable,
considering that it is possible that the absence of the mention of the
names of the Imams (A) could be due to some reason that we do not know.
Apart from this, as mentioned earlier, there are other traditions which
explicitly state that the name of 'Ali (A) has not been mentioned in the
Qur'an.

10. Al-Nuri cites traditions describing differences of readings, which
the Ahl al-Sunnah have narrated in large numbers and have justi­fied
them as being in consonance with the tradition that says that the Qur'an
was revealed in sab\`at ahruf. They accept the validity of the seven
readings even though, as pointed out by some of them, the number of
these readings exceeds ten. The Shiah have also narrated some of these
readings, though most of the related traditions are not sahih, and the
few that are sahih are contradicted by such other tradi­tions as إقرأوا
كما يقرأ الناس (Read as the people read) and إقرأوا كما عُلِّمتم (Read
as you have been taught). Moreover, these traditions are akhbar ahad,
while the Qur'an requires tawatur as a proof, and there also exists the
probability of their being explanations of the verses.

This and the following argument are based on traditions from Shii
sources in which there is a mention of the Qur'an having under­gone
tahrif. It may be pointed out that by \`tahrif mentioned in these
traditions - apart from the fact that most of these traditions have been
narrated from al-Sayyari, a ghali, and other daif narrators - is implied
semantic alteration not textual alteration, because we have unambiguous,
sahih traditions proving this point, among them being the letter of the
Imam (A) to Sa'd al-Khayr, cited earlier, which al-Kulayni has
men­tioned in Rawdat al-Kafi.

12. Here al-Nuri has collected nearly a thousand Shii traditions
concerning specific verses in which tahrif has been alleged.

The following points may be noted in regard to this argument.

More than 320 of these traditions contain in their chains the name of
al-Sayyfiri, a ghali, who was cursed by al-Imam al-Sadiq (A) and has
been discredited by all the authorities on rijal.

More than 600 of these thousand traditions are repetitions, the only
difference between them being that they are derived from different books
while their chains of transmission are the same, or that their chains of
transmission are different.

As to the traditions which do not fall in the above two categories, we
find more than 100 traditions cited from al-Tabarsi's Majma\` al­ bayan
concerning variant readings. Most of these traditions are common to the
Shiah and the Ahl al-Sunnah, for al-Tabarsi often cites traditions from
Sunni

narrators such as al-Kisai, Ibn Masud, Al Jahdari, Abu 'Abd al-Rahman,
Al Salami, al-Dahhak, Qatadah, Ibn \`Umar, Ibn Hijaz, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah,
'Aishah, Ibn Zubayr, Hamzah, Ibn Yamar, Ibn Nuhayk, Sa'id ibn
Jubayr,\`Umar ibn Qaid and other Sunni personalities.

In view of this, is it possible to affirm tahrif by relying upon the few
remaining traditions - whether reported by al-Kulayni or 'Ali ibn
Ibrahim al-Qummi - when we already know that the vast majority of Shii
'ulama' believe that the Qur'an has remained secure from tahrif and that
it has been proved through tawatur?

Moreover, some of the traditions mentioned by al-Nuri relate to the
exposition and sha'n al-nuzal of Quranic verses, as pointed out by
al-­Majlisi in his commentary on the Usul Al-Kafi.

As a conclusion to this discussion we may mention what Aqa Buzurg
al-Tehrani relates about his teacher, Mirza Husayn al-Nuri. Al­Tehrani
says,

I have heard him (al-Nuri) say: "I made a mistake in naming the book and
it was more appropriate that it should have been named Fasl fi \`adam
tahrif al-Kitab because I have proved in it that the scripture of Islam,
the Noble Qur'an, as present between the two flaps and in circulation in
all parts of the world, is the revelation of God in respect of all its
surahs, verses and sentences, and no alteration, change, addition or
deletion has taken place in it from the day of its compilation to this
day, and its first compilation has reached us through a confirmed
tawatur..

However, I was negligent in respect of express­ing this fact in several
places in the book in order to avoid becoming a target of criticism and
abuse, and I have foolishly expressed the contrary. I was content with
an allusion to my belief on page 22, whereas that which was important
was achievement of certainty concerning the nonexistence of anything
besides the compilation existing between the two flaps, and to this
effect I quoted al-Shaykh al-Mufid on page 36.

The certainty as to the non­existence of any remainder can be attained
only by refuting the six logical possibilities (about the occurrence of
tahrif), because even if one of these possibilities is present in the
mind no certainty concerning the nonexistence of a remainder can be
attained.

I have left the task of judging whether all these possibilities are
refutable or not to the reader who studies with a penetrating eye the
indications and supportive evidence mentioned by me in the book. Now if
there remains in his mind a doubt about the possibility of some
remainder besides the extant Qur'an, he should not extravagantly claim
to be certain of its nonexistence.

And if there remains no such doubt, then he has indeed attained
certainty, as the popular saying goes, 'There is no town beyond Abadan.'
Apart from this, no Shari responsibility devolves upon one in regard to
the presence or absence of this certainty, and therefore there is no
occasion here for anyone of the two groups to find fault with the other.

Al-Tehrani adds: "This is what I have heard from my teacher him­self,
and as to his practice, we saw him give no credence to the contents of
the traditions (in this regard); rather he considered them Ahad,
incapable of proving anything regarding the Qur'an and worth being
discarded.56


