Part 2:  The Shi'ite Point of View
==================================

5. The Necessity of Imamate and the Qualifications of an Imam
-------------------------------------------------------------

### A. Necessity of Imamate

From the Shi'ite point of view, the institution of *Imamate* is
necessary, according to reason. It is *lutf* (grace) of Allah which
brings the creature towards obedience and keeps him away from
disobedience, without compelling the creature in any way.

It has been proved in the Shi'ite theology that *lutf* is incumbent on
Allah. When Allah orders that man to do something yet is aware that man
cannot do it or that it is very difficult without His assistance, then
if Allah does not provide this assistance, He would be contradicting His
own aim. Obviously, such negligence is evil according to reason.
Therefore *lutf* is incumbent on Allah.

*Imamate* is a *lutf*, because as we know when men have a chief
(*ra'is*) and guide (*murshid*) whom they obey, who avenges the
oppressed of their oppressor and restrains the oppressor, then they draw
nearer to righteousness and depart from corruption.

And because it is a *lutf*, it is incumbent on Allah to appoint an Imam
to guide and lead the *ummah* after the Prophet.[^1]

### B. Superiority (afdaliyyah)

The Shi'ahs believe that, like the Prophet, an Imam should excel the
*ummah* in all virtues, such as knowledge, bravery, piety and charity,
and should possess complete knowledge of the Divine Law. If he does not,
and this high post is entrusted to a less perfect person when a more
perfect one is available, the inferior will have been given preference
over the superior, which is wrong in reason and against Divine Justice.
Therefore, no inferior person may receive Imamate from Allah when there
exists a person superior to him.[^2]

### C. Infallibility

The second qualification is '*ismah* (infallibility). If the Imam is not
infallible (*ma'sum*) he would be liable to err and also deceive
others.[^3]

Firstly, in such a case, no implicit confidence may be placed in what he
says and dictates to us.

Secondly, an Imam is the ruler and head of the *ummah* and the *ummah*
should follow him unreservedly in every matter. Now, if he commits a sin
the people would be bound to follow him in that sin as well. The
undeniability of such a position is self-evident; for obedience in sin
is evil, unlawful and forbidden. Moreover, it would mean that he should
be obeyed and disobeyed at one and the same time; that is, obedience to
him would be obligatory yet forbidden, which is manifestly absurd.

Thirdly, if it would be possible for an Imam to commit sin it would be
the duty of other people to prevent him from doing so (because it is
obligatory on every Muslim to forbid other people from unlawful acts).
In such a case, the Imam will be held in contempt; his prestige will
come to-an end and instead of being the leader of the *ummah* he will
become their follower, and his *Imamate* will be of no use.

Fourthly, the Imam is the defender of the Divine Law and this work
cannot be entrusted to fallible hands nor can any such person maintain
it properly. For this very reason, infallibility has been admitted to be
an indispensable condition to prophethood; and the considerations which
make it essential in the case of a prophet make it so in the case of an
Imam and caliph as well.

More will be said on this subject in Chapter 13 (*Ulu '1Amr* Must Be
*Ma'sum*) .

### D. Appointment by Allah

As in the case of the prophets, the above-mentioned qualifications alone
are not enough to automatically make one an Imam. *Imamate* is not an
acquired job; it is a 'designation' bestowed by Allah. [^4]

It is for this reason that the Shi'ah Ithna 'Asharis (The Twelvers)
believe that only Allah can appoint a successor to the Prophet; that the
*ummah* has no choice in this matter-its only duty is to follow such a
divinely-appointed Imam or caliph.

The Sunnis, on the other hand, believe that it is the duty of the
*ummah* to appoint a caliph.

#### Verses of the Qur'an

The following verses of the Qur'an confirm the views held by the
Shi'ahs:

***And thy Lord creates what He wills and chooses; they have no right to
choose; glory be to Allah, and exalted be He above what they
associate!*** **(28:68).**

This clearly shows that man has no right to make any selection; it lies
entirely in the hands of Allah.

Before creating Adam (as), Allah informed the angels:

**... "*****Verily I am going to make a caliph in the earth*** **". . .
( 2: 30).**

And when the angels demurred politely at the scheme, their protest was
brushed aside by a curt reply: "***Surely I know what you know not*****"
(*****ibid*****.).** If the *ma'sum* (infallible) angels were given no
say in the appointment of a caliph, how can fallible humans expect to
take the whole authority of such an appointment in their own hands?

Allah Himself appointed Prophet Dawud (as) as caliph on the earth-

**"*****O Dawud ! Verily; We have made thee (Our) caliph on the earth
...*****" (38:26)**

In every case Allah attributes the appointment of the caliph or the Imam
exclusively to Himself.

Likewise, the call went to Prophet Ibrahim (as):

**(Allah)** ***said: "Surely I am going to make you an Imam for men."
(Ibrahim) said: "And of my offspring?" He said: "My covenant will not
include the unjust.*** **" (2 : 124)**

This verse leads us to the correct answers of many important questions
concerning *Imamate*.

a. Allah said: "*Surely I am going to make you an Imam for men.* " This
shows that *Imamate* is a divinely-appointed status; it is beyond the
jurisdiction of the *ummah*.

b. "*My covenant will not include the unjust.*" This clearly says that a
non-*ma'sum* cannot be an Imam. Logically, we may divide mankind into
four groups:

1. Those who remain unjust throughout their lives;

2. those who are never unjust;

3. those who are unjust early in their lives but later become just; and

4. those who are just early in their lives but later become unjust.

Ibrahim (as) had too high a position to request *Imamate* for the first
or the fourth group. This leaves two groups (the second and the third)
which could be included in the prayer. However, Allah rejects one of
them; i. e., those who are unjust early in their lives but later become
just. Now there remains only one group which can qualify for
*Imamate* -those who are never unjust throughout their lives, i.e.,
*ma'sum*.

c. The literal translation of the last sentence is as follows: *My
covenant will not reach the unjust*. Note that Allah did not say, the
unjust will not reach My covenant, because it would have implied that it
was within the power of man-albeit a just one-to attain the status of
*Imamate*. The present sentence does not leave room for any such
misunderstanding; it cleary shows that receiving *Imamate* is not within
human jurisdiction; it is exclusively in the hands of Allah and He gives
it to whom He pleases.

Then as a general rule, it is stated:

***And We made them Imams who were to guide by Our command ...***
**(21:73)**

When Prophet Musa (as) wanted a vizier to help him with his
responsibilities, he did not appoint someone by his own authority. He
prayed to Allah: "And make for me a vizier from my family, Harun (Aaron)
my brother" (20:29-30). And Allah said:

**"*****You are indeed granted your petition, O Musa!*****"
(*****ibid.*****, 36).**

That Divine selection is made known to the *ummah* through the prophet
or the preceding Imam. This declaration is called *nass* (specification;
determination; designation of the succeeding Imam by the prophet or
preceding Imam). An Imam according to Shi'ite belief, must be *mansus
min Allah*, i.e., designated by Allah for that status.

### E. Miracles

If one has not heard *nass* about a claimant of *Imamate*, then the only
way of ascertaining the truth is through a miracle (*mu'jizah*). [^5]

Generally speaking any man may claim that he is an Imam or a prophet's
caliph and infallible, but a miracle is the only unfailing test of truth
in such cases. If the claimant proves a miracle also in support of his
claim, it would be admissible without hesitation. If he fails to do so,
it is evident that he does not possess the qualifications required for
*Imamate* and caliphate, and his claim would therefore be false.

#### Precedent

The universal practice of prophets had been to nominate their successors
(on the command of Allah) without any interference from the *ummah*.

The history of these prophets does not offer a single instance of a
prophet's successor being elected by a voting of his followers. There is
no reason why in the case of the successor of the last Prophet this
established Divine Law should be changed. Allah says:

***And you shall never find a change in divine practice*** **(33:62).**

#### Logical Reasons

1. The same reasons which prove that the appointment of a prophet is a
divine prerogative prove with equal force that the successor of that
prophet should also be appointed by Allah. An Imam or Caliph, like the
prophet, is appointed to carry on the work of Allah; he must be
responsible to Allah. If he is appointed by the people, his first
loyalty will be not for Allah, but for the people who would be 'the
basis of his authority'. He will always try to please people, because if
they were to withdraw their confidence in him he would lose his
position. So he will not discharge the duties of religion without fear
or favour; his eyes will always be on political considerations. Thus the
work of Allah will suffer.

And the history of Islam provides ample evidence of glaring disregard
for the tenets of religion shown by man-appointed caliph’s right from
the beginning. So this argument is not just academic; there is solid
historical evidence behind it.

2. Also, only Allah knows the inner feelings and thoughts of man; no one
else can ever know the true nature of another person. Perhaps someone
may pose as a pious and god-fearing man merely to impress his Colleagues
and gain some worldly benefit. Such examples are not rare in history.
Take, for example, the case of 'Abdu '1 Malik ibn Marwan who used to
spend all his time in the mosque in prayer and recitation of the Qur an.
He was reciting the Qur'an when news reached him of the death of his
father and that people were waiting to pledge their allegiance to him.
He closed the Qur'an and said: "This is the parting between me and
thee".[^6]

Therefore, as the existence of qualifications which are necessary for an
Imam or Caliph can only truly be known to Allah, it is only Allah Who
can appoint an Imam or Caliph.

6. Infalability of the Imams
----------------------------

Now, let us note what the Qur'an says about the *Ahl u'l-bayt* (family
members) of the Holy Prophet.

According to the Qur'an, the following persons were sinless and
infallible at the time of the death of the Holy Prophet 'Ali, Fatimah,
Hasan and Husayn. The verse of purity (*tathir*) reads as follows:

**...** ***Allah only desires to keep away abomination from you, O
People of the House! And to purify you a (thorough) purifying*****. (33
:33)**

It is universally agreed that the above-named four persons are 'People
of the House' and are sinless and free from all kinds of abomination.

The sentences before and after this verse are addressed to the wives the
Holy Prophet and the pronouns therein are of feminine gender; but the
pronouns in this verse are of masculine gender. The reason why this
verse has been placed in its present position is not difficult to guess.
The late renowned scholar 'Allamah Puya writes in footnote no. 1857 of
the translation of the Holy Qur'an by S. V. Mir Ahmed Ali:

"The portion of this verse relating to the divinely effected purity of
the Holy *Ahl u'l bayt*-needs a proper explanation commenting with
reference to its correct context. This portion of this verse is a
separate ayah or verse by itself revealed separately on particular
occasions but placed here as it deals with the wives of the Holy
Prophet. The location of this verse here if studied properly makes it
obvious that it has its own significant and important purpose behind it.
While the address in the beginning of the verse is in the feminine
gender-there is the transition here in the address from the feminine to
the masculine gender. While referring to the consorts of the Holy
Prophet, the pronouns also are consistently feminine. For a mixed
assembly of men and women, generally the masculine gender is used. This
transition in the grammatical use of the language, makes it quite
obvious that this clause is quite a different matter used for a
different group other than the previous one, and has been suitably
placed here to show a comparative position of the *Ahlu 'l-bayt* in
contrast to the wives of the Holy Prophet. 'Amr ibn Abi Salamah who was
brought up by the Holy Prophet relates:

"'When this verse was revealed the Holy Prophet was in the house of Umm
Salamah. At the revelation of (the verse): *Verily willeth God to keep
away impurity from you O People of the House! and He purifieth you with
the perfect purification*, the Holy Prophet assembled his daughter
Fatimah, her sons Hasan and Husayn and her husband, his cousin, 'A1i,
and covered the group, including himself, with his own mantle and
addressing God said: "O God! These constitute my progeny! Keep them away
from every kind of impurity, purified with perfect purification''. Umm
Salamah, the righteous wife of the Holy Prophet, witnessing this
marvellous occasion, humbly submitted to the Holy Prophet, "O Apostle of
God! May I also join the group? “to which the Holy Prophet replied, "No,
remain thou in thine own place, thou art in goodness"'". [^7]

This is not the place to name the countless references concerning this
verse; still, I would like to quote Mawlana Wahidu'z-Zaman, the famous
Sunni scholar, whose translation and commentary of the Qur'an as well as
his book *Anwaru'l-lughah* (a dictionary of the Qur'an and *ahadith*)
are among the recognized references. He writes in his commentary of the
Qur'an about this verse: "Some people think that it is especially for
those family members who had b1ood relation with the Prophet, i.e.,
'Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn. The present translator says that the
traditions which are correct (*sahih*) and well-connected up to the
Prophet, support the same view, because when the Prophet himself has
declared that his family members are only these, then to accept it and
believe in it becomes obligatory. And one more sign of correctness of
this view is that the pronouns used before and after this verse are
those for females, while in this verse are those for males . . .”[^8]

Again he says in his *Anwaru 'l-lughah*: "The correct view is that in
this verse of purity only these five persons are included (i.e., the
Prophet, 'Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn), although in Arabic usage, the
word *ahlu 'l-bayt* is used for wives also. Some people prove by this
verse that these five persons were sinless and *ma'sum* (infallible).
But if not *ma'sum*, then of course they were surely *mahfuz* (protected
from committing any sin or error)." [^9]

I have quoted these two references to show that not only the
Ithna'Asharis but the learned Sunni scholars also confirm that,
according to the rules of Arabic grammer and according to the correct
unbroken traditions of the Prophet, only 'A1i, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn
are induded in this verse, besides the Prophet himself. Also, it is
clear that the view that these persons were sinless is shared by Sunni
scholars too. It is apparent that in the least they say that if they
were not infallible (theoretically) they were surely protected from sin
and error (practically) .

There are many other verses and traditions testifying to the purity
(*'ismah*) of the *Ahlu '1bayt*, but the limitation of space does not
allow me to enumerate them even briefly.

7. Superiority of ‘Ali (as)
---------------------------

*Afdaliyyah* (superiority) in Islam means "to deserve more reward
(*thawab*) before Allah because of good deeds".

All Muslims agree that this ' superiority ' cannot be decided by our own
views or outlook and that there is no way to know it except through the
Qur'an or *hadith*. al-Ghazzali, the famous Sunni scholar, has written:
"The reality of superiority is what is before Allah; and that is
something which cannot be known except to the Holy Prophet."[^10]

Most of our Sunni brethren believe that superiority was according to the
sequence of the caliphate; i.e., Abu Bakr was more superior, then 'Umar,
then 'Uthman, then 'A1i.

But this belief is not based on any proof, nor was it the belief of all
the Sunnis of early days. During the time of the Holy Prophet, we find
that such respected Companions as Salman al-Farisi, Abu Dharr
al-Ghifari, Miqdad al-Kindi, 'Ammar ibn Yasir, Khabbab ibn al-Aratt,
Jabir ibn 'Abdillah al-Ansari, Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman, Abu Sa'id
al-Khudri, Zayd ibn Arqam and many others believed that 'Ali (as) was
the most superior amongst all the *Ahlu 'l-bayt* and the Companions.
[^11]21

Ahmad ibn Hanbal was once asked by his son about his views on the
subject of superiority. He said: "Abu Bakr and 'Umar and 'Uthman." His
son asked: "And what about 'Ali ibn Abi Talib? " He replied: "He is from
the Ahlu '1bayt. Others cannot be compared with him."[^12]

'Ubaydullah Amritsari writes in his famous book *Arjahu 'l-matalib*: "As
superiority means 'having more *thawab*', its proof can only be known
from the *ahadith* (traditions) of the Holy Prophet. .. and if there are
conflicting traditions, then the authentic traditions should be accepted
and strong traditions should be differentiated from the weak ones.

"al-'Allamah Ibn 'Abdi 'l-Barr writes in his book al-Isti'ab[^13]
concerning the *ahadith* which have been narrated about the superiority
of Amiru 'l-mu'minin, 'A1i that: 'Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, al-Qadi Isma'il
ibn Ishaq, Imam Ahmad ibn 'Ali ibn Shu'ayb an-Nasa'i and al-Hafiz Abu
'Ali an-Naysaburi have said:[^14] "There have not come as many *ahadith*
with good chains of narrators (*asnad*) about virtues of any of the
Companions as have been narrated on the virtues of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib
(as) ."

"Furthermore, if we look at the exclusive virtues of Amir u'l-mu'minin,
'Ali (as) and think about those things which caused him to reap great
rewards before Allah, we will have to admit that only he was the most
superior after the Holy Prophet.'' [^15]25

The author himself was a Sunni, and he has discussed this matter in
detail in Chapter 3, pages 103-516, of the above-mentioned book.

Obviously, I cannot provide here even a short list of the verses and
traditions concerning the *afdaliyyah* of 'A1i (as). It will suffice to
say that there are at least 86 verses in the Qur'an extolling the
virtues of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) and the traditions on this subject
cannot be counted.

Thus, it should be obvious even to the casual observer that 'Ali (as)
was the most superior of the Muslims after the Holy Prophet.

8. Appointment of Ali (as)
--------------------------

After giving a short account of '*ismah* and *afdaliyyah* of 'Ali ibn
Abi Talib (as), now comes the most important question of his appointment
by Allah.

On several occasions the Holy Prophet had declared that 'Ali (as) was to
be his successor and caliph.

It is a fact that the first open declaration of the prophethood was the
very occasion when the first open declaration of 'Ali's caliphate was
made. It was at the time of the "Feast of the Clan."

When the verse: "*And warn thy nearest relations* (26:214), was
revealed, the Prophet ordered 'Ali to prepare food and invite the sons
of 'Abdu'l-Muttalib so that he could convey to them the words of Allah.
After the feast, the Prophet intended to talk to them, but Abu Lahab
interfered by saying:"Verily, your comrade has entranced you". Upon
hearing this statement all of them dispersed.

The next day, the Messenger of Allah again called them for a feast.
After they had finished with their food, the Prophet addressed them: "O
sons of 'Abdul'l-Muttalib, I have brought for you the good of this world
and the next, and I have been appointed by the Lord to call you unto
Him. Therefore, who amongst you will administer this cause for me and be
my brother, my successor and my caliph?" No one responded to the
Prophet’s call except 'Ali who was the youngest of the congregation. The
Prophet then patted 'Ali's neck and said: "O my people! This 'A1i is my
brother, my successor and my caliph amongst you. Listen to him and obey
him.'' [^16]26

It is interesting to note here that the Leiden edition (1879 A.D., p.
1173) of *at-Tarikh* of at Tabari records the words of the Holy Prophet
as "*wasiyyi wa khalifati*" (my successor and my caliph); but in the
Cairo edition of 1963 A.D., (which claims to be checked with the Leiden
edition) these important words have been changed to "*kadha wa kadha*"
(so-and-so) ! How sad it is to see the academic world sacrificing its
honesty and integrity on the altar of political expediency!

9. Verses of mastership ( wilayah)
----------------------------------

After that, on many occasions, many verses and traditions reminded the
Muslims that 'Ali was their master after the Holy Prophet. One of the
most important verse is as follows:

***Verily, your Master is only Allah and His Apostle and those who
believe, those who establish prayers, and pay the zakat while bowed***
**(in worship) (5:55) .**

The Muslim scholars, Sunni and Shi'ah alike, agree that this verse was
revealed in honour of Imam 'Ali (as). It clearly shows that there are
only three masters of the believers. Firstly, Allah secondly, His
Prophet and thirdly, 'Ali (with the eleven succeeding Imams).

Abu Dharr al-Ghifari says that one day he was praying with the Prophet
when a beggar came to the Prophet's mosque. No one responded to his
pleas. The beggar raised his hands towards heavens and said, "Allah! be
a witness that I came to Thy Prophet's mosque and no one gave me
anything". 'Ali (as) was bowing in ruku' at that time. He pointed his
little finger, on which was a ring, towards the beggar who came forward
and took away the ring. This incident occurred in the Prophet's presence
who raised his face towards heaven and prayed: "O Lord! my brother Musa
had begged of Thee to open his breast and to make his work easy for him,
to loose the knot of his tongue so that people might understand him, and
to appoint from among his relations his brother, as his vizier, and to
strengthen his back with Harun and to make Harun his partner in his
work. O Allah! Thou said to Musa, 'We will strengthen thy arm with thy
brother. No one will now have an access to either of you!' O Allah! I am
Muhammad and Thou hast given me distinction. Open my breast for me, make
my work easy for me, and from my family appoint my brother 'Ali as my
vizier. Strengthen my back with him". The Prophet had not yet finished
his prayers when Jibril brought the above quoted verse. [^17]27

Here is not the place to give all the references of this *hadith*. (They
run in the hundreds.) This verse and the prayer of the Prophet jointly
and separately show that 'A1i (as) was designated to be the Master of
the Muslims after the Holy Prophet.

10. The formal declaration of Ghadir Khum
-----------------------------------------

All the previous declarations may be classified as a prelude to the
formal declaration of Ghadir Khumm.

This event has been unanimously described by the learned historians and
scholars of both sects. Here we give a brief account to show what great
arrangements were made to declare 'Ali as the successor to the Holy
Prophet.

Ghadir Khumm lies in Juhfa between Mecca and Medina. When the Prophet
was on his way home, after performing his last pilgrimage, Jibril
brought him this urgent command of Allah:

***O Apostle! Deliver what has been sent down to you from your Lord; and
if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message (at all); and
Allah will protect you from the people . . .*** **(5 :67)**

The Prophet stopped at once and ordered that all people who had gone
ahead should be called back, and he waited for those who were following.
When the entire caravan had gathered, a pulpit was set up by piling up
camel saddles; the acacia thorns were swept away. The Prophet ascended
the pulpit and delivered a long sermon. The day was very hot; people had
to stretch their cloaks under their feet and over their heads. The
Prophet addressed them as follows: O you people! Know it well that
Jibril came down to me several times bringing me orders from the Lord,
the Merciful, that I should halt at this place and inform every man,
white and black, that 'Ali, the son of Abu Talib, is my brother and my
*wasiyy* (successor) and my caliph, and the Imam after me. His position
to me is like that of Harun to Musa, except that there is to be no
prophet after me, and he is your master next to Allah and His Prophet.

O you people! Verily, Allah has appointed him to be your Imam and ruler.
Obedience to him is obligatory alike on all the *muhajirun* (Emigrants)
and *ansar* (Helpers) and on those who follow them in virtue, and on the
dwellers in cities and the nomads, the Arabs and the non-Arabs, the
freeman and the slave, the young and the old, the great and the small,
the white and the black. His command is to be obeyed; his word is
binding and his orders obligatory on everyone believing in the One God.
Cursed is the man who disobeys him and blessed is he who follows him,
and he who believes in him is a true believer.

O you people! This is the last time I shall stand in this assembly.
Therefore, listen and obey and surrender to the command of your Lord.
Verily, Allah, He is your Lord and God; then after Him, His Prophet,
Muhammad, who is addressing you, is your Master, then after me 'Ali is
your Master and your Imam, according to Allah's command. Then after him
the *Imamate* will continue through my descendants begotten by him till
the day you meet Allah and His Prophet. O you people! Meditate on the
Qur'an and understand its verses; reflect over its clear verses and do
not go to the ambiguous ones.

For, by Allah, none will properly explain to you its warnings and
expound to you its meanings except ,this man (i.e.,'Ali) whose hand I am
lifting up in front of myself. And I say unto you that ***whoever whose
Master I am, 'Ali is his Master***; and he is 'Ali, the son of Abu
Talib, my brother and *wasiyy* (successor); and *wilayah* (obedience to
him and love for him) has been made obligatory by Allah, the Powerful,
the Exalted.

The other Imams have also been briefly referred to in this address; and
they are mentioned in precise detail in many other traditions. For
example, on one occasion addressing Imam Husayn the Prophet said: "You
arean Imam, the son of an Imam, the brother of an Imam, nine of your
lineal descendants will be pious Imams; the ninth of them being their
Qa'im (he who will rise).'' [^18]28

Even a casual observer would not fail to realize that, it was a matter
of vital importance to Islam and that is why the Prophet, under the
Divine Command, made all the possible preparations to accomplish it.
Exposed to the scorching rays of the midday sun, he mounted the pulpit
to make the important pronouncement.

First of all, he informed the audience of his approaching end and then
called them to witness that he had faithfully discharged his duties.
Then he asked them: "Do I not have more authority upon you than you
yourselves have. All of them cried out that he certainly had more right
on them than they themselves had. The Prophet then said: "Whoever whose
Master I am, 'Ali is his Master." In the end he invoked blessings on
'Ali, saying: "O Allah! Love him who loves 'Ali, and be the enemy of the
enemy of 'Ali; help him who helps 'Ali, and forsake him who forsakes
'Ali.''

When the ceremony was over, the following verse of the Qur'an was
revealed:

***This day I have perfected your religion for you and I have completed
My bounty upon you and I have approved Islam as your religion***
**(5:3).**

This Divine Communication clearly shows that because of 'Ali's
appointment to thee Imamate the religion was perfected, the bounty; and
favour of Allah completed, and Islam approved by Allah. On the arrival
of this glad tiding from heaven the believers congratulated 'Ali in the
Prophet's presence and many poets composed poems on this event. All
these facts stand recorded in books of tradition as will be seen in the
following pages.

### Hadith of Ghadir: Mutawatir

The following extracts (taken from authentic Sunni books) from the said
lecture (*khutbah*) of the Holy Prophet are very important:

I am leaving behind, among you, two most precious things. . . (1) the
Book of Allah . . . and (2) my descendants who are my family members.
They will not separate from each other until they come to me near
Kawthar (a pool in Paradise). Verily Allah is my Master and I am the
Master of every believer. Then he took the hand of 'Ali and said:

*Whoever whose Master I am, 'Ali is his Master.*

These two traditions are referred to as the traditions of 'Two Precious
Things' (*Thaqalayn*) and Mastership' (*Wilayah*) . They are singly and
Jointly narrated by hundreds of traditionalists.

Nawwab Siddiq Hasan Khan of Bhopal, says: "al-Hakim Abu Sa'id says that
the tradition of 'Two Precious Things' and of 'whoever who’s Master I
am, 'Ali is his Master' are *mutawatir* (i.e., narrated unbrokenly by so
many people that no doubt can be entertained about their authenticity),
because a great number of the Companions of the Prophet have narrated
them. So much so that Muhammad ibn Jarir has written these two
traditions through seventy-five different chains (*asnad*); and he has
written a separate book which he named *Kitabu 'l-wilayah*; and al-Hafiz
adh-Dhahabi also has written a complete book on its *asnad* and has
passed the verdict that it is *mutawatir*; and Abu 'l-'Abbas ibn 'Uqdah
has narrated the *hadith* of Ghadir Khumm through one hundred and fifty
chains and has written a complete book on it." [^19]29

Some writers have tried to cast doubt on the authenticity of the events
of Ghadir Khumm. It is necessary to mention that this *hadith* is
*mutawatir*, and the late renowned scholar al'Allamah al-Amini in the
first volume of his celebrated book *al-Ghadir* has given (with full
references) the names of 110 famous Companions of the Holy Prophet who
have narrated this *hadith*. As an example, I am enumerating the names
given under letter *alif*.

The years of 1. Abu Layla al-Ansari (37); 2. Abu Zaynab ibn 'Awf
al-Ansari; 3. Abu Fadalah al-Ansari (38); 4. Abu Qudamah al-Ansari; 5.
Abu 'Amrah ibn 'Amr ibn Mutassin al-Ansari; 6. Abu 'l-Haytham ibn
at-Tayyihan (37); 7. Abu Rafi' al-Qibti, slave of the Holy Prophet; 8.
Abu Dhuwayb Khuwaylid (or Khalid) ibn Khalid al-Hudhali; 9. Usamah ibn
Zayd ibn Harithah (54); 10. Ubayy ibn Ka'b al-Ansari (30 or 32); 11.
As'ad ibn Zurarah al Ansari; 12. Asma' bint 'Umays; 13. Umm Salamah,
wife of the Holy Prophet; 14. Umm Hani bint Abi Talib; 15. Abu Hamzah
Anas ibn Malik al-Ansari; 16. Abu Bakr ibn Abi Quhafah; and 17. Abu
Hurayrah. [^20]30

And there are not less than 84 *tabi'in* (disciples of the Companions)
who narrated this *hadith* from the above-mentioned Companions. Again,
the list under letter *alif* is given here as an example:

1. Abu Rashid al-Hubrani ash-Shami, 2. Abu Salamah ibn 'Abdi'r-Rahman
ibn 'Awf; 3. Abu Sulayman al-Mu'adhdhin; 4. Abu Salih as-Samman, Dhakwan
al-Madani; 5. Abu 'Unfuwanah al-Mazini; 6. Abu 'Abdi 'r-Rahim al-Kindi;
7. Abu 'l Qasim, Asbagh ibn Nubatah at-Tamimi; 8. Abu Layla al-Kindi;
and 9. Iyas ibn Nudhayr.[^21]31

Traditionists have recorded this *hadith* in their books in every
century and every era. For example, the names of those writers and
scholars who have narrated this *hadith* in the second century of
*hijrah* are:

1. Abu Muhammad, 'Amr ibn Dinar al-Jumahi al-Makki (115 or 116); 2. Abu
Bakr Muhammad ibn Muslim ibn 'Ubaydillah al-Qurashi az Zuhri (124); 3.
'Abdu'r Rahman ibn Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr at-Taymi al-Madani
(126); 4. Bakr ibn Sawadah ibn Thumamah, Abu Thumamah al-Basri (128); 5.
'Abdullah ibn Abi Najih, Yasar ath-Thaqafi, Abu Yasar al-Makki (131); 6.
al-Hafiz Mughirah ibn Muqassim, Abu Hisham ad-Dabbi al-Kufi (133); 7.
Abu 'Abdi'r-Rahim Khalid ibn Zayd al-Jurnahi al Misri (139); 8. Hasan
ibn al-Hakam an-Nakha'i al-Kufi (ca. 140); 9. Idris ibn Yazid, Abu
'Abdillah al-Awd; al-Kufi; 10. Yahya ibn Sa'id ibn Hayyan at-Taymi
al-Kufi;

11. al-Hafiz 'Abdu'l Malik ibn Abi Sulayman al-'Arzami al-Kufi (145);
12. 'Awf ibn Abi Jamilah al'Abdi al Hajar; al-Basri (146); 13.
'Ubaydullah ibn 'Umar ibn Hafs ibn 'Asim ibn 'Umar ibn al-Khattab
al-'Adawi al-Madani (147); 14. Nu'aym ibn al Hakim al-Madayini (148);
15. Talhah ibn Yahya ibn Talkah ibn 'Ubaydillah at-Taymi al-Kufi (148);
16. Abu Mukammad Kathir ibn Zayd al-Aslami (ca. 150); 17. al-Hafiz
Mukammad ibn Ishaq al-Madani (151 or 152); 18. al-Hafiz Mu'ammar ibn
Rashid, Abu 'Urwah al-Azdi al-Basri (153 or 154); 19. al-Hafiz Mis'ar
ibn Kidam ibn Zahir al-Hilali ar-Rawasi al-Kufi (153 or 154); 20. Abu
'Isa Hakam ibn Aban al-'Adani (154 or 155);

21. 'Abdullah ibn Shawdhab al Balkhi al-Basri (157); 22. al-Hafiz
Shu'bah ibn al-Hajjaj, Abu Bistam al-Wasit; (160); 23. al Hafiz
Abu'1-'Ala', Kamil ibn al-'Ala' at-Tamimi al-Kufi (ca. 160); 24.
al-Hafiz Sufyan ibn Sa'id ath-Thawri, Abu 'Abdillah al-Kufi (161); 25.
al Hafiz. Isra'il ibn Yunus ibn Abi Ishaq as-Sabi'i Abu Yusuf al-Kufi
(162); 26. Ja'far ibn Ziyad al-Kufi al-Ahmar (165 or 167); 27. Muslim
ibn Salim an-Nahdi, Abu Farwah al-Kufi; 28. al Hafiz Qays ibn ar-Rabi',
Abu Mukammad alAsadi al-Kufi (165); 29. al-Hafiz Hammad ibn Salamah, Abu
Salamah al-Basri (167); 30. al Hafiz 'Abdullah ibn Lahi'ah, Abu 'Abdi
'r-Rakman al-Misri (174);

31. al-Hafiz Abu 'Uwanah al-Waddak ibn 'Abdillah ai-Yashkuri al-Wasit;
al-Bazzaz (175 or 176); 32. Al Qadi Sharik ibn 'Abdillah, Abu 'Abdillah
an-Nakha'i al-Kufi (177); 33. al-Hafiz 'Abdullah (or 'Ubaydullah) ibn
'Ubaydu 'r-Rahman (or 'Abdu 'r-Rahman) al-Kufi, Abu 'Abdi 'r-Rahman
al-Ashja'i (182); 34. Nuh ibn Qays, Abu Rawh al-Huddani al-Basri (183);
35. al-Muttalib ibn Ziyad ibn Ab; Zuhayr al-Kufi, Abu Talib (185); 36.
Al Qadi Hassan ibn Ibrahim al-'Anazi, Abu Hashim (186); 37. al-Hafiz
Jarir ibn 'Abdi 'l-Hamid, Abu 'Abdillah ad-Dabbi al-Kufi ar-Razi (188);
38. al-Fadl ibn Musa, Abu 'Abdillah al-Marwazi as-Sinani (192); 39.
al-Hafiz Muhammad ibn Ja'far al-Madani al-Basri (193); 40. al-Hafiz
Isma'il ibn 'Uliyyah, Abu Bishr ibn Ibrahim al-Asadi (193);

41. al-Hafiz Muhammad ibn Ibrahim, Abu 'Amr ibn Abi 'Adiyy as-Sulami
al-Basri(194);42. al-Hafiz Muhammad ibn Khazim, Abu Mu' awiyah atTamimi
ad-Darir (195); 43. al-Hafiz. Muhammad ibn Fudayl, Abu 'Abdi'r-Rahman
al-Kufi (195); 44. al-Hafiz al-Waki' ibn al-Jarrah ar-Ru'asi alKufi
(196); 45. al-Hafiz Sufyan ibn 'Uyaynah, Abu Muhammad ai-Hilali al-Kufi
(198); 46. al-Hafiz 'Abdullah ibn Numayr, Abu Hisham al-Hamdan;
al-Kharifi (199); 47. al-Hafiz Hanash ibn al Marith ibn Laqit an-Nakha'i
al-Kufi; 48. Abu Mupammad Musa ibn Ya'qub az-Zama'; al-Madani; 49.
al-'Ala' ibn Salim al-'Attar al-Kufi; 50. al-Azraq ibn 'Ali ibn Muslim
al-Hanafi, Abu 'l-Jahm al-Kufi;

51. Ham ibn Ayyub al-Hanafi al-Kufi; 52. Fudayl ibn Marzuq al-Agharr
ar-Ru'asi al-Kufi (ca. 160); 53. Abu Hamzah Sa'd ibn 'Ubaydah as-Sulami
al-Kufi; 54. Musa ibn Muslim al-Hizami ash-Shaybani, Abu 'Isa al-Kufi
at-Tahhan (Musa as-Saghir); 55. Ya'qub ibn Ja'far ibn Abi Kathir
al-Ansari al-Madani 56. 'Uthman ibn Sa'd ibn Murrah al Qurashi, Abu
'Abdillah (Abu 'Ali) al-Kufi. [^22]32

Thus this *hadith* continues to be narrated by so many narrators
(*ruwat*) in every era as to make it mutawatir. Coming to the scholars
and writers who have narrated this *hadith* in their books of
traditions, it is enough to mention that al-'Allamah al-Amini has listed
the names of 360 scholars according to fourteenth century.[^23]

Some people have tried to cast doubts about the asnad of this *hadith*.
As every student of Islamic tradition knows, if a *hadith* is
*mutawatir* there is no need to look at individual's *asnad* at all.
Still to show the hollowness of this charge, I would like to give here
the opinions of some of the famous traditionalists (*muhaddithun*).

### II. Asnad of Hadith of Ghadir:

a. al-Hafiz Abu 'Isa at-Tirmidhi (d.279 A.H.) has said in his *Sahih*
(one of the *as-Sihah* *as-Sittah*) that "This is a good (*hasan*) and
correct (*sahih*) *hadith*.''[^24]34

b. al-Hafiz Abu Ja'far at-Tahawi (d. 321 A.H.) has said in his *Mushkil
u'l-athar* that "This *hadith* is *sahih* according to the chains of
narrators (*asnad*) and no one has said anything contrary to its
narTators." [^25]35

c. Abu 'Abdillah al-Hakim an-Naysaburi (d. 405 A.H.) has narrated this
*hadith* from several chains in his *al-Mustadrak* and has said that
this *hadith* is *sahih*.[^26]

d. Abu Muhammad Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-'Asim; has said: "This *hadith* is
accepted by *ummah*, and it is in conformity with the principles.

Likewise, the following traditionalists (among hundreds of others) have
quoted that this *hadith* is *sahih*:- [^27]

1. Abu 'Abdillah al-Mahamili al-Baghdadi in his *Amali*; 2. Ibn 'Abdi
'l-Barr al-Qurtubi in *al-Isti 'ab*; 3. Ibnu 'l-Maghazili ash-shafi'i in
*al-Manaqib*; 4. Abu Hamid Ghazzali in *Sirru 'l-'alamayn*; 5.
Abu'l-Faraj ibn al-Jawzi in *alManaqib*; 6. Sibt ibn al-Jawzi in
*Tadhkirat khawaissi 'l-ummah*; 7. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid al-Mu'tazili in his
*Sharh Nahji 'l-balaighah*;

8. Abu 'Abdillah al Ganji ash-Shafi'i in *Kifayatu 't-talib*; 9. Abu
'l-Makarim 'Ala'ud-Din as-Simnani in *al-'Urwatu'l-wuthqa;* 10. Ibn
Hajar al-'Asqalani in *Tahdhibu'l-tahdhib*; 11. Ibn Kathir ad-Dimashqi
in his *Tarikh*; 12. Jalalu'd-Din as-Suyuti; 13. al-Qastalani in
*al-Mawahibu 'l-ladunniyyah*; 14. Ibn Hajar al-Makki in *as-Sawa'iqu
'l-muhriqah*; 15. 'Abdu'l-Haqq ad Dihlawi in *Sharhu 'l-mishkat*; and
many others. [^28]38

It should be noted that all the names mentioned above are of Sunni
scholars; and in Sunni usage, a *hadith* is called ''*sahih*'' when it
is uninterruptedly narrated by persons of approved probity (*'adil*) who
have perfect memory, does not have any defect, and is not unusual
(*shadhdh*). [^29]39

If the above virtues are found in the *asnad* of a *hadith* but the
memory of one or more of its narrators is a degree less than that
required for *sahih*, then it is called "*hasan*” [^30]40

So when the Sunni scholars say that the *hadith* of Ghadir is *sahih*,
they mean that its narrators are of approved probity (i.e., they do not
have any defect in belief and deeds) and have perfect memory, and that
this *hadith* has no defect and is not unusual.

### III. General Meanings of Mawla:

As the Sunnis cannot deny the authenticity of the *hadith* of Ghadir,
they try to downplay its significance by saying that the word "*mawla*"
in this *hadith* means 'friend', and that the Holy Prophet wanted to
announce that: "Whoever whose friend I am, 'Ali is his friend!"

The trouble is that not a single person who was present in Ghadir
grasped this alleged meaning. Hassan ibn Thabit, the famous poet of the
Holy Prophet, composed a poem and recited it before the audience, in
which he said:

The Prophet then said to him: "Stand up, O Ali, As I am pleased to make
you Imam and Guide after me."

'Umar ibn al-Khattab congratulated 'Aliin these words:

"Congratulations, O son of Abu Talib, this morning you became *mawla* of
every believing man and woman.'' [^31]41

If *mawla* means 'friend' then why the congratulations? And was 'Ali
'enemy' of all believing men and women before that time, so that 'Umar
said that 'this morning' you became friend of them all?

al-Imam 'Ali (a. s.) himself wrote to Mu' awiyah: "And the Messenger of
Allah granted to me his authority over you on the day of Ghadir Khumm.
[^32]42

And there are many other Companions of the Holy Prophet who used in
their poems the word "*mawla*" in connection with Ghadir Khumm in the
sense of "master".

Countless scholars of the Qur'an, Arabic grammar and literature have
interpreted the word "*mawla* " as "*awla* " which means "having more
authority " . The names of the following scholars may be quoted here as
examples:

Ibn 'Abbas (in his *Tafsir*, on the margin of *ad-Durru 'l-manthur*,
vol. 5, p. 355); al-Kalbi (as quoted in *at-Tafsiru 'l-kabir* of
ar-Razi, vol. 29. p.227; al-Alusi, *Ruhu 'l-ma'ani*, vol. 27, p. 178);
al-Farra', (ar-Razi, *ibid*.; *al-Alusi*, *ibid*.); Abu 'Ubaydah
Mu'ammar ibn Muthanna alBasri (ar-Razi, *ibid*.; and ash-Sharif
al-Jurjani, *Sharhu 'l-mawaqif*, vol. 3, p. 271); al-Akhfash al-Awsat
(in *Nihayatu 'l-'uqul*); al-Bukhari (in *as-Sahih*, vol.7, p. 240); Ibn
Qutaybah (in *al Qurtayn*, vol.2, p.164); Abu'l-'Abbas Tha'lab (in
*Sharhu 's-sab'ah al-mu'allaqah* of az-Zuzani); at-Tabari (in his
*Tafsir*, vol.9, p. 117); al-Wahidi (in *al-Wasit*); ath-Tha'labi (in
*al-Kashf wa 'l-bayan*); az-Zamakhshari (in *al-Kashshaf*, vol. 2, p.
435); al-Baydawi (in his *Tafsir,* vol.2, p. 497); an-Nasafi (in his
*Tafsir*, vol. 4, p. 229); al-Khazin al-Baghdadi (in his *Tafsir* vol.
4, p. 229); and Muhibbu'd-Din Afandi (in his *Tanzilu 'l-ayat*). [^33]43

### IV. Meaning of "Mawla" in the Context

Now let us examine what meaning can be inferred from the context of this
*hadith*. If a word has more than one meaning, the best way to ascertain
its true connotation is to look at the association (*qarinah*) and the
context. There are scores of "associations" in this *hadith* which
clearly show that the only meaning fitting the occasion can be "master".
Some of them are as follows:

***First***: The question which the Holy Prophet asked just before this
declaration: He asked them: "Do I Not have more authority upon you than
you have yourselves?" When they said: "Yes, surely," then the Prophet
proceeded to declare that:

"**Whoever whose** ***mawla*** **I am. 'Ali is his** ***mawla*****.**"

Without doubt, the word "*mawla*" in this declaration has the same
meaning as: (having more authority upon you) has in the preceding
question. At least 64 Sunni traditionalists have quoted that preceding
question; among them are Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Ibn Majah, an-Nasa'i and
at-Tirmidhi.[^34]

***Second***: The following prayer which the Holy Prophet uttered just
after this declaration:

"O Allah! Love him who loves 'Ali, and be the enemy of the enemy of
'Ali; help him who helps 'Ali, and forsake him who forsakes 'A1i."

This prayer shows that 'A1i, on that day, was entrusted with a
responsibility which, by its very nature, would make some people his
enemy (and that responsibility could not be that except of a ruler); and
in carrying out that responsibility he would need helpers and
supporters. Are helpers ever needed to carry on a ' friendship ' ?

***Third***: The declaration of the Holy Prophet that: "It seems
imminent that I will be called away (by Allah) and I will answer that
call." This clearly shows that he was making arrangements for the
leadership of the Muslims after his death.

***Fourth***: The congratulations of the Companions and their
expressions of joy do not leave room for doubt concerning the meaning of
this declaration.

***Fifth***: The occasion, place and time: Imagine the Holy Prophet
breaking his journey in midday, and detaining nearly
one-hundred-thousand travellers under the burning sun of the Arabian
desert, making them sit in a thorny place on the burning sand, and
making a pulpit of camelsaddles; then imagine him delivering a long
lecture and at the end of all those preparations coming out with an
announcement that: "Whoover loves me should love 'Ali," or "Whoever
whose friend I am, 'Ali is his friend! "

Is such a thing excusable before common sense? No, but some people are
ready to accuse the Holy Prophet of such childish behaviour!

11. 'Ali "self" of the Prophet
------------------------------

There are many verses which point to the caliphate of 'A1i ibn Abi Talib
(as). It is not possible to enumerate them all here. But the event of
*Mubahalah* (malediction, imprecation) which took place in the ninth
year of the *hijrah* should be noted.

In this year a delegation consisting of fourteen Christians came from
Najran to meet the Prophet. When they met the Prophet they asked him:
"What is your opinion about Jesus?" The Apostle said: "You may take rest
today and you will receive the reply afterwards." The next day three
verses of the third chapter of the Qur'an (3:59-61) about Jesus were
revealed. When the Christians did not accept the words of Allah and
insisted on their own beliefs, the Apostle recited the following verse:

***But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say: "Come let us call our sons and your-sons,
and our women and your women, and our selves and your selves, then let
us be earnest in prayer and invoke the curse of Allah upon the liars***
**(3:61).**

The next day the Christians came out on one side; and on the other side,
the Apostle came out of his house carrying Husayn in his arms with Hasan
walking by his side holding his hand. Behind him was Fatimah, and behind
her, 'A1i. When the Christians saw the five pure souls they abstained
from the proposed malediction and submitted to a treaty with the
Prophet.

In this verse, according to Jabir ibn 'Abdillah al-Ansari, the word
"sons" refers to Hasan and Husayn, the word "women" refers to Fatimah,
and the words "our selves" refer to the Prophet and 'A1i . Thus 'A1i ibn
Abi Talib ( a. s.), has been referred to in the verse of *Mubahalah* as
"the self" of the Prophet.[^35]

It also follows that just as it is unlawful to seek to be superior to
the Prophet, similarly it is unlawful to supercede 'Ali he being the
"self" of the Prophet according to the words of Allah. Anyone who
presumed to supercede him was in essence presuming to supercede the
Prophet.

12. Traditions
--------------

After the declaration of Ghadir, there is really no need to provide more
proofs of the caliphate of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (as). Yet, it may be
pertinent to quote some *ahadith* in this regard.

In the *Hadithu'th-thaqalayn* the Prophet said:

I am leaving two weighty things among you -the Book of Allah and my
*Ahlu 'l-bayt*. If you adhere to them and continue to and obey both of
them and forsake neither, you will never be misled. They will not
separate from each other till they reach me at Kawthar (the pool in
Paradise).

Now, it is admitted on all hands that 'Ali ibn Abi Talib is not only one
of the *Ahlu 'l-bayt* but is the head of the *Ahlu 'l-bayt*. Therefore,
the obligation of his obedience is proved from this universal accepted
tradition. [^36]46

Then there is the *hadith* known as *Hadithu 'l-manzilah*. In the
expedition of Tabuk (in the month of Rajab of the ninth year A.H.) the
Prophet left 'A1i as his deputy in Medina. 'Ali exclaimed with dismay:
"Are you leaving me behind?" The Prophet asked him: "O 'Ali, are you not
satisfied that you have the same position in relation to me as Harun had
to Musa except that there is no prophet after me? "

The Prophet thereby meant that as Musa had left behind Harun to look
after his people when he went to receive the Commandments, in the same
way he was leaving 'Ali behind as his deputy to look after the affairs
of Islam during his absence. [^37]47

Then there is the occasion of communicating the verses of *surah
al-Bara'ah* (ch. 9) to the people of Mecca. First Abu Bakr was sent to
proclaim it before the pagans. Later the Prophet sent 'Ali to take the
*surah* from Abu Bakr and announce it at Mecca. Abu Bakr returned to
Medina from his journey midway en route to

Mecca and asked the Prophet whether any verse or order was received from
Allah against him announcing the *surah*. The Prophet said: ''Jibril
came to me and said that no one shall deliver the message except myself
or the person who is from me." [^38]48

The moral principle evident in these declarations of the Prophet is also
expressed in the following tradition which has been accepted by all
sects.

The Prophet said: " 'Ali is with the truth and the truth is with 'Ali;
whither soever 'Ali turns, the truth (also) turns with him."[^39] The
rightful caliphate is thus rightly entrusted to 'Ali and to none else.

Another is the *hadith* of "Divine Light" (*Hadithu 'n-nur*). Sayyid
'Ali Hamadani writes in *Mawaddatu'l-qurba*, on the authority of Salman
al-Farsi, that the Prophet said: "I and 'Ali were both created from one
and the same *nur* (Divine Light) four thousand years before Adam was
created, and when Adam was created that *nur* was given a place in his
backbone. So we continued to occupy the same place till we were
separated in the back of 'Abdu 'l-Muttalib. Therefore in me is the
prophethood and in 'Ali is the caliphate." In *Riyadu 'l-fada'il*, the
last words of the above *hadith* are written as follows: "Then He made
me a prophet and made 'A1i a *wasiyy* (vicegerent)."[^40]

13. Ulu 'L-Amr must be ma’sum
-----------------------------

Allah says in the Qur'an:

***O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those vested
with authority from among you; then if you quarrel about anything, refer
it to Allah and the Apostle, if you believe in Allah and the last day;
this is better and very good in the end*** **(4:59).**

This verse obliges the Muslims to two obediences: First, the obedience
of Allah; second, the obedience of the Apostle and 'those vested with
authority from among you' (*uli'l-amri minkum*). The arrangement of the
words shows that the obedience of *ulu 'l-amr* is as much obligatory as
is the obedience of the Apostle. Naturally, it means that *ulu 'l-amr*
should be of the same caliber as the Apostle; otherwise Allah would not
have joined them together in this verse.

Before deciding who the *ulu 'l-amr* are, it will be of help to have a
look at the commandment of obeying the Apostle, to see how
all-encampassing and al1-pervading this commandment is and how great the
authority of the Apostle of Allah is. Allah says in the Qur'an:

***And We did not send any Apostle, but that he should be obeyed by
Allah's permission*** **(4:64).**

The prophets and the apostles were to be obeyed and followed; the
followers were not expected to check every action of the prophet to
decide what was to be obeyed and what not. Clearly, it shows that the
prophets and apostles were free from error and sin; otherwise Allah
would not have ordered the people to obey the apostles unconditionally.

There are many verses in which Allah commands us to obey the Prophet:

*O ye who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Apostle*.[^41]

Again, He says:

*And whoever obeys Allah and His Apostle. .*[^42]

 In the same *surah* it is asserted:

***Whoever obeys the Apostle, he indeed obeys Allah*** **(4:80).**

In these as well as numerous other verses of the Qur'an, obedience of
Allah is synonymous with the obedience of the prophets. Such assertion
would have been impossible if the prophets were not *ma'sum*
(infallible).

Now, note the following verse:

**. . .** ***and obey not from among them a sinner or an ungrateful
one*** **(76:26).**

The picture is complete. The prophets are to be obeyed; the sinners are
not to be obeyed. The only conclusion is that the prophets were not
sinners or wrong-doers. In other words, they were *ma'sum*-infallible,
sinless.

Just imagine what impossible situation would have been created if any
prophet began exhorting his followers to commit a mistake or sin. The
wretched followers would have been condemned to the displeasure of Allah
in any case. If they obeyed the Prophet and committed that sin they
disobeyed the command given by Allah and thus were disgraced. If, on the
other hand, they disobeyed the Prophet, they again disobeyed the command
of Allah about obeying the Prophet. So, it appears that a non-*ma'sum*
prophet could bring nothing but disgrace and condemnation to his people.

Looking especially at the Holy Prophet of Islam, Allah tells us

**. . .** ***and whatever the Apostle gives you, take it; and from
whatever he forbids you, keep back*** **(59:7).**

This means that the permission or prohibition of the Holy Prophet was
always in accordance with the will of Allah and always favoured by Him.
It proves that the Holy Prophet was *ma'sum*. No one can be so sure
about the commands of a man who is not infallible.

There is another verse: Say:

**"*****If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you and
forgive you your sins*****" (3:31).**

Here the love of Allah is made contingent on following the Prophet of
Islam. Both sides of love are included in it. If you love Allah follow
the Prophet; if you love the Prophet, Allah will love you. Does it not
show that the Prophet was absolutely free from any type of blemish?

Not only his actions, even his words were the Commands of Allah. Allah
says in the Qur'an:

***Nor does he speak out of (his own) desire. It is naught but
revelation that is revealed*** **(53:3-4).**

Here we find the highest degree of infallibility which can be imagined.
Also, there are several verses in which the following words have been
used for the Holy Prophet:

**. . .** ***and Apostle from among themselves, who recites to them His
communications and purifies them, and teaches them the Book and the
Wisdom.***[^43]

How could a prophet purify others of sins and blemishes if he himself
were not pure? How could a man teach others wisdom if he had no wisdom
to distinguish right from wrong; or worst still, if he had no willpower
to resist from doing wrong? The Prophet was to teach people the Book of
Allah; this means that he knew the Commandments of Allah. He was to
purify them and teach them wisdom. So this means he had wisdom and
purity himself.

Witness to the perfection of his character is found in the Qur'an where
it says:

***And most surely you are on sublime morality*** **(68:4).**

A man committing mistakes does not deserve such compliments.

All these verses clearly show two things:

***First***: The authority of the Holy Prophet upon the believers was
unlimited and all-comprehensive. Any order given by him, under any
condition, in any place, at any time, was to be obeyed unconditionally.

***Second***: That supreme authority was given to him because he was
*ma'sum* (sinless) and free from all types of error and sin. Otherwise,
Allah would not have ordered us to obey him unconditionally.

In this verse, *ulu 'l-amr*, have been given exactly the same authority
over the Muslims, because both the 'Apostle' and the *ulu 'l-amr* have
been jointly mentioned under one word "obey"; which shows that the
obedience of *ulu 'l-amr* has the same standing as the obedience of the
Apostle.

It naturally follows that *ulu 'l-amr* must also be ma 'sum (sinless)
and free from any type of error and sin. Otherwise, their obedience
would not have been joined with the obedience of the Prophet. Amiru
'l-Mu'minin 'Ali (as), said: "The one who disobeys Allah is not to be
obeyed; and verily obedience is of Allah and of His Apostle and those
vested with authority. Verily, Allah ordered (the people) to obey the
Apostle because he was sinless and clean (pure), who would not tell the
people to disobey Allah; and verily He ordered (the people) to obey
those vested with authority because they are sinless and clean (pure),
and would not tell the people to disobey Allah.[^44]

14. Ulu 'l-Amr: does it mean Muslim ruler?
------------------------------------------

Many of our Sunni brethren tend to interpret "*ulu 'l-amr*" as ' the
rulers from among yourselves', i.e., Muslims rulers. This interpretation
is not based on any logical reasoning; it is solely based on twists of
history. The majority of the Muslims have remained as a vassal of the
monarchs and rulers, interpreting and reinterpreting Islam and the
Qur'an to please the powers to be.

The history of the Muslims (like any other nation) is replete with the
names of rulers whose injustice, debauchery and tyranny have tarnished
the name of Islam, as will be mentioned briefly in the latter part of
this text. Such rulers have always been and will always be. And we are
told that they are the *ulu 'l-amr* mentioned in this verse.

If Allah were to order us to obey such kings and rulers, an impossible
situation would be created for the Muslims. The wretched followers would
be condemned to the displeasure of Allah, no matter what they did. If
they obeyed these rulers, they disobeyed the Command of Allah: "Do not
obey a sinner." And if they disobeyed such rulers, they again disobeyed
the Command of Allah to "obey the Muslim rulers” . So, if we accept this
interpretation, the Muslims are condemned to eternal disgrace whether
they obey or disobey their non-*ma'sum* Muslim rulers.

Also, there are Muslim rulers of different beliefs and persuasions.
There are Shafi'is, Wahhabis, Malikis, Hanafis, as well as Shi'ahs and
Ibadis. Now, according to this interpretation the Sunnis residing under
an Ibadi Sultan (like in Oman) should follow Ibadi tenents; and those
residing under a Shi'ah ruler (like in Iran) should follow Shi'ah
beliefs. Do these people have the conviction of courage to follow their
professed interpretation to its logical end?

The famous Sunni commentator, Fakhru 'd-Din ar-Razi, concluded in his
*Tafsiru 'l kabir*[^45] that this verse proves that *ulu 'l-amr* must be
*ma'sum*. He argues that Allah has commanded the people to obey *ulu
'l-amr* unconditionally; therefore, it is essential for the *ulu 'l-amr*
to be *ma'sum*. Because if there is any possiblity of their committing
sin (and sin is forbidden), it will mean that one has to obey them and
also disobey them in that very action. And this is impossible! Then to
dissuade his readers from the *Ahlu 'l-bayt*, he invented the theory
that the Muslim *ummah* as a whole is ma 'sum.

This interpretation is unique, as no Muslim scholar ever subscribed to
this theory and it is not based on any tradition. It is quite surprising
that ar-Razi accepts that each individual of the Muslim nation is
non-*ma'sum*, yet still claims that their sum-total is *ma'sum*. Even a
primary school student knows that 200 cows plus 200 cows makes 400 cows
and not one horse.

But ar-Razi says that 70 million non *ma'sum* plus 70 rnillion
non-*ma'sum* will make one *ma'sum*! Does he want us to believe that if
all the patients of a mental hospital joined together they would be
equal to one sane person?[^46]

The poet of the Orient, Iqbal, has said:

The minds of two hundred donkeys cannot produce the thoughts of one man.

Obviously, with his great knowledge he was able to conclude that *ulu
'l-amr* must be *ma'sum*; but it was his prejudice which compelled him
to say that the Islamic *ummah* as a whole is *ma'sum*.

Also, he did not pause to see that the verse contains the word
"*minkum*" ("from among you" ) which shows that the said *ulu 'l-amr*
shall be part of the Muslim *ummah*, not the whole Muslim nation. And if
the whole Muslim nation is to be obeyed, then who is there left to obey?

15. Real meaning of Ulu 'l-Amr
------------------------------

Now we return to the correct interpretation of the above verse.

Al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (as) said that this verse was revealed about
'Ali ibn Abi Talib, Hasan and Husayn (as) . Upon hearing this, someone
asked the Imam: "People say, 'Why did Allah not mention the names of
'Ali and his family in His Book?'"

The Imam answered: "Tell them that there came the command of *salat*
(prayer), but Allah did not mention whether three or four *raka'at*
(units) (to be performed); it was the Apostle of Allah who explained all
the details. And (the command of ) *zakat* was revealed, but Allah did
not say that it is one in every forty dirham; it was the Apostle of
Allah who explained it; and hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca) was ordered but
Allah did not say to perform *tawaf* ( circumambulation of the Ka'bah)
seven times the Apostle of Allah explained it. Likewise, the verse was
revealed:

 ***Obey Allah, and obey the Apostle and those vested with authority
from among you*****,**

and it was revealed about 'A1i and Hasan and Husayn (as). [^47]57

In *Kifayatu 'l-athar*, there is a tradition from Jabir ibn 'Abdillah
al-Ansari, in explanation of this verse. When it was revealed, Jabir
said to the Prophet: "We know Allah and the Prophet, but who are those
vested with authority whose obedience has been conjoined to that of
Allah and yourself ?" The Prophet said: “They are my caliphs and the
Imams of the Muslims after me. The first of them is 'Ali, then Hasan,
then Husayn, then 'A1i, son of Husayn; then Muhammad, son of 'A1i, who
has been mentioned as al-Baqir in the Torah. O Jabir! You will meet him.
When you see him, convey my salam (greetings) to him. He will be
succeeded by his son Ja'far as-Sadiq (the Truthful); then Musa, son of
Ja'far; then 'A1i, son of Musa; then Muhammad, son of 'A1i; then 'A1i,
son of Muhammad; then Hasan, son of 'Ali.

"He will be followed by his son whose name and patronym (*kunyah*) will
be the same as mine. He will be *Hujjatu-llah* (Proof of Allah) on the
earth and *Baqiyyatu-llah* (the one spared by Allah to maintain the
cause of faith) among mankind. He will conquer the whole world from east
to west. So long will he remain hidden from the eyes of his followers
and friends that the belief in his *imamah* Will remain only in those
hearts which have been tested by Allah for faith. "

Jabir said: "O Messenger of Allah! Will his followers benefit from his
seclusion?

The Prophet said "Yes! by Him Who sent me with prophethood! They will be
guided by his light, and benefit from his *wilaayah* (love; authority)
during his seclusions just as people benefit from the sun even when-it
is hidden in a cloud O Jabir! This is from the hidden secrets of Allah
and the treasured knowledge of-Allah. So guard it except from the people
(who deserve to know ) . "[^48]

This *hadith* has been quoted from Shi'ah sources. Sunni traditions do
not provide as much detail; still there are many Sunni traditions which
refer to the Twelve Imams, as explained in the next chapter.

Now that we know who "*those vested with Authority*" are, it is evident
that the question of obeying tyrant and unjust rulers does not arise at
all. Muslims are not required by this verse to obey rulers who may be
unjust, tyrannical, ignorant, and selfish and sunk in debauchery. They
are in fact ordered to obey the specified Twelve Imams, all of whom were
sinless and free from evil thoughts and deeds. Obeying them has no risks
whatsoever. Nay, it protects from all risks; because they will never
give an order against the Will of Allah and will treat all human beings
with love, justice and equity.

16. Twelve caliphs or Imams
---------------------------

Now it is advisable to refer to several parts of the 77th chapter of
*Yanabi'u 'l-mawaddah* of al-Hafiz Sulayman ibn Ibrahim al-Qunduzi
al-Hanafi.

A well known *hadith* has been quoted that: "There will be twelve
caliphs, all from the Quraysh", in many books including those of al
Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi .

The author quotes many traditions to the effect that the Holy Prophet
said: "I, 'Ali, Hasan, Husayn and nine of the descendants of Husayn are
pure and sinless."

He also quotes that the Holy Prophet told al-Imam Husayn: "You are a
chief, brother of a chief; you are an Imam, son of an Imam, brother of
an Imam; you are Proof (of Allah), son of a Proof (of Allah), brother of
a Proof (of Allah), and father of nine Proofs (of Allah), the ninth of
whom will be al-Mahdi. "

After quoting many such traditions, he writes: "Some scholars have said
that the traditions (which show that the caliphs after the Holy Prophet
would be twelve) are well known, from many *asnad*. Now, with the
passage of time and through historical events, we know that in this
*hadith* the Holy Prophet has referred to the Twelve Imams from his
*Ahlu 'l-bayt* and descendants, because:

"This *hadith* cannot apply to the four *al-khulafa'u 'r-rdshidun* from
among his Companions, as they were less than twelve.

"And it cannot apply to the caliphs from the tribe of *Umayyad*, because
(a) they were more than twelve; (b) all of them were tyrants and unjust
(except 'Umar ibn 'Abdi'l-'Aziz); and (c) they were not from the *Banu
Hashim* and the Holy Prophet had said in a *hadith* that: 'all of them
will be from the *Banu Hashim*. . .' "And it cannot apply to the caliphs
from the *Banu 'Abbas*, because: (a) they were more than twelve; and (b)
they did not comply with (the demands of) the verse:

***Say.’I do not ask of you any recompense for it except the love for
(my) near relatives*****' (42:23),**

nor with the Tradition of the Mantle (*Hadithu'l-kisa'*); (i.e., they
persecuted the descendants of the Prophet).

"Therefore, the only way to interpret this *hadith* is to accept that it
refers to the Twelve Imams from the Holy Prophet's Ahlu'l-bayt and
descendants, because they were, in their times, the most knowledgeable,
the most illustrious, the most god-fearing, the most pious, the highest
in their family lineage, the best in personal virtues, and the most
honoured before Allah; and their knowledge was derived from their
ancestor ( the Prophet ) through their fathers, and by inheritance and
by direct teachings from Allah."[^49]

17. Few facts about the twelve Imams(a)
---------------------------------------

**First Imam**: Amiru 'l-Mu'minin Abu '1-Hasan 'ALI al-Murtada, son of
Abu Talib, was born on 13th *Rajab*, 10 years before the declaration of
the Prophethood (600 A.D.), inside the Kabah; became Imam, on the death
of the Prophet on 28th *Safar*, 11 /632; was fatally wounded by the
poisoned sword of Ibn Muljam while engaged in prayers at the Mosque of
Kufah (Iraq), and expired two days later on 21st *Ramadan*, 40/661 and
was buried at an-Najaf al-Ashraf (Iraq).

**Second Imam**: Abu Muhammad AL-HASAN al-Mujtaba, son of 'Ali (as), was
born on 15th *Ramadan*, 3/625 at Medina; died of poison on 7th or 28th
*Safar*, 50/670 at Medina.

**Third Imam**: Sayyidu'sh-Shuhada' Abu 'Abdillah AL-HUSAYN, son of 'Ali
(as), was born on 3rd *Sha'ban*, 4/626 at Medina, was martyred with his
sons, relatives and Companions, on 10th *Muharram*, 61/680, at Karbala'
(Iraq). He and his elder brother, al-Hasan, were sons of Fatimah
az-Zahra' (as), daughter of the Holy Prophet.

**Fourth Imam**: Abu Muhammad 'ALI Zaynu 'l-'Abidin, son of al-Husayn
(as), was born on 5th *Sha'ban*, 38/659; died of poison on 25th
*Muharram*, 94/712 or 95/713 at Medina.

**Fifth Imam**: Abu Ja'far MUHAMMAD al-Baqir, son of 'Ali Zayn
u'l-'Abidin (as), was born on 1st *Rajab*, 57/677 at Medina; died of
poison on 7th *Dhu 'l-hijjah*, 114/733 at Medina.

**Sixth Imam**: Abu 'Abdillah JAFAR as-Sadiq, son of Muhammad al-Baqir
(as), was born on 17th *Rabi u'l-awwal*, 83/702 at Medina; died there of
poison on 25th *Shawwal*, 148/765.

**Seventh Imam**: Abu 'l-Hasan al-Awwal, MUSA al-Kazim, son of Ja'far
as-Sadiq (as), was born at al-Abwa' (7 miles from Medina) on 7th
*Safar*, 129/746; died of poison on 25th *Rajab*, 183/799 in the prison
of Harun ar-Rashld at Baghdad and was buried at al-Kazimiyyah, near
Baghdad (Iraq) .

**Eighth Imam**: Abu 'l-Hasan ath-Thani, 'ALI ar-Rida, son of Musa
al-Kazim (as), was born at Medina on 11th *Dhu 'l-qi'dah*, 148/765; died
of poison on 17th *Safar*, 203/818 at Mashhad (Khurasan, Iran).

**Ninth Imam**: Abu Ja'far ath-Thani, MUHAMMAD at-Taqi al-Jawad, son of
'A1i ar-Rida (as), was born on 10th *Rajab*, 195/811 at Medina; died of
poison at Baghdad on 30th *Dhu 'lqi'dah*, 220/835; was buried near his
grandfather at al-Kazimiyyah.

**Tenth Imam**: Abu 'l-Hasan ath-Thalith, 'ALI an-Naqi al-Hadi, son of
Muhammad at-Taqi (as), was born on 5th *Rajab*, 212/827 at Medina; died
of poison at Samarra' (Iraq) on 3rd *Rajab*, 254/868.

**Eleventh Imam**: Abu Muhammad, ALHASAN al-'Askari, son of 'Ali an-Naqi
(as), was born on 8th *Rabi 'u 'th-thani*, 232/846 at Medina; died of
poison at Samarra' (Iraq) on 8th *Rabi'u 'l-awwal*, 260/874.

**Twelfth Imam**: Abu 'l-Qasim, MUHAMMAD AL-MAHDI, son of al-Hasan
al-'Askari (as), was born on 15th *Sha'ban*, 255/869 at Samarra' (Iraq).
He is our present Imam; he went into Lesser Occultation in 260/874 which
continued until 329/844; then the Greater Occultation began, which still
continues. He will reappear when Allah allows him, to establish the
Kingdom of Allah on earth, to fill the world with justice and equity, as
it would be full of injustice and tyranny. He is *al-Qa'im* (the one who
shall stand to establish the rule of Allah); *al-Hujjah* (the Proof of
Allah over His creatures); *Sahibu 'z-Zaman* (the Lord of Our Time), and
*Sahibu 'l-Amr* (the one vested with Divine authority).

[^1]: al-'Allamah al-Hilli: al-Babu 'l-hadi 'ashar, Eng. tr W.M. Miller,
pp. 50, 62-4.

[^2]: Ibid. p.69.

[^3]: Ibidpp.64-8.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 68.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 69.

[^6]: as-Suyuti: Tari'khu 'l-khulafa, p.217.

[^7]: Holy Qur'an, Eng . tr. S. V. Mir Ahmed Ali, fn. 1857, p.l261

[^8]: Wahidu 'z-Zaman: Tafsir Wahidi (on the margin of the Qur'an's
translation by the same author), para.22fn.7,p.549.

[^9]: Wahidu'z-Zaman: Anwaru 'l-lughah, para.22,P.51.

[^10]: al-Ghazzali: Ihya' 'ulumi 'd-din, vol. I, pt.2, p. 10.

[^11]: Ibn Abdi 'l-Barr:al-lsti'ab, vol.2, p.470.

[^12]: al-Qunduzi: Yanabi'u 'l -mawaddah, p. 253.

[^13]: Ibn 'Abdi 'l-Barr: al-Isti'ab, vol. 3, p. 1 1 15.

[^14]: Ibn Hajar al-Haytami: Sawa'iqu 'l-muhriqah, p.72 Ibn Hajar
al-'Asqalani: Fathu 'l-bari, vol. 8, p.71.

[^15]: Amritsari, Arjahu 'l -matalib, p. 112.

[^16]: Ibnu 'l-Athir: al-Kamil, [vol.5, pp. 62-3]; al Baghawi:
at-Tafsir, [vol. 4, p.127]; al-Khazin: at-Tafsir, [vol. 4, p. 127];
al-Bayhaqi: Dala 'ilu 'n-nubuwwah [vol. I, pp.428-30]; as-Suyuti:
ad-Durru 'l-manthur [vol.5, p.97]; al-Muttaqi al-Hindi: Kanzu 'l-'ummal
[vol.15, pp .100,113,115-7]; Abu 'l -Fida': al -Mukhtasar, [vol. I, pp
.116-7]; at -Tabari: at Tarikh, [vol. I pp .171-3]; Carlyle , T.: On
Heroes, Hero Worship and the Heroic in History, [p.54]; Gibbon, E.: The
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, [vol. 3, p. 94]; Davenport, J.: An
Apology for Muhammed and the Koran [ p.21 ]; Irving, W.: Mahommet and
His Successors [p.45]. (For further details, see al-Amini: al-Ghadir [
vol.2,pp.27889])

[^17]: See [at-Tabari; at-Tafsir, vol. 6, p. 186]; as-Suyuti: ad-Durru
'l-manthur, [vol. 2,,, pp. 293-4]; ar-Razi: at-Tafsiru 'l-kabir,
[vol.12, p. 26]; az-Zamakhshari: at-Tafsir (al-Kashshaf), vol.l, p.649;
[al-Jassas: Ahkamu 'l-Qur'an, vol. 2, pp.542-3; al-Khazin: at-Tafsir,
vol. 2, p. 68]

[^18]: al-Qunduzi: Yanabi'u 'l-mawaddah, [p.168; Amritsari: Arjahu
'l-matalib, p.448].

[^19]: Siddiq Hasan Khan: Manhaju 'l-wusul, p.l3. death indicated in
parentheses are in A. H. )

[^20]: al -Amini: al -Ghadi'r, vol 1, pp . 14-18

[^21]: Ibid.,pp.62-63.

[^22]: Ibid., pp.73-81.

[^23]: Ibid ., pp. 73-151.

[^24]: at-Tirmidhi: as-Sahih, vol. 2, p.298

[^25]: at-Tahawi: Mushkilu 'l-athar, vol.2, p.308

[^26]: al-Hakim: al-Mustadrak, vol.3, pp.109-10.

[^27]: al Amini: al-Ghadir, vol. 1, p. 295.

[^28]: Ibid.,pp.294-313.

[^29]: Subhi' as-Salih: 'Ulumu 'l-hadith wa mustalahatuh, p. 145.

[^30]: Ibid., p.l56.

[^31]: al-Khatib at-Tabrizi: Mishkatu 'l-masabih [p.557]; Mir Khwand:
Habibu 's-siyar, [vol. 1, pt. 3, p. 144]; at-Tabari: [al-Wilayah];
[ar-Razi: at-Tafsiru 'l-kabir, vol. 12, pp. 49-50]; Ahmad: al-Musnad,
[vol. 4, p. 281 ]; Ibn Abi Shaybah: al-Musannaf; Abu Ya'la: al-Musnad;
Ahmad ibn 'Uqdah: al-Wilayah, and many others. [See also al-Amini:
al-Ghadir, vol. 1, pp. 270- 83 - for further references.]

[^32]: al-Amini: al-Ghadir, vol. I, p. 340.

[^33]: See al-Amini: al-Ghadir, pp. 344-50, for detail references .

[^34]: Ibid.,pp.370-371.

[^35]: al-Wahidi: Asbabu 'n-nuzul, p. 40; as-Suyuti: ad-Durru
'l-manthur, vol. 2, p. 38.

[^36]: This hadith can be seen in most books of traditions. See for
instance, at-Tirmidhi: as-Sahih, vol. 2, p. 308; Ibnu 'l-Athir: Usdu
'l-ghabah, vol. 2, p. 12; as-Suyuti: ad-Durru 'l-manthur, vol. 6, p. 7;
al-Muttaqi al-Hindi: Kanzu 'l-'ummal, (Hyderabad, 1312 A. H.), p. 48.

[^37]: Ibn Majah: as-Sunan, p.l2; Ahmad: al-Musnad, vol. 1, p. 174;
an-Nasa'i: al-Khasa'is, pp. I5-16; atTahawi: Mushkilu 'l-athar, vol. 2,
p. 309; al-Muhibb at-Tabari: Dhakhatiru 'l-'uqba, p.63.

[^38]: as-Suyuti: ad-Durru 'l-manthur, vol. 6, p. 209, at-Tabari:
at-Tafsir, vol. 10, p. 47; an-Nasa'i: al-Khasa 'is, p. 20.

[^39]: al-Khati'b al-Khwarazmi: al-Manaqib, p. 56; al-Hammuyi: Fara'idu
's-simtayn, vol. 1, p. 176; al-Khati'b al-Baghdadi: Tari'kh Baghdad,
vo1. 14, p. 321

[^40]: As quoted in Mafatihu 'l-matalib, p.396; al-Ganji: Kifayatu
't-talib, p. 176.

[^41]: Qur'an, 47:33; see also:3:32,132; 5:92; 8:1,20, 46; 24:54; 58:13;
64:12.

[^42]: Qur'an,4:13;see also: 4:69; 24:52; 33:71; 48:18.

[^43]: Qur'an,62:2;seealso:2:129;3:164.

[^44]: as-Saduq: 'Ilalu 'sh shara'i', [ vol. I, p . 123 ]

[^45]: ar-Razi: at-Tafsiru 'l-kabir, vol.10, p.l44

[^46]: Though we hold special respect for others' opinions, and
particularly for the beliefs of our Sunni brothers, at the same time,
the author had no other alternative but to criticize the opinion of
ar-Razi with these examples. Of course, we do not regard this opinion of
ar-Razi to be the manifesto of all Sunni brothers. (pub.)

[^47]: al-'Ayyashi: at-Tafsir, vol. 1, pp.249-50; Fayd al-Kashani:
at-Tafsir (as-Safi), vol.1, p.364.

[^48]: al-Khazzaz: Kifayatu 'l-athar, p. 53

[^49]: al-Qunduzi; Yanabi 'u 'l-mawaddah, pp.444-7.


