Acknowledgments
===============

Over the four-year process of writing this book, I have received help
and support from many sources. One of my first debts is to those who
read the manuscript, in part or as a whole. Tim Schoettle read almost
every page in draft and has provided immensely helpful suggestions and
responses, especially for the first and last chapters, and I am deeply
indebted to our conversations for much of the ultimate critical
direction of the book. Jim Wetzel has also provided many helpful ideas
and responses based on his reading of the entire manuscript. Among those
who have read and commented on parts, I would like especially to thank
Brian Keith Axel, Jeffrey Barrett, Jake Berger, Walter Brogan, David
Chalmers, Richard Eldridge, Wayne Martin, Alan Nelson, David Woodruff
Smith, and Amie Thomasson. I would also like to thank two anonymous
referees for the*Journal of Philosophical Research* who provided
detailed and helpful comments on an earlier version of chapter 8.

Much of the material in the book was developed in graduate and advanced
undergraduate seminars at Villanova over the past four years. I would
like to thank all those who have participated; my debts to those
discussions are multiple and deep. In particular, John Bova and Jeffrey
Gower provided especially detailed readings and comments. Some of the
material in the book originated even longer ago, while I was still a
graduate student at the University of California, Irvine. Chapter 7
originated in a graduate seminar I took with Leonardo Distaso, and I
would like to thank him for the inspiration to begin thinking about the
issues therein. Coursework and discussions with Bill Bristow, Wayne
Martin, Alan Nelson, and David Woodruff Smith have also played a
decisive role in inspiring many of the ideas in the book.

The last sections of the book were completed while I was an Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation research fellow at the Karl-Ludwigs Universität
in Freiburg im Breisgau, from March to August, 2007. I would like to
thank the Humboldt Foundation for their gracious support. I would also
like to thank my sponsor, Günter Figal, for his support of the project.

Some of the material in chapter 7 appeared in an earlier version
in*Inquiry* 46:3 (2003), pp. 324-45. An earlier version of chapter 2
appeared in*Philosophical Investigations* 27:1 (2004), pp. 34-67. A
version of chapter 6 will appear in*Philosophy and Social Criticism*
33:6 (2007), pp. 691-715. I would like to thank the editors of these
publications for their permission to reprint this material.

Finally, as always before and now again, I especially wish to
acknowledge my wife, Elizabeth Amberg Livingston. Without the
conversations and experiences we have shared, this project would not
have been possible; and beyond this, her constant love and support over
the last four years have meant more than any language can say.


