6. Wittgenstein, Kant, and the Critique of Totality
===================================================

One of the most central and familiar elements of Wittgenstein’s later
philosophy is his call to replace the traditional inquiries of
philosophy with investigation into the “use” [*Gebrauch* ] of words in
their various practical connections and surroundings, linguistic and
non-linguistic.[^290] Again and again, Wittgenstein counsels his readers
to abandon the search for “deep” or esoteric inquiries into the nature
of things, in favor of reminders of the ways we actually employ language
in the vast variety of contexts and situations that comprise a human
life. But despite the familiarity and widespread influence of
Wittgenstein’s appeal to use, I argue in this chapter, this appeal has
a*critical* significance that commentators have often missed. What has
been missed in projects that construe Wittgenstein as offering a theory
of meaning as grounded in social practice, in fact, is a
far-ranging*critique of totality* that runs through Wittgenstein’s work,
early and late.

For although he constantly directs his readers to recall the “use” of a
word, Wittgenstein nevertheless just as constantly resists the natural
temptation to think of this use as an object, a unity, or a whole,
accessible to a comprehensive, theoretical understanding of practice or
enclosable within a set of determinate rules. In this way, his practice
of linguistic criticism works to undermine the totalizing assumptions
behind not only what can be called a “metaphysical” picture of the
nature and force of rules but also the concrete technological and
material practices that this kind of picture tends to support.
Wittgenstein’s philosophical method, in fact, challenges just those
features of thought that Adorno, in*Negative Dialectics,* characterized
as “identity thinking,” and joins the tradition of critical theory in
its criticism of the totalizing assumptions that underlie it. Seeing
this connection - a connection ultimately rooted in the common Kantian
heritage that Wittgenstein’s project shares with the project of critical
theory - can help us to understand the*political* significance of
Wittgenstein’s investigations of language in a new way, and suggests
farther-ranging implications for the kind of philosophical reflection
they embody.

I

It is a familiar point that one aim of Kant’s*Critique of Pure Reason* ,
particularly in the*Transcendental Dialectic* , is to exhibit the
fundamental*incompleteness* of human thought. This incompleteness is,
for Kant, a consequence of the operation of the very principles of
reason itself, of the inevitability of its own critical questioning, in
accordance with these principles, of its own scope and limits. What
Kant, in the*Dialectic* , calls “transcendental illusion” results from
our tendency to misunderstand the principles of reason, construing these
actually subjective rules as if they were objective principles really
governing things in the world. The misunderstanding results from
reason’s inherent function, to synthesize the principles of the
understanding into a higher unity.[^291] It does so by means
of*inference* , striving to reduce the variety of principles of the
understanding [*Grundsatze* ] under the unity of a small number of
inferential principles of reason [*Prinzipien* ].[^292] But in so doing,
reason also creates the problematic “pure concepts” or “transcendental
ideas” (A 321/B 378) that stand in no direct relationship to any given
object.

The transcendental ideas arise from reason’s synthesis by means of
inference, in particular, when this process of synthesis is thought of
as*complete* .[^293] According to Kant, in seeking to unify knowledge
under higher inferential principles, reason seeks the condition for any
given conditioned, leading it ultimately to seek*totality* in the series
of conditions leading to any particular phenomenon:

Accordingly, in the conclusion of a syllogism we restrict a predicate to
a certain object, after having first thought it in the major premiss in
its whole extension under a given condition. This complete quantity of
the extension in relation to such a condition is called*universality
(universalitas)* . In the synthesis of intuitions we have corresponding
to this the*allness (universitas)* or*totality* of the conditions. The
transcendental concept of reason is, therefore, none other than the
concept of the*totality* of the*conditions* for any given
conditioned.[^294]

The search for totality, Kant explains, takes three forms, corresponding
to the three kinds of inference through which reason can arrive at
knowledge by means of principles.[^295] These three forms furnish the
rational ideas of soul, world, and God that are the objects of
transcendental dialectic. In each case, however, the transcendental
critique will show that the pretension of these ideas to furnish to
knowledge objects corresponding to them is unfounded. Whatever
the*subjective* validity of the ideas of reason in instructing us to
pursue the search for ever-greater unification, the attempt to
provide*objects* of knowledge corresponding to the total synthesis of
conditions cannot succeed.

Accordingly, one upshot of the Kantian critique of the totalizing ideas
of reason, significant for the critical projects that would descend from
it, is that the work of reason in synthesizing knowledge is, for
Kant,*essentially incomplete* . The critique of transcendental illusion
opens an irreducible gulf between the sphere of possible knowledge and
the satisfaction of reason’s own demands, disrupting every attempt or
pretense to present the work of reason as complete or completeable. As
John Sallis (1980) has argued, the Kantian critique of totality thus
reveals the impossibility of any final repair of the “fragmentation”
that is characteristic of finite knowledge. By contrast with the
unifying power of the deduction of the categories in the*Transcendental
Analytic* , which succeeds in gathering the manifold of intuition into
unities under the categories of the understanding, the “gathering of
reason” attempted in the*Transcendental Dialectic* ultimately fails:

Thus, in each of the gatherings of reason, critique exhibits a radical
non-correspondence between the two moments that belong to the structure
of the gathering, between the unity posited by reason and the actual
gathering of the manifold into this unity. It shows that in every case
the actual gathering of the manifold falls short of the unity into which
reason would gather that manifold. An inversion is thus prepared: With
respect to its outcome the gathering of reason is precisely the inverse
of that gathering of pure understanding that is measured in
the*Transcendental Analytic* . Whereas the gathering of reason
culminates in the installation of radical difference between its
moments, the gathering of understanding issues in identity, unity,
fulfillment.[^296]

Whereas the categories in the*Analytic* result in a gathering of the
representations of the intuition into a unity that is stable and
uncontestable, the gathering of reason fails to result in a unity of
knowledge, instead installing a kind of essential difference at the
heart of reason’s work. This difference is the gap between reason’s
actual attainments and its own irrepressible demands; it recurrently
determines the failure of reason to complete its synthetic work. The
line of critique, stably drawn in the*Analytic* between the field of
possible contents of experience and that which transcends this field,
accordingly becomes*destabilized* . The work of reason’s self-critique
becomes a practically endless dialogue, an ever-renewed questioning of
the claims of positive knowledge and a critical interrogation of its
intrinsic claims to totality. The line that critique draws between truth
and illusion becomes, rather than a stable line between two fields of
definable contents, the unstable and constantly shifting line of
reason’s rediscovered finitude in the face of its infinite aims.

Kant’s installation of radical difference and essential unsatisfiability
in reason’s own work proves essential, moreover, to the ability of
critical practice to disrupt the totalizing claims of*instrumentalized*
and*reified* conceptions of reason. In his lectures on Kant’s*Critique
of Pure Reason* , Theodor Adorno suggests that this moment of Kantian
critique is in fact the source of critique’s power to break up the
hegemony of the “identity thinking” that ceaselessly determines its
object through the abstract assumption of a stable and complete unity of
knowledge:

On the one hand, we think of the*Critique of Pure Reason* as a kind of
identity-thinking. This means that it wishes to reduce the synthetic*a
priori* judgments and ultimately all organized experience, all
objectively valid experience, to an analysis of the consciousness of the
subject. … On the other hand, however, this way of thinking desires to
rid itself of mythology, of the illusion that man can make certain ideas
absolute and hold them to be the whole truth simply because he happens
to have them within himself. In this sense Kantian philosophy is one
that enshrines the validity of the non-identical in the most emphatic
way possible. It is a mode of thought that is not satisfied by reducing
everything that exists to itself. Instead, it regards the idea that all
knowledge is contained in mankind as a superstition and, in the spirit
of the Enlightenment, it wishes to criticize it as it would criticize
any superstition. …

Now the greatness of the*Critique of Pure Reason* is that these two
motifs clash. To give a stark description we might say that the book
contains an identity philosophy - that is, a philosophy that attempts to
ground being in the subject - and also a non-identity philosophy - one
that attempts to restrict that claim to identity by insisting on the
obstacles, the *block* , encountered by the subject in its search for
knowledge. And you can see the double nature of Kant’s philosophy in the
dual organization of the *Critique of Pure Reason* . [^297]

According to Adorno, Kant’s thinking is implicitly totalizing in its
attempt - with one of its voices - to reduce all knowledge to a unity of
categories or*a priori* representations, to delimit the sphere of
possible knowledge to the closed field of transcendental subjectivity,
excluding all that lies outside this field. But at the same time, as
Adorno notes, Kant’s recognition of the essential incompleteness of
reason’s work inscribes non-identity within the project of critique,
disrupting every totalizing claim to reduce knowledge to a stable unity.
According to Adorno, it is this recognition of non-identity that makes
Kantian critique enduringly relevant for the criticism of Enlightenment
and post-Enlightenment patterns of rationality. In particular, the
recognition of an essential*limitation* and incompleteness of identity
thinking allows its pretensions of unity and totality to be recurrently
interrogated and criticized. “Dialectics,” Adorno says in*Negative
Dialectics* , “is the consistent sense of nonidentity.”[^298] Kant’s
early recognition of this provides both the source and the enduring
model for critical theory’s continued application of dialectical
critique to existing norms and regimes of social behavior.

II

Standard interpretations of the critical element of Wittgenstein’s
philosophy often present his intention as one of drawing or articulating
a*line* between meaningful language and nonsense. Thus, for instance, in
his classic discussion of the*Tractatus* , Maslow suggests reading it as
“a kind of Kantian phenomenalism, with the forms of language playing a
role similar to Kant’s transcendental apparatus.” This interpretation,
Maslow says, involves seeing language “not only [as] an instrument of
thought and communication but also [as] an all-pervading factor in
organizing our cognitive experience” (p. xiv); the task of
Wittgenstein’s critical philosophy is, according to Maslow, thus to
establish the nature of this factor and mark its necessary bounds. In a
similar vein, Pears (1970) suggests understanding Wittgenstein’s thought
as a whole as inspired by the “Kantian” desire to understand the forms
of language in order to deflate the pretensions of philosophy to go
beyond them.[^299] According to this interpretation, the critical
purpose of the*Tractatus* is to investigate the logic of language in
order to pave the way for a rejection of nonsense. Once the logical
conditions for the possibility of meaning are clearly understood, it
will be possible clearly to distinguish utterances that satisfy these
conditions from those which do not. This distinction will provide the
Wittgensteinian linguistic philosopher with a new basis on which to
criticize and dismiss the substantial claims of metaphysics that Kant
already attacked, claims which can now be dismissed as not only going
beyond any possible experience but also any possible sense.

Within the context of this usual way of viewing Wittgenstein’s critical
intentions, his appeal to practice can seem to have an
essentially*conservative* flavor. On the usual interpretation, the
purpose of Wittgenstein’s treatment of meaning as use is to remind us
that a word only has significance insofar as it functions within a
well-defined and established ordinary practice, one of the many unities
of intersubjective speaking, acting, and accomplishing that Wittgenstein
(so it is often supposed) designates as “language-games.” This
interpretation of Wittgenstein as a conservative thinker has in fact
prompted some to reject Wittgenstein’s method outright.[^300]
Alternatively, others have accepted and celebrated what they see as the
“conservative” implications of Wittgenstein’s appeal to use.[^301] Still
others, along similar lines, take the supposed uncriticizability of
practices on Wittgenstein’s view to establish a relativism that denies
the possibility of criticizing any practice or “language game” from any
position external to it.[^302] On all of these interpretations, however,
Wittgenstein’s appeal to use has the significance of
dismissing*nonsense* on the basis of an identification of*sense* with
the unity of a practice. The accordance or nonaccordance of a piece of
language with the standards or criteria established by an existing
practice - itself thought of as, in principle, a bounded and demarcated
unity - determines the extent to which it has sense. As the
stable*basis* for the critical determination of sense, the unity of
practices is itself, on this standard interpretation, immune from
criticism. The delimitation of the bounds of sense and the
identification of nonsense can only confirm and consolidate existing
practices, tracing their boundaries ever more securely, but never
challenging their underlying stability.

Despite the near-ubiquity of this usual reading, however, Wittgenstein
can be read differently. In particular, an alternative interpretation
becomes possible as soon as we see*another* way in which Wittgenstein
inherits the critical legacy of Kant.[^303] For Wittgenstein, I shall
argue, does not invoke “use” only, or primarily, to*confirm* the logic
of existing practices by identifying their boundaries with the bounds of
sense. For even though Wittgenstein’s invocation of “use” calls upon us
to remember the way that the sense of a word is dependent on its usual
employment, on the surroundings of practice in which it ordinarily
functions, Wittgenstein also constantly and recurrently aims to
challenge the assumption of any stable theoretical*delimitation* of
these surroundings.

Indeed, as Alice Crary (2000) has recently argued, the standard
interpretation of Wittgenstein’s project as drawing a stable critical
line between sense and nonsense itself results from the assumption that
Wittgenstein formulates a “use-theory” of meaning according to which the
“place a bit of language has in our lives - the public techniques to
which it is tied - fixes or determines its meaning.”[^304] As Crary
argues, this standard way of understanding Wittgenstein’s intention
makes the assumption of a fixed line, determinable in principle, between
the kinds of use licensed by these “techniques” and those outside their
bounds more or less inevitable. This, in turn, generates the entire
debate between “conservative” interpreters who see Wittgenstein as
arguing for the inviolability of established practices and
“conventionalist” or relativist interpreters who see him as establishing
the contingency of any particular set of practices. Against this, Crary
urges that we need not see Wittgenstein as theorizing meanings as
“fixed” at all:

Wittgenstein hopes to expose as confused the idea that meanings might
somehow be ‘fixed’ (whether independently of use or otherwise). There
is, he wants us to grasp, no such thing as a metaphysical vantage point
which, if we managed to occupy it, would disclose to us that meaning
were ‘fixed’ in one way or another and would therefore enable us to
bypass the (sometimes enormously difficult) task of trying to see
whether or not a new employment of a given expression preserves
important connections with other employments. His aim is to get us to
relinquish the idea of such a vantage point and, at the same time, to
relinquish the idea that what we imagine is to be seen from such a
vantage point has some bearing on our ability to submit practices to
criticism.[^305]

As Crary suggests, we can actually gain a new sense of the critical
implications of Wittgenstein’s practice of linguistic reflection by
seeing the way in which it*resists* the idea of the fixity of meaning
that underlies the most usual way of understanding them.[^306] This
problematizes the usual understanding of the shape of Wittgenstein’s
inheritance of Kant - according to which Wittgenstein would be involved
in the project of drawing a fixed, stable line between sense and
nonsense - but also makes room for*another* way of understanding the
Kantian legacy of Wittgenstein’s method. If Wittgensteinian reflection
on meaning is not the drawing of a stable line of critique, but rather
an ever-renewed process of reflecting on the shifting and unstable
boundaries of sense, then one result of Wittgenstein’s method, like
Kant’s own critique of reason, is to call into question the totalizing
view that any such line can be drawn at all.

Wittgenstein’s first work, the*Tractatus* , already carries out a
practice of reflecting on meaning by reflecting on use, and enacts, at
least implicitly, a critique of the assumption of the*totality* of use.
The preface specifies the aim of the book as that of drawing “a limit to
thought, or rather - not to thought, but to the expression of thought …”
(*TLP* , p. 3). For Wittgenstein in the*Tractatus* , the critical line
is not to be drawn between two regions of thought that are independently
identifiable; this would involve thinking on*both* sides of the limit,
which would be impossible. Instead, immanent reflection on the uses of
terms and propositions in ordinary language is itself to provide the
basis for any possibility of critically distinguishing between sense and
nonsense. As we saw in chapter 3, Wittgenstein’s use-doctrine of
meaningfulness in the*Tractatus* supports, as well, the official
Tractarian account of the origination of philosophical error. According
to the account, the illusions that lead us to philosophical inquiries
typically arise from*mistaking* the uses of words in ordinary language.
Because ordinary language allows one and the same sign to be used in
various possible ways, we very often misconstrue our signs or fail to
give them any determinate use at all. Accordingly, Wittgenstein says
that the correct method of philosophy would simply be to criticize this
kind of mistake:

The correct method in philosophy would really be the following: to say
nothing except what can be said, i.e. propositions of natural science -
i. e. something that has nothing to do with philosophy - and then,
whenever someone else wanted to say something metaphysical, to
demonstrate to him that he had failed to give a meaning to certain signs
in his propositions. (6.53)

By reminding ourselves of the uses that we ourselves have given - or
failed to give - our signs, we correct the typical errors that lead to
philosophical speculation.

In the practice of philosophical criticism that the*Tractatus*
recommends, therefore, reflection about the correct or legitimate*uses*
of signs suffices to expose the errors of ordinary language and positive
metaphysics alike. But nowhere in the*Tractatus* does Wittgenstein
suggest that it must ultimately be coherent to*state* the rules of
“logical syntax” that distinguish sense from nonsense. In fact, the
suggestion of the*Tractatus* as a whole is that any such statement must
undermine itself:

My propositions serve as elucidations in the following way: anyone who
understands me eventually recognizes them as nonsensical, when he has
used them - as steps - to climb up beyond them. (He must, so to speak,
throw away the ladder after he has climbed up it.)

He must transcend these propositions, and then he will see the world
aright. (6.54)

The remarks that “frame” the*Tractatus* thus suggest a pragmatic and
performative dimension of its teaching that do not appear on the level
of straightforward theory. Rather, as recent commentators like Diamond
(1991) have suggested, they invite us to undertake a certain kind of
elucidatory self-criticism. According to Diamond, the point of the book
is not to show or reveal some metaphysical structure of the language and
the world, substantial in itself, that can be said or described; the
point is, rather, to dramatize the nonexistence of any such structure by
showing that the attempt to describe it immediately results in
nonsense.[^307] The text invites us to see this by leading us to enter
imaginatively into the supposed theory of the world and language that it
outlines, and then showing us how, by the very lights of this theory
itself, every proposition that attempts to express it must be nonsense.
In this “play of the imagination” - constituted by our initial
identification with, and then forceful separation from, the position of
the philosopher who takes the sentences of the*Tractatus* to outline a
substantial theory - we come to see the illusoriness of the perspective
from which the propositions that theoretical philosophy formulates can
seem to have sense. We gain the kind of “solution” that is “seen in the
vanishing of the problem” - vanishing not in the sense of having been
resolved or answered, but in the sense that it has been revealed as*not*
being a problem at all.

In the particular case of the*Tractatus* theory of meaning, therefore,
attending to the ‘frame remarks’ allows us to see how the very same
critical movement that*draws* the line between sense and nonsense also
serves to*destabilize* it. Thus, the practice of distinguishing sense
from nonsense, rather than depending on a stable theoretical boundary,
becomes a constantly renewed work of reasoning in concrete cases,
without the assurance of any unitary criterion of meaningfulness
exterior to this work itself. This compels us to recognize not only the
inherent instability of the critique of nonsense, but also
the*Tractatus* ’ ongoing engagement with the metaphysics that it
criticizes.[^308] If Tractarian critique is self-critique, then it
cannot result in any stable, unified, or totalizing demarcation of the
bounds of sense. The reflection on the uses of words that it calls upon
us to undertake does not actually aim at, or conclude in, the
demarcation of a stable region of “sense” to be distinguished from
another region of “nonsense.” Instead, the idea of such a stable
demarcation is*itself* one of the pieces of metaphysics that
the*Tractatus* centrally aims to confront. The self-critical practice of
linguistic reflection problematizes, in its very critical movement,
every attempt to authorize such a line.

For the later Wittgenstein, then, seeing the great variety and
heterogeneity of the contexts in which we can significantly employ a
word means seeing the complexity of anything that we can understand as
its “use.” And although there is a sense in which the*use* of the word
is present to my mind when I understand it (in the sense that, if I
understand it, I know*how* to use it), knowing the use in this sense
does not mean having the*totality* of the word’s uses present to mind,
not even in a shadowy or schematic way.[^309] To understand the word is
to know how to use it, and the understanding of a word is manifest in
the kinds of use one makes of it, in a diversity of contexts, over time.
But even while seeing this, there is a deep temptation to think that to
understand the use of the word is to grasp the totality of its use all
at once, in the moment of understanding; and accordingly that this
totality of use must exist as a whole, present to the mind as a unity
underlying all the diverse instances of its expression. The temptation
is, evidently, of a piece with those underlying psychologistic theories
of content that explain it in terms of private and subjective acts,
objects or events. Like these theories, it seeks to explain our actual
performance in terms of the presence to mind of a superlative item,
capable of underlying the infinite diversity of this performance in a
way no symbol or picture could actually do. Wittgenstein’s critique of
it, like the analytic tradition’s longstanding critique of psychologism,
develops the specific significance of reflection on the structure of
language to the point of its inherent instabilities. It applies this
reflection critically to show the untenability of the very assumption of
a totality of use, underlying the use of ordinary words, that
descriptions of this structure most often presuppose.

The opening sections of the*Investigations* develop Wittgenstein’s
invocation of use by reminding the reader of the*diversity* of uses of
words, of the*various* ways in which they function and bring about
results.[^310] The “Augustinian” picture of language with which
the*Investigations* begins is, itself, Wittgenstein argues, a
characteristic result of failing to see this diversity of
function.[^311] Augustine’s mistake is like the failure of someone who,
seeing the visual uniformity of a printed script, assumes that the uses
and purposes of the words are as uniform and similar as the script
itself appears to be.[^312] Characteristic philosophical errors - for
instance the error of assuming that every sentence is a proposition, or
that every propositional sentence is the “assertion” of a judgment -
themselves result from the same tendency to miss the great multiplicity
of different purposes of words in the language.[^313]

Wittgenstein’s criticism, in the*Investigations* , of the explicit
theoretical position of the*Tractatus* itself consists partly in
reminding the reader of the inherent complexity and heterogeneity of the
uses of any word.[^314] Missing this complexity, Wittgenstein argues, we
are inclined to think of the meaning of a word as something uniform that
it carries with it on each occasion of its use. In pursuing
philosophical questions about meaning, we can become seduced by the
appearance that the term or proposition carries its significance with it
like an aura, that this significance accompanies it automatically into
every kind of application.[^315] Insofar as the*Tractatus* sought to
answer the general question of the nature of meaning by introducing a
general account of the logical form of propositions and language, it too
committed this characteristic error of reducing the diversity and
heterogeneity of uses of a word to a unity co-present with it on each
occasion. The search for an explanation of meaning led to the assumption
that there must be “strict and clear rules of the logical structure of
propositions,” somehow hidden in “the medium of the
understanding.”[^316] The assumption of an underlying logical structure
of language thereby became an “unshakable” ideal, an assumption of
“crystalline purity” that dictates the form that the investigation must
subsequently take.[^317]

Resisting this ideal, “we see that what we call ‘sentence’ and
‘language’ has not the formal unity that I imagined, but is the family
of structures more or less related to one another” (*PI* 108).
Meaningful language itself is not a region of*praxis* that can be
delimited by the introduction of any uniform theoretical standard or
criterion. Instead, it is a complex*family* of structures and concepts,
interconnected in the most various and diverse ways with the whole
variety of material and social practices that comprise a human life.
Wittgenstein’s heuristic use of the concepts of ‘family resemblance’ and
‘language games’ themselves aim to remind us of this irreducible
diversity. In each case, looking to the ‘use’ of a word - reminding
ourselves of how it is actually used - means also reminding ourselves
that our understanding of this ‘use’ is no stable unity, no delimitable
totality, but rather an essentially*open* application of the word to
ever-new contexts of significance.

III

We have seen that, in the opening sections of the*Philosophical
Investigations* , Wittgenstein’s investigation of use leads him
repeatedly to criticize the characteristic assumption of*totality* that
presents the*use of a word* as a theoretically definable whole. Another
version of this assumption, in fact, is the main critical target of the
skein of interrelated passages standardly described as the
“rule-following considerations.” For Wittgenstein, the “metaphysical
concept of a rule” that he critiques in these passages is itself
a*totalizing* concept; its effect is to present a mythology of the
application of words as grounded in the presence to mind of the totality
of this application, all at once. Wittgenstein’s internal critique of
the concept of a rule aims to disrupt this totalizing assumption,
exposing the untenability of the mythological picture of use it
formulates.

According to Wittgenstein in the*Investigations* , one of the key
sources of the*Tractatus* ’ positive picture of meaning was the
assumption that “if anyone utters a sentence and*means* or*understands*
it he is operating a calculus according to definite rules” (*PI* 81).
The*Tractatus* ’ positive appeal to rules of “logical syntax” underlying
the use of language distorted the actual form of linguistic practice,
construing the variety and multiplicity of our uses of words as
controlled by a uniform underlying system. But this misunderstanding
was, for Wittgenstein, just one case of a more general and ubiquitous
one that arises whenever we think of our linguistic practices
as*constrained* by intelligible rules that, by themselves, determine the
correct and incorrect application of words across an infinite diversity
of cases. Wittgenstein’s account of the source of this error echoes his
account in the*Blue Book* . Seeing that reflection on meaning is
reflection on use, we are tempted to think that the whole use of the
word must be, in some sense,*present* in the mind on each occasion of
its use.[^318] We then think of the rule itself as a superlative item,
somehow capable of determining an infinite number of cases, despite
being itself a finite item.

The thought that “in a*queer* way, the use itself is in some sense
present” to the mind on each instance of successful understanding is
thus the most characteristic source of the metaphysical picture of a
rule that Wittgenstein criticizes.[^319] When we think of the “entire
use” as underlying and determining any specific instance of it, we are
tempted to think of it as captured by something - the symbolic
expression of a rule, or a picture or image - that*itself* determines
each of an infinite number of instances of application, that determines
what is, in each of an infinite number of cases, the*right* way to apply
the word in question. Against this metaphysical picture of the rule,
Wittgenstein reminds us that any finite, symbolic expression of a rule
is capable of various interpretations. No such expression suffices to
determine or delimit, by itself, the infinite number of cases in which a
word is used correctly. When thought of in this superlative way, the
symbolic expression is really “a mythological description of the use of
a rule” (*PI* 221).

Wittgenstein’s critique of rule-following therefore seeks to disrupt a
characteristic picture of the*totality* of the use of a word; but it
also targets a typical way of thinking about identity of meaning that
tends to hold this picture in place. This becomes evident at*PI* 214-16,
where Wittgenstein responds to an interlocutory suggestion that an
“intuition” must be needed, in each particular case of the development
of a series, to determine the correct way to go on. Characteristically,
Wittgenstein’s response is a*reductio* of the interlocutor’s invocation
of ‘intuition’ in this case:

214. If you have to have an intuition in order to develop the series 1 2
3 4 … you must also have one in order to develop the series 2 2 2 2 …

215. But isn’t the same at least the same?

We seem to have an infallible paradigm of identity in the identity of a
thing with itself. I feel like saying: “Here at any rate there can’t be
a variety of interpretations. If you are seeing a thing you are seeing
identity too.”

Then are two things the same when they are what one thing is? And how am
I to apply what the one thing shews me to the case of two things?

216. “A thing is identical with itself.” - There is no finer example of
a useless proposition, which yet is connected with a certain play of the
imagination. It is as if in imagination we put a thing into its own
shape and saw that it fitted.

This appeal to an “intuition” is one characteristic recourse of the
metaphysical picture of the rule. The interlocutor attempts to ground
this picture, ultimately, in what he thinks of as the*self-identity* of
a rule, its sameness to itself across the infinite set of its instances.
If the metaphysical picture of the rule were correct, indeed, a rule
would be a finite item that determines an infinite number of cases
by*repeating itself identically* in each of its instances of
application. The self-sameness of the rule, its abstract identity with
itself, would provide the ultimate basis for its uniform applicability
across an infinite number of possible cases. The application of rules
would be thinkable only as the infinite repetition of a self-same item,
even across a great variety of cases and contexts. In challenging the
characteristic assumption of totality that leads to the metaphysical
picture of the rule, Wittgenstein’s critique also challenges this
assumption of self-identity. Along with it, he challenges the
characteristic impression of necessity that most often accompanies the
adumbration of logical, semantic, or grammatical rules of use, the
impression that these rules*themselves* determine what can be said, and
on what occasions. The point of the critique is not that there are no
necessities governing our use of language, but that the attempt to
schematize these necessities in rules conceived as by themselves
determining, all by themselves, possibilities of significant usage
mistakes the reality of language’s own inherent possibilities of
self-critique. Presenting these possibilities as if they were determined
already anyway by a fixed set of articulable standards, it forecloses
the essential and constitutive openness of language to the heterogeneity
of its applications, and the standing openness of these applications to
ever-changing terms of immanent linguistic critique.

IV

I have argued that a decisive element of Wittgenstein’s critical
invocation of*use* is his critique of the assumption of totality that
would portray the use of a word as a stable unity of practice. Insofar
as Wittgenstein’s method directs us to seek the meaning of a word by
reflecting on*praxis* , its aim is not to introduce any kind of unifying
theory of linguistic practices, but rather to disrupt the assumption
that any such unification is possible at all. The assumption of totality
that Wittgenstein criticizes is a characteristic feature of
philosophical attempts to theorize meaning positively, including what
may seem to be Wittgenstein’s own attempt in the positive movement of
the*Tractatus* . But the significance of Wittgenstein’s critique of
totality is by no means limited to its bearing against specialized
philosophical theories. Indeed, it is well known that Wittgenstein
thought of his philosophical work as relevant to the resolution of
cultural, political, and social questions, even though it has not always
been obvious how this relevance should be understood.

Many of Wittgenstein’s remarks in*Culture and Value* exhibit his
well-known pessimism about the idea of technological progress and his
lack of faith in the social and material practices of the modern
world.[^320] As is also well known, Wittgenstein was at least somewhat
sympathetic with Marxism, and his thinking in the*Investigations* may
have been significantly influenced by that of the Marxist economist
Sraffa. But beyond these personal and biographical connections,
Wittgenstein’s central philosophical texts also in fact exhibit a deep
concern with the metaphysics that underlies contemporary institutions
and social and material practices.[^321] In particular, Wittgenstein was
undoubtedly well aware of the dominance, in the twentieth century, of a
regime of thought that tends to assimilate individual, concrete acts of
reasoning and communication to a unified field of abstract, formal
logic. His own*Tractatus* was misread - most significantly by the Vienna
Circle logical positivists - as a contribution to the theory of this
field. And over the period of his interactions with the Circle,
Wittgenstein became acutely critical of the motivations of those who saw
in logic the key to a new “construction” of the world.[^322]
Wittgenstein was also, doubtless, aware of the way in which this regime
of thought can support dominant cultural practices of technology,
systematization and calculation. Characteristically, these practices
treat individual actions as significant only insofar as they can be
evaluated and repeated from the standpoint of abstract rationality,
which itself is conceived as a system of universal rules.

Commentators have long speculated about the political implications of
Wittgenstein’s work, but it is only recently that a significant number
of interpreters have begun to see his practice of linguistic reflection
as supporting a practice of critique that is radical and potentially
liberatory with respect to prevailing social practices and norms.
McManus (2003), for instance, has argued that Wittgenstein’s
consideration of prevailing practices of measurement and calculation,
particularly in the context of the philosophy of mathematics, can
actually support a far-ranging critique of our tendency to treat these
numerical practices as referring to substantial realities in themselves.
Without such a critique, McManus suggests, we tend to “reify” the
relevant practices, giving them an unquestioned and otherwise undeserved
value. Similarly, Janik (2003) suggests that one target of
Wittgenstein’s critique of rule-following might be the kinds
of*regularity* that a certain conception of rule-following in fact tends
to produce in our political and social practices of legislation and
authority, and accordingly that Wittgenstein can be read as a critic of
some of these practices.

For these commentators, Wittgenstein’s critical reflection on rules
offers a position from which it becomes possible both to question the
assumptions of regularity and fixity that underlie normal descriptions
of the regularity of typical practices, for instance of calculation and
legislation, and to criticize these practices themselves on that basis.
When, in particular, large sectors of social practice and prevailing
institutions become governed by deeply held assumptions of regularity
and uniformity, such a critical reflection on the sources of these
assumptions becomes particularly important. If the current analysis is
correct, in fact, these particular suggestions for the application of
Wittgensteinian critique are simply isolated examples of a much more
general and far-ranging critical method, bearing not*only* against the
assumptions implicit or explicit in particular practices of calculation,
automation, and legislation, but also against the whole complex of
deeply-held metaphysical assumptions that make the normative logic of
these practices possible.

The Frankfurt school’s concept of “reification” offers more general
terms for thinking about prevailing social practices and their
foundation in totalizing patterns of thought, including the “identity
thinking” that Adorno criticizes throughout his comprehensive*Negative
Dialectics* .[^323] The critique of these linked concepts targets not
only particular instances of injurious or oppressive practice, but the
whole cultural style of an entire historical period. For the early
Frankfurt school, the critical examination of socially dominant
characterizations of reason and rationality provides a particularly
important critical index of such a style, one that Wittgenstein himself
occasionally characterizes as the “spirit” of modern, Western
civilization. Wittgenstein’s own critique of the metaphysical concept of
the rule strongly resembles the Frankfurt School’s sustained criticism
of the regime of thought and practice that construes rationality as
formal, symbolic ratiocination.[^324] Against this regime, Wittgenstein,
like Adorno and Horkheimer, seeks to re-inscribe in our thinking a sense
of the openness of everyday practices to novelty and difference, and of
the necessary failure of any attempt to enclose this difference within a
totality of theory or explanation.[^325] Beyond simply echoing the
Frankfurt school’s critique of reification, however, Wittgenstein’s
self-reflexive philosophical method also offers to give us the terms in
which we can formulate this critique as a*linguistic* one: that is, as a
critique of assumptions and habits of thought that lie deeply concealed
in language itself, and that only linguistic self-reflection offers to
remove.[^326]

In suggesting that we can read Wittgenstein as critical of the
ideological support of prevailing social practices, I do not mean to
suggest that he himself thought of this kind of social critique as a
prevailing, or even an explicit, goal of his philosophical practice. It
is true that Wittgenstein says little explicitly about the social and
political implications of his own work. But as we have seen, this has
not prevented commentators from interpreting the social and political
implications of his view of language. Indeed, it seems obviously
appropriate to interrogate the critical consequences of Wittgenstein’s
practice, given the evident Kantian background of his project of
reflection. What I have offered in this chapter is an alternative
interpretation of these consequences, one that shows that Wittgenstein
need not be construed as a social conservative or as contributing to the
dominance of entrenched conceptions of reasoning and rationality.
Instead, I have argued, we can read him as offering new terms for the
identification, diagnosis and interrogation of the deep ideological
foundations of these dominant and entrenched conceptions.

If this is correct, then another benefit of the kind of reading I
suggest here is that it can begin to open, in a new way, reflection on
the question of the relationship of analytic philosophy to the larger
historical contours of Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment thought. In
particular, it begins to show how the characteristic analytic turn
toward language can yield a kind of critical thought that continues the
Enlightenment project of demystification, of identifying and criticizing
the illusions of metaphysics, while nevertheless resisting the reified
and standardized forms of rationality that have so often resulted from
this project in the past.


