7. Thinking and Being: Heidegger and Wittgenstein on Machination and Lived-Experience
=====================================================================================

Over the last several chapters, we have seen how the analytic
tradition’s inquiry into language has led it repeatedly to experience
the failures and paradoxes of its attempt to envision language as a
total structure of signs. This withdrawal of language at the point of
its own positive description occurs repeatedly in the history of the
tradition, and marks in a fundamental way the most prominent results of
its consideration of the basis and nature of linguistic meaning. The
analytic tradition’s inquiry into language begins with the attempt to
demonstrate the philosophical relevance of what at first seems
self-evident, our ordinary access to the language that we speak. It
ends, as we have seen over the last several chapters, by demonstrating
the inherent and pervasive ambiguities of this access, not only in the
theories of philosophers but in its everyday forms as well. In the
demonstration, what had been self-evident becomes less so; the aporias
of the explicit, theoretical attempt to grasp the structure of language
reveal the underlying and pervasive ambiguities of our ordinary
relationship to it. The inherent problems of the structuralist picture
of language thereby become opportunities for the renewed posing of a set
of critical questions about the linguistic basis of the practices and
circumstances of an ordinary life.

These critical consequences of the analytic tradition’s inquiry into
language come to the fore especially when this inquiry is set in a
broader philosophical and historical context. To this end, in this
chapter, I examine another prominent twentieth-century reflection on
language, one that, although seldom well understood by analytic
philosophers, experiences much the same withdrawal of language and
explicitly draws from it some far-ranging critical consequences about
contemporary social and technological practices. The critical
consequences of Heidegger’s examination of language, I argue, bear deep
parallels to some of the most decisive results of the analytic
tradition, most centrally to the twofold consideration of “rule
following” and the idea of a “private language” that marks the main
critical movement of Wittgenstein’s*Philosophical Investigations* . The
two skeins of criticism are indeed linked, I shall argue, in the
problematic of*self-identity* that defines the modern philosophical
conception of the thinking and experiencing subject. Once made explicit,
this problematic suggests new ways of thinking about*difference*
and*heterogeneity* within a broader consideration of the priority of
language for the human “form of life.”

Characteristically, Heidegger’s own engagement of language over the
entirety of his career is determined by his pervasive concern with the
question of the*meaning of being* . From his first writings, Heidegger
sought to open a fundamental questioning regarding the possibility of
expressing the basic character of “being itself.” He came to see this
possibility of expression, or the lack thereof, as conditioned by
determinate, historically specific interpretations of the factual as
well as “ontological” relationships among different kinds of beings or
entities, including significantly the kind of beings we ourselves are.
These interpretations themselves, according to Heidegger, find
expression in the forms of language open to speakers at various
historical times, and are at least partially discernible through
reflection on these forms. Since the beginning of philosophical ontology
with the Greeks, the history of the linguistic forms of the expression
of being and the modes of thought they make possible has been, according
to Heidegger, one of ever-greater forgetfulness and obscurity. The
progressive withdrawal of being from any possibility of positive
expression has been marked by an ever-greater development of determinate
interpretations and assumptions that tend to obscure its real character
and make it deeply inaccessible to us. Over the course of the 1930s,
Heidegger accordingly began to speak of the entire period of this
history of successive forgottenness as the period or epoch
of*metaphysics* .

During this time, Heidegger accordingly began to take up with greater
and greater explicitness the question of the relationship of ordinary
language, and the metaphysical assumptions that underlie it, to
the*life* of the kind of beings that we ourselves are, what he had
characterized in Being and Time as “Dasein.”[^327] This language, he
argued, has for a long time determined the life of the human being as
the “subjectivity” of a subject of experience. In the complicated and
enigmatic*Beiträge zur Philosophie* , written between 1936 and 1938,
Heidegger connects this metaphysical conception of subjectivity as
“lived-experience” to the complex of technological practices and
calculational ways of thinking that he calls “Machenschaft” or
machination. These are practices and ways of thinking that he sees as
increasingly characteristic of, and dominant over, modern life and its
forms and institutions of power; they include, but are not limited to,
what he would later characterize as “technology” and “calculational ways
of thinking.” With the development of the “history of being” that he
undertakes at this time, Heidegger aims both to unmask the complicity of
a metaphysical conception of subjectivity with these forms of practice
and thought, and also to demonstrate the root of this complicity in the
historical forms of language that, as he holds, continue to prevent the
truth of being itself from coming to expression.

I.

As he became more and more concerned with the nature of language,
Heidegger came to see the very possibility of the*expression* of being,
as limited by the forms of ordinary language, determined as they are by
deep-seated metaphysical assumptions and interpretations that tend rule
out this expression. Beginning in the 1930s, accordingly, his history of
being aimed to prepare for the futural occurrence of an “event”
[*Ereignis* ] of being that is, within the metaphysical language that is
the only language that exists, literally inexpressible. The term aims to
express the possibility of an “en-owning” or self-expression of “being
itself,” an expression that, according to Heidegger, has normally and
ever more pervasively been blocked by the forms of metaphysical thinking
and language. The essential hint of this event to come, according to
Heidegger at this time, is provided, not by any possible expression or
word of language, but by the paradoxical experience of a*withdrawal*
or*refusal* of language that at the same time reveals, in negative mode,
something of its positive character. The connection he thereby draws
between being and the obscure possibility of its linguistic expression,
leads him, at the same time, to interrogate the far-ranging connections,
deeply rooted in the history of philosophy, that exist between the
structures of ordinary language and the metaphysical determination of
the kind of being that has, since ancient times, been specified as
the*animale rationale* or the*zoon logon echon* , the “animal having
language.”

In the 1930s, the experience of language thus came to determine, for
Heidegger, the possibility of a futural event of being, and with it the
possibility of expression that belongs to it. It was not always so.
In*Being and Time* , Heidegger’s attempt to formulate the long-forgotten
question of the meaning or “sense” of being through a preparatory
analysis of the constitutive structures of human Dasein or “being-there”
repeatedly alluded to the question of language. Nevertheless*Being and
Time* did not (as later texts would) make the being of language*itself*
central to the possibility of an understanding of being. Heidegger’s
analysis of the structures of Da-sein’s “being-in”, or its possibilities
of existing in the world, presented “discourse” [*Rede* ] as a
derivative mode of articulation, subjacent to other, more basic
structures of “disclosedness” and lacking any*essential* priority in
articulating human possibilities of sense.[^328] Thus,*Being and Time*
’s analysis of language displayed Heidegger’s interest in the question
of the*possibility* of treating language as an object of theoretical
judgment or hermeneutic reflection, without coming, yet, to anything
quite like a decision on the extent or implications of this possibility:

In the end, philosophical research must for once decide to ask what mode
of being belongs to language in general. Is it an innerworldly useful
thing at hand or does it have the mode of being of Da-sein or neither of
the two? What kind of being does language have, if it can be “dead”?
What does it mean ontologically that a language grows or declines? We
possess a linguistics, and the being of beings that it has as its theme
is obscure; even the horizon for any investigative question about it is
veiled. Is it a matter of chance that initially and for the most part
significations are ‘worldly,’ prefigured beforehand by the significance
of the world, that they are indeed often predominantly ‘spatial’? Or is
this ‘fact’ existentially and ontologically necessary and why?
Philosophical research will have to give up the ‘language-philosophy’ if
it is to ask about the ‘things themselves’ and attain the status of a
problematic that has been clarified completely.[^329]

The determination of language (what ancient ontology grasped as*logos* )
as an*objectively present being* is itself, according to Heidegger,
responsible for the basic indifference and confusion of the concept of
being that it hands down to us.[^330] Within this determination,
language may appear as an instrument of use, a system, or a totality of
spoken or written signs; in any case, the decision that has made these
prevailing interpretations of language dominant is hidden from us. Even
within the course of Heidegger’s own preparatory fundamental analysis of
the structures of Da-sein, the being of language remains mysterious for
phenomenological investigation. Even its fundamental*mode* of being,
what kind of “thing” it is and how it relates to Da-sein as its
“speaker,” remains, as Heidegger says, veiled in obscurity. But as
Heidegger undertook a more explicit examination of the historical
determination of being itself by the various concepts and practices of
metaphysics, he came to see the obscurity of the “mode of being” of
language as in fact decisive for the withdrawal and forgottenness of
“being itself” within this history. For during this period, he came to
see these possibilities for the revealing or concealing of being as
deeply controlled by linguistic possibilities of expression, especially
insofar as the forms of language*themselves* have come to embody the
deep proclivities of metaphysics.

The most important of these proclivities, according to Heidegger, is the
tendency of language to interpret being itself as one or another form
of*present* being or entity. The tendency begins with Plato’s
interpretation of being in terms of the endurance of the
unchanging*eidos* and continues, through medieval theology, into the
modern determination of beings*objects* representable in the
self-consciousness of a*subject* of experience. This tendency, with its
various modes of determination of being itself as presence, prevents the
true character of being from coming to light or even from being
intelligibly questioned.[^331] An abiding sense of the dangerous and
destructive consequences of this withdrawal of being from expression,
and the hope of the futural event that would reverse it, dominates the
esoteric rhetoric and elliptical investigations of Heidegger’s
“being-historical treatise” of the mid-1930s, the*Beiträge zur
Philosophie: vom Ereignis* . From its first pages, in fact,*Beiträge*
takes up the question of being as a question of the possibility of
language, as a question of the possibility of an adequate “saying” of
being itself, or of its “essential swaying” (*Wesen* ) in the singular
event of*Ereignis.* *Ereignis* itself, the event of “en-owning” to whose
articulation the entirety of the book contributes, is difficult to
define, and cannot be understood at all, according to Heidegger, through
the “used-up” words of metaphysics. Thus, the entirety of the*Beiträge*
will constitute an attempt toward a “thinking-saying” of*Ereignis* , a
thinking and saying that also, unlike the language of metaphysics,
“belongs … to be-ing’s*word* .” In a time when the fundamental
possibility of a thoughtful speaking of being has all but completely
retreated, “all essential titles have become impossible” and “the
genuine relation to the word has been destroyed”[^332] . The*Beiträge*
’s speaking and thinking of*Ereignis* will therefore, necessarily,
attempt to find a way back to this “genuine relation”*through* the
impoverishment and failure of the language of metaphysics, a struggle
with and through the language of the tradition to find the terms and
voices that can again speak, or witness, its most significant
experience.

Heidegger’s growing appreciation, in the*Beiträge* , of the failure of
metaphysical language to articulate the truth of being necessitates
certain terminological innovations, giving the*Beiträge* a tone that is
less straightforward and more evocative and performative than the
analytic prose of*Being and Time* . One of these innovations is
Heidegger’s practice in*Beiträge* of re-writing “being” itself as*Seyn*
rather than*Sein* , at least when he is discussing it as it might appear
outside the closure of the metaphysical tradition.[^333] This is
necessary, Heidegger explains, in order to gesture toward a break with
the metaphysical tradition’s consistent interpretation of being as
“beingness,” the quality of enduring presence and representability that
the language of metaphysics constantly inscribes in its interpretation
of individual beings. This stranger and more archaic way of writing
“being” also aims to gesture toward the strangeness of a future
experience or event of being outside the closure of this tradition, the
event of*Ereignis* itself. The speaking of be-ing in*Ereignis* ,
Heidegger tells us, will no longer be a speaking “about” being in which
words and phrases describe or represent its aspects or characteristics,
but rather a direct speaking “of” be-ing itself.[^334]

But the exhaustion of ordinary language makes this future speaking and
thinking problematic, indeed almost impossible, in that the very
linguistic terms that would be needed for it are lacking, along with the
thought that those terms could call forth:

The truth of be-ing cannot be said with the ordinary language that today
is ever more widely misused and destroyed by incessant talking. Can this
truth ever be said directly, if all language is still the language of
beings? Or can a new language for be-ing be invented? No. And even if
this could be accomplished - and even without artificial
word-formation - such a language would not be a saying language. All
saying has to let the ability to hear arise with it. (*CP* , 54)

Here, Heidegger makes it clear that no new language, no innovation of
new terms or introduction of new turns of phrase, can make possible the
simple speaking of the truth of be-ing. The linguistic failure that
renders be-ing unsayable is not simply the failure of this or
that*particular* natural language to include the terms or metaphors that
would be needed. Rather, the failure of language to speak the truth of
be-ing conditions*all* language in the historical epoch of the
consummation of metaphysics, since this consummation itself means that
the truth of be-ing withdraws from us more and more.

Following these introductory remarks, the “Preview” that begins
the*Beiträge* moves to articulate the way in which the
necessary*failure* of language makes way for the possibility of a future
speaking and thinking of*Ereignis* . Insofar as this failure is not
simply an empirical or contingent failure of a particular speaker, it
reveals something of the character of language itself:

The word fails, not as an occasional event - in which an accomplishable
speech or expression does not take place, where only the assertion and
the repetition of something already said and sayable does not get
accomplished - but originarily. The word does not even come to word,
even though it is precisely when the word escapes one that the word
begins to take its first leap. The word’s escaping one is enowning as
the hint and onset of be-ing.

The word’s escaping is the inceptual condition for the self-unfolding
possibility of an originary-poetic-naming of be-ing.

When will the time of language and deep stillness come, the time of the
simple nearness of the essential sway and the bright remoteness of
beings - when the word would once again work?[^335]

Here, the possibility of the time of “language and deep stillness,” the
time to come when “the word would once again work,” must remain
radically in question, since it cannot be asserted within any language
that is available today. But precisely in witnessing the
necessary*failure* of language to speak being, Heidegger says, it
becomes possible to obtain a “hint” and even an “onset” of be-ing
itself.[^336]

Significantly, Heidegger’s description here of the failure of language
that provides the first possibility of this first “hint,” goes far
beyond anything that is suggested by*Being and Time* ’s description of
“keeping-silent” as a possible mode or modification of the existential
structure of discourse and articulation.[^337] Here, the decisive
silence is not at all the contingent silence of an individual speaker
who chooses to keep silent, of my choosing to hold back what I could or
would otherwise say, but choose not to. The failure of language is not
any longer traceable to the individual decision of a human subject at
all; it is, rather, a matter of the failure of the word itself, of a
situation in which “the word does not even come to word.” In his later
works on language as well, Heidegger would often return to the
description of what is shown in this experience of “words failing one”,
finding in it, as in his earlier discussions of*Angst* and the
nothingness, the possibility of a first revelation of beings as a whole
in their underlying character.[^338] The failure of language to speak
the truth of being under the conditions of the completion of metaphysics
is not simply a matter of the absence of words or terms. Instead, it
witnesses the incapacity of any and every language, of language itself,
to bring to light its own most fundamental determinants.

As is clear from Heidegger’s discussions of the “ontological difference”
between beings (e.g., individual items, events, objects, processes, or
ideas - whatever can be named) and being itself, one of the
characteristic forms of this failure is the metaphysical diremption that
makes every attempt to*speak* being, to articulate the fundamental
character of being itself, collapse into the description of*a* being, an
object or principle whose objective presence is subsequently
presupposed. For:

Every saying of be-ing is kept in words and namings which are
understandable in the direction of everyday references to beings and are
thought exclusively in this direction, but which are misconstruable as
the utterance of be-ing. Therefore it is not as if what is needed first
is the failure of the question (within the domain of the
thinking-interpretation of be-ing), but the word itself already
discloses something (familiar) and thus hides that which has to be
brought into the open through thinking-saying.

This difficulty cannot be eliminated at all; even the attempt to do so
already means misunderstanding all saying of be-ing. This difficulty
must be taken over and grasped in its essential belongingness (to the
thinking of be-ing). (*CP* , 58)

This collapse of the word of be-ing into “references to beings” is not a
simple error or an avoidable mistake, since it is deeply rooted in the
tendency of metaphysics to determine being as beingness, or as the most
general characteristic of objective and enduring presence.
Correlatively, along the lines of a necessity that amounts to the sway
of metaphysics over language itself, being is taken for a being,
stabilized in the form of objective, enduring presence as soon as it is
named at all.

II

As is well known, also beginning in the 1930s, Heidegger would
consistently identify the character of modern times as determined
by*technological* and*calculational* ways of thinking and behaving.
These ways, he thought, manifest the most developed and injurious forms
of an abiding forgetfulness or loss that traces almost to the beginning
of the Western tradition. The discovery and unveiling of the hidden
bases of the technological character of modern thinking and acting thus
became an essential part of Heidegger’s narrative interpretation of the
history of Western thought from its first beginning with the Greeks to
its anticipated, if wholly unforeseeable, future. But in*Beiträge*
itself, the Heideggerian critique of technology develops alongside what
may be a surprising result even to those familiar with this story: that
the modern dominance of technology and a technological way of thinking
and relating to things - what Heidegger calls, in the*Beiträge* ,
“machination” (*Machenschaft* ) - is possible only through the conjoint
emergence and growth of something that seems at first completely opposed
to technology, namely individual, subjective “lived-experience”
or*Erlebnis* .

Heidegger’s description of this conjoint emergence and dominance in
modern times traces it to the increasing*withdrawal* of being from any
possibility of expression within forms of language and life determined
by metaphysics. This withdrawal manifests itself as the prevailing
determination of being [*das Sein* ] from the sole perspective of
individual beings [*die Seienden* ][^339] , and culminates in the total
dominance of technological and calculational ways of thinking and
handling objects. Heidegger refers to the total pattern of these ways of
thinking and operating, and the interpretation of beings that
facilitates them, as*machination* .[^340] From the perspective of
machination, all objects become raw material for quantitative
measurement, calculation, and manipulation according to a
natural-scientific understanding of matter. With its dominance, the
making and manipulating of particular objects comes completely to the
fore and obscures even the possibility of any question about the essence
and nature of being itself.

At the utmost limit of the process, the distress caused by the
withdrawal of being and of the question of its possibility, Heidegger
says, is so complete that it manifests itself as a total*lack* of
distress, as the impossibility of even raising the question of what has
withdrawn and what has been abandoned.[^341] But Heidegger nevertheless
thinks that it is possible, even in the most advanced forms of
abandonment that culminate in the total domination of machination, to
detect a faint echo or resonance of the original “happening” or
“swaying” [*Wesung* ] of being at the time of the beginning of Western
history. Perceiving this echo even in the completion of the dominant
processes of technological thinking and machination, Heidegger suggests,
will simultaneously enable us to gain a first premonition, hint, or
intimation of the event of being, as*Ereignis* , in the “other”
beginning, the one for which the thinking of the*Beiträge* aims to
prepare.[^342]

Machination thus echoes being in an age that has completely forgotten
it. Coming to the fore alongside the withdrawal of being, machination
fosters what is not proper to being (*das Unwesen des Seins* ), what
furthers this withdrawal and indeed brings it to completion. But because
it does nevertheless echo the essential sway of being, machination can
also prepare the way for the event of*Ereignis* , in which be-ing (Seyn)
comes into its own.[^343]

But if we are to hear in machination the distant echo of being and see
in its structure the possibility for beginning our preparation for
another beginning, more is needed than simply an appreciation of its
ambiguous nature. We must also understand, according to Heidegger, the
long-suppressed connection between machination and what seems at first
most distant from it, lived-experience or*Erlebnis* . The increasing
spread and completion of the dominance of machination leads incessantly,
Heidegger says, to the dominance of lived-experience as an “insipid
sentimentality” in which every undertaking and event exists as
experience and to be experienced.[^344] But behind this banality lies a
matter of the utmost importance for the historical project he
undertakes. For it is the thought of the hidden connection between
machination and lived-experience that will complete the “basic thrust”
of Western history and begin the preparation for the “other beginning”:

If machination and lived-experience are named together, then this points
to an essential belongingness of both to each other … When
thinking-mindfulness (as questioning the truth of be-ing and only as
this) attains the knowing awareness of this mutual belongingness, then
the basic thrust of the history of the first beginning (history of
Western metaphysics) is grasped along with that, in terms of the knowing
awareness of the other beginning.

If we can understand what machination and lived-experience have to do
with one another, Heidegger suggests, we can understand in the deepest
sense how Western metaphysics, arising from the first beginning, has
interpreted being and understood the nature of beings, and from this
understanding begin to glimpse the futural event of be-ing in the “other
beginning.”

III

In the context of the development of Heidegger’s thought,*Beiträge* ’s
description of the connection between machination and lived-experience
is significant in several ways. First, the connection of machination to
‘lived experience’ both illuminates and problematizes Heidegger’s
inheritance of the phenomenological project of the descriptive analysis
of experience. Though*Erfahrung* rather than*Erlebnis* is Husserl’s
usual word for experience, Heidegger’s use of*Erlebnis* gestures towards
the*Leben* of Husserl’s*Lebenswelt* and the temporal primacy of
Husserl’s ‘living present’. With his criticism of ‘lived-experience’ as
conjoint and coeval with machination, Heidegger seems to turn decisively
against his teacher’s attempt to reduce the abstracted and ramified
conceptual network of scientific knowledge to its foundation in actual
experience. In*The Crisis of European* *Sciences* , Husserl had
undertaken the*epoche* or ‘bracketing’ of the world of scientific
abstraction in order to uncover its foundation in the actually lived
world of unabstracted experience. The current crisis of European culture
itself, Husserl had complained, arises from a certain overdevelopment or
technization in modern science that has led to a forgetfulness of this
foundation. The scientific abstraction that Husserl criticizes bears
many similarities to Heidegger’s ‘machination’: both arise as a total,
all-engulfing framework of conceptualization and calculation; both
injuriously neglect the historical origin and basis of this framework.
But if, as Heidegger says, machination and lived-experience arise
together as what is not ownmost to being, there is no hope for Husserl’s
revitalizing return to a foundation in lived-experience. The apparent
forgottenness of this foundation in the development of the modern
scientific outlook is only apparent, the echo of the more fundamental
forgottenness of being that inaugurates Western philosophy.

Secondly, and more broadly, Heidegger’s identification and critique of
the connection between machination and lived-experience mark his most
direct rejection of a range of projects in the nineteenth-century
philosophy of subjectivity, project that identified subjectivity with
‘life’ and saw ‘lived experience’ as the vital foundation for all
aesthetic and cultural productions. Heidegger must certainly have had in
mind, for instance, Dilthey’s repeated invocation, throughout his
‘philosophy of world-views’ of the subjective, lived-experience of the
individual thinker as the basis for any possible philosophy or artistic
creation.[^345] A decade earlier, in*Being and Time* , Heidegger had
already criticized the orientation of Dilthey’s investigations toward
the problematic of ‘life’, suggesting that although Dilthey’s philosophy
contains an ‘inexplicit’ tendency toward fundamental clarification, this
tendency cannot be fulfilled by it, for the philosophical orientation
which begins with the life and lived-experience of individual persons
(and here, Heidegger identifies not only Dilthey, but also Husserl,
Bergson, and Scheler as adherents to this orientation) still cannot
raise the question of the*being* of the person.[^346] As early as*Being
and Time* , therefore, Heidegger begins to develop a critique
of*Erlebnis* that also aims to criticize the prevailing
‘anthropologistic’ or humanistic philosophy of subjectivity, and indeed
the entire subjective/objective contrast that it presupposes. But it is
not until the*Beiträge* that Heidegger develops this critique fully,
connecting the rise of lived-experience explicitly to the rise of
anthropological thinking in philosophy, and situating both against the
background of the growing dominance of machination and technology.[^347]

More broadly, in his later thought, Heidegger sees no way to surpass the
modern idea of subjectivity while remaining within the confines of any
existing notion of the “human.” The critique of subjectivity he
undertakes is therefore, as he says, simultaneously a critique of
“anthropologism” and every “human”-centered way of thinking.
In*Beiträge* , Heidegger finds that the emergence of lived-experience,
and its totalization as the universal category of the “experienceable,”
“demands and consolidates the anthropological way of thinking.”[^348]
For in connection with the identification of all kinds of things and
happenings as graspable through “lived-experience,” the human being is
defined as the*animal rationale* . The definition begins by defining the
human purely biologically, in terms of its animal “life,” and then
subsequently adding the determination of rationality, which then can
only, Heidegger avers, be understood as a capacity for representing
objects and contents of thought within a subjective
self-consciousness.[^349] Lived-experience, then, inaugurates and
confirms the prevailing anthropologistic conception of humankind
as*animal rationale* . It does so by restricting “beings” to a certain
limited range, the range of beings that are representable as “lived
through live-experience.” It makes the livability of any being as an
experienced representation the criterion of its being altogether, and
thereby restricts being to objectivity, understood as set over against
subjectivity. The movement of this restriction is that of a
pre-delineation, a pre-structuring of the totality of beings to
guarantee their representability as objects, their livability in
experience, and their comprehensibility to rational man. In the
pre-delineation of beings as a whole, lived-experience and
experienceability become the univocal standard of their being.

On the basis of this pre-delineation of beings as possible objects of
experience and representation for subjects, “man” is conceived as
the*animal rationale* and the realm of beings as essentially consisting
of objects of representation open to his rational knowing.
Lived-experience and the notion of “objectivity” are linked in their
historical arising; moreover, the more that objectivity is developed as
the realm of the existence of whatever is, the more that it demands
subjective lived-experience as its criterion and standard. Machination
and lived-experience, then, come to prominence together, in modern
times, when every event and object comes to be understood as material
for the experience of the experiencing subject, and hence subject to the
pre-delineation imposed by a framework of possible representation and
representability. This pre-delineated framework is what Heidegger would
later call*Gestell* or “enframing,” the essence of technology itself
according to the late essay “The Question Concerning Technology.”[^350]
Its imposition leads to the interpretation of all beings as measurable
and calculable, and to the growth and furtherance of the forms of
technological creation and manipulation that this universal
measurability and calculability makes possible. Heidegger indicates that
we can understand the deeper history of this process only by grasping
the original, non-quantitative understanding of the nature of beings
that reigned at the time of the first beginning. This understanding of
nature, not as a particular domain or set of beings, but as the nature
of beings themselves, was called “phusis” by the Greeks.

In the*Beiträge* discussion, Heidegger invokes this original
understanding of beings as “phusis” without explaining it in any detail;
for more insight, we must look to his less esoteric published writings.
In the course*Basic Questions of Philosophy* , written contemporaneously
with*Beiträge* , Heidegger considers the origin of technology as the
origin of*techne* , the Greek term for the particular attitude toward
beings that culminates in today’s advanced calculational processes of
technological manipulation and control. He finds, though, that*techne*
does not originally arise from calculation or the quantitative at all,
but rather from a basic attitude of*wonder* at beings in the
world.*Phusis* itself is the conception of beings that encounters them
from within this attitude of wonder. Given this, original*techne* is
already, in a certain sense, a proceeding against*phusis* . But it is
not yet the totalizing, world-involving process of modern
technology.[^351]

Primordially,*techne* is a perceptual knowledge of beings. Though it
does not yet involve the systematic ordering of all beings according to
principles,*techne* already proceeds “against” beings, trying to “grasp
beings as emerging out of themselves in the way they show themselves …
and, in accord with this, to care for beings themselves and to let them
grow, i.e., to order oneself within beings as a whole through
productions and institutions.”[^352] In this “against,” we can already
see the roots of the interpretation of beings that is evident in the
etymology of the German word for “object”:*Gegenstand* , or, literally,
that which stands against. Primordial*techne* will eventually lead to
the determination of beings as objects and the oppositional
subject/object relationship that characterizes the dominance of
machination. But in primordial*techne* , Heidegger finds a more basic
“against”; it is the “against” of perceptual knowledge grounded in
wonder as a basic disposition. This perceptual knowledge accords with,
rather than opposes, the way that beings can show themselves in truth,
what Heidegger elsewhere calls*poiesis* .[^353] Indeed, it implies a
procedure “against beings, but in such a way that these themselves
precisely show themselves.”[^354] Originally,*techne* is the respectful
looking that perceives the being in its self-showing openness. The
relationship of man to beings in original*techne* is neither the
relationship of particular subject to particular object nor the
challenging relationship of man to beings in technology. Instead, it is
the appearing of*phusis* , or the self-showing of beings in the
resonance and strikingness - the wonder - of their own being.

But although it is itself neither machination nor lived-experience, the
primordial seeing of*techne* originates*both* machination*and*
lived-experience in their togetherness. For although primordial*techne*
remains a non-confrontational seeing, the exteriority of*techne*
to*phusis* already prepares the objectification of beings and of the
dominance of lived-experience as the unified standard of all events and
happenings. From the basic proceeding of*techne* “against”*phusis* will
emerge the mutually challenging relationship in which lived-experience,
as a universal standard of experienceability, pre-delineates beings and
prepares them for technological and machinating control. In
understanding the phenomenology of originary techne, we understand the
showing of being in*techne* *prior to* the forgetting and obscurity of
being that transforms*techne* into machination and starts it on the path
of total domination of objects. Still, the possibility of this
withdrawing of being is already essentially prepared by basic*techne* :

The basic attitude toward*phusis* ,*techne* , as the carrying out of the
necessity and need of wonder, is at the same time, however, the ground
upon which arises*omoiosis* , the transformation of*aletheia* as
unconcealedness into correctness. In other words, in carrying out the
basic disposition itself there resides the danger of its disturbance and
destruction. For in the essence of techne, as required by phusis itself,
as the occurrence and establishment of the unconcealedness of beings,
there lies the possibility of arbitrariness, of an unbridled positing of
goals and thereby the possibility of escape out of the necessity of the
primordial need.[^355]

The forgetting of being inaugurates machination by covering over the
basic need of wonder, the need of the basic attitude that takes beings
into respectful consideration and care. Without this basic attunement
toward wonder, the prevailing way of revealing beings becomes the
correctness of representations rather than their self-showing in
original unconcealment, what Heidegger calls*aletheia* . The overall
character of beings itself becomes objectivity rather than*phusis* ;
beings are understood as objects for subjective representation, and the
standard of such representation is their universal experienceability in
lived-experience.

In the passage, Heidegger also names the origin of this process of
forgetting and covering over whereby beings become objects and truth
becomes correctness. It is*omoiosis* , or identity. Identity itself is
the origin of the “disturbance and destruction” that transforms the
original attunement toward beings into one of representation and
subjectivity. After the onset of this “disturbance and
destruction,”*identity* plays an essential role in determining the
nature of beings, leading ultimately to the determination of the overall
character of beings as objectivity and of truth as representational
correctness. At first glance, this claim seems puzzling. How could such
a thing as identity, surely among the most abstract and contentless of
philosophical concepts, play a fundamental role in determining the
prevailing conception of the nature of objects and the everyday ways of
thinking and operating that arises from this conception? But as we shall
see, Heidegger thinks that the thought of identity, and in particular
the tautological principle of the self-identity of objects, itself
underlies, at the deepest level, the conjoint arising of machination and
lived-experience as a universal standard for beings. To see how, though,
we must look elsewhere in Heidegger’s corpus.

IV

With the location of the joint origin of lived-experience and
machination in original*techne* , the togetherness of these seeming
opposites becomes thinkable. In*Beiträge* , Heidegger says also that the
thought of the original unity of lived experience and machination
“completes the basic thrust of Western history” and essentially prepares
our thinking for*Ereignis* . The preparation for*Ereignis* is
intelligible as soon as the true character of machination’s echo of the
first beginning becomes apparent. This character, in turn, becomes
apparent as machination’s origin in primordial*techne* , from which
machination and lived experience arise jointly under the condition of
the forgottenness of being. In*Beiträge* , Heidegger specifies, in a
distinct but related way, the connection between machination and being’s
essential swaying in the first beginning:

Machination and lived-experience are formally [formelhaft] the more
originary version of the formula for the guiding-question of Western
thinking: beingness (being) and thinking (as re-presenting
com-prehending).[^356]

This formula recalls the fragment of Parmenides that Heidegger
investigates in several of his later texts, most significantly*Identity
and Difference* and*What is Called Thinking* :

to gar auto noein estin te kai einai

This fragment, Heidegger says in*What is Called Thinking* , is usually
translated as:

"For it is the same thing to think and to be."

This saying of Parmenides captures, according to Heidegger, “the basic
theme of all of Western-European thinking.”[^357] It echoes in Kant’s
identification of the conditions for the possibility of experience with
the conditions for the possibility of the objects of experience, and in
Hegel’s “Being is Thinking.” But the*to auto* , or sameness, of the
Parmenides fragment is not*omoiosis* , or identity, even though sameness
and identity are often treated as interchangeable in the tradition of
Western metaphysics.[^358] Indeed, one of the most basic foundations of
Western thinking, Heidegger suggests, can begin to come to light if we
can understand the difference between this sameness and this identity.

In*Identity and Difference* , Heidegger explores the implications of the
principle of identity: A=A. This principle, Heidegger says, is itself a
keynote of Western thought. It asserts the sameness of each particular
thing with itself. But rather than simply rest with this seemingly
self-evident principle, Heidegger proceeds to inquire into its hidden
ground:

Sameness implies the relation of ‘with,’ that is, a mediation, a
connection, a synthesis: the unification into a unity. This is why
throughout the history of Western thought identity appears as
unity.[^359]

Throughout the history of Western thought, identity has been considered
in connection with unity: what is self-identical is unified with itself.
But this relationship of the thing with itself becomes more than simple
unity as the Western tradition progresses. In the speculative idealism
of Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, Heidegger suggests, self-identity,
understood in terms of the selfhood of the subject, becomes articulated
as a complex process of self-relation.[^360] What is decisive for the
possibility of speculative idealism is the possibility of seeing the
self’s relationship of self-identity as one that is capable of
mediation, and thus one that can exist and develop in a variety of
different ways. With this notion of mediated self-identity, the original
principle of identity comes to bear a philosophical weight that brings
to completion its historical itinerary. If we can think of the “is” of
the proposition “A is A” not as a purely abstract relation of unity, but
as an expression of being itself, Heidegger suggests, we can understand
how the principle of identity expresses an ancient and guiding
determination of the nature of beings:

For the proposition really says: “A is A.” What do we hear? With this
“is,” the principle tells us how every being is, namely: it itself is
the same with itself. The principle of identity speaks of the Being of
beings.

As a law of thought, the principle is valid only insofar as it is a
principle of Being that reads: To every being as such there belongs
identity, the unity with itself.

What the principle of identity, heard in its fundamental key, states is
exactly what the whole of Western European thinking has in mind - and
that is: the unity of identity forms a basic characteristic in the Being
of beings. Everywhere, wherever and however we are related to beings of
every kind, we find identity making its claim on us.[^361] (pp. 25-26).

Western thought, repeatedly and foundationally, asserts the unity of
identity (*die Einheit der Identität* ). In speaking the unity of
identity and the identity of the same, it seeks to subject beings to the
basic law that determines the identity of any object. This basic law, in
turn, pre-determines the field of possible beings, making possible the
pre-delineation of the world that is then accomplished by the dominance
of machination and lived-experience. When the formal identity of “A is
A” is understood as the selfhood of a self, it makes the self-identical
self of Hegel, Fichte, and Schelling the center and locus of this
pre-delineation. Subjective experience becomes the universal and
universalizing standard for the nature of beings. Lived-experience
emerges along with machination as the total systematicity enabled by the
application of the self-identity of the experiencing subject to the
lawbound world of objects.

In originary*techne* , by contrast,*noein* is not thinking as
representing or calculating, but as the basic attitude of a perceptual
knowing grounded in the attunement of wonder and the understanding of
beings as*phusis* . Under the condition of the forgottenness of being,
sameness (*to auto)* becomes identity (*omoiosis)* and*noein* becomes
thinking in the sense of Kant and Hegel. In this development, the
originary sameness of thinking (as*noein* ) and being (*estin* ) becomes
the technological challenging-forth of beings and the standard of
lived-experience that makes it possible. But the connection of
machination and lived-experience continues to pose a form of the
“guiding-question of Western thinking.” For by understanding of the
connection of machination and lived-experience, we begin to grasp the
meaning of Parmenides’ fragment, and thereby to understand the meaning
of being at the “first beginning” of history, from which understanding
we can begin to prepare for the “other beginning” of*Ereignis.*

V

In 1930, six years before Heidegger began writing his*Beiträge* ,
Wittgenstein wrote the following as part of the introduction to his
planned*Philosophical Remarks* :

This book is written for such men as are in sympathy with its spirit.
This spirit is different from the one which informs the vast stream of
European and American civilization in which all of us stand.*That*
spirit expresses itself in an onwards movement, in building ever larger
and more complicated structures; the other in striving after clarity and
perspicuity in no matter what structure. The first tries to grasp the
world by way of its periphery - in its variety; the second at its
centre - in its essence. And so the first adds one construction to
another, moving on and up, as it were, from one stage to the next, while
the other remains where it is and what it tries to grasp is always the
same.[^362]

Wittgenstein’s thought, like Heidegger’s, explores the relationship
between lived-experience and machination in order to issue a deep
challenge to the prevalence of the guiding metaphysical idea of the
self-identity of the same. The attitude Wittgenstein critiques in
the*Remarks* , the spirit of onward and upward movement, is the attitude
of machination. And Wittgenstein’s critique of the metaphysical picture
of the rule, as developed in the*Philosophical Investigations* , aims at
the essence of what is “always the same” through an investigation of the
same connection of machination and lived-experience that Heidegger
discovers in the course of his own thought.

In critiquing the constructional spirit “which informs the vast stream
of European and American civilization,” Wittgenstein may well have had
in mind the constructional project of Carnap’s*Der Logische Aufbau der
Welt* , published just two years previously. In*Aufbau* , Carnap had
outlined an optimistic and utopian project of epistemological
“construction” of the scientific world:

If we allot to the individual in philosophical work as in the special
sciences only a partial task, then we can look with more confidence into
the future: in slow careful construction insight after insight will be
won. Each collaborator contributes only what he can endorse and justify
before the whole body of his co-workers. Thus stone will be carefully
added to stone and a safe building will be erected at which each
following generation can continue to work .[^363]

The constructional project of the*Aufbau* aims to display the
epistemological structure of science by revealing the concepts of
science as logical constructions from basic, uninferred entities.
According to Carnap’s conception, science itself is a network of logical
relations, a unified field of logically interrelated propositions. The
relationality of this total network, Carnap suggests, is the condition
for the possibility of objectivity itself:

Now, the fundamental thesis of construction theory … which we will
attempt to demonstrate in the following investigation, asserts that
fundamentally there is only one object domain and that each scientific
statement is about the objects in this domain. Thus, it becomes
unnecessary to indicate for each statement the object domain, and the
result is that*each scientific statement can in principle be so
transformed that it is nothing but a structure statement* . But this
transformation is not only possible, it is imperative. For science wants
to speak about what is objective, and whatever does not belong to the
structure but to the material (i.e. anything that can be pointed out in
a concrete ostensive definition) is, in the final analysis,
subjective.[^364]

Carnap’s conception of objectivity as the form of relational description
of science, in connection with his utopian ambitions for construction
theory, manifests the key elements of Heidegger’s description of
machination. The logical form of objectivity is the pre-delineated field
of lawbound relations among objects, explainable in virtue of their
submission to this pre-delineation. As Heidegger suggests, this lawful
pre-delineation is itself, according to Carnap, the essential condition
for the possibility of objectivity. In the logical field of
propositional relations, the totality of beings is subject to
explainability and reducibility. Moreover, Carnap’s project essentially
involves the connection between this machinational pre-delineation and
lived-experience as a universal standard. For the epistemologically
illuminating reconstruction of a scientific concept reduces it to its
basis in*immediate lived experiences* ,*erlebnisse* or “erlebs.” In
Carnap’s picture, therefore, the correlate of the total field of
objectivity is the standard of experienceability by a subject.
Objectivity is possible only on the basis of the formalizability of all
lived-experiences, their regimentation in a total web of scientific
explanation. With this relation, Carnap’s picture inherits Kant’s
identification of the conditions of being (as objectivity) with the
conditions of possible experience (as subjectivity); and he situates
these conditions explicitly within a total pre-delineated world-picture
of unitary explanation.[^365]

Wittgenstein’s*Philosophical Investigations* critiques the joint
configuration of machinational, technical thinking and subjective
lived-experience in two interrelated movements, the so-called
“rule-following considerations” and the “private language argument.” As
is well known, the argument against private language attempts to show
the incoherence of the idea of a subjective language, particular to one
person, in virtue of which she could name her essentially private
sensations or experiences. It shows the incoherence of this idea by
showing that such naming would be in a certain sense idle or empty, that
it could do nothing to give the name a stable relationship to its bearer
if this relationship were not already determined by its complex role in
the entirety of a human life. In Heidegger’s language, the critique of
private language shows that no standard of lived-experience, no
criterion of experienceability-by-a-subject, can do the work of
authorizing the total pre-delineation of a unified field of objectivity
and explainability of beings, as it appears to do on Carnap’s picture.

The target of Wittgenstein’s critique has it in common with the target
of Heidegger’s critique, in particular, that it presents the referential
connection between a “word” and its “object” as forged by the fixation
of a particular mental image or symbol in the mind of a subject of
experience. The assumption of such a connection determines the
fundamental relationship of thinking to its objects as one of
representation, and hence (as Heidegger would point out) as a mode of
presence, a substitution of image for thing in the interiority of the
subject. The conception was, as we have already seen, a primary target
of analytic philosophy’s linguistically based critique of psychologism,
even before Wittgenstein’s determinate and extended application of it to
the problems of “rule-following” and “private language.” In the opening
pages of the*Investigations* , Wittgenstein seeks to loosen its hold by
reminding us of the various types of words (not only nouns and verbs)
that make up a language, and of the vast and scarcely delimitable
heterogeneity of their ways of functioning in a language as a
whole.[^366] With this reminder, Wittgenstein calls into question, on
linguistic grounds, the picture that sets the subjectivity of experience
against the objectivity of things, where such objectivity is determined,
first and foremost, in terms of a subject’s capacity of
making*reference* to particular things.

In place of the picture that determines the fundamental character of
language as that of representation, and so consolidates the logic that
sets subjective experience off over against the objectivity of objects,
Wittgenstein seeks to remind us of the irreducible complexity of the
functioning of various types of words in the various contexts of a human
life. His special terms of art for this complex integration and the
unities they make up - “language-games” and “forms of life” - do not
refer to specific, theoretically representable unities of practice or
activity. Rather, they express the variety and complexity of this
integration of language into human life and the multiplicity of its
modes. In relation to the human life of whose possibilities these
linguistic modes are so many expressions, language itself is nothing
like a possession. With the concrete reminder of the multiplicity and
complexity of the varieties of usage and their integration into human
life, the ancient definition of the human as*zoon logon echon* (the
animal having language) lapses, as it does in a different way in
Heidegger’s critique. For both philosophers, the availability of
language to life can no longer be specified as that of a present object
simply open to the theoretical gaze. The essential and revealing
withdrawal of language from this gaze shows the inherent ambiguity and
unavoidable complexity of the everyday relation of life to the language
that articulates its most definitive possibilities, the ambiguous and
open space of the*application* of language to everyday life.

For Heidegger as well as for Wittgenstein, the experience that most
directly reveals the inherent complexities of the relationship of
language to life is indeed that of the*failure* of language, of the
“running up against” its boundaries that Wittgenstein saw as the
characteristic expression of a fundamental and typical human
desire.[^367] Where these boundaries are encountered in the form of the
failure of language, we gain, according to Heidegger, a certain kind of
insight into the character of language itself. This insight shows us the
underlying reasons for our pervasive failure, within the ordinary realm
of language and its possibilities of expression, to bring to light the
essential character of the deepest determinants of our being. The early
Wittgenstein, in a revealingly parallel way, identified “the limits of
my language” with “the limits of my world” and called the*feeling* of
contemplating the world “as a limited whole” the “mystical.”[^368] Near
the end of the*Tractatus* , he also identifies the “mystical” with the
“inexpressible” that can only be shown and never said.[^369] As for
Heidegger, the revelation of this “inexpressible” beyond is marked most
of all by the linguistic experience of language’s own boundaries in the
privative mode of silence, by the necessary silence that one must
preserve “whereof one cannot speak.”[^370]

Yet where are the “boundaries of language,” and what does the analytic
tradition’s recurrent failure to fix them in the form of an explicit
theoretical description reveal about the complexities of their figuring
in a human life? As we have already seen, for the late Wittgenstein as
well as the author of the*Tractatus* , the critical or reflective work
of tracing the boundaries of sense in the linguistic performances of
everyday conversation or action cannot and does not culminate in the
specification of a single, univocal set of criteria capable of drawing a
fixed line between sense and nonsense in the practice of a language as a
whole. In the idiom of the*Tractatus* , any such statement undermines
itself, as soon as it is stated, by revealing itself as nonsense. In
that of the*Investigations* , any propositional expression of criteria
meant to determine the bounds of sense still leaves open the further
critical question of the application of*that* expression in practice.
With the*Investigations* ’ detailed critical consideration of
rule-following, the access to language that we constantly presuppose,
and practice with every word and gesture, is shown to be incapable of
explication in terms of any fixed set of rules or standards. Rather, our
constant recourse to language is a paradoxical deliverance to what can
never appear as an object, given to the theoretical gaze that would
account for it or in the ordinary practice that would be determined by
it.[^371] Synthesizing the rhetoric of Wittgenstein and Heidegger, we
might say: our most everyday experiences of language, of its successes
as well as its failures, its capacities for revealing as well as what it
hides, mark the ordinary occasions of our recourse to it with the
extraordinariness of the unresolved mystery of language’s being itself.

VI

In the context of the late Wittgenstein’s project of perspicuously
viewing the actual use of our language in order to clear up
philosophical confusions, the concept of the*rule* emerges as a
particular point of difficulty. When discussing rules, he agues, we are
particularly tempted to misinterpret the grammar of our language, giving
it an interpretation that it does not bear. We may particularly be
tempted to invoke rules when we are tempted to establish and explain the
submission of beings to the possibility of overall explanation and
clarification. Explanatory projects like Carnap’s, for instance, make
the rule-based and lawbound character of beings the basis of their total
explainability and characterizability in the objective terms of
scientific description and explanation. In reminding us of the actual
character of our language of rule-following, Wittgenstein shows the
failure of this metaphysical use of rules to establish its own ground.
He shows us that the metaphysical interpretation according to which
beings are submitted to a unified regime of explanation insofar as they
are rule-bound fails to accomplish its goal, because it conceals its own
origin in what is actually a fiction, a mythology of the regular
self-identity of the rule across the infinite diversity of the
circumstances of its application.

Considered in connection with Heidegger’s thought, the concept of a rule
again has a special and basic significance. For the rule, in the basic
picture of machination, is the most essential condition under which a
subject’s experience can act as standard and criterion for the object.
Only in virtue of a rule-bound pre-delineation of beings does the
self-identical subject guarantee the submission of the range of beings,
as objects of representation, to its thinking. In the self-identity of
the rule, the self-identity of the subject itself is made the standard
of the world of objects; for it is the universal applicability of the
rule that establishes the possibility of the pre-delineation of the
world as explainable in relational, causal, and lawbound terms. The
universality of the rule, then, licenses the projection of the assumed
self-identity of the subject into the assumption of the lawbound unity
of the world of objects, guaranteeing the fundamental comprehensibility
of all objects by guaranteeing their universal experienceability. It is
this claim for the universality of the rule, its guarantee of infinite
application undisrupted by heterogeneity, difference, and particularity,
that we may see Wittgenstein’s considerations as criticizing in
particular.

One specific way that Wittgenstein criticizes the application of the
idea of rules in projects like Carnap’s is to remind us of the close
connection between the use of the concept of the “rule” and the concept
of the “same:”

223. One does not feel that one has always got to wait upon the nod (the
whisper) of the rule. On the contrary, we are not on tenterhooks about
what it will tell us next, but it always tells us the same, and we do
what it tells us.

One might say to the person one was training: “Look, I always do the
same thing: I ….”

224. The word ‘agreement’ and the word ‘rule’ are related to one
another, they are cousins. If I teach anyone the use of the one word, he
learns the use of the other with it.

225. The use of the word “rule” and the use of the word “same” are
interwoven. (As are the use of “proposition” and the use of “true”).

Under the pressure of the demand to explain what it is to follow a rule,
our natural temptation is to explain the rule in terms of the identity
of the same. We think of the rule as a self-identical structure
that*repeats itself infinitely* by*telling us the same* at every stage.
The rule, we are tempted to think, “always tells us the same, and we do
what it tells us.”[^372]

To see more clearly the philosophical temptation at the root of the line
of thought that Wittgenstein is criticizing, we may consider the
following sequence:

2 4 6 8 10

Having given the partial sequence, we might attempt to give the rule of
the series: it is “add two.” The rule itself can be thought of as a
finite item. But when we think of the rule as the metaphysical item that
generates the series, we think of it repeating*itself* infinitely. As we
apply the rule to generate more of the series, we do the*same* thing
again and again. We can do so because the rule itself remains the same.
The rule itself is not affected by the conditions of its application.
The*self-identity* of the rule guarantees the*sameness* of each of its
infinite applications.[^373]

According to the thinking that Wittgenstein criticizes, then, to follow
a rule consistently or correctly is to do the same thing, again and
again, ignoring or leaving no room for any possible heterogeneity of
instances of its possible application and development. The assurance
provided by this characterization, however, blinds us to the complex
relationship of our concrete acts of rule-following to the particular
contexts of their occurance. Attempting to explain, rather than
describe, what it is to follow a rule, we picture to ourselves the
self-identity of an entity the same with itself in all of its instances.
It is this picturing that underlies the misleading picture of the rule
that Wittgenstein criticizes, the picture of the rule as a “rail laid to
infinity,” a selfsame, stable bearer of regularity whose only
application is infinite repetition.[^374] And to advert to the assurance
of the rule in explaining our*practices* of counting and calculating is
to advert to the certainty of an idealized process of thought that would
be applicable in any situation whatsoever, one that would make
the*subject* the self-identical thinker of the same in any circumstance
or context. Accordingly, it is to dissimulate in advance the varieties
of difference, found in the openness of the horizon of possible
applications of a rule, that could subvert its underlying stability and
disrupt the ideal certainty of this ideal subject.

The “rule-following considerations” problematize this metaphysical
picture of the rule by posing a paradox.[^375] The paradox shows that
the metaphysical description of the rule - the description according to
which the rule repeats the identity of the same - fails to afford us the
explanation it seems to. For as long as the rule is thought
metaphysically, any application of the rule still needs another
explanation. The rule, thought metaphysically, needs an interpretation
in order to be applied at all; but then the interpretation itself must
be interpreted, and so on. The self-identical rule, meant to guarantee
the certainty of the self-identical subject in applying a universal
standard of experience to all beings, falls short of this guarantee
exactly where it is called upon to interact with the subject. No
metaphysical item - no self-identical agent of infinite repetition - can
explain what we call “following a rule” in the particular cases in which
we appeal to that notion.

VI

With his*Beiträge* critique of the joint configuration of machination
and lived-experience, Heidegger joins Wittgenstein in exposing and
criticizing the pervasive determination of modern “forms of life” and
conceptions of its subject through forms of metaphysics that are
inscribed ceaselessly in the everyday expressions of our language
itself.[^376] The underlying basis of the critique, for both
philosophers, lies in their sustained considerations of the nature of
language, of the possibilities it brings to light or constrains, and of
the ambiguity of our lived relation to it. In both philosophers’
treatments, this ambiguity is shown in the experience of language’s
withdrawal from the forms of description that would bring it to light as
an object, that would clarify its fundamental mode of being and thereby
display its relationship to the living being that speaks. This
experience of the withdrawal of language from the positive description
of its essential mode of being is also, as we have seen over the last
several chapters, a regular and repeated experience of the analytic
tradition that undertakes explicitly the analysis and description of
language’s structure. It makes evident the determination of ordinary
forms of action and practice by unargued metaphysical conceptions of
language, meaning, and identity. In so doing, it opens the critique that
interrogates these practices on the basis of the ambiguity of their own
linguistic ground, and so might perhaps open the possibility of a life
purged of the forms of violence and mystification to which they lead.

Analytic philosophers are likely to be suspicious, with some justice, of
the determinative role in Heidegger’s inquiry of the question of the
expressibility of “being itself.” The characteristic Heideggerian
narrative of the successive withdrawing of this ill-defined “object,”
with its eschatological hopes for a future return, inscribes Heidegger’s
critical aims within a framework that we may see as both nostalgic and
historically totalizing in ways that analytic philosophers, typically
suspicious of such grand narratives, may certainly wish to resist. But
the central object of Heidegger’s analysis of the origin of the
linguistic forms of metaphysics - our standing tendency to take language
as a present being, as an unproblematic possession of the human animal
and so as wholly under the control of its power of thought - is readily
recognizable in the specific forms of language, and pictures of the life
of its speaker, that the analytic tradition also repeatedly
interrogates. Whatever the effects or forms of its historical
development, this tendency to treat words as the possessions of a
thinking subjectivity that inscribes the possibilities of their use in
advance is present wherever and whenever, in human discourse, the
question of the meaning of a word, or its significant employment in the
course of a life, is explicitly raised or implicitly foreclosed. The
critique that exposes the ambiguity of its objectification of language
does not depend on any determinate or positive conception of the “nature
of being” or the prospects for its influence over the course of history,
for it demonstrates this ambiguity in the everyday life of language
itself. It exposes the failure of the thinking, experiencing subject,
and of the rule-governed forms of regularity it inscribes, to master the
open possibilities of language’s everyday use.

It has been evident for several decades that the possibility of gaining
a clear understanding of the significance of linguistic reflection for
twentieth-century philosophy, and with it perhaps as well possibility of
a genuine reconciliation of analytic and continental philosophy, depends
in significant measure on gaining a clear sense of the parallels and
convergences between the very different critical projects of Heidegger
and Wittgenstein. Many commentators have speculated on these
convergences, but relatively few have placed them within the context of
a larger consideration of the implications of the basic inquiry into the
nature and structure of language that both philosophers actually
undertook.[^377] Within the scope of “analytic” readings, interpretation
of the significance of Heidegger’s thought has furthermore regularly
been vitiated by a prominent and influential misreading which,
portraying him as a “social pragmatist” theorist of the practical basis
of the disclosure of beings in the world, tends to obscure the deep and
ever-growing significance of the question of language for his most
central concerns.[^378] Their explicit setting within the scope of this
question reveals the ongoing relevance of the common experience of the
enigmatic withdrawal of language that Heidegger and Wittgenstein shared,
and that still continues to determine our relation to language wherever
and whenever it is in question.


