8. Language, Norms, and the Force of Reason
===========================================

The last several chapters have constituted a detailed examination of the
concepts and values of “language,” “meaning,” “practice,” and “use,”
“rule,” “regularity” and “institution” in the dialectic of analytic
philosophy in the twentieth century. At each stage, I have examined the
relationship of these concepts with the notion of a language as a total
logical, grammatical, or practical structure, and with the ambiguities
inherent in an appeal to language that constantly tends to figure it as
a structure of signs, while subsequently finding just this structure to
be inadequate to account for its own institution, extent, limits, or
ultimate guiding principles. In the repeatedly enacted dialectic that I
have explored, the attempt to describe or theorize the logical form or
structure of language in terms of a*corpus* of analytic rules,
principles, or norms has, I have argued, repeatedly been contested by
those moments of presence, genesis or institution that resist being
included in the structural system of language as simply*another* element
or another moment (see chapter 1). The dialectic has repeated itself
consistently, unfolding each time out of the inherent dynamic of the
analytic tradition’s founding and originally determinative recourse to
language. Language, with almost every resort that the analytic tradition
has made of it, then appears ambiguously as an objectively present
structure or system, accessible in principle to the schematic resources
of a theoretical description of its structure or form; and then again,
in its moments of founding principles, limits, or ultimate nature, as
something radically transcendent to, mysterious or problematic for any
such accounting.

There are few themes more pervasive in the discourse of analytic
philosophy of language today than the invocation of*ordinary lived
practices* as the ultimate source of linguistic meaning and
intersubjective intelligibility.[^379] The appeal to practices figures,
in the recent literature, most centrally in projects that attempt to
explain the meaningfulness of language as grounded in
essentially*public* and*social* practices of communication,
deliberation, evaluation and criticism. In many of its versions, it
seeks as well to account for the “*normative* ” dimension of language -
in other words, for distinctions between correctness and incorrectness
in linguistic usage - by reference to the existence or regularity of
socially learned and inculcated standards, rules, or norms. But as I
shall argue, this appeal to practices, in most of its formulations, is
simply another version of the characteristic and repeated attempt to
comprehend language as a total structure, and the force of reason as the
force of its rules in application to a human life. In this final
historically focused chapter, I shall consider three recent
linguistically oriented projects that consider the longstanding question
of the force of reason in relation to the forms of our access to the
language we speak. Despite superficial similarities, these projects
diverge widely, I shall argue, in the ways they construe the force of
the better reason as operating to determine thought and action; these
divergences mark some of the different contemporary possibilities for
taking up the analytic tradition’s ongoing critique of linguistic
reason, or continuing it in the space of a broader history of critical
thought.

I

In his recent text*Making it Explicit* , Robert Brandom outlines a
complex, far-ranging and innovative project of semantic and pragmatic
analysis. One of his overriding aims is to make the practical foundation
of reason and our practices of reasoning intelligible in a new way by
showing how the norms that he sees as governing them can be*socially*
instituted and maintained. One of the most urgent aims of the*“*
normative pragmatics*”* that Brandom develops is to provide an
alternative to the “representationalist” view that construes
propositional contents as fixed and determined in themselves,
independent of their characteristic roles in inferential and
communicative practices. Drawing on readings of Kant, Frege, and
Wittgenstein, Brandom argues that the norms of reasoning and the
contents of concepts are in fact wholly determined by these
practices.[^380] Thus, instead of seeing conceptual norms, in the first
instance, as rules, laws, or commandments represented*explicitly* in our
description of them, we ought to see them as typically*implicit* in our
actual social practices of making and attributing judgments and our
practical attitudes of treating the judgments that others make as
legitimate or illegitimate.[^381]

Following the suggestion of some of Frege’s polemics against a
psychologistic treatment of logic, Brandom distinguishes sharply between
the merely causal consequences of linguistic performances and the
distinctive*normative* significance that these exercises take on when
they are understood as involving*reasons* and aiming at the*truth* . For
Brandom, the first sort of significance is describable from a
naturalistic perspective, whereas the second sort is not. In particular,
the normativity of reasoning comes into view whenever performances are
legitimately assessable as*correct* or*incorrect* .[^382] Norms of
reasoning do not, like natural laws, specify what*will* happen, but
rather what ought to happen: which inferences, for example, it
is*correct* to draw from some set of premises or assumptions. This
liability to assessments of correctness does not, Brandom argues, adhere
to events described purely naturalistically, where what is at issue can
be, at best, the regularity or normalcy of a performance, but there is
no legitimate application of the concept of correctness. It is,
moreover, distinctive of the peculiar “force” of normative rules in
reasoning that we are bound, not by these rules directly, but by
our*conceptions* of them. Normative rules, as opposed to causal ones,
have force in determining how we ought to reason only for beings capable
of conceiving of them as having this force, and*as* so conceived.
Brandom argues that this demarcates the realm of normativity from the
realm of facts and phenomena accessible to explanation in purely
naturalistic terms, thereby marking us as the particular kinds of beings
we are, responsive not only to natural, but also to rational, force. It
is only because our acting on normative rules is dependent upon our
recognition or conception of them, our accepting or grasping them,
implicitly or explicitly, that we are “denizens of the realm of
freedom,” rational agents, at all.[^383]

This description of the basis of normativity has its roots in Kant, and
has more recently played a central role in a variety of analytic
projects that have discussed our “responsiveness to reasons” or the
possibility of characterizing our social and linguistic “reasoning
practices” as involving commitments to “norms” in a fundamental
way.[^384] For these projects, normative entities such as standards or
rules are to be distinguished from non-normative ones in that their
force in determining what we do depends on our*recognition* of them as
such. By contrast with natural laws or regularities, they are not
binding “in themselves,” but only insofar as we can recognize them as
binding, or (equivalently) recognize*ourselves* as bound by them. Their
force is not, then, that of the natural laws that compel the movements
of bodies, but a categorically distinct kind of rational force that
depends on our recognition of it as binding, a recognition that, we may
further suppose, is experienced and negotiated primarily in linguistic
and social practices of justification, explanation, and evaluation. Its
paradigm is the “game of giving and asking for reasons” in which we
offer, accept or reject not only particular claims to truth, but also
more general criteria for their evaluation and criticism of specific
linguistic performances, and so gain clarity about (what we will then
take to be) the standards or claims of reason in relation to our
world-directed attitudes.

Although Brandom, following Kant, thinks of reasons as (at least
potentially) having the form of*rules* governing possibilities of
correct or incorrect linguistic performance, it is also one of his
overriding goals to argue against an unrestricted “regulism” according
to which what makes a performance correct or incorrect is always its
relation to an*explicit* rule or principle.[^385] Though performances
can sometimes be evaluated by reference to explicit rules that they
violate or comport with, the more usual case is that they are simply
treated as correct or incorrect*in practice* , without any explicit
reference to rules or principles. Ordinary attitudes of treating or
taking a performance as correct or incorrect, shown in actual behaviors
of praise, censure, approval or disapproval are sufficient, according to
Brandom, to establish the normative status of a particular performance
in a social context. This kind of normativity is always social, since it
depends on the interaction of the performer of an action and those who
are in a position to evaluate it, but the evaluation need not wait on
the formulation of any explicit principle or rule that underlies it. In
this sense, norms are typically*implicit in practice* before they become
explicit in a stated principle. The possibility of identifying such
implicit norms or “proprieties” of practice is in fact essential to
Brandom’s case for the essentially*social* character of normativity.
Such proprieties are “normative statuses - the status a performance has
as correct or incorrect according to a rule or practice.” (p. 628).

Brandom’s argument against regulism, and his defense of the
implicit/explicit distinction, relies heavily on what he takes to be the
main point of the rule-following considerations of
Wittgenstein’s*Philosophical Investigations* . For Wittgenstein as
Brandom reads him, the notorious paradox of*PI* 201 poses a general, and
insurmountable, problem for the view that all proprieties of practice,
all evaluations of practices as correct or incorrect, are dependent
on*explicitly represented* rules. For the application of an explicit
rule, in a particular case, is itself something that is amenable to
evaluation as correct or incorrect. As Brandom puts it, “applying a rule
in particular circumstances is itself essentially something that can be
done correctly or incorrectly.”[^386] But, then,*if* all proprieties
depended on explicitly represented rules, it would be necessary in each
case to determine the application by resorting to another explicitly
represented rule, leading to a bottomless infinite regress. The
application of each rule, in each case, would depend on the
specification of a*further* rule; since rules cannot interpret
themselves, the process of interpretation would be endless. The solution
to the paradox, according to Brandom, lies in recognizing the fact that
at bottom, the determination of the correctness or incorrectness of a
performance is irreducibly*practical* :

The question of the autonomy of the intellectualist conception of norms,
presupposed by the claim that rules are the form of the normative, is
the question of whether the normative can be understood as ‘rules all
the way down,’ or whether rulish properties depend on some more
primitive sort of practical propriety. Wittgenstein argues that the
latter is the case. Rules do not apply themselves; they determine
correctnesses of performance only in the context of practices of
distinguishing correct from incorrect applications of the rules. To
construe these practical proprieties of application as themselves
rule-governed is to embark on a regress. Sooner or later the theorist
will have to acknowledge the existence of practical distinctions between
what is appropriate and what not, admitting appropriatenesses according
to practice as well as according to rules or explicit principles.[^387]

For Brandom, then, the solution to the regress paradox that makes
trouble for the regulist position that norms must be*explicit* rules is
the recognition of a more primitive level of normativity*implicit* in
practice.*Given* primitive proprieties of practice that suffice by
themselves to determine individual performances as correct and
incorrect, even without an explicit rule, the regress is blocked. For
these primitive proprieties, being already ingrained in our practice,
are already effective in determining possibilities of evaluation and
criticism, whether or not they are ever explicitly formulated. There is
no need, in particular cases, for a further explicit formulation of the
principles that govern these attitudes, though they remain effective in
demarcating correct from incorrect performances in practice.

The interpretive grounds for attributing the full extent of this
argument to Wittgenstein are in fact obscure. Wittgenstein himself never
suggests a general distinction between ‘implicit’ and ‘explicit’ norms,
and indeed only rarely uses the term “normative,” or any of its
variants, at all. Indeed, its only appearance in the*Philosophical
Investigations* comes in the context of Wittgenstein’s criticism of his
earlier view of language as a calculus or a game, a view which he held
in writing the*Tractatus* :

81. F. P. Ramsey once emphasized in conversation with me that logic was
a ‘normative science’. I do not know exactly what he had in mind, but it
was doubtless closely related to what only dawned on me later: namely,
that in philosophy we often*compare* the use of words with games and
calculi which have fixed rules, but cannot say that someone who is using
a language*must* be playing such a game.[^388]

When the later Wittgenstein does refer to a philosophical operation,
comparable to Brandom’s “explicitation”, of showing or bringing to light
structures thought to*underlie* our practical determinations of
correctness and incorrectness, he seems to be quite skeptical of the
possibility or helpfulness of any such procedure.[^389] In any case, in
the sections immediately following his invocation of Wittgenstein’s
argument, Brandom provides a detailed account of the way in which,
according to his theory, the “normative statuses” of various reasoning
practices are instituted. According to Brandom, the normative status of
any performance is always dependent on more basic evaluative “attitudes”
of taking or treating that performance as correct or incorrect. The
evaluative attitude of treating a performance as correct or incorrect
may itself be adopted in various ways. Most directly, evaluative
attitudes are connected to*sanctions* : one treats a performance as
incorrect by punishing it, and treats it as correct by rewarding
it.[^390] However, Brandom argues that treating a performance as correct
or incorrect by negatively or positively sanctioning it must go beyond
simply treating it as*regular* or*irregular* according to the standards
of the community. For genuine normativity, it is essential that positive
and negative sanctions adhere to actions that are*correctly* taken to be
correct or incorrect, rather than simply to those that are*in fact*
taken to be correct or incorrect.[^391] Since the attitudes that
institute proprieties are in this way themselves normative, there may be
no way to reduce normativity, so described, to any*non-normative* basis
in regularities of practice; the basis of social practices of reasoning
may be, as Brandom puts it, “norms all the way down.”

The sanctions that institute and stand behind actual attitudes of
approval and disapproval may be as simple as corporal punishment - for
instance hitting offenders with sticks - or they may extend to more
complex, fully social attitudes and actions, such as extending or
restricting permissions or rights. Turning to the particular way in
which the force of reason works in intersubjective communicative
situations, moreover, it is important to Brandom that the source of
sanctions is not, first and foremost, the community itself, but rather
its individual members in concrete interlocution. The primary social
relation, in which normative evaluations first become possible, is not
between the individual and the community but between two individuals.
Appreciating this, Brandom argues, is essential to avoiding an “I-we”
account of intentionality, one that misleadingly sees the community as
itself a source of evaluative attitudes. By affirming that evaluative
attitudes, sanctions, and normative statuses occur, first and foremost,
in particular communicative situations of interpretation, we can
instead, he suggests, uphold a more realistic “I-thou” model of
intentionality and rational significance.[^392] As Brandom points out,
even given community-wide agreement, it still ought to be conceivable
that the community is wrong. And this is conceivable, given a social
model of reasoning, only if determinations of truth and objectivity are
themselves evident, first and foremost, in concrete evaluative attitudes
taken in concrete episodes of interlocution, before anything like a
“community standard” appears. As Brandom points out, moreover, this
makes normative statuses*perspectival* in an important sense: the
determination of the concrete commitments of social actors is always
made from a particular interpretive perspective.

The implicit/explicit distinction further facilitates the shift away
from an abstract, universalizing account of rationality by treating
normative standards for correct and incorrect reasoning as implicit in
concrete communicative interactions, and demonstrated in the practical
attitudes of the participants toward each others’ performances, even if
neither party could explicitly formulate them. Nevertheless, despite
this significant element of perspectivalism, Brandom thinks of the
institution of normativity and indeed the contents of concepts
themselves as explicable by reference to the total structure of
linguistic and attributional practices that a community is interpretable
as engaging in.[^393] This commitment to structuralist explicability in
terms of social practices is most evident in the context of the other
half of Brandom’s project in*Making it Explicit* , the “inferentialist
semantics” that is to complement his “normative pragmatics.” According
to inferentialism, concepts are determined as having the contents that
they do only by their occupying the particular positions that they do in
complex networks of propositional inference and deduction. For the
inferential semanticist, conceptual contents are therefore defined by
the complex network of formal and material inference rules that govern
“moves” from one claim to another, and from explicit claims to
intentional actions, in the language as a whole. These rules may of
course be largely implicit in practice rather than explicitly
formulated; it is the job of rational reflection, in fact, to act as the
“organ of linguistic self-consciousness,” bringing what is “implicit in
practice” to explicit expression. For Brandom, in particular, the
“inferential norms” that govern the use of expressions in everyday
practice are conceived as conveying upon these expressions the content
that they have. Later, explicitation makes these norms clear and thus
displays this content in the context of a general inferentialist
description of the structure of content in a language as a whole.[^394]

As we have seen, Brandom construes Wittgenstein’s argument as
challenging the notion that the determination of correctness or
incorrectness in concrete interlocution could ever rest wholly
on*explicit* norms or principles, and so as arguing that it must rest
instead on norms or proprieties*implicit* in practice. This leaves out,
however, the possibility of construing Wittgenstein as issuing a more
radical challenge, one directed against the very attempt to portray
normative judgments as depending on structures intelligible as norms or
proprieties (no matter how “primitive”) at all. issues As I shall argue,
though, it is just such a challenge that Wittgenstein can indeed be read
as issuing; and reading him this way helps to show what is taken for
granted in Brandom’s account.

At PI 202, Wittgenstein says, apparently in an attempt to resolve the
“paradox” of PI 201, that “‘obeying a rule’ is a practice;” a few
paragraphs earlier, he says that “to obey a rule, to make a report, to
give an order, to play a game of chess, are*customs* (uses,
institutions).” (PI 199). These remarks, as well as Wittgenstein’s
scattered references to “forms of life,” have encouraged interpreters in
taking him, as Brandom does, to be accounting for the ordinary
possibility of following explicitly formulated and consciously
recognized rules by reference to more primitive or basic norms, implicit
in the “practices” we share. For some commentators, these norms are to
be taken as regularities instituted by some form of convention or social
agreement; according to others, they depend on the “natural” or
biological regularities of human behavior.[^395] But another, quite
different reading of the significance of these remarks becomes possible
when we consider the specific way in which Wittgenstein*situates* his
“appeal” to practices (if such it be) within a broader consideration of
the basis and limits of philosophical explanation of the “uses of words”
themselves. In seeking to explain how it is that it is*possible* to
follow a rule correctly (to go on as we do), we may easily and naturally
be tempted to advert to a basis for our practices in a more fundamental
or primitive fact of agreement:

241. “So you are saying that human agreement decides what is true and
what is false?” - It is what human beings say that is true and false;
and they agree in the language they use. That is not agreement in
opinions but in form of life.

242. If language is to be a means of communication there must be
agreement not only in definitions but also (queer as this may sound) in
judgments. This seems to abolish [*aufzuheben* ] logic, but does not do
so…[^396]

In response to the interlocutor’s attempt to reduce truth and falsity to
such a fact of “human agreement,” Wittgenstein responds by adverting to
the even more basic fact of “agreement” in the*language* that we use. He
explicitly distinguishes this kind of agreement from agreement on
“opinions” or beliefs, and further calls it agreement “in form of life.”
This kind of “agreement,” which is not an agreement on opinions or
beliefs, and so is not a matter of sharing interpretations of facts,
holding common creeds, or the like, is nevertheless pervasively*shown*
in ordinary life, in what we call “following a rule,” “responding to an
order,” “going on in the same way,” and so on. When these ordinary
phenomena occur, the “basis” of their possibility is not ordinarily
called into question; we take it for granted, by and large, that others
who share our language will go on as we do. But when it does come into
question, we will respond by appealing to the fact of agreement that is
(perhaps only now) perspicuous as having existed all along, the ground
of our sharing a language or a way of life. Such agreement can have the
force of reminding our interlocutor of her commitments to such shared
routes of significance and patterns of judgment, of what she already
knows but may have forgotten, of what actions or decisions we may
perceive her life, as she has lived it before us, as committing her to
as she goes on to live it.

Despite differences in emphasis, Brandom can take most of these points
in stride; indeed, it is almost impossible, once we have taken
Wittgenstein to be*theorizing* meaning in terms of something like
“practices,” to resist interpreting the fact of “agreement in judgments”
that he cites as the fact of our sharing a broad range of*specific*
and*describable* “linguistic practices,” including centrally, but not
limited to, our practices of judging and evaluating the linguistic
performances of others. As is well known, though, Wittgenstein has
deeply seated animadversions, in general, against conceptions of the
task of philosophy as consisting in*explanation* or theory at all. Even
more decisive in the present context is his specific critical sense of
the relevant force of appeals to “agreement,” whether in the course of
ordinary discourse or philosophical explanation.[^397] The “agreement”
that we share in sharing a language, he makes clear in the passages
where he more closely considers the ordinary sites and implications of
our appeal to it, is not*itself* to be understood or explained, in
general, in terms of any more*basic* set of facts or phenomena, not even
more basic normative attitudes or proprieties of practice.

This becomes clear, especially, in Wittgenstein’s consideration of what
is called going on in the “same” way, for instance in completing a
series of numbers or using a word in new cases. Where an interlocutor’s
performances are recognized as deviant with respect to the standard we
take ourselves to be committed to, we will ordinarily criticize them as
failing to go on in the “same” way we do. But such criticism,
Wittgenstein makes clear, is not itself based on any criterion or
standard of “sameness” more basic than the fact of agreement itself.
The*uses* of the words “agreement,” “same” and “rule” are indeed, he
says, deeply interwoven, both in the teaching of practices and their
criticism.[^398] But this interweaving is not such as to confer priority
on any one of the notions they express, in relation to the others. The
appeal that we may be tempted to make, in response to a recognizably
deviant performance, to the “sameness” of a way of applying a rule or a
way of going on in the completion of a series or the use of a word,
is*also* , irreducibly, an appeal to the simple fact of our*acting* the
way that we do; it does not adduce deeper explanatory grounds for this
fact, but simply gives expression to it.[^399] In particular, the appeal
to “sameness” in explaining what we do, or criticizing the performance
of an interlocutor who fails to do this, does not itself adduce any
grounds for our agreement in practice that are deeper than that
agreement itself. Our appeal to it cannot, therefore,*in general*
sustain a retrospective description of those explicit standards and
rules that we are later in a position to present ourselves as agreeing
in, as having been*implicitly* present in our practices all along.

Of course, we may*make* this appeal, in ordinary life as well as in
special contexts of philosophical theorizing. Where an interlocutor or a
learner fails to go on in the expected way, to do what we do, to follow
the rule that he seemed to understand in the way that (as we understand)
it*must* be followed, we may appeal to the fact of that which he shares
with us, the understanding that he already manifested in his
performances before, the regularities or proprieties that he already
showed in the previous instances of his practice. But as Wittgenstein’s
rule-following paradox itself brings to the fore, any such appeal
may*itself* be variously understood or understood (as we shall say)
wrongly. It may then yield a performance that is, by our lights,
deviant; we may then criticize the performance, censure its performer,
repeat our demand for him to recognize what he shares with us.
Wittgenstein’s paradox, in its most general form, calls upon us to
account for our making, and enforcing, this demand by reference to some
formulable item or basis that we can cite as underlying it. Its critical
upshot is that no such item or describable basis can do so. We are, in
practice, thrown back upon repeating the demand itself, and nothing can
guarantee its success in*any* case.

In the passages in which he considers most closely what is involved in
our evaluation of certain responses, as opposed to others, as being
“normal” or “natural,” Wittgenstein emphasizes the specificity of the
surroundings in which such evaluations themselves “normally” occur, and
against the backdrop of which they function. For instance, at PI 143, he
considers the various possibilities of a learner’s response in a
language-game that involves writing down “series of signs according to a
certain formation rule”:

143…. And here we may imagine, e.g., that he does copy the figures
independently, but not in the right order: he writes sometimes one
sometimes another at random. And then communication stops at*that*
point. - Or again, he makes ‘*mistakes* ’ in the order. - The difference
between this and the first case will of course be one of frequency. - Or
he makes a systematic mistake;. . Here we shall almost be tempted to say
that he has understood*wrong* .

Notice, however, that there is no sharp distinction between a random
mistake and a systematic one. That is, between what you are inclined to
call “random” and what “systematic.”

Perhaps it is possible to wean him from the systematic mistake (as from
a bad habit). Or perhaps one accepts his way of copying and tries to
teach him ours as an offshoot, a variant of his. - And here too our
pupil’s capacity to learn may come to an end.

In ordinary cases of learning, the pupil can be brought, relatively
easily and by means of the relevant training, to do what we do, to go on
in the right way; but Wittgenstein’s point here is that
nothing*guarantees* that this must always be possible. The pupil’s
capacity to learn may always come to an end; and when it does, there may
be*nothing* more to which we can appeal to ensure her future agreement.
And this possibility of breakdown, the possibility of my being unable to
find grounds for demanding agreement, or of my grounds failing to appeal
to the other, affects in an essential way anything we should call an
explanation of my justification for my following the rule as I do:

217. “How am I able to obey a rule?” - if this is not a question about
causes, then it is about the justification for my following the rule in
the way I do.

If I have exhausted the justifications I have reached bedrock, and my
spade is turned. Then I am inclined to say: “This is simply what I
do.”[^400]

The point here is closely related to the earlier one about the*role* of
appeals to agreement, judgments of sameness, and applications of
“identity” in the ordinary cases in which we evaluate and criticize
linguistic performances. It is that explicitly cited grounds for these
appeals and judgments*may* fail to motivate in any case, and that*when*
they do so fail, nothing need necessarily ensure that the learner will
indeed go on in the right way. Here, any appeals to norms*implicitly*
shared in practice will be just as idle, and just as little capable
of*ensuring* agreement, as the appeal to*explicitly* stated norms or
agreements that it replaces.

Thus, far from demanding, as Brandom takes it, that norms made explicit
in reflection be construed as having a basis in inexplicit but
nevertheless normative proprieties of practice, Wittgenstein’s
rule-following paradox, read in this general way, poses a much
deeper-seated threat to the project of a socially based inferentialist
semantics than Brandom can see. For it effectively challenges the
thought that the motivating force of reasons in ordinary conversation
can ultimately be explained, in the course of a general explanation of
the possibility of communication, by reference to anything “implicit in
practices” at all. The appeal to commonalities of response or underlying
agreements may fail in any case; and in each case where it does fail, an
appeal to the existence of a shared practice can do no better. If this
possibility of failure is indeed always present, indeed, then there are
in general*no such things* as univocal standards or norms that are
silently present, determining correctness and incorrectness even where
there is, as yet, no explicit standard. It is an*essential* feature of
our ordinary discourse that it may always, and sometimes in fact does,
“bottom out” in the “bedrock” of which Wittgenstein speaks, that the
chain of reasons may always come to an end. But*when* bedrock is
reached, in the interlocutor’s continued (as we may put it, “stubborn”)
failure to see what I see, her refusal to find grounds in what I say for
going on as I do, as I say she*must* , my further appeal to proprieties
implicit in the practices we share, to common routes of judgment or
standards for evaluation that we must share insofar as we share a
language at all, goes and can go no further than my appeal to this bare
fact of our sharing a language itself. Here, one might say, there is no
longer any*question* of accounting for the incorrectness of the
interlocutor’s performance. For the normal surroundings of commonality
that provide so much as the*possibility* of accounting for the
performance as correct or incorrect have failed. I will then be
inclined, as Wittgenstein says, simply to repeat the fact of*my*
practice, of my grounds and of my ways of going on. Since I can no
longer see these ways as determining, or necessitating, the performance
of the other, I can in the end only point again to it, repeating my
appeal to the legitimacy of*my* way only, this time, by demonstratively
indicating its bare existence.

The bedrock of which Wittgenstein speaks*can* always be reached, in the
order of practice. But it is one of the implications of the
rule-following paradox that it*is* reached, in the order of
explanation,*whenever* we try to give a general account, in terms of
more primitive (implicit or explicit) underlying “norms,” proprieties,
or standards, of what we suppose to be the practical “basis” of the fact
of our using language at all. Most directly, of course, the paradox
bears against the picture that takes our linguistic action to be
everywhere determined by underlying and describable rules. Given this
picture, it shows that since “any course of action can be made out to
accord with the rule,” no course of action can actually be presented
as*determined* by it.[^401] Once we realize the generality of this
paradox and the extent of the problem it represents, the picture of our
ordinary practices as governed everywhere by describable rules is
visible as a “mythological” description of our practice. No such
description, in particular, can*account* for the fact that we go on in
the way we do, since no appeal to rules can adduce grounds more basic
than this fact itself for supposing that it*must* hold.[^402] But if the
appeal to explicit rules cannot explain what is involved in our
practice, than neither can, for similar reasons, the appeal to
inexplicit proprieties of practice that Brandom makes. Within the course
of a general attempt to*explain* the possibility of communication or
account for the possibility of criticizing the performances of others,
the mythology of implicit proprieties of practice is in fact little
different from the mythology of rules that Wittgenstein most directly
opposes. If, as I have argued, the fact of agreement is not explicable
in terms of anything more basic of itself, to talk of a standard or a
norm here,*even an implicit one* , is to commit a grammatical confusion;
it is to presuppose a metaphysical picture of our binding to a
linguistic, grammatical or “pragmatic” structure that cannot survive
Wittgenstein’s staging of the self-undermining fantasy of constraint
upon which it relies.

Thus, in Wittgenstein’s consideration of what is involved in “following
a rule,” the ordinary and hardly eliminable possibility of communication
breaking down in*any* case can be seen to pose a pervasive general
problem for any accounting that, like Brandom’s, seeks to*explain* our
usual agreement in ways of going on by reference to more primitive
features of practice, even those that are not yet “explicit” in
reflection or judgment. The explanatory project founders, in particular,
at the point of bedrock, where the simple fact of my action is no longer
explicable in terms of anything more basic than it itself. Here, there
are no longer facts or norms (even implicit ones) that I can appeal to
in*explaining* my action, since, as Wittgenstein puts it, there is no
longer the specific kind of doubt that such an explanation could
answer.[^403]

The problem here is not, it is important to note, that there is anything
wrong or suspect about Brandom’s claim that even the most “basic” or
foundational human behaviors*can* be characterized in terms that are
“normative” in Brandom’s sense.[^404] At PI 289, for instance,
Wittgenstein says with reference to an immediate, first-person
expression of pain, that to “use a word without justification does not
mean to use it without right.” That is, even at the point of bedrock,
where no further justificatory explanation is possible or useful, we
may*still* describe performances as legitimate or illegitimate, and even
(in many cases) “correct” or “incorrect” according to some standard.
This possibility of “normative” description at this level is not at
issue between Wittgenstein (as I am reading him) and Brandom; what*is*
at issue, however, is the possibility, essential to Brandom’s account,
of making it the basis of a*subsequent* general explicitation of the
“norms implicit in practice” all along. Of course we may
sometimes*describe* our existing practice as having involved, all along,
some set of distinctive commitments; such descriptions will be useful,
in general, only where there is some specific reason for doubt about
those commitments or their bearing on the particular case, and may,
again, always themselves be accepted or rejected. But in emphasizing the
standing possibility that such descriptions fail, that we find ourselves
at bedrock, without any possibility of further appeal, Wittgenstein
challenges the notion of rules that sees them as always already silently
determining our uses of words, throughout a language as a whole.[^405]
If, as I have argued, in the “bedrock” situation, appeals to implicit
norms fare no better, than Wittgenstein’s paradox is just as fatal for
Brandom’s inferentialism as it is for the mythological picture of rules
that it aims to replace.

Again, this critical claim is not, it is important to note, based on
some version of the argument that if it is possible, in*any* case, for
me to fail to find my ground with another, it must be impossible to find
ultimately workable grounds or standards for agreement in*every* case.
Such an argument, though perhaps resembling Descartes’ argument for
perceptual skepticism on certain reconstructions of it, would be a bad
one, trading on what might seem to be a peculiarly philosophical
tendency to absolutize the imperfections of our abilities to know or our
liabilities to respond. It is, indeed, no part of Wittgenstein’s claim
to suggest on philosophical grounds that our capability to understand
one another, or to find grounds for understanding where they at first
seem to be lacking, goes any less far (or farther) than it in fact does.
The fact that it*does* go as far as it does, indeed, can be seen as a
remarkable one, and all the more so, in view of how little we can say,
in a general sense, to explain it. Wittgenstein’s claim is, rather,
that, whatever this fact may be taken to involve, the justificatory or
explanatory appeal to it cannot be either discharged or shored up by an
appeal to facts*or* norms more basic than it itself. Our appeals to the
fact of agreement, in the actuality of everyday conversation as well as
in philosophical explanation, can in the end only retrace themselves,
ceaselessly gesturing at the fact which is presupposed to, but never
wholly explained by, all of our reference to rules, norms, or practices,
whether explicit or implicit: the omnipresent but scarcely comprehended
fact of our sharing (what is called) “a language” at all.

Again, seeing the way in which Wittgenstein’s rule-following paradox
gives us reason to doubt the ultimate coherence of any general account
of language-use as depending in primitive proprieties implicit in
practice need not prevent us from acknowledging the existence, in many
actual cases, of just the process of reflective*explicitation* that
Brandom describes so carefully. Doubtless, this process*does* go on, and
indeed*does* play an essential role in a wide variety of human
institutions and “linguistic” practices. The present point is just that
it is ultimately incoherent to make it, as Brandom does, the basis of an
explanation of the possibility of meaningful language itself. A good
example of the actual process of explicitating norms, indeed, is
the*juridical* practice of the articulation and reflective determination
that Brandom cites as a model, wherein laws and standards of justice are
articulated by reflection on past precedent and what can be seen to have
been implicit in their previous application to particular cases. And in
many, probably most, of the vast range of cases in which something like
the articulation or explicitation of binding standards of practice or
judgment does go on within a particular practice, it will be possible
for its participants to see the standards or rules thus articulated as
grounded in (what they will now be able to see as) proprieties or
standards of judgment and evaluation that were (at least as they
will*now* see it)*implicit* in their practice all along. But it is one
thing to say (what is surely true) that such a distinction between what
is implicit in practice and what is later to be seen as explicit in
rules plays an important role in our pursuit and description of a wide
variety of human practices; it is quite another to appeal to the
implicit/explicit distinction, in the general way Brandom does, as
providing the basis for a general*explanation* of the possibility of
human communication, and the contentfulness of its concepts, overall. In
so doing, as we have seen, Brandom misplaces the specific and uniquely
perilous situation of appeals to standards, and hence of the possibility
of (what we may or may not be able to recognize as) “explicitation,” in
our claims and demands on one another.

The difference between Brandom and Wittgenstein on this point has
important consequences for the broader question of the specific*force of
reason* , the basis and nature of the claim of the “better” reason over
our actual decisions and acts of judgment. For consider how implicit and
explicit norms are pragmatically*enforced* , according to Brandom’s
social pragmatist picture. As we saw, for Brandom the enforcement of
norms, and hence the institution of normativity, always depends on the
practice of imposing positive or negative*sanctions* for correct or
incorrect behavior. The stake of reasoning, what underwrites the force
of the obligations we undertake in committing ourselves to particular
claims, is always dependent on the threat or promise of the sanctions
imposed by our peers, including the determination of whether we are
entitled to membership in the community at all. Where the underlying
threat is not immediately present, the force I take it to have may
depend, to be sure, on my*recognition* of it as applying to me, or (what
is equivalent) my recognition of*myself* as subject to its force.[^406]
Thus, to evaluate a performance as according or failing to accord with
some explicit standard is always, for Brandom, to assess its liability
to be rewarded or punished; it is this liability to sanction that
underlies the possibility of specific performances being assessed at
all. The liability to sanctions and rewards is seen as already existing,
even before it is explicitly articulated in formulable standards; it is
by reference to it, according to Brandom, that appeals to such
explicitly articulated standards have the force that they do.

But as Wittgenstein’s consideration of rule-following, by contrast,
brings out clearly, the “articulation” of standards to criticize
specific performances is*itself* the operation of a fundamental claim of
force. It is so, most of all, inasmuch as such explicitation
effectively*constitutes* a standard of criticism, and so*introduces*
determinate possibilities of criticism and sanction, punishment and
reward, that did not exist before. (For instance, the laws or standards
that prohibit*extorting money from a corporation* , and thus make it
punishable to do so, do not exist prior to the determinate forms of
social life and institution that give them sense). Of course, it is an
integral part of the force of this kind of explicitly formulated
normative claim that it can present the standard it “formulates” as
having already existed, operating silently as a determinate but
“implicit” component of the practice that we already accepted. Brandom’s
picture, in seeing the articulation of norms as always dependent on such
implicit proprieties of practice, consents uncritically to this claim,
both in general and in the manifold specific cases where it plays a role
in the determination of our perceptions of rightness and the pursuit of
our projects.

If understood in the way I am recommending, though, Wittgenstein’s
rule-following considerations, by contrast, yield grounds for
demystifying the theoretician’s claim to retrospectively recognize
“proprieties” held to have been “implicit” in practice all along. These
grounds are thus also grounds for interrogating critically the claim of
force or power that the demand for this kind of “recognition” involves.
From this perspective, the fact that “we” (but who is included in this
“we”?) can constitute standards of judgment and then apply them to new
cases in a way that is (largely) recognizable as “uniform,” is, again,
bound to appear remarkable; but as it is not founded in any determinate
or describable fact of our agreement on beliefs or contents of judgment,
it is not, also, founded in the commonality of threats we all fear or
rewards we all seek. When a performance is recognized as deviant, an
appeal to “what we all do” or to the rule or regularity implicit, in any
case, in our practices*can* have the effect of bringing the performer
back in line; it will have this effect, in particular, whenever the
performer*can* recognize herself as having been committed, all along, to
the standard we thereby articulate. But this recognition will be shown,
if at all, only in the complexity of what she then goes on to do; and it
may, again,*always* be refused.

The claim to articulate binding standards of rationality, regularities
of practice, or rules of use conceived as having always already (if
implicitly) guided possibilities of significant expression in the
practice of a language, is in any case always grounded in a claim of
mastery, a claim on the part of the critic to be able to oversee, and
thus articulate, the relevant possibilities.[^407] The basis of this
claim, as it is operative in our actual discourse, is not, in general,
any actual or even promised application of real sanctions or rewards,
but the*mystified* and even*imaginary* picture of language that is also
the core of the metaphysical picture of rules that Wittgenstein most
directly criticizes.[^408]

The picture figures deeply in ordinary as well as philosophical
practices of criticism; its methodological basis is the ordinary
ambition to gain insight into the abstract expressive possibilities of
the structure of language as a whole, and to portray them at some level
of abstraction from the variety of actual performances they are seen as
determining. Brandom, as we have seen, shares this ambition with others
who have theorized language as grounded in “social practices.” And
although he takes pains to avoid an implausible regulism or any simple
attribution of norms to the standards of “communal practice,” his
picture nevertheless replicates the fundamental instability of the
earlier, less sophisticated social-practice structuralisms whose
explanatory ambition it shares. These projects have in common that they
take for granted both the accessibility of the basis of linguistic
meaningfulness to theoretical description, and the utility of some
coherent concept of linguistic “use” or “practice” in explaining it. But
Wittgenstein’s rule-following paradox, in challenging the structuralist
to account for the gap between rules and their application, poses a
fundamental problem for this configuration of commitments. It does so,
most of all, by exposing the open problem of the*application* of a word
to a new case of its use. The paradox of rule-following shows that this
problem will always be open, as long as we picture language itself as a
structure intelligible to theoretical description. No matter how
complete this description is, no matter how much it adduces in terms of
the proclivities of our practices or the commitments said to be inherent
in them, it will still leave the open gap between the structure of
language and the life of its use. The attempt to cross this gap with
“implicit” proprieties of practice is, from this perspective, as futile
as the earlier one to cross it with explicit, symbolically formulated
rules. In each case the standard that is designed to explain the use of
the word fails to do so, since it*itself* can be used in various ways.
With Wittgenstein’s posing of the paradox, the authority of the
structuralist picture is undermined in that it is shown up as
inadequate, and indeed futile, for its explanatory purpose. It is
thereby exposed to immanent critique at the point of the claim of power
that it, in the guise of neutral explanation, recurrently exerts.

II

From his first published works on Austin and Wittgenstein, Stanley
Cavell’s writing is marked by his profound critical engagement with the
methods of ordinary language philosophy.[^409] In the articles “Must we
Mean What we Say?” and “Knowing and Acknowledging,” for instance, Cavell
takes up the question of the relationship of these methods to the
traditional problem of skepticism, a question that will occupy him as
well throughout the complex argument of*The Claim of Reason* .[^410]
Here, Cavell develops the methods of reflection on ordinary language
pioneered by Austin, Ryle, and Wittgenstein not in order to provide a
direct or indirect*refutation* of skepticism, but rather to articulate
the unique position from which this reflection can engage in a dialogue
with skepticism. For Cavell, the special resources available to this
reflection arise most directly from the form of its most typical
question, the question of “what we should say when. .” in a variety of
different circumstances. The appeal of this question is not to factual
or statistical knowledge about normal patterns of speech behavior, but
rather, in each case, to what the speaker*herself* will say in a new
case. In a remarkable way, according to Cavell, the procedures of
ordinary language philosophy appeal to a kind of knowledge we ourselves
possess simply in virtue of being speakers of a natural language, a kind
of knowledge that essentially involves our capacity to project our
reasons into new situations.

Like Brandom’s own argument for the implicit/explicit distinction,
Cavell’s appreciation of the distinctive methods of the ordinary
language philosopher rests heavily on an interpretation of the
implications of Wittgenstein’s “rule-following considerations.” For both
philosophers, it is also significant that the possession of a language,
and hence of a social existence, depends upon the ability to project a
familiar concept into a new context in ways that our peers will deem
appropriate. But whereas Brandom’s inferentialism understands both this
ability and the ability to determine appropriateness as governed by
describable norms, ordinarily implicit if not explicit in practice,
Cavell’s appeal to ordinary language philosophy figures our ability to
project concepts*itself* as the object of the philosopher’s appeal. In
practicing ordinary language philosophy, the philosopher does not seek
to*describe* the norms governing discourse, but directly engages the
interlocutor’s*own* ability to make judgments of correctness and
incorrectness.

It is significant for this appeal that the projection of words into new
contexts is, as Cavell puts it in*The Claim of Reason* , characterized
by both “‘outer variance’ and ‘inner constancy’”.[^411] That is, the
meaning of a word can (in some sense) be the*same* , regardless of the
social, pragmatic, or semantic context in which we use it. But contexts
are heterogeneous and diverse. Despite our intuitive sense that words
have more or less stable meanings, the question of whether a word*can*
appropriately be used in a new context is never completely determined,
at least in advance of*our* determination of this:

We learn and teach words in certain contexts, and then we are expected,
and expect others, to be able to project them into further contexts.
Nothing insures that this projection will take place (in particular, not
the grasping of universals or the grasping of books of rules), just as
nothing insures that we will make, and understand, the same projection.
That on the whole we do is a matter of our sharing routes of interest
and feeling, modes of response, senses of humor and significance and of
fulfillment, of what is outrageous, of what is similar to what else,
what a rebuke, what forgiveness, of when an utterance is an assertion,
when an appeal, when an explanation - all the whirl of organism
Wittgenstein calls “forms of life.”[^412]

According to Cavell, then, the ongoing projection of words into new
contexts is neither arbitrary*nor* “determined” by rules or norms.
Rather, on the level of the methodological practice of ordinary language
philosophy, the question of the application of an old word in a new case
is not any longer a question of degrees of determinacy or arbitrariness
with respect to*any* standard, but involves an appeal that must be
made*prior* to the grasping of any standard. Any advance delimitation of
the range of contexts in which a word*can* appropriately be used would
destroy some of its fertile and constitutive ambiguity, and hence some
of its sense. But it is the task of ordinary language philosophy, or of
a practice of ordinary interlocution informed by it, to negotiate the
determination of appropriateness again and again, in each case appealing
to the interlocutor’s own senses of propriety, significance, and
relevance. As Cavell puts it,*nothing* insures that the “right”
projection will take place; recognizing that there is no standard or
principle whose formulation must convince means recognizing that there
is no substitute, in the practice of ordinary language philosophy, for
the ever-renewed appeal to what Cavell calls the “projective
imagination.” The openness of this appeal, its ability to engage the
imaginative work of language itself, would be lost if we took it, as
Brandom does, that it always amounts to the appeal to what could then
later be presented as norms implicit in practice. That this appeal must
be renewed in*every* new case, and that its application in each case is,
to some extent at least, an exercise of the imagination, serves to mark
it off from any comprehensive attempt to theorize the norms of language
and reason once and for all.

The specific way in which Wittgenstein, according to Cavell, resists an
interpretation of linguistic practice as essentially rule-bound comes
out more clearly if we consider the concrete practices of reasoning in
which the giving of rules and justifications ordinarily takes place.
These practices essentially involve, as well, the*determination* of
whether rules have indeed been followed. For Brandom, as we saw, this
determination amounted to the application of critical “score-keeping”
practices whereby interlocutors evaluate one another; such evaluation
was, according to Brandom, “essentially something that can be done
correctly or incorrectly.” But as Cavell points out, there is an
important*difference* between the practice of following a rule itself
and the practice of determining whether a rule has been correctly
followed:

For Wittgenstein, ‘following a rule’ is just as much a ‘practice’ as
‘playing a game’ is (PI, 199). Now what are its rules? In the sense in
which ‘playing chess’ has rules, ‘obeying a rule’ has none (except,
perhaps, in a special code or calculus which sets us some order of
precedence in the application of various rules); and yet it can be done
or not done. And whether or not it is done is not a matter of rules (or
of opinion or feeling or wishes or intentions). It is a matter of what
Wittgenstein, in the*Blue Book* , refers to as ‘conventions’ (p. 24),
and in the*Investigations* describes as ‘forms of life.’ (e.g., PI, 23).
That is always the ultimate appeal for Wittgenstein - not rules[^413]

In other words, though it may be the case that determining correctness
or incorrectness is itself something that can be done correctly or
incorrectly, it is significant that the practice of making this
determination in each case is not*itself* , in general, something that
is governed by determinate rules. In this sense, for Wittgenstein as
Cavell interprets him, the practice of giving and asking for reasons
is*not* one of “norms all the way down.”[^414] For the determination of
the correctness or incorrectness of a performance may indeed advert to a
rule, implicit or explicit; but the determination, in a particular case,
of how to understand what the rule itself requires*cannot* be made by
introducing another rule, or indeed anything like a rule at all. Rather
than seeing reasoning practices as embodying*implicit* rules, capable of
subsequent explication in analysis, therefore, the ordinary language
philosopher can only gesture toward what Wittgenstein calls “bedrock.”
And when this bedrock is reached - when there are no more reasons to
give - the ordinary language philosopher’s method does not seek to
render it explicit or explicable, to summarize it in a set of principles
or norms or a corpus of rules.[^415] Rather, the ordinary language
philosopher must simply*appeal* to it, mutely, insisting upon what we
must share if we can share a world at all. At the same time, this appeal
can itself always fail, breaking down into mutual incomprehension,
exhibiting the claim of reason as something weaker, more limited and
less assured in its operation, than any explicitation of norms and
principles can express.[^416]

For Cavell, the normativity of concepts is not, then, constituted by the
explicit*or even* *implicit* structure of norms presupposed in
discourse; for even where such principles are presupposed, their
application in any particular case is*itself* a matter that must be
settled, in*each* case, by the exercise of the interlocutors’ own
ability to project concepts into new contexts. That there is no
substitute for this appeal, both in actual practices of reasoning and in
the forms of philosophy that are best suited to demonstrate what is
involved in them, is, according to Cavell, the most important
implication of the ordinary language philosopher’s consideration of
reasoning. In*The Claim of Reason* , Cavell further develops his account
of the ordinary language philosopher’s appeal to this inexplicit and
inexplicable ground of human attunement by considering Wittgenstein’s
own distinctive way of using the concept of “criteria.” For Cavell,
“criteria” are what competent speakers of a language share, what they
agree in, if they share a language at all; but criteria can always fail
us, and agreement in them is never to be assured by a standard conceived
as determinate in advance. In this special sense, to recognize oneself
in another on any particular occasion can be described as “agreeing” in
criteria; but it is important that this agreement, shown in particular
cases, is not reducible to agreement*on* any general set of explicit or
implicit principles. And it is essential to our way of sharing criteria,
of being mutually attuned, that we can also turn out not to share them,
to*fail* to be attuned:

Our ability to communicate with him depends upon his “natural
understanding”, his “natural reaction”, to our directions and our
gestures. It depends upon our mutual attunement in judgments. It is
astonishing how far this takes us in understanding one another, but it
has its limits; and these are not merely, one may say, the limits of
knowledge but the limits of experience. And when these limits are
reached, when our attunements are dissonant, I cannot get below them to
firmer ground. The power I felt in my breath as my words flew to their
effect now vanishes into thin air. For not only does he not receive me,
because his natural reactions are not mine; but my own understanding is
found to go no further than my own natural reactions bear it. I am
thrown back upon myself; I as it were turn my palms outward, as if to
exhibit the kind of creature I am, and declare my ground occupied, only
mine, ceding yours.[^417]

There is in principle no way, according to Wittgenstein and Cavell, to
foreclose this possibility of refusal, no ultimate authority to appeal
to when the attempt to find oneself in the other fails. It follows that
what is at stake in reasoning, in accepting or refusing an
interlocutor’s explicit justifications*or* what is simply implicit in
his ways of life, is never*simply* a matter of compliance or failure to
comply with intelligible normative principles. Where disagreements
arise, rules may be cited, and the introduction of explicit normative
principles*may* suffice to convince one or another party to the dispute.
The introduction of explicit rules is itself, for the ordinary language
philosopher, an integral part of the variety of practices that we call
reasoning, deliberating, arguing, and convincing. But the citation of an
explicit principle, even if it is offered*as* normative for the kind of
language-game that we are involved in, or as constitutive for
rationality itself, may always itself fail to convince. And when this
happens we are, as Cavell suggests, “thrown back upon ourselves” in a
peculiar sense, left with nothing more to say, left to occupy our own
ground silently, capable of appealing, in the end, only to ourselves.

This staking of*ourselves* in reasoning, figured in the ordinary
language philosopher’s methodological appeal to our own sense of the
projection of our words and in her recognition of the ongoing
possibility for appeals to rules to*fail* to convince, distinguishes the
ordinary language philosopher’s conception of these practices from other
conceptions current within the analytic tradition. The standards or
norms implicit in these ordinary practices may always be described in
terms of rules, and the introduction of explicit rules will in fact in
many cases help us to see what was involved in our practices all along,
and thus show us the extent of our obligation to them. But if the
introduction of explicit rules may*always* fail to convince, then there
is an important sense in which this description by means of explicit
forms of rules must*always* fail to portray its object. The theoretical
adumbration of rules meant to describe the grammar of ordinary language
practices can go only as far as the ordinary explicitation of rules
within these practices itself goes; and there can be no hope that the
introduction of any set of rules could suffice to eliminate*all*
disagreements. What is made possible by the explicitation of any
particular standard is then, at best, the appeal of one interlocutor to
another (“see it this way!”)*within* the practice of reasoning, an
appeal that might always be taken up, or might be refused. Such an
appeal may be an appeal to an explicit or explicitable standard of
judgment, but it may also be an appeal to*ways* of judging, routes of
significance, ways of seeing what is significant in a new case or worthy
of our attention in an old one. It may appeal as much to our powers of
imagination as our capacities of judgment; what is at stake in it is as
much*how* we shall think as*what* we shall do.

For the ordinary language philosopher, the peril of deviant reasoning
is not so much sanctioning as*alienation* , the possibility that I may
find myself (that any of us may find ourselves) at bedrock, unable to
find words to justify myself to another, unable to find or articulate
the ground of our mutuality. The threat of this alienation is not, at
least in most cases, that I may*actually* be ostracized or forcefully
excluded from the community; it is, rather, that I will not be able to
find myself within it, will not be able to identify with its modes of
action or its determinations of significance. And where the*I* find
these modes and determinations lacking, where I cannot find a grounding
for their assumptions in myself, the place of the alienation they
threaten can also be the opening of the possibility of their critique.
Either way, what is staked is not so much our freedom from negative
sanctions or even our membership in a community, but the very
possibility of community itself, of the unthought ground of mutuality
that enables me to receive the other, and to be received by her, at all.
In taking up or failing to take up the other’s words and reasons as
words and reasons that can be ours as well, we will find or miss the
ground of our mutuality, the extent to which we can share reasons, the
extent to which we find ourselves capable or desirous of community with
the other.[^418]

The method of ordinary language philosophy, as Cavell reconstructs it,
is thus practically unique in refusing to see the*force* of reason as
dependent on the*enforcement* of norms, or indeed as amounting to
any*authority* more distinct or elevated than that of the mere and
never-ensured possibility of our relation to one another.[^419] It is
for this reason that Cavell’s appeal to the methods of ordinary language
philosophy, in constant dialogue with the threat of skepticism,
culminates in his recognition of the need to refigure the traditional
problematic of skepticism as one of*acknowledgment* rather than
knowledge. The skeptic figures the problem inherent in skepticism as a
problem of inadequate knowledge, as if recognizing our human situation
meant recognizing that there is something that we*cannot* know of the
object before us or the person who speaks to us. The appeal to ordinary
language does not, according to Cavell, block this conclusion directly,
but rather interrogates its ground in the kind of projection of the
ordinary uses of terms that it demands. This projection, evident in, for
instance, the skeptic’s question whether we know of the existence of
the*whole* of an object before us, whether we can really*know* (and not
only assume, infer or guess) that our interlocutor is not simply an
automaton, is, according to Cavell, neither fully “ordinary” nor
completely “extraordinary”. Instead of simply rejecting or ruling out
the skeptic’s appeal, Cavell interrogates the movement of its desire,
revealing it as coeval with the desire to develop a totalizing analysis
that would speak to the human epistemological condition outside
any*particular* context. But this desire to project our words “outside
language-games,” to find a place to speak outside the practical contexts
and concerns that alone give speech its ordinary surrounding, is not
itself simply to be rejected, for it is inherent in the projective
character of our language itself, in our tendency to project terms ever
again into new and unanticipated contexts.[^420] Through the ordinary
language philosopher’s own appeal to the projective imagination, though,
it becomes clear that what is at stake in it is not*simply* an
inadequacy of knowledge. To work through my skepticism is to*live* it,
to stake myself, in the concrete discursive recognition of another, on
the possibility that there*is* a context of reasoning, desiring, and
suffering that we can share.

The skeptic’s worry, which can masquerade as a theoretical one about the
possible adequacy of knowledge, then stands revealed on the level of the
real anxiety from which it arises, the anxiety of alienation or
isolation, of failing to find myself with another, of being “thrown back
upon myself” in solipsism. That this anxiety is always possible, for
Cavell, means that traditional skepticism manifests (though darkly)
something like a disappointment with the human condition as such, with
the fate of having to seek recognition, finding and losing it ever
again, outside the possibility of any conclusive refutation of our need
for it.

III

Cavell’s use of the methods of ordinary language philosophy culminates
by showing that we can see the stake of reasoning as the need for
acknowledgment, of the way in which we live or fail to live the
mutuality of our words. In this way, Cavell’s investigation of
skepticism offers to orient its problematic away from a question of the
completeness of knowledge, and toward the question of our ability to
acknowledge one another. This breaks with the totalizing impulse of the
structuralist understanding of language, offering instead to
re-articulate the source of this impulse at the level of our need, or
desire, for mutual understanding, agreement, or attunement, our need or
desire to find a context of interests and reasons that we can share, a
world in which we can live together. But to see how this alternative
ethics arise from, and in turn requires, both an alternative conception
of philosophical practice and a renewal of reflection about the nature
of language itself, it is helpful to turn to the work of Levinas, a
philosopher who is not in any sense a part of the analytic tradition,
but whose work on language and ethics nevertheless may bear some
significance for our understanding of how that tradition might, today,
be received.

From his first philosophical work, Levinas’ thought is marked by the
attempt to understand the foundations of our understanding of one
another outside the*closure* of a totalizing system of metaphysics,
phenomenology, or ontology. These comprehensive approaches of these
projects, Levinas argues, will always fail to adequately respect the
ethical implications of our human relationships with one another by
failing to acknowledge the respect in which*difference* or*alterity*
figures in these relationships, a way that is, according to Levinas,
more basic than any theoretical accounting for it. Recognition of the
primacy of alterity, Levinas argues in*Totality and Infinity* , calls
for an ethics that is at the same time “first philosophy.”[^421] This
ethics, according to Levinas, would recognize that the ethical claim of
one upon another is in fact prior to those claims of ethical or
metaphysical theory that would portray it as a form of relation between
two already constituted terms. In this respect, for Levinas as for
Cavell, the fundamental ethical imperative is the demand for
acknowledgment, a demand whose satisfaction cannot be guaranteed by the
systematic inscription of any set of norms, rules, or principles that
could be known, but must be experienced in the experience of the
possibility of my relationship to another. The question of my
relationship to the other, for Levinas as for Cavell, is not first and
foremost a question of knowledge (as much as it may seem to be within
the traditional projects of philosophy), but rather a question of
whether I can rise to the stringent exigency of an “ethical” demand, of
a claim of the other upon me, that is never simply a dictate of
comprehension.

For Levinas as for Cavell, the ethical demand of the other begins where
I am tempted to say that my knowledge of her must be incomplete, where
it is no longer possible to comprehend our relationship as that between
two terms in a system of relations governed by theoretical principles or
rules. If society as such is founded upon the regular or contractual
relationship of autonomous subjects, fidelity to the ethical
relationship itself demands an acknowledgment that comes before this
contract. According to Levinas, it requires, instead, a recognition of
the way in which the possibility of the relationship to the other, a
relationship marked by “infinite” distance, itself marks the very form
of our subjectivity. For according to Levinas, there is no
responsibility outside the possibility of this genuinely constitutive
relation to alterity, to the other as other, irreducibly singular and
unique.

Levinas’ own ethics of alterity takes shape, most determinatively,
against the backdrop of his critical rejection of Heidegger’s project of
ontology, a project in which Levinas detects a repetition of the
totalizing gesture of philosophy as such. This gesture, according to
Levinas, aims to eliminate alterity and the ethical relationship by
reducing it to the univocity of a monological description, in this case
the description of the closure and totality of being. His rejection of
Heidegger’s ontological project culminates in the dense and
elliptical*Otherwise than Being or Beyond Essence* , where Levinas again
insists upon a form of subjectivity that is defined by the possibility
of my putting myself in the place of the other, outside any possibility
of a theoretical comprehension of her situation.[^422] It is only in
this form of substitution, Levinas suggests, that the concreteness of
the ethical relationship can appear in its full strangeness and
difference, a concern that unsettles the subject to its core, a concern
for alterity that is in principle uncapturable as a concern for anything
“in being” itself.

For Heidegger as Levinas reads him, the univocity of being meant that
language as such must be the language of being, the speaking of being
with one voice in the primordiality of*logos* .[^423] Rejecting this
univocity, Levinas returns to language to find in it the possibility of
ethics as an*otherwise than being* , a form of relationality and
difference that cannot be reduced to the totalization of a single voice.
Levinas’ consideration of this primordiality yields one of the most
suggestive distinctions of*Otherwise than Being* : the distinction
between the*saying* (as the original form of the ethical*appeal* of one
to another) and the*said* (of propositions, demonstration, and
knowledge) in which it will always already be fixed:

From the amphibology of being and entities in the said we must go back
to the saying which signifies prior to essence, prior to identification,
on the hither side of the amphibology. Saying states and thematizes the
said, but signifies it to the other, a neighbor, with a signification
that has to be distinguished from that borne by words in the said. This
signification to the other occurs in proximity. Proximity is quite
distinct from every other relationship, and has to be conceived as
responsibility for the other; it might be called humanity, or
subjectivity, or self. Beings and entities weigh heavily by virtue of
the saying that gives them light.[^424]

According to Levinas, the possibility of ethics - indeed, the
possibility of subjectivity itself - depends on the possibility of a
return to this paradoxical saying before the said, to a linguistic
relation that is grounded in an exposure to the other. He treats this
exposure as a kind of “signification” that is prior to the fixture of
what is said in the form of propositions or contents; it is “prior to
all objectification” and to any giving or exchanging of signs.[^425] For
Levinas, the possibility of any social relation, any intersubjective
agreement of principles or judgments, any “game” of reasoning together
in debate, discussion, argument, or conversation, depends on this more
primordial saying. The appeal of the one to the other, for Levinas, is
the voicing of a demand that cannot be captured in the objectivity of a
set of rational contents, of a totality of propositions bearing rational
relations to one another.

Were the critical and reflective methods of ordinary language
philosophy, descendents of the envisioning of language that first began
the analytic tradition as such, to take up this Levinasian discourse of
the saying and the said, the distinction would necessarily be subject to
far-ranging and difficult critical questions whose scope can only, at
best, be indicated here.[^426] To talk of the primacy of the saying over
the said, of is greater “originality” and of the more basic and “grave”
responsibility that stems from it, is at best to gesture toward the same
ineffable ground that Wittgenstein calls bedrock, the ground of
mutuality that itself, in the ambit of any general theoretical attempt
to elucidate it, stands revealed as groundless. As we have seen, both
the critical upshot of Wittgenstein’s rule-following considerations and
the practice of ordinary language philosophy depend on the possibility
of a methodological acknowledgment of this groundlessness, of the
ultimate baselessness of the fact of our agreement. But the
methodological acknowledgment of this groundlessness within a practice
of philosophical reflection or linguistic criticism demands as well our
recognition that, at this point of bedrock, “my spade is turned,” that
the movement of articulation here fails in the very saying.

The most significant legacy of these alternative considerations of
linguistic reason and reasoning, then, is not an alternative account or
even a single alternative practice. It is, rather, the opening of a set
of*questions* about the nature of language and its relationship to what
we treat as the ordinary forms of social life. Within the ambit of these
questions, it must be asked whether it is even so much as possible to
grasp the “structure of language” as the basis for an explanatory
account of these ordinary forms, or of the role of what was once grasped
as reason in determining and controlling them. The effect of posing such
questions can be, as well, to re-open the question of the basis of
rational force, of the ground for what we take to be the claims of
reason in application to the pursuit of our lives. To ask them is also
to interrogate more closely the relationship between claims for the
force of reason and the real systems of power and violence with which
they have sometimes made common cause; it is to re-open the ancient
question of the relationship of the force of language to that which
binds a community together, ensures its regular life, or seeks to
conserve or protect its integrity against internal or external enemies.
These questions, as we have seen, are recurrently be re-opened by the
historical trajectory of structuralism, even as it tries incessantly to
foreclose them; that they bear a deep significance for any future
thinking of the political, of ethics, and of the claims of rational
reflection in today’s world, seems beyond doubt. Their opening, in the
text of analytic philosophy’s sustained consideration of intersubjective
meaning and interpretation, ought to reveal as well the way in which the
tradition’s sustained inquiry into language deepens and radicalizes
them.


