IV. CONCLUSION
==============

Chapter 9: The Question of Language
===================================

"Now I am tempted to say, that the right expression in language for the
miracle of the existence of the world, though it is not any
proposition*in* language, is the existence of language itself."

-Wittgenstein[^427]

If there is such a thing as language, the historical singularity of the
analytic tradition lies in its ambition to lay it open to view, and so
to render its underlying principles, the form and order of its terms,
and the basis of its possibilities of meaning open to philosophical
criticism. The unprecedented envisioning of language that the analytic
tradition undertook from its first stages would, if successful, have
delivered the human “capacity” for linguistic meaning to philosophical
thought as an explicit object of description. In so doing, it would have
revealed language as the previously unthought ground of the expressive
possibilities of a human life, the source of its deepest possibilities
of clarity and the root of its most threatening illusions. Yet as we
have seen, the critical discourse that originally sought to produce a
clarified life by policing the bounds of sense could not foreclose a
more problematic encounter with the pervasive question of the basis of
its own authority. Thus, with a necessity that is the same as that of
reason’s own reflection on its inherent forms, the analytic tradition’s
modalities of linguistic analysis and interpretation became more and
more involved in the underlying problems of our everyday access to
language itself.

Over the course of this work, I have sought to document some of these
problems as they have arisen, and exerted their effects, upon the texts
and questions of twentieth-century philosophy. They are apparent, most
of all, in relation to the*structuralist* picture of language whose
detailed pursuit evinced them as theoretical results in the projects of
philosophers like Quine and Wittgenstein. But since, as I have also
attempted to show, this picture is already implicit in the first
self-reflective words of ordinary language, the problems that these
projects demonstrate are by no means limited to the philosophically
special project of “explaining” or “accounting for” our understanding of
language. If language is never simply given to the theoretical
reflection that would reveal its overall structure, and if the
theoretical projects that have pursued it have ended by eliciting the
inadequacy of their own explanatory modes, then our everyday access to
language becomes all the more mysterious. The specific critical results
of the tradition’s envisioning of language are then visible as
linguistic epiphanies of the extraordinariness of the ordinary, the
strangeness of what is most familiar, the puzzling and uncanny
possibility of our everyday access to language, and of the ordinary
language that ceaselessly inscribes this access, from its first word, in
the circumstances and practices of our lives.[^428]

For the philosophical discourse that counted a turn to the analysis of
language as the essence of its revolutionary break with the
philosophical past, the question of the bearing of language on a human
life could never count simply as one problem among others.[^429] The
progress of the tradition, in particular with its determinative
discovery of the problems of the relationship of “meaning” to “use” or
“practice” and the projects and results that evinced the ineliminable
interdependence of the “syntax” and “semantics” of meaning with the
“pragmatics” of the actions and goals of human practice, moved to
liberate this problem from the obscurity in which it was initially
cloaked. At the same time, the explanatory assumptions of those theories
that formulated one or another theory of “meaning” in terms of “use” or
“practices” tended to obscure the problem once again, dissimulating it
at the point of its fundamental threat to the intelligibility of a human
life. Thus the problem of the existence of language, although visible
within a larger history as the basis of analytic philosophy’s own most
significant critical innovations, has repeatedly been disavowed or
forgotten within the tradition whose own methods and modes it continues
to structure. The disavowal is itself, as we shall see in this final
chapter, rooted in a recurrent tendency of the tradition to hide its own
most central problems. Reversing it could bring about the substantial
methodological renewal of a tradition whose dispersal and exhaustion
have often, of late, been bemoaned.[^430]

If the problems of our access to language indeed inflect the most
ordinary acts and circumstances of our lives, then the analytic inquiry
can also be seen as the tradition’s critical encounter with their most
pervasive contemporary ideological determinants. For the claim to
comprehend language is itself, in part, a claim of power; the analytic
tradition’s reflection on this claim provides internal resources for
resisting it, at the point of the everyday metaphysics of meaning that
it presupposes. The structuralist picture of language itself figures
determinately in some of the most deeply seated assumptions and
strategies of power in the modes of life definitive of advanced
industrial societies of the twentieth century. The critical results that
articulate its failures are therefore intelligible, as I have argued, as
chapters of a liberatory project of demystification, the checking of
claims of power by the diagnosis and criticism of the false and
misleading pictures of human life that form their basis. Here,
reflection leads to freedom: the demystification of structuralism’s
false pretense to master language’s own inherent possibilities offers to
deliver a clarified human life from the claims of power it facilitates.

But if the claims of linguistic reason that threaten to exert violence
over life are, as I have argued, rooted in the very forms that would
make (that*do* make) language intelligible to us at all, the critical
work of “demystification” becomes more complex and harder to place. For
this work can no longer ascribe the violence of identity and totality
simply to the consequences of an optional picture of language or its
claim on a human life. Since there is no*other* picture, they are
revealed as instances of a more fundamental violence, one that arises
with, and is already fully present in, the first word of language’s
reflection on itself. In tracing the pictures that mystify the
heterogeneous moments of our lives by assimilating them to the identical
and totalizable, the critical inquiry that aims to check the violence of
language can, similarly, no longer count these pictures simply as errors
or illusions. For the claims of identity and totality that structuralism
more explicitly formulates are revealed as inherent to the irreducible
phantasmatic core of ordinary language itself, and invoked in its every
word. In this way, at the point of its encounter with the basic question
of the relationship of life to language, the analytic project of
demystification yields to a more fundamental mystery (one that is,
yet,*not* a mystification) at the center of our ordinary access to words
and the fatedness of our lives to what they can say. The mystery is that
of (as we may put it) the existence of language itself, the*fact* of its
constant accessibility to the individual moments and circumstances of an
ordinary life. It can be the occasion for wonder, or for a transformed
sense of the immanence of a life given over, in every word of language,
to the openness of its possible discovery of itself.

I

In the contemporary texts that are today most representative of analytic
philosophy, the question of language has neither the methodological nor
the thematic centrality it had in the original and founding moments of
the tradition. Once grasped as the basis for a revolutionary
philosophical program of linguistic clarification, the question of the
nature of language and its relationship to a human life has largely
retreated from the explicit concerns of many analytic philosophers, even
those who most centrally continue the methods originally suggested by
this program. The forms of this retreat are various, but they share (as
I shall argue here) a common, if normally obscure, root in the critical
tendencies of the program of clarification itself. Documenting this root
can help to remove the obscurity and re-open the question of language
for the methods of analytic philosophy, or those that inherit them in a
broader and more inclusive space of philosophical discussion.

In the recent analytic literature, dissimulation or obscuration of the
original question of language takes several typical forms. One of the
most common of these is evident in many of the projects of contemporary
philosophical*naturalism* . Within these projects, if language is
positively described at all, it often appears only as an empirically
explicable phenomenon of biology or sociology, one whose own structure
bears no specific relevance to the problems of philosophy or their
resolution. In this literature in particular, the project of
“explaining” language or linguistic representation is then treated as
the project of explaining a range of facts of behavior, biology,
neuroscience, cognitive science, or some combination thereof.[^431] The
naturalistic projects that take up the project in this way, and so
construe the totality of language as comprised by such facts, are
themselves heirs to the critical results of analytic philosophy that
demonstrated the inherent difficulties of accounting for linguistic
meaning by means of a description of the basis of its possibility. Their
restriction of material for the explanation of language to the facts of
nature is legitimate, insofar as there is certainly no*other* range of
facts available for this explanatory project. But the totalizing
assumption that all of what we pre-theoretically discuss under the
heading of “meaning” must be*either* completely and adequately explained
in this way, or unreal, is not demanded or even supported by any actual
empirical result or collection thereof.[^432]

An often-cited basis for this assumption is Quine’s rejection of the
analytic/synthetic distinction and the purported consequence, drawn
indeed by Quine himself, that facts about linguistic meaning (if they
exist at all) are, in a sufficiently broad sense, “empirical” facts
amenable to explanation within a “naturalized” epistemology. But as we
have seen, the critical result of Quine’s own inquiry into possibilities
of translation is not simply that the facts of language are
comprehensible as causally determined within a total theory of language
use, but that even such a theory will leave what we intuitively or
pre-theoretically grasp as identities and differences of “meaning”
systematically indeterminate. The alternatives, then, are two: either to
deny the utility of ordinary discussion of “meanings,” as Quine himself
sometimes suggests we do, and take up the purely empirical description
of the causal regularities and preconditions of language use; or to
renew the critical reflection that the analytic tradition has long
undertaken on the elusive role of meaning in our lives. If this second
alternative is taken, the question of the adequacy of naturalist
accounts can be brought into a more sophisticated dialogue with the
forms of theoretical desire that actually motivate them. The
naturalistic restriction of material for explanation to structures of
causally interrelated facts invokes a research program that would
indeed, if complete, produce a*kind* of understanding of the “facts” or
“phenomena” of language, but it does not succeed in quieting the desire
for intelligibility that would still persist in posing its question of
the significance of language even if all the facts were in.

Another often-cited basis for the widespread assumption that a critical
inquiry into language is unnecessary or irrelevant to the contemporary
practice of analytic philosophy is the claim that the utility of such an
inquiry has been refuted or disputed by positive theoretical results of
the tradition itself. In particular, in 1972, Kripke’s*Naming and
Necessity* demonstrated the existence of “metaphysically necessary”
identities and judgments that are at the same time*a posteriori* .[^433]
For instance the identity “Water is H2O” is metaphysically necessary
since water could not be, in any metaphysically possible world, anything
other than H2O, although it is also*a posteriori* .[^434] The result,
together with Kripke’s apparatus of “rigid designation,” was widely
taken to support the possibility of an analysis of modality in terms of
the metaphysical notion of possible worlds rather than the epistemic
notion of*a priori* city. In a related fashion, the “causal” theories of
reference suggested by Kripke and Putnam were taken to establish an
alternative to Russell’s analysis of names as concealed descriptions.
For “causal” theorists, they are, instead, directly linked to their
objects by means of an initial act of ostension, demonstration, or
baptism.

Both developments were seen by some philosophers as demonstrating the
limitations of a purely “conceptual” analysis of the significance of any
name or referring term in language. Such analyses, it became common in
the 1980s and 1990s to urge, must be supplemented with at least
partially causal or empirical descriptions of the phenomenon of
reference. Additionally, the development of model theory and its
“possible world semantics” was seen by some as suggesting the
possibility of a methodological return to “metaphysics” in some
non-pejorative sense.[^435] This metaphysics would be the analysis of
the metaphysical structure of possible worlds without especial regard to
the semantic or linguistic possibilities of our description of them.
More broadly, all three developments have been seen by various
philosophers and interpreters as showing the limitations of “linguistic
analysis,” at least as it was practiced by the first generation of
analytic philosophers, or even as ushering analytic philosophy itself
into a second phase whose methods can no longer be characterized as
grounded centrally in the analysis of language.[^436]

Within a comprehensive history of the methods and results of the
analytic tradition, these developments of modal logic, model theory, and
the “theory of reference” ought certainly to be accorded a prominent
place. They have called into question previously undoubted conclusions
and suggested new ways of thinking about the epistemology and
metaphysics of logic itself. But whatever their importance, the
interpretation that takes them to have established the irrelevance of
the “linguistic turn” to the continuing methods of the analytic
tradition is ungrounded in these results themselves or any of their
actual implications. It may certainly be legitimate, in light of the
results of Kripke, Putnam, and others, to hold that earlier descriptive
theories of nominal reference must be supplemented with partially causal
accounts of reference, or that it is possible to draw a logically
motivated distinction between metaphysical and epistemic necessity that
was often missed by earlier analysts. None of this, however, goes even
part of the way to establishing the impossibility of linguistic analysis
or reflection or its irrelevance to the continuing methods of analytic
philosophy. Insofar as all of these results, indeed, have their basis in
extended applications of modal logic and model theory, they follow most
directly from the very same project of “conceptual” reflection on the
structure of language and logic that analytic philosophers have
practiced since the beginning of the tradition. The relatively more
formal and symbolic areas of this reflection can be distinguished from
those relatively less so, but no result of midcentury logic or inquiry
into its epistemology or metaphysics can by itself establish the
irrelevancy of the project, or the impossibility of re-opening the
question of language in which it is rooted.

Even where language is still discussed, and the hope of a positive
description of its structure and nature still pursued, the underlying
and basic critical question of the relationship of language to life is
again often routinely dismissed or obscured. The normal form of this
obscuration, in the contemporary texts of analytic philosophy that*do*
still take up explicitly the question of language, is the prejudicial
assumption that language must, if it is intelligible at all, be
intelligible as consisting in, or based in, some form of*everyday social
practices* . As we have seen, the assumption appears often enough, and
with little enough independent argument, in the texts and projects of
contemporary analytic philosophy to confirm its status as something like
a dogma. And as we have also seen, it is grounded in a recurrent
misreading of the significance of the analytic tradition’s determinative
posing of the*question* of the relationship of language to its everyday
use or practice. This posing, in the texts of Quine and Sellars as much
as the later Wittgenstein, articulates the fundamentally*open* question
of language’s application by exposing the underlying failures of its
structuralist description. The recurrent misreading, by
contrast,*closes* this question by assuming the explicability of use in
terms of one or another set of practices. But in the sense in which we
can say that such things as playing cards, issuing legal judgments, or
holding elections are “practices,” using language is*not* itself a
“practice.” For in the sense in which we can say, of any of these
garden-variety “practices,” what their ordinary*point* is, what the
significance of their undertaking, what the qualifications necessary,
what regions of life they are likely to arise in, what are likely to be
the characteristic forms of their successes and failures, frustrations
and illusions, we*cannot* say this, in any general way, about
language.[^437] Whereas, we might say, we can normally (or at least,
often) count on an understanding of the*point* of practices*within* our
lives, language has no such point*within* our lives because its forms
are coextensive with these lives. And the various sub-regions of
activity into which we might divide the speaking of language (arguing,
debating, asserting claims, chatting, giving orders, making pleas,
demanding excuses; or asserting claims, evaluating them, drawing
inferences from them; or “saying things” vs. “doing things” with words;
or mumbling, screaming, singing songs, speaking loudly or softly,
emphatically or deferentially? - the classifications cross-cut one
another)[^438] are too richly intertwined and too mutually inseparable
in the most ordinary experiences of language to provide any help to the
theoretical imagination that would grasp their structure overall.

Grasping the difficulties that arise in the course of attempts to
describe theoretically the rules of the practices that are supposed to
underlie language, some have attempted to save the picture by portraying
the learning of a language as a species of irreducibly practical
competence or “knowing-how,” analogous to learning a skill or technique,
rather than a “knowing-that” that would be describable in terms of
clearly stated rules. The distinction, which goes back to Ryle’s (1949)
discussion of the dispositional “know-how” involved in the ability to
make various kinds of assertions and reports, actually provides no help.
For again, in the sense in which various performances of everyday life
can be said to involve knowing how to do various things (riding a
bicycle, speaking a second language, pole-vaulting and the like),
learning a first language*cannot* be said to involve learning how to do
any*thing* (unless it be learning how to*do* anything, that is, how to
do anything at all).[^439]

How, then, can we think about the “point” of our “linguistic” practices,
regular experiences or phenomena of language that are also the
constitutive moments of our lives? It is true that in*a great many* of
these experiences, ‘meaning’ or ‘significance’ is regularly (that
is,*can* regularly be) at issue. That is, the question “what does that
mean”? (or “what do*you* mean”?)*can* arise (although this does not mean
that there is*any* case in which it*has* to arise, or that it has to ask
after the same thing in each case when it*does* arise), and where it
does arise, it can be the occasion for conversation or reflection,
negotiation of interests or demands, the imposition of power or
submission to its claims. But to treat all of these varied and diverse
experiences of language as if there were some single description that
covered them all (e.g. “communication”), or some particular set of
purposes that they all served, would be to falsify their everyday
reality and artificially foreclose the movement of the desires that
animate them.[^440]

The question “what do you mean?” posed in the course of a mutually
undertaken project, the negotiation of a possible future, is not just a
request for theoretical explication; it can also aim, or purport to aim,
for consensus or mutual understanding. It can also challenge
assumptions, interrogate the bases of claims or the implications of
pseudo-claims, seek to expose those linguistic effects of authority that
depend on the presumption of meaningfulness where there is actually
none. In all of these cases where the question of meaning*can* arise,
the analogy of language to a practice inscribes an answer, or the form
of an answer, in advance. And so its imposition amounts to*denying* the
significance of this question. Where the question of meaning would
inquire into the significance of our practices themselves, where it
would ask after their implications for our other or larger goals, the
possibilities they open or close, their role in a human life, the
misconceived analogy of language to a practice blocks these inquiries
before they can even get started.

II

The analytic tradition has systematically and pervasively interrogated
what is involved in our ordinary access to meaningful language, asking,
in some of its most foundational gestures, what makes it so much as
possible for spoken or written signs to have meaning at all. It has just
as often, and in the same ambiguous modes of criticism, foreclosed this
question as an instance of a kind of theorizing that it has taken, more
or less clearly, to be impossible owing to the central and decisive
ambiguities of the enterprise of envisioning language itself. We can see
the methodological roots of this tendency to foreclosure in a 1940 paper
by Austin in which he proposes to take up the vexed question of the
sense of the phrase “the meaning of a word.” He concludes that the
phrase is, in many, if not all, of its uses, “a dangerous
nonsense-phrase” that ought, on the whole, to be avoided.[^441] The
confusions to which it regularly leads, particularly in philosophy,
arise in particular from the specific kind of error of generalization to
which it tempts us:

Having asked in this way, and answered, ‘What is the meaning (of the
word) ‘”rat’”?’, ‘What is the meaning of (the word) “cat”?’, ‘What is
the meaning of (the word) “mat”?’ and so on, we then try, being
philosophers, to ask the further*general* question, ‘What is the meaning
of a word?’ But there is something spurious about this question. We do
not intend to mean by it a certain question which would be perfectly all
right, namely, ‘What is the meaning of (the word) “word”?’:*that* would
be no more general than is asking the meaning of the word ‘rat’, and
would be answered in a precisely similar way. No: we want to ask rather,
‘What is the meaning of a-word-in-general?’ or ‘of any word’ - not
meaning ‘any’ word you like to choose, but rather no particular word at
all, just ‘any word’. Now if we pause even for a moment to reflect, this
is a perfectly absurd question to be trying to ask… This supposed
general question is really just a spurious question of a type which
commonly arises in philosophy. We may call it the fallacy of asking
about “nothing-in-particular” which is a practice decried by the plain
man, but by the philosopher called ‘generalizing’ and regarded with some
complacency. Many other examples of the fallacy can be found: take, for
example, the case of ‘reality’ - we try to pass from such questions as
‘How would you distinguish a real rat from an imaginary rat?’ to ‘What
is a real thing?’, a question which merely gives rise to nonsense.[^442]
58

Having once committed this error of asking the question of the meaning
of any word in general (Austin writes it “What-is-the-meaning-of a
word?”), Austin says, we may all too easily pass to another question or
pseudo-question, namely “What is the-meaning-of-a-word?” that seems to
ask what “meaning” itself is. And in response to*this* question, Austin
says, we now are forcibly tempted to introduce various entities that
might seem to provide reassurance, but are in fact fictitious, entities
such as “ideas,” “concepts” and “sense-data” that have been the
characteristic stock-in-trade of philosophy, whenever questions of
meaning and generalization arise.

The error responsible for the pseudo-question about the meaning of a
word, and for all the mischief it causes, is thus, according to Austin,
both typical of philosophy and avoidable through reflection on the
grammatical forms and structures of ordinary language, as they are
ordinarily employed. The process of spurious generalization from which
it arises is one that may be suggested or intimated by certain forms of
our everyday language (in particular, the phrase “the meaning of…”) but
it would not be tolerated, even for a moment, by the “plain man” whose
image Austin contraposes to that of the philosopher. Nevertheless,
according to Austin, we may easily, especially when doing philosophy, be
tempted to it by implicit or explicit theories of language that seem to
permit it, for instance the “curious belief that all words are*names* ”
or a more general tendency to take “the meaning of (the word) ‘x’” to
be, in*each* case, a referring phrase.”[^443]

In thus considering and criticizing philosophical uses of the phrase
“the meaning of a word” and the fallacies of generalization to which
they can tempt us, Austin displays in a particularly clear form some of
the most characteristic diagnostic and critical tendencies of the
analytic tradition. Applying the various methods of what would later be
called “ordinary language philosophy,” he undertakes to judge the
meaningfulness of one of the typical questions of philosophy by
considering the typical or ordinary uses of its main phrase. He
concludes that the phrase is legitimate in*some* of its employments, but
“dangerously” misused in those philosophical employments that depend on
the error of the projective imagination that he diagnoses. And although
he acknowledges that “one should not impute motives,”[^444] he does not
hesitate to give a diagnostic account of the characteristic temptations
that lead us to this error. These temptations, Austin suggests, arise
from our too easily moving between forms of language that appear similar
but are “actually” very different in context, our assuming that a
question that has sense in particular cases must therefore have sense in
all cases or in the “general” case, and then inventing all sorts of
fictions to answer it.

The conclusion that Austin reaches about “meaning” has also often been
repeated in the history of analytic philosophy. Indeed, virtually every
project that has critically considered the term or concept “meaning” has
reached a similar conclusion.[^445] It is that there really are no such
“things” as meanings, that the tendency to treat meanings as objects
over against the words whose meanings they are, or to assume that every
term must be like a proper name in referring to some particular object,
is grounded in a characteristic error of the imagination and ought to be
rejected. The conclusion is recognizable as an instance of the analytic
tradition’s more general inclination to criticize what it sometimes
describes as the*objectification* of meaning, to criticize the tendency
to treat the meanings of words as if they were themselves objects
correlative to the words that stand for them.[^446] But the success of
the criticism tends to eliminate the trenchancy of its terms of
critique. If it is indeed not only*false* but*impossible* to answer the
general question “what is the meaning of a word?” with the specification
of an object or a type of object, then it will indeed have been
impossible to have committed the error that the critique claims to
identify. The error will not have been in giving the question a false
answer, but in thinking one could give a (referring) answer at all. The
error of attempting to do what is impossible (at least by the lights of
the critique that determines the positive and negative conditions of the
possibility of our speaking about language at all) will be intelligible
only as the false analogy of an imagination that, assimilating
linguistic forms to one another, sees here the illusion of a question
where there is none, and so the possibility of an answer that, in the
end, is no answer at all.

Austin’s critique must therefore rule out the general question “What is
the meaning of a word?” along with all of the objectual answers that
have been offered for it. Having pre-determined the impossibility
of*answering* the question, he must exclude even the possibility of
posing it. But the very terms of criticism by means of which Austin
excludes the question are grounded in responses to this question itself.
For, as we have seen repeatedly over the last several chapters of this
work, it was the question of the possibility and ground of linguistic
meaning that made possible, to begin with, the very modes of linguistic
criticism that Austin here employs. In consigning the phrase “the
meaning of a word” at least in its*philosophical* uses, to the category
of “dangerous nonsense,” Austin employs both reflection on ordinary
linguistic usage and diagnosis of the errors to which a failure to
comprehend this usage may lead us. Yet in thus rendering judgment on the
possibility of significant employments of the phrase, Austin practices
the critique of language in an unreflectively juridical mode that the
tradition’s better reflective judgment would learn to overcome. His
appeal to the judgment of the “plain man” - certainly itself a
“philosophical” straw-man whose appearance (one thinks of Berkeley’s
appeal to the opinions of the “ordinary man” in his defenses of
idealism) has long been responsible for any amount of mischief - itself
constructs the illusion of a determinate standard of sense that can
hardly be discharged by any analysis of the grammatical or logical forms
of ordinary language yet accomplished. The employment of such a
standard - in which the philosopher purports to pass judgment on what is
permissible, and what impermissible, in an ordinary language untainted
by the philosophical imagination - was always recognizably problematic,
and grew more so as Oxford philosophers presented successive analyses,
always incomplete, of the forms of this ordinary language.

Exhibiting an ambiguous but essential tendency of analytic philosophy,
Austin’s analysis thus moves to close the very question whose openness
is the basis of the possibility of its own critical terms. His attempt
to exclude the question of linguistic meaning by introducing a standard
of meaningfulness grounded in what is supposed to be the linguistic
grammar of an ordinary life presupposes, as an essential methodological
precondition, the openness of the very question he wishes to close. This
ambiguity is, as we have seen, rooted in the deep critical ambiguity
involved in the analytic tradition’s envisioning of language itself,
whereby the description of the positive structure of language tends
essentially and repeatedly to undermine the basis of its own
possibility. It is also the root of all of the various critical gestures
by means of which the analytic tradition, especially in its most recent
instances, having opened the question of language in a vague and
indeterminate way, repeatedly again moves to close the question by
undermining, dissimulating, or obscuring it.

Further reflection on the roots of this ambiguity tends to demonstrate,
moreover, how deeply, and inextricably, the language of the everyday is
indeed bound up with the “dangerous” forms of philosophical imagination
of which ordinary language philosophy, in some of its forms, would like
to purge it.[^447] The distinction between “ordinary” and
philosophically “extraordinary” employments of language, which
philosophers like Austin and Ryle (but not Wittgenstein) would have
liked to draw, develop, enforce and police through their description of
the forms of ordinary language, is perspicuous, within this further
reflection, as another instance of the attempt to fix the bounds of
sense by means of pre-determined criteria. Precluding the question of
meaning by means of a standard of sense that is nowhere actually
specified or defended, it forecloses the desire that leads us to pose
the question of meaning in “ordinary” as well as “philosophical” life,
thereby missing the opportunity for a deeper reflection on its forms and
implications here as well.

In this way, the tendency to disavow or reject the problems of
linguistic meaning that has become widespread in recent analytic
philosophy has its roots, ironically, in the critical impulses that
originally underwrote the most central projects of the analytic
tradition itself. Following Quine’s indeterminacy result and developing
further its implications for what might be involved in an understanding
of language in relation to social and intersubjective*praxis* , Donald
Davidson developed, over the course of the 1960s and 70s, a series of
analyses of those possibilities of linguistic interpretation in which,
he followed Quine in assuming, all theoretical descriptions of meaning
must be grounded. For Davidson, all comprehension of linguistic meaning
was grounded in what he called radical interpretation, a generalization
of Quine’s radical translation.[^448] Within the course of the attempt
to understand another, according to Davidson, speakers and interlocutors
exhibit a practical competence which could be described by means of an
empirical theory of a certain form, a so-called “theory of
interpretation” or “meaning” for a natural language. Such a theory,
Davidson supposed, would exhibit certain formal constraints, relating
truth and meaning in the language as a whole by means of recursively
applicable axioms.[^449] But because, on any real occasion of
interpretation, determinations of the truth of utterances and of their
meanings are deeply and inseparably intertwined, and because of the
indeterminacies that Quine had adduced, the actual application of a
theory of interpretation will always depend on certain auxiliary
assumptions, so called “charity assumptions” that, without any direct
basis in empirical fact, assume the conformity of the alien community’s
large-scale beliefs and general understanding of the world with one’s
own.[^450]

The conclusion led Davidson to repudiate “the very idea of a conceptual
scheme” and the metaphysical picture of the relationship of such a
scheme, or a language, to the world that it presupposes.[^451] Because
charity assumptions are, according to Davidson, necessary
presuppositions for any understanding of the meaning of an alien
language to be possible at all, it makes no sense, in the actual
practice of interpretation, to suppose that they might not hold. From
this, Davidson draws an anti-relativist conclusion: that since it makes
little sense to suppose that conceptual schemes could differ in
large-scale respects in their relation to a commonly shared world, we
must reject the whole notion of such schemes, as set over against a
world of objects, experiences, or events that they capture or “organize”
at all. Accordingly, Davidson argued, it makes little or no sense to
suppose, in the actual course of interpretation, that an alien culture’s
large-scale understanding of the world is different from our own. The
indeterminacies already adduced by Quine, together with the necessity of
charity assumptions in translation, thus demand that we reject the idea
of a conceptual scheme, along with the metaphorical picture of the
possible variety of schematizations of the world that it supports.

In 1986, Davidson drew what might well be seen as the larger implication
of this line of thought for analytic philosophy’s project of
comprehending language:

I conclude that there is no such thing as a language, not if a language
is anything like what many philosophers and linguists have supposed.
There is therefore no such thing to be learned, mastered, or born with.
We must give up the idea of a clearly defined shared structure which
language-users acquire and then apply to cases. And we should try again
to say how convention in any important sense is involved in languages;
or, as I think, we should give up the attempt to illuminate how we
communicate by appeal to conventions.[^452]

Following out Quine’s result, Davidson thus ultimately rejects the
structuralist picture of language along with the notion of determinate
conventions that has often supported it. His counsel is one of defeat:
the attempt to understand language as a structure that can be acquired
or learned, shared by a community and clearly defined by analytical
interpretation of its practices, has failed and with the failure, we
must reject the very idea of a language that is presupposed by it. Thus
developing the consistent aporetic results of the analytic tradition’s
attempt to envision language as a structure, Davidson concludes that the
attempt should be abandoned, or at least seriously rethought.

Set within a broader critical reflection, his result might have
occasioned, instead of or in addition to this counsel of defeat, a wider
consideration of the possibilities and limits of the human capacity to
discuss linguistic meaning. The aporetic results of the analytic
tradition do indeed bear witness to the repeated failure of this
capacity in its explicitly developed structuralist mode. The results of
this attempt give reason to believe that this capacity undermines
itself, in a surprising and revealing way, as soon as language itself is
named, envisioned, conceived or described. Davidson, following out this
envisioning in the specific context of structuralism, and recording its
aporetic consequences there, does not ask whether, and to what extent,
the problem that he evinces exists already, and inscribes its
implications, in the everyday life of language itself. Imagining that he
can avoid structuralism simply on the level of theory, he fails to ask
about its continued inscription in the very forms of discourse that we
employ to consider and criticize the meanings of terms every day. Had he
done so, his consideration of the ground of linguistic meaning in the
interpretive practices of everyday life might have, beyond simply
counseling defeat, shown more thoroughly the lived implications of our
problematic use of language, or of its constant critical reflection on
itself.[^453]

III

In a far-ranging and much-discussed recent work, John McDowell aims to
resolve a dilemma that characterizes recent analytic inquiry into the
relationship of experience to thought. Faced with the question of this
relationship, McDowell claims, analytic philosophers are prone to
oscillate between an untenable empiricist appeal to the “givenness” of
empirical content, on the one hand, and (on the other) a “coherentism”
that tends to present thought as entirely unconstrained by anything
external to it.[^454] Help in resolving the dilemma, McDowell argues, is
to be found in a conception of experience as drawing on the same
conceptual capacities that are responsible for the spontaneity of
thought.[^455] By realizing that the capacities drawn on in thought and
experience are largely the same, McDowell argues, we can picture the
objects upon which our experience bears as genuinely constraining this
experience, although not from outside the “logical space of reasons,”
the total space of relations of rational constraint and justification
that governs the logic of empirical concepts.

This responsiveness of objects of experience to conceptual relations
within the “logical space of reasons” is bound to look mysterious, as
McDowell argues, if we conceive of the natural world as simply the realm
of causes and effects and of our experience of it simply in causal
terms. He therefore argues for a re-conception of the shape of our
openness to nature itself, what he calls a “naturalism of second nature”
that presents this openness to a rationally organized world as the
normal outcome of a specifically human process of maturation. Drawing on
Gadamer’s distinction between a human “world” and a (merely animal)
“environment”[^456] , McDowell argues that we can adequately picture to
ourselves what is involved in responsiveness to reasons only by
picturing our normal maturation as coming to be at home in such a world:

Thought can bear on empirical reality only because to be a thinker at
all is to be at home in the space of reasons.

Now it is not even clearly intelligible to suppose a creature might be
born at home in the space of reasons. Human beings are not: they are
born mere animals, and they are transformed into thinkers and
intentional agents in the course of coming to maturity. This
transformation risks looking mysterious. But we can take it in our
stride if, in our conception of the*Bildung* that is a central element
in the normal maturation of human beings, we give pride of place to the
learning of language . This is a picture of initiation into the space of
reasons as an already going concern; there is no problem about how
something describable in those terms could emancipate a human individual
from a merely animal mode of living into being a full-fledged subject,
open to the world.[^457]

McDowell thus pictures the learning of a language as making intelligible
the very possibility of our rational responsiveness to the world, as
orienting us to a world whose rational structure is already present as a
“going concern.” Drawing further on Gadamer’s hermeneutic description of
the constitutive structures of our living in the world, McDowell
furthermore conceives of natural language as “a repository for
tradition” or in other words a “store of historically accumulated wisdom
about what is a reason for what.”[^458] By reminding ourselves that a
normal human upbringing involves, decisively, introduction to such a
tradition, and with it, openness to a world that is already structured
by its determination of the space of reasons, we can, according to
McDowell, resolve the dilemmas and contradictions that can otherwise
trouble our conception of our relation to the world.

In the perspective of a historical consideration of the analytic
tradition’s critique of language, McDowell is, doubtless, right to see
the problems and contradictions of our attempts to understand our
relation to the world as grounded in the problems of our envisioning, or
failing to envision, language in its role in human life. But his attempt
to render these problems innocuous simply by reference to the learning
of a language is futile. For it presents as self-evident and
unmysterious just those features of our relationship to language that
repeatedly emerge, in the history of the analytic tradition, as
problematic and aporetic, as incapable of positive theoretical
description or total elucidation. Following Gadamer in his attempt to
assure the distinction between a human and a “merely animal” life by
reference to the learning of a language, McDowell writes as if this
learning is itself an unproblematic and readily intelligible fact of our
normal maturation.[^459] He conceives of it as giving us access to a
determinate structure of concepts, largely laid out in advance and
subsequently structuring, in detail, both our experience of the world
and the possibilities of our thought about it. Though he does not
develop, even partially, an account of the actual layout of this
structure, he takes it as evident that a mere reference to its
“embodiment” in a language, conceived as the bearer of a tradition, is
enough to verify its existence and remind us of its role in determining
the shape of our lives.

In conceiving of the “space of concepts” as positively determined by the
structure of a language, McDowell’s account therefore replicates the
structuralism that has, as we have seen, repeatedly characterized
analytic conceptions of language. Like other instances of this genre, it
forecloses the critical question of our relationship to language by
pre-judging this question in the form of an assumed structuralist
account. Citing “initiation into a tradition” as an obvious and
unmysterious fact of human life, it insinuates without argument the
openness of the determinate contours of such a tradition (or of the more
general “space of reasons” that they all share?) to philosophical
reflection, their availability to the work of rendering unmysterious our
access to the world or our relationship to its concepts. It solves the
philosophical problem of our human relation to the world only through
reference to a human relationship to language that is bound, once
removed from the unargued assumption of a structuralist account, to
appear just as problematic.

McDowell argues that we can gain a corrected perspective on the role of
language in our lives, one that allows us to solve the problem of
“oscillation” he addresses, if we avoid taking what he calls a
“sideways-on” perspective on the question of the relationship of
language to the world.[^460] In other words, the point is that we must
avoid conceiving of “language” and the “world” as two separable systems,
subsequently somehow to be brought into connection.[^461] The critical
claim echoes one that is in fact common in the recent texts of analytic
philosophy that address the “relationship” between language and the
world; the claim is that we must refuse a “transcendental perspective,”
outside our language or ordinary practices, from which we could evaluate
or claim to account for the relationship between language and the world
at all. The critical intention underlying the claim is laudable, but as
with Austin’s criticism of claims to talk about “meaning,” the success
of the critique tends to undermine the terms of criticism. For if it is
incoherent to suppose we can “get outside language” in order to talk
about it, it is just as incoherent to suppose that we can stay inside it
and talk about it from there. If the very terms in which we could, or
would, define a boundary between what is “inside” and what is “outside”
language are indeed successfully and repeatedly undermined by the
progress of analytic reflection on them, then the sense of progress, or
resolution, that is suggested by the claim that we must stay “inside”
language is illusory too. The critique, at the point of its most
explicit development, thus undermines the critical line that it itself
would earlier have drawn. Talking about “language” is seen to be equally
problematic “from the inside” as “from the outside,” and the terms of
“practices” and “language-games” in which the contemporary discussion
would define it are just as problematic as the old ones of structure,
system, and “conceptual scheme.”[^462] It remains that we*do* talk about
language, that its structure and possibilities are open for discussion
(from within or without) in virtually every moment of our ordinary
lives. The trace of its problems in the constancy of our everydayness
demands an ever-renewed critique that can no longer claim to achieve the
fixity of a perspective (internal or external) that would finally end
them.

In a related context, Cavell describes the causes and consequences of
what we may be tempted to call (even while recognizing the actual
incoherence of the designation) our tendency to “speak outside language
games,” our tendency (which is also language’s own tendency) to attempt
to replace the particular acts and moments of our struggles with and
against language with a statement that would explain our relation to
language, all at once:

The reason we cannot say what the thing is in itself is not that there
is something that we do not in fact know, but that we have deprived
ourselves of the conditions for saying anything in particular. There is
nothing we cannot say. That doesn’t mean that we can say*everything* ;
there is no “everything” to be said. There is nothing we cannot know.
That does not mean we can know everything; there is no everything, no
totality of facts or things, to be known. To say we do not (cannot) know
things-in-themselves is as much a Transcendental Illusion as to say we
do. If we say the philosopher has been ‘misled by grammar’, we must not
suppose that this means he has been led to say the wrong thing - as
though there was a*right* thing all prepared for him which he missed. It
is, rather, as I have been putting it, that he is led into supposing
that what he*must* say is something he*means* to say, means as
informative. And the question still is: How can we not know (realize)
what we are saying; how can we not know that we are not informing
ourselves of something when we think we are? Here one might capture a
sense of how the problems of philosophy become questions of
self-knowledge.[^463]

The linguistic critique that begins by claiming to diagnose the
“illusions” of a false or distorted picture of the world ends by
undermining the grounds for distinguishing between “truth” and “falsity”
in picturing the world at all. Its deeper aim is not, as Cavell puts it,
to find the “right” thing to say, the picture that is adequate to the
world as it is or that accurately or correctly captures our relation to
it. It is, rather, to constantly and recurrently recover, and
interrogate, the forms of desire that lead us to this search. Its yield
is not a corrected picture of the world, but rather the renewal of our
own vision of what leads us to seek one, of how this search is begun and
ended, how its hopes are ventured or lost.

IV

The desire to comprehend meaning, in its ordinary as well as theoretical
forms, is not only a desire for understanding but*also* a desire for
mastery. The pictures that it fosters aim to determine in advance the
possibilities of the application of words by determining the grounding
of their sense. In so doing, they respond to (what one might describe
as) a fear of words getting away from us, of their meaning escaping our
regular ability to anticipate and control the implications of their use;
as if without such pictures or the assurances they offer, the meanings
of words could vanish into idiosyncrasy or arbitrariness, as if there
would then be nothing to insure the possibility of mutual understanding,
nothing to guarantee the possibility of a shared human life. Like the
various forms of hegemony and authority that structure the form of
society as the phantasmal response to a desire for security or order,
they repress the ordinary anxiety to which they respond (that I might
not be understood) only to allow it to re-appear, partially obscured and
hyperbolized, as the*absolute* form of an anxiety (that words
might*never* work, that there might not be such a thing as
meaning*anything* ever) that now demands a total response in the form of
a vision of the possibilities of sense that holds in general and at all
times.[^464] The pictures or accounts that then offer such a response -
pictures of the regular structure of language, and hence of the life
that is determined by its practice -- then operate in an
“overdetermined” fashion to enforce what is, in any case, necessary by
their own lights: the determination of meaning by structures of rules
that are, though perhaps partially obscure to us, in any case present
and*capable* of being described. In so doing, they inscribe in the
everyday life of our practices a characteristic double bind. They
present the dictates of reason that they claim to adumbrate as
prohibitions of what is in any case, by their own lights, impossible.
Articulating the universality of what preconditions*all* possibilities
of sense, they subsequently use this articulation to prohibit or
preempt*specific* ways of talking, interpretations of situations, “ways
of going on.” The double bind facilitates a distinctive violence,
inseparable from our ordinary understanding of language in all of its
forms: that of the preclusion or pre-emption, the prejudicing or
alienation, of human possibilities of meaning in the form of the
pre-determination of possibilities of sense.[^465] The ordinary or
philosophical, technical or authoritarian projects that exercise this
violence operate, in large part, by projecting the image of this
pre-determination on the basis of their claim to comprehend the
structure of language.

The modern experience in which language, once delivered as a specific
object of investigation to theoretical or practical self-consciousness,
is subsequently taken as a total structure of signs and accordingly
investigated, explained, developed or manipulated as such, is by no
means unique to analytic philosophy. It is pervasive, as well, in the
technological developments of the twentieth and early twenty-first
centuries. Its effects are present wherever the technologies of
communication, computation, and media determine forms of social,
political, economic and personal life on the basis of their ability to
handle and manipulate language in its “abstract” or informational forms.
These developments of media, technology, and social life develop the
same desires for standardization and regularization that underwrite the
technical and formal methods of symbolic logic, from which they in many
cases (in particular in the case of computational technology) actually
arose. They shape and form the lives of their participants or consumers,
the regular possibilities of meaning open to them, by determining in
advance the symbolic forms in which these possibilities can be captured,
stored, repeated, transmitted and exchanged.

The technological metaphor by means of which language regularly appears
as a total instrument or object of use, subject uniformly to the
pre-existing and presupposed desires and intentions of what are supposed
to be its “users,” (and by means of which, conversely, the leading forms
of what appears as the technologies of information and communication are
themselves determined as extensions of the usefulness of language) will,
doubtless, take a long time to overcome. It remains one of the most
typical and pervasive metaphors of our time. Yet as we have seen, the
analytic critique of language, both through its revolutionary criticism
of psychologistic and subjectivist assumptions about the ground of
language and through its radical interrogation of the category of “use”
or “application,” can serve to expose the ultimate ground of this
metaphor - and hence its claim to power over the determination of life -
as null. The critical projects of continental philosophy and critical
theory that have attacked contemporary social and technological forms
for their artificial imposition of control over a human life conceived
as otherwise innocent of them have not generally portrayed the depth of
their actual roots in what is intelligible as the forms of language, as
soon as systematic reflection on them begins. The modes of critique that
the analytic tradition has developed, grounded in its interrogation of
the effects of the objectification of language that begins already with
the first question of meaning, could perhaps begin to do so. Their
exposure of the structuralist picture of language as grounded in nullity
exposes as baseless the claims to power that accompany the systematic
technological or social control of language or manipulation of its
possibilities. In this, it leaves these phenomena of signification or
developments of technology exposed to the baselessness of their own
claims to force, demystifying the narratives of transcendence, progress,
and development that continue to support them.[^466]

The analytic tradition’s critique of language thus continues and
develops the continental critique of metaphysics on the ground of
language that underlies its claims, both to truth and to power. It does
so, in part, by discovering in the history of philosophy and the forms
of ordinary life characteristic fantasies that are also, in each case,
intelligible as*fantasies of language* , pictures of the regular
relationship of language to life. In a passage from the*Big Typescript*
, Wittgenstein finds the effects of one of these pictures in the texts
of Frege that he reads critically:

And here one can appreciate what a disastrous effect the preoccupation
with the ‘sense’ of a proposition, with the ‘thought’ that it expresses,
has had. For as a result of this, characteristic mental images that
attach themselves to the words of a sentence are seen as decisive even
when they aren’t, and when everything depends on the technique for using
the sentence. - And one*can* say that the proposition has a different
sense if it creates a different image. And if I might take the liberty
at guessing at Frege’s basic idea in his theory of sense and meaning, I
would now continue: that the*meaning* of a proposition, in Frege’s
sense, is its use.

… The proposition, or its sense, is not a kind of breathing organism
that has a life of its own, and that carries out various exploits, about
which we need to know nothing. As if in a manner of speaking we had
breathed a soul into it from our soul - it sense - but now it has its
own life - like our child - and all we can do is explore it and more or
less understand it.

The instinct is guiding us rightly that leads to the questions: How can
one know something like that? What reasons can we have to assume that?
From what experiences would we deduce such a proposition?, etc.

Sense is not the soul of a proposition. So far as we are interested in
it, it must be completely measurable, must disclose itself completely in
signs.[^467]

Wittgenstein interrogates the picture of sense that he finds still in
Frege’s text, a picture of meaning as dependent on the powers of actions
and events of thought themselves pictured as mysterious and obscure, a
picture of the possibility of linguistic meaning as dependent on the
metaphysical (anyway super-sensible) accomplishments of its speakers,
the life of an obscure spirit whose breath is the inspiration of sense
into the dead matter of signs.[^468] The picture operates by responding
to the characteristic obscurity of our understanding of language with
the form of an answer that leaves it obscure. It dissimulates the life
of language by producing a phantasmatic image of its metaphysical
production in the hidden, inner life of its speakers.[^469] To this
picture, Wittgenstein responds by repeating and displacing the demand
for the intelligibility of language that the metaphysical picture
purports to satisfy, but in fact forecloses. He reminds us that what we
seek, in understanding language, is not the biography of the hidden life
of a subject of experience whose powers and accomplishments must remain
obscure, or the pseudo-empirical description of its sublime capacity of
inspiring dead signs with the life of significance, but the
understanding that produces the clarity of a life in which the inquiry
into meaning is no longer felt as (only) a*theoretical* problem.

Staging the metaphysical picture of sense in order to demystify it,
Wittgenstein alludes to the legitimacy of those positivist or
materialist methods of criticism that have, in the past, taken up
parallel claims of metaphysics in order to expose them as groundless.
His critical response thus inherits the methods of an earlier project of
positivist thought, one that, demanding the universal “measurability” of
all facts and phenomena, has indeed played a decisive role in the
analytic philosophy’s consideration of language. He says of this
project, which opposes the metaphysical picture by exposing its
groundlessness in anything that we can call knowledge, that its instinct
is the right one. But if his critical reading thereby resists the
picture of sense as the soul of language, its reason for doing so is
not, essentially, a materialist or positivist one. It is, rather, that
sense discloses itself “completely in signs,” that is, in the ordinary
life of language itself. The critical reading aims to deliver the life
of language to its immanent sense.[^470]

The picture that portrays sense as the soul of language, conceiving of
the life of its use as dependent upon the inspiration of matter with
spirit, of sound with meaning, is not only contingently or superficially
related to the deepest and most enduring forms of metaphysics.[^471]
Other regions of twentieth-century philosophical thought have critically
considered this picture, demonstrating its regular connection with the
same metaphysics of sense that Wittgenstein interrogates, and
documenting the effects of its regular appearance in ordinary and
philosophical language. In the 1959 text “The Way to Language,”
Heidegger quotes from Aristotle’s*De Interpretatione* :

Now, whatever it is [that transpires] in the creation of sound by the
voice is a showing of whatever affections there may be in the soul, and
the written is a showing of the sounds of the voice. Hence, just as
writing is not identical among all [human beings], so too the sounds of
the voice are not identical. However, that of which these [sounds and
writing] are in the first place a showing are among all [human beings]
the identical affections of the soul; and the matters of which these
[the affections] form approximating presentations are likewise
identical.[^472] (pp. 400-401 in translation).

Like the quotation from Augustine that begins the text of
the*Philosophical Investigations* , the passage stages a fantasy of the
life of language, one that understands it as the outward expression of
the inner life of the soul, one that seeks to guarantee the possibility
of a common linguistic life on the phantasmatic ground of the absolute
self-identity of this inner one. The picture, as Heidegger reports, thus
culminates in the idealist metaphysics that makes the life of language
the recurrent work of the spirit’s labor of self-expression, the
realization of spirit in the material world, the historical progress of
the animation of matter by soul up to the point of their absolute
identity.[^473] This metaphysics takes a long time to complete, but it
is already prepared by the conception of subjectivity that, constructing
and modulating the distinction between matter and spirit, has long
determined the concepts and projects of Western history. The ancient
ground of this construction, and the conceptions of subjectivity and
objectivity it produces, is perspicuous to modern thought as the
envisioning of language itself:

Along with the assertion-character of language (assertion taken in the
broadest sense that language, the said and unsaid, means something (a
being), and represents it and in representing shapes or covers it over,
etc.), language is known as property and tool of man and at the same
time as “work.” But this interconnection of language to man counts as
something so profound that even the basic determinations of man himself
(again as animal rationale) are selected in order to characterize
language. What is ownmost to man, in terms of body-soul-spirit, is found
again in language: the body (word) of language, the soul of language
(attunement and shade of feeling and the like) and the spirit of
language (what is thought and represented) are familiar determinations
of all philosophies of language. This interpretation of language, which
one could call anthropological interpretation, culminates in seeing in
language itself a symbol for human being. If the question-worthiness of
the idea of symbols (a genuine offspring of the perplexity toward be-ing
that reigns in metaphysics) is here set aside, then man would have to be
grasped as that being that has what is his ownmost in his own symbol,
i.e., in the possession of this symbol (*logon echon* ).[^474]

The ancient metaphysics that defines the human as the*zoon logon echon*
presents the life of this being, animal in itself, as essentially
determined by its possession of language, and thus by its capacity for,
or mastery over, the labor of the progressive manifestation of
supersensible meaning in sensible forms that is seen as permitted by
this possession. The image and correlate of this picture of the essence
of the human is the picture of language that opposes the perceptible
character of the sign to its imperceptible sense through the mediation
of subjective thought, experience, or intentionality in linguistic
“expression.”[^475] The structuralist picture of language develops this
picture as one of the figuring of the total structure of language’s
signs within the life of the being that speaks, whether this figuring is
presented as grounded in the capacities of an individual subject of
experience or in the regular practices of a community. Developing this
picture to the point of totality at which it undermines itself, the
tradition demonstrates the nullity and baselessness of the distinction
it attempts to draw between language and life and, thereby, of the
everyday metaphysics that seeks to guarantee this distinction. As
Heidegger points out, this metaphysics is the most characteristic
contemporary expression of the ancient definition (tracing to Aristotle)
of the human being as the unity of a life determined as*zoon* with the
articulated structure of*logos* . It is unclear whether either this
definition, or the forms and practices of everyday “human life” it still
supports, can survive the critical inquiry suggested by the results of
the analytic tradition, into the forms of metaphysics underlying it and
their continuing force over ordinary life.[^476]

One of the most characteristic and deep-seated effects of these forms of
metaphysics is the picture that presents signs, in their repetition
across the diversity of the contexts of their employment, as
self-identical bearers of an unchanging sense, “contents” or “meanings”
invisible to the eye and inaudible to the ear, but nevertheless carried
by the sign in all the great variety of its employments. The picture
extrapolates from the perceptible identity of sign-tokens the unity of
an imperceptible identity of sense even as it adduces the arbitrariness
of the*particular* connection between sense and sign-type in
any*particular* language.[^477] The metaphysics that develops this
fantasy of sense finds in this possibility of repetition an immortality
of meaning that dissimulates the mortality of everyday speech; it
constructs the temporality of language’s life in the medium of the
eternal. The critical thought that interrogates the terms of this
construction recognizes it as a form of the dissimulation of death, as
the projection of an attempt to control the life of language or
guarantee its vitality against a standing threat of nullification. The
projections and images that try to display the total structure of
language attempt this guarantee in forms that are both normally
constitutive for our self-understanding and repressive of that very
self-understanding.

Yet if its diagnosis of the deep linguistic sources of distorted
pictures of our lives allows it to expose the nullity of the claims to
power on the basis of which these pictures exert their effects, the
critique of language can nevertheless hardly hope to replace them with a
better one. For the forms of metaphysics that it diagnoses are, as we
have seen, present in the most everyday forms of language itself, and
evident already in the first moments of its reflection on its own role
in a human life.[^478] Thus the critical reflection that once hoped to
purge language of illusion and lay bare the form of a finally purified
life is consigned, with the intrinsic deepening of its own critical
problematic, to trace endlessly and perennially the claims of
metaphysics over a linguistic life that would be*unintelligible* without
them, the claims of an immortal distinction between sound and sense,
matter and spirit, (without which this life would be meaningless) that
it must redraw with one hand even as it erases with the other.[^479]
This tracing, and erasing, is none other than the envisioning of
language with which the analytic tradition began and whose ambiguities,
as I have argued, continue to define the tradition’s most significant
results. The possibility of its continuance may determine the fate of
philosophy in our time.

V

The quotation that serves as the epigraph for this chapter comes from
the “Lecture on Ethics” that Wittgenstein prepared, and probably
delivered, in Cambridge sometime in 1929 or 1930. Wittgenstein’s aim in
the lecture as a whole is to consider the status of “ethical”
propositions or, as he puts it, propositions intended to express claims
of “absolute” value, for instance claims of intrinsic and non-relational
goodness, beauty or worth, or about the meaning of life, or what makes
life worth living. His argument is that such claims*cannot* be expressed
by propositions. For if one were to write a book that describes all the
facts concerning the position and movement of bodies in the world, “this
book would contain nothing that we would call an ethical judgment or
anything that would logically imply such a judgment.”[^480] The
statement of*facts* , no matter how complete, does not express anything
“sublime, important, or trivial”; facts are all on a level, and their
description thus never suffices to express what is aimed at in a
judgment of absolute value.[^481] It follows that, if there could be a
“science of ethics,” “nothing we could ever think or say should be the
thing.”[^482] The claim to express an absolute value is the claim to
express in propositions the elevation, above all others, of
a*particular* state of affairs, for instance (as we may put it) the
claim of a path judged “good” to*compel* us to follow it. But as soon as
the claim is stated that way, we can see it to be chimerical. For “no
state of affairs has, in itself, what I would like to call the coercive
power of an absolute judge.”[^483]

If we remain tempted to speak of absolute value, we can*only* express
ourselves in metaphors that are actually inadequate to this purpose. In
so doing, we fixate on what we may describe as particular experiences
which we have, or call to mind, when we find ourselves under this
temptation; one such (“entirely personal” and subjective) experience for
Wittgenstein is, he says, the experience he would express as “wondering
at the existence of the world.”[^484] But the attempt to express this
experience itself reveals the expression as nonsense; for since it is
inconceivable that the world might*not* have existed, it is incoherent
to wonder that it does. No expression of language can capture what the
expression of wonder gestures at, for no fact or event, however
outlandish, can confirm it. Recognizing the failure of language to
express it, we might now put this, Wittgenstein says, as “the experience
of seeing the world as a miracle”; and now we might also say that,
failing any expression*in* language, it finds expression in
the*existence* of language itself.[^485] This expression is itself
nonsensical; as Wittgenstein emphasizes, it puts into words*only* the
feeling of frustration we had before, our frustration with the inability
of language to “go beyond the world” to express what we meant. But we
can now see this frustration as an expression of the basic tendency that
underlay all our formulations. This was the “perfectly, absolutely
hopeless one” of “all men who ever tried to write or talk Ethics or
Religion,” namely “to run against the boundaries of language.”[^486]

This desire to run against the boundaries of language is perspicuous, in
Wittgenstein’s own text, as the root of what we may attempt to express
as the mystical or transcendental, for instance the vision of the world
“sub specie aeterni” as a*limited* whole.[^487] It is at the root, as
well, of the ambiguous envisioning of language that the analytic
tradition takes up from its first moments, and to which, as we have
seen, we can trace its most decisive critical results. Appreciating
these results, we may follow Wittgenstein in deeming nonsensical all of
the expressions that seek to*fix* the boundaries of language or*account*
for its relation to a life separable from it. But by way of a
displacement and renewal of the analytic tradition’s linguistic
critique, it remains possible that we might nevertheless venture to take
up again the desire at their root, in the irreducible dispersion of
language’s everyday life.

Within the logically structured language whose possibilities of sense
are evident in propositions, whose statements capture a world made up of
facts (and so make possible reference to such a world at all),
Wittgenstein’s expression for wonder at the existence of the world has
no sense. Outside this language (but there is no outside, since there is
no other language), it has the significance of a gesture. It ostensively
indicates that which it is surely impossible for any gesture*within* the
world to indicate, the singular*fact* of language, the existence of the
possibility of gesturing itself. Thus, by means of a “showing” that
could not be reduced to any saying, Wittgenstein evinces that desire
whose adequate expression would transcend the world or destroy it, the
mute pointing at the boundaries of the world that transmits to human
cognition the null space of a beyond. Without delivering its object, in
critical forms that, indeed, incessantly trace its withdrawal, the
demonstration takes the place of revelation, the purity of lighting
that, without explanation, first shows the world as it is.[^488]

The significance of this gesture is easy to miss. Within the more
general critique of language that Wittgenstein himself pioneered, the
point of staging the tendency that leads us to misleading or
metaphysical forms of words is usually only to repudiate it. Yet as
Wittgenstein recognizes, beyond the linguistic criticism of ethical
claims as nonsense, the desire that*leads* us to seek these claims will
remain, and is eminently worthy of our respect. Passing through the
completion of this criticism of sense, we can even recover this desire
in a clarified form for a critical inquiry that takes it up anew.

If Wittgenstein’s gesture were successful (but it cannot be) it would
ostend the being of the world by gesturing at the existence of what
cannot be said, the fact of the existence of language that is itself the
presupposition for any saying. The terms of its demonstration would
define the paradoxical distance between the world’s boundaries and what
can always only appear, within it, as a determinate and limited fact:
the total fact of the existence of language, the totality of actions,
events, and practices that exhaust its actual and possible occurrence.
The void space of this distance is the site of wonder, of the
paradoxical revelation of the indeterminable possibility of language
itself.

Wittgenstein’s description of the experience his gesture expresses as
that of “seeing the existence of the world as a miracle” formulates his
recognition that no fact or set of facts can account for it. There is no
way, we may say, to*explain* the “fact of language” that is more simple
or basic than it itself. Thus, if we should attempt to put this fact as
the fact “that language exists,” it would, like the sentence expressing
wonder at the existence of the world, again immediately undermine
itself. So, too, would its denial; no proposition justifies either form
of words, no proposition can account for, or put in simpler terms, what
they would say. It remains that the very ordinary possibility of*using*
the terms “language,” “meaning,” “sense” and “significance” constantly
and immediately invites us to invoke the existence of what they
obscurely seem to name. The ground of this possibility, what we should
like to express by asserting the existence of language, then remains, in
an essential way, mysterious.

At the end of linguistic demystification, the critical project that took
it up therefore faces a more pervasive mystery, at the root of its own
claim to envision language and so to practice its criticism. This
mystery is no longer a mystification, for it is not a*falsification* or
an*error* ; it will remain even when*all* the facts are in, when
“nothing is hidden” and there is no (factual or scientific)*question*
left to be posed. Yet its appearance in the form of the*question* of the
existence of language, a question which*cannot* be answered
affirmatively or negatively, will remain essential for the acts and
events of an ordinary life.

What are the means by which what can never be said thus shows itself,
and what does this showing mean for the continuing practice of critical
reflection on language and its “forms”? (What is revealed in the
revelation of what*cannot* be said?) If we had to find a basis*in*
language for the possibility of Wittgenstein’s gesture at “the existence
of language itself,” we could find it in language’s paradoxical capacity
to refer to itself, to take up the question of its own sense and
application to the circumstances of life in which linguistic meaning is
constantly at issue. This capacity inscribes the extraordinariness of
Wittgenstein’s gesture in every word of ordinary language’s
consideration of itself; its determinate instances are manifestations of
the extraordinary in the everyday, revelations of the basis of
significance in the inconsequential moments of an ordinary life.[^489]

We have seen that this paradoxical capacity of ordinary language to
refer to itself underlies both the analytic tradition’s detailed and
explicit critical envisioning of language and the instabilities to which
it is repeatedly prone. Historical retrospection marks the ambiguities
of this envisioning as those of language’s own vision of itself. It is
the image of the clarity of a life’s constituent forms, as reflected in
(what then appears as) the determinate forms of language itself. The
analytic tradition’s longstanding and determinative claim to envision
language, the root, as we have seen, of its most important results and
the basis of any possible claim to continue its methods, must then be
deemed neither successful on the level of its original demands nor
unsuccessful in its demonstration of (what we may wish to call) the
everyday*fact* of language which grounds the problematic possibility of
linguistic self-reference. The critical vision that attempted to master
language saw it as a set of possibilities to be described, elucidated,
traced and delimited, a silent and unified structure of rules underlying
every expression of sense. The inherent paradoxes that this vision
encountered, in its more explicit development, demonstrated a more basic
and problematic ground for sense in the irreducible actuality of a life.
The place of this appearance of these paradoxes is marked by language’s
own obscure capacity to demonstrate itself. With this
self-demonstration, language shows itself in a way that cannot be
reduced to any description of its structure or any differentiation of
its forms. Its critical power is no longer that of the distinction of
reality from illusion, of the truth of linguistic forms from their power
to mislead the imagination, for the medium of language it irreducibly
evinces is the imagination itself. If there is no place*outside* the
forms of language from which the grip of imagination over them can be
criticized, there is equally no discernible ground*within* them from
which its productive power can be elucidated or checked. When they are
allowed to come to critical expression in these everyday sites, the
claims of power that sought to master life by comprehending the
possibilities of language can cede to wonder at its very existence.

From the beginning, as we have seen, the analytic tradition’s
envisioning of language invoked it as a positive object of possible
elucidation, elaboration, and description in relation to the
possibilities of life that it was recurrently envisioned as determining.
The most determinate form of this invocation was what I called, in
chapter 1, the*structuralist* picture of language. For philosophers
throughout the tradition, and even today, it formulated the possible
intelligibility of language to the theoretical reflection that would
elucidate it. It formulated, as well, the claim of this reflection to
elucidate the points of linguistic reason’s force*over* a human life, to
describe the ground of the “force of the better reason” in determining
thought and action. But the picture was unstable in relation to the
actuality of the life it aimed to capture. And the critical results that
articulated the instability, in particular (but not only) Wittgenstein’s
rule-following considerations, demonstrated the essentially
unforeclosable openness of life to what then appears as language’s
“use,” at every moment of its practice. Showing the actual futility of
any attempt finally to master life’s possibilities in the forms of
language, they opened an uncrossable theoretical gap between the
symbolic expression of a rule and the instances of action or behavior
that may be said to amount to following it.

Henceforth, this gap can be the site of a life that cannot be explained
in terms of possibilities of language, even as it recurrently takes up
again language’s envisioning of itself. The ground of life on which
structuralism would seek to situate the ultimate possibility of sense,
by reference to which it would seek to guarantee the possibility of
linguistic meaningfulness, is revealed as null and void. The forms of
explanatory or theoretical discourse that would seek to express it cede
to a mute gesturing, the ostension of a ground of language that is
everywhere presupposed but nowhere describable.

The tradition’s demonstration of the nullity at the center of language’s
structure can then be seen as the revelation to everyday thought and
practice of what Giorgio Agamben calls “The Idea of Language:”

The fulfilled revelation of language is a word completely abandoned by
God. And human beings are thrown into language without having a voice or
a divine word to guarantee them a possibility of escape from the
infinite play of meaningful propositions. Thus we finally find ourselves
alone with our words; for the first time we are truly alone with
language, abandoned without any final foundation. This is the Copernican
revolution that the thought of our time inherits from nihilism: we are
the first human beings who have become completely conscious of
language.[^490]

To an age in which the self-consciousness of language is thus complete,
the desire to run up against the limits of language that Wittgenstein
diagnoses is visible as the previously obscure root of every attempt to
articulate propositions of ethics or religion. It finds obscure
expression, in particular, in the search for transcendence, what we can
now see as the search for a position outside language from which it
would be*possible* to comprehend, describe, trace or express the being
of language as a whole, to determine the boundaries of its sense or the
possibilities of its reference to a world conceived as outside it. As we
have seen over the course of this work, in a double movement of
criticism that can be considered its own specific method, the analytic
tradition repeatedly moves to formulate this position and then repudiate
this very formulation. At the limit of this doubled criticism, it will
no longer be possible to discern the logical structures of language or
identify the specific points of their force in constraining the
possibilities of a human life. There will be, then, no ultimate*ground*
for language in life, no moment of life or component of its pursuit that
will be identifiable as the source of language or the basis of the
possibility of meaning. But the everyday critical modalities that
constantly call language into question on the basis of its own vision of
itself also constantly inscribe the nullity of its center, its freedom
from the claims of power that would master it from without or within.

With respect to a metaphysics whose forms are as old as language itself
and whose specific claims operate anywhere and everywhere we speak, the
critical results of analytic philosophy thus do not mark its end or
overcoming, the death of what is surely immortal. But they do reveal the
nullity of its specific claims to power by demonstrating the nullity of
the fact of language that they claim to master. The revelation of
language that the analytic tradition has developed thus witnesses the
possibility that these claims, grounded in the imposition of
distinctions that themselves stand exposed as groundless, could (without
denying the reality of their effects or foreclosing the continuance of
their memory) be allowed to lapse into a correlative insignificance
along with that of the history they have organized. This insignificance
is the erasure of the line that metaphysics traces at the center of a
human life between that life itself and the language that it speaks.

The radical vision of language that transformed philosophy at the
beginning of the twentieth century and continues to support its deepest
critical modes therefore reveals the sense of words and the significance
of symbols, everywhere and always, as phenomena of a ground that can
only be incomprehensible to it. It bears witness to the paradoxical
possibility of what remains, within the metaphysics of a language that
continues to pre-determine every possibility of the significance of a
human life, impossible or inconceivable, ineffable or unspeakable: the
dream of the self-revelation of a life without mystification or
violence. Within the metaphysics that still determines the sign as the
mute bearer of memory, archive of the violence of life and guarantor,
beyond death, of the immortality of its significance, such a life
remains insignificant. Open to the play of phenomena of sense and
significance without determining them in the forms of possession,
intention, mastery or control that have regularly defined them, it gives
no sense to its language beyond that of the immediacy of its own breath.
It thereby opens itself to an experience of language which, beyond the
violence of history and the regimes of its force, abandons its life to
the peace of what remains. The vision of language that would have
comprehended this life ends by exposing it to its own immanence. That we
who speak and write become incomprehensible to ourselves may be the
stake, and the promise, of the clarity of its light.
