Preface
=======

This book has several origins, widely separated in time and space. One
of the first of these was the ambiguous reaction I had upon my initial
encounter with analytic philosophy as an undergraduate in a prominent
American philosophy department in the mid-1990s. There, the projects of
Quine and Davidson were still current, those of Carnap and Russell much
less so, and phenomenology and “continental” philosophy widely dismissed
and barely discussed at all. The pedagogy that communicated the current
projects to me did a good job of expounding their details, but was less
successful at showing their deeper programmatic motivations and larger
philosophical significance. It took me longer to see the currently
favored projects themselves as arising from, and hence interpretable in
terms of, a long and revealing history. This history, I realized later,
connects the contemporary projects of analytic philosophy to what was
once experienced as nothing short of a revolution in thought: the
attempt to grasp in symbolic logic the very structure of the world, and
so to make the terms of language speak into existence the clarity of a
demystified life. It was then, especially in reading Wittgenstein, that
I realized that whatever “analytic philosophy” might today be said to
be, its particular methods and styles could be understood as resulting
from a radical and unprecedented opening of language to philosophical
investigation and reflection. Discerning the effects of this opening in
the history of the tradition might help as well, I reasoned, to
determine what is really at issue in the question of its continuance
into the future.

At the same time, I had taken up reading some of the texts of
twentieth-century “continental” philosophy, particularly the
phenomenology of Husserl and Heidegger. The accusation of “unclarity”
that analytic philosophers often direct against them did not convince
me, and as I read further, I began to see the possibility of a much
closer conversation than is now customary between analytic philosophy
and these and other “continental” texts. The close connections between
Husserl’s phenomenology and the projects of Frege and the early Vienna
Circle, the significant parallels between the analytic tradition’s
midcentury critique of Cartesianism and Heidegger’s critique of
subjectivism, and (above all) the common origination of*all* of these
projects in developments of Kant’s critique of reason, all spoke for the
possibility of a renewed discussion of the two traditions’ common
methodological and thematic strands.

I grew convinced, at the same time, that the epochal discovery of
language for philosophical criticism at the beginning of the analytic
tradition gestured toward an “object” whose occurrence is too pervasive,
and implications too general, in ordinary human life for its
philosophical relevance to be limited to a specialized consideration of
the conceptual problems of scientific knowledge or a mere
systematization of pre-existing or commonsensical “intuitions.”
Continental philosophers, largely unschooled in the methods of analysis,
clarification, and criticism deriving from Frege, might see formally
based reflection on language as irrelevant to a larger consideration of
the problems of meaning and existence; analytic philosophers might
continue to dismiss these problems themselves as too vague and
intractable. Even within the analytic tradition itself, the question of
language, once opened for philosophical reflection, has again and again
subsequently been partially or wholly concealed or obscured,
dissimulated and repressed. It nevertheless remains possible, in a
broader historical context, as I have attempted to show herein, to grasp
the analytic tradition’s inquiry into language as one of the most
complete and radical developments of philosophy’s continuing critical
encounter with what was long ago grasped as*logos* , and brought down
through the ages as reason and*ratio* , the immanent form of thought and
the order of the world.

Another origin of this book came later, in my reading, in graduate
school, of contemporary texts that seek to theorize and account for the
regularities and norms of meaningful language. These texts, more or less
universally, presupposed a conception of language as grounded in
intersubjective “social practices” controlled by public criteria of
application and evaluation. But when I read the definitive documents of
the middle of the twentieth century (most of all, those of Quine and
Wittgenstein) that were supposed to have actually proven this basis, I
was surprised to find that they seemed to drive toward a quite different
(indeed almost opposite) conclusion. For far from establishing the
possibility of basing an account of linguistic meaning in an account
of*praxis* , they seemed to me to locate an essential gap or aporia
between signs and their application in an ordinary human life,
demonstrating an essential incommensurability of linguistic meaning with
any theoretically describable structure of practice or action. The
skeptical or critical results that demonstrate this gap, it seemed to me
as well, must have deep consequences for the form of our ordinary access
to language’s structure, and hence for our understanding of the diverse
and varied contexts and situations of human life wherein language is
regularly at issue.

If the question of language has indeed been definitive for the analytic
tradition, this definitiveness is nevertheless not immediately evident
either in the prevalent methods of the tradition as it is currently
practiced or in much of the historiography that has recently begun to
recount their development. As the methods of analytic philosophy have
gained a position of unquestioned prominence in Anglo-American
philosophy departments, the underlying motivations of its original
project have often nevertheless been lost, hidden, or obscured within an
ostensibly neutral set of practices of expository clarity and rational
argumentation. This obscuration arises, as we shall see, for essential
reasons from the deep and nearly unresolvable ambiguities to which the
philosophical critique of language is exposed as soon as it attempts to
gain theoretical clarity about its own positive methodological basis.
Nevertheless it amounts to an artificial and premature closure of a set
of essential questions that have by no means either been answered or
dissolved by positive theory.

In the various specific investigations of this book, I have therefore
tried to trace the consequences of the philosophical vision of language
for the development of some of the main historical projects of the
analytic tradition, asking, in each case, what ensures or precludes the
openness of language to philosophical reflection, what constitutes
language as an object or ensures the possibility of a critical inquiry
into its structure or limits, and also what permits, and what
problematizes, our everyday rational reflection about the bearing of
language on the form of a human life.

My aim in posing these historical and conceptual questions is not to
espouse or invite any positive doctrine or theory. Instead, I hope only
that this book can serve as a kind of signpost or marker, a historically
based indication of a question that was once open for philosophy and
could be taken up again, not only in the future inheritance of its
specific methods, but also in the practices and events of an everyday
life that knows itself as transfigured by the language it takes up.

**-Freiburg im Breisgau**

**July 2007**


