1. Introduction: Language and Structure
=======================================

We are tempted to think that the action of language consists of two
parts; an inorganic part, the handling of signs, and an organic part,
which we may call understanding these signs, meaning them, interpreting
them, thinking. These latter activities seem to take place in a queer
kind of medium, the mind; and the mechanism of the mind, the nature of
which, it seems, we don’t quite understand, can bring about effects
which no material mechanism could …

Frege ridiculed the formalist conception of mathematics by saying that
the formalists confused the unimportant thing, the sign, with the
important, the meaning. Surely, one wishes to say, mathematics does not
treat of dashes on a bit of paper. Frege’s idea could be expressed thus:
the propositions of mathematics, if they were just complexes of dashes,
would be dead and utterly uninteresting, whereas they obviously have a
kind of life. And the same, of course, could be said of any proposition:
Without a sense, or without the thought, a proposition would be an
utterly dead and trivial thing. And further it seems clear that no
adding of inorganic signs can make the proposition live. And the
conclusion which one draws from this is that what must be added to the
dead signs in order to make a live proposition is something immaterial,
with properties different from all mere signs.

But if we had to name anything which is the life of the sign, we should
have to say that it was its*use* .[^1]

If language grants the possibility of sense to a human life, then the
systematic inquiry into its structure consigns this life to an ambiguous
basis in the relation of signs to their meanings. For as soon as it
becomes the object of systematic analysis, the totality of language both
demands and refuses completion by a principle of meaning exterior to its
own economy. Wittgenstein’s text, written in 1933 or 1934 as part of a
series of notes intended for his students at Cambridge, identifies the
desire for such a completion in the thought of his great philosophical
progenitor, Frege. The anxiety to which this desire responds is one of
death, specifically a death of sense in the materiality of the sign. The
characteristic resource it marshals against this anxiety is the life of
the human being who speaks, understands, intends and thinks.

One of the most significant projects of the analytic tradition in the
twentieth century has been its attempt to envision and comprehend the
structure of language. From the first moments of the development of its
characteristic modes of analysis, reflection, and inquiry, the analytic
tradition has attempted to grasp language as a regular structure of
signs accessible to rational elucidation. Wittgenstein’s analysis of the
tendencies operative in Frege’s thought displays, particularly clearly,
some of the constitutive tensions to which this attempt is prone. As we
shall see over the next several chapters, the analytic tradition’s
search for a comprehensive description of the structure of language has
also involved a complex consideration of the*life* of the human user of
language. It has pictured this life, alternatively, as the
self-consciousness of a subject of experience or as the shared life of a
community of speakers, the mutuality that is seen as the foundation of
any possibility of communication. The implications of the analytic
tradition’s joint envisioning of language and life are varied and far
ranging; a historically based exploration can help to elucidate the
broader legacy of the analytic tradition itself for contemporary
critical thought and action. In its diagnostic modality, this
exploration looks toward the clarity of a life that no longer seeks its
significance in the problematic attempt to master the relationship of
signs to their meanings, but might find in the withdrawal of this
relationship into abeyance the vanishing of the problem it
represents.[^2]

I.

Analytic philosophy’s engagement with language has been, on any account,
longstanding, sustained, and determinative for both the tradition’s main
methods and its most significant results. It is probably impossible to
identify a*single* conception of the nature of language that underlies
all of the tradition’s varied analytic, reflective, and critical
projects. Nevertheless, there is a distinctive set of interrelated
theoretical and methodological commitments that have repeatedly made
reference to “language” itself*possible* for many, if not most, of the
projects of analytic philosophy throughout the twentieth century that
have discussed it. Introducing these commitments briefly may serve to
facilitate reflection on the nature of this reference and focus some of
the questions that it raises.

As I shall discuss it in this work, the*structuralist* picture of
language consists in four interrelated central commitments and a fifth,
less central one that often (though not always) goes along with the
first four:

1. Language as a whole can be understood as a*system* or*structure* of
signs, words, propositions, sentences or other significant terms.

2. The logical, grammatical, or structural interrelations among these
terms, as well as their ordinary use in speaking or writing, are wholly
or partially constrained by a corpus of intelligible*rules*
or*regularities.*

3. These rules or regularities are describable and their description can
account for the*correct* or*normal* use of terms in everyday
interlocution.

4. On the basis of such a description, it is possible to determine
the*meaning* or*meaningfulness* of terms or combinations of terms used
on particular occasions.[^3]

5. The rules or regularities that thus constrain the use of language are
essentially*public* ,*intersubjective* , and*social* in character.[^4]
[^5]

These interrelated theoretical commitments, naturally linked to one
another in the vision of language that they determine, have had
far-ranging methodological consequences from an early moment in the
development of the tradition. At its beginning, they provided the
methodological basis for the projects of conceptual or logical*analysis*
that characterized the tradition in its early stages, and indeed
originally gave it its name. For the practitioners of these early
projects, the solution or dissolution of philosophical problems depends
on the clarification and description of logical*structure* .[^6]
Analysis of propositions, facts, or concepts into their structurally
simpler elements serves to reveal the real or genuine form of these
individual items or their systematic interrelationships, over against
our ordinary tendencies to mistake or misconstrue these forms or
relations. The demonstration is, in particular cases, to be guided by an
overarching elucidation of the structure of a set of systematically
interrelated terms, whether these terms are conceived as elements of
language (at first they were not), as objects of knowledge, or as
individual concepts, thoughts, senses or meanings.

An early and influential expression of one such project can be found in
the manifesto “The Scientific Conception of the World: The Vienna
Circle,” released in 1929 to summarize the project of the circle of
philosophers and scientists that had been, since the early 1920s,
meeting in Vienna around Moritz Schlick. The manifesto describes the
“scientific world-conception” of the Circle as consisting in two main
features: first an “empiricist” and “positivist” orientation demanding
that “there is knowledge only from experience;” and second, the
application of “a certain method, namely*logical analysis* .”[^7] The
authors (chiefly Hans Hahn, Otto Neurath and Rudolf Carnap) explain the
implications of this method:

It is the*method of logical analysis* that essentially distinguishes
recent empiricism and positivism from the earlier version that was more
biological-psychological in its orientation. If someone asserts “there
is a God”, “the primary basis of the world is the unconscious”, “there
is an entelechy which is the leading principle in the living organism”,
we do not say to him: “what you say is false”; but we ask him: “what do
you mean by these statements?” Then it appears that there is a sharp
boundary between two kinds of statements. To one belong statements as
they are made by empirical science; their meaning can be determined by
logical analysis or, more precisely, through reduction to the simplest
statements about the empirically given. The other statements, to which
belong those cited above, reveal themselves as empty of meaning if one
takes them in the way that metaphysicians intend. … Analysis … shows
that these statements say nothing but merely express a certain mood or
spirit.[^8]

According to the Vienna Circle authors, then, the analysis of
propositions decides the meaningfulness of statements of ordinary and
philosophical language by elucidating the extent of their logical
connection to propositions already known to be meaningful (in this case,
propositions describing the “empirically given.”) This determination
provides the basis for drawing a line, within language as a whole,
between statements that are meaningful (those of empirical science) and
those that lack meaning (typically those of “metaphysics”). As the
authors of the manifesto make clear, this demarcation of language into
meaningful and meaningless regions itself depends on a systematic
elucidation of the logical interrelationships of the concepts of
science.[^9] In the spirit of the “scientific world-conception” that
they saw as gaining ground in Europe, England, and the U.S., the authors
of the manifesto thus looked forward to the complete dissolution of
metaphysics through the clarification of the logical structure of
meaningful language. The project, despite the similarities they noted to
earlier versions of empiricism and positivism, had its methodological
basis in the new apparatus of logic that the Circle philosophers had
available to them, and in the conception of language as a total
structure of signs that it suggested.[^10]

When the manifesto authors wrote in 1929, there were already significant
precedents for the practice of logical analysis that they espoused.
Perhaps the most decisive early influence was Frege’s conception of a
systematic notation for the clear logical expression of thoughts, the
so-called*Begriffsschrift* or “concept writing.” The new syntax was to
bring out in symbolic form the underlying structure of thought. Frege
compared the improvement over ordinary thinking that such a notation
would afford to the advantage of a microscope over the eye. Like a
specialized visual instrument most useful for special investigative
purposes, the more precise symbolism would, without replacing ordinary
language, facilitate the special work of an analysis of the logical
structure of concepts actually underlying ordinary claims and
judgments.[^11] The analysis would be particularly important, Frege
thought, in consolidating the rigor of mathematical proof and placing
mathematics on a firmer logical basis. This hope to find a rigorous
logical basis for mathematics led him to pursue the project later
called*logicism* : the reduction of the claims of mathematics to a basis
in a small set of axioms and their logical, deductive consequences.

This logicist program culminated in Russell and Whitehead’s*Principia
Mathematica* of 1910-1913. The three-volume work, which provided a
logical analysis of the basic notions of set theory and number theory,
represented the most detailed and rigorous development of the conception
of logical analysis that Russell had originally reached, at least in
embryonic form, around the turn of the century, and which the Vienna
Circle authors themselves cited as a definitive inspiration for their
own project. As early as 1900, Russell, rejecting the holism and monism
that characterized the then-dominant Hegelian Idealism, had declared the
utility of an analytic approach: “That all sound philosophy should begin
with an analysis of propositions is a truth too evident, perhaps, to
demand a proof.”[^12] Russell’s colleague Moore had used the term
“analysis” in*Principia Ethica* (1903) to characterize his own
investigation of the concepts of ethics. Russell’s theory of
descriptions, expounded in the 1905 article “On Denoting,” demonstrated
the utility of the method by offering a powerful early example of a
successful logical analysis, showing that the actual meaning of a large
class of sentences could be exhibited, against the obfuscating effects
of ordinary language, by clarifying their underlying logical form.[^13]

Subsequently, Russell articulated and defended the “logical-analytic”
method again in 1914 in the lectures that became*Our Knowledge of the
External World* .[^14] Here, it formed the methodological basis for a
wholesale project of epistemological clarification of the nature and
basis of empirical knowledge. Russell’s work in the foundations of set
theory had led him to suggest that the referents of a large variety of
ordinary-language terms might be treated as “logical constructions” of
simpler elements. In the particular case of ordinary spatial objects of
perception, for instance, analysis could decompose them into the simple
sensible particulars that made them up and exhibit the logical relations
among these particulars. Analysis, he suggested, could resolve the
“inferred entities” of ordinary experience into the logical
constructions that they in fact were; in this way, their ultimate
constituents would be revealed and the possibility of our knowledge of
them explained.[^15]

For all of the early analytic philosophers who appealed to logical
structures in practicing the new methods of analysis, a primary
motivation for the appeal was their desire to safeguard the*objectivity*
of contents of thought, over against the threat posed by subjectivist
theories of them. Only*logically* structured contents, they thought,
could genuinely be objective in the sense of existing wholly
independently of anyone’s acts of thinking of them, grasping them,
considering them or entertaining them. Frege’s conception of the
objectivity of logically articulated contents of thought, and his
resultant polemics against psychologistic and historicist theories of
content, figured prominently in his writings on logic and the
foundations of mathematics from nearly the beginning of his career.[^16]
A similar motivation, directed initially against the then-dominant
post-Hegelian Idealism, underwrote Russell’s initial realism about
“propositions” and “meanings” and his resultant conviction that logical
analysis could demonstrate, through decomposition, the actual
constituents of the world.[^17] For Schlick, Carnap and other members of
the Vienna Circle as well, an analysis of the logical structure of the
propositions of science was essential to demonstrating their objectivity
and distinguishing them from the claims of pseudo-science or
metaphysics. Only by displaying their underlying logical structure,
Schlick and Carnap thought, could the propositions of empirical science
be purged of any essential dependence on ostensive or demonstrative
elements, and so portrayed as genuinely independent of the acts or
occasions of their discovery or verification.[^18]

Logical analysis, as it was first conceived within the tradition,
therefore sought to demonstrate the actual logical relations that
determine the contents of thoughts or propositions, and so also the
meaning of the linguistic terms that express them. But the first
analytic philosophers (in particular, Frege, Moore, and Russell) did not
yet see their methods as grounded primarily or specifically in the
analysis of language. Their attention to ordinary language most often
had the aim of exhibiting its tendency to obfuscate and conceal rather
than any analysis of language for its own sake. For Russell (at this
time) and Frege as well as for Moore, the object of investigation was
“thoughts,” “concepts,” “meanings,” or “propositions” (conceived as
non-linguistic but structured constituents of the world) rather than
words or sentences.[^19] In*The Philosophy of Logical Atomism* , culled
from lectures he delivered in 1918, Russell described his method of
analysis as dividing the world into mutually independent “facts,” each
of which were further decomposable into more basic simples or
particulars. Most basically, Russell thought, a fact was what made a
proposition true or false; its further logical decomposition would
resolve the particular simple objects to which the simplest terms of
such a proposition, if fully analyzed, refer.

The young Wittgenstein, in the*Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus* , drew
out the semantic and ontological consequences of this “logical atomism”
for the relationship of language to the world. With its invocation of
“logical form” as responsible not only for the laws of logic but
the*possibility* of any meaningful language, the*Tractatus* was the
first to suggest that the solution to the problems caused by the forms
of ordinary language could lie in analysis of these forms themselves.
They were to be elucidated by means of reflection on the varieties of
sense or nonsense they permit; by drawing a line between sense and
nonsense, the analyst could hope to clarify the logical structure shared
by language, thought, and the world. The suggestion, and its quick
reception (and partial misconception) in the logical empiricism of the
Vienna Circle, brought the structuralist conception of language in its
fully developed form to bear on the problems of philosophy and the
meaning of everyday language alike.

Although the structuralism of early analytic philosophy was not,
initially, explicitly linguistic, the structuralist conception of
language as a totality of signs governed by logical rules thus appeared
relatively quickly to be the most natural setting for its distinctive
methods of analysis. It captured, as well, much of what analytic
philosophers explicitly carried forward from earlier philosophical
projects, and hence came to define the relationship of early analytic
philosophy to the larger philosophical tradition which it sought to
update. One important precedent for the structuralist picture of
language as a system governed or determined by rules for the
intercombination of signs was the logical system of Leibniz. In some of
his earliest writings, Leibniz had suggested the idea of a*mathesis
universalis* or “universal character,” a symbolic language of logic that
would, like Frege’s own “concept-writing,” clarify human reasoning by
giving it a unified, systematic mathematical calculus for the evaluation
of the validity of arguments and conclusions.[^20] Russell’s first
substantial philosophical work, written in 1900, took up the question of
the relationship of Leibniz’s conception of logic to his metaphysics
against the changed backdrop of the new forms of logic derived from
Frege and his recent forebears, and Rudolf Carnap cited Leibniz’s
project approvingly as a precedent for his own logical analysis project
in his first masterpiece,*The Logical Structure of the World* .[^21]

To this determinative rationalist influence deriving ultimately from
Leibniz, the philosophers of the Vienna Circle added a picture of
experience drawing on the empiricism of Hume, Locke, and Berkeley, as
well as the positivism of Mach, Poincaré, and Duhem. Logical analysis
was, among other things, to clarify the inherent structure of the given
contents of experience, clarifying its simple elements and describing
their structural interrelationships. But even more methodologically
decisive for the Vienna Circle’s project of linguistic and logical
analysis was the legacy of Kant’s critical project of tracing the
boundaries of reason’s legitimate employment in relation to our
knowledge of the world. Several of the Vienna Circle philosophers had
themselves been deeply influenced by the neo-Kantianism of philosophers
like Cassirer, Cohen, Natorp, and Rickert.[^22] These philosophers had
already undertaken to update Kant’s critical project by reflecting on
the way the formal and symbolic structures of language condition the
possibility of human knowledge. Now, the availability of the new methods
of logical analysis suggested that formal logic itself could be the
basis for a critical delimitation of the boundaries of language or of
sense, clarifying the scope of possible experiential meaning and thus
carrying forth the Kantian limit-fixing project in an updated
logical-linguistic mode.

From near the beginning of its itinerary, the structuralist conception
of language existed in an uncertain relationship with the empiricist
conception of subjective experience that also regularly accompanied it.
Beginning in the late 1920s, the philosophers of the Vienna Circle
envisioned the analysis of scientific propositions as elucidating the
total logical structure of science, as well as the possibility for some
of its claims - the so-called “protocol sentences” - to be
directly*verified* by experience.[^23] The ensuing debate about the form
of protocol sentences their relationship to the other propositions of
science touched on a large number of interrelated philosophical issues
within epistemology, metaphysics, and the nascent field of “philosophy
of mind.” But at the core of many of these issues was the question of
the relationship of language, conceived as a total structure of
rule-bound symbols whose meaning is defined only relationally, to
immediate, first-person experience.[^24] The structuralist conception of
language and objectivity demanded that the concepts of science be
defined by their structural role in the system of science as a whole,
independently of their relationship to experience. But in order to
distinguish genuinely empirical propositions from non-empirical ones, it
was necessary to give an account of the role of experience in grounding
or verifying them. The question of the status of protocol sentences - in
particular, whether they should be pictured as verified by experiential
events outside the realm of logically structured, objective science or
as ordinary elements within this structure - was never resolved by the
participants of the Vienna Circle themselves. Subsequently, Schlick’s
murder in 1936, along with the political events of the 1930s, led to the
Circle’s breakup and the indefinite suspension of its project.

During and after World War II, the new forms of analysis and projects of
what was only then first widely called “analytic” or “analytical”
philosophy proposed new methods and means of linguistic clarification,
reflection, and critical demarcation.[^25] These methods ranged from
those of the “ordinary language” school that developed at Cambridge and
Oxford to Quine’s logical “regimentation” of ordinary language using the
formal apparatus he had learned from Carnap’s original syntactical
project. Essential to many of these new projects was their repudiation
of what they took to have been the Circle’s “reductionism” and
“verificationism.”[^26] In the widely influential “Two Dogmas of
Empiricism” of 1950, Quine sought to replace the “dogmas” of analyticity
and reductionism with a*holistic* picture of confirmation that drew
explicitly from Neurath’s earlier anti-foundationalist conception of the
structure of language.[^27]

Subsequent historical retellings of the development of the analytic
tradition have often seen Quine’s argument, and the more general
repudiation of verificationism that quickly became established wisdom,
as essential to the abandonment of the original methods of analytic
philosophy, in particular the*decompositional* method of analysis that
had been suggested by Frege, Russell and Carnap. But as we shall see
over the next several chapters, attention to the ongoing role of
structuralist assumptions about language demonstrate the actual
continuance of the most significant methodological threads of the
original project even in those postwar projects that claimed most
directly to repudiate it.[^28] For the ambiguities of the relationship
of logical structure to its elements that had proved fatally problematic
for the Vienna Circle’s project of analysis remained in place, and
continued to produce characteristic difficulties for structuralist
reflection on language and its meaning, even when “reductionism” was
replaced with “holism” and verificationism was replaced with a more
nuanced conception of empirical confirmation.[^29]

My aim in identifying the influence of structuralism upon the analytic
tradition is not to impose a false unity upon a tradition that has
certainly been marked, at least since the 1950s, by an extremely diverse
and heterogeneous set of philosophical methods and practices.[^30] But I
do hope to show the deep and pervasive way in which the methods and
results of*many* of these practices, even including the ones that have
officially rejected structuralism or sought explicitly to limit its
influence, can be seen as deeply influenced by the problems and
ambiguities that arise from it. These problems and ambiguities have
continued to exert a decisive influence on the methods and results of
analytic philosophy, I shall argue, long past the widespread midcentury
rejection of reductive and atomistic forms of “conceptual
analysis.”[^31] Indeed, even many of those contemporary projects that
reject the entire idea of a specific relevancy of linguistic reflection
to the problems of philosophy, preferring to define themselves as
pursuing “metaphysics” (in some non-pejorative sense) or empirical
contributions to psychology, sociology, or biology, nevertheless inherit
styles of argumentation, methods of reasoning, and writing practices
that originated within the earlier project of structuralist analysis and
remain subject to its specific instabilities. Historical reflection on
the origin and persistence of these instabilities within the methods of
analytic philosophy helps to demonstrate the contemporary relevance of
these projects to the (still very much open) question of the nature and
basis of linguistic meaning, and of the continuing possibility of
philosophy’s recourse to it.

In choosing the term “structuralism” to characterize the particular set
of commitments underlying the picture of language that has been most
widely influential within the analytic tradition, I intend also to
gesture toward the close conceptual and methodological connections
between this set and the tradition of European (chiefly French) thought
that has been called by the same name. Although my chief concern here is
to identify and trace the role played by the structuralist picture of
language in the analytic tradition, the texts of philosophers,
linguists, and anthropologists such as Saussure, Jackobson,
Levi-Strauss, and Benveniste show the influence of a similar picture
just as pervasively.[^32] The sustained inquiry into the systematic
character of language and linguistic meaning begun by Saussure has, over
the course of the twentieth century, situated and given essential shape
to the political, social, and philosophical contributions of
phenomenology, psychoanalysis, and critical thought. Part of my hope in
characterizing this inquiry as parallel in many important respects to
the analytic one is that the unfortunate and divisive legacy of
disregard and mutual misunderstanding that has existed, throughout the
second half of the twentieth century, between representatives of the two
structuralist traditions, European and Anglo-American, can be recognized
as baseless and finally overcome, presumably to the mutual benefit of
both.

II

From the beginning of the tradition, the structuralist picture of
language as a totality of rule-governed signs directed the attention of
analytic philosophers toward the analysis of the structure of
propositions, facts, or terms and the systematic clarification of their
logic. This structuralist clarification, at first (for instance in
Frege) cited logical rules that were conceived as underlying the
objectivity of thought in an ideal sense, quite independently of the
actual*practice* of language. But with the explicit turn to language,
philosophers quickly began to see reflection on linguistic practice as
the most natural home for analysis of logical or grammatical structure.
At this point, it became natural to consider linguistic terms and
sentences as, among other things, objects of*use* . Such use is, besides
being explicable in terms of rules or regularities, to be understood as
essentially publicly and intersubjectively learned and controlled. The
fifth commitment that has often held by analytic philosophers who have
held a structuralist conception of language, accordingly, concerns its
essentially*public* nature:

5. The rules or regularities that constrain the use of language are
essentially*public* ,*intersubjective* , and*social* in character.

This commitment is logically independent of the other four. As we have
seen, the first analytic philosophers, Frege and Russell, did not hold
it. But it is already at least implicit in Schlick and Carnap’s
descriptions of the project of analysis as grounded in the elucidation
of “rules of use” governing the application of terms in the practice of
a language as a whole. It would soon thereafter come to play an
increasingly explicit role in many philosophers’ statements of their own
projects. It follows, in any case, naturally enough from structuralism’s
picture of language as a system or structure of rule-governed signs.
Once language itself is seen as a regular structure of signs governed by
rules determinative of meaning or meaningfulness, it is natural to
suppose that the relevant rules are primarily applicable to, and evident
in, the establishment and maintenance of social practices, especially
communicative practices of judgment, assertion, rational evaluation, and
criticism.

In many of the texts of immediately postwar analytic philosophy, in
particular, commitment to the “public character” of language was held to
be essential to repudiating the*individualistic* or
methodologically*solipsistic* assumptions of earlier philosophical
projects.[^33] Here, it was supposed, only a fundamental insistence on
the essential publicity of linguistic concepts and their basis in
intersubjective practices of using and learning language could remedy
the (now widely repudiated) reductionist and foundationalist assumptions
of an earlier phase of analytic reflection. Insistence on the essential
publicity of language and concepts seemed to offer new and pervasive
grounds, as well, for continuing the critique of*psychologism* that had
figured centrally in the analytic tradition’s methods of logical
reflection. For if our very access to the concepts in terms of which we
describe our immediate experience is dependent on our understanding of a
language, learned in public and controlled by public criteria of
applicability, then there is no hope for psychologistic theories of
meaning that base it instead in the experiences or phenomena of an
individual mind, consciousness, or subject of experience.

A socially based theory of the learning and communication of linguistic
terms and their regular interrelationships thus came to seem requisite
for a comprehensive understanding of the structure of language
itself.[^34] The hope for such a theory indeed became almost ubiquitous
in the projects of midcentury analytic philosophy of language. The
continued complicity of these projects with structuralist assumptions
about language was hardly noted. But as we shall see, the fundamental
problems and inherent ambiguities of the structuralist picture of
language in fact remained determinative in producing the theoretical
tensions to which these projects of analytic reflection were repeatedly
prone.

Significantly for the continuing reception of the analytic tradition,
the fifth assumption of structuralism about language continues to play a
pervasive role, as well, in prominent projects of analytic philosophy
today. The thought that an accounting for linguistic meaning and
meaningfulness depends on a description or analysis of social practices
of assertion, communication, and judgment, plays a foundational role,
for instance, in the projects of Davidson, Dummett, Brandom, Kripke, and
Rorty, among others.[^35] For these philosophers, the rules,
regularities, or norms that determine the actual and correct usage of
terms and locutions in a language are to be discovered, at least in
part, in the*institutions* of social practice that govern the
intersubjective behavior of the language’s speakers in discourse and
communication. Such social practices are inextricably connected with
non-linguistic*praxis* as well, and normally include our ordinary ways
of interacting with and shaping our environments. What they involve, on
any particular occasion, is thought largely to be learned along with, or
as an essential part of, the learning of a first language. After they
are learned, they are maintained, and enforced, through essentially
intersubjective and social mechanisms for the evaluation, critique,
endorsement or censure of particular linguistic performances, insofar as
these performances comport, or fail to comport, with them.

In some recent projects, social practices are seen as providing an
explanation not only for the actual facts of language use, but also for
the*normativity* of language or concepts and the*rationality* of their
users. That is, our social practices are seen as providing a basis not
only what we in fact do say, in a variety of contexts and situations,
but for determinations of what we*should* say if we want to draw
rational inferences, or respond appropriately to the utterances of our
peers, or cooperate with them in making claims that lead us reliably to
the truth. The various practices of deliberation, correction,
consideration and evaluation that normally accompany the venturing and
verification of claims in everyday discourse are thus seen as embodying,
through the rules or norms of usage ordinarily governing them, the
claims of*reason* or*rationality* to which traditional philosophy
devoted a complex and self-critical reflection. The real object of this
traditional reflection can then be seen as, in Sellars’ memorable
phrase, the socially inculcated and maintained “game of giving and
asking for reasons,” the set of communicative practices ultimately
responsible both for the meaning of propositions and the validity of the
claims they formulate.

Some of the contemporary and recent philosophers who assume a basis for
the meaningfulness of language in publicly learned and socially
maintained practices claim to draw inspiration from the late
Wittgenstein, and in particular from his considerations of
“rule-following” and the idea of a “private language” in
the*Philosophical Investigations* . On a hasty reading, it can indeed
seem as if Wittgenstein’s scattered references to the forms of human
understanding, thought, and perception as grounded in “language-games”
articulate a (perhaps largely “implicit” or suggestive) theory of these
forms, or indeed of the “practice of language” itself, as grounded in
regular, describable, public social practices or institutions. Such an
account is often seen, moreover, as including a “use-theory” of meaning
that accounts for the significance of the various terms of language by
reference to the facts or norms of their ordinary application. Partisans
of such an interpretation often hold that Wittgenstein himself did not
work out such a theory in detail, but that one could be developed,
consistently with Wittgenstein’s underlying intentions, either through
empirical research into sociology, psychology, linguistics, biology or
some combination thereof or through philosophical description of the
underlying structure of our practices.[^36]

Such interpretations, as I shall argue, ignore not only Wittgenstein’s
lifelong and methodologically essential animadversions against mistaking
positive theory (especially of an empirical type) for philosophical
work, but indeed miss, as I shall argue, one of the most significant
critical points of the*Investigations* . This point is not at all to
confirm or consolidate accounts that place rule-bound practices at the
basis of the ordinary meaningfulness of language. It is, rather, almost
the direct opposite: to criticize the structuralist conception of rules
and rule-following that provides the ordinary setting for such accounts
on the level of their picture of language as a whole. Taking
Wittgenstein to be supporting a “practice”-based account of language,
commentators and subsequent philosophers have largely missed the deep
and pervasive way in which his consideration of rule-following actually
undermines any such account.[^37] They have thus persisted uncritically
in a structuralism about language and practices that a fuller reading of
Wittgenstein’s internal critique of structuralism otherwise might have,
long ago, taught them to doubt.

Indeed, the assumption of a social basis in intersubjective practice for
linguistic meaning and meaningfulness has repeatedly obscured the
far-reaching*critical* implications of the analytic tradition’s
sustained consideration of the structuralist picture of language. Even
when, as with Wittgenstein’s critique of rule-following or Quine’s
thesis of the indeterminacy of radical translation, these critical
consequences have appeared with a fair degree of explicitness, they have
seemed, within the ambit of social-practice accounts of language, simply
to bear against one or another more*restricted* picture of the structure
of language, and their more general significance as internal critiques
of structuralism has been missed. The usual result has been the
continuance of an underlying structuralism about language, despite
relatively superficial changes in the form it takes, and a recurrence of
the problems to which it leads.

III

Grounded in the envisioning of language that is decisive for analytic
philosophy, the structuralist picture of language has articulated, for
many of the philosophers within the tradition, the specific relevance of
language for philosophy and so comprised the theoretical basis for a
wide variety of projects of analysis, clarification, description, and
explanation. And even among those philosophers who have not accepted all
of its claims or made its influence explicit, the structuralist picture
has played a decisive role throughout the twentieth century in thematic
and methodological conversations about language and its relevance to the
methods of philosophy. But the structuralist picture of language
is*constitutively unstable* and even actively*self-undermining* in a
historically significant way. Its instability, I shall argue, repeatedly
troubles the positive theoretical ambitions of the projects of the
analytic tradition that have depended on it. The particular historical
and conceptual dynamic to which this instability leads, moreover, has
repeatedly determined the inquiry of twentieth-century philosophy about
language and philosophy’s access to it, playing a key role in generating
many of the specific developments of theory and practice that the
tradition has witnessed.

The instability that repeatedly troubles the structuralist picture
arises directly from its own essential commitments. Recall, in
particular, the second commitment of the structuralist picture sketched
above. This commitment requires that ordinary linguistic use be
describable in terms of a body of*rules* or*regularities* conceived as
determining or constraining it, and furthermore requires that these
rules or regularities be intelligible and describable. It was the hope
of partially or fully describing them, indeed, that most directly
supported the original project of logical analysis undertaken by
Russell, Carnap, Schlick and others, and this hope has continued to play
a decisive role in the analytic tradition even after the empiricist and
positivist commitments of these particular philosophers were widely
repudiated. But the constitutive instability that troubles the
structuralist picture is apparent as soon as ask how such a description
of the rules and regularities underlying language is*itself* possible.

The question of the possibility of articulating the rules or
regularities definitive of the normal or correct use of language is
clearly an essential one for the structuralist picture and all the
methodologies of analysis, clarification, and reflection it supports. If
language is to be conceived as a total system governed by expressible
rules or regularities, it is essential, in particular, to know how these
rules or regularities are to be conceived as actually*operating* to
determine or constrain linguistic practice. Why should we think
of*these* rules rather than others as the correct ones? What shall we
say to someone who, willfully or ignorantly, refuses to follow them?
Even once we have determined the underlying rules, what verifies the
legitimacy of our critical application of them to pass judgment on
ordinary locutions? How shall we justify our uncritical acceptance of
them in everyday practice, and how account for our learning them in
childhood? And what is it that allows the rules or regularities to
confer*meaning* or*meaningfulness* upon the (otherwise bare and
“lifeless”) signs whose use they constrain?

Such questions are often dissimulated,*within* structuralist projects,
by means of a negative analysis of the meaningfulness of their*own*
constitutive terms; but they are bound to appear decisive whenever
structuralism itself is articulated or defended. Thus structuralism,
having presented the constitutive rules and regularities as the
essential determinants of the system of language, comes to demand an
account of the basis of their existence and the force of their
legitimate application. But the demand to give such an account faces the
structuralist theorist with an exceedingly general and apparently
irresolvable dilemma. The dilemma can be simply stated: does the basis
for the existence and legitimacy of the rules and regularities
constitutive of the system of language lie*inside* or*outside* this
system itself? A natural and recurrent response, when faced with the
demand to account for the existence and legitimacy of the rules and
regularities constitutive of language, is to posit their basis in some
grounding item or phenomenon*outside* language itself. For instance,
their basis may be located in the intentionality of consciousness, or
the ostensive demonstration of some object or image that is seen as
determining the*correct use* of the word that is demonstrated along with
it. Such an item, if located outside the system of signs itself, must be
(in respect to its ability to determine meaning) ineffable or
indescribable, lying as it does*outside* the range of application of the
conditions of meaningfulness it explains. But if the original basis for
the existence and legitimacy of the constitutive structure of language
is ineffable, it cannot after all do the explanatory work that was
required of it. If the description of the total structure of language
depends on the invocation of a mute, ineffable presence that, itself,
cannot be described, then the justificatory question about the basis of
this structure and the ultimate source of the meaning of signs must
finally go unanswered.

If, on the other hand, the basis for the system of language*is*
positively described as existing within the system itself, the
description invites the question of its*own* meaningfulness and
application. The description of the basis of the existence and force of
linguistic rules thus leads to a repetition, rather than a solution, of
the question it was supposed to answer. Thus the theoretical proposition
and application of structuralism, which invites, almost as soon as it is
formulated, the question of its basis, cannot comfortably locate this
basis either*outside* or*inside* the total economy of language. Its
descriptions of language and applications of these descriptions to its
analysis thereby experience an ongoing and unstable oscillation, whereby
the sought principle and source of linguistic meaning is repeatedly
located outside the total system of language, only to be brought again
within it.

Wittgenstein’s gloss on Frege’s reaction to formalism illustrates this
oscillation particularly clearly. Although the views of the formalist
philosophers to whom Frege reacted were explicitly restricted to the
philosophy of mathematics, Frege perceived within these views the key
commitments of the structuralist picture of language. Conceiving of
mathematics as a formal, abstract system of logical rules for the
manipulation of symbols, the formalists hoped, all of mathematics could
be described as a calculus of signs that were themselves devoid of any
intrinsic meaning. But this structuralist picture of mathematics invited
the recoil evident in Frege’s reaction. Rejecting the claim that meaning
can be completely explained by the system of language itself, the recoil
seeks to identify the basis of meaning, instead, with something*outside*
this total system. As Wittgenstein notes, it is characteristic of this
recoil to cite, as essential for meaning, something beyond the material
signs of language or their regular combination and recombination:
something, for instance, like the animating intentionality of an idea or
mental image, or the meaning-conferring force of an ideal sense. Frege
himself thought that his conception of*contents of thought* , existing
outside the subjectivity of any individual mind but also outside the
total economy of language, could provide the needed basis. But as
Wittgenstein says, the introduction of any such item,*within* the
economy of language, as the principle of meaning, amounts always only to
the introduction of another sign, comprehensible (if at all) simply as
another element of the generality of language:

If the meaning of the sign (roughly, that which is of importance about
the sign) is an image built up in our minds when we see or hear the
sign, then first let us adopt the method … of replacing this mental
image by some outward object seen, e.g. a painted or modeled image. Then
why should the written sign plus this painted image be alive if the
written sign alone was dead? - In fact, as soon as you think of
replacing the mental image by, say, a painted one, and as soon as the
image thereby loses its occult character, it ceases to seem to impart
any life to the sentence at all. (It was in fact just the occult
character of the mental process which you needed for your purposes.)

As a part of the system of language, one may say, the sentence has life.
But one is tempted to imagine that which gives the sentence life as
something in an occult sphere, accompanying the sentence. But whatever
accompanied it would for us just be another sign.[^38]

Insofar as we can understand the sought basis of meaning as such at all,
it will be by understanding its effects on the use of signs; insofar as
we cannot so understand it, it is simply a further mystification. But to
understand the effect of an item or object on the use of signs is
already to inscribe it within a total picture of the use of signs. The
attempt to satisfy the protest against the totality of the structuralist
picture of language ends by inscribing the basis of meaning, initially
located outside the picture, within this picture itself, producing no
ultimate satisfaction but only a repetition, on other grounds, of the
same underlying complaint.[^39]

The paradoxicality of this theoretical situation is exceedingly general.
It arises almost inevitably, in fact, as soon as serious reflection
about the nature and limits of language begins. Priest (2003) has
recently documented the arising of paradox in a variety of philosophical
projects, both inside and outside the analytic tradition, that grapple
with questions about the limits of thought or language. As he argues, it
results whenever two natural theoretical requirements are fulfilled. The
first requirement is*closure* : that it be possible to refer to or
generalize over the totality of elements of a given kind (e.g.
everything sayable, thinkable, etc.). The second is what Priest
calls*transcendence* : that there be a regular operation which, given
such a totality, generates an element that is outside it.[^40] The
satisfaction of these two elements, as Priest argues, leads a general
and pervasive form of paradox. For given the closure of the totality of
language (or thought), we can then use the transcendence operation to
generate a new element that is*outside* this totality. But the new
element is itself sayable or describable - it must be, if we can refer
to it at all - so it is also*within* the totality of the sayable (or
thinkable). This generates an inconsistency at the limits of thought and
language that Priest describes as informing the traditional projects of
philosophers ranging from Aristotle and Anselm to Kant and Hegel. In its
specifically linguistic form, however, the paradoxical dynamic of
inclusion and exclusion at the limits of thought is endemic to any
systematic attempt to theorize language as a total structure. This
attempt in itself produces*closure* in articulating a conception of the
totality of the meaningful or sayable; and any articulation of the basis
of the rules or principles that constrain meaning amounts
to*transcendence* . The result is the constitutive instability that
Wittgenstein locates in Frege’s reaction to the formalists, and that
recurs in various forms throughout the history of the tradition,
whenever the supposed basis for the determinate applicability of the
rules and regularities of language to specific instances of linguistic
use is itself described.

The effects of this dialectic of appropriation and expropriation are
perspicuously discernible in the longstanding analytic debate about the
role of various forms of “givenness.” Whereas appeals to the “given
contents of experience” or to the givenness of facts were experienced as
relatively unproblematic in the positivist and empiricist projects of
the 19th century (witness, for instance, Mach’s positivist analysis of
the facts of science as uniformly grounded in such givenness), analytic
philosophers began to question them, early in the tradition, on the
basis of their own understanding of language as a structure of signs.
The critique particularly singled out for criticism claims of
the*ineffability* of the given, claims which seemed to place it beyond
the total structure of language. One of the first versions of this
interrogation was Neurath’s physicalist criticism of Schlick’s
conception of protocol sentences as grounded in the “ineffable” fact of
our experiential relationship to the world. Given Neurath’s
structuralist understanding of language, the specter of such an
ineffable grounding of empirical content from outside the totality of
language could only appear to be the last remnant of a metaphysical
picture of meaning which a thoroughgoing physicalism about language
would successfully repudiate. From Neurath’s program, widely perceived
as successful even if unsupported by any decisive triumph of his
arguments over Schlick’s, grew (largely through Quine’s adherence to it)
the subsequent forms of physicalism that analytic philosophy inherits as
“naturalism” today.[^41]

In this particular debate as well as subsequently within the tradition,
“givenness” in a broad sense has figured not only as the ineffable
content or character of experience but also as the (putative) semantic
privilege of first-person or indexical utterances or the “original
intentionality” or meaning that is supposed by some philosophers to
characterize mental states that underlie meaningful language.[^42] Its
most pervasive and obvious form in the contemporary dialectic of
analytic philosophy is probably the invocation of “qualia,” supposed
facts or properties of the immediate, ineffable first-person quality of
experience. But its problems are closely related, also, to those of the
role of ostensive demonstration in (what is sometimes supposed to be)
the fixation and regulation of linguistic meaning.[^43] Starting with
Neurath, analytic philosophers have regularly criticized appeals to the
“given” on the basis of structuralist considerations about language;
just as regularly, its invocation in one form or another has served,
within the tradition, as an inarticulate protest against the totality of
those considerations.[^44] Where structuralist methods would totalize
our understanding of language as that of a regular structure of signs,
adherents of the “given” in its various forms protest the possibility of
this totality by claiming to introduce facts, events, or objects that
both exceed the grasp of this totality of signs and are purported to
account for the basis of their meaning.

By explicating the general form of the paradox of inclusion and
exclusion that arises naturally from the key commitments of the
structuralist model, Priest’s framework also reveals the deep formal
similarity between this paradox and some of the most significant formal
results of the analytic tradition, most notably Russell’s paradox and
Gödel’s incompleteness theorem. Each of these results historically
marked the failure of a strongly formal and reductionist program of
logical analysis and structural description, showing respectively that
Frege’s axiomatization of set theory and the logicist program of
reduction of mathematics to a language like that of Russell and
Whitehead’s*Principia Mathematica* could not succeed. Although Russell’s
paradox and Gödel’s proof are both essentially negative results,
demonstrating the impossibility of carrying out projects that were once
thought definitive of the program of logical and linguistic analysis, we
can nevertheless learn from them about the internal dynamics,
development, and implications of structuralist programs of analysis and
explanation in general. In this way, the rigorous formal attempt to
account for mathematics as a logically founded structure suggests, by
its own failure, the possibility of a more critical reflection on the
existence of language and our ordinary and philosophical access to
it.[^45]

In describing the structuralist picture as self-undermining in this way,
I am not claiming that its commitments are individually*false* or even,
in any straightforward way, individually or jointly*incoherent* .
Indeed, the picture is almost inevitable, as soon as systematic
reflection on the basis of linguistic meaning begins; and this
reflection has begun as soon as ordinary language has the ability to
refer to itself and thus take up, however implicitly or vaguely, the
question of the meaning of its words. The tendency of the picture, in
its more complete formulations, to undermine itself demonstrates, as I
shall argue, an underlying and genuine instability in ordinary language
itself, one that inhabits this language wherever and whenever, in the
varied occasions and circumstances of life, the meaning of terms or
expressions is at issue. The aim of the present analysis is therefore
not to suggest any alternative theoretical picture of language or to
suggest that we somehow drop the structuralist picture from our everyday
use of, and reasoning about, language. It is, rather, to document the
effects of its detailed theoretical pursuit on the texts and projects of
analytic philosophy, and say something about the critical significance
of these texts for the question of our relationship to the language we
speak.[^46]

IV

The reading of the analytic tradition that I carry out here draws
centrally on Wittgenstein’s lifelong inquiry into the nature of language
and its implications for human life. One paradigm for it, in fact, is
the project of philosophically based clarification of language that
Wittgenstein articulates in the*Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus* .[^47]
For decades, interpreters took the*Tractatus* ’ description of the
principles of “logical form” underlying the structure of language and
the world to contribute to a structuralist project of*line-drawing* ,
closely akin to the logical positivists’ attempt to purge language of
metaphysics by clarifying the boundaries of factual language. Such
demarcation projects do, indeed, in general depend on the structuralist
picture, relying as they do on a general specification of the rules
governing meaningful language to produce both a detailed understanding
of its structure and a guide to the limits of its legitimate employment.
But the claim that the*Tractatus* is involved in such a project sits
poorly with one its own most pervasive theoretical claims, the claim
that logical form*cannot* be stated or described, but only “shown”
through an ongoing philosophical*activity* of clarification:

4.121 Propositions cannot represent logical form: it is mirrored in
them.

What finds its reflection in language, language cannot represent.

What expresses*itself* in language,*we* cannot express by means of
language.

Propositions*show* the logical form of reality.

They display it.

It follows from the*Tractatus* ’ own internal picture of language,
indeed, that any linguistic expressions that would aim to articulate
bounds of sense by specifying the rules of logical form that determine
them would, themselves, be nonsense. In the penultimate proposition of
the*Tractatus* , Wittgenstein famously intimates that a kind of insight
can result from the transcendence of these propositions, from
our*recognition* of them as nonsense. The claim that we ought to take
this intimation completely seriously, indeed that the theoretical
propositions of the*Tractatus* are genuinely and completely nonsense, is
the guiding principle of a line of interpretation of the*Tractatus* --
the so-called “resolute” interpretation - that has recently been
formulated and gained some popularity.[^48] On the resolute
interpretation, the aim of the*Tractatus* overall is edifying or
elucidatory rather than theoretical. The point of its apparently
theoretical propositions is simply to demonstrate their own
meaninglessness, thus producing a deflationary or enlightening effect on
the reader who might formerly have taken them - or propositions like
them - seriously as descriptions.

Analysis, as it has been understood in the tradition since Russell, aims
to*reveal* logical form, to show the true or underlying structure of
linguistic utterances over against the superficial forms of ordinary or
everyday language. Such analysis would culminate in showing the
categorical, inferential, and semantic structure of language overall,
exhibiting the complete set of rules of significance and practice that
govern meaning and inference. But the “resolute” interpretation of
the*Tractatus* suggests a very different - almost opposite -
understanding of the results of analysis. For on the interpretation,
analysis shows not only the structure of language itself but also
the*meaninglessness* of any linguistic expression that would attempt to
articulate that structure, any expression that would articulate a
logical or grammatical rule capable of demarcating meaningfulness from
meaninglessness. If this is right, the attempt to describe the “logical
form of language” undermines itself in the very moment of its
expression. Along with it goes the possibility of forming a stable
picture of language as a whole as a rule-bound unity, and all the
explanatory or normative force that that picture might have been thought
to have. Since the articulation of any formal principle of structural
meaning undermines itself, the philosophical attempt to*enforce* the
boundaries of meaning by distinguishing between “meaningful” and
“meaningless” propositions also collapses under its own weight.*All*
propositions are, as such, meaningful; and the activity of philosophical
clarification works only within the medium of ordinary language and can
no longer presuppose any standard of sense drawn from outside it.[^49]
In this way, the actual incoherence of the structuralist picture of
language as a whole emerges as the most pragmatically significant result
of the theoretical practice that had sought to elucidate it.[^50]

V

From the beginning of the career of the structuralist picture within
analytic projects, descriptions of analysis often combined a guiding
commitment to its*methods* with a thematic*disavowal* of the problematic
of the basis of meaning to which they actually responded. In 1934, for
instance, Carnap described the project of analysis as requiring the
elucidation of a “logical syntax” that would display the logical
structure of language, without, however, implying anything about
“meaning” itself:

By the “logical syntax” (or also briefly “syntax”) of a language we
shall understand the system of the formal (i.e., not referring to
meaning) rules of that language, as well as to the consequences of these
rules. Therein we deal first with the formative rules (*Formregeln* ),
which decree how from the symbols (e.g., words) of the language
propositions can be built up, secondly with the transformation rules
(*Unformungsregeln* ), which decree how from given propositions new ones
can be derived . The formation and transformation of propositions
resembles chess: like chess figures words are here combined and
manipulated according to definite rules. But thereby we do not say that
language is nothing but a game of figures; it is not denied that words
and propositions have a meaning; one merely averts methodically from
meaning. One may express it also thus: language is treated as a
calculus. (pp. 9-10)[^51]

Thus Carnap can say that language is to be treated*as* a calculus,
without making any claims about its actually*being* such a calculus
(such a claim he would, indeed, have deemed metaphysical) or about the
actual basis of the bearing of its rules on the life of its use.
Starting in the late 1920s, indeed, he would treat this bearing itself
as a matter of*convention* , leaving it, in accord with his “principle
of tolerance” up to language users to stipulate whatever conventions of
use suited them in the varied projects of their lives.

This tendency to*practice* structuralism methodologically while
disavowing the truth or meaningfulness of its explicit commitments is in
fact a recurrent gesture of twentieth-century analytic philosophy. It
plays a role, not only in Carnap’s definitive project, but in a wide
variety of projects that judge the meaningfulness or possibility of
various (philosophical or non-philosophical) claims, even (and
especially) while disavowing the inclination to explain or account
theoretically for the possibility of meaning itself. Some contemporary
projects, for instance, even while purporting to establish strongly
revisionist consequences with respect to ordinary usage, nevertheless
continue to disavow any particular interest in the analysis of
meaning.[^52] Others present their philosophical task simply as
consisting in the schematization or “systematization” of pre-existing
“intuitions.” In both cases, structuralist considerations of the
systematic meaningfulness of terms continue to play a central
methodological role, even though they are no longer grounded in
an*explicit* picture of the structural basis of meaning.

In any case, Carnap’s statement invokes a faith in the separability of
doctrine and method that the subsequent dialectic of the analytic
tradition would effectively and repeatedly call into question. The
question of the relevance of the life of language’s practice to its
structuralist analysis, which the young Quine was the first to pose in
relation to Carnap’s own project, challenges the methods of
structuralism to demonstrate their utility to our understanding of the
ways language is actually employed, of the desires it serves and the
forms of intelligibility it permits. Structuralism, even when pursued
“purely methodologically,” pre-determines the nature of language as that
of a regular structure of signs, and so can only subsequently present
this relevance as their indifferently specified “use,” arbitrarily or
conventionally determined by stipulation or decision. Against this, the
historical dialectic of structuralism and those who have contested it
evinces the actual and pervasive ambiguity of the relationship of
language to life, its inherent complexity and the failure of this
attempt at pre-determination.

The disavowal of the question of meaning evident in Carnap’s statement
of a purely methodological structuralism aims to eliminate the taint of
metaphysics which may still adhere to the explicit statement of
structuralism’s commitments. But rather than eliminating the fundamental
instability of these commitments, it inscribes it in the dialectic
between the adherents of the structuralist project (both in its thematic
and “methodological” forms) and those who contest its specific versions.
The history of the successes and failures of the projects that have
aimed to understand language, over the course of the twentieth century,
demonstrates the ongoing effects of this dialectic. In it, those who
would contest the totality of structuralism’s commitments repeatedly
point to their inadequacy in accounting for specific phenomena of the
ordinary life of meaning. Structuralists subsequently respond by echoing
Carnap’s gesture, disavowing the need to account for meaning, along with
the theoretical meaningfulness of these commitments themselves. Such is
the dialectic of structuralism and its inarticulate contestation in
which much of the twentieth-century attempt to comprehend language has
remained confined. The historical recounting that interrogates its
underlying motivations aims to bring the sources of the dialectic to
light and thereby to show their regular effect on our understanding of
the meaning of language.

VI

The analytic tradition’s sustained inquiry into language and linguistic
meaning has often presupposed and promulgated the structuralist picture
that treats language as a total structure of signs. But with and beyond
the formulation and articulation of this picture, the methods and
results that have articulated its constitutive instabilities and
paradoxes comprise*another* legacy of the analytic tradition, a
significant*critical* legacy of thinking about language in relation to
everyday life that may represent one of the tradition’s most important
outcomes for the philosophical future. Like the results that marked the
failure of Frege’s axiomatization of set theory and of the logicist
program, the critical results of the tradition’s sustained consideration
of the structuralist picture of language may at first seem to be wholly
negative in character, demonstrating simply the failure of structuralism
to account adequately for the ordinary phenomena of linguistic meaning.
But like the legacy of an earlier age of critical thought in relation to
the conceptions of reason it interrogated, the results that articulate
the constitutive inadequacies of the structuralist picture bear
consequences far beyond their tendency to repudiate the specific
theoretical pictures to which they react. Just as Kant’s critical
interpretation of the constitutive inadequacies of reason’s
self-understanding did at an earlier time, the reading that traces the
inherent tensions of the structuralist picture in the history of the
analytic tradition exhibits the broader ethical, social, and practical
consequences of linguistic reason’s ongoing dialogue with itself.

The sustained analytic critique of our relationship to the language that
we speak operates primarily by interrogating the categories that
articulate a pervasive and general conception of the nature of
linguistic meaning, as it is assumed to determine the acts and
institutions of everyday life. When Frege conceived of the possibility
of using a regular, symbolic language to clarify the underlying logic of
thought, he took it for granted that only the rules of such a language
could explain the possible determinacy and objectivity of judgments
leading to truth. With respect to the ordinary language that Frege
himself wanted to criticize, the ultimate source of this objectivity of
judgments could only be the rule-governed identity of*senses* that,
distinct from either the symbols of ordinary language or their
referents, nevertheless ensured the possibility of uniform reference to
objects in the world. Such senses might indeed coordinate only poorly
with terms in everyday language, but one of Frege’s key insights was
that a logical notation could nevertheless make them perspicuous and
thereby exhibit their regular and essential role in determining the
actual reference of these terms.[^53]

The first projects of analytic philosophy, like Frege’s, pictured the
identity of senses as grounded in their status as universals or
idealities. Later projects conceived of it as grounded in the regularity
of social practices, including the regularity of evaluative and
reflective procedures for determining the “actual” sense of an
utterance. The difference between these types of projects in the way
they account for the unity and identity of sense is less important, in a
historical context, than their shared assumption of the existence of an
intelligible ground, accessible to philosophical analysis of language,
for ordinary judgments of sameness and difference of meaning. By
pursuing the implications of this assumption in the texts and projects
that have developed the implications of the structuralist picture most
clearly, we can bring into view, as well, the tradition’s sustained
internal critique of it.

The best model and example of this internal critique is the late
Wittgenstein’s consideration in the*Philosophical Investigations* of the
nature of rules and rule-following. As in the*Blue Book* ,
Wittgenstein’s discussion in the*Investigations* begins by taking up the
deep sources of the temptation to understand language as a structure of
signs:

81.All this, however, can only appear in the right light when one has
attained greater clarity about the concepts of understanding, meaning,
and thinking. For it will then also become clear what may lead us (and
did lead me) to think that if anyone utters a sentence and*means*
or*understands* it he is operating a calculus according to definite
rules. (*PI* 81).

Over the next 120 paragraphs, Wittgenstein considers the basis and
implications of this picture of language as a calculus and the
conception of rule-following that it depends on.[^54] Central to the
consideration is the description and diagnosis of a “mythology” of
meaning that attributes to a learner who develops a mathematical series
or uses a word or sentence correctly the knowledge or understanding of a
rule with the superlative capacity to determine an infinite number of
instances of application “in advance,” as if pre-inscribed in some item
or symbol that the learner grasps in understanding how to go on.
Wittgenstein’s method of consideration and diagnosis of this picture,
here, is a descendent of the one he used in the*Blue Book* ; by noting
that any item that manifests understanding of a rule is itself nothing
more than a symbolic expression, and so is open to*various*
interpretations, he exposes the conception of rule-following in terms of
superlative items as empty and inadequate to its explanatory purpose.
The conception, and the structuralist picture that it underlies, lead to
the famous “paradox” of*PI* 201:

This was our paradox: no course of action could be determined by a rule,
because any course of action can be made out to accord with the rule.
(*PI* 201)

Here as elsewhere in the analytic tradition, seeing the force of the
paradox requires interrogating the deeply-held assumptions of the
structuralist picture and the various conceptions of language and
practice that depend on it. Given the structuralist picture that
envisions the total description of the rules governing and constraining
the everyday practice of language, the paradox of*PI* 201 arises almost
inevitably and marks the picture’s inability to explain what it seeks
to. By interrogating the roots of this picture, Wittgenstein’s inquiry
also interrogates the deeply held assumptions that can make the
structuralist picture of language and its associated conception of rules
seem simply obvious and unquestionable wherever the nature of language
is in question.

Beginning in 1965, Saul Kripke put the Wittgensteinian “rule-following
paradox” in a clear and general form that has subsequently made his
version of it widely accessible and broadly discussed.[^55] As is
familiar, Kripke presents Wittgenstein’s considerations as introducing
or inventing a new and unprecedented form of “skepticism” about the
possibility of linguistic meaning. Its basis is the challenge that
Kripke’s “bizarre skeptic” poses to an ordinary interlocutor. The
challenge is to justify the claim that one’s present usage accords with
one’s past usage, for instance that my previous acts of computation
actually accorded with the normal function “plus” rather than the
bizarre function “quus.”[^56] The skeptic demonstrates that there is no
fact about this previous usage that*demands* that I meant “plus” rather
than “quus,” since any such fact can be interpreted as according
with*either* function. The conclusion that Kripke pictures the skeptic
as drawing is that:

There can be no such thing as meaning anything by any word. Each new
application we make is a leap in the dark; any present intention could
be interpreted so as to accord with anything we may choose to do.[^57]

To this paradox, Kripke responds with a “sceptical solution” that,
without denying the truth of the conclusion, seeks to provide grounds
for asserting that, even despite it, “our ordinary practice … is
justified because - contrary appearances notwithstanding - it need not
require the justification the sceptic has shown to be untenable.”[^58]
In particular, Kripke suggests that such a solution is to be found in
what he construes as Wittgenstein’s replacement of*truth conditions*
(conditions for the*truth* of propositions) with*assertibility*
conditions that simply record the circumstances under which we
are*allowed* to make various assertions within our ordinary “language
game.”[^59] The suggestion enables Kripke to offer what has been called
a “communal” or “communitarian” picture of rule-following as grounded in
the evaluative procedures of a community that subjects individual
responses to criticism on the basis of their agreement or disagreement
with the responses that are normal within “our shared form of
life.”[^60]

In the years since Kripke’s initial formulation of the paradox,
discussion of his work has grown to comprise a vast literature.[^61]
Much of this literature consists in attempts to evaluate or criticize
the legitimacy of Kripke’s “communitarian” solution to the
rule-following paradox, either as a reading of Wittgenstein or in its
own right, or attempts to replace it with one or another form of
alternative “solution.” My aim in this work in relation to the
Wittgensteinian “paradox” of PI 201 is, however, different from these.
Instead of trying to find a solution that*protects* “our ordinary
practices” from philosophical criticism based in reflection about
possibilities of meaning, I have attempted to trace some of the ways in
which these ordinary practices are in fact regularly interrogated,
questioned, criticized and problematized by the implications of the
“philosophical” problem that Wittgenstein (among others) discovers. For
the distinction between the ordinary life of our “practices” and the
forms of “philosophical” reflection on them is nowhere more complicated,
regularly contested, and open to criticism than in those manifold
occasions of (“ordinary” or “philosophical”) life where linguistic
meaning is itself open to question, and where Wittgenstein’s problem
about this possibility may therefore be seen to operate.

Paraphrasing Wittgenstein, Kripke at one point describes the temptation
to supplement “our ordinary concept of meaning” with additional
superlative facts that would answer to the skeptic’s worry as “based on
a*philosophical* misconstrual - albeit a natural one - of such ordinary
expressions as ‘he meant such-and-such’, ‘the steps are determined by
the formula’, and the like.” (pp. 65-66; my emphasis). A good way to
begin a renewed critical tracing of the complicated and various
implications of the analytic tradition’s sustained inquiry into language
for the ordinary life of “our practices” is to ask what is
“philosophical” and what is “natural” about this kind of response, what
(false?) forms of reflection or pictures of life motivate it or seem to
demand it, what specific instances of ordinary life are likely to prompt
it, and what determines that it is indeed a “misconstrual” of these
instances.[^62] Both Kripke’s project and many of those that explicitly
oppose him refer to “ordinary practices” only in order to find grounds
for insulating them from the threat that philosophical skepticism is
supposed to pose. In so doing, they predetermine the question of meaning
that is the site of Wittgenstein’s paradox as “philosophical” in a
pejorative sense. They thereby miss the significance of the regular
arising of this question in the course of the pursuit of our “ordinary
practices” themselves.

VII

By understanding the implications of Wittgenstein’s internal critique of
the structuralist picture of language in the*Investigations* , it is
possible to see some of the deep methodological parallels that exist
between the analytic tradition’s sustained consideration of language and
the neighboring traditions of phenomenology, critical theory, and
deconstruction. These traditions, like the analytic one, have centrally
taken up the nature of language and the question of its accessibility
and relevance to philosophy. As we shall see, the methodological course
of these traditions’ treatment of language, arising in part from
Saussure’s structuralist picture of language as a “system of
differences” without positive terms, Husserl’s logically articulated and
anti-psychologistic phenomenology of linguistic meaning, and the
neo-Kantian influences that shaped Heidegger’s inquiry into the meaning
of being, indeed significantly parallels the analytic tradition’s
inquiry into language through the whole course of its development.[^63]

For all of these “continental” projects the investigation of language in
relation to the human life that it articulates ultimately yields
far-ranging*critical* consequences for the metaphysics that underlies
both ordinary and philosophical conceptions of language. In 1927, near
the beginning of the introduction to his masterpiece,*Being and Time* ,
Martin Heidegger wrote of the need for philosophy to reconsider the
forms and concealments of the tradition it inherits:

If the question of being is to achieve clarity regarding its own
history, a loosening of the sclerotic tradition and a dissolving of the
concealments produced by it is necessary. We understand this task as the
destructuring of the traditional content of ancient ontology which is to
be carried out along the guidelines of the question of being …[^64]

This call for a de-structuring of the history of philosophy’s
consideration of the meaning of being has resonated throughout the
variety of phenomenological and hermeneutic projects that have grown
from it the course of the twentieth century. With respect to the legacy
of metaphysical thinking, indeed, the critical motivations underlying
this call were not far removed, either in form or content, from those
that philosophers like Carnap and Wittgenstein cited in relation to
their own critical projects.[^65] For these philosophers as for
Heidegger, taking up the tradition of metaphysics, whether approvingly
or critically, requires an inquiry into the*limits* of its structure and
the structural basis of its claims, an inquiry whose goal is not the
adumbration of theory but rather the attainment of*clarity* about the
implications of these claims.

When Heidegger wrote in 1927, he did not yet accord the question of the
structure of language itself any decisive priority in this project, or
in the methods that were to accomplish it. But the structuralist
tradition of Saussure, Levi-Strauss, and Benveniste meanwhile gave the
question of language, and the structuralist picture of it, a central
place in the pursuit of questions of meaning and significance in the
discourses of phenomenology and hermeneutics that had inherited
Heidegger’s project. In the 1966 article “Structure, Sign, and Play in
the Discourse of the Human Sciences,” Jacques Derrida brought these
legacies together in a far-reaching description of the problematic
dynamics of language and its structure.[^66] The classical and
historical discourses of the history of philosophy have always, Derrida
suggests, sought explanatory structures with which to account for
knowledge, truth, meaning or understanding; and in so doing, have
characteristically sought to ground these structures in an*item*
or*presence* (what Derrida calls the “center”) that is itself not a
member of the structure it grounds:

It would be easy enough to show that the concept of structure and even
the word “structure” itself are as old as the episteme - that is to say,
as old as Western science and Western philosophy - and that their roots
thrust deep into the soil of ordinary language, into whose deepest
recesses the episteme plunges in order to gather them up and to make
them part of itself in a metaphorical displacement. Nevertheless, up to
the event which I wish to mark out and define, structure - or rather the
structurality of structure - although it has always been at work, has
always been neutralized or reduced, and this by a process of giving it a
center or referring it to a point of presence, a fixed origin … As
center, it is the point at which the substitution or the transformation
of elements (which may of course be structures enclosed within a
structure) is forbidden … Thus it has always been thought that the
center which is by definition unique, constituted that very thing within
a structure which while governing the structure, escapes structurality.
This is why classical thought could say that the center is,
paradoxically,*within* the structure and*outside* it. The center is at
the center of the totality, and yet, since the center does not belong to
the totality (is not part of the totality), the totality*has its center
elsewhere* . The center is not the center. The concept of centered
structure - although it represents coherence itself, the condition of
the episteme as philosophy or science - is contradictorily coherent. And
as always, coherence in contradiction expresses the force of a
desire.[^67]

The desire that Derrida speaks of is the same one that Wittgenstein
finds at the basis of Frege’s criticism of the formalists. It arises, as
we have seen, wherever a structuralist account demands the basis of its
own structurality in an element or item external to its own order,
leading to the historical dynamic that has played itself out repeatedly,
as we shall see over the next several chapters, in the development of
the analytic tradition over the course of the twentieth century. As
Derrida explains, the tendency to produce this dynamics of
“contradictory coherence” is present wherever philosophy seeks to ground
the explanatory claims of its structures on an item of presence, basis,
or center that is itself conceived as ungrounded; and the project of
this grounding is none other than the history of metaphysics that
Heidegger interrogates. But because the language of the metaphysics that
Heidegger sought to de-structure is also deeply implanted in (indeed,
inseparable from) the language of the everyday, the integrity of its
structure attains a certain new level of self-consciousness when, in the
twentieth century, the problematic of its critical reading becomes
entwined with that of the structure of language overall:

The event I called a rupture, the disruption I alluded to at the
beginning of this paper, presumably would have come about when the
structurality of structure had begun to be thought, that is to say,
repeated, and this is why I said that this disruption was a repetition
in every sense of the word. Henceforth, it became necessary to think
both the law which somehow governed the desire for a center in the
constitution of structure, and the process of signification which orders
the displacements and substitutions for this law of central presence -
but a central presence which has never been itself, has always already
been exiled from itself into its own substitute. … This was the moment
when language invaded the universal problematic …[^68]

Those who today inherit the methods of analytic philosophy, with its
penchant for expository clarity, precisely defined problems, and
rigorously signaled argumentation, may at first be reluctant to take up
the pursuit of Derrida’s complicated deconstructive reading of the
history of metaphysics. But the dynamics of structure that the
deconstructive reading identifies in the history of metaphysics have
themselves played a decisive role in the origin and development of these
very methods. The envisioning of language in which many of the most
significant projects of the analytic tradition are rooted encounters the
problematic of grounding that Derrida describes as soon as it pictures
language as a total structure of signs. In manifold forms across the
decades of the tradition’s development, its theories and claims, results
and methods, have demonstrated the implications of this problematic for
our understanding and practice of the bearing of language on life.
Understanding them can help us not only to overcome the crippling legacy
of distrust that still exists between representatives of the analytic
and continental traditions but to comprehend the great significance of
the*shared* project of envisioning language that has, in deeply parallel
but seldom-appreciated movements of theory, analysis, interpretation,
and practice, linked them over the course of the twentieth century, and
continues to define their legacy for the philosophical future.[^69]
