I. EARLY ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY
============================

2. Frege on the Context Principle and Psychologism
==================================================

The “context principle” articulated by Gottlob Frege, holding that a
word has significance only in the context of the sentences in which it
appears, has played a determinative role in the projects of analytic
philosophy’s investigation of language and sense. It was in
the*Grundlagen der Arithmetik* of 1884 that Gottlob Frege first
formulated it; there, he describes it as crucial to his groundbreaking
analysis of the logical articulation of the contents of thought. Such
contents, Frege thought, must be*objective* in the sense of being
independent of subjective mental states and acts of individual thinkers
or subjects of experience. It was particularly important to him,
therefore, that the context principle could be used to help demonstrate
the inadequacy of existing*psychologistic* theories of content that
accounted for it in terms of subjective states or events. In this
chapter, I shall examine this connection between the context principle
and Frege’s argument against psychologism in order to better understand
its significance for the most characteristic methods and results of the
analytic tradition as a whole. As is well known, the critique of
psychologism that Frege began would also prove decisive for the projects
of the philosophers that followed him in defining this tradition; for
the young Wittgenstein as well as for Carnap, for instance, it was
essential to the success of analysis that it adumbrate purely*logical*
relations owing nothing to psychological associations or connections.
Later on, as has also sometimes been noted, the context principle would
figure centrally within projects of analyzing or reflecting on the*use*
or*practice* of a language as a whole.

I

Frege twice asserts in the*Grundlagen* that observing the context
principle as a methodological guideline is practically necessary if we
are to avoid falling into a*psychologistic* theory of meaning or
content, according to which content is dependent on mental or
psychological states or events. Thus formulated, the principle tells us
that, rather than looking for the meaning of individual*words* in
isolation, we should begin by considering words only in the context of
the*sentences* in which they figure. The first suggestion of a
connection between it and antipsychologism comes near the beginning of
the*Grundlagen* , where Frege lays out the “fundamental principles” of
his investigation:

In this investigation I have adhered to the following fundamental
principles:

There must be a sharp separation of the psychological from the logical,
the subjective from the objective;

The meaning of a word must be asked for in the context of a proposition,
not in isolation;

The distinction between concept and object must be kept in mind.

To comply with the first, I have used the word ‘idea’ [‘Vorstellung’]
always in the psychological sense, and have distinguished ideas from
both concepts and objects. If the second principle is not observed, then
one is almost forced to take as the meaning of words mental images or
acts of an individual mind, and thereby to offend against the first as
well.[^70]

At this point, the suggestion of a connection between the observance of
the context principle and the avoidance of psychologism is only
programmatic. Frege does not say, here,*how* the two are connected,
or*why* we must think that seeking the meaning of words in isolation
will “almost” force us into subjectivist psychologism. Frege’s second
mention of the context principle in the*Grundlagen* provides more
detail. It comes in the course of his attempt to define the concept of
number, after he has already argued that numbers are independent,
self-standing objects, and that each judgment about a number contains an
assertion about a concept. Frege considers an objector who challenges
the mind-independence and objecthood of numbers on psychological
grounds. Such an objector may hold that the conception of numbers as
objects cannot be sustained, since we have no idea or image of many
numbers; numbers expressing very small or large quantities or
magnitudes, for instance, routinely outstrip our ability to provide
intuitive images in thought or imagination to represent them. Frege’s
response does not dispute the truth of the psychological claim, but
instead suggests the replacement of the psychologistic procedure with a
logical one:

We are quite often led by our thought beyond the imaginable, without
thereby losing the support for our inferences. Even if, as it seems to
be, it is impossible for us as human beings to think without ideas, it
may still be that their connection with thought is entirely inessential,
arbitrary and conventional.

That no idea can be formed of the content of a word is therefore no
reason for denying it any meaning or for excluding it from use. The
appearance to the contrary doubtless arises because we consider the
words in isolation and in asking for their meaning look only for an
idea. A word for which we lack a corresponding mental picture thus
appears to have no content. But one must always keep in mind a complete
proposition. Only in a proposition do the words really have a meaning.
The mental pictures that may pass before us need not correspond to the
logical components of the judgment. It is enough if the proposition as a
whole has a sense; its parts thereby also obtain their content.[^71]

Our quantitative judgments about great distances, or about the size of
objects, like the Earth, that are vastly larger or smaller than us, do
not rest on our ability to form a mental image of anything accurately
representative of the magnitudes involved. But this does not deprive our
judgments of warrant or show that they do not concern genuine objects.
Indeed, Frege avers, our temptation to think that these judgments*must*
be contentless arises from our temptation to identify the meanings of
their constituent terms with the intuitive images or mental pictures
that occur to us as we hear or consider them in succession. When,
because of the inherent limitations of our intuitive faculties, we
cannot supply a mental image for a particular term, for instance “the
size of the Earth,” we may then be tempted to conclude that the term has
no meaning. But we can, after all, make judgments about magnitudes even
when they far exceed our intuitive grasp; and although we attach no
intuitive content to the idea of there being 0 of any particular type of
object, nevertheless our quantitative judgments involving 0 are
unimpaired.

The possibility of making such judgments meaningfully, Frege suggests,
itself suffices to defend the objecthood of numbers against the
envisaged objection. That they can be made at all shows that these
judgments concern entities that do not depend on our particular
intuitive abilities. Frege’s defense of the objecthood of numbers
therefore rests, in this case, on a notion of content according to which
judgments may have particular, well-defined contents even if some or all
of their key terms cannot be supplied with representative*intuitive*
images. Given this notion of content, it will be possible to construe
the possibility of content-bearing judgments as demonstrating the
existence of the objects to which their terms refer. But this conclusion
will itself, Frege claims, depend on our considering the contents of
sentences as logically prior to the meanings of their individual terms.
Beginning with sentence-level contents, we are to identify their real
“logical components,” components which may not correspond to anything
identifiable as the meanings of the sentence’s constituent words. It
will be these true components of the judgment, rather than the mental
accompaniments of individual words, that determine the actual
existential commitments of the judgment as a whole.

Two sections later, Frege further specifies the sort of judgments we
should begin with in order to determine the actual logical content and
existential commitments of judgments involving numbers:

How, then, is a number to be given to us, if we cannot have any idea or
intuition of it? Only in the context of a proposition do words mean
something. It will therefore depend on defining the sense of a
proposition in which a number word occurs. As it stands, this still
leaves much undetermined. But we have already established that number
words are to be understood as standing for independent objects. This
gives us a class of propositions that must have a sense - propositions
that express recognition [of a number as the same again]. If the
symbol*a* is to designate an object for us, then we must have a
criterion that decides in all cases whether*b* is the same as*a* , even
if it is not always in our power to apply this criterion. In our case we
must define the sense of the proposition

‘The number that belongs to the concept*F* is the same as the number
that belongs to the concept*G* ”;

that is, we must represent the content of this proposition in another
way, without using the expression

‘the Number that belongs to the concept*F* .’

In doing so, we shall be giving a general criterion for the equality of
numbers. When we have thus acquired a means of grasping a definite
number and recognizing it as the same again, we can give it a number
word as its proper name.[^72]

Having already argued that numbers are objects and that judgments about
number are judgments about concepts, Frege realizes that judgments of
the equinumerosity of concepts are at the same time judgments that
“express recognition” of particular numbers, that identify a number as
the same again in a new case. Given this, the possibility of judgments
of equinumerosity suffices to defend the objecthood of numbers against
any objection based on the possible failure of intuition to provide
images corresponding to them. The possibility of judging that the number
belonging to one concept is the same as the number belonging to another
provides what an intuitive image cannot: the identification of a
particular number as an object, self-identical and re-identifiable in
ever-new situations in our judgments of equinumerosity.

Frege’s general reason for requiring a distinctive kind of logically
defined content that arises primarily at the level of sentences, then,
seems clear. Only by recognizing such a level of content, he claims,
will it be possible to underwrite the objectivity of judgment and the
existence and mind-independence of its objects. This recognition
moreover depends on our according priority in the practice of logical
analysis to sentence-level contents. For considering words in isolation
will debar us from recognizing their real logical contents and force us
to construe their contents as consisting in their idiosyncratic
psychological accompaniments. The application of the context principle
in the*Grundlagen* thus requires that contents on the sentential level
play a role not only in determining the meaning or content of sentences,
but also the possibility of their terms making objective reference.[^73]
For Frege’s argument moves, as we have seen, from the recognition of the
significance of judgments of equinumerosity to the ontological
conclusion that number-terms refer to self-standing, independent
objects. The general ontological conclusion would not follow if
determinations of the meaning of sentences did not also provide general
conclusions about the references of the terms which make them up.[^74]
The sort of content that shows up in the analytic practice that Frege
suggests will be*logical* content, moreover, in that it is at least
partly determined by inferential and deductive relationships between
sentences in the language. Only this sort of content, because of its
determination by logical relations, rather than intuitive or
psychological ones, can legitimately participate in logically relevant
judgments about the identity of referents. Accordingly, only this sort
of content is qualified to ground the*possibility* of objective
reference.

One might wonder, however, what it is about the role of this kind of
content in judgment that entitles it to enjoy this special claim to
ground objective reference. Part of the answer lies in Frege’s
conception of intuition not only as subjective but also as
essentially*private* . In “The Thought,” for instance, he argues that
intuitive images are not only subjective but also, because of the
impossibility of*knowing* the contents of another’s mind, strictly
private and incommunicable.[^75] If this is right, then reference to an
intuitive image by itself will clearly be of no use in an argument
attempting to establish the objectivity of what it represents. But even
if this is the case, we may still wonder why*logical* content, simply
because it is related to and determined by logical relations of
deduction and inference among sentences, should fare any better. For one
thing, it is not at all obvious why intuitive contents, even if
themselves private, could not at least provide a*basis* for the public,
potentially objective judgments of equinumerosity to which Frege
appeals. When Frege wrote, he was well aware that empiricists like Locke
and Hume had provided detailed theories of abstraction to account for
the possibility of meaningful judgments about mathematics and numbers
even when these judgments exceed direct, intuitive support. And Frege’s
conversant, Husserl, would soon provide a complex anti-psychologistic
theory of abstraction that portrayed particular acts of numerical
judgment as*grounded* in individual intuitive acts.[^76] On any of these
theories, the judgments that Frege appeals to as lacking intuitive
support, and so exemplifying an alternative sense of content that does
not rely on intuition, are construed instead as arising from concrete,
intuitive contents by way of a process of abstraction. If these theories
of abstraction are at all plausible, Frege’s examples of judgments
lacking in immediate intuitive support are not decisive. Moreover, it is
difficult to see how the context principle could make the important
difference that Frege says it does, if what is at issue is simply
the*privacy* of intuitive contents. For it is not initially clear why
the contents of sentences should be any*less* dependent on intuition
than are the contents of words, taken alone; and if they are just as
dependent on intuition, they must, on Frege’s view, be just as private,
and hence just as incapable of grounding objective reference.
Alternatively, if there is a distinctive, logically robust kind of
content in virtue of which judgments are both public and potentially
objective, it is far from obvious why single words, even “considered in
isolation,” could not have content in this logically robust sense as
well.

II

What is needed to make Frege’s claims for the importance of the context
principle intelligible is a notion of a kind of non-intuitive, logically
defined content defined primarily at the level of sentences rather than
words and capable of demonstrating the objectivity of the referents of
their terms. Such a notion of content can indeed be found, at least
implicitly, in Frege’s conception of logical analysis. It results from
his view of the relationship of the comprehension of a sentence to the
determination of its*truth-conditions* . Whatever kind of meaning an
individual word might be thought to have, individual words do not
possess truth-conditions of their own; the possibility of making a claim
that is true or false emerges only at the level of sentences. Frege will
consistently connect this feature of sentences - that they alone are apt
for truth or falsehood - to his conception of the content of sentences
as determined by their inferential relations. This notion of content
indeed provides an alternative to any intuitionist or psychologistic
account. As Dummett has argued, it also suggests that Frege’s doctrine
of thought is inseparably entwined with a general consideration of
the*use* or*practice* of a language, a consideration that Frege himself
did not explicitly undertake, but can be seen to be all but explicit in
his account.

Throughout his career, Frege understood “thoughts” as, definitively,
contents*capable* of truth or falsity. As early as the*Begriffsschrift*
he gave this conception a prominent role in his practice of logical
analysis. Here, he linked the logical content of a sentence with its
inferential role, understanding two sentences to express the same
thought if and only if they have the same set of inferential
consequences and antecedents.[^77] This*inferentialism* about content
provides substantial justification for extracting from Frege’s method of
logical analysis a conception of the role of sentences that accords them
a special status. For if logical contents are determined by inferential
roles, it will evidently only be sentences that can have logical
contents of this sort. For*only* sentences have their own, identifiable
roles in the process of inference.[^78] But f Frege’s appeal to the
context principle is to establish the anti-psychologistic conclusion, it
must draw a further nexus between the truth-aptness of a sentence-level
content and its ability to establish both the potential*objectivity* of
its claim and the*objecthood* of its referents. Following Dummett, we
can bring out this nexus, in a way sympathetic to Frege’s project of
analysis, by situating that project within a broader consideration of
linguistic*use* . In the context of this reflection, the special aptness
of sentence-level contents for truth or falsity is just one aspect of a
broader privilege of sentences in the*practice* of a language. We can
express this privilege by noting that a sentence is the smallest unit by
which a speaker can effect the linguistic*act* of asserting a judgment.
Thus Dummett reconstructs the basis of the context principle as the
recognition that any characterization of the senses and references of
individual words must be dependent upon a characterization of the
possible*uses* to which they may be put in sentences:

To assign a reference to a name or a set of names … could only have a
significance as a preparation for their use in sentences …. More
generally, the assignment of a sense to a word, whether a name or an
expression of any other logical type, only has significance in relation
to the subsequent occurrence of that word in sentences. A sentence is …
the smallest unit of language with which a linguistic act can be
accomplished, with which a ‘move can be made in the language-game’: so
you cannot do anything with a word - cannot effect any conventional
(linguistic) act by uttering it - save by uttering some sentence
containing that word …[^79]

As Dummett says, any ascription of content to individual words will be,
in general, unintelligible unless specified in terms of the difference
it makes to the acts that can be effected by the sentences in which they
figure. The intelligibility of the particular contents of particular
words thus rests on a prior appreciation of the particular semantic
tasks of claiming and asserting that they can contribute to
accomplishing. But because they can only accomplish these tasks when
combined with other words in sentences, our logical understanding of the
contents of individual words must apparently rest on a prior
appreciation of the contents of the sentences in which they can appear.

This way of reconstructing Frege’s views indeed provides a natural way
of understanding the basis of his claims for the objectivity of thought.
Throughout his career, as Dummett points out, Frege held as well that
successful linguistic*communication* of a thought requires that hearer
and speaker agree in attaching the same sense to a sentence. Of course
it is possible for this agreement, in particular cases, not to obtain.
But when it does not, the divergence in sense must, according to
Dummett, at least be objectively discoverable; it must be possible, in
other words, to find rational grounds for clarifying the sense of a
sentence that do not depend essentially on any fact of psychology or
inner mental processes.[^80] And, as Dummett also points out, Frege had
at least the outlines of a powerful and general account of what such
agreement on sense consists in. On the account, what speaker and hearer
agree on in agreeing on the sense of an assertoric sentence is
its*truth-conditions* . Understanding a sentence means knowing which
facts or circumstances will make it true and which will make it false,
and successful communication requires agreement in this understanding.
For this agreement, private items or accompaniments are irrelevant; all
that matters is that we associate with a sentence the same, objective
and factual, truth-conditions. Indeed, on Frege’s view as Dummett
reconstructs it, the special role of sentential-level contents in
underlying objective reference is naturally explained as a result of the
possibility of our coming to agree on the truth-conditions of sentences.
Objective reference is possible only insofar as it is possible to agree
on criteria for the judgment of identity of reference; and such
agreement is itself a matter of agreement on the truth-conditions of
sentences expressing the requisite judgments.

A significant effect of Dummett’s reading is to yield grounds for
resisting, in a way that coheres with the spirit of Frege’s thought if
not the letter of his commitments, his Platonistic claims about the
existence of a “third realm” of thoughts and the problematic metaphor of
the “grasping” of senses residing in it. For if Dummett is right, to
grasp the sense of a sentence is just to know its truth-conditions.[^81]
Such knowledge can reasonably be held to be wholly manifest in ordinary,
observable usage. In any case, we have no reason to suspect that it will
escape intersubjective verifiability in the way that private mental
events or intuitive images could. Even though Frege did not himself have
any developed account of the intersubjective practice of a language,
construing him, as Dummett does, as at least implicitly something like a
“use-theorist” of meaning thus allows us to endorse Frege’s claim for
the objectivity of thought without requiring that we concur with what
has often seemed the most problematic aspect of this claim, namely
commitment to a Platonic third realm. The potential objectivity of
contents of thought is itself explicable, on this line, as the direct
outcome intersubjective agreement on truth-conditions. And this
agreement is evident, and verifiable, in ordinary practices of assertion
and justification, of giving and asking for reasons for claims
entertained and evaluated.

III

If this account of Frege’s appeal to the context principle is correct,
its application in Frege’s method of analysis already inaugurates a
comprehensive inquiry into the systematic functioning of sentences in a
language as a whole. In Frege’s own case, as we have seen, this
commitment can also reasonably be taken to be the methodological basis
for the criticism of psychologism that Wittgenstein himself would later
take up and extend. Following Dummett, we may indeed take Frege’s
application of the context principle against psychologism as the first
significant application, within the analytic tradition, of reasoning
about the systematic logical structure of language to the question of
the nature of linguistic meaning and reference. Its most direct purpose,
as we have seen, is to guarantee the possibility of objective reference
by demonstrating its grounding in regular criteria for the
identification and re-identification of objects. Such criteria, Frege’s
line of thinking suggests, are perspicuous only in the context of
judgments of identity and non-identity. And the possibility of such
judgments depends on the existence of sentential senses that fix the
truth-conditions of the sentences whose senses they are.

Nevertheless, there are deep, essential, and determinative problems,
both of an internal and external kind, with the view that Dummett
attributes to Frege, and indeed with the pervasive and general
commitment it expresses. To begin with, there are good reasons to doubt
that Frege himself could actually have held anything like a “use-theory
of meaning” given his clear desire to resist, not only psychologistic,
but also historicist or socially based theories of meaning. As Green
(1999) has argued, Frege’s attempt to secure the objectivity of
judgments was explicitly directed as much against accounts that would
explain content in terms of shared*public* practices as those that would
explain it in terms of private mental facts or accompaniments. The point
of introducing the third realm was to secure a conception of the
contents of thoughts as independent of what*anybody* might actually
think, not simply as independent of particular individuals within a
larger community. Frege’s appeals to the objectivity of sense most
directly support his goal of establishing or securing the objectivity of
scientific investigation, a goal that theories of meaning in terms of
communal linguistic use, tied as they are to the vicissitudes of actual
social practice, have difficulty in satisfying. It may be the case,
indeed, that something like Frege’s Platonistic appeal to objectively
existing senses is necessary in order to satisfy this goal. We may
detect in this appeal the persistence of a mythology that Frege gives us
little independent reason to accept; we may even locate in its obscure
metaphor of “grasping” the undischarged remnant of the very psychologism
that Frege is concerned to dispute. But it may also be impossible to
accomplish Frege’s goal of securing the objectivity of sense without it.
In particular, it is not at all obvious that anything like
a*description* of intersubjective social practices gives us the ability
to do so.

Beyond this, it is not clear that the view that Dummett attributes to
Frege is coherent, even on its own terms. We can see this by reflecting
on what the context principle requires, according to Dummett, of the
relationship between the senses of sentences and the senses of words in
intersubjective practice. In the article “Nominalism” Dummett expresses
the context principle as embodying the claim that “When I know the sense
of all the sentences in which a word is used, then I know the sense of
that word…”[^82] Elsewhere, he construes Frege’s argument for the
objecthood of numbers as depending upon our having “provided a sense”
for each identity-statement involving numerical terms.[^83] On Dummett’s
view, then, the context principle asserts that the sense and reference
of each word in a sentence depends systematically on the senses of*all*
of the sentences in which that word can appear. Dummett furthermore
interprets the sense of a word as*rule* systematically dependent on
sentential senses, holding that:

…The sense of a word consists in a rule which, taken together with the
rules constitutive of the senses of the other words, determines the
condition for the truth of a sentence in which the word occurs. The
sense of a word thus consists - wholly consists - in something which has
a relation to the truth-value of sentences containing the word.[^84]

According to Dummett, then, the context principle implies in part that
fixing the senses of the range of sentences in which a word can appear
is at least sufficient (and perhaps necessary) to determine the sense of
the word. The sense of a word is itself a rule which, together with the
rules for other words, determines the truth-value of each of the
sentences in which it appears.

This helps to explain how, given the context principle, we can
nevertheless understand (viz., determine the truth-conditions of) new
sentences that we have not previously heard. On Dummett’s account, we do
so by comprehending the rules that govern the combination of individual
words to provide determinate sentential senses. But these rules
governing individual words are themselves first determined by
abstraction from the interrelations of the senses of the sentences in
which the words figure. Dummett recognizes that, construed as a theory
of understanding, this threatens to place an impossible demand upon the
competence shown by ordinary speakers. For it is evident that no
ordinary speaker can ever be construed as having explicitly
considered*all* (or even very many) of the infinite number of sentences
in which a particular word can appear.[^85] As Dummett realizes and
admits, this threatens to make a person’s understanding of a word
unverifiable in principle; for we can only test her understanding of a
finite number of sentences, whereas on the view her linguistic
competence with a word would have to consist in her capability of
grasping each of the infinite number of sentences in which it can occur.

The epistemological side of this objection can be answered by
construing our ordinary ability to understand new sentences as
manifestations of a cognitive*capacity* whose actual performance need
not exactly match its idealized, infinitary performance. We can, then,
take ordinary performances of understanding as good (though imperfect)
evidence for the requisite capacities. There might still be some
indeterminacy about exactly what these capacities are, or what further
performances they might underlie, but the indeterminacy will be no
greater than what is normally involved, in any case, in induction from a
finite set of examples.

If theorizing about language amounts to the formulation of empirical
theories of linguistic competence to systematize and explain actual
performance, we might well, therefore, take the objection in stride as a
necessary, though not fatal, limitation on our ability to systematize
the relevant capacities completely. But behind the epistemological
objection that the context principle, as Dummett applies it to the
social practice of a language, threatens to make our knowledge of the
sense of a word unverifiable in principle, there lurks a different,
non-epistemological line of objection that cuts much deeper. For
Dummett’s suggestion that Frege’s conception of sense be treated as
explicable in terms of socially inculcated*rules* for use,
understanding, or comprehension exposes this conception to the open
question of the*ground* and*force* of such rules. This is, at the same
time, the question of the possibility of describing “meaning as use” at
all; the question is whether there is an intelligible concept of “use”
at all by means of which we can indeed characterize*knowing the sense of
a term* as*knowing “how it is used.”* [^86] Here (to anticipate results
that would, admittedly, only be articulated much later), Wittgenstein’s
consideration of rule-following and the “paradox” of*PI* 201 come
directly to bear. On Dummett’s conception of Frege’s view, to determine
the sense of a word is to determine a rule that allows us, for any
sentence in which the word occurs, together with the rules that
determine the senses of the other words in the sentence, to determine
the truth-conditions of the sentence. Of course, the sentential contexts
in which any particular word may appear, and the combinations into which
it may enter, are infinite and widely varied. We might, with some
justice, therefore be reluctant to attempt to*specify* any such rules,
at least before we are in a position to specify*all* of the rules for
the language as a whole. Wittgenstein’s point, however, is that (even if
we have worked it out as part of a total specification of all the rules
for the language) any such specification is*itself* a symbolic
expression, and as such is open to various possible interpretations in
practice. That is, if understanding the sense of a word means
comprehending the rule that connects it to the truth-conditions of the
sentences in which it occurs, then (as Wittgenstein argues in a more
general context) any expression of such a rule can*also* be taken to
connect the same word, in some contexts, to*different* truth-conditions.

The objection, put this way, is not adequately met simply by drawing a
distinction between competence and performance in the practice of a
language overall.[^87] For even if we draw such a distinction,
distinguishing linguistic capacities or dispositions from the
performances that issue from them, the force of Wittgenstein’s paradox
is that we have no ability even to*identify* these capacities, even
where we take them to exist.[^88] We might speak ordinarily, for
instance, of a capability to use the word “red,” and take someone’s
finite set of (ordinary and non-deviant) occurant sentential
performances with the word to license our ascription to them of this
capability. The person can, in all the cases we have yet observed,
associate with sentences involving the word “red” the “right”
truth-conditions, in any case the ones that we ourselves expect to be
associated with those sentences. But according to the context principle,
as Dummett reconstructs it, we can have no understanding of what the
relevant capacity is - nor even any assurance that it is indeed a
capacity relating to the*same* sense that we take our own sentences
involving “red” to invoke - without knowing how it contributes to fixing
the senses, and truth-conditions, of an infinite number of sentences. It
follows that, prior to gaining knowledge of how a speaker would perform
in an infinite number of cases, we can have no legitimate basis even for
guessing that a speaker’s new performance with what appears to be a
familiar word will conform with her prior usage. Nor can we intelligibly
criticize a new performance as incorrect owing to its failure to comport
with the speaker’s or the community’s existing standard.

The Wittgensteinian paradox poses a problem for the very possibility of
a systematic understanding of a language in terms of the “rules for its
use.” This problem has, indeed, influenced and inflected many of the
various projects that have taken up Frege’s conception of sense along
the lines of something like Dummett’s interpretation. Since Tarski wrote
in the 1930s, it has been known that it is possible to gain access to
some portion of the systematic structure of truth and reference for a
language by stating and systematizing the truth-conditions of its
sentences. Donald Davidson, drawing on Quine’s project of “radical
translation,” was the first to envision the project of giving a
complete*theory of meaning* for a natural language.[^89] Such a theory
would, Davidson supposed, necessarily be an empirical one, grounded in
the observable behavior and reactions of the language’s speakers. It
would have as deductive*consequences* all of the (true) Tarski sentences
for the language, that is, all true sentences of the form:

“Snow is white” is true in English if and only if snow is white.[^90]

By capturing the totality of Tarski sentences for the language, the
envisaged theory of meaning would capture the systematic dependence of
sentential sense on truth-conditions. But it would derive the Tarski
sentences, Davidson supposed, from some finite number of recursive
principles specifying the dependence of the senses of sentences on the
words from which they are composed. The total corpus of such rules,
recursively specified, would, Davidson supposed, embody what is involved
in knowing a language and what is accordingly attributed to an ordinary
speaker of it.[^91] Within the envisaged theory of meaning, sentential
senses would thereby be regularly connected to the determination of
truth conditions and the senses of terms to their systematizable role in
determining sentential senses. If it could be worked out completely and
without begging any questions, such a theory would therefore vindicate
Frege’s conception of sense as Dummett reconstructs it, showing how the
regular practice of a language follows from a distinct and particular
set of specifiable rules of use.

For a time after Davidson wrote, the pursuit of such theories of meaning
for natural languages became a widely pursued project.[^92]
Nevertheless, forty years later, there is still no general consensus on
whether even one such theory is possible. Intensional contexts such as
direct and indirect quotation, indexical terms, tense, and metaphor have
all been cited as posing problems for its development.[^93] The
recalcitrance of these phenomena to a straightforward Tarski-style
analysis gives grounds for thinking that the connection between meaning
and truth that Davidsonian theories take as essential does not exhaust,
and so does not suffice to explain, the intuitively graspable
possibilities of meaning in any natural language. More significantly in
relation to Wittgenstein’s paradox about rules, it is not clear what
would be accomplished, even if a complete Davidsonian theory of meaning
for a natural language such as English were, one day, successfully
worked out. As McDowell (1983) has recently argued, there is good reason
to think that a completed theory of meaning would indeed capture
schematically what is involved in the grasping of the various concepts
of a language, but in such a way that the schematization could*only* be
understood by speakers already in possession of a grasp of those
concepts. But to construe a theory of meaning, in this way, as incapable
of conferring a grasp of the concepts whose use in the language it sets
out to explain (in terminology also used by Dummett in his
interpretation of Davidson, to construe it as “modest”) is to construe
it as having this explanatory role only against the backdrop of the
ordinary practice of the language itself.[^94] Nothing about
Wittgenstein’s paradox threatens the claim that we can count on an
explicit schematization of the rules of use of a language to capture the
senses of words*if* we can already appeal to our knowledge that our
interlocutor’s behavior is correctly describable in terms of her
performing some familiar, general type of action.[^95] For instance,
nothing about Wittgenstein’s paradox prevents us from taking a
description of the rules for use of the word “red” to capture its
sense,*if* we may already presuppose that our interlocutor already
shares our way of using the term and so attaches to it the same sense
that we do. The force of Wittgenstein’s paradox, however, is that
nothing completely describable on the level of rules of use can
ground*this* additional presupposition. Nothing that we can capture in a
symbolic description of rules can, by itself, require of our
interlocutor (even if he accepts this symbolic description) that he
indeed attach the same sense to a term that we do, or demonstrate that
he indeed will go on, in each of an infinite number of cases, to
understand its role in determining the truth-conditions of sentences in
the same way that we do.

The Wittgensteinian paradox threatens any theory that, like Dummett’s,
attempts to*explain* the senses of words wholly by reference to (what
are supposed to be) rules characterizing the regular use of words and
sentences in a language. It thereby raises a challenge to the coherence
of the notion of regular use that Dummett sees as underlying senses, and
thereby (if Dummett’s interpretation is actually true to the motivations
of Frege’s own project) to the coherence of Frege’s notion of sense
itself. There are various ways to finesse the objection; for instance,
Dummett himself often admits that the senses of expressions are, in
general, indescribable, sometimes relying on Wittgenstein’s own
showing/saying distinction to hold that, in associating a term with its
regular referent, we*say* (by stipulating) what its reference is to be,
but only*show* its sense (namely, its way of contributing to the sense
and reference of the sentences in which it figures).[^96] Wittgenstein
himself, in the*Tractatus* , held something similar about sentential
senses: they were to be the way of*using* or*applying* sentences (for
instance to determine truth-conditions in particular cases).[^97] In
general, as Dummett says, the only way to specify the sense of a
sentence is to provide another sentence with the same sense, and there
is no reason to suppose that this will always be possible. But to hold
that the conditions for the identity or difference of senses in the
shared use of a language are only to be shown, and never said, is to
hold that determinations of such identity and difference have no basis
in anything like a*description* of this use itself. There is, in other
words, no basis to be found, in the description of the rules underlying
anyone’s use of a word, for holding that they will go on using the word
in the same way that they have before, or will use it the same way that
I do in a new case.

IV

The problem that Frege’s application of the context principle brings out
is first perspicuous as the problem of the possible bearing of language
on*objective* referents, as opposed to the merely subjective ones that
would apparently be all that language could support, if psychologism
were correct. But set in a larger critical context, it is actually a
problem about how linguistic expressions have an*application* at all.
That is, it is the problem of how a linguistic expression can*do*
anything at all, how its utterance can amount, for instance, to an
assertion, or how it can be evaluated, in a way regularly determined by
its constituent terms, for truth or falsity. The problem, even in its
more general form, was indeed already clear to Frege, as is shown by his
critical discussion in*Grundgesetze* of the formalist mathematicians
Heine and Thomae.[^98] These mathematicians thought of mathematics as a
purely formal game involving the rule-bound manipulation of symbols,
themselves conceived as lacking any intrinsic meaning. In the course of
his exhaustive and biting criticism, Frege shows that the formalists
themselves constantly renege on their own commitments, repeatedly
presupposing the properties of the objects that the symbols of
mathematics are supposed to represent, rather than (as would have been
more consistent with their own methodological principles) confining
themselves simply to discussing the symbols themselves. But the core of
Frege’s objection to the formalist project is that any purely formal
description of the rules for combining mathematical symbols would still
leave open the question of the basis of the*application* of these
symbols to real facts, statements, and events:

Why can no application be made of a configuration of chess pieces?
Obviously, because it expresses no proposition. If it did so and every
chess move conforming to the rules corresponded to a transition from one
proposition to another, applications of chess would also be conceivable.
Why can arithmetical equations be applied? Only because they express
propositions. How could we possibly apply an equation which expressed
nothing and was nothing more than a group of figures, to be transformed
into another group of figures in accordance with certain rules? Now, it
is applicability alone which elevates arithmetic from a game to the rank
of a science. So applicability necessarily belongs to it. Is it good,
then, to exclude from arithmetic what it needs in order to be a
science?[^99]

Without their applicability to real-world situations, Frege suggests,
the symbols of mathematics would be as inherently empty of content or
meaning as are configurations of chess pieces. As things are, however,
according to Frege, the capacity of mathematical expressions to be
applied is a result of their expressing*propositions* , that is, as a
result of their capacity to capture*contents* evaluable as true or
false. As we have already seen in connection with the context principle,
this capacity also implies, according to Frege, the ability of the
constituent terms of mathematical sentences (for instance
number-symbols) to refer to actually existing objects. The ultimate
basis for this capacity of reference, and so for the applicability of
mathematical propositions in real-world contexts is the possibility of
objective judgment, for instance of those judgments of equinumerosity
that Frege makes the basis of the reference of number-terms.

In his discussion of the formalists in the*Grundgesetze* , Frege
therefore already situates his question of the objective reference of
terms within the context of the larger and more general question of
the*application* of linguistic symbols. And this question is decisive,
not only for the success or failure of Frege’s own account of sense, but
for all of the subsequent projects of analytic philosophy that take up
and develop the critical impulse implicit in it. The connection is
evident, for instance, in the*Blue Book* passage where Wittgenstein
comments most directly on the methodological character of Frege’s
thought.[^100] In the passage, Wittgenstein effectively endorses the
methodology of Frege’s criticism of psychologism, while at the same time
suggesting that Frege’s*own* Platonistic theory of senses itself tends
to fall afoul of this criticism. His method, like Frege’s in applying
the context principle against psychologism, is to consider the
relationship between symbols and their application, what Wittgenstein
here calls the “use” of the sign.

Reflection on this relationship of use to meaning is here, as it was in
Frege’s application of the context principle, to underwrite the
conclusion that psychological items or mental accompaniments of speaking
and understanding cannot provide the basis for an explanation of
meaning. Such items or accompaniments are, in relation to the systematic
functioning of language as a whole, only further symbols, and so cannot
provide the basis for an explanation of how*any* symbolic meaning is
possible. But by putting the objection against psychologism this way,
Wittgenstein also expands the criticism initially suggested by Frege to
a more general form. In this more general form, it bears not only
against the thought that psychological items or accompaniments can be
the basis for an account of meaning, but against the thought
that*anything* graspable as an object can be such a basis.[^101] The
conclusion holds equally for “thoughts”, understood as “distinct from
all signs” but nevertheless grasped in understanding them and
responsible for their capacity to carry meaning. Decisively for
Wittgenstein’s own later consideration of rule-following in
the*Philosophical Investigations* , it holds equally, as well, for
“rules of use,” wherever the grasping of such rules is taken to be
essential to the understanding of a language and responsible for the
meaningfulness of its terms.

Commentators, including Dummett, have missed the significance of this
broader application of the critical methods originally developed by
Frege because they have misunderstood Wittgenstein’s injunction to “look
for the use” (rather than the meaning) in just the way Wittgenstein
warns against in the*Blue Book* passage. That is, taking Wittgenstein to
have been committed to the “slogan” that “meaning is use,” they have
understood his reflection on the relationship between symbols and their
application to contribute to a theoretical project of*describing*
or*displaying* the “rules of use” for a language as a whole. This
project is supposed to bear against psychologism in that it makes it
clear that no mental items or subjective phenomena can by themselves
determine how a word is to be used; any such determination, it is
further supposed, depends on the intelligible regularities of a public,
socially learned and inculcated, practice. But in substituting a search
for public conditions of meaningfulness for the earlier search for
private ones, it misses the broader critical significance of the
reflective methods originally brought to bear against that earlier
search. For as Wittgenstein says, to “look for the use” is no better
than to look for psychological accompaniments, if we thereby treat the
“use” as an object potentially present to mind and thereby explanatory
of the possibility of meaning. Any such object, anything capturable as
a*description* of the right or normal use of a word or an*expression* of
the “rule” determining it, is itself simply another sign or set of
signs, still open to various interpretations. In the course of the
attempt to understand what*determines* a sign’s (right or normal)
application, such descriptions and expressions in fact do no better than
the description of psychological acts or accompaniments. In both cases,
the gulf between symbols and their application, what Wittgenstein calls
the difference between the symbols themselves and their “life” in the
practice of a language[^102] , remains unbridged and unbridgeable by any
item, rule, or principle introducible in the course of theoretical
reflection.

V

Frege’s application of the context principle, as we have seen, already
suggested the more general thought that terms have meaning only in the
context of the system of their roles in a*language* as a whole. His way
of putting this was to say that terms have their meaning only in the
context of sentences that express thoughts, or contents evaluable as
true or false. In interpreting the point, he relied on considerations
about the possibility of intersubjective communication, or of the
possibility of agreement on the sense of a sentence. The question that
is most decisive for the critical legacy of the reflection that Frege
began is: what underlies the possibility of this agreement on what
we*must* share, if we can mutually understand a sentence at all? Frege
himself could answer this question with his theory of sentential senses,
his Platonist account of them as strongly objective and ideal, and his
metaphorical description of our knowledge of them as the intellectual
act of “grasping”. But if we find this account unsatisfying, or if we
suspect, with Wittgenstein, that the obscurity of its metaphors is
essential to its purported ability to explain, we will have to seek
further for ground for the notion of identity of sense that plays such a
decisive role in Frege’s account.

The assumption that one and the same word (or, in any case, successive
tokens of the same word-type) can be used again and again, in various
contexts and sentential connections, with the “same” meaning, figures so
deeply in our ordinary thinking about meaning that this thinking would
probably be rendered impossible without it. But the broadest implication
of Wittgenstein’s reflection on symbols and their uses, and the paradox
it leads to, is that there is*nothing* accessible to systematic
reflection on the structure of language that supports this ordinary and
pervasive assumption. We*can* , and regularly*do* , assume that we use
words in the same ways that we always have before, that others will do
so as well, that it will be more or less clear when someone has used a
word differently than we do or has not explained her way of using it,
that such explanations, when offered, will be readily intelligible and
will lead to a reform in our own practices or a criticism of their
deviant application. But it is one thing to say that we make this
assumption (and even that our making it is essential to the
intelligibility of what we say and do), and quite another to hold that
we can, within a theory of language or its systematic structure, find
grounds for justifying it.

In our ordinary language, the assumption of the identity of the sense
of a word across its manifold different contexts of application is
indeed systematically*interwoven* with the assumption of the existence
of a rule underlying its use.[^103] Inquiries after the justification of
claims of sameness of sense will, in the ordinary practice of the
language, regularly advert to rules of use, and vice-versa. But this
regular interweaving does not imply that the introduction or description
of rules can provide anything like a general*justification* for the
assumption of identities of sense across the heterogeneity of contexts
of employment that regularly pervades our discourse. Indeed, one way of
putting the force of Wittgenstein’s paradox, in relation to the
principle of identity that Frege constantly presupposes, would be to say
that:*if* we needed criteria of identity to apply terms significantly,
then the criteria of identity would themselves stand in need of criteria
of application. Any description or formula we could introduce as
accounting for our ability to use a term, in the wide variety of
contexts, with the same sense, or even as determining what “the same
sense” consists in, would itself still stand in need of criteria for
its*own* application to the heterogeneity of cases. On the level of the
systematic description of symbols or reflection on their
application,*nothing* explains the assumption of the identity of senses
that constantly pervades our practice. Its justification is nothing
other than itself, or the actuality of our ways of using of language to
which we can, finally, only gesture mutely toward, without further
explanation.[^104]

In retrospect, then, Frege’s appeal to the context principle can be seen
as inaugurating the systematic reflection on the structure of signs and
the use of language that has been decisive for much of the analytic
tradition. The logically based reflection he developed was sufficient to
allow the statement, though not the resolution, of the paradox of signs
and their application that Wittgenstein’s*Philosophical Investigations*
brought to its fullest expression. Frege’s own Platonistic theory of the
identity of sense is perspicuous, in retrospect, as an unsatisfactory
attempt to resolve the paradox. Bringing it out in its general form
shows, as well, the unsatisfactoriness of “use-theories” of meaning in
resolving it by means of a description of (what are supposed to be) the
“rules of use” for terms in a language. For Frege (or anyone else) to
have found grounds on the level of such a theory to support his
assumption of the identity of sense, he would have needed, in addition
to his description of the systematic logical structure of a language, a
theory of the pragmatic*force* of terms in application to the various
acts and accomplishments of which language is capable.[^105] He would
have needed such a theory not only, as Dummett says, because his account
of senses tied their truth-conditions to the special act of judgment,
and so required an account of the pragmatic force of*assertion* (as
distinct from, for instance, consideration, questioning, negating, and
so forth), but more generally because the underlying assumption of an
identity of sense across different contexts of a term’s use implies the
distinction between terms and their meanings, one the one hand, and the
effects of their employment, on the other. But Wittgenstein’s paradox of
rule-following is just the most perspicuous and clearly stated of the
wide variety of results of the analytic tradition that tend to suggest
that grounds for drawing such a distinction between “semantics,” and
“pragmatics,” on the level of a systematic explanation of linguistic
practice, are essentially lacking.

More than a hundred years after Frege’s*Begriffsschrift,* we know as
little as Frege himself did about what, in the systematic structure of a
language, underlies the regular and pervasive assumption of the unity of
the sense of a word across the heterogeneity of its contexts and
applications. We know as little (or as much), indeed, as Plato did when
he invoked the supersensible idea as that which all of the items rightly
called by a term have in common, in virtue of which they*are* all
rightly called by that term.[^106] But the logico-linguistic reflection
on symbols and their use that Frege began inaugurated the inquiry that,
in its subsequent development within the analytic tradition, would
evince the metaphysics of the identity of sense on the level of its
ordinary presupposition, and so, in a radical and unprecedented way,
expose language to the deeper effects of its immanent self-critique.
