3. ‘Meaning is Use’ in the Tractatus
====================================

It has long been standard to attribute to the later Wittgenstein a “use
theory” of meaning, a theory which is supposed to have replaced the
“metaphysically realist” meaning-theory of the*Tractatus* . Having
become skeptical of the*Tractatus* account of meaning as mirroring
between language and the world, so the standard story goes, Wittgenstein
replaced it, in the*Investigations* , with a pragmatic description
of*intersubjective* communicative practice, a description he partially
developed through the suggestive but puzzling concepts of “language
games” and “forms of life.” I shall argue in this chapter that this
interpretation of Wittgenstein’s development is misleading, and that we
misunderstand his role in the history of the analytic tradition if we
accept it. For the early Wittgenstein was actually more closely an
adherent of the doctrine expressed by the slogan “meaning is use” than
was the later Wittgenstein; and an understanding of the central role of
this doctrine in the theory of the*Tractatus* is essential, as well, to
understanding Wittgenstein’s decisive*critical* reaction to it in
the*Philosophical Investigations* . The central notion of the Tractarian
theory of*meaning* , the notion of “logical form” shared between
meaningful propositions and the states of affairs they describe, itself
depends on the*Tractatus* ’ theory of the*meaningfulness* of signs as
arising from their syntactical application according to logical rules of
use. In seeing linguistic criticism as grounded in reflection on the use
of expressions, the theory already captures one of the most pervasive
themes of the analytic tradition’s consideration of language overall.
But after 1929, Wittgenstein would also come to see it also as a
characteristic expression of the*mythological* picture of language as a
regular calculus that the “rule-following considerations” of
the*Philosophical Investigations* directly aims to dispel.

I

The*Tractatus* has long been seen as articulating a jointly semantic and
metaphysical “picture” theory of meaning that treats the meaning of a
sentence as a function of its specific “logical form.” But just as
important to Wittgenstein’s concerns in the*Tractatus* is an account of
the*meaningfulness* of signs, an account of the possibility that
otherwise inert written or spoken signs have meaning at all. He provided
this account by appealing to the concept of the*use* - or, as he put it
in the*Tractatus* , the “logico-syntactical employment” - of a sign in
accordance with logical rules. By examining the set of remarks in
section 3 of the*Tractatus* in which Wittgenstein articulates the first
version of a “meaning is use” doctrine explicitly formulated within the
analytic tradition, we can understand the relationship of this central
strand in Wittgenstein’s philosophical method to the reflection on
meaning from which it arose, and thereby begin to understand its
decisive relationship to some of the most important critical and
interpretive practices of analytic philosophy.

It is well known that the*Tractatus* articulates a “picture” theory of
meaning, according to which a proposition has the meaning that it does
in virtue of sharing an abstract*structure* or*form* with a possible
state of affairs.[^107] Just as a visual picture, in order to depict a
situation, must share its*spatial* form, any proposition whatsoever, in
order to depict, must share with the possible or actual state of affairs
for which it stands its “logico-pictoral” or “logical” form.[^108] A
proposition is said to share the logical form of a state of affairs when
there is an isomorphism between the relational structure of the
proposition and the relational structure of the state of affairs;
the*fact* that the elements of the proposition are related in a
particular way represents the*fact* that things are related, in the
state of affairs, in the same way.[^109] Wittgenstein emphasized that
the logical structure of a proposition can be shown clearly in the
arrangement of its constituent signs; we can imagine using physical
objects, rather than written signs, in various spatial arrangements to
depict possible situations.[^110] But propositions as they are written
in ordinary language do not always show clearly the relational structure
of their logically simple elements.[^111] One task of philosophical
criticism or analysis, accordingly, is to articulate these elements by
rewriting ordinary-language propositions in a perspicuous notation
that*shows* through its symbolism the logical relations that
propositions express.

Many commentaries on the*Tractatus* are content to leave matters here,
with the Tractarian picture theory of meaning explained as a
metaphysical theory of the meaning of propositions in terms of their
articulation as relational structures of signs.[^112] In so doing,
although they often appeal to the analogy that Wittgenstein suggests
between the spatial form of an ordinary picture and the logical form of
a proposition, they typically leave the metaphysical underpinnings of
the central notion of logical form somewhat obscure. A proposition’s
meaning is said to consist in an “abstract” or “formal” correspondence
between the relational structure of signs in a proposition (once these
are logically articulated by analysis) and the relational structure of
simple objects in a state of affairs. But it is not said what this
correspondence amounts to, or how to recognize when a proposition has
been articulated, through analysis, enough to make it perspicuous.

It is in this connection that Wittgenstein’s theory of
the*meaningfulness* *of signs* , generally missed by standard
interpretations, proves to be an especially important part of the
*Tractatus* theory of meaning. The theory unfolds in a series of remarks
at the thematic center of the *Tractatus* , in the immediate context of
the development of the picture theory and the introduction of the idea
of a perspicuous notation capable of clarifying the logical structure of
ordinary propositions. It begins with a distinction that Wittgenstein
draws between signs - mere perceptible spoken sounds or (token) written
marks [^113] - and *symbols* , which are signs *taken together with* the
*ways* in which they signify:

3.32 A sign is what can be perceived of a symbol

3.321 So one and the same sign (written or spoken, etc.) can be common
to two different symbols - in which case they will signify in different
ways.

3.322 Our use of the same sign to signify two different objects can
never indicate a common characteristic of the two, if we use it with two
different modes of signification. For the sign, of course, is arbitrary.
So we could choose two different signs instead, and then what would be
left in common on the signifying side?

In these remarks, Wittgenstein characterizes symbols as signs together
with their “modes of signification,” their “use[s] with a sense,” or
their “logico-syntactical employment.”[^114] Prior to an understanding
of their logico-syntactical employment, signs themselves are inert,
incapable of defining by themselves a logical form in virtue of which
they could correspond to possible states of affairs. For it is, of
course, arbitrary that a particular orthographic or audible sign should
be chosen for a particular expressive purpose within a particular
language; what makes arbitrary signs capable of signifying the states of
affairs that they do - what gives them meaning - are the logical
possibilities of their significant use:

3.326 In order to recognize a symbol by its sign we must observe how it
is used with a sense.

3.327 A sign does not determine a logical form unless it is taken
together with its logico-syntactical employment.

3.328 If a sign is useless, it is meaningless. That is the point of
Occam’s maxim.

(If everything behaves as if a sign had meaning, then it does have
meaning).

We cannot understand the logical form of a symbol without understanding
the ways in which the signs that comprise it are significantly used.
Wittgenstein goes so far as to suggest that these possibilities of
significant use define the*essence* of a symbol.[^115] At the same time,
the possibility of understanding the uses of symbols in a proposition,
what Wittgenstein calls “recognizing the symbol in the sign,” is also
one of the metaphysical preconditions for the possibility of meaning.
For it is only by having significant uses that sequences of signs mean
anything at all. Wittgenstein’s theory of meaningfulness - his theory of
the conditions under which signs have meaning at all - therefore plays
an essential role in his general picture of meaning. It is only insofar
as signs*have* significant uses that they have logical forms at all; and
it is, of course, only in virtue of their logical forms that they can
embody meanings.

For Wittgenstein, then, the sense of a sentence is defined not simply by
the way in which its simple signs are combined, but by the relational
structure of its signs*against the backdrop of their possible uses in
the language* If a sentence has a sense, it is because its constituent
signs have significant uses that allow their combination to express that
particular sense; we do not understand the sentence unless we *grasp*
these possibilities of use. The correspondence at the basis of the
meaning-making isomorphism between propositions and states of affairs is
not a correspondence between *signs* and objects, but between *symbols*
and objects. It is essential to grasping the logical form of a
sentence - to understanding its meaning - that its simple signs be
understood, not only in their combinatorial structure, but together with
their possibilities of significant use or application. If there is a
question about the *sense* of a sentence - if its logical form is not
understood, even though all of the verbal or written signs are given -
clarification of sense can only amount to clarification of the *ways* in
which those signs are being used, in the context of the sentence, to
signify.

II

The central Tractarian concept of logical form, then, cannot be
understood except in conjunction with Wittgenstein’s use-doctrine of the
meaningfulness of signs. But this doctrine of meaningfulness as use also
immediately suggests a process of semantic clarification whereby
confusions common in ordinary language are exposed and remedied through
the development of a logically purified notation:

3.323 In everyday language it very frequently happens that the same word
has different modes of signification - and so belongs to different
symbols - or that two words that have different modes of signification
are employed in propositions in what is superficially the same way.

Thus the word ‘is’ figures as the copula, as a sign for identity, and as
an expression for existence; ‘exist’ figures as an intransitive verb
like ‘go’, and ‘identical’ as an adjective; we speak of something, but
also something’s happening.

(In the proposition ‘Green is green” - where the first word is the
proper name of a person and the last an adjective - these words do not
merely have different meanings: they are different symbols.).

3.324 In this way the most fundamental confusions are easily produced
(the whole of philosophy is full of them).

3.325 In order to avoid such errors we must make use of a sign-language
that excludes them by not using the same sign for different symbols and
by not using in a superficially similar way signs that have different
modes of signification: that is to say, a sign-language that is governed
by logical grammar - by logical syntax.

(The conceptual notation of Frege and Russell is such a language,
though, it is true, it fails to exclude all mistakes.)

Philosophical and ordinary confusions typically arise, Wittgenstein
thinks, from the unrecognized use of a single sign to signify in two or
more different ways; accordingly, analysis proceeds by recognizing
distinctions in use that are not clear at the level of everyday language
and expressing them in an improved symbolic notation. In the logically
perspicuous notation that Wittgenstein envisions as the endpoint of
analysis, identity of use is represented by identity of sign.[^116] Each
sign has exactly one use, and this use is shown, in each case, in the
combinatorial rules that govern the sign’s possibilities of significant
combination with other signs in the perspicuous notation. Wittgenstein
calls the complete set of such rules “logical syntax” or “logical
grammar;” their role in analysis is to exhibit the patterns of usage
that are implicit in ordinary language, making them explicit as
combinatorial rules for the significant appearance of signs. The logical
notation not only renders philosophical confusions impossible, but
exhibits the patterns of use that are the implicit foundation of
ordinary-language meaning.

In thus describing the basis for the meaningfulness of signs in the
possibilities of their significant use, Wittgenstein therefore provides
a substantially new answer to the ancient question of the relationship
of material or lexicographical signs to what we intuitively or
pre-theoretically understand as their*meanings* or *referents.* [^117]
As it functions in the *Tractatus* , the new conception, and its role in
philosophical criticism, depends both on the thought that meaning is
intelligible only in reflection on use and the further claim that use is
itself explicable through a systematic clarification of the rules
governing it. Thus, while the ordinary relationship between signs and
“meanings” might have been specified, in an earlier age of philosophical
thought, as consisting in the capacity of repeatable signs to evoke
similar ideas or images in the minds of their speakers and hearers,
Wittgenstein’s conception of the systematicity of language and the
origination of possibilities of error inherent in its use led him to
reject any such subjectivist picture and replace it with the direct
critical inquiry into the uses of terms that he suggests here. Indeed,
while philosophers at least since Locke had criticized our tendency to
assume that identity of sign implies identity of meaning or reference,
it is only through his conception of the systematicity of the rules of
use for a language as a whole that Wittgenstein is able to transform
this piecemeal and opportunistic criticism of use into a wholesale
doctrine of the meaningfulness of language overall. [^118]

Though he is not completely explicit about the scope and character of
logical syntax, Wittgenstein proceeds to work out an instructive example
of how the elucidation of its rules can dissipate one important
philosophical error, Russell’s mistake of supposing it necessary to
augment the logical theory of propositional signs with a theory of
ordered types. A perspicuous notation that exposes the logical structure
of language, Wittgenstein argues, will by itself show that there is no
need for the theory of types; for it will show that Russell’s paradox,
to which it answered, cannot arise. Wittgenstein makes the point by
considering how a case of the paradox might be symbolized:

3.333 The reason why a function cannot be its own argument is that the
sign for a function already contains the prototype of its argument, and
it cannot contain itself.

For let us suppose that the function*F* (*fx* ) could be its own
argument: in that case there would be a proposition ‘*F* (*F* (*fx* ))’,
in which the outer function*F* and the inner function*F* must have
different meanings, since the inner one has the form*f* (*fx* ) and the
outer one has the form*y* (*f* (*fx* )). Only the letter ‘*F* ’ is
common to the two functions, but the letter by itself signifies nothing.

This immediately becomes clear if instead of ‘*F* ( *Fu* )’ we write ‘(
$ *f* ): *F* ( *f* *u* ). *f* *u* = *Fu* ’.

That disposes of Russell’s paradox.

This argument against Russell’s theory follows directly from the
use-based theory of the meaningfulness of signs that we explored in the
last section. It operates by showing that the attempt to express the
paradox results in a series of signs which have not yet been given a
tolerably clear sense. Our attempt to formulate the paradox necessarily
uses the same sign two different ways; if we disambiguate them, giving
each sign a univocal sense, the (appearance of) paradox dissolves. It is
important to note that it is no part of Wittgenstein’s argument
to*prohibit* (conventionally or stipulatively) the embedding of a
propositional sign within itself; the perspicuous notation simply*shows*
, when we try to express such an embedding in it, that we cannot
unambiguously do so. When we write*F* (*F* (*fx* )), the notation shows
clearly that the two occurrences of*F* have*different* forms; they are
being used in different ways and according to different rules. Once we
see this, we see that there is nothing in common to the two occurrences
except that they use the same letter. As often happens in ordinary
language, we have used the same sign in two different ways; the
difference is simply that the logical notation, unlike ordinary
languages, immediately shows the difference in form through its
expressive syntax. The thought that a proposition can make a statement
about itself, the thought that led to Russell’s paradox, is exposed as
arising from a notational confusion: it is only because we use the same
orthographic sign for what are in fact two different symbols that we are
led to think the paradox possible. But once we see clearly that the
symbol expressed by a sign is determined by its possibilities of
significant use, we can also see that the attempt to state the paradox
is doomed from the outset.

This criticism of Russell exemplifies the philosophical method that,
Wittgenstein thought, could disarm philosophical and ordinary confusions
by exposing their roots in our temptation to use the same orthographic
sign in a variety of different ways. On the method, reflection about the
various uses of an ordinary sign suggests its replacement with one or
more distinct signs; ultimately, we develop a notation in which each
sign is used in exactly one way. The form of this perspicuous symbolism
then shows the logical rules that govern meaningful linguistic use.
Wittgenstein insisted that these rules of logical syntax must treat only
of signs themselves, and never involve reference to their
meanings.[^119] In other words, there ought never, in the process of
analysis, be any occasion to *stipulate* the possible uses of signs by
referring to the meanings that we want them to have; Wittgenstein
objected that Russell had done just this in his theory of types, and
that this alone showed the invalidity of the theory. [^120] Instead,
reflection on the uses that signs *already have* in ordinary language
must suffice to develop all the distinctions expressed in the structure
of the logically perspicuous symbolism. The introduction of a new sign
can, accordingly, only be justified by the recognition of a previously
unrecognized use; the new use will then naturally be codified in
combinatorial, syntactical rules governing the possible appearances of
the new sign. In this way, the logical analysis of language proceeds
from ordinary observations about significant use to the notational
expression of these observations, yielding clarity about the *meanings*
of signs by exhibiting perspicuously their *use* .

III

Thus understood, Wittgenstein’s theory of the meaningfulness of language
suggests an ambitious program of meaning-analysis or clarification that
would terminate in the elimination of all philosophical confusions by
way of the elimination of all confusions about the use of signs. It may
be clear enough how this kind of grammatical clarification can prevent
philosophical errors in the straightforward examples of ambiguity that
Wittgenstein gives (“Green is green” and the various uses of the words
“is,” “exist,” and “identical”), but we might legitimately wonder how
general Wittgenstein actually intended the program to be. How widely
applicable is the method of clarifying the meaning of propositions by
identifying and elucidating the uses of their simple signs? Clearly, the
answer to this question depends on specifying just how we should
understand the “use” of a sign, how we should identify which features of
our*actual* employment of signs we should consider relevant to the
philosophical practice of clarifying meaning.

My suggestion is that the program is*completely* general; for its
foundation is not any specific theoretical conception of meaning, but
rather the general theory of the meaningfulness of signs that we have
already examined. The general theory of the meaningfulness of signs
expresses what appeared to Wittgenstein at this time to be the relevance
to the determination of meaning of the systematic structure of a
language as a whole. Commentators have, in fact, often underestimated
the comprehensiveness and generality of the program of analysis that
Wittgenstein suggests in the*Tractatus* . For insofar as they have
discussed the concept of logical syntax at all, they have generally
supposed that the rules of logical syntax, to be shown through the
practice of meaning-analysis, are intended to be in some way limited or
restricted with respect to the totality of rules of use that determine
meanings in ordinary language. Anscombe, for instance, interprets the
phrase “logico-syntactic employment” as meaning “the kind of difference
between the syntactical roles of words which concerns a logician” rather
than gesturing toward “‘role in life,’ ‘use’, [or] ‘practice of the use’
in the sense of*Philosophical Investigations* .”[^121] But actually
there is no reason to think that Wittgenstein intended the scope of the
rules of logical syntax shown by logical reflection on the use of
symbolism in ordinary language to be any smaller than the total range of
possible meanings in ordinary language. Wherever, in ordinary language,
there are distinctions of meaning, there is presumably the possibility
of a notation that shows those distinctions; if this is right, then
logical clarification, in Wittgenstein’s sense, can proceed according to
the clarificatory question “what does that mean?”*regardless* of the
subject matter of the proposition or claim in question.

With the nature and scope of Wittgenstein’s Tractarian program of
analysis thus clarified in its connection with his use-doctrine of
meaning, we can begin to see that program not only as a much more direct
antecedent of the*Philosophical Investigations* conception of grammar,
but also of a variety of significant subsequent innovations in the
history of analytic philosophy. First, the*Tractatus* ’ use-doctrine of
meaningfulness means that its project of analysis is already*holistic* .
There is no way to clarify the meaning of a sign without clarifying its
use; but the use of a sign is identified with*all* of its possibilities
of significant appearance in propositions of the language. It follows
that there is no complete analysis of the meaning of a sign that does
not determine all of these possibilities. The clarification of the
meaning of a sign must take into account all of the contexts in which it
can appear significantly, and the combinatorial rules of logical syntax
thereby revealed will govern, for each sign, the possibilities of its
appearance in conjunction with*each* of the other potentially
significant signs of the language. It follows that there is, in an
important sense, no such thing as the analysis of a*single* term in
isolation. The only way to give a*complete* analysis of any term is to
give an analysis of the whole language. In this sense, the project of
the*Tractatus* already expresses the claim, usually associated with the
later Wittgenstein, that “understanding a sentence means understanding a
language.”[^122] The holistic semantic dependence of one term upon all
of the other terms in the language is bound to be implicit in ordinary
discourse, but analysis makes it explicit in its progress toward a
logically perspicuous notation.

Additionally, there is a second, deeper way in which the*Tractatus*
program of analysis anticipates the commitments of much later, and even
contemporary, projects. Because it begins with ordinary judgments of the
meaning of propositions, and proceeds from identifying the semantic
relations of *propositions* to identifying their logically distinct
terms by their uses, the program of the *Tractatus* embodies what might
today be called an *inferentialist* program of analysis. [^123]
Wittgenstein emphasizes, just before stating the use-doctrine of
meaningfulness, that only propositions have sense; a name has meaning
only in the nexus of a particular proposition. [^124] Judgments of
meaning must begin as judgments of the meaning of propositions; it is
only on the basis of the judgment that a *proposition* is meaningful -
and has the meaning that it does - that we can begin to understand the
meanings (uses) of its constituent symbols. To identify the logically
simple parts of a proposition (parts that, of course, may not be shown
perspicuously by the symbolism of ordinary language), we begin by
considering a *class* of propositions, all of which have *something* in
common that is essential to their sense. [^125] The class of
propositions that have some component of their sense in common, then,
share a “propositional variable;” by stipulating values for the
variable, we can recover the original class of propositions. [^126] If a
sentence’s significant terms are *all* replaced by propositional
variables, its logical form is shown. [^127] In this way, beginning with
logical relations of semantic similarity among *propositions* , the
analysis works toward the segmentation of those propositions into their
logically simple parts. There is no way to access these parts, however,
other than by first comprehending the logical and inferential
relationships among propositions as a whole. The logical or inferential
relationships of sense among propositions themselves define their
logically simple parts; so there is no alternative, in the analytic
process of articulating a proposition into its logically simple parts,
to beginning with its semantic relations to a large variety of other
propositions. [^128]

IV

Wittgenstein’s Tractarian conception of analysis therefore already
involved, as we have seen, the determinative claim that the analyst’s
work consists in determining and symbolizing the specific rules that
govern linguistic usage in a language as a whole. These rules are
conceived as implicit, in any case, in ordinary patterns of usage, but
the imperfections of our ordinary explicit understanding of them are to
blame for a wide variety of errors and confusions. The possibility of
linguistic or philosophical criticism depends on the gap between what we
in*fact* do, on particular occasions of utterance, and what the actual
rules of usage require of us; in particular, these rules establish
identities of usage where we are tempted to use one and the same sign in
more than one particular way. The assumption that language as a
whole*could* be portrayed as a total corpus of rules determining
distinct uses therefore governed, at this time, both Wittgenstein’s
conception of language and his sense of the work of philosophical
criticism of it. But the underlying instabilities of this conception,
which became apparent to Wittgenstein only after his return to
philosophy in 1929, would also demand a deep transformation in his
conception of this work. For as Wittgenstein would come in stages to
appreciate after 1929, the conception of a language as a systematic
calculus involves an untenable conception of what is involved in its
learning or understanding.

Wittgenstein’s transitional works show clearly how the Tractarian
picture of logical syntax began to cede to a more pluralistic and
nuanced conception of the grammatical foundations of meaning. In
the*Philosophical Remarks* composed in 1929 and 1930, Wittgenstein
considered in detail the possibility of clarifying the grammatical
structure of ordinary language in virtue of which it allows for various
perceptual and experiential possibilities; he called this project
“phenomenological.”[^129] The*Remarks* explicitly retained
the*Tractatus* conception of philosophical criticism as the critique of
failures to give signs a univocal sense; but Wittgenstein was now less
certain that the truth-functional notation that he had suggested in
the*Tractatus* would be adequate to the clarificatory task.[^130]
Propositions concerning colors and quantities, for instance, proved
recalcitrant to the symbolization in terms of simple propositions that
the*Tractatus* had suggested. Nevertheless, Wittgenstein continued to
think that “phenomenological” relationships such as the incompatibility
between red and green must be expressible in a logically perspicuous
symbolism that captures the grammatical form of our language, even
though our ordinary language does not show this form explicitly:

77. How is it possible for f(a) and f(b) to contradict one another, as
certainly seems to be the case? For instance, if I say ‘There is red
here now’ and ‘There is green here now’?…

78. If f(r) and f(g) contradict one another, it is because r and g
completely occupy the f and cannot both be in it. But that doesn’t show
itself in our signs. But it must show itself if we look, not at the
sign, but at the symbol. For since this includes the form of the
objects, then the impossibility of ‘f(r).f(g)’ must show itself there,
in this form.

It must be possible for the contradiction to show itself entirely in the
symbolism, for if I say of a patch that it is red and green, it is
certainly at most only one of these two, and the contradiction must be
contained in the sense of the two propositions.

That two colours won’t fit at the same time in the same place must be
contained in their form and the form of space.

As in the*Tractatus* , Wittgenstein distinguishes between sign and
symbol; ordinary language fails to show the structure of exclusion that
characterizes the sense of propositions about colors and that a
perspicuous symbolism could reveal. But the fact that this structure is
non-truth-functional - two of its simple propositions can be mutually
contradictory without being negations of one another - led Wittgenstein
to conclude that the connection between the possibilities expressed in
its symbolism and the possibilities for the combination of objects in
the world must be more complicated than the*Tractatus* had held.

On the new conception, the correspondence that makes a proposition true
is not simply a correspondence between that proposition and the world,
but a correspondence between*the entire system of propositions in which
it figures* and the world.[^131] The propositions “the surface is red”
and “the surface are green” are only contradictory because they
designate different positions in the whole*system* of propositions
expressing colors, and a perspicuous notation would have to express this
whole system, capturing the exclusivity of different positions within
it. The exclusive relationship between red and green is a feature of an
entire articulated system; and it is the relationship between this whole
system and the states of affairs in the world that makes any single
proposition about color true. Translating into the language of
the*Tractatus* , we can put this recognition as the discovery that
recognizing the symbol in a sign, by means of a clarification of the use
of terms in a proposition, requires the elucidation of the whole logical
system in which that proposition figures. Accordingly, it becomes harder
to imagine that such recognition could culminate in anything like a
single, unique analysis of any sentence.

At about the same time, and partially as a result of the discovery of
the non-truth-functional nature of certain kinds of logical form,
Wittgenstein began also to reconsider the central question of the
relationship of the*use* of a sign to its meaning. In thinking about
what is involved in using a sign meaningfully, we can easily be tempted,
Wittgenstein now thought, by a kind of “mythology,” a notion that
the*meaning* of the sign is itself a kind of shadowy, mysterious
accompaniment to it, for instance a mental process or state that endows
the otherwise inert and meaningless sign with a sense.[^132] In his
exposition of this line of critique in the*Philosophical* *Remarks* ,
Wittgenstein’s direct target is primarily Russell’s theory of judgment,
according to which the correctness of a judgment consists not only in
the relationship between the judgment and a fact, but also in a
subjective experience of correctness.[^133] The theory was objectionable
in that, in addition to describing the “internal” logical relationship
between a judgment and the fact it adduces, it introduces also a third
event which, even if it existed, could only be “externally” related to
this logical relationship and so must be completely irrelevant to its
description.[^134]

The temptation to introduce such intermediaries, Wittgenstein says here,
has its root in a “danger of giving a mythology of the symbolism, or of
psychology: instead of simply saying what everyone knows and must
admit.”[^135] The mythology threatens, for instance, when we explain
“how a picture is meant” in terms of the psychological reaction it tends
to elicit, or the state of mind that is supposed to accompany my meaning
or intending it a certain way. We avoid the mythology only be
recognizing that, as Wittgenstein puts it, “the intention is already
expressed in the way I*now* compare the picture with reality” and not in
any other item, inner or outer, mental or physical, thought to accompany
this present application.[^136]

Even if we recognize that clarification of the meaning of a sign means
clarification of its significant uses, we can be tempted, under the
influence of this mythology, to think that the “use” is something
somehow present, all at once, alongside or behind*each* significant
employment of the sign. Wittgenstein’s increasingly explicit criticism
of the confusion implicit in such accounts, in line with the critique of
psychologism that Frege had first developed, culminates in the diagnosis
of their central assumption that he offers in the Blue Book:

The mistake we are liable to make could be expressed thus: We are
looking for the use of a sign, but we look for it as though it were an
object co-existing with the sign. (One of the reasons for this mistake
is again that we are looking for a ‘thing corresponding to a
substantive.’) (p. 5)

Wittgenstein thus recognized the Russellian theory as an objectionable
instance of psychologism and opposed it, as he had opposed psychologism
more generally in the*Tractatus* , by way of an immanent reflection on
the*use* or*application* of pictures, in this case to judgments of truth
or falsity. But as the subsequent development of his thought would make
even clearer, Wittgenstein had already begun to see at least the
rudiments of the mythology of meaning as having existed, also, in
the*Tractatus’* conception of use itself. For although the*Tractatus*
had steadfastly avoided psychologism by refusing to describe the
psychological or mental accompaniments of the regular use of a sign, its
conception of the*meaningfulness* of signs, as we have seen,
nevertheless pictures their application in practice as a matter of
adherence to systematic*rules* of use, intelligible in their totality to
philosophical elucidation and description.

Were one to give a psychological description of the actual practice of
using a language, in accordance with this conception, one could only
portray it as a matter of our grasping or understanding rules of use on
some conscious or unconscious level. The rules, or their symbolic
expressions, would then, again, amount to additional items thought to be
present “behind” one’s current use and adduced to explain it; and this
is just the mythology of symbolism that Wittgenstein now opposed. It is
true, of course, that the*Tractatus* , in order to avoid psychologism,
avoided giving any such description of the*psychology* of grasping or
understanding rules; but its conception of correct language use
as*determined* by rules presupposes that the correctness or
incorrectness of a linguistic performance, on a particular occasion,
depends on its adherence or failure to adhere to such rules nonetheless.
As such, this conception repeats the mythology of meaning that
Wittgenstein now criticized in Russell. It accounts for the
meaningfulness of signs in the practice of a language only by
introducing a conception of this practice that repeats, rather than
answering, the underlying question that it purports to address.

The critique of psychologism that Wittgenstein inherited from Frege
began by attacking theories that explain the possibility of meaning or
understanding a term by reference to the presence of a mental*object*
or*item* accompanying it. But in this more extended application,
Wittgenstein brought the critique to bear as well against theories that,
like his own earlier one, explain this possibility as a matter of the
presence of a systematic corpus of*rules* intelligible to philosophical
analysis. Against such theories, Wittgenstein continues to recommend
that we look for the*use* of terms, but warns us against seeing this use
as consisting in anything like an item, object, or structure potentially
present to mind. In the*Investigations* , in the course of a complicated
reflection on what is involved in our determination, in actual cases,
that a student or an interlocutor has “gone on” to use a word in the
right way, that she has “grasped” its sense, Wittgenstein considers
specifically the picture that holds that such grasping consists in
bringing to mind the*entirety* of the use of a word:

‘It is as if we could grasp the whole use of the word in a flash.’
Like*what* e.g.? - Can’t the use - in a certain sense - be grasped in a
flash? And in what sense can it not? - The point is, that it is as if we
could ‘grasp it in a flash’ in yet another and much more direct sense
than that. - But have you a model for this? No. It is just that this
expression suggests itself to us. As the result of the crossing of
different pictures. (PI 191) [^137]

The objection that Wittgenstein formulates here plays a central role in
the detailed considerations of rule-following and private language that
form the two main critical movements of the*Investigations* . For the
roots of the various mythologies that he criticizes, in both cases, can
be found in the attempt to explain the meaningfulness of a language’s
terms by reference to rules thought to be grasped or present to mind in
the regular practice of a language. This attempt itself has its root in
the mistake that he criticizes in the*Blue Book* , namely the tendency
to look for the use of a sign as an “object co-existing” with it
that*explains* its being used the way that it is.[^138]

As we have seen, the*Tractatus* ’ conception of the practice of logical
analysis envisioned the logical identification and adumbration of the
distinct*uses* of signs as leading to a clarified notation that would
prevent philosophical confusion. With this conception of a clarified
notation that coordinates each sign to exactly one use, the project
depended crucially on the possibility of an overall determination and
segmentation of the varied application of signs in an ordinary language
into distinct and describable uses; each of these was pictured, in
particular, as governed by the determinate rules of the “logical syntax”
that the practice of analysis sought to display. But as Wittgenstein had
come to appreciate already in the transitional texts, the diversity and
heterogeneity of ordinary contexts of use makes it implausible that any
such (simple and unified) rules actually exist and can be
described.[^139]

Going even further, indeed, the “rule-following” considerations of the
Philosophical Investigations, especially through their articulation of
the ‘paradox’ of PI 201, raised the decisive critical question of what
application such rules could have, even if they*could* be described. The
*Tractatus* conception of analysis, as we have seen, relied for its
force in application to the criticism of ordinary language on the
possibility of distinguishing between performances judged correct, with
respect to the rules of “logical syntax,” and those that, in misusing
terms or confusing distinct uses, violated them. The distinction was
supposed to be underwritten by the theorist’s ability to discern, within
the heterogeneity of ordinary usage, the right or correct rules of
syntax for a language; but the *Tractatus* conception of meaningfulness
already gave the theorist no resource for determining these rules beyond
what is involved in this ordinary use itself. As Wittgenstein would come
to see later, this rendered any description of the rules of logical
syntax essentially arbitrary with respect to the ordinary use it was
supposed to explain. Some rough schematization of regularities or normal
patterns “implicit” in ordinary usage might still be possible; but the
force of the rule-following paradox of PI 201 was to show that any such
schematization would itself remain open to the question of its own
normative or critical application to individual linguistic performances,
and so would fail to capture the (unique) rules underlying
meaningfulness in the language as a whole.

Although he would continue to insist that the clarification of meaning
depends on reflection on usage, the paradoxical gap Wittgenstein now saw
as existing between the signs of a language and their application
therefore meant that this reflection could no longer be supported by
what he now recognized as a mythology of silent, determinate rules
underlying ordinary linguistic performance. In connection with other,
parallel results of the analytic tradition, as we shall see over the
next several chapters, Wittgenstein’s identification and diagnosis of
this mythology indeed marks one of the most significant lasting critical
results of the tradition’s inquiry into the form and structure of the
language that we speak and the problems of our ordinary access to it. It
opens the space of a critical reflection on the varied and complicated
implications of this access for the form of a linguistic life and the
possibilities of meaning it permits.
