4. Ryle and Sellars on Inner-State Reports
==========================================

As we saw in chapter 3, Wittgenstein’s use-based theory of
meaningfulness in the*Tractatus* already conceived of the sense of
propositions as defined by the regular possibilities of their
significant use, including their inferential relations with other
propositions in a language as a whole. Over the decades following the
publication of the*Tractatus* , developments of this holist,
inferentialist program of analysis would come to exert an ever broader
and more widespread influence over the methods of analytic philosophers.
It would play a central methodological role, indeed, in the single
development most characteristic of midcentury analytic philosophy. This
was the radical critique undertaken by Austin, Ryle, and Sellars of the
various subjectivist, empiricist, or Cartesian theories of mind that had
placed the “givenness” of private sense-data or other immediate contents
of consciousness at the center of their accounts of knowledge and
understanding. Against these earlier theories, the midcentury
philosophers emphasized the essential linguistic articulation of even
the most basic*perceptual* concepts and judgments.[^172] Such judgments,
they emphasized, are applied, first and foremost, to the description of
objective facts, phenomena, and events, and only secondarily to the
“private” phenomena of first-person experience.

In this chapter, I shall explore the historical and methodological
implications of this appeal to the “publicity” of linguistic use over
against traditional theories of the privacy of experience. When Ryle
wrote*The Concept of Mind* in 1949, his goal was to employ reflection on
the “logical geography” of the ordinary concepts of mind and mentality
against the claims of the “official doctrine” tracing to Descartes. This
doctrine, with what Ryle characterized as its central dogma of the
“ghost in the machine,” presented what to him seemed a strangely divided
picture of the mental and physical departments of a human life, treating
these as though they were the subject of two largely separate and
independent biographies. In response, Ryle suggested a logically unitary
analysis of the bearing of “mentalistic” terms on the description of
actions and events of ordinary life. A key element of this suggestion
was Ryle’s analysis of the terms ordinarily taken to refer to
perceptions or sensations as having a “dispositional” logic. That is,
rather than referring to special items or object immediately present to
consciousness, Ryle suggested that they could be taken simply to
attribute various kinds of tendencies, liabilities, and abilities to
behave in ordinary perceptual situations. In this way analysis could
bring the crucial recognition of the public and intersubjective
character of language to bear against the subjectivist theories of mind
that treated perception as grounded in the presence of immediately
“given” mental objects such as sense-data. These theories could then
cede to one that placed the possibility of*attributing* dispositions and
capacities to perceive at the center of ordinary linguistic practice.

When Sellars took up his own analysis of the language of “inner
episodes” in what would become his most famous work,*Empiricism and the
Philosophy of Mind,* he inherited some of the most significant
methodological components of Ryle’s inferentialist analysis. Familiarly,
Sellars’ largest aim was to dispel what he called the “Myth of the
Given,” the myth of unconceptualized and non-linguistic deliverances of
experience at the basis of our knowledge of the world. The myth, Sellars
thought, had been a central component of empiricist theories of
perception and knowledge, both in their classical forms and, more
recently, in the early explanatory projects of the analytic tradition.
His criticism of it involved both a decisive appeal to the publicity of
language as well as, I shall argue, a determinative critical
appreciation of the problems to which the attempt to describe
first-person experience can lead. But although he shared Ryle’s
anti-phenomenalist and anti-subjectivist motivations, Sellars
nevertheless saw reason to criticize, in detail, Ryle’s dispositionalist
account of sensation and perception. Understanding the reasons for this
criticism, I shall argue, helps us to see the broader critical
implications of a reflection on language for the specific problems of
subjectivity and experience, problems it must encounter in taking up a
more general inquiry into the significance of language for the form of a
human life.

I

Readers of*The Concept of Mind* have long been familiar with Ryle’s
anti-Cartesian*dispositionalism* about the meaning of many terms of
mentalistic description. The core of Ryle’s suggestion is that concepts
like those of knowing, believing, intending, and perceiving, can be
analyzed in terms of verbal and nonverbal behaviors and capacities,
tendencies, and abilities to behave in particular ways. This provides an
alternative to the Cartesian assumption that they must as refer to
occurent states, processes and events in an inner, mental realm. A good
example is the notion of “intelligence.” On the traditional Cartesian
picture, Ryle suggests, intelligence seems to be a property of inner
acts of thinking or conceiving. Thus, for instance, the Cartesian
analyst understands someone’s*intelligently playing chess* as involving
two essentially different kinds of actions: first, an inner, mental act
of calculation or intellection (the act properly described as
“intelligent,”), and second, a separate physical act of carrying out its
result.[^173] Ryle’s suggestion is that the intelligent playing ought to
be analyzed, instead, simply as an instance of playing by somebody
possessing the familiar background of skills and abilities
(dispositions) that make for what we call intelligence in chess-playing.
We can investigate the origin of these general skills, and even
investigate their physical or neurophysiological basis in the brain. But
there is no need to describe the performance as involving a
separable*mental* act which itself has the property or feature of
“intelligence.”

Ryle supported his dispositionalism about mentalistic terms with a
sophisticated semantic account of the logic and grammar of
disposition-ascriptions in intersubjective discursive practice. Here as
well, Ryle’s grammatical account steadfastly aims to avoid invoking the
existence of esoteric private or inner mental events, items, or
structures, even those that can be understood purely physicalistically
and neurophysiologically. It can be no part, Ryle reasons, of the
ascription of an ability to play chess intelligently or speak French
competently that reference is made to any underlying mental or
neurophysiological structure. For we need have no knowledge of such
structures in order to ascribe these dispositions as we do in ordinary
intersubjective practice.[^174] Indeed, in a chapter of*The Concept of
Mind* devoted to the nature of dispositionalist analysis, Ryle clarifies
that it is no part of his style of dispositionalism to require the
ascription of any sort of*facts* at all (behavioral, neurophysiological,
or otherwise). Instead, he offers what can be called a*non-factualist*
account of disposition-ascriptions. On the account, to ascribe a skill,
tendency, liability, proclivity (or any other of a variety of specific
types of dispositions) is not to report the obtaining of any set of
facts, but rather to*operate among* fact-statements.[^175] Ryle likens
the role of disposition-ascriptions to the role of statements of
physical law; both kinds of statements do not, he suggests, state facts
but rather*license* certain patterns of inference*among* statements of
them:

At least part of the point of trying to establish laws is to find out
how to infer from particular matters of fact to other particular matters
of fact, how to explain particular matters of fact by reference to other
matters of fact, and how to bring about or prevent particular states of
affairs. A law is used as, so to speak, an inference-ticket (a season
ticket) which licenses its possessors to move from asserting factual
statements to asserting other factual statements.[^176] (p. 121)

The point of the statement of a causal or logical law, Ryle argues, is
simply to allow inference from certain factual statements to other
factual statements. Given this analysis, he goes on to suggest, we can
see that the thought that the adoption of a law requires the recognition
of a new entity (for instance a “causally necessary connection” between
the states of affairs connected by a causal law) must be confused. For
any such entity could only do the semantic work that the law-statement
already does, namely issue a warrant for predictive and explanatory
inference from one set of states of affairs to another.[^177]

Like law-statements, Ryle argues, disposition-statements should be
understood as having the logical job, not of reporting facts, but of
licensing particular kinds and patterns of inference among
fact-statements:

Dispositional statements about particular things and persons are … like
law statements in the fact that we use them in a partly similar way.
They apply to, or they are satisfied by, the actions, reactions and
states of the object; they are inference-tickets, which license us to
predict, retrodict, explain and modify these actions, reactions and
states …

Dispositional statements are neither reports of observed or observable
states of affairs, nor yet reports of unobserved or unobservable states
of affairs. They narrate no incidents. But their jobs are intimately
connected with narratives of incidents, for, if they are true, they are
satisfied by narrated incidents..[^178]

On the Rylean account, then, to say of someone that they know French is
just to*license* certain inferences, for instance from their being
presented with a French telegram to their reading it correctly; to say
that Doe knows French is just to say if the antecedent of the inference
is fulfilled, its consequent probably will be as well. Ordinary use of
disposition-terms does not require that the inferences licensed by these
inference tickets be exceptionless; they need only be likely to hold,
under normal conditions.[^179] Indeed, the general inference-patterns
allowed by particular disposition-statements are, Ryle argues, usually
only*partially* satisfied by particular statements of fact. For
instance, somebody may be called “irresponsible” after committing a
particular error, although he has not in fact committed many of the
other errors which the censure predicts he will or may commit, in
particular circumstances. Ryle calls dispositional statements that are
only partially satisfied by particular occurrences “mongrel-categorical
statements,” and suggests that these include most of the dispositional
and categorical statements that function in our ordinary language of
mental life.[^180]

Ryle’s analysis of the logic of disposition-statements exemplifies
particularly clearly the bearing of analysis of the categorical
structure of language on questions about what an earlier discourse would
have described as our “inner” life. In the particular case of the
language of sensations, Ryle makes the dispositional analysis central to
his argument against the traditional empiricist or phenomenalist
sense-datum theory of perception. His aim is to dispel the thought that
the meaning of sensation-language involves its referring to a set of
private or proprietary inner objects. To this end, Ryle aims to show
that the standard perceptual cases on which the sense-datum theory
trades can be analyzed along other lines than the sense-datum theorist
suggests. For instance, where the sense-datum theorist is inclined to
interpret the sense of “looks” in which a tilted plate “has an
elliptical look” as showing the*existence* of an “elliptical look” of
the round plate (conceived as an inner item or set of*sensa* ), Ryle
proposes that the case be analyzed along dispositionalist lines:

In other words, the grammatically unsophisticated sentence ‘the plate
has an elliptical look’ does not, as the theory assumes, express one of
those basic relational truths which are so much venerated in theory and
so seldom used in daily life. It expresses a fairly complex proposition
of which one part is both general and hypothetical. It is applying to
the actual look of the plate a rule or a recipe about the typical looks
of untilted elliptical plates, no matter whether there exist such pieces
of china or not. It is what I have elsewhere called a
mongrel-categorical statement … The expressions ‘it looks …’, ‘it looks
as if…’, ‘it has the appearance of …’, ‘I might be seeing…’ and plenty
of others of the same family contain the force of a certain sort of open
hypothetical prescription applied to a case at hand.[^181]

Where the sense-datum theorist takes the familiar language of perception
to involve commitment to the existence of epistemologically
primary*sensa* , Ryle proposes to analyze it instead as involving
hypotheticals connecting the ways things look in various conditions of
perception to the ways they are. These include, for instance, the rule
that tilted round plates often “look like” untilted elliptical ones.
Indeed, Ryle argues that the language of looking is itself essentially
dependent on the language with which we describe the public properties
of publicly ascertainable objects.[^182] To say that something*looks* a
certain way just is to say that it seems as if it*is* that way, while
also recognizing that, owing to nonstandard perceptual conditions or
error, it may not be. Our ability to employ the language of looking,
then, is just our ability to comprehend the logical and inferential
relations among the ways things can be and the ways they can seem to be,
given nonstandard perceptual conditions or cases of perceptual error.
This language, significantly, stops short of introducing any such
entities as “looks,” “appearances,” “seemings,” or “sensings,”
hypostatized*events* that begin the traditional theorist on the path
toward substantial object-like sense-data.

In fact, Ryle goes on to suggest, the traditional theorist has
misunderstood the nature of the logical gap between “looks”-talk and
basic reports of how things actually are. According to Ryle, proponents
of the traditional model discern rightly that, although knowledge about
a public state of affairs will depend in part on simply observing that
state of affairs, it will also depend on the satisfaction of further
conditions, which may in some special cases fail to obtain. But they
mistake these*standing* conditions for occurent processes which are said
to*accompany* the observation as it happens, or very soon afterward:

When a person is described as having seen the thimble, part of what is
said is that he has had at least one visual sensation, but a good deal
more is said as well. Theorists commonly construe this as meaning that a
description of a person as having seen the thimble both says that he had
at least one visual sensation and says that he did or underwent
something else as well; and they ask accordingly, ‘What else did the
finder of the thimble do or undergo, such that he would not have found
the thimble if he had not done or undergone these extra things?’ Their
queries are then answered by stories about some very swift and unnoticed
inferences, or some sudden and unrememberable intellectual leaps, or
some fetching up of concepts and clapping them upon the heads of the
visual data. They assume, that is, that because the proposition ‘he
espied the thimble’ has a considerable logical complexity, it therefore
reports a considerable complication of processes.[^183]

For Ryle, then, talk of perceptions and sensations is to be analyzed as
involving the application of learned rules within a logically prior
descriptive language. The ability to apply these rules is theoretically
inseparable from our mastery of an ordinary language, a kind of mastery
we ascribe to anyone we consider to be perceptually and linguistically
competent. The normal assumption of perceptual competence is itself
essential to our understanding of what is said when agents report the
ways things look or seem to them. But this assumption is just the
attribution of a disposition, an attribution that we make to anyone who
has mastered ordinary perceptual and observational concepts. The most
important precondition for justification in issuing the attribution, and
the most important component in the judgment that an agent is
perceptually competent, is entitlement to suppose the agent’s perceptual
and observational reports, when made in standard conditions, accurate.
Like the other disposition-attributions that Ryle discusses, the
attribution of perceptual competence operates as an inference-ticket,
allowing the ascriber to infer from the agent’s observational report to
the probability of things being as they are reported to be.

Ryle’s theory, therefore, is*eliminativist* with respect to at least
some of the*apparent* commitments of sensation-reports and other seeming
reports of inner states and processes. According to Ryle, the forms of
language that appear to give support to a conception of the inner life
can uniformly be analyzed as involving*only* commitments to public and
publicly observable facts and their grammatical interrelations. The
suggestion of the eliminability of the commitments of the language of
the ‘inner’ is itself motivated, most of all, by Ryle’s claim to trace
the*actual* commitments of ordinary language by systematically
reflecting on the use of its terms. In thus turning reflection on the
systematic structure of language to the criticism of those earlier
theories that place individual, subjective experience at the center of
their accounts of content, Ryle both continues the methods, and deepens
the results, of the critique of psychologism that Frege and Wittgenstein
had already pursued. Here, indeed, this critique drives to what is
perhaps its most radically formulated bearing against traditional
accounts of the ‘interiority’ of experience. Whereas earlier
practitioners had been content to criticize philosophically or
scientifically specialized psychologistic theories of content, Ryle
adduces grounds for thinking that the entire metaphor of ‘interiority,’
as it is used in ordinary discourse*as well as* specialized
philosophical discourses, is without foundation.

At the same time, however, its revisionist suggestions with respect to
the apparent commitments of ordinary usage to the description of inner
life invite the objection that Ryle’s theory has, in the end, actually
failed to capture some of the most ordinarily significant features of
this usage itself. In particular, on Ryle’s account, my description of
my own sensory state embodies*nothing* that could not equally well be
recognized from the perspective of another observer. The state of
affairs it identifies - including my recognition of the possible
nonveridicality of my own perceptual state - is in no sense particularly
private or even first-personal. It is a perfectly public, objective
matter of the configuration of one’s perceptual devices and abilities.
Accordingly, on Ryle’s theory, what appears to be the report of a
sensation has no special claim to be true if issued in the first person;
it is simply the description of a perceptual state of affairs, and may
as well be taken to be true from*any* perspective.

But it is a familiar feature of our ordinary language of sensation, and
indeed of all first-person reports of experience, that the
reporter*does* enjoy a special epistemic and semantic privilege in
making the report. Such reports are routinely entitled, in ordinary
intersubjective linguistic practice, to a default assumption of
accuracy; indeed, it is not even obviously coherent to assume that
one*can* be mistaken about one’s own present sensations.[^184] And even
if Ryle can reduce the first-person*uses* of sensation language to
correspondent first-person uses of perception language involving talk of
“looks,” the Rylean theory has no account, in either case, of the
special authority - the default claim to be taken true - that
characterizes them. For all Ryle says, the locutions that seem to report
on the existence of perceptions and sensations might as well be
empirical descriptions of one’s own perceptual states, enjoying no
greater antecedent claim to truth than any other empirical description.
Ryle’s theory fails, in other words, to construe sensation-reports
genuinely as*reports* : declarative utterances that are, if
true,*caused* in part by the states of affairs that make them true.
Instead, on Ryle’s theory, sensation-reports are actually*descriptions*
of the objective perceptual situation of the perceiver. This, however,
seems to badly mischaracterizes the semantics of these locutions, with
precipitous consequences for the place of first-person experience in
Ryle’s theory.

II

At first glance, Sellars’ theoretical aims in*EPM* with respect to
sensations and sensation-reports seem strikingly similar to Ryle’s. Both
philosophers want to dispel the theory of sense-data, both in its
Cartesian and contemporary forms, and the empiricism in which it
figures. They both aim to defeat the sense-datum theorist’s conception
of sensations as epistemologically ultimate by emphasizing the role of
conceptual training as a precondition to even the simplest
sensation-reports. Such reports can no longer be treated as
epistemologically foundational, both philosophers argue, once
the*linguistic* preconditions for their use are appreciated. Both
recognize as central to their own projects, moreover, the analysis of
our ordinary language of observation, perception, and sensation. In
particular, the actual epistemological significance of seeming
perceptual and sensory reports is to be determined by their ordinary
linguistic roles, as this is shown in everyday use. But on at least one
centrally important point, Sellars’ theoretical aim is different from
Ryle’s, and indeed arises, in part, from a direct criticism of the
limitations of Ryle’s program. For Sellars is centrally concerned
to*preserve* , rather than dispute, the meaningfulness of the forms of
language with which we seem to refer to inner processes and episodes
such as sensations.

If we insist, as Sellars and Ryle both do, that only public objects (and
never sensations or impressions) literally have properties like being
red or triangular, we can easily, Sellars suggests, be led to think that
we never directly*refer* to such inner items at all. On this line of
argument, we can only characterize them indirectly, via definite
descriptions, in the language of public events and properties. But in
following this line, Sellars notes, “we would scarcely seem to be any
better off than if we maintained that talk about ‘impressions’ is a
notational convenience, a code, for the language in which we speak of
how things look and what there looks to be.”[^185] And in explicit
criticism of Ryle, Sellars argues that any theory that follows this line
will fail to account for important features of our ordinary discourse:

Indeed, once we think this line of reasoning through, we are struck by
the fact that if it is sound, we are faced not only with the question
“How could we come to have the idea of an ‘impression’ or ‘sensation?’
but by the question ‘How could we come to have the idea of something’s
looking red to us, or,’ to get to the crux of the matter, ‘of seeing
that something is red?’ In short, we are brought face to face with the
general problem of understanding how there can be inner episodes -
episodes, that is, which somehow combine privacy, in that each of us has
privileged access to his own, with intersubjectivity, in that each of us
can, in principle, know about the other’s.[^186]

Sellars’ criticism of Ryle is subtle and far-reaching. Ryle’s
dispositionalist account of the language of “impressions” and
“sensations” treats this language as a shorthand, a notational
replacement for discussion of how things look or seem to us. But even if
Ryle can reduce the language of “sensations” and “impressions” in this
way, the special logical features of the supposedly anterior language of
ways of looking or seeming themselves stand in need of explanation.
Reducing language about sensations and impressions to language about
ways of looking and seeming simply pushes the problem back. We still
lack an account of the distinctive kind of authority that inner-state
reports, whether reports of sensation or of perception, can have.
Sellars insists that there will be no way to solve*this* problem without
confronting the issue of inner episodes: without, that is, discovering
how there can be items or events that be, at the same time,
both*descriptive* objects of public language and*episodic* sources of
our reports:

We might try to put this more linguistically as the problem of how there
can be a sentence (e.g. ‘S has a toothache’) of which it is logically
true that whereas anybody can use it to state a fact, only one person,
namely S himself, can use it to make a report. But while this is a
useful formulation, it does not do justice to the supposedly episodic
character of the items in question. And that this is the heart of the
puzzle is shown by the fact that many philosophers who would not deny
that there are short-term hypothetical and mongrel
hypothetical-categorical facts about behavior which others can ascribe
to us on behavioral evidence, but which only we can report, have found
it to be logical nonsense to speak of non-behavioral episodes of which
this is true. Thus, it has been claimed by Ryle that the very idea that
there are such episodes is a category mistake, while others have argued
that though there are such episodes, they cannot be characterized in
intersubjective discourse, learned as it is in a context of public
objects and in the ‘academy’ of one’s linguistic peers. It is my purpose
to argue that both these contentions are quite mistaken, and that not
only are inner episodes not category mistakes, they are quite ‘effable’
in intersubjective discourse.[^187]

Without an account of how seeming reports of “sensations” and
“impressions” can genuinely be reports of inner episodes, Sellars
suggests, we will be unable to capture the logical features of these
reports that account for their functioning, in intersubjective
discourse, as they do. In particular, we will lack an account of how
these seeming reports can be reports of happenings that seem in a
certain way proprietary to their bearers, a status which is recognized
in the default assumption of truth that reports of them enjoy when
issued in the first person.

Sellars mentions his aim of preserving the meaningfulness of discourse
about inner episodes often enough to show that it is one of the main
theoretical goals of his account in*EPM* . He cites the explication of
the “logical status of impressions or immediate experiences,” for
instance, as the main purpose of the famous Myth of Jones. With this
reconstructive story, Sellars aims to show how a group of people
initially limited to a “Rylean” language capable only of referring to
the public properties of public objects could, once given the resources
to discuss the*semantic* properties of their own language, develop a
mode of discourse about inner episodes and states with all the logical
features of our own inner-state language.[^188]

Indeed, Sellars suggests that his attack on the Myth of the Given will
not really succeed unless it can preserve at least*some* of the
theoretical motivations, implicit in ordinary language, that provided
support for the traditional empiricist picture of sensation-reports as
representing a semantically and epistemologically special stratum of
knowledge. For Sellars as for Ryle, the meaningfulness of
observation-reports depends upon their being generated by a reporter
with the ordinary perceptual and conceptual abilities of a competent
adult observer. What is ascribed in ascribing these abilities is itself
at least partially comprehensible in terms of their inferential
articulation.[^189] To judge someone’s perceptual report meaningful,
then, is, at least in part, just to ascribe them the normal suite of
perceptual and conceptual abilities, which in turn is just to issue the
kind of inference-ticket that such ascription involves. But for Sellars,
the ascription of competence that figures in the authority of perceptual
and observational reports is not*simply* the issuance of an
inference-ticket. For in addition to the intersubjectively ascertainable
reliability that perceptual competence involves, Sellars insists that
the meaningfulness of an agent’s perceptual and observational reports
depends, as well, on the agent’s*knowledge* that her reports are
normally reliable.

This additional requirement of knowledge goes beyond anything that
Ryle’s theory demands or suggests. Sellars insists on it - what I shall
call Sellars’*knowledge requirement* - at several points in*EPM* . He
formulates it most directly in section 35:

For if the authority of the report ‘This is green’ lies in the fact that
the existence of green items appropriately related to the perceiver can
be inferred from the occurrence of such reports, it follows that only a
person who is able to draw this inference, and therefore who has not
only the concept green, but also the concept of uttering “This is
green” - indeed, the concept of certain conditions of perception, those
which would correctly be called ‘standard conditions’ - could be in a
position to token ‘This is green’ in recognition of its authority. In
other words, for a*Konstatierung* ‘This is green’ to ‘express
observational knowledge,’ not only must it be a symptom or sign of the
presence of a green object in standard conditions, but the perceiver
must know that tokens of “This is green” are symptoms of the presence of
green objects in conditions which are standard for visual
perception.[^190]

The requirement might seem innocuous, but actually it represents an
important divergence from Ryle’s account and a key element of Sellars’
own argument against the Myth of the Given. Indeed, Sellars goes on to
say that the requirement is essential to showing that observation
reports are not epistemically basic in the sense in which traditional
empiricism takes them to be:

Now it might be thought that there is something obviously absurd in the
idea that before a token uttered by, say, Jones could be the expression
of observational knowledge, Jones would have to know that overt verbal
episodes of this kind are reliable indicators of the existence, suitably
related to the speaker, of green objects. I do not think that it is.
Indeed, I think that something very like it is true. The point I wish to
make now, however, is that if it*is* true, then it follows, as a matter
of simple logic, that one couldn’t have observational knowledge of any
fact unless one knew many*other* things as well. And let me emphasize
that the point is not taken care of by distinguishing between knowing
how and knowing that, and admitting that observational knowledge
requires a lot of “know how.” For the point is specifically that
observational knowledge of any particular fact, e.g. that this is green,
presupposes that one knows general facts of the form*X is a reliable
symptom of Y* . And to admit this requires an abandonment of the
traditional empiricist idea that observational knowledge “stands on its
own feet.”[^191] (pp. 75-76)

Even if the meaningfulness of observation reports can be analyzed in
terms of their issuers’ possession of standard perceptual and conceptual
abilities, it is essential to Sellars’ story that it additionally
involves the reporter’s possession of general knowledge about the
reliability of particular sentence tokens in reporting particular states
of affairs. This knowledge is not, as Ryle would have it, explicable
simply as “knowledge-how” in contrast to “knowledge that.” That is, it
cannot be explained simply as a matter of our possession of various
kinds of ability or dispositions. It is this that shows that,*contra*
the epistemological foundationalist’s theory of them, “basic”
observation-reports already presuppose a substantial amount of general
knowledge, and so cannot be the ultimate basis of empirical knowledge in
the way foundationalism takes them to be.

To understand the reason for the requirement, it is helpful to reflect
on its setting within Sellars’ critical discussion of a specific form of
epistemic foundationalism. Sellars states the requirement in the course
of his reconstructive discussion of the logical empiricist view
according to which observation reports are immediate reports on a
stratum of inner and private experiences, non-verbal episodes which are
held to be*self-authenticating* in that their authority does not rest on
anything but themselves.[^192] On the view, which was held most closely
by Schlick, basic observation reports are the immediate expression of
the content of more primary experiential episodes
called*Konstatierungen* . The*Konstatierungen* themselves were taken to
be infallible, and to have a non-verbal or pre-verbal logical form. The
authority of basic observation-reports was then thought to derive, as is
suggested by their usual inclusion of indexical or token-reflexive
expressions (terms like “I” and “now,” as in what was taken to be the
standard form of a sense-datum report, “I am having a red sensation
now”), from their being made in the*presence* of the experiences on
which they report. The kind of authority, or claim to be believed, that
these reports have would then be essentially different from the kind of
authority possessed by other propositional claims. For whereas the
authority of most sentence-tokens can be understood in terms of
the*inferential role* of the contents they express - the kinds of
evidence that support them, and the kinds of inferences that can be
drawn from them - the authority of observation reports would depend
instead on the*conditions* under which tokens of them are issued.

Thus, whereas propositional authority ordinarily flows
from*sentence-types* to*sentence-tokens* (so that a token sentence is
authoritative in virtue of its being a token of the sentence-type that
it is a token of) the epistemic use of observational reports would
involve a kind of authority that flows in the opposite direction,
from*sentence-tokens* authorized by their*conditions* of utterance (and
involving indexicals) to*sentence-types* expressing nonindexical
observational contents. This would give them a kind of ultimate
credibility, a credibility that does not depend on their relation to
other propositional contents or tokens. Their having this kind of
credibility, it is then reasonable to think, would be essential to their
claim to express observational knowledge at all, knowledge that is the
direct outcome of observational processes rather than inference from
other propositions. At the same time, it would be comparable to the
ultimate credibility of analytic statements, statements that are true
simply in virtue of the conventional rules of linguistic usage. This
parallel suggested to Schlick and others that the correctness of an
observational report like “This is green” ought to be thought of as
depending simply on one’s following the “rules of use” for the term
“green” and the indexical term “this,” rules of use that call for the
utterance of the observational report when, and only when, the
requisite*Konstatierung* is present.

Unsurprisingly, Sellars rejects Schlick’s view itself as an instance of
the Myth of the Given. The postulated*Konstatierungen* would comprise an
ineffable stratum of immediate and self-authorizing, linguistically
ineffable but somehow semantically contentful episodes.[^193] They are,
in other words, typical instances of the unexplained Given; and the
consistent point of Sellars’ insistence on the social and linguistic
preconditions for these basic reports is that these reports do not rest,
conceptually or evidentially, exclusively on any such*ineffable*
episodes.[^194] But though his diagnosis of the Myth involves his
showing that ineffable inner episodes cannot be the foundations of
empirical knowledge, Sellars emphasizes that his account nevertheless
aims to make room for*effable* inner episodes that are in a sense
non-linguistic.[^195] As Sellars’ subsequent remarks clarify, in fact,
its ability to do so actually arises from its preservation of one of the
most important components of Schlick’s view, the suggestion that
observation-reports have the authority that they do in virtue of their
being made under the particular*conditions* that they are.

Immediately after rejecting Schlick’s view as an instance of the Myth of
the Given, Sellars considers what kind of theoretical view of
observation reports, though purged of Givenness, might still capture
their claim to express genuine observational knowledge. He begins by
contemplating a standard reliabilist account, according to which

An overt or covert token of ‘This is green’ in the presence of a green
item is a*Konstatierung* and expresses observational knowledge if and
only if it is a manifestation of a tendency to produce overt or covert
tokens of “This is green” . if and only if a green object is being
looked at in standard conditions.[^196]

The reliabilist account shares with Schlick’s account the guiding idea
that observation reports have the authority that they do have, an
authority that flows from sentence-token to sentence-type, because of
the conditions under which they are issued. The difference is just that
the reliabilist account replaces Schlick’s inner, experiential episodes
with the presence of a general disposition - a reliable tendency - to
produce tokens of the right types in the right circumstances. On the
reliabilist account, it is in virtue of their being an instance*of* such
a tendency that observation-reports have authority. But Sellars
concludes that the unaugmented reliabilist account still fails to
preserve the claim of observation reports to express genuine
observational knowledge. For this claim to be preserved, the account
must be supplemented with two additional conditions.[^197] First,
Schlick’s understanding of the credibility of observation-reports as
involving the correct following, by the reporter, of semantic rules, has
to be replaced with an essentially*social* account of the kind of
correctness that authoritative observation-reports exhibit.[^198] In
other words, the authority of observation-reports must be seen as
deriving not only from an individual’s following linguistic “rules of
use” but from their (in so doing) reflecting reliable tendencies that
are intersubjectively ascribed in a linguistic community.

As they were for Ryle, these tendencies are intelligible as
dispositions, demonstrated and attributed in a social context. But
second, in addition to this social requirement, Sellars also adds the
requirement of*knowledge* of reliability that we’ve already discussed.
This knowledge of reliable connections between reports and the
inferences they make possible that Sellars refers to in accounting for
the authority of first-person experiential reports plays a central role
in*EPM* , and particularly in the concluding Myth of Jones. The most
decisive chapter in the story is the invention of a*theory* of internal
processes by the genius Jones on the model of semantic discourse. The
Rylean ancestors become able to talk about each other’s thoughts by
internalizing the language with which they formerly talked about the
meaning and truth of each other’s public statements.[^199] Given these
semantic resources, Jones invents a “theory” of inner episodes on the
model of overt verbal behavior, semantically characterized.[^200] It is,
in fact, essential to his ability to invent the theory that the inner
states characterized by it can be described using the same semantic
predicates as can already be used to talk about overt utterances. It is
essential, in other words, to the*identity* of the postulated inner
states that they can be described as*“* meaning” this or that or being
“*about”* this or that.[^201] Without this possibility of description,
they would not be intelligible as the states that they are; but the
possibility of reporting their identity is itself dependent on the
application to them of the concepts ordinarily used to describe
objective phenomena and events. They inherit their content from the
common content of the public utterances that exemplify the perceptual
and observational reports that can be made in the various situations
where we describe things as looking or being thus-and-so, and therefore
depend constitutively on the subject’s ability to issue those reports in
standard and nonstandard perceptual conditions. And that ability,
together with all the conceptual and semantic knowledge it implies, is
just what is required by the knowledge requirement.

The knowledge of reliable usage that Sellars requires as the background
of our use of perceptual concepts, if we are to be counted as competent
users of these concepts at all, thus plays a central role in enabling
his theory to give a plausible account of the authority of first-person
reports. In earlier accounts such as Schlick’s that did not share
Sellars’ commitment to a wholly public and intersubjective account of
the acquisition and use of first-person language, the reference and
authority of such reports was explained by reference to the immediate
deliverances of Givenness. For Sellars, though, a speaker’s knowledge
that a semantic token such as “green” can (reliably) be used in
referring to green objects is itself sufficient to ground the authority
that the earlier theories relied on the givenness of green*sensa*
or*Konstatierungen* to explain. This knowledge about reliable use
is*semantic* knowledge; where present, it counts as conferring on its
possessor knowledge of the*meaning* of the term “green” in ordinary
discourse and practice. It is knowledge that we can be expected to have,
inasmuch as we speak a language at all, and which would be inaccessible
to us if we did not. Our attribution of it to an agent expresses, in
other terms, the judgment that that agent is a member of the linguistic
community in which we, ourselves, live or can live.

III

We have seen that Sellars’ insistence on the knowledge requirement
figures essentially in his claim to defeat traditional empiricism by
showing that even basic perceptual reports already logically require a
substantial amount of general knowledge. This explanatory connection
between semantic knowledge and inner discourse has its home, beyond and
before*EPM* , in a broader Sellarsian project of*pure pragmatics* . This
project understands semantical concepts as supporting logical structure
in virtue of their*linguistic roles* and aims to solve traditional
philosophical problems, including the traditional “mind-body” problem,
through a characterization of the “pragmatics” of their use. Sellars
articulated the project in a variety of articles over the first half of
the 1950s; but it is sketched only partially and elliptically in*EPM*
itself.[^202] We shall see that an appreciation of the contours of the
program clarifies the role of the questions Sellars addresses in that
work within the larger history of the methods and practices of analytic
philosophy’s reflection on ordinary language, and of the problems to
which the characterization of its logical structure is prone.

Starting in the late 1940s, Sellars offered “pure pragmatics” as a
supplement to the existing formal characterizations of syntactic and
semantic notions. The supplement would be*pure* in that it would retain
the non-factual and*a priori* character of existing formal analyses. But
it would be*pragmatic* in that it would give a formal analysis of
semantic predicates like “meaningful” and “verified,” predicates whose
adequate analysis would require a formal explanation of how an*entire
language* or the large subset of one that is “empirical” can be
meaningful at all.[^203] Thus, pure pragmatics would comprise a “pure
theory of empirically meaningful languages,” and its formal analysis
would display the pragmatic conditions that are required for any speech
behavior to amount to empirically meaningful language at all.[^204]

Sellars’ clearest pre-*EPM* application of the program of pure
pragmatics to the problems of philosophy of mind is the 1953 article “A
Semantical Solution to the Mind-Body Problem.” The article is
historically significant in its own right, for it offers what can be
understood as the earliest suggestion in the philosophical literature of
a*functionalist* theory of mental-state terms. On such theories, these
terms are understood as meaningful in virtue of the patterns of use that
define their*conceptual roles* and thereby identify the semantic “place”
of the mental events to which they refer.[^205] The core of the
article’s analysis is a consideration of the possibility and
implications of a “behaviorist” analysis of mental terms like “thinks”
and closely connected semantic terms like “means.”[^206] As in*EPM* ,
Sellars does not defend a (Rylean) “logical behaviorism,” according to
which mentalistic and semantic discourse would be logically reducible to
discourse about the behavior of bodies.[^207] Instead, he sketches a
“scientific behaviorism” that would uphold truth-functional or
material - but possibly empirical and*a posteriori* - equivalences
between mentalistic statements and statements characterizing only bodily
behavior.[^208] And as in*EPM* , Sellars begins with the thought that
these equivalences, if they obtained, would analyze mental terms by
identifying them with dispositions to behave and episodes*qua*
expressing such dispositions. Smith’s thought that it is raining outside
might, for instance, be identified by a behavioristic psychology with
Smith’s tendency to behave in particular ways, for instance his behavior
of reaching for his umbrella and putting on his raincoat, along with, of
course, the tendency to utter the linguistic expression “it is raining”
and other suitably connected expressions.[^209] But it is immediately
clear that the last-mentioned kind of tendency poses additional problems
for the behaviorist analysis. For the requirement of it is not just the
requirement that Smith tend to utter a particular set of noises (it
could be just as well satisfied, if Smith were a German speaker, by his
tendency to utter the completely different set of noises “es regnet”)
but that he utter a set of noises which mean*it is raining* .[^210]

This difficulty marks the essential difference of Sellars’ semantically
based account from the behaviorist theories he criticizes. Such
theories, insofar as they are genuinely behaviorist, are limited to
describing verbal behavior in terms of the actual utterances issued and
the normal occasions of their utterance. But a genuinely explanatory
semantics, Sellars realized, would have to describe not only the
utterances themselves but also what an earlier age of philosophical
reflection would have characterized as their “meanings.” That is, it
would have to characterize the abstract features (as it seemed to
Sellars) of their*use* that make it possible for two tokens of a
language on different occasions, or two wholly different utterances in
different languages, to mean “the same thing.” Within the broader
program of pure pragmatics, this required that the analyst give an
account of the semantic and pragmatic functioning of the predicate
“means,” and Sellars now undertakes to provide a description of this
functioning. He exploits the central idea that to describe a sentence
as*meaning* thus-and-so is to characterize it as occupying a
particular*role* in the cognitive economy of the speaker. The predicate
“means” has the metalinguistic use of gesturing at this kind of role, a
role which may be shared by several different sentence-types across
different particular languages. The problem, as it now stands, concerns
the implications of a behaviorist analysis of sentences of the form
“Smith utters ‘es regnet’ where ‘es regnet’ means*it is raining* ” into
sentences purely about behavior. If the behaviorist analysis is
possible, Sellars argues, it will issue in equivalences of the form

“Es regnet” uttered by b means*it is raining* \<-\> Ψ (“es regnet”, b)

where the right side of the biconditional “says of b that it has certain
habits relating its utterances of ‘es regnet’ to other utterances, to
other habits, and to sensory stimuli.”[^211] As the predicate “means” is
generally used, “es regnet” can mean the same thing when uttered by a
German-speaker as “il pleut” means when uttered by a French speaker; so
we can take it that the habits of the German-speaker with respect to “es
regnet” share a “common generic feature” with the habits of the
French-speaker with respect to “il pleut.” Thus, if the behaviorist
identification is possible, we can write the general schema:

“…” uttered by b means*it is raining* \<-\> K(“…”, b)

where K(“…”,b) says that b has the particular habits concerning “…” that
qualify it, when uttered by b, to mean*it is raining* .[^212] In other
words, the right-hand side of the biconditional says that “…”occupies
the particular pragmatic and conceptual*role* in b’s cognitive economy
that makes it an utterance meaning*that* it is raining. Its occupying
this role can only be understood as its instancing the generic
tendencies and habits which qualify b as a competent user of the phrase
“it is raining.” Viewed from another direction, of course, these generic
tendencies and habits are just those that qualify b as a competent
verbal reporter of*rain* .

The suggested analysis of the semantic term “means,” then, analyzes the
assertion that an utterance has a particular meaning as the assertion
that it occupies a particular semantic role in the cognitive economy of
a speaker, or, equivalently, that it is a manifestation of particular
behaviorally comprehensible habits and dispositions. But it is essential
to the pragmatic character of Sellars’ suggestion about the nature of
mentalistic terms that one cannot, in general,*specify* the semantic
role in question*except* by issuing, in one’s own language, a token
utterance that occupies it. Equivalently, one cannot, in
general,*specify* the habits and dispositions that a meaningful token of
a particular content must manifest, without issuing a token utterance
that itself*manifests* those very habits and dispositions:

Now we are all familiar with the fact that when we say ‘Jones’
utterances of ‘es regnet’ means it is raining’ we are mentioning ‘es
regnet’ and using ‘it is raining’ to convey what is meant by ‘es regnet’
as uttered by Jones. According to Scientific Behaviorism, if what we say
of Jones’ utterances is true, then the utterance ‘it is raining’ which
we*use* is the manifestation of habits generically identical with Jones’
habits with respect to ‘es regnet’. Thus, when I utter

“Es regnet” uttered by b means it is raining \<-\> K (“es regnet”, b)

the “it is raining” of the left hand side is a manifestation of the
habits mentioned by ‘K (“it is raining”, Sellars)’, and when I utter

“It is raining” uttered by Sellars means*it is raining* \<-\> K(“it is
raining”, Sellars)

the unquoted “it is raining” on the left hand side is a*manifestation*
of the habits mentioned by the right hand side.[^213]

Sellars thus emphasizes that a description of a speaker’s utterance as
meaning thus-and-so can*convey* information about the semantic role of
the utterance by comprising an utterance that*occupies* the same general
role, without involving any*description* of the role itself. Indeed,
this possibility of showing without saying is essential to the ordinary
functioning of the predicate “means” itself. The most typical and basic
use of this predicate is in connection with judgments of the form “ ‘a’
means that b.” Such judgments can compare propositions in two different
languages, or they can compare two different formulations in the same
language of (what is thereby asserted to be) the same fact. When we
issue them, we are, as Sellars says, essentially*demonstrating* a
semantic role by instantiating it. Our assertion of identity of meaning
will be understood only by someone who already possesses the habits and
dispositions thereby instantiated.

This point is central to Sellars’ suggestion of a kind of behavioristic
analysis of mentalistic terms that stops short of the logically
necessary identities that would be required by “logical” (as opposed to
“scientific”) behaviorism. On the analysis, the ascription of mental
states in ordinary discourse (for instance the determination of the
character of an agent’s thoughts) depends, in general, on the
possibility of characterizing those states as having propositional
meanings, and thus on the pragmatic possibility of*conveying*
without*specifying* the conceptual roles of the utterances they are
modeled on. The identities of meaning in which the analysis issues do
not, then,*reduce* mental states to behaviors and dispositions. Rather,
the analysis shows how discourse about mental states can be understood
as discourse ‘about’ behavioral dispositions and habits, in the special
pragmatic sense of ‘about’ in which a semantic sentence can be ‘about’ a
semantic role by exemplifying without specifying that role.[^214] This
kind of exemplification cannot be understood, in general, except through
a pragmatic description of the capability of semantic discourse to show
or exhibit what it does not explicitly state. Accordingly, it is a
consequence of the suggested analysis that a particular mental state can
be construed as meaningful only by an interpreter capable of employing
utterances with the*same* linguistic role as that occupied by the
expression of that state:

While we can convey how Jones uses ‘es regnet’ by the use of “’es
regnet’ uttered by Jones means it is raining’ only to someone who shares
our habits with respect to ‘it is raining’, we can convey this
information even though neither of us has a ‘clear and distinct’ idea of
what these habits are, and even though neither of us is able to
characterize these habits without the repeated use of statements of the
form “S means”, and indeed of the form “in Jones’ mind there is a
thought about”.[^215]

Because semantical pragmatics is (loosely put) a matter of*showing*
rather than saying, only someone capable of meaningfully making an
utterance can describe the same utterance, when issued by another agent,
as meaningful. And only someone capable of occupying the particular
meaningful mental state at issue can describe someone else as being in
that very same (type of) state.

With this “semantical solution” explicitly in mind, we can understand
just how the kind of semantic knowledge embodied by Sellars’ knowledge
requirement in*EPM* makes possible a description of the logic of
inner-episode descriptions that avoids the logical reductionism of
Ryle’s account. Sellars explicitly employs the semantic solution, and to
its special pragmatic sense of ‘implication’, in explaining how the
Jonesian myth can show that semantic discourse about inner states need
not be reduced to a definitional shorthand or notational variant of the
original Rylean language limited to the description of behavioral states
and dispositions:

And let me emphasize … that to make a semantical statement about a
verbal event is not a shorthand way of talking about its causes and
effects, although there is a sense of ‘imply’ in which semantical
statements about verbal productions do imply information about the
causes and effects of these productions. Thus when I say “’Es regnet’
means it is raining,’ my statement ‘implies’ that the causes and effects
of utterances of ‘Es regnet’ beyond the Rhine parallel the causes and
effects of utterances of ‘It is raining’ by myself and other members of
the English-speaking community. And if it didn’t imply this, it couldn’t
perform its role. But this is not to say that semantical statements are
definitional shorthand for statements about the causes and effects of
verbal performances.[^216]

The Rylean analysis commits itself to a dispositionalist understanding
of inner-state descriptions in terms of the semantic roles occupied by
their typical verbal expressions, and thus, at least in principle, to an
ultimate reduction of the language of inner-state descriptions to the
language of causal descriptions of behavioral dispositions. For
instance, Ryle’s analysis understands the attribution, to Jones, of the
thought that it is raining as simply the attribution of a particular
disposition to Jones. This attribution is itself simply the judgment
that Jones will issue a token utterance with a particular semantic role
under particular conditions. On the Rylean analysis, this semantic role
can be characterized simply in terms of the kinds of situations which
causally elicit the utterance, so the Rylean analyst commits herself, at
least in principle, to the view that descriptions of inner states must
be reducible to the purely causal description of the typical causes and
effects of particular verbal utterances. But Sellars’ semantic solution
shows how the semantic role of an utterance might be pragmatically
identified in semantic discourse without any*specification* of its
typical causes and effects. It thereby makes room for the possibility of
a language for the description of inner episodes that*arises* (as in the
Myth of Jones) from the Rylean causal language when that language is
supplemented with semantic discourse, without being*reducible* to causal
or causal-plus-semantic language. On the Sellarsian story, this
inner-episode language will be*theoretical* in the sense of having been
introduced for the purposes of explaining and predicting overt verbal
and semantic behavior. But it will also exhibit, in its positing of
inner states as new entities, a descriptive autonomy that makes it
irreducible to those earlier strata of descriptive language.

On Sellars’ account, then, the issuance of an inner-state report is not
simply the issuance of a redescription of one’s own behavior or
behavioral dispositions. It is, instead, the issuance of a piece of
semantic discourse, discourse that essentially exploits the special
logical features of the predicate “means”. And as such, it is a piece of
discourse which, if understood, must be understood as*showing* (or
“implying,” in Sellars’ special pragmatic sense of “implies”) the
existence of a complex semantic disposition that the listener herself
possesses. To be able to understand such a report, then, implies
knowledge not only of the normal occasions of its production in an
individual’s habitual behavior, but also of the ordinary circumstances
of the use of its constituent terms in the linguistic practice of a
community as a whole; this latter kind of knowledge marks its
understanding as a manifestation of the ability to speak a language that
one shares with such a community, insofar as one is a member of it.
Their essential exploitation of semantic discourse gives first-person
inner-state reports (like first-personal semantic discourse generally) a
kind of authority that flows from token to type rather than type to
token; the comprehension of the token essentially involves the
recognition that*that token* was produced in the right sort of way, and
thus endows it with a default presumption of truth. The token sentence
itself thus bears the presumption of its truth in the conditions of its
comprehension.[^217]

In comparison with Ryle’s account, as well as other applications of the
methods of inferentialism and holistic analysis to the problems of
“philosophy of mind” and subjective experience, Sellars’ semantically
based account therefore goes some way to restoring something like a
theory of the authority and privilege of the subject. But what is most
remarkable about Sellars’ account, in the perspective of a broader
history of the methods of linguistic analysis and reflection, is not
simply its capacity to restore some of the ordinary logical features of
first-person description and reporting by means of an appeal to our
knowledge of a language. It is, rather, the pervasive and essential
ambiguity it demonstrates in the form of this knowledge itself. Indeed,
with Sellars’ semantic account, our ordinary knowledge of the language
that we speak is shown to be capable of grounding ordinary attributional
practice*only insofar as* it is opaque to theoretical description. Not
only the authority of first-person reports, but indeed the entire
possibility of semantic discourse on which it is based, depends on our
ability to*instantiate* or*display* our knowledge of the regularities of
a language without further describing them. The semantic roles
underlying the use of ordinary terms might indeed be describable within
a total structuralist description of the language as a whole, but such
an account, like the Rylean one that Sellars criticizes, would make the
distinctive authority of first-person accounts inexplicable. In place of
those theories that appealed to an ineffable subjectivity to ground
first-person authority in what were conceived as the deliverances of
pre-conceptual givenness, therefore, Sellars appeals to the capacity of
language to refer to, by*instantiating* , its own regular structure. But
the account makes the structure of language, again, essentially
ineffable on the level of its explanatory theoretical description. The
Given mental objects or sense data whose mute presence earlier theories
placed at the foundation of the possibility of knowledge are thereby
replaced, as promised, with the understanding that we can be taken to
have, and regularly appeal to, insofar as we speak a language at all.
But the mystery of what is involved in this understanding is by no means
cleared up. Rather, the linguistic roles whose demonstration is,
according to Sellars, the essential basis for any possibility of
semantic discourse now themselves amount to theoretically ineffable
objects of a recurrent and essential appeal.


