5. Quine’s Appeal to Use and the Genealogy of Indeterminacy
===========================================================

The envisioning of language that has long marked the analytic tradition
involved, at first, only a relatively vague and inexplicit conception of
language’s “use,” “application,” or intersubjective “practice. ” Even
this vague and inexplicit conception was, as we have seen, already
enough to suggest some of the fundamental ambiguities that arise from
placing an appeal to language at the center of the methods of
philosophy. But it was left to the second generation of analytic
philosophers, those who also played the largest role in consolidating
and spreading the tradition as a unity, to develop more explicitly the
more problematic implications of its methods. One of the most
significant and enduring of these expressions is W. V. O. Quine’s model
of “radical translation” and the notorious thesis of*indeterminacy of
translation* to which it led.

Over a period of twenty-five years, from the period of his first
published writings to his seminal*Word and Object* , Quine moved by
stages away from the “logical syntax” project of his mentor Carnap, and
toward the “radical translation” or “radical interpretation” model of
linguistic understanding. The model seeks to reconstruct the facts about
the meaning and interpretation of a language in terms of the publicly
accessible knowledge available, in principle, to a field linguist
initially innocent of the language under interpretation. It thus
captures, probably as completely as is possible, the thought that to
understand a language is to understand a*structure* of signs that are
offered and consumed in a public, social context. But the most
significant implication of the radical translation model is not its
formulation of a structuralist picture of language, but rather the way
its result undermines this picture from within. For almost as soon as
Quine had fully conceived the radical translation model, he also saw its
radical implication: that the meaning of ordinary sentences, though
entirely grounded in the publicly accessible facts of language-use, is
also systematically*indeterminate* with respect to the totality of those
facts.

The indeterminacy result was first articulated in*Word and Object*
(1960), but it had developed gradually, in Quine’s own thinking, over
the twenty-five years of his dialogue with Carnap. Over the period from
1934 to 1950, Quine came by stages to question and then entirely to
reject the traditional distinction between analytic and synthetic
statements, and with it also the intuitive notions of logical necessity,
synonymy, meaning and intention that Carnap and others had used it to
explicate. The publication, in 1951, of Quine’s influential “Two Dogmas
of Empiricism” marked a watershed moment in this development; in the
article, Quine made explicit his rejection of the analytic/synthetic
distinction and began to articulate his own, alternative picture of
epistemology. But years before this watershed, the seed of both Quine’s
divergence from Carnap and his elaboration of the radical translation
scenario had already been planted with a subtle but unmistakable appeal
that already appears in some of Quine’s first published writings.

What I shall call Quine’s*appeal to use* appears already in 1934, in
Quine’s first published reactions to Carnap’s*Logical Syntax* . There it
already marks, as I shall argue, the essential difference of emphasis
that would eventually grow into Quine’s rejection of Carnap’s entire
picture. For from the time of these first philosophical writings, Quine
held that it is impossible to understand the*structure* of language in
complete independence of an understanding of the
intersubjective*practice* of its speakers. In this, Quine already
diverged from Carnap, whose vision in*The Logical Syntax of Language*
called for languages to be treated as arbitrary, rule-based calculi,
uninterpreted in themselves. By understanding the significance of this
difference for the development of Quine’s thought, we can gain insight
into both the underlying reasons for his divergence from Carnap and the
larger significance of the indeterminacy result itself. For we can see
how it formulates Quine’s far-ranging internal critique of the
structuralist picture of language that can otherwise seem, as it did for
Carnap, natural and unavoidable, and that continues to determines both
ordinary and philosophical thinking about language and its analysis.

I

We can begin to understand the development of Quine’s understanding of
language and meaning by considering its origins in his initial reaction
to the work that was the basis of his first philosophical writings,
Carnap’s*Logical Syntax* . Conceived and written over a period of three
years, and appearing in 1934,*Logical Syntax* made the bold claim that
the problems of philosophy and the logic of science could be treated
purely*syntactically* : that is, in terms simply of formal rules
governing the interrelation and combination of symbols, without
reference to their meanings.[^218] Logicians had previously recognized
the syntactical nature of the grammatical*formation rules* governing the
possibilities of combining symbols into meaningful sentences, given a
perspicuous sorting of symbols into grammatical types. In addition to
this, Carnap argued,*transformation rules* governing inference or
derivation of one symbol-sequence from another could also be treated as
purely syntactical ones, concerning only the interrelations of
symbols.[^219] In this way, the logical analysis of language becomes the
purely descriptive “mathematics and physics of language,” the theory of
the rules actually governing the inscription and manipulation of signs
in a particular language, natural or artificial.[^220] The important
notions of analyticity, deducibility, and logical contradiction can then
be formulated, Carnap argues, in terms of the syntactical rules for a
given language. Their formal properties, moreover, can be investigated
in abstraction from any pre-existing interpretation of the*significance*
of those rules.[^221]

Indeed, as Carnap urged, the syntactical conception of logic had the
substantial merit of exposing the arbitrariness of the logical rules
constitutive of any*particular* language. For any particular language,
logical syntax displays the rules constitutive of meaning and logic
in*that* language; but we can always imagine, and formulate, alternative
sets of rules to suit our particular needs. This shows, Carnap suggests,
that the logical analysis of language need not be an investigation of
the “single” logic or the “true” logic, as philosophers had formerly
supposed.[^222] Instead, in logical investigations, a “principle of
tolerance” reigns, allowing the logician to stipulate*arbitrary*
rule-determined languages to suit particular needs. Logical
investigations can henceforth be liberated from any assumption or
question of correctness or incorrectness, and alternative logics and
languages freely pursued. Carnap suggests that this will lead to the
solution of many troubling philosophical problems, including problems in
the foundations of mathematics. These disputes can henceforth be seen
simply as involving alternative*proposals* for the form of a language,
rather than the substantive disagreements about the nature or forms of
objects or entities that they might otherwise appear to be.

The syntactical conception of language thereby gave Carnap a powerful
new suggestion for resolving philosophical disagreements by treating
them as resulting from disagreements about conventional language
forms.[^223] At the same time, though, the conception of logic as syntax
also makes possible an account of the*origin* of philosophical and
metaphysical error and confusion that would prove decisive for Carnap’s
ongoing critique of metaphysics. According to Carnap in*Syntax* , most
metaphysical sentences in fact arise from the confusion of two ways of
speaking, what Carnap calls the*formal* and the*material* modes. The
sentences of logical syntax, sentences about symbols and the rules that
govern them, are expressed in the formal mode. According to Carnap, all
philosophical and logical claims can be written in this mode, since all
logical claims in fact characterize the syntax of language. In ordinary
usage, though, these formal, syntactic claims are often mistaken for
claims in the material mode, or claims about objects and entities rather
than about symbols. This becomes particularly problematic when such
claims appear to license general ontological or metaphysical
conclusions. Thus, for instance, we might be tempted to assert in the
course of metaphysical theorizing that “5 is not a thing, but a number”
or that “Friendship is a relation.”[^224] But the appearance of
substantial theory vanishes when we transform these material-mode
sentences into their formal-mode correlates, the syntactical
propositions “ ‘5’ is not a thing-word, but a number word” and “
‘Friendship’ is a relation-word.”[^225] By transforming the
material-mode philosophical claims into the formal mode, we reveal their
hidden root in the conventional form of the language.

With this revealed, it becomes possible to see what might otherwise seem
to be substantial philosophical claims as in fact resting on nothing
more than the conventionally determined rules of a particular language.
Even claims about meaning, Carnap argues, can be treated as propositions
of syntax mistakenly formulated in the material mode. Rightly
understood, the claim that one sentence*means* the same as another is
simply the syntactical claim that the two sentences are
intersubstitutable, according to the syntactical rules of the language,
without altering grammatical or derivational relations to other
sentences.

The body of*Logical Syntax* develops these suggestions by developing two
specific artificial languages. The rules of Carnap’s “Language I” allow
for the formation of meaningful terms and predicates, relations of
logical inference between sentences, and a syntactic property of
analyticity. The syntactical rules for Language I are themselves, as
Carnap demonstrates using a method akin to Gödel’s method of
arithmetizing syntax, formulable in Language I itself. Thus the
formulation of logical syntax does not require any problematic hierarchy
of meta-languages, since each language of a certain degree of complexity
has the resources to describe its own syntax.[^226] The second formal
language, Language II, is an expansion of Language I, produced by adding
to it unlimited quantifiers that allow its sentences to refer to an
infinite range of objects. In the context of the logical syntax project
as a whole, the two specialized artificial languages have the role of
simplified models. Carnap compares their introduction to the physicist’s
use of abstractive constructions such as the simple pendulum to help
establish the underlying principles of the much more complicated natural
world. Just as reflection on these abstractions can illuminate the basic
principles of more complicated natural situations, Carnap suggests, the
construction of simplified artificial languages like Languages I and II
will illuminate the principles and rules underlying the “vastly more
complicated” natural languages.[^227]

For Carnap, it was thus essential to the possibility of logical syntax
that languages, both the artificial ones he developed in the book and
the actually spoken natural languages, could be treated as*formal
calculi* . Such calculi are pure rule-based systems for the combination
and transformation of symbols, themselves conceived as lacking any
determinate individual meaning.[^228] Examples include not only natural
and artificial linguistic systems, but even rule-based systems that
include nothing recognizable as symbols; for instance, the game of
chess, considered as an uninterpreted system of positions and rules for
the transformation of positions, is such a calculus. The procedure of
considering calculi without reference to the intended meaning of their
symbols, according to Carnap, ensures that what we discuss as the
“meaning” of sentences can be treated “exactly,” as emerging from the
explicit and definite rules of syntax, rather than defined inexactly and
ambiguously, as it would have to be if it depended on the introduction
of specific meanings for words:

Up to now, in constructing a language, the procedure has usually been,
first to assign a meaning to the fundamental mathematical-logical
symbols, and then to consider what sentences and inferences are seen to
be logically correct in accordance with this meaning. Since the
assignment of meaning is expressed in words and is, in consequence,
inexact, no conclusion arrived at in this way can very well be other
than inexact and ambiguous. The connection will only become clear when
approached from the opposite direction: let any postulates and any rules
of inference be chosen arbitrarily; then this choice, whatever it may
be, will determine what meaning is to be assigned to the fundamental
logical symbols.[^229]

Carnap’s method of securing meanings by treating languages as calculi
hearkens back to the Fregean idea that the meaning of a sentence can be
determined purely by the logical rules that govern its relations of
inference and derivation (see chapter 2). It combines this
inferentialist conception of meaning with a formalist conception, akin
to Hilbert’s, of the nature of a symbolic system. The synthesis makes it
clear that the meaning of a sentence, at least insofar as it is relevant
to logic, has nothing to do with the ideas, intuitions, or psychological
associations that might be connected, in any person’s consciousness,
with the particular words that make it up. Rather, meaning is, from the
outset, explicitly public, since the syntactical rules definitive of it
are shared ones, introduced as a matter of stipulation or public
agreement. The philosophical logician’s task is, then, simply to
consider the variety of linguistic systems, both actual and possible,
and to compare the systems underlying actually existing languages with
the simplified and artificial ones he may readily create.

But in requiring that syntactical rules be both*completely arbitrary*
and wholly constitutive of the sentential meaning that will emerge from
the linguistic practice using them, Carnap’s view invites a certain
significant tension regarding the institution, stipulation, or adoption
of these rules themselves. The tension is almost evident in the first
words of the Foreword of*Logical Syntax* :

For nearly a century mathematicians and logicians have been striving
hard to make logic an exact science. To a certain extent, their efforts
have been crowned with success, inasmuch as the science of logistics has
taught people how to manipulate with precision symbols and formulae
which are similar in their nature to those used in mathematics. But a
book on logic must contain, in addition to the formulae, an expository
context which, with the assistance of the words of ordinary language,
explains the formulae and the relations between them; and this context
often leaves much to be desired in the matter of clarity and exactitude.
In recent years, logicians representing widely different tendencies of
thought have developed more and more the point of view that in this
context is contained the essential part of logic; and that the important
thing is to develop an exact method for the construction of these
sentences about sentences. The purpose of the present work is to give a
systematic exposition of such a method, namely, of the method of
“logical syntax”[^230]

In the course of the actual practice of constructing artificial
languages, the explicit introduction of specialized symbolism will
always depend on*auxiliary* explanations and interpretations. These will
specify the*intended* significance and implications of the new symbolism
in a convenient, already existing language. As Carnap notes, it is
typical to regard such explanatory auxiliaries, as they might occur in
the introduction of special symbolism in a textbook, as strictly
inessential to the symbolism thereby introduced. The explanatory
auxiliaries*must* , in fact, be strictly inessential to the language
itself, if it can be considered to be a*pure* logical calculus,
arbitrarily chosen from among all such possible systems. But carrying
out the project of logical syntax itself requires that the explanatory
introduction of syntactical rules*not* be inessential in this way. For
the actual stipulation or formulation of rules is not simply descriptive
of, but actually*constitutive* of, the specialized languages created by
the syntactician. And it is difficult to imagine that, as a matter of
theoretical practice, the syntactical rules constitutive of a language
can in fact generally be formulated without any specific intended
meaning in mind.

Carnap, in other words, problematically construes the discursive
explanations that accomplish the exposition of the system of syntax as
both*external to* and*necessary for* our understanding of that system
itself. For Carnap’s requirement of arbitrariness to be satisfied, it is
essential that the significance of the auxiliary explanations and
interpretations be extrinsic to the significance of the rules
themselves. But even where this specification takes place in the object
language, it relies, in practice, on*some* existing understanding of the
intended significance of the rules laid down. The particular rules
Carnap introduces in*Syntax* for Languages I and II, for instance, are
introduced with a variety of such devices and auxiliary formulations.
Even the introduction of the most basic rules for the sentential
connectives, ‘\>’, ‘~’, etc. depends on the reader’s antecedent
understanding of the ordinary usage of the words “or”, “not,” etc.

This difficulty about the role of interpretation in the formulation of
syntactic rules is compounded further in the case of the study of
already existing natural languages. Here, the theoretician’s explicit
introduction of syntactic rules that purport to represent the actual
syntax of the language in question can only be motivated by some
antecedent sense, even if only a vague one, of the significance of these
rules in terms of the actual practice of the language’s speakers.[^231]
The theoretician seeking to describe this practice syntactically can
legitimately abstract from most of the vast variety of causal and
inferential linkages, evident in the actual use of a language, between
individual words and their ordinary referents. But his introduction of
rules meant to capture the*actual* logic of inference in the language
can hardly portray them as completely arbitrary. The introduction of any
rule that purports to re-describe the underlying logic of an
already-existing language will inevitably rely on discursive
explanations that express that rule in antecedently familiar terms, and
so will make backhanded reference to forms of speech already familiar to
the language’s speakers. Given Carnap’s description of the analytical
procedure of logical syntax, it seems impossible to avoid this
reference. But given that it must occur, it is extremely difficult to
preserve Carnap’s commitment to the genuine arbitrariness and
conventionality of all of our language systems.[^232]

II

These considerations about the ambiguity inherent in the theoretical
introduction of syntactic rules did not figure explicitly in the young
Quine’s first attempts to elaborate the procedures of logic, devoted as
these were to a largely sympathetic exposition of Carnap’s syntax
project. But they are nevertheless central to the minor inflectional
differences that would already distinguish these first attempts from
Carnap’s descriptions of the methods of syntax. The early article
“Ontological Remarks on the Propositional Calculus,” published in 1934
(the same year as*Syntax* ), already bears witness to some slight, but
significant, differences in conception between Quine and his teacher.
The article poses the question of how best to construe the subject
matter of the logician’s symbolic, propositional calculus. Should the
formulas and sentences of logic be taken to stand for extra-logical
items, perhaps facts or states of affairs, or (following Frege) the
truth-values True and False? Each of these solutions, Quine suggests,
invites problematic metaphysical speculations. We do better, if we can,
to construe the functioning of the propositional calculus without
countenancing such “inferred entities” that would take us “beyond the
realm of everyday uses of words.”[^233] Accordingly, Quine outlines two
distinct strategies for construing the reference of the sentences and
formulas of the propositional calculus without invoking propositions.
First, we may take the special truth-functional symbols of the
propositional calculus simply to be*abbreviations* of ordinary English
words and phrases. Thus, for instance, the special symbol ‘~’ can be
construed as a definitional abbreviation for ‘not’ or ‘it is false
that:’, and the other truth-functional signs conceived similarly. The
approach has the desired effect of eliminating the suggestion of any
special subject-matter for the logical calculus. But as Quine notes, it
also means that the propositional calculus “ceases to be a system in the
usual sense.”[^234] For if the truth-functional connectives and variable
signs are simply abbreviations for natural-language terms and sentences,
the propositional calculus is itself no longer a system of actually
existing elements subject to specific operations, but just a paradigm
showing the use of these ordinary terms and sentences. The formation and
derivation rules can help to show under what circumstances certain of
these sentences are true - in particular, they show us more clearly
which ordinary propositions can be considered*logical* truths - but
beyond this, they have no distinct denotational objects of their own.

As Quine suggests, a second way to construe the significance of the
propositional calculus without countenancing propositions is simply to
construe the variable symbols of the calculus as denotations
of*sentences* , grammatically well-formed sequences of symbols. This is
essentially Carnap’s solution in*Logical* *Syntax* , and with it the
propositional calculus again becomes a system of rules constraining the
legitimate manipulation of elements, the sentences of the ordinary
language. The truth-functional connectives now become signs denoting
sentential*operations* , for instance the operation of appending “not:”
before a sentence or concatenating two sentences and interposing the
word “or”. As Quine observes, on this second solution, the symbolic
formulas*of* the propositional calculus now become, themselves,
symbols*about* sentences, in particular variables which ambiguously
stand for any ordinary-language sentence of a certain logical form. The
theorems of the system then become, themselves, assertions to the effect
that the sentences they denote are true, and the turnstile symbol ‘├’,
previously used simply as an informal tag for theoremhood, must now be
construed as a*predicate* asserting the truthfulness of the sentences
ambiguously denoted by the formula that follows it.

Both of these suggested Quinean solutions to the problem of the nature
of the propositional calculus share the strongly anti-metaphysical
attitude of Carnap’s*Syntax* project in their staunch avoidance of
propositional entities beyond actual sentences themselves. But it is
significant that both Quinean solutions, in construing the propositional
calculus as involving nothing more than actual sentences, construe the
formational and inferential*rules* of the symbolic calculus as
systematically dependent upon the actual patterns of sentential*use*
evident in ordinary linguistic practice. For Quine, there is nothing
beyond such patterns for the symbols of the propositional calculus to
be*about* . Gone, already, is any suggestion of the logician’s*complete*
freedom in creating*arbitrary* symbolic calculi. For Quine, even the
possibility of interpreting the transformation rules as rules
of*inference* requires some reference to the antecedently understood
significance of inference in an already-understood language. Similarly,
even identifying a sentence in the calculus as a postulate or a logical
truth means asserting the truthfulness of a whole class of actual
object-language sentences with a certain form. This intrinsic dependence
on the antecedently more-or-less understood notions of inference,
derivability, and truth cannot be eliminated completely, even if the
syntactical procedure may be thought to sharpen and clarify these
notions somewhat.

This Quinean appeal to antecedent use in the articulation of syntactic
rules develops further in his subsequent reckonings with the legacy of
Carnap’s project. In his 1934 “Lectures on Carnap” delivered at Harvard,
Quine summarized*Logical Syntax* , presenting its main results to a
non-specialist audience. But although the second and third lectures are
wholly devoted to exegesis, in the first lecture Quine introduces
Carnap’s notion of analyticity by describing an original semantic
procedure that can be followed in order to arrive at clear definitions
of terms, and in order to determine the range of sentences that are
analytic in a given language. To carry out the procedure for any given
term, we begin by considering the set of all the sentences involving
that term that are*true* in the language, or accepted on a
commonsensical level by its speakers. Now, if we can lay down
definitions that indeed make all such sentences true in each case, we
will have arrived at an accurate definition of the term and, more
generally, at a set of definitional conventions that expose the actual
logical structure of the language:

Now suppose we are confronted with the job of defining K. If we can
frame a definition which fulfills all the accepted K-sentences, then
obviously we shall have done a perfectly satisfactory job. Nobody who
was inclined to dispute the definition could point to a single respect
in which the definition diverged from the accepted usage of the word K;
for all accepted K-sentences would be verified.[^235]

Were there only a relatively small number of sentences, for any given
term, that both involve that term and are accepted by the speakers of
the language, the definition would be easily accomplished, simply by
listing the true sentences and proposing that the term should be used in
just those ways and no others. But because there are, in any actual
language, an infinite number of sentences including any given term, it
is in general impossible to define terms in this finitary way. Rather,
explicit definitional*rules* must be introduced for each particular term
to subsume, as much as possible, the infinite number of true sentences
involving it. Since each sentence involves more than one term, framing
the rules requires making determinations as to whether a particular term
appears in a context more or less*materially* . For instance, the term
“apple” appears materially in “Every apple weighs at least two grams,”
but does not do so in the sentence, “Within any class of two apples
there is at least one apple,” since it may be replaced, in the latter
sentence but not the former, with any other substantial term.[^236] In
framing definitional rules for the language as a whole, we are likely to
begin with rules for terms, such as mathematical ones, that tend to
appear in many contexts non-materially or vacuously; but since no
term*always* appears vacuously, our definitional procedure will always
involve making decisions of relative priority. The result is a system of
rules that determines certain sentences as analytic, or true by
definition. But because of the inherent arbitrariness of the
determination of priority, the extent of the set of sentences deemed
analytic will itself be, to a certain extent, arbitrary. In the limiting
case (as Carnap had indeed already suggested),*all* of the currently
accepted sentences of the language, in fact, could be rendered analytic,
simply by framing the rules in such a way as to make them all come out
true. But in actual practice, the decision of the best systematization
for the language as a whole will presumably be guided by considerations
of overall, systematic simplicity, while also aiming to respect our
ordinary, intuitive notion of the distinction between formal or logical
and empirical truth.

The “Lectures” therefore exhibit, as yet, no significant disagreement
with Carnap over the extent and significance of the analytic/synthetic
distinction for a given natural language. As for Carnap, on Quine’s
procedure the determination of the set of sentences that are analytic
depends on the conventional introduction of explicit, syntactical rules.
And because there is some degree of arbitrariness in framing these
rules, the question of whether any given sentence is analytic or
synthetic does not have a completely determinate answer. But the
suggested procedure of framing the definitional rules for a term by
reference to the set of accepted sentences involving that term has no
direct correlate in Carnap’s suggested procedure. For Carnap in*Syntax*
, after all, the introduction of syntactical rules is a wholly arbitrary
stipulation, having no essential reference to or dependence on the set
of sentences that are actually considered true or accepted in any
antecedently existing language. Even when the introduction of rules is
supposed to capture, in some intuitive sense, the actual logic of an
existing natural language, Carnap makes no provision for this
introduction to depend on reasoning about the range of sentences already
accepted or considered true. For Quine, by contrast, the introduction of
particular syntactic rules is already always legitimated*only* by their
ability to capture antecedent usage in the language. The rules can only
purport to be syntactic rules at all, insofar as they can claim to
capture the patterns of antecedent usage with reference to which they
will, pragmatically, be introduced.

A year later, in 1935, Quine re-formulated the material of the 1934
lectures and added some further speculations about logical truth in the
influential article “Truth by Convention.” The article, again, offers no
outright challenge to what Quine here calls the “linguistic doctrine” of
logical truths as true by convention. But it does argue that there is no
motivated way, in schematizing a language, to demarcate truths that are
intuitively logical or mathematical in character from those that are
intuitively empirical, in such a way as to ensure that truths in the
first class are analytic and those in the second, synthetic. Quine
begins the article by rehearsing the procedure introduced in the
lectures for formulating the definitional rules for a language by
considering the range of true statements involving a particular term. On
this procedure, the introduction of a new symbol into the calculus
always amounts to a definitional*abbreviation* for some antecedently
understood term or phrase, in conformity with its already-understood
traditional usage:

To be satisfactory in this sense a definition of the sign not only must
fulfill the formal requirement of unambiguous eliminability, but must
also conform to the traditional usage in question. For such conformity
it is necessary and sufficient that every context of the sign which was
true and every context which was false under traditional usage be
construed by the definition as an abbreviation of some other statement
which is correspondingly true or false under the established meanings of
its signs.[^237]

Here, Quine clearly holds, even more explicitly than he had in the
earlier lectures, that definitional rules can do no more than to
summarize antecedently existing traditional usage. In addition, he
explicitly*denies* that the introduction of such rules can be considered
to be the result of a purely arbitrary and free decision. Even if
Quine’s method at this point does not demand any specific doctrinal
break with the system of *Logical Syntax* , the methodological
divergence from Carnap’s approach is therefore already substantial.
Quine has no interest in, nor even any ability to make sense of,
Carnap’s general constructional method, with its associated maxim of
tolerance and arbitrariness in language-system creation. Instead, he
insists that the inferred or derived rules, even for an artificially
constructed language, can have significance only by reference to its
already-understood practice.

At the end of the article, Quine poses another, even deeper problem for
the “linguistic doctrine” according to which logical and mathematical
truths are rendered true by convention. The problem, one of infinite
regress, derives originally from Lewis Carroll, who had introduced it in
the form of a dialogue between Achilles and the tortoise.[^238] On the
conventionalist doctrine, in any actual language, Quine argues, there
will be an*infinite* number of statements that we may take to be
logically or analytically or conventionally true. It follows that any
conventional introduction of them must rely on the introduction of
a*finite* set of rules or paradigms that are considered to govern an
infinite number of instances. Quine in fact considers, in some detail,
how the tautological formulas of the propositional calculus might
actually be introduced as logically true through one such set of
conventions. Each of these paradigms is taken to assert the logical
truth of the infinite number of particular sentences of a certain form;
their adoption corresponds directly to the fixation of basic,
syntactical rules for the language, as described by Carnap. The
difficulty, though, is that the application of these paradigms,
constitutive of logic, to generate any of the infinite number of
particular sentences*itself* depends on the very conventions of logic
that they are supposed to formulate. The doctrine of the conventionality
of logic is then rendered circular; or, if the introduction of the basic
conventions is construed as giving meaning to the primitive logical
signs, this meaning is rendered incommunicable:

In a word, the difficulty is that if logic is to proceed mediately from
conventions, logic is needed for inferring logic from the conventions.
Alternatively, the difficulty which appears thus as a
self-presupposition of doctrine can be framed as turning upon a
self-presupposition of primitives. It is supposed that the if-idiom, the
not-idiom, the every-idiom, and so on, mean nothing to us initially, and
that we adopt the conventions … by way of circumscribing their meaning;
and the difficulty is that communication of [these conventions]
themselves depends upon free use of those very idioms which we are
attempting to circumscribe, and can succeed only if we are already
conversant with the idioms.[^239]

The problem becomes evident as soon as the rules or paradigms of logic
are taken to provide information about the derivation or inference of
true statements from other true statements. For instance, one of the
rules that we may take to be definitive of the material conditional
states that,*if* we substitute any true sentence for “p” and for
“pÉq”,*then* the sentence substituted for “q” is true. But the
application of this rule to any particular triad of sentences, say “a”,
“aÉb”, and “b”, then itself depends on the use of the material
conditional. In a similar manner, the application of any of the general
rules of logic to particular cases itself depends on the rules
themselves. As Quine concludes, there is no hope of taking the rules
simply to be conventionally introduced, without relying on any prior
understanding or basis, all at once.

In its implications for a general understanding of the basis of
meaningful language, the Carroll infinite-regress problem cuts deeper
than any objection Quine had hitherto formulated to Carnap’s*Syntax*
project. The earlier objections, both in the “Lectures” and in the first
sections of the “Truth by Convention” article, had established the
arbitrariness of any particular circumscription of the rules underlying
the practice of a language to include, as analytic, only “logical” and
“mathematical” truths. So far as this goes, however, it would still be
reasonable to suppose that there*are* such rules, implicit in practice
even if not non-arbitrarily capable of explicitation, and actually
operative in governing the practice of inference and reasoning for both
“logico-mathematical” and “empirical” propositions. The Carroll
infinite-regress objection, though, challenges the coherence even of
this, more cautious, supposition. If the logical rules governing the
practice of a language cannot even be made explicit without circularity,
the significance of supposing them to have been*implicit* all along, in
the practice of the language itself, begins to lapse. For any other set
of rules, themselves introduced circularly, might enjoy an equal claim
to represent the actual logic of the language, provided that they, too,
are consistent with the facts of antecedent usage. Quine draws the
conclusion near the end of the article:

It may be held that we can adopt conventions through behavior, without
first announcing them in words; and that we can return and formulate our
conventions verbally afterward, if we choose, when a full language is at
our disposal. It may be held that the verbal formulation of conventions
is no more a prerequisite of the adoption of the conventions than the
writing of a grammar is a prerequisite of speech; that explicit
exposition of conventions is merely one of many important uses of a
completed language. … It must be conceded that this account accords well
with what we actually do. We discourse without first phrasing the
conventions; afterwards, in writings such as this, we formulate them to
fit our behavior. On the other hand it is not clear wherein an adoption
of the conventions, antecedently to their formulation, consists; such
behavior is difficult to distinguish from that in which conventions are
disregarded. When we first agree to understand ‘Cambridge’ as referring
to Cambridge in England, failing a suffix to the contrary, and then
discourse accordingly, the role of linguistic convention is
intelligible; but when a convention is incapable of being communicated
until after its adoption, its role is not so clear. In dropping the
attributes of deliberateness and explicitness from the notion of
linguistic convention we risk depriving the latter of any explanatory
force and reducing it to an idle label.[^240]

The point, though cautiously formulated here, is a general and decisive
one. The character of a language as a rule-based calculus of signs, and
the consequent distinction between uses of the language that accord, and
those that fail to accord, with the rules, is not evident prior to the
formulation of these rules themselves. But since this formulation is
more or less arbitrary within the confines of what we actually say, it
cannot claim to represent any unique determination of the actual
underlying logic of the language under consideration. Nor can the
specification of rules claim to offer new criteria, above and beyond
those we have already formulated, for the logical correctness or
legitimacy of particular inferences. As Quine would begin to realize
more and more clearly, the facts of what we actually utter and do are
all that is available to philosophical summary or reconstruction. Beyond
these facts themselves, the actual form of the “rules underlying the
language” must be taken to be either arbitrarily stipulated at the
moment of reconstruction or be considered to be, antecedently to this
moment, substantially indeterminate.

III

Already in 1934, therefore, Quine’s consideration of what is involved in
understanding an existing language had led him to a conception of
syntactical investigation that diverged sharply from Carnap’s
constructivist treatment of languages as uninterpreted calculi. The
introduction of specialized notation, whether conceived as constituting
an autonomous language or simply as explicating the underlying logic of
an existing one, could not, for Quine, help but depend on our antecedent
grasp of ordinary patterns of usage characteristic of the language we
already speak. Indeed, in introducing the Carroll problem, Quine had
suggested some reason to doubt that the practice of a natural language
can legitimately be treated as determined by a unique underlying set of
rules at all.

Quine probably did not yet perceive the depth of the challenge this
represented to Carnap’s understanding of languages as calculi. The
decisive break would come sixteen years later, in Quine’s 1950 address
at the Eastern Division of the American Philosophical Association.[^241]
In “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” Quine argued for the untenability of the
analytic/synthetic distinction and of the verificationist dogma of
“reductionism” that he thought depended on it. The article is
notorious.[^242] Its thematic center is an accusation of circularity,
directed at Carnap’s suggested procedure of determining analyticity by
explicitly specifying semantic rules constitutive of a language. Over
the period from 1934 to 1950, Quine had gained the courage to make this
attack explicit; and he had realized that by questioning the motivation
of a stipulative determination of analyticity he could also call into
question the coherence of the notions of necessity, intensionality, and
even synonymy or sameness of meaning, which, he now realized, are
interdefinable with analyticity, if they are definable at all. Any of
these notions might have a clear significance, if analyticity itself
does. But according to Quine, the natural strategy of demarcating the
class of analytic sentences in any language by specifying semantical
rules is itself empty. This is the case, Quine argues, not only for
natural languages, where the underlying rules themselves might be
thought to be vague and inexplicit, but even for the artificial
languages that Carnap clearly had primarily in mind.[^243]

It is, of course, possible,*given* any selection of sentences as
analytic, to specify semantical rules that determine those sentences,
and just those sentences, as analytic. But this specification provides
no more information, above and beyond that already present in the
selection of sentences already made. In the case of an artificial
language, where analyticity is already determinate, the specification of
rules underlying this determinacy is empty. In the case of an existing
natural language, on the other hand, the selection of a particular range
of sentences as “analytic”, as a subset of those generally accepted as
true, is arbitrary, and cannot be rendered non-arbitrary by the
subsequent or concomitant provision of explicit rules. The explicitation
of rules, whether conceived of as constitutive of a fully-formed
artificial language or simply as an aid to the comprehension of an
existing language, cannot determine what is, in the actual practice of
speech, undetermined.

The appeal to pre-existing use that was already decisive, as we saw, in
1934, is explicit at various points in “Two Dogmas.” Quine makes it, for
instance, in the course of rejecting the interdefinability of
constituent terms as a criterion for the analyticity of a sentence:

There are those who find it soothing to say that the analytic statements
of the second class reduce to those of the first class, the logical
truths, by definition; ‘bachelor’, for example, is defined as ‘unmarried
man’. But how do we find that ‘bachelor’ is defined as ‘unmarried man’?
Who defined it thus, and when? Are we to appeal to the nearest
dictionary, and accept the lexicographer’s formulation as law? Clearly
this would be to put the cart before the horse. The lexicographer is an
empirical scientist, whose business is the recording of antecedent
facts; and if he glosses ‘bachelor’ as ‘unmarried man’ it is because of
his belief that there is a relation of synonymy between those forms,
implicit in general or preferred usage prior to his own work.[^244]

We have seen that, with his formulation of the Carroll problem, Quine
had already suggested in 1934 that this appeal to antecedent use,
indeed, tends to rule out any conception of the practice of a language
as embodying any determinate set of syntactic or semantic rules at all,
implicit or explicit. This point goes even further than the rejection of
analyticity itself. For it implies not only that there can be no
non-arbitrary sorting, by means of rules, of currently accepted
sentences into analytic and synthetic but even that, more generally, the
patterns of use characteristic of the acceptance and rejection of
sentences in a language cannot be given any unique, explicit formulation
in terms of rules at all. Nevertheless, in the period between “Two
Dogmas” and his formulation of the indeterminacy result in 1960, Quine
would make this second, stronger claim more and more explicitly. In
1954, Quine developed the argument of “Two Dogmas” more specifically,
and brought it to bear more directly against Carnap, in “Carnap and
Logical Truth”. Here, he directly addresses, for the first time,
Carnap’s suggestion that the free propounding of an artificial language
is analogous, in the sense in which it amounts to a determination of
conventional rules, to the symbolic interpretation or regimentation of a
natural language. The analogy, Quine maintains, fails. For the
interpretation of an existing language by means of a set of rules is
always, at least in part, a*projection* of the interpreter’s assumptions
rather than a neutral determination of the real structure of the
language under interpretation. We can see this, Quine argues, by
considering the possibility of interpreting an alien language, one
initially quite unfamiliar to us. He considers the case of an imaginary
logical positivist, Ixmann, who wants to clarify the logic of science by
developing an artificial language purged of metaphysical claims:

Ixmann’s answer consists in showing in detail how people (on Mars, say)
might speak a language quite adequate to all our science but, unlike our
language, incapable of expressing the alleged metaphysical issues … Now
how does our hypothetical Ixmann specify that doubly hypothetical
language? By telling us, at least to the extent needed for his argument,
what these Martians are to be imagined as uttering and what they are
thereby to be understood to mean. Here is Carnap’s familiar duality of
formation rules and transformation rules (or meaning postulates), as
rules of language. But these rules are part only of Ixmann’s narrative
machinery, not part of what he is portraying… The threat of fallacy
lurks in the fact that Ixmann’s rules are indeed arbitrary fiats, as is
his whole Martian parable. The fallacy consists in confusing levels,
projecting the conventional character of the rules into the story, and
so misconstruing Ixmann’s parable as attributing truth legislation to
his hypothetical Martians.[^245]

With this, Quine’s rejection of Carnap’s conventionalism about the
formulation of languages is complete, and the appeal to antecedent usage
that this rejection depends on is fully and explicitly formulated. The
introduction of a corpus of rules, even in Carnap’s ideal case of the
postulation of a wholly new language meant to show the emptiness of
metaphysical questions concerning existence, can itself only be
conceived as a projection onto the existing language under
consideration. It would be a confusion of levels, Quine suggests, to
consider the corpus of rules to*accurately* represent the real structure
of the language as it is practiced, even when the language under
consideration is just an imaginary one. The only intelligible criterion
for the accuracy of an explanation of such a language, whether real or
imaginary, is just that it provide an interpretation of its sentences in
*our* language: that is, that we be able to translate each sentence of
the language under consideration into a sentence of like truth-value in
our familiar one. If a conventionally introduced corpus of rules - what
Quine would later call a “translation manual” - can do this, it is
adequate in every real respect. The purport of any such corpus to
represent real distinctions, above and beyond the facts about which
sentences are accepted as true and which rejected as false, of (for
instance) analyticity or syntheticity, must be rejected as empty.

IV

When, in 1937, Carnap offered his first published response to Quine’s
incipient criticism of conventionalism, he reacted with tolerance,
apparently perceiving in Quine’s suggestions no deep challenge to his
own views. In*Foundations of Logic and Mathematics* , Carnap re-iterated
the position of*Syntax* with some minor modifications. Here he goes on
to consider directly, in all but explicit reply to Quine, the question
of whether logic is a matter of convention. As in*Syntax* , to assert
the conventionality of logic simply means, for Carnap, to deny that
there is “a distinction between objectively right and objectively wrong
systems” of logical rules.[^246] And this assertion, Carnap continues to
maintain, must be upheld,*provided* we begin with the free stipulation
of uninterpreted calculi, allowing the interpretation and meaning to be
determined later. Carnap next reacted to Quine’s attacks in print two
decades later, in the “Library of Living Philosophers” volume devoted to
his work, a volume that also contained Quine’s “Carnap and Logical
Truth.” In the brief response, Carnap again expressed puzzlement about
the extent and intended force of Quine’s attack. In particular, he
failed to see the reason for Quine’s apparent requirements, in “Two
Dogmas” and “Carnap and Logical Truth,” that “analyticity” be given a
general clarification, applicable to any arbitrary language, and that
this clarification take the form of an empirical, “behavioristic”
criterion. Carnap was especially puzzled in that he could find no
argument, in Quine’s writings, to the effect that his actually suggested
semantic and syntactic rules were not “exact and unobjectionable.”[^247]

In fact it is not surprising, given the extent to which Quine’s points
about the arbitrariness of the stipulation of rules could thus be seem
to be sympathetically absorbed by Carnap’s conventionalist doctrine,
that Carnap never really saw Quine’s attack as having any great depth.
But there was nevertheless a crucial difference in outlook and
philosophical approach between the two philosophers, one that, as we
have seen, appeared already in Quine’s first writings on Carnap. As we
have seen, Quine*always* took it that the interpretation of any
specialized logical notation, even one introduced as an autonomous,
artificial language, would depend on the existing patterns of usage and
agreed-upon understandings of terms and sentences in an
already-understood language. Thus what was, for Carnap, only an optional
starting point - the pre-existing meanings of the terms and sentences
that*explain* a logical calculus - was for Quine essential to the
logical calculus having any interpretation at all.

Noting the extent to which Quine’s explicit results need not actually
have been threatening to Carnap’s project, and the extent to which that
project itself has subsequently been misunderstood, some recent
commentary on the Quine/Carnap debate has attempted a partial
rehabilitation of Carnap’s picture against what have elsewhere been
taken to be Quine’s devastating criticisms. For instance, Creath (1987)
argues that Quine’s arguments against conventionalism in “Truth by
Convention” and “Carnap and Logical Truth” fail to attack any view that
Carnap ever actually held.[^248] Along similar lines, Ebbs (1997) argues
that Quine’s attacks on conventionalism misses the pragmatic and
programmatic spirit of Carnap’s suggestion that language frameworks be
freely chosen. In particular, Carnap’s picture requires no
metaphysically or epistemologically problematic picture of languages,
and the logical truths within, them, as instituted or constituted by
conventional, stipulative acts.[^249] All that is required is what Ebbs
calls Carnap’s “motivating insight”: that in order to settle
philosophical and metaphysical disputes, we must explicitly “state rules
for the use of linguistic expressions.”[^250]

But the rehabilitation of Carnap’s view can be, at best, partial. For
although Quine did often present his attacks as bearing against a more
general view than the one that Carnap actually held, his appeal to
antecedent use provides, as we have seen, reason for doubting the wide
freedom of choice that, according to the position Carnap actually did
hold, the logician must enjoy. For it was a requirement for the cogency
of Carnap’s view (his actual one as much as the other versions of
conventionalism that Quine sometimes tended to attribute to him) that
the logician’s freedom in creating new logical systems be*complete* :
that, in other words, languages could reasonably be viewed as pure
symbolic calculi, stipulated simply by laying down syntactical rules,
without constraint by antecedently understood meanings. By contrast,
Quine’s consideration of the role of antecedent use in providing an
interpretation for whatever sign system we might create led him, from
the start of his engagement with Carnap’s views, to doubt this key
premise.

Ebbs argues further that the Carroll problem of infinite regress does
not threaten Carnap’s view of linguistic stipulation, since
investigators are already, in virtue of sharing a language, in a
position to agree upon and take for granted some rules of inference,
which they will then presuppose in determining and agreeing upon more
specialized rules for the particular domain in need of clarification.
But this begs the question against Quine by assuming that what is shared
among native speakers of a natural language, as a presupposition for the
possibility of communication, is*already* comprehensible as a set of
agreed-upon rules, explicit or implicit. Though it is certainly true
that investigators into a special area of language must*in some sense*
antecedently share a language, if they are able to communicate at all,
it is far from obvious that this sharing must amount to agreement upon
any determinate set of logical or inferential rules, such as could help
block the regress.

One significant obstacle, indeed, to understanding the depth and force
of Quine’s attack against Carnap is that there is a great tendency to
take the picture of language that Carnap held as inevitable or obviously
true. It can seem simply obvious that if speakers share a language,
their agreement simply in speaking it must amount to agreement on*some*
corpus of rules, explicit or implicit, in principle capable of
formulation and explicitation. The impression that this much is obvious
may explain, to some extent, the tendency of commentators to understand
Quine to be attacking a*specific view* of the institution or
significance of the rules constitutive of language, a view that Carnap
never held, and then to object that (as Carnap himself appears to have
thought) the attack misses its mark. But in fact the scope of Quine’s
attack goes much deeper, to the extent of challenging the seemingly
obvious assumption that language*must* be explicable as a rule-based
calculus itself.

By the time he formulated the parable of Ixmann, Quine understood
clearly that any interpretation of the actual rules supposed to be
constitutive of a language could only amount to the*projection* of
interpretive assumptions, at home in the interpreter’s language, *onto*
the language under interpretation. It is implicit in this, and in the
motivation of most of Quine’s various attacks on versions of
conventionalism, that there is no non-arbitrary way to describe a
language as a rule-bound calculus that is both consistent with, and
wholly determined by, the actual use and practice of that language. In
this sense, the force of Quine’s attack is not even limited to
conventionalist pictures of the adoption of the rules supposed to govern
language; it holds force against *any* picture, conventionalist or not,
that supposes that language is explicable in terms of such rules at all.
[^251] Though Quine may never have put the point just this way, his
attack on Carnap therefore called into question the exceedingly general
notion of logical, linguistic, syntactic or semantic rules as
constitutive or explanatory of a language. Such rules, if the upshot of
Quine’s critique is right, can only be stipulated against the
presupposed background of the understood meanings of terms in an
already-existing language, a background which *itself* is not capable of
explicitation as a system of rules (on pain of a Carroll-style regress).

V

As we have seen, Quine’s attacks on Carnap, beginning in 1934, developed
from the innocent-seeming thought that the meanings of special
linguistic symbols and rules could only be interpreted against the
backdrop of an already-understood language. But although he always
appealed in this way to antecedent use, and understood this as something
other than an explicit corpus of rules, it was not always clear*what* ,
exactly, was the object of this appeal. It was this that the model of
radical translation, in its description of the limits and scope of the
range of facts accessible to an interpreter with no antecedent knowledge
of the language under interpretation, attempted to make maximally clear.
With the model, Quine found, as well, a way to express the surprising
upshot of his critique of Carnap as a general result about language and
meaning, the indeterminacy of translation.

The descriptive set-up of the scenario of radical translation, which
Quine first explicitly formulated in the second chapter of*Word and
Object* , is familiar enough to require only a brief rehearsal. In
radical translation, a translator is charged with the task of making
sense of a wholly unfamiliar language, unguided by clues of shared or
cognate word forms or cultural cues.[^252] The attempt will culminate,
if it is successful, in the production of a*translation manual*
systematically linking sentences of the foreign language with sentences
in the translator’s own language, or providing systematic, recursive
recipes for such linkages.[^253] The evidence on which the interpreter
must depend in arriving at a systematic translation is limited to what
she can observe of the natives’ speech behavior, including their
tendencies to use various utterances in the presence of various
observable phenomena and events, and the natives’ responses of assent or
dissent, when queried as to the use of a particular sentence in a given
environmental situation.[^254] From this meager evidentiary base, meant
nevertheless to capture all of the evidence that*could* , in principle,
be accessible in radical translation, the interpreter must construct a
systematic translation of each native sentence into a sentence of his
familiar language. The result, which Quine suggests at the beginning of
the chapter, is that translation is systematically indeterminate. For,
as a detailed appeal to the radical translation scenario will show:

…manuals for translating one language into another can be set up in
divergent ways, all compatible with the totality of speech dispositions,
yet incompatible with one another. In countless places they will diverge
in giving, as their respective translations of a sentence of the one
language, sentences of the other language which stand to each other in
no plausible sort of equivalence however loose.[^255]

Before evaluating the indeterminacy result, it is important to
understand the underlying motivational assumptions of the radical
translation scenario itself. Since Quine wrote, it has been standard in
the interpretive literature to object to the radical translation
scenario on the ground that it restricts the interpreter artificially by
placing tendentious and unmotivated limitations on the form of the
evidence to which he may have access. If the evidence is so restricted,
commentators have argued, the indeterminacy result follows trivially,
but fails to establish anything significant about the nature of meaning
or language overall. The impression of an unmotivated and artificial
limitation on evidence, indeed, is strengthened by Quine’s consistent
tendency to describe the totality of facts available to the
interpreter - and indeed all the facts that there*are* about the use of
the language - in a physicalist, behaviorist language of stimuli and
responses.[^256] But in fact, as we are now in a position to see, the
impression that the radical translation scenario depends on behaviorism
is, though perhaps fostered by Quine’s own rhetoric, quite
superficial.[^257] For its significance is the same as that of the
appeal to use that Quine had consistently presupposed: that any
interpretation of a language presupposes, and cannot go beyond, the
facts of antecedent usage in the practice of that language.

Though sometimes couched in their idioms, this appeal itself has no
essential dependence on behaviorism. Rather, it simply formulates
methodologically the thought that the interpreter who does not already
know a language can only avail himself of such facts as he might
reasonably be thought, in this position, to have access to. If we are to
make sense of the interpretation of a language as comprising a set of
rules by means of which we can understand it (whether an explanatory
calculus, as for Carnap, or a translation manual, as for Quine), it is
important that the statement of the facts available at the outset not
include any information about any logical, deductive, or grammatical
rules that will later on be used to*explain* these antecedently
observable facts. In this sense, the interpreter’s evidentiary
restriction involves nothing more than a limitation to what must, on any
account, be considered to be accessible to a potential interpreter,
independently of the interpretation he will provide. This limitation,
significantly, involves no prejudicial or tendentious limitation to one
or another*type* of facts (for instance facts “about behavior” or
“expressible in physical terms”). Indeed,*anything* that could, in
principle, be observed by an interpreter innocent of the interpreted
language can be included in the evidentiary base. The requirement is
restrictive only in prohibiting a circular presupposition of an
interpretation, prior to any interpretation actually being
formulated.[^258]

The force of the indeterminacy result is not that, then, the facts about
meaning are indeterminate with respect to some other, more restricted
set of facts; but, rather, that for*any* uninterpreted fact (be it about
a subject’s behavior, his inner constitution, or whatever) there is an
open question about its meaning that can only be answered by*some*
interpretation or other.[^259] The result follows readily from
reflection about the extent to which the knowledge embodied by a
translation manual, and requisite for providing an interpretation of a
language as a whole, must systematically outrun anything directly
required by the totality of facts antecedently available to an
interpreter. The point, as Quine had already suggested in his attack on
Carnap, is that any explicative introduction of rules specifying the
form of a language goes significantly beyond what can be considered to
be genuinely inherent in that language itself. The slack is taken up, in
interpretive practice, by what Quine calls “analytical hypotheses,”
systematic assumptions not directly required by any fact of linguistic
practice, but stipulated in order to achieve maximum simplicity and
charity in interpretation.[^260] But because the analytical hypotheses
are not uniquely determined by any objective facts of the matter, there
is significant room for variability and arbitrariness in their
stipulation. The result is that two translation manuals of a single
language into another one can differ and disagree to a large extent,
while still legitimately claiming to embody equally all the genuine
facts about the underlying language.

Quine’s exposition of the indeterminacy thesis proceeds by considering,
in detail, the procedure that a radical interpreter might follow in
arriving at a systematic interpretation of a language, meanwhile showing
the particular points at which indeterminacy tends to arise. The
interpreter will begin with sentences that are assented to only
momentarily or for a short time upon the presentation of a stimulus.
Quine calls these “occasion sentences;” his classic example of this is
the one-word sentence “Gavagai,” which prompts assent upon the
presentation of a rabbit. Even here, with the sentences most directly
keyed to present stimulations, indeterminacy threatens. For instance, it
is impossible to exclude the possibility that the native occasion
sentence refers at least in part to another object, seen by the native
on a particular occasion but missed by the interpreter. More generally,
the native’s assent or dissent to a prompted occasion sentence may
depend as much upon collateral information held by the native as upon
the presence of the stimulus itself.[^261] The possible role of
collateral information may be minimized, to some extent, by comparing
different speakers of the language in point of their willingness to
assent to various observation sentences. But since significant
collateral information may be shared by all competent speakers of a
language, it is never possible completely to factor out the contribution
it makes to the observable facts, or to eliminate the translational
indeterminacy that results.

Of course, the role of collateral information, and the extent of the
resulting indeterminacy, grows larger when the translator moves from
occasion sentences keyed as directly as possible to present stimuli to
more abstract sentences, held true not only under particular, distinct
conditions of stimulation but more enduringly or abstractly. And even if
the problem of collateral information could be solved in some unique
way, indeterminacy would continue to threaten under another heading,
what Quine would later call the “inscrutability of reference.”[^262] The
problem is that the determination of a translation, even for the basic
designative terms of simple occasion sentences, will depend on some
systematic sense of the overriding categorical structure of the language
as a whole, of its most basic means of sorting individuals into
ontological types. This structure is itself undetermined by anything
that the translator can observe, antecedent to interpretation. Thus, for
instance, even if “Gavagai” is successfully tied to presently evident
rabbits, there is nothing in this observational tie to require that
“Gavagai” actually refers to rabbits (individuated as*we* would
individuate them); it may, for all we know, refer merely to temporal
stages of more enduring processes. Or it may refer to what is conceived
as a part of a single, spatiotemporally distinct particular.[^263] These
aberrant possibilities seem unusual from our perspective; but there is
nothing in the interpreter’s fund of evidence to exclude them. And if
they may, indeed, obtain, then the interpreter’s evidence does not
suffice to establish that the native’s term “Gavagai” and our term
“rabbit” are coextensive, even if the former term is used by the natives
under every circumstance in which*we* would use the latter.

It follows that, beyond a core of observation sentences whose
translation is maximally determinate, there is a wide range of sentences
which may equally well be translated in any of various, clearly
different ways. No matter what types or categories of facts are
introduced into the observational base, there is no way to minimize the
range of indeterminacy, without circularly presupposing the
interpretation which it is the radical interpreter’s task to provide.
But because the radical translation scenario models our ordinary
capacity to understand meaning, it follows that there must be an
ineliminable indeterminacy in the very meanings of our ordinarily
understood sentences and terms. Though the fiction of an interpreter of
a wholly alien language is used to expound the result, the model of
radical translation also captures, according to Quine, the epistemic
conditions each of us are under in coming to understand utterances in
our own language, and the indeterminacy result must also be taken to
hold for it. As Quine puts it elsewhere, “radical translation begins at
home.”[^264] Having admitted that indeterminacy affects any intelligible
notion of interlinguistic sameness of meaning, or synonymy, there is no
way to prevent it from affecting the intralinguistic notion as
well.[^265] It follows that, on any intelligible sense of “meaning,” two
speakers may speak and understand the same language, and yet diverge
radically in the meanings they associate with its sentences.[^266]

The result, thus put, has an air of extreme paradox. If it is correct,
it seems to follow that the vast majority of the sentences that we use
everyday, in ordinary language, have no determinate meaning. When I use
any one of these sentences, even one as plain as “there is a rabbit,”
there is no determinate fact of the matter about what I mean. And this
does not result simply from giving “meaning” a specialized or
philosophically loaded sense; Quine’s claim is that indeterminacy of
meaning arises for*any* coherent notion of linguistic meaning, no matter
how broad or general.

Perhaps because of its extreme air of paradox, commentators responding
to the indeterminacy result have often attempted to find grounds, for
instance in considerations overlooked by Quine about the conditions
which must be satisfied for a speaker to master a language, on which it
is possible to argue that the actual extent of indeterminacy of meaning,
in the real practice of a language, is in fact significantly less than
Quine suggests, or perhaps actually nonexistent.[^267] But by seeing the
real sources of the indeterminacy result in Quine’s sustained critique
of the picture of languages as calculi, we can fully accept the result
while at the same time perceiving the larger implications of the paradox
it articulates. To a large extent, the paradoxicality of the result
arises from the seeming poorness of its fit with our ordinary intuitions
about the use of language. When somebody utters a sentence in my own
language and I take myself to understand it, I generally have no sense
of arbitrarily selecting one meaning or interpretation from a variety of
systematically different possibilities. Nor does the abstract
possibility of alternative translation manuals seem to pose any
practical obstacle to the ordinary practice of communicating and
understanding meanings. Indeed, there seems to be an obvious sense in
which, in uttering a familiar English sentence meaningfully, I*must* ,
as a competent speaker of English, be said to understand and be capable
of communicating its meaning.[^268] Indeterminacy thus seems to have no
effect on ordinary linguistic practice; it is perfectly possible to say
something, and mean something determinate by it, without having any
particular systematic translation manual in mind at all. It can seem
difficult or impossible to square these obvious features of the
phenomenology of ordinary language with the claim that there is, when I
utter a normal, declarative sentence, no genuine fact of the matter
about what I mean. But it is this claim that the indeterminacy result
implies; and hence it can seem that the only reasonable way to react to
it is to find hitherto unnoticed grounds, implicit in our understanding
of linguistic practice, for denying that the result could be true.

But we can put the result in a different perspective by placing it
against the backdrop of Quine’s longstanding appeal to antecedent use,
and reflecting on the way in which this appeal provided grounds for his
emerging critique of Carnap’s picture of languages as calculi. For seen
against this backdrop, the indeterminacy of meaning is, in effect, the
product of two separate and somewhat (though not completely) isolable
factors.*One* of these factors is the totality of facts about the
ordinary practice of a language, captured in Quine’s formulation as the
totality of facts antecedently accessible to the interpreter. But
another factor, equally crucial to the result, is introduced by the
attempt to schematize or specify meanings by formulating them explicitly
in a translation manual. That meanings so specified must systematically
outstrip any determinacy actually present in the facts they purport to
represent and systematize is a key thought of Quine’s, from early in his
dialogue with Carnap. But this point implies no threat to the evident
determinacy of these facts in themselves. If speakers are confined to
the realm of an*unreflective* linguistic practice, and*debarred wholly
from reflecting about any systematic principles or rules underlying
their use of language,* no troubling impression of indeterminacy need
arise. Ordinary communication proceeds untroubled, without any need to
work out or specify an entire interpretation or translation.[^269] The
indeterminacy only emerges as part of the reflective practice of
explicating and specifying meanings, a practice that the radical
translator’s activity of translation explicitly models. It is only
within the ambit of*this* general reflection that the possibility
emerges of translating one and the same utterance in two radically
different ways. Without it, the fact of indeterminacy remains, but it
need not be considered to introduce anything paradoxical into the
phenomenology of ordinary, unreflective practice.

But in practice, it will, of course, be impossible to make this a clean
separation. As we saw in the last chapter, the possibility of systematic
reflection about the ground and basis for linguistic meaning is
inscribed in a language as soon as it contains the predicate “means”
itself. Indeed, as soon as a language includes expressions for such
notions as “meaning,” “truth” and “language” the reflective activity of
explicitation that would culminate in a formal calculus or translation
manual has already implicitly begun. A language purged of these
expressions, and hence debarred from the possibility of systematic
reflection on the basis of linguistic meaning, would scarcely be
recognizable as a (human) language at all.[^270] To construe the
indeterminacy result as an artifact of reflection on the form of a
language is not, then, to limit its significance to the abstract,
theoretical activity of linguists and philosophers. In the ordinary,
everyday practice of clarifying and reflecting on meanings, a practice
which presupposes the concepts which, if fully explicated, would yield a
systematic understanding of the structure of the language as a whole,
indeterminacy and conflicting interpretations may arise at any point.
But since it can be taken to be essential to human conversation that it
*always* involve at least the possibility of raising questions of
meaning, or of interpreting and criticizing what has been said with
reference to an understanding of a language as a whole, this practice is
none other than ordinary interlocution. Its ambiguities and
indeterminacies are those of language as such, anywhere and everywhere
it plays a role in human relation.

In interpreting the indeterminacy result as arising from the specific
instabilities of a structuralist picture of language such as Carnap’s,
moreover, it is important not to lose sight of the depth of the sources
of this picture in our everyday thinking about language, and the genuine
difficulty of resisting it. In the course of any systematic attempt to
reflect about language as a practice it seems just obvious that this
practice must, on some level of description, be guided by systematic
rules of grammar and inference that can, at least in principle, be
recovered by theoretical reflection. This seemingly obvious assumption
forms a large part of the basis of projects, throughout the analytic
tradition, that see themselves as clarifying or making explicit the
underlying logical, semantic, grammatical, or pragmatic form of
language. Carnap himself never questioned it, always assuming (despite
the large amount of room his conventionalism allowed for arbitrariness
and stipulation in the reconstruction of a language) that the
explication of a language, or an area of a language, in terms of a
specialized calculus could genuinely clarify and account for real,
underlying relations of justification and inference within that
language.

The picture of language as a calculus cuts so deeply in ordinary and
philosophical thinking, indeed, that Quine himself, despite his
sustained critique of it, also does not seem to completely escape its
influence. Other regions of his thought, less closely connected to the
dialogue with Carnap, tend to re-instate it, at least in part; and its
vestigial influence on Quine’s thinking may explain why he never posed
the indeterminacy result explicitly and specifically as a critique of
it. For instance, Quine held, beginning in*Word and Object* , that a
logical “regimentation” of specific regions of language could clarify
their inferential structure and ontological commitments.[^271] The
famous holist picture of language as an interconnected “web of belief”,
surrounded at the outer perimeter by experience, with which he ends “Two
Dogmas of Empiricism,” seems to suggest that the total state of
language, diachronically revisable and changeable though it may be,
could be portrayed, at least at any specific moment, by a determinate
calculus of rules relating currently accepted propositions, both to each
other and, holistically, to the empirical world. And the naturalist
vision of epistemology that he celebrated beginning with “Epistemology
Naturalized” can seem to suggest that general principles of the
grammatical and inferential practice of a language could be determined
purely empirically by means of reflection about the physiological route
from sense-stimulation to the fixation of beliefs and their expression
in behavior.[^272] In each of these cases, the appeal to some notion of
language as a calculus is less complete and explicit than Carnap’s
conception, but it remains in the background nonetheless. These
vestigial remnants of the picture of language as a calculus need not
imperil the more general recognition that we have located in Quine’s
critique of Carnap, to the effect that it is impossible to foreclose the
indeterminacy that is a necessary result, once we conceive of language
as a calculus. But their seeming irresistibility, as soon as systematic
thinking about language begins, can start to explain why Quine himself
never formulated this general recognition in these explicit terms.

More broadly, by understanding how Quine came to articulate a
fundamental criticism of the picture of languages as calculi on the
basis of his ongoing appeal to use, we can derive a striking general
lesson about the role of the interrelated notions of rules, use, and
practice in our ordinary understanding of language. It is an*essential*
part of this understanding that words and expressions are describable as
similar, identical or different in meaning, and that this description,
when offered, could be underwritten by a description of similarities,
identities, or differences in the regularities of use. The most radical
and surprising implication of Quine’s indeterminacy thesis is that this
assumption of regularity is ungrounded in anything we could discern as a
description of the facts. The set of assumptions of the determinacy and
identity of meanings that make possible not only our ordinary reflection
on meaning but the ordinary conversations in which this reflection plays
an essential part stand revealed, then, as mythologies. Nevertheless
they remain operative in what we regularly grasp as our regular
“practice” of using language, and continue to essentially determine what
we do and say within it. As soon as we begin to reflect on our practice
of using words as such, the possibility of describing meanings as the
“same” or “different” emerges as an essential part of this practice; but
the effect of Quine’s result is to show that nothing describable as part
of this practice grounds this possibility of determining sameness and
difference of meaning.

At an earlier stage of its pursuit, the analytic tradition’s reflection
on language had been explicitly directed against the mythology of
“ideas” or psychological items as the underlying basis for judgments of
identity or difference of meaning. With Quine’s indeterminacy result,
this reflection reaches its most radical conclusion. In the more radical
application that Quine’s indeterminacy result exemplifies, the critique
bears not only against the earlier psychologistic conception but also
against the pervasive mythology of meaning as grounded in regularly
describable “usage” as well. It remains that the assumption of a
substantial basis, in practice, for judgments of the identity and
difference of meaning play a pervasive and practically ineliminable role
in the simplest situations of intersubjective life. The startling effect
of Quine’s result is to show the impossibility of any attempt to
discharge this assumption by reference to the facts of use. If my
assumption that an interlocutor will go on using a word in the “the same
way” I do, or that he means the same thing with his utterances or
inscriptions that I would mean in using auditorially or
lexicographically similar tokens, indeed has a basis to which I can
appeal, this basis is (as we might put it) nothing other than the fact
that we share a language; and this fact is not further explicable in
terms of facts of linguistic usage or reference more primitive or basic
than it itself. This fact grounds every possibility of human linguistic
communication, and of the application of linguistic criticism to the
circumstances and practices of human life. But within the systematic
attempt, engendered already with the first word of language’s reflection
on itself, to comprehend its system and schematize its principles, it
emerges as itself groundless, the essentially elusive core of human
mutuality itself.
