III. CRITICAL OUTCOMES
======================

Introductory: From the Aporia of Structure to the Critique of Practice
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The analytic tradition’s inquiry into the structure of language,
throughout the course of its itinerary, has repeatedly taken up the
question of the relationship of language to its everyday use, practice
or employment. This inquiry has not yielded any consistent or complete
positive theory of this relationship. But its most significant
implication might be its ability to continue, and re-inscribe, the
traditional*critique of reason* on the indeterminate ground of the
everyday relationship of language to the life of the being that speaks.
For with its ongoing consideration of the structure of language, the
analytic tradition has, as we have seen, also sought to understand how
language structures the possibilities of a human life. In seeking a
description of the rules and regularities that would determine the
extent and nature of the possible meaningfulness of signs, and so fix
the bounds of linguistic sense, it has also sought to elucidate what we
can understand or appreciate in the words or utterances of another, what
we can take as a reason for an action or an explanation of its sense,
what we can see as a project to be shared or contested, a way of life to
be endorsed or refused.[^273] The desire for the clarification of
meaning that underlies this inquiry is an ordinary one, marked already
in the most mundane requests for clarification, the most everyday
questions of shared meaning. But in its detailed development in the
analytic tradition, its “object” is the same as that which philosophical
thought has long sought to grasp as*logos* , the form of the meaning of
words as well as the linguistic reason their everyday practice embodies.
Historical reflection on the itinerary of the tradition’s encounter with
this problematic object suggests both a more comprehensive sense of the
significance of its most innovative methods and a more exact placement
of them in a broader geography of critical thought.

The analytic tradition’s inquiry into language, in most of its
historical forms, looks toward the completion of a comprehensive
theoretical or descriptive understanding of the possibility of
linguistic meaning. Most often, this takes the form of the search for a
descriptive overview or systematic clarification of the rules or
regularities conceived as constitutive of language and its possibilities
of use. As we have seen over the last several chapters, however, this
quest for understanding repeatedly succumbs to inherent ambiguities and
instabilities, grounded in the essential ambiguities of the
structuralist picture of language itself. The quest is open to criticism
on the basis of an expanded conception of the kinds of explanation, or
intelligibility, we may wish from a theoretical “account” of language.
But it is also clear that the ambiguities it evinces are already
present, if only in a vague and inarticulate way, in the ordinary
language that it aims to theorize. As we have seen, in particular in
relation to Quine, these ambiguities are indeed present as soon as
language can speak of itself, as soon as there are words for its
capacity to mean anything, and thus as soon as the meaning of words,
their bearing on our lives, becomes a topic for human conversation at
all.

Thus it is that, according to what might well be considered one of the
most consistent results of the tradition, linguistic reason, in its
everyday employment, poses certain questions that are unavoidable for
it, but at the same time cannot be answered univocally by the
elucidation of logical or grammatical structure. The situation is
closely reminiscent of that described by the famous first lines of the
first edition of Kant’s*Critique of Pure Reason* :

Human reason has this peculiar fate that in one species of its knowledge
it is burdened by questions which, a prescribed by the very nature of
reason itself, it is not able to ignore, but which, as transcending all
its powers, it is also not able to answer.[^274]

Indeed, as I shall argue in this final section, like the Kantian project
which responds to a similar exigency of reason, the analytic inquiry can
be seen as performing a complex*critique* of linguistic meaning itself
on the ambiguous ground of its relationship to human life. The critique
effectively challenges the underlying ideological bases of some of the
most prevalent social practices of modernity by revealing their complex
relation to the forms of language and assumptions about meaning that
support them.

At the beginning of the analytic tradition, Kant’s critique of reason
provided both a model and an inspiration for practitioners of the newly
developed methods of logical and grammatical analysis. This influence
was felt not only by philosophers like Carnap and other members of the
Vienna Circle (whose training and background in the Neo-Kantianism of
Cohen, Natorp and Rickert played a decisive role in determining the
Circle’s project) but just as much by the young Wittgenstein, who saw in
the new methods of analysis pioneered by Frege and Russell the
possibility of conceiving of all philosophy as linguistic critique:

All philosophy is a 'critique of language' (though not in Mauthner's
sense). It was Russell who performed the service of showing that the
apparent logical form of a proposition need not be its real one.[^275]

Like Kant’s own project, the methods of this new form of linguistic
critique would seek to elucidate and demonstrate the necessary forms of
the representation of facts, and thereby to gain an understanding of
their*a priori* conditions and the limits of their possibilities. But
the definitive inspiration of the new practice of critique was that this
form could be grasped as*logical* or*linguistic* one, and so could be
clarified through the newly developed methods of analysis. The
Russellian theory of descriptions itself was a limited case, bearing
only on the question of the actual significance of a certain class of
apparently referring propositions, and eventually to be undermined by
its own set of seeming counterexamples. But for Wittgenstein as well as
other early analytic philosophers, it provided an essential early
demonstration of the bearing of the methods of analysis on
the*clarification* of language, the illumination of its “real”
possibilities of meaning over against the tendency of ordinary language
to obscure or falsely assimilate these forms. Such was the singularity
of Wittgenstein’s insight, or the specificity of his historical
position, that he could see philosophy’s problems as entirely and
universally grounded in such linguistic obscurities and illusions. And
such was the audacity of his vision of language that he could declare
these problems universally resolved by their critique.[^276]

At first, the critique of language meant the drawing of a critical*line*
, within the totality of language itself, between the*meaningful*
propositions of scientific or objective description and those that
(though they might serve to express a mood or feeling) lacked meaning in
this sense. From the beginning, though, the critical practice that would
delimit linguistic sense by clarifying the real or genuine forms of
meaning encountered the question of the methodological basis of its own
claim to enact this delimitation. Thus structuralism was faced with the
further critical question of the ground of its own defining commitments.
And the philosophical reflection that took up this question as the
question of linguistic signs to their ordinary use also took up the
deeper critical inquiry to which it led.

The results of this inquiry - in particular, as we have seen, those of
the Sellars, Quine, and the later Wittgenstein - tended to problematize
what we may assume about our ordinary relationship to “meaning” by
calling into question the structuralist model that earlier projects had
uncritically presupposed. In different ways, each of these projects
articulated a fundamental instability that troubles the structuralist
attempt to characterize linguistic meaning by describing its basis in
rules of use. In the case of Wittgenstein’s consideration of
rule-following in particular, this instability defines a
fundamental*aporia* or gap between what the structuralist picture
envisions as rules and what is involved in*applying* or*following* them
in the varied circumstances of a human life. The gap is uncrossable by
any theoretical explanation as long as linguistic meaning is conceived
in structuralist terms, since any such conception leads to the paradox
of*PI* 201. Its diagnosis and criticism is to make way for an
alternative way of understanding what is involved in following a rule, a
way that expresses itself in what we call “following a rule,” or “going
against it”, from “case to case” of actual “use.”[^277]

At PI 217, Wittgenstein asks, in an interlocutory voice, “How am I able
to obey a rule?” The question, as I shall attempt to document in this
final section of the book, can also be seen as*the* central question of
those forms of contemporary social, political, and cultural critique
that take up the question of our relationship to linguistic reason and
the forms of life and practice determined by this relationship. Within
these forms of life and practice, the most normal form of the
determination of action is its being in accord with one or another
symbolically formulable rule. Here, the*force of reason* - what
motivates or compels us to choose the better action rather than the
worse, to accept the claim that is best justified by the evidence or
follow the course of action that will lead to the best outcome - is also
typically comprehensible as the justification of action by rules that
can be stated and discussed, explicated and evaluated. In the course of
such discussion, I may present my action as justified by reference to
one or another cited rule; but I may also ask the question of what in
the cited rule itself demands or even suggests my particular action, of
how I should understand the ultimate basis of its (actual or
“normative”) force in determining what I do. The question, in its
general form, is the same as the question of linguistic reason’s
authority, the relevance of its claims to the pursuit of a linguistic
life. It formulates, in distinctively linguistic mode, one of the most
central questions of the Kantian critique of reason itself.[^278]

Wittgenstein’s immediate response to the interlocutor, without answering
the question, expresses a pervasive sense that such answers may fail to
do what we expect of them, may fail ultimately to place the distinctive
force of reason on any more basic foundation than it already has:

If this is not a question about causes, then it is about the
justification for my following the rule in the way I do.

If I have exhausted the justifications I have reached bedrock, and my
spade is turned. Then I am inclined to say: “This is simply what I
do.”[^279]

The paradox of PI 201 articulates the gap between a rule and its
application that makes any further description of our*practices* - any
further description of what we do - idle in answering the question of
the ultimate ground of rational force. It thus demonstrates a nullity at
the center of structural reason’s claim to force over a life responsive
to its dictates.

Like the more formal results of Gödel and Tarski before them, the
results of Sellars, Wittgenstein, and Quine demonstrate the necessary
failure of a natural and plausible theoretical project, in this case the
project of a total structuralist explanation of linguistic meaning. And
if, in the larger context of the history of the analytic tradition,
these results were*only* comprehensible as the outcomes of a positive,
theoretical explanatory project (one whose ambition, for instance, were
simply to contribute to a growing fund of scientific or empirical
knowledge about language) they would indeed amount*only* to failures,
and their repeated occurrence would suggest that the entire project from
which they arose be abandoned or at least seriously reconsidered. But if
seen within the broader context of the critical methods that the
tradition has practiced since its inception, they drive toward a very
different possibility, one that could ensure the continuance rather than
the abandonment of the reflective project they represent. For they could
be the basis of an explicit renewal of the analytic tradition’s
ongoing*critical* consideration of our access to linguistic meaning, of
the contours of its inherent possibilities and the threat of its
failures, and of the implications of the determinate pursuit of its
structure for our understanding of its role in the life of the being
that speaks.

Stanley Cavell gives an apt sense of the cultural bearing of this
critique, as it appears in the texts of the late Wittgenstein:

That the justifications and explanation we give of our language and
conduct, that our ways of trying to intellectualize our lives, do not
really satisfy us, is what, as I read him, Wittgenstein wishes us above
all to grasp. This is what his ‘methods’ are designed to get us to see.
What directly falls under his criticism are not the results of
philosophical argument but those unnoticed turns of mind, casts of
phrase, which comprise what intellectual historians call ‘climates of
opinion’, or ‘cultural style’, and which, unnoticed and therefore
unassessed, defend conclusions from direct access - fragments, as it
were, of our critical super-egos which one generation passes to the next
along with, perhaps as the price of, its positive and permanent
achievements …[^280]

Like an earlier epoch of enlightenment thought, the analytic critique of
language aims, in one of its most prominent historical modes, at the
identification of sources of*mythology* , and so culminates in
the*demystification* of the pictures of human life they impose and
diagnosis of the false consciousness that accompanies them.[^281] One of
its first and still most significant accomplishments, for instance, was
to provide linguistic grounds for challenging the longstanding picture
of the content of thought as consisting in the conscious processes of a
closed, centered subjectivity. The critique of psychologism that
Wittgenstein inherited from Frege exposed this picture to its own fatal
failure to account for the meaningfulness of language that is
presupposed by it. Psychologism, like others of the various pictures of
human life that the analytic tradition takes up, is perspicuous to the
critique as a “grammatical” illusion, one deeply grounded in the forms
of ordinary language, the ordinary descriptive locutions and turns of
phrase it permits.[^282] Like other such pictures, it arises from
certain characteristic desires, presenting their imagined fulfillment;
but it does not survive the lucid description of these desires and
reflection on the nature of their demand.[^283]

More generally, the modes of analytic criticism expressed in projects of
Sellars, Quine, and Wittgenstein, and formulated in their most
significant results, express grounds for criticizing what we might
describe as our tendency to assume the*fixity* of meaning across the
heterogeneity and diversity of contexts of linguistic use. The
metaphysical picture of rules that is the target of Wittgenstein’s
criticism in the*Investigations* , for instance, is a picture of the
basis of such fixity, of the regular meaning of a word as consisting in
the regularity of the rule that underlies its use. Something similar
could be said about the critical bearing of Quine’s radical translation
result against Carnap’s conception of languages as calculi, and Sellars’
criticism of Ryle’s structuralist eliminativism. In each of these cases,
analytic reflection on the problematic relationship of language to
anything intelligible as its “use” leads to a deep challenge to the
claim that the meaningfulness of terms is explicable by means of an
explication of the rules supposed to be responsible it. In this
challenge, even if it is not generally perceived as posing a devastating
challenge to structuralism as such, the inherent instabilities of the
structuralist picture of language come to the fore as challenges to the
coherence or possibility of its existing specific formulations.

But if the real object of critique is not any of these specific
formulations, but rather their more*general* , and deeply natural,
picture of language that they determinately formulate, then the sites of
criticism do not stop short of the infinitely varied contexts of a human
life, wherever meaning is in question at all. For the commitments and
pictures that lead us to (as we may put it) “assume” the fixity of
meanings, or “presuppose” substantial identities of sense underlying our
varied uses of a word, are already present, in our ordinary language, as
soon as we begin to reflect on the relationship of words to their
meanings, as soon as we experience their singular tokens as*instances*
of a more general category at all. The critique that begins as
“linguistic” demystification is therefore, with its more radical
application to the “metaphysics of meaning” that must be seen to
underlie*everyday* reflection on meaning as much as the determinate
theoretical forms of analysis and explanation that grow from it, no
longer presentable simply as consisting in the dissolution of errors or
superstitions. It cannot be seen (though this is certainly part of its
work)*simply* as eliminating distorting falsehoods from a human life
that could then be revealed, purged of the mystifications of philosophy,
in an undistorted and pure form. Rather, the analytic critique of
language joins with those other expressions of a broader critique of
metaphysics that have increasingly located the sites of its operation,
and the point of its threat to the clarity of the human life, in nothing
short of the innumerable variety of contexts in which meaning is open to
question, from the first word of language to the last.

In this, the analytic tradition joins with, as I shall argue in the
following chapters, the neighboring traditions of “continental”
philosophy that have, especially in the twentieth century, taken up an
older critique of metaphysics in the critical mode of reflection on the
forms of language and our access to them. In recent historiography, the
origin of the widely acknowledged “divide” between “continental” and
“analytic” philosophy has been widely and variously located in time and
space. Some locate it at the beginning of the existence of the analytic
tradition as such (for instance, in the discussion between Frege and
Husserl over logic, language, and psychology and in the different
conclusions they reached about the centrality of language to
philosophical analysis;[^284] or in Russell and Moore’s rebellion
against post-Hegelian idealism[^285] ). Others cite some of the
particularly divisive episodes in which analytic philosophers have
explicitly attacked the methods and results of “continental”
philosophers. One infamous example of such an attack is Carnap’s
scathing criticism of a few sentences drawn from Heidegger’s 1929
Freiburg inaugural lecture, “What is Metaphysics?”[^286] Still others
locate the historical origins of the divergence in more or less
contingent historical or sociological facts[^287] (for instance the
immigration of many prominent representatives of logical empiricism to
the U.S.A. after World War II).

However, though, the split of the analytic tradition from its
philosophical neighbors is located, it can hardly be denied that
questions of the structure and limits of linguistic meaning played a
decisive role in producing it. Early in the tradition, the project of
linguistic criticism combined with positivistic assumptions about
experience and the forms of objective knowledge to produce the project
of the “overcoming of metaphysics” that Schlick, Carnap, and other
members of the Vienna Circle pursued zealously, and with prejudice,
against the methods, aims, and statements of contemporary philosophers
like Husserl and Heidegger. The analytic philosophers who applied this
kind of critique saw themselves as possessing clear, logically based
criteria of meaningfulness and empiricist criteria of significance that
expressly excluded what they saw as the speculative, non-empirical
claims of phenomenologists. The criticism, however, often showed no very
clear understanding of the actual motivations and projects underlying
these claims, and so as often as not mistook them; often the claims
themselves were much more humble and “analytic” than their critique
implied.[^288] In any case, the specifically positivist and
verificationist terms of the critique were soon themselves to be
overcome, within the analytic tradition itself, by midcentury projects
that saw themselves as having decisively passed beyond logical
positivism.

Interestingly, though, even when it became clear that these criteria of
meaningfulness and significance could not be applied in the
straightforward and univocal way that the logical empiricists had
supposed, analytic philosophers have persisted in criticizing the claims
and expressions of continental philosophers in methodologically similar
ways. The newer attacks most often deploy more general criteria of
clarity in argumentation and precision in expression, criticizing the
claims of continental philosophers as being unclear or even
unintelligible.[^289] But like the earlier attacks, they rest
essentially on the analytic philosopher’s claim to pass judgment on
linguistic possibilities of sense.

Methodologically speaking, then, the claim of analytic philosophers to
criticize continental projects has remained dependent on the claim,
already decisive for the logical empiricists, to determine, and apply, a
standard capable of circumscribing the possibilities of meaningful
philosophical language. The prejudicial application of this critique
against the projects of continental philosophy has been vastly
excessive; and the subsequent internal development of the analytic
tradition’s own modes of critique indeed provides reason to doubt its
continuing trenchancy. As I shall attempt partially to demonstrate over
the next three chapters, in fact, shat the analytic criticisms of
continental philosophy have most pervasively and unfortunately missed is
the extent to which various projects of continental philosophy over the
twentieth century have themselves moved to perform a sophisticated
critical reflection on the role of language in the life of its speakers.
Over the course of the twentieth century, the inquiries of
phenomenology, hermeneutics, critical theory and deconstruction have all
undertaken deep and penetrating investigations into the “nature of
language,” into its underlying forms and the implications of its role in
human life. These inquiries, good heirs to the Kantian project, have
self-consciously struggled with and against the claims of a metaphysics
that they have come to recognize as pervasive in everyday as well as
philosophical language, a metaphysics that is as old as philosophy and
whose effects on the forms and practices of our everyday lives are both
ubiquitous and determinative. One of my hopes in pursuing the
significant, and deepening, connections between this critical struggle
and the parallel one that, I argue, the analytic tradition has similarly
undertaken, is that the usual dismissive attitude that one still finds
among practitioners of each “tradition” toward the other can yield to a
broader and more responsible conversation, informed by the deep
questions of language that both traditions share.


