The beliefs of the Imamiyyah
============================

To begin with, the lmamiyyah distinguish themselves from other Muslim
groups by their doctrine of the divine Imamate, from which they take
their name. Thus Muslims are split into two sects on the basis of their
different positions on the question of who should succeed the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family and grant them salvation. (The
history of this division, when and why the schism occurred, is not our
concern at this point.)

First there are those who maintain that the Prophet of Allah designated
an imam after him in a way which was unequivocal and did not require
interpretation, that this was done through a revelation from Allah and
was not a result of his personal desire for which there was absolutely
no divine command, and that he named them individually and said how many
there would be, especially the first of them, he being ‘Ali, the
Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon him; that the Imams possess
knowledge of the shari‘ah, infallibility, perfection, and the power to
work miracles such as the Prophet possessed, and that they must be
obeyed and revered as he must be; the only difference lies in
Prophethood and the revelation of the Divine Law, which are peculiar to
him there is no prophet after him.

Secondly, there are those who do not believe in the Imamate in this
sense, and who maintain instead that the matter of succession was either
neglected, as the Prophet did not say anything definite about it, or
that it was left to the Muslims themselves to choose whom they wished to
rule over them, although they differed about how they should choose him,
what his qualities should be, and the characteristics of the electors.

However, the differences between the Imamiyyah and other Muslim sects
concerning the Imamate carries over to disagreements in many other
matters, some of which pertain to basic dogma, and some to law and
jurisprudence. The most important points of dogma in which the Imamiyyah
differed from other Muslim sects are as follows:

a) Regarding Unicity, they believe in the complete and total rejection
of any belief in the corporeality of Allah or in anthropo- morphism,
either in a literal or an interpreted sense. On this basis, they
catagorically deny that Allah is visible, either in this world or in the
Hereafter, in wakefulness or in dreams. They also reject the attribution
of spatio-temporal movement and translocation to Him, because they deny
that time and place can be ascribed to Him.

b) They believe that the attributes of Allah divide themselves into
attributes of essence and attributes of action, and that the former
exist in the very existence of His essence, and are absolutely one with
Him, eternally preexistent in, not with, the preexistence of His essence
itself. On the other hand, attributes of action are, in reality, actions
of Allah, which come into exist- ence. On this basis, they distinguish
between the All-Knowing (al-‘Alim) and the Living (al-Hayy), and the
Creator (al-Khaliq), the Provider (ar-Raziq), and the Speaker
(al-Mutakallim); (these examples are merely cited by way of
illustration, and are by no means exhaustive). They also maintain that
the second group of attributes derive from the actions of Allah, and
come into existence with the coming into existence of the act. For this
reason, they do not believe that the Qur’an is eternally uncreated,
although some of them avoided saying that it was created.

c) With respect to Justice (‘adl), whereby they counted themselves among
the ‘Adliyyah, their belief contains both elaborations and consequence:

(i) the impossibility of demanding that a legally responsible individual
do that which he is unable to do;

(ii) the impossibility of punishing an individual for that which he
could not avoid doing, or was unable to do, except when his inability
sprang from his own choice;

(iii) the evil of punishment without clear notification; and (iv) the
necessity for Allah to establish a Proof (hujjah) for creatures by way
of mercy (lutf) – part of this is the sending of the Messenger.

The relationship between the Imamiyyah and the Mu‘Tazilah
---------------------------------------------------------

However, the picture of the Imamiyyah and their beliefs which emerges
among historians of the sect and I am referring to those who were not
themselves Imami differs from the afore said in several respects. Even
if these writers did not distinguish between Imami ideas and opinions
and the kind of demonstration used, it is nevertheless a picture, which
gives us reason to pause.

There exists a prevailing opinion among them that these ideas and
opinions were passed on to Imami scholars at a time somewhat after the
formation of the sect, through their being influenced by the thinking of
the Mu‘tazilah and following their teachers.

This is the approach that Professor ‘Irfan adopts in his introduction
generally, and specifically in the third part, in which he comments upon
the sections of the book in more detail; and this is one of the reasons
we have not published it. This third part investigates the relationship
between Shi‘i and Mu‘tazili theology at the time of the Buyids. He
states:[^1]

A critical examination reveals that the shift in Shi‘i theology from its
form based on hadith to its rationalist, interpretative form was in the
beginning inspired by the critical and rationalist positions of the
Mu‘tazilah . . .al-Mufid exemplifies the novel rationalist direction in
Shi‘i thought, which was responsible for the rejection of a literal
interpretation of the divine shari‘ah, and which introduced rationalist
and interpretative explanations of it into the teachings of the
Imamiyyah . . .

A critical, comparative examination of the differences between Tashihu
'l-i‘tiqad and its precursors must centre itself upon the influence of
the Mu‘tazilah upon the Imamiyyah.In addition to these statements, in
which he fails to distinguish between differences in belief and
differences in the methods of proof or ways of demonstration, Professor
‘Irfan also makes the following points:

i) That the Imamiyyah were, at the beginning of their history,
transmitters of hadith and partisans of doctrines based solely upon the
Holy Qur’an and the Sunnah, without recourse to reason (‘aql) and the
sort of demonstration resting upon its use, which they rejected.

ii) That the shift in Shi‘i theology from its early form to a subsequent
variant one was a result of the contact of the Imamiyyah with Mu‘tazili
ideas, by way of the instruction they received from Mu‘tazili shaykhs
and the influence of their views.

iii) That al-Mufid was the first to complete this shift.

iv) That this judgement is based upon a comparison between the
theological views of al-Mufid and those of his predecessor as- Saduq.

v) That the 'rationalist school of theology', with which al-Mufid is
associated, is defined as 'the rational and metaphorical, or
interpretative, explanation of the Muslim shari‘ah.'

We shall treat the first four of these points in what follows. It is
enough to comment here on the definition of the rationalist school he
gives by saying that the shari‘ah has two facets: the dogmatic aspect,
or what is designated as the principles of the religion, which the faith
requires of the Muslim, and the practical aspect, or derivatives of the
religion, which are the divine laws associated with worship,
transactions, rights, the judicial process, and all that which is
investigated in the science of fiqh.

Allah forbid that our Shaykh al-Mufid and all the Imamiyyah, not to
mention the Mu‘tazilah and those who followed them, such as the
Zaydiyyah, should rely on rational or interpretative explanations for
the derivatives of the religion, such as prayer, fasting, zakat, hajj,
and the other laws of worship and transactions, including everything
contained in the shari‘ah and explained comprehensively and succinctly
in the books of fiqh.

It is true that there are some who speak of a hidden meaning (batin) in
the shari‘ah, and who explain prayer, fasting, and hajj in a way that
excludes their being acts of worship; instead, they maintain, the
shari‘ah contains secrets such that he who discovers them and holds
faith in them has no need to act according to the ostensive meaning of
the divine law, and that the burden of the law is lifted from him. How
few are those who believe such things and speak of themselves as
Muslims; and how many are those who accuse people of this falsely and
maliciously, and are actually trying to dispel suspicion or repel
accusations leveled at them.

It is necessary for us to add that rationalist and interpretative
explanation of the Book [of Allah] and the Sunnah regarding matters of
belief is not, as some would have it, arbitrary or wishful, zealous or
fanciful, or some sort of search for buried treasure, or a devilish
incitement to revolt against Allah and His Prophet. Rather, it centers
upon the adoption of the stronger of two arguments, and the explication
of the weaker of the two in light of the stronger, or on the basis of a
comparison and evaluation of the evidence used. For this activity there
are principles and guidelines, which form the subject matter of the
science of usulu 'l-fiqh.

There is no difference in the principal beliefs between the two Imami schools
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Shaykh as-Saduq stands out amongst the Imami scholars of Tradition
and Narration. A few aspects of his distinctive character have been
mentioned in the introduction to the English translation of his book
I‘tiqadatu 'l-Imamiyyah. He came from a scholarly family, distinguished
in the science of hadith and its transmission, and he faithfully adopted
their methods. All of what he held conforms with what the Imami scholars
of hadith agreed upon, especially the Qummi school, or at least with
what the greatest of them taught, except in a few places, such as the
inattention of the Prophet in prayer. In this latter opinion he followed
his teacher Muhammad ibn al-Hams ibn al-Walid, whom the majority of
scholars, Tradition-ist or otherwise, did not agree with.

A comparative study of I‘tiqadatu 'l-Imamiyyah and the commentary made
upon it by the Shaykh al-Mufid in Tashihu'l-‘tiqad reveals the
overwhelming concurrance of the Tradi- tionist and theological schools
of the lmamiyyah with respect to the principles of dogma and its
details; in comparison, the points where the two schools disagree in
these matters are very few. Indeed, the difference between them is only
in the method of demonstrating their opinions in dogmatics.

A comparative study also reveals that criticisms by lmami theologians of
the hadith which the Traditionists relied upon did not arise essentially
from their stances on dogma and their disagreements about the principles
of theology, but rather was centered on standards for the criticism of
the hadith each Traditionist employed, through criticizing the chain of
transmission, bringing its narration into question and showing that one
of its transmitters was not trustworthy, or through casting doubt upon
what it proved, rejecting it because it contradicted a stronger proof
from the verses of the Holy Qur’an or from hadith whose chain of
transmission was superior to it or whose proof was clearer.

This must be set against the accusation usually made by non-Imami
Traditionists, including the theologians of the Jahmiyyah, Mu‘tazilah,
Murjiah, and others: that they completely rejected verses of the Holy
Qur’an and well-established Prophetic sunnah if these disagreed with
their own theological views.

It may be that the secret to understanding this methodological dispute
between the Imami and non-Imami Traditionist schools goes back firstly
to the difference between the nature of the Imami and non-Imami hadith
which each of them chose to employ, as we shall indicate. Secondly,
Imami and non-Imami mutakallims are distinguishable in that rarely does
one come upon an Imami mutakallim who is not also well versed in hadith
and its sciences, such that he combined these two qualities equally in
his theology.

If a man specialized in hadith, he was not ignorant in kalam, adopting a
hostile and controversial stance opposing it; and if he was addressing
theological issues, then he did not find himself able to dispense with
hadith and their soundness of transmission, as was said about others.

Another of the Shaykh al-Mufid's works, Awailu 'l-maqalat fi 'l-madhahib
wa 'l-mukhtarat reveals differences between Imami scholars up to his
time, whether they were scholars exclusively of hadith and fiqh, or
exclusively of kalam (to the best of my knowledge, this applies only to
some members of the Banu Nawbakht), or of both. But these differences
are few when compared to their agreements. Such a study also reveals
differences between these scholars and those from other prominent sects
of Muslims up to al-Mufid's time.

On these matters, there is a need for a detailed study com- paring the
books of as-Saduq and al-Mufid. As space is limited here, however, it
will suffice to cite the conclusions of a Western scholar, Dr. Martin J.
McDermott, as they appear in his book The Theology of al-Shaikh
al-Mufid. Here I quote a short passage, in which he states:

Ibn Babuya [as-Saduq] was a traditionist. When he set out to explain a
difficulty or answer a question, he preferred to quote a tradition
rather than reason out an answer of his own. Even his creed, the Risalat
al-i‘tiqadat, consists largely of traditions strung together.
Nevertheless he did hold many of the same theses as the theologians, and
when a tradition he was reporting seemed to contradict one of his
theological views, on God's Unity or Justice, for example, Ibn Babuya
would interject his own interpretation of the tradition.

Here in lies Ibn Babuya's major difference from his pupil, al-Mufid, who
is a theologian as well as a traditionist. When a point can be proved
both from revelation and an argument from reason, al-Mufid generally
prefers to rely on the latter, quoting the tradition or quranic text as
supplementary argument.

Most of the important theological doctrines held by Ibn Babuya and his
pupil are the same. . . .

Here he goes on to review the points of difference between the two as
evident in their books. Then he states:

Ibn Babuya, then, is a traditionist with many views that are akin to
Mu‘tazilite theses. Al-Mufid is a theologian as well as a traditionist,
and his views, though basically simi-lar to Ibn Babuya's, go further in
a Mu‘tazilite direction.[^2] I shall not comment on McDermott's words at
all here, as the reader will himself find the differences between us in
opinion and in conclusions in the following discussion.

Wide differences between the two Non-Imami schools
--------------------------------------------------

We must examine, if only very briefly, what has been referred to up to
now as the 'non-lmami school of theologians', since there are common
points which are mentioned as stemming from the beliefs of the 'poeple
of hadith and Tradition', and on the basis of which their views and
beliefs are weighed against those of others, which were in fact taken
from the non-Imami school, and proofs and evidence which are mentioned
in this field which exist in a complete form in the body of hadith which
the non-Imami Traditionists relate, and which form the sole basis for
the opinions which they adopted, or which were attributed to them.

In addition, the intellectual and doctrinal contradiction between the
Traditionist and theological schools in those days they were the
Mu‘tazilah, the Jahmiyyah, the Murjiah, and those who followed in their
wake was borrowed from non- Imami hadith, from the opinions of non-Imami
Tradition-ists, from their attitude towards the views of the
theologians, from their dismissal of them, and from their criticism of
those who held them; and indeed, from their criticism of them for the
theological trend, in a general sense, in religious belief.

It is not correct to make these general characteristics, or these
general contradictions, into a general trait of either the Imami or the
non-Imami Traditionist trend, which is above all else based on the Holy
Qur’an and the Sunnah, in deducing and formulating religious doctrine.

What is called the 'Traditionist school' a more accurate term for them,
which they themselves prefer, is 'the people of hadith and Tradition'
(ahlu 'l-hadith wa 'l-athar) – was not a school of thought which was
defined and clearly characterized in all or many respects, as was the
case with the Mu‘tazilah or the Jahmiyyah, for example, so that it is
possible to specify what opinions they agreed upon, and what
distinguished them from other sects.

Moreover, this designation was assigned to them not by their own
choosing, but was derived from their positions and views. All that they
believed was: that those who were involved with hadith should not go
beyond the hadith which had come down to them, and which they believed
to be true, in explaining their opinions and representing their beliefs,
but that they should rely on the narration of the ostensive wording of
the hadith for expressing their views and should not change the wording
for the convenience of the meaning.

Whatever we may say about them, the Traditionists certainly did not fit
into one single mould, but rather into many, since the extent of the
difference between any one Traditionist and any one of those they called
theologians is only to be measured by the quantity of what the
Traditionist narrated and the number of hadith he narrated whose
veracity he was committed to. It is clear that the Traditionists
differed in the number of hadith, which they narrated, and in the
number, which they believed to be true.

Moreover, they varied between those who had few and those who had many,
and between those who were generous in judging veracity, and those who
were strict, not judging them to be true unless many conditions were
fulfilled. On this basis the hadith differed in terms of those whose
narrations they agreed upon and those, which were only narrated by some,
as well as in terms of those whose veracity they were agreed upon and
those whose veracity they were not agreed upon.

It should be noted that even though the Ash‘Ari School was based on the
rejection of Mu‘tazili thinking, its teaching was primarily concerned
with reconciliation and not rejection. For the teaching encompassed by
it and contained in it went back to Abu 'l-Hasan al-Ash‘ari, ‘Ali ibn
Isma‘il ibn Abi Bashir, al- Basri (260/874 or 270/883–324/936), the imam
of the Ash‘aris, who quarrelled with his Mu‘tazili teachers over the
fact that, according to him, they used to reject anything that went
against their views even when the Holy Qur’an and the authentic Sunnah,
in his own view, supported it. However, there is not enough space here
to speak at length about this or to marshal the evidence concerning it.

Examples of Non-Imami traditionist opinions
-------------------------------------------

It is not necessary here to speak at length about the hadith, which are
from our non-Imami brothers, as it is possible for the reader to find
them comprehensively collected in the following sources:

1. Muhammad ibn Isma‘il, Abu ‘Abdillah al-Bukhari (194/810 –256/870):
Khalq af‘ali 'l-‘ibad;

2. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Hanbal, Abu ‘Abdillah ash- Shaybani
(164/780–241/855), the imam of the Hanbalis: ar- Radd ‘ala 'l-Jahmiyyah
wa 'z-Zanadiqah;

3. Abu ‘Abdi 'r-Rahman, ‘Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
(213/828–288/901): as-Sunnah;

4. ‘Uthman ibn Sa‘id, Abu Sa‘id ad-Darimi (c 199/815–280/894): ar-Radd
‘ala 'l-Jahmiyyah and ar-Radd ‘ala Bishr al- Marrisi;

5. Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Khuzaymah as-Salami an-Naysaburi
(223/838–311/924): at-Tawhid wa ithbat sifati 'r- rabb;

6. Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn ‘Abdillah al-Ajuri, ash-Shafi‘i,
al-Baghdadi (c 280/893–360/970): ash-Shari‘ah.

And with reference to the interpretation of the Ash‘aris, see:

1. Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Furak al-Isbahani, al- Ash‘ari,
ash-Shafi‘i (d. 406/1015): Mushkilu 'l-hadith;

2. Ahmad (Hamad) ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim, Abu Sulay- man al-Khattabi,
al-Busti, al-Ash‘ari, ash-Shafi‘i (319/931–388/998): al-Bayhaqi has
quoted, below, many of his works;

3. Ahmad ibn al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, Abu Bakr al-Bayhaqi, al- Ash‘ari,
ash-Shafi‘i (384/994–458/1066): al-Asma’ wa 's-sifat and al-I‘tiqad;

4. ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn Hibatillah, Abu 'l-Qasim ibn ‘Asakir
ad-Dimashqi, al-Ash‘ari, ash-Shafi‘i (499/1105–571/1176): Tabyin kidhbi
'l-muftari fi-ma nasaba ila Abi 'l-Hasan al-Ash‘ari.

All these sources are in print; al-Khattabi's opinions are contained in
al-Bayhaqi. I shall only give examples of the opinions of the
Traditionists and ignore those who were imams of a madhhab, such as the
Hanbali Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, whose views and beliefs form the
foundation for the doctrines of Ibn Taymiyyah, Taqiyyu 'd-Din, Ahmad ibn
‘Abdi 'l-Halim al-Harrani, al-Hanbali (661/1263–728/1328), and Muhammad
ibn ‘Abdi 'l-Wahhab an-Najdi al-Hanbali (1115/1703–1206/1792), the
heralds and leaders of the Salafiyyah, as they call themselves, or 'the
Wahhabiyyah', as others refer to them.

I shall also steer clear of the imams of other madhhabs, lest someone
should associate me with people with whom I do not wish to be
associated. Those who wish to study the views of the Hanbali and other
schools can find them in the afore-mentioned sources; in connection with
the defence of Ahmad ibn Hanbal, see the two following sources:

l. ‘Abdu 'r-Rahman ibn ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, Abu 'l-Faraj ibn al-Jawzi
al-Baghdadi, al-Hanbali (508/1114–597/1201): Daf shubahi't-tashbih
bi-akuffi't-tanzih;

2. Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn ‘Abdi 'l-Mu’min, Taqiyyu 'd-Din al-Hisni,
ad-Dimashqi, al-Ash‘ari, ash-Shafi‘i (752/1351–829/1426): Daf‘ shubah
man shabbaha wa tamarrada wa nasaba dhalika ila 'l-Imam Ahmad.

\* \* \* \* \*

Abu 'l-Faraj ibn al-Jawzi stated:

Know that all the Traditionists made the ostensive meaning of everything
that had to do with the attributes of the Creator conform to the senses,
and thus they were anthropomorphist, because they did not mix with the
fuqaha’, so as to learn how to make the ambiguous conform with the
unambiguous.[^3]

He also said:

Know that people are at three levels concerning reports of [His]
attributes:

First, at a level at which they are taken literally, with no explanation
or interpretation, unless necessity demands it – as in the case of His
words:

***and thy Lord comes [al-Fajr, 89:22],***

i.e., His decree came – viz. the Salafiyyah; secondly, at the level of
interpretation, which is a perilous position; and thirdly, at a level
which is called conformity with the senses, which is common among
ignorant 'reporters' [by this he means the Traditionists], since they
possess no part of the intellectual sciences, which let it be known what
is possible and what is impossible for Allah, for intellectual science
turns the ostensive meanings of what is reported away from
anthropomorphism.Since they were deprived of this, they were at liberty
in Traditions to make them conform to the senses.[^4]

In refutation of those who held that most of the Hanbalis were
corporealists and anthropomorphists, Ibn Taymiyyah said:

The corporealists and anthropomorphists were more prevalent in groups
other than [that of] the followers of the Imam Ahmad; these include
certain groups of Kurds, all of whom are Shafi‘i, and among them is
found more corporealism and anthropomorphism than in any other group,
and the people of Gilan, among whom are Shafi‘is and Hanbalis. As for
the pure Hanbalis, there was not as much of it among them as among
others; the Karamiyyah were all Hanafis.[^5]

I do not agree with Ibn Taymiyyah in his defense of the members of his
school, but I shall remain silent about it – an apology to our brothers
the Kurds whom Ibn Taymiyyah spoke Ihya’ at-Turathi 'l-‘Arabi, Beirut,
offprint 2, 1392/1972, vol.1, p.418. Of as he did, for they know him as
well as I do. As for the people of Gilan, they stopped being Shafi‘i and
Hanbali centuries ago, and today they are all Imami Shi‘i.

The position of Non-Imami traditionists on anthropomorphism
-----------------------------------------------------------

As examples of what Ibnu 'l-Jawzi pointed out in his discus- sion of the
Traditionists, I shall choose three who are not clear- cut Hanbalis, and
I shall provide a short biography of each of them, so that I will not be
accused of having stumbled upon two obscure and undistinguished men who
were of little significance among Traditionists:

1. Ishaq ibn Ibrahim ibn Makhlad ibn Ibrahim, Abu Ya‘qub al- Hanzali
al-Marwazi, Ibn Rahwayh an-Naysaburi (161/778–238/853). al-Katib said:
"He was one of the leaders of the Muslims,a landmark in religion; he
combined knowledge of hadith and fiqh, his memeory was excellent and
reliable, and he was pious and an ascetic. He travelled to Iraq, the
Hijaz, Yemen, and Sham . . . He came to Baghdad and became familiar with
the memorizers of hadith there, and exchanged narrations with them. He
returned to Khurasan and settled in Naysabur."

al-Mazzi and as-Subki said of him: "He was the teacher of al-Bukhari,
Muslim, at-Tirmidhi, Abu Dawud, and an-Nasa’i, . .. Ahmad ibn Hanbal, .
. . and Yahya ibn Mu‘in . . ."Nu‘aym ibn Hammad said: "If you see an
‘Iraqi casting aspersions on Ahmad ibn Hanbal, have your doubts about
his beliefs; and if you see a Khurasani casting aspersions on Ishaq ibn
Rahwayh, have your doubts about his beliefs." And an- Nasa’i said: "He
was a leader, trustworthy, reliable." Ahmad ibn Hanbal said: "If Abu
Ya‘qub [Ibn Rahwayh], the commander of the traditionists, narrates
something to you, hold on to it."

Abu Hatim said: "He was a leader of the Muslims." Ibn Hibban said:
"Ishaq was a leader of his time in fiqh and reli-gious sciences, a
memorizer [of hadith], someone who held opinions [in these sciences],
someone who wrote books, made deductions from Prophetic Traditions and
defended them, and suppressed those who opposed them. His grave is well
known and is visited." Abu ‘Abdillah al-Hakim said: "He was the leader
of his time in memorizing hadith and giving fatwas."

Abu Nu‘aym al-Isbahani said: "Ishaq [ibn Rahwayh] was an associate of
Ahmad [ibn Hanbal]; he elevated [the status of] hadith and reduced
deviators to nothing." adh-Dhahabi said: "The great leader, the shaykh
of the East, the master of the memorizers [of hadith]. On account of his
memory he was the leading commentator [on the Qur’an], one of the heads
of fiqh, and a leader in ijtihad."[^6]

Abu ‘Isa at-Tirmidhi, after narrating a Tradition in which it is said
that Allah accepts alms (sadaqah) and takes it by His right hand, said:

More than one of the hadith scholars has said concerning this hadith and
those like it which speak of His Attributes, and concerning the descent
of Allah, blessed be He and Exalted, every night to the lowest heaven:
'The narrations about this are confirmed, and must be believed in, but
one should neither conceive nor ask the question "How?" ‘Similar reports
are narrated from Malik ibn Anas, Sufyan ibn ‘Uyaynah, and ‘Abdullah ibn
al-Mubarak, concerning these kinds of Traditions: 'Act on them without
[asking] how.' And this is the opinion of the Sunni scholars. On the
other hand, the Jahmiyyah denied the validity of these hadith, saying:
'This is anthropomorphism.'

In several places in the Holy Qur’an, Allah, the Mighty, the Exalted,
says: 'hand', 'hearing', 'sight', and the Jahmiyyah gave a linguistic
interpretation (ta’wil) of these verses, and gave a different exegesis
from that of the hadith scholars, saying: 'Allah did not create by His
hand; the meaning of  
 'hand' here being power (quwwah).'

Ishaq ibn Ibrahim:[^7] 'There is only anthropomorphism when one says: "A
hand like [another] hand, or similar to [another] hand; or hearing like
[another] hearing, or similar to [another] hearing", and when one says:
"hearing like [another] hearing, or similar to [another] hearing", this
is anthropomorphism. But if one says, as Allah, the Exalted, said:
"hand", "hearing", "sight", and does not ask how, and does not say:
"similar to [another] hearing" or: "like [another] hearing", this is not
anthropomorphism, and is like Allah, the Exalted, saying: There is
nothing like unto Him; He is the All-hearing, the All-seeing.'[^8]

From this it is clear that at-Tirmidhi was in agreement with this latter
opinion.

2. Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Khuzaymah as-Sulami an-Naysaburi
(223/838–311/924), of whom it was said: He was the imam of Naysabur in
his time, a faqih, a mujtahid, a sea among the seas of knowledge, whose
advancement in science was recognized by all people of his period;
as-Safadi, al-Yafi‘i, adh-Dhahabi, as-Subki, Ibnu 'l-Jazari, as-Suyuti,
and Ibn ‘Abdi 'l-Hayy nicknamed him 'imam of the imams'. ad-Dar Qutni
said: "He was an imam without equal." Ibn Kathir stated: "He is one of
the mujtahids in the religion of Islam, and they say that he has
miraculous powers (karamat)."

As-Sam‘ani stated: "Many [of the Traditionists] can be traced back to
him, each one of whom was spoken of as a Khuzaymi [as he was the imam of
a Traditionist school]." This is a small sample of what was said about
him.[^9]Ibn Khuzaymah asserted that Allah has a face. He said: "The
meaning of this is not that His face is like a human face; otherwise
anyone could say that humans had a face, and pigs, monkeys, and dogs,
and so on, have faces, and that the faces of humans are like the faces
of pigs, monkeys, and dogs . . .[^10]

Similarly, he mentions the eye, the hand, the palm, and the right side,
saying: "The eyes of Allah are unlike any other eyes." He adds: We say
that our Lord the Creator has two eyes, by which He can see that which
lies beneath the ground and under the seventh and lowest earth, and that
which is in the highest heavens, and all that lies in between . . . Let
us add a commentary and explanation and say:

The eye of Allah is eternal and everlasting, and its strength continues
for-ever, and is never destroyed or extinguished, while the eyes of
human beings come into being; they did not exist and were not created,
then Allah brought them into being and created them with His Word, which
is one of His essential attributes . . .[^11]

He states that Allah has two hands: 'His two eternal hands are
everlasting, while created hands come into being . . . What a
comparison!'[^12] Interpretation is excluded from all this, especially
the interpretation of His hands as Favour and Power.[^13]

He mentions that:

The speech of our Lord does not resemble the speech of created beings,
because the speech of Allah is unbroken, uninterrupted by a pause or
mannerism, unlike the words of humans, which are broken by mannerisms
and silences due to pauses [for breath], or reflection, or fatigue . .
.[^14]

3. ‘Uthman ibn Sa‘id, Abu Sa‘id ad-Darimi, at-Tamimi, as- Sijistani (c
199/815–280/894), al-Imam al-Hafiz al-Hujjah, a thorn in the flesh of
the heretics, an upholder of the sunnah, trustworthy, established, an
authority. It is said of him: He was an imam who was emulated during his
life and after his death. The Shafi‘is mentioned him in their
biographies, and the Hanbalis count him among the followers of Ibn
Hanbal.[^15]

Ad-Darimi stated that Allah has a place (makan), which he demarcated as
the throne (al-‘arsh),[^16] and that He is clearly visible to His
creation, above His throne in the atmosphere of the Afterlife, where
there is no other creature, and no sky above Him.[^17] He said:

We have specified a single place for Him, the highest, purest, and most
noble place: His mighty throne . . . above the seventh, highest heaven,
where there are no men or jinn, no smoke, no toilet, and no devil. You
[Bishr al- Marrisi][^18] , along with the rest of your misguided
colleagues, claim that He is in every place, in smoke, in the toilet,
and next to every man and jinn! Is it you who anthropomorphize Him, when
you speak of incarnation in places, or us?[^19]

He said:

If Allah did not have hands with which to create Adam and touch him as
you claimed, then it would not be possible to say [of Allah]: by Your
gracious hand.[^20] Thus he ignored all meaning or explanation relating
to Favour or Power, save for the two hands [for which there is a
meaning, since they are the organs dedicated to sensation].[^21]

Truly Allah has two fingers . . . and two legs; there is no other
interpretation.[^22]Although we do say, as Allah states:

***The face of thy Lord remains (ar-Rahman, 55:27).***

By this He meant the face that is turned towards the believers, and not
good works, or the qiblah . . .[^23] The refutation of anthropomorphism
is rather that Allah posesses all these, but that they are not analogous
to created things.[^24]

I have cited the above as specific examples of what has been stated
about the non-Imami Traditionist school, and I shall not add anything to
them, except what I consider necessary to note  
 in a very brief manner – regarding the intention of corporealism and
anthropomorphism which is refuted of Allah, and which certain proofs
have refuted. The real meaning of the doctrine of corporealism or what
underpins it, such as limbs or bodily extremities, locality, and time,
requires the comparison of Allah with created beings; anthropomorphism
lies at the root of corporealism and its consequences, not in its
typology or particularities.

The doctrine that Allah has a head or a stomach, for example – may Allah
be raised above such things – requires corporealism, and leads in the
end to Allah being comparable with created beings. Either His head or
stomach are comparable to created heads or stomachs, or they do not
resemble any of these heads or stomachs and are rather distinguished as
a head which does not resemble any other, and a stomach which does not
resemble any other, and so on for other things besides the head and the
stomach.

With respect to the hadith which they pass on and maintain as true (the
sources will be mentioned), 'Allah created Adam in His own image',
according to those who explain it as the image of Allah, and another
hadith, that Adam was created in the image of the Merciful (ar-Rahman),
these do not refer to the belief that Allah has an image or a face, and
that is all, but [to the belief] that His image and His face resemble
the face and image of Adam and resemble man's face and the image of him.

### Comparison of the Imami and Non-Imami schools

For a comparison between the above and that which is associated with the
Imamiyyah, the reader can refer to what I have written about the Imami
Traditionists in what I have said concerning as-Saduq and al-I‘tiqadatu
'l-Imamiyyah and his connection with al-Mufid and Tashihu 'l-i‘tiqad.
What follows is a discussion of the Hishamayn, [i.e.] Hisham ibn
al-Hakam and Hisham ibn Salim, who were accused of corporealism and
anthropomorphism. As for others besides them, and those whose names are
mentioned alongside them, I do not deny that there were among the
Imamiyyah those who spoke of determinism (jabr) and anthropomorphism, or
who were accused of it, but these were very few.

It is natural, with respect to all sects, and in all intellectual and
religious communities, for a member or members to deviate, to stand
apart with ideas and convictions, which are at odds with the group they
originate from. To judge the group itself by way of judgments drawn from
the stance of these few is incorrect, unless they form the majority, or
are prominent or predominate to the extent that they become
representative of their sect, and a model for them.

Another example which underscores what I have said comes from a study of
the commentaries on al-Kafi in what concerns the hadith on Unicity in
Kitabu’t-Tawhid. Of the many com- mentaries of al-Kafi there are four,
all in print, by four contemporaneous scholars. They are:-

1. Sadru’d-Din, Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Yahya al-Qawami, ash-Shirazi,
Sadru 'l-Muta’allihin (979/1571–1050/1640): Sharhu'l-Kafi, dealing with
what is contained in the first part of the Kitabu 'l-Hujjah in the Usulu
'l-Kafi.

2. Muhammad Salih ibn Ahmad al-Mazandarani (d. 1086/1675), the famous
scholar and Traditionist: Sharh Usulu 'l-Kafiwa 'r-Rawdah.

3. al-Fayd al-Kashani, Muhammad Muhsin (1010/1599–1091/1690), in his
comments on the hadith of al-Kafi on Unicity in his book al-Wafi.

4. al-‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Muhammad Baqir ibn Muhammad Taqi
(1037/1628–1110/1699): Mir’atu 'l-‘uqul, which comments extensively on
al-Kafi.

These four differ with respect to their intellectual orientations, their
knowledge of the sciences, and their specialization in its branches.
Among them, one was considered an outstanding authority in Islamic
philosophy, the master of one of its most famous schools, i.e., Sadru
'l-Muta’allihin. Another was among those who stood between philosophy,
fiqh, and hadith, i.e., al-Fayd, and the two others were largely
concerned with hadith and its sciences, i.e., al-Majlisi and his
brother-in-law al- Mazandarani.

A study of their commentaries and their concurrance on hadith
transmitted from the Imams of the Ahlu 'l- Bayt, peace be upon them,
concerning Unicity and Justice should provide us with the strongest
evidence for what I have stated about the Imamiyyah: that whatever the
differences in their approaches their opinions about that which related
to the fundamentals of the faith did not differ.

At the most basic level, the fundamental reason for this goes back to
the nature of the Imami hadith itself, and the fact that they differ
from non-Imami hadith. The hadith related by non- Imami sects – and I
have listed the names of the books which refer to these hadith, and
which treat of their explanations, and of the interpretations of those
which require interpretation – do not contain a trace of anything that
refutes corporealism, anthropomorphism, or determinism, while at the
same time they abound in hadith which on the surface support
corporealism, anthropomorphism, and determinism.

The interpreters could not find reliable hadith which explicitly refute
anthropomorphism, thus enabling them to solve the problem by explicating
hadith with hadith or by interpretating what appears to affirm it
through that which textually negates it, so they were compelled to take
refuge in other methods of interpretation.

This is clearly apparent in the works of Ibn Furak, al- Khattabi, and
al-Bayhaqi – mentioned above – and also in what was written by Abu
'l-Ma‘ali al-Juwayni, ‘Abdu '1-Malik ibn‘Abdillah an-Naysaburi
ash-Shafi‘i (419/1028–478/1085), the famous Ash‘ari theologian, in his
books on theology, and Fakhru 'd-Din ar-Razi, Muhammad ibn ‘Umar
ash-Shafi‘i (544/1150–606/1210), the imam of the theologians, the
well-known Ash‘ari commentator, in his famous Commentary on the Holy
Qur’an and in his books on theology.

It is also evident in the interpretations of Ibnu 'l-Jawzi and
Taqiyyu’d-Din al-Hisni, in their two books on religion mentioned
previously. A study of these interpretations should provide the
strongest proof of what we have said.

The situation with Imami hadith was the opposite of this. The hadith on
Unicity are cited in the Kitabu 't-Tawhid in al- Kulayni's al-Kafi, the
Shaykh as-Saduq's Kitabu 't-Tawhid, and the Kitabu 't-Tawhid wa 'l-‘adl
from the well-known encyclopedia of hadith, the ‘Allamah al-Majlisi's
Biharu 'l-anwar. The latter contains all that was passed down in the
Imami sources, whether it was firmly established or incompletely
transmitted, whether its chain of authority was correct or incorrect,
and is to be found in the modern edition in six sections (vols.3-8).

Whoever refers to them will find them without equal, for they are
replete with sound hadith, one after the other, complete, and
meaningful, which clearly prove the refutation of anthropomorphism,
corporealism, and determinism, and which specifically prove the majority
of what the Imamiyyah believe regarding Unicity and Justice, along with
that which they share with other Muslims. For this reason, al-Kulayni
and as-Saduq did not find any difficulty in demonstrating the falsity of
these doctrines, except in the fact that they had to choose from an
enormous number of hadith, which plainly and clearly demonstrated it.

On top of all this, there is what the Shaykh as-Saduq pointed out in the
opening of the Kitabu’t-Tawhid, when he said:

What led me to write my book was that I found people among those who
opposed us attributing the doctrines of anthropomorphism and determinism
to our group, since they found information in their books of whose
explanation they were ignorant or whose meaning they did not under-
stand, and which they took out of context and failed to compare word by
word with the Qur’an [to see if it concurred with the holy Qur’an in
word and meaning, for if the holy Qur’an substantiated anthropomorphism
and determinism, then it was proof, and if they did not speak of a proof
for this in the Qur’an why did they speak of its proof in hadith].

In this way they denounced our school before the ignorant, obscured our
path for them, diverted people from the religion of Allah, and prompted
them to reject the proofs of Allah. I have sought favour with Allah in
writing this book on Unicity and on the refutation of anthropomorphism
and determinism . . .[^25]

The essence of the discussion is that the Imamiyyah studied their
beliefs in light of the hadith passed down from the Imams, peace be upon
them, and that this study clearly revealed that what they believed
derived from these hadith, and that the contents of the hadith were
consistent whether they had been narrated on the authority of the first
Imam, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon him, or from the
eleventh Imam, or the Awaited Proof, peace be upon them, for example.

The reason for this is that after having professed belief in the Imamate
and sworn obediance to the Imams, peace be upon them, as I previously
noted regarding the meaning of the Imamate among the Imamiyyah, they
took their beliefs from them, just as they took their laws. A study of
the two books I‘tiqadatu 'l-Imamiyyah by as-Saduq and Tashihu 'l-i‘tiqad
by al-Mufid suffices to uphold this view, especially since as-Saduq's
book is no more than a compilation of the contents of hadith and
Qur’anic verses employing the same words and phrases as we have
mentioned previously.

I shall not dwell on the idea that the Imamiyyah drew on the Mu‘tazilah
and were influenced by them in the beliefs they concurred upon except to
say that it is a baseless falsehood without a speck of truth in it, and
without any support from the study of the beliefs of the Imamiyyah and
the foundations upon which these beliefs are based. The question, which
deserves attention, is whether anyone apart from the Imamiyyah took
their beliefs from the Imams.

I shall not attempt to look into this aspect here; it is enough to point
out that al-Ka‘bi al-Balkhi, the Qadi ‘Abdu 'l-Jabbar, Ibnu 'l-Murtada
and Nashwan al-Himyari trace the origin of the Mu‘tazilah School, with
respect to Justice and Unicity, to the Commander of the Faithful, peace
be upon him.[^26]

adh-Dhahabi said: "Zurqan [the famous Mu‘tazili mutakal- lim] said: 'Abu
'l-Hudhayl al-‘Allaf narrated to us: "I have taken what I believe
concerning Justice and Oneness from ‘Uthman at-Tawil, and he informed me
that he took it from Wasil ibn‘Ata’, who took it from ‘Abdullah ibn
Muhammad ibn al- Hanafiyyah, who took it from his father, who took it
from his father ‘Ali, who took it from the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him [and his family] and grant [them] peace, who narrated that
Gabriel came down with it from Allah, the Sublime." ‘Several people have
narrated this from Zurqan."[^27]

It must be pointed out that if something is found in
I‘tiqadatu'l-Imamiyyah which al-Mufid did not comment on or which he
affirmed, which he objected to or did not accept, or with the proof of
which, as given by as-Saduq, he was not satisfied, it is not
consequently established that other Imami scholars agreed with either or
both of them, deemed their proofs correct, agreed with the
demonstrations of their opinions, or accepted al- Mufid's objections.
Naturally, this aspect of the two books is restricted to the details of
what is mentioned in them, not to the fundamental beliefs, which all the
Imamiyyah are agreed upon.

### The nature of Imami traditions rejects corporealism and anthropomorphism

One example, which I shall cite, of the hundreds of examples, which
demonstrate the nature of Imami hadith and their insistence that no
inclination towards corporealism and anthropomorphism or determinism
should find a place in the soul of anyone who believes in them, is what
was narrated on the authority of the Commander of the Faithful, peace be
upon him, in the words of one of his famous speeches.

This is the speech mentioned by ash-Sharif ar-Radi, Abu 'l- Hasan
Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Musawi (359/970–406/1015) in Nahju
'l-Balaghah, and which was narrated by the Imami Traditionists who came
before him. The Shaykh as- Saduq (c 306/919–381/991) transmitted, and
partially com- mented upon, a large section from the beginning of this
sermon in his Kitabu’t-Tawhid,[^28] though this differs somewhat in
wording from the versions in Nahju 'l-Balaghah, and al-Bihar.[^29]

Abu 'n-Nadr Muhammad ibn Mas‘ud as-Sulami al-‘Ayyashi (d. c 320/932)
also narrated it, and extracted a portion of it in his Tafsir,[^30] and
this is narrated in al-Bihar,[^31] and in the Tafsiru'l-burhan.[^32] All
of them traced the chain of authority from themselves back to Mas‘adah
ibn Sadaqah, who narrated it on the authority of the Imam as-Sadiq and
on the authority of his father, peace be upon them both.

This person is Abu Muhammad, Mas‘adah ibn Sadaqah al-‘Abdi, a follower
of as-Sadiq and al-Kazim, peace be upon them both, who wrote Kitab
Khutab Amir al-Mu’minin ‘alayhi 's-salam.[^33] Zaydi Traditionists such
as Yahya ibn al-Husayn al-Hasani, an-Natiq bi 'l-Haqq, the Zaydi imam
(340/952–424/1033), narrated it with another chain of authority ending
with Zayd ibn Aslam,[^34] who narrated it directly from the Commander of
the Faithful, peace be upon him. His wording is close to that of
as-Saduq, although the chain of authority differs. The author of Taysiru
'l-matalib fi amali 'l-Imam Abi Talib[^35] cites a large portion of it,
as does Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Rabbih al-Qurtubi al-Maliki
(246/860–328/940) in his al-‘Iqdu 'l-farid.[^36]

The Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon him, delivered this sermon
from the pulpit in Kufah. A man said to him, while he was speaking:
"Describe our Lord as we will see Him with our eyes . . ." and he became
angry with him and summoned the community to prayer; and the people
collected about him until the mosque was packed with his followers, and
he said, among other things (according to the narration of ash- Sharif
ar-Radi):

I bear witness that whoever makes a likeness for You out of the
disparate limbs of Your creation and the connection of the sockets of
their joints which you have clothed in Your wisdom has not fixed the
innermost part of his mind on knowledge of You, nor has certainty
informed his heart that there is no equal to You.

It is as if he had not heard the followers absolving themselves from
those they [falsely] follow, saying:

***By Allah, we were in manifest error when we made you equal with the
Lord of the worlds (ash- Shu‘ara’, 26:97-98).***

The transgressors falsify You when they liken You to their idols,
attribute to You with their imaginations the adornment of created
things, divide You up in their minds according to the partition of
bodies, and judge You by analogy with natural constitutions and their
various powers through the talents of their intellects. I bear witness
that whoever equates You with a thing of Your creation has put You on
the same level with it, and that whoever does so is a disbeliever,
according to that which has been revealed through the unambiguous among
Your verses and that which the evidence of Your clear proof pronounces.

For truly You are Allah Who cannot be confined to the mind so as to be
brought into conformity with the vicissitudes of its thinking, nor to
the deliberation of its mental operations to be limited and subject to
whims.[^37]

I do not wish to comment on this section of the sermon, in which the
Imam pointed out the reasons for the occurrence of anthropomorphism and
corporealism among the Imamiyyah in its early days, 'when they liken You
to their idols . . .' However, I will say that someone who believes that
these words, and others from the hadith of the Ahlu 'l-Bayt, are from an
infallible Imam who commands an obedience not unlike that of the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, (and I have
already demonstrated the belief of the Imamiyyah in the Imamate and the
Imam) would hardly be naturally inclined (except in abnormal
circumstances) to speak about anthropomorphism or corporealism except in
an unknowing way. The Qadi ‘Abdu 'l-Jabbar al-Mu‘tazili ash-Shafi‘i
said:

As for the Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon him, his sermons
declaring the refutation of anthropomorphism and upholding Justice are
more than can be counted . . .[^38]

He also stated:

If you look at the sermons of the Commander of the Faithful, you will
find them replete with refutations of the visibility of Allah.[^39]

### Anti-Imami scholars reverse the reality

Whatever the case may be, the accusation was raised against the
Imamiyyah by their adversaries that the Imamiyyah, in their formative
days and during the times that immediately followed, limited themselves
and their beliefs within the literally pre- scribed boundaries of the
Holy Qur’an and the Sunnah, and did not cross over into intellectual
fields by relying on reason as a basis for explaining the faith and its
directives, or resorting to it in demonstrating the truth, rejecting the
objections of its enemies, and showing the falsity of their proofs.

However, the adversaries of the Imamiyyah did not stop at that; rather,
they went on to accuse the Imamiyyah of being, before their joining the
Mu'tazilah:

1. Clear proponents of anthropomorphism and corporealism;

2. Not upholders of Justice as a religious principle having special
attributes and requirements;

3. Unaware of the precise differences and theoretical discussions
pertaining to Unicity and Justice which I pointed out in a general way
during the discussion about the beliefs of the Imamiyyah – and unaware
of the difference between Attributes of Essence and Attributes of
Action, for example, since they had not yet resorted to intellectual
investigations which lead to the clarification of these critical
fundamentals and the establishment of these particulars;

4. And upholders, even fierce upholders, of predestination.

Abu 'l-Husayn al-Khayyat al-Mu‘tazili stated:

As for the totality of the teaching of the Rafidah, it is: that Allah
has a physique, an image, and a limit; He is in motion and at rest,
draws near and moves away, is lightened and weighed down . . . This is
Rafidi Unicity in its entirety, save for a small group of them who
associated with the Mu‘tazilah and believed in Unicity, . . . and these
the Rafidah expelled and washed their hands of. As for their shaykhs,
like Hisham ibn Salim, Shaytanu 't-Taq, ‘Ali ibn Maytham, Hisham ibn
al-Hakam, ‘Ali ibn Mansur, and as- Sakkak, their belief is what I have
related concerning them.[^40]

McDermott says, on the authority of Ibn Taymiyyah, that the doctrine of
Divine Justice was taken up by the later writers of the Imamiyyah, like
al-Mufid (336/948–413/1022), al-Musawi (ash-Sharif al-Murtada
[355/966–436/1044]), and al-Karajiki (c 369/980–449/1057), and had
little influence on their predecessors in the Imamiyyah. On this basis,
McDermott main- tains that al-Khayyat points to the presence of a
minority con- nected with the Mu‘tazilah and influenced by their
beliefs, just as al-Ash‘ari mentions in his writings. McDermott gives
the Nawbakhtiyyin, who existed around the end of the third century (the
beginning of the tenth century AD) as an example.[^41]

al-Mufid was heir to a double legacy: that of the early Imamite
theologians – notably the Nawbakhtis, who were in contact with
Mu‘tazilite thought from the latter part of the third century of the
Hijrah, and the traditionist school of Qum represented by Ibn Babuyah
al-Qummi [as- Saduq].[^42]

But a disciple of Ibn Taymiyyah, Shamsu 'd-Din adh- Dhahabi
(673/1274–748/1348) anticipated what his colleague narrated, and said:

Since the end of the year 370 [980] up to our own time the Rafidah and
the Mu‘tazilah have befriended each other like brothers.[^43]

However Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani does not accept this definition of
history, and states:

It is not as he says, but rather they ceased being brothers from the
time of al-Ma’mun (the ‘Abbasid caliph [170/786 – caliph 198/813 – d.
218/833]),[^44]

I shall pass over all these remarks, and concern myself only with the
examination of what they are founded upon. It all goes back to what
these adversaries related on the authority of some of the Imami
scholars, and the predecessors of their Tradition- ists and theologians,
like those al-Khayyat names, concerning the doctrine of blatant
corporealism and anthropomorphism, and how they wound up on the brink of
idiocy and obscenity.

In doing so I am motivated by the endeavor to uncover the truth, and
more importantly, by my belief in Islam and what it enjoins upon
faithful Muslims who heed words when they are spoken, who listen to all
sides of the story and then pick the best, who judge fairly and without
personal bias, who speak the truth even when it goes against them, and
adhere to the word of Allah:

***O you who believe! Be steadfast witnesses to Allah in equity, and do
not allow hatred for any people to seduce you, and cause you to act
unjustly. Act justly, for that is closer to your duty. Be dutiful to
Allah, for Allah is informed of what you do (al-Mdaidah, 5:8).***

Faithful to all this, I shall examine some of these charges in a general
way via a study restricted to the two Hishams, Hisham ibn al-Hakam and
Hisham ibn Salim. I shall not venture beyond them, and on the results of
this inquiry about them judge others who are like them.

\* \* \* \* \*

Before beginning, however, I shall summarize the main points:

i) By its very nature, Imami hadith can only accept that those who
believe in them must follow those propositions upon which the Imamiyyah
are generally agreed, and the later Imamiyyah were here only following
previous generations. These generally agreed positions have been
previously pointed out in summary form.

ii) Unlike the situation with the Imamiyyah, there occured a split among
the non-Imamis into those who submitted to the hadith which reached
them, and who accepted them without any commentary or interpretation,
and out of which those who were called the muhaddithun developed; and
into those who did not accept them absolutely, such as the Mu‘tazilah,
whether we accept the accusation by their opponents that they were
unbelievers in the sunnah, or accept that, as they themselves said, they
were unbelievers in those hadith that were fabricated because they did
not accord with their beliefs – and that they interpreted other hadith
to accord with their beliefs. Between these two camps there arose a
bitter controversy, with accus- ations of heresy and going beyond the
bounds of religion, even sometimes reaching physical confrontation.
However, this kind of dispute never arose among the Imamiyyah at all,
not even to the smallest degree. This has already been attributed to the
fact that Imami hadith did not give rise to such splits, and clearly
demonstrated Imami beliefs so that such a split could not occur.

iii) We have already pointed out that the kalam school among the
non-Imamis is really represented by the Mu‘tazilites, not the
Ash‘arites. Investigation reveals that the latter had as their aim to
harmonize the intellectual procedures of the Mu‘tazili school with the
beliefs of the muhaddithun. They did have recourse to investigation,
though this was not a position sanc-tioned by their hadith, and they
found nothing in the sunnah to authorize their interpretation and which
could support their claim to be interpreting the sunnah by the sunnah.
They were obliged not to reject the sunnah so that they would not be
accused of depending solely on interpretation as the Mu‘tazilah were.

iv) The Imamiyyah did not blindly follow the Mu‘tazilah in those
opinions on which they agreed, but were only following their Imams in
these beliefs. The Imams preceded the Mu‘tazilah both historically and
in status, and so one cannot say that they were taught by them.

v) The Mu‘tazilah themselves agreed that they took their basic positions
– tawhid and ‘aql – from Amir al-Mu’minin, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be
upon him, through isnad which were trust- worthy for them; and ‘Ali,
peace be upon him, was the first of the Shi‘i Imams. The Imamiyyah paid
more attention to the evidence of his teachings than did the Mu‘tazilah,
and we have already given an example of this. So, if it is incorrect to
say that the Mu‘tazilah borrowed from the Imamiyyah, surely it is, in
fact, all the more incorrect to say that the Imamiyyah bor-rowed from
them.

[^1]: The Emendation of A Shi‘ite Creed, Intro., p.13ff.

[^2]: Martin McDermott, The Theology of al-Shaikh al-Mufid, Dar
al-Mashriq, Beirut, 1978, pp.367-9.

[^3]: Talbis Iblis, al-Muniriyyah Press, Cairo, 1368, p.116.

[^4]: Daf‘ shubahi 't-tashbih bi-akuffi 't-tanzih, al-Maktabah
at-Tawfiqiyyah, Cairo, 1976, pp.73-74.

[^5]: al-Munazirah fi 'l-‘aqidati 'l-Wasitiyyah, Majmu‘atu 'r-rasaili
'l-kubra, Dar

[^6]: al-Bukhari, at-Tarikhu 'l-kabir, vol.1, pt.1, pp.379-80; Ibn Abi
Hatim, al- Jarh wa 't-ta‘dil, vol.2, pp.209-10; Ibn Hibban, ath-Thiqat,
vol.8, pp.115-6; al-Khatib, Tarikh Baghdad, vol.6, pp.345-55; Abu
Nu‘aym, Hilyatu 'l- awliya’, vol.9, pp.234-8; al-Mazzi, Tahdhibu
'l-kamal, vol.2, pp.373-88; adh-Dhahabi, Siyar a‘lami 'n-nubala’',
vol.11, pp.358-82; Tadhkiratu '1- huffaz, vol.2, pp.433-5; Ibn Hajar,
Tahdhibu 't-tahdhib, vol.2, pp.216-9.

[^7]: Ishaq ibn Rahwayh, ‘Aridah al-ahwadhi, vol.30, p.332.

[^8]: al-Jami‘u 's-sahih: zakat, chap. "sadaqah", vol.3, pp.50-51,
no.662.

[^9]: adh-Dhahabi, Tadhkiratu 'l-huffaz, vol.2, pp.720-31, al-‘Ibar,
vol.2, p.149; as-Sam‘ani, al-Ansab, vol.5, p.124; Ibnu '1-Athir,
al-Lubab, vol.1, p.442; Ibnu 'l-Jawzi, al-Muntazam, vol.6, pp.184-6; Ibn
Kathir, al-Bidayah wa 'n- nihayah, vol.11, p.149; as-Subki, Tabaqatu
'sh-Shafi‘iyyah, vol.3, pp.109-19; as-Safadi, al-Wafi bi '1-wafayat,
vol.2, p.196; al-Yafi‘i, Mir’atu 'l-jinan, vol.2, p.264; Ibn ‘Abdi
'l-Hayy, Shadharatu 'dh-dhahab, vol.2, pp.262-3; as- Suyuti, Tabaqatu
'l-huffaz, pp.310-1; Ibnu 'l-Jazari, Tabaqatu 'l-qurra’, vol.2,
pp.97-98.

[^10]: at-Tawhid wa ithbat sifati 'r-rabb, revised and commented upon by
Muhammad Khalil Haras, teacher in the College of Usulu 'd-Din (in al-
Azhar), al-Azhar University Library, Cairo, 1387/1968, p.23.

[^11]: Ibid., pp.50-55.

[^12]: Ibid., pp.82-85.

[^13]: Ibid., pp.85-88.

[^14]: Ibid., p.145.

[^15]: 33 Tadhkiratu 'l-huffaz, vol.2, pp.621-2; al-‘Ibar, vol.2, p.64;
Mir’atu 'l-jinan, vol.2, p.193; Ibn Kathir, vol.11, p.69; Tabaqatu
'sh-Shafi‘iyyah, vol.2, pp.302-6; Tabaqatu '1-huffaz, p.274; Tabaqatu
'1-Hanabilah, vol.1, p.221.

[^16]: ar-Radd ‘ala Bishr al-Marrisi, ‘Aqaid as-salaf, published by Dr
‘Ali Samian-Nashshar, ‘Ammar Jam‘i at-Talibi; Munsha’atu 'l-Ma‘arif,
Alexandria, Egypt, 1971, p.382.

[^17]: Ibid., p.439.

[^18]: i.e., Bishr ibn Ghiyath al-Marrisi, al-Baghdadi, al-Hanafi (c
138/755–218/833), the scholar who proclaimed and defended the theory
that the Qur’an was created, along with other Mu‘tazili ideas, whom
ad-Darimi is refuting.

[^19]: Ibid., p.454.

[^20]: Ibid., p.387.

[^21]: Ibid., p.398.

[^22]: Ibid., pp.420, 423-4, 427-8.

[^23]: Ibid., p.516.

[^24]: Ibid., p.432-3, 508.

[^25]: at-Tawhid, Maktabatu 's-Saduq, Tehran, 1387, p.17-18.

[^26]: al-Balkhi, Dhikru 'l-Mu‘tazilah, p.64; a1-Qadi ‘Abdu 'l-Jabbar,
Fadlu 'l- i‘tizal wa dhikru 'l-Mu‘tazilah, pp.146-7, 150, 163, 214-5;
Ibnu 'l-Murtada, al-Munyah wa 'l-amal, pp.26-27, 125-8; al-Bahru
'z-zakhkhar, vol.1, p.44; Nashwan al-Himyari, Huru 'l-‘iyn, p.206.

[^27]: Siyar a‘lami 'n-nubala’, vol.13, p.149.

[^28]: 46 Maktabatu 's-Saduq, Tehran, 1387, pp.48-56.

[^29]: Vol.4, pp.274-84.

[^30]: Vol.1, p.163, no.5.

[^31]: Vol.3, p.257.

[^32]: Vol.1, p.271, no.12.

[^33]: an-Najashi, p.259, Majma‘u 'r-rijal, vol.6, p.87; adh-Dhari‘ah,
vol.7, p.191, no.972.

[^34]: This would appear to be a scribal error, the true person being
Zayd ibnWahb al-Jahni (d. 96/715), one of the greatest of the Followers
of the Com- panions of the Prophet, and one of the followers of the Imam
‘Ali, who wrote a Kitab Khutab Amir al-Mu’minin ‘alayhi 's-salam ‘ala
'l-manabir fi 'l- jum‘ah wa 'l-a‘yad wa ghayriha; see at-Tusi,
al-Fihrist, p.97; Ma‘a1imu 'l-‘ulama’, p.44; Majma'u 'r-rijal, vol.3,
p.85; adh-Dhari‘ah, vol.7, p.189. no. 965.

[^35]: Mu’assasat al-A‘lami, Beirut, Lebanon, 1395/1975, pp.202-4.

[^36]: Board of Writing, Translation, and Publication, Cairo, 2nd ed.,
1381/ 1962, vol.4, pp.152-4.

[^37]: Nahju 'l-Balaghah, the commentary of Muhammad ‘Abduh and Muham-
mad Muhyi 'd-Din ‘Abdu 'l-Hamid, al-Istiqamah Press, Cairo, vol.1, pp.

[^38]: Fadlu 'l-i‘tizal wa dhikru 'l-Mu‘tazilah, p.163.

[^39]: Sharhu 'l-usuli 'l-khamsah, p.268. 163-4; see also al-Bihar,
vol.77, p.318, and the commentary of Ibn Abi 'l- Hadid, vol.6, pp.413-5.

[^40]: al-Intisar wa 'r-radd ‘ala Ibnu 'r-Rawandi al-mulhid, p.14.

[^41]: The Theology of ash-Shaikh al-Mufid, pp.2-3.

[^42]: Ibid., p.395.

[^43]: Mizanu 'l-i‘tidal, vol.3, p.149.

[^44]: Lisanu 'l-mizan, vol.4, p.248.


