The Mu‘Tazilis whom Hisham met and their discussions
====================================================

I have been concerned with Hisham ibn al-Hakam, and after him with
Hisham ibn Salim, only because adversaries of the Imamiyyah made him the
crack through which they attacked the Imamiyyah with all their might,
and directed at him, and through him at the Imamiyyah, every possible
defamation, derogation, and disparagement, prejudice and malediction.
They attributed to him what was correct – albeit infrequently –and, more
often, what was incorrect; and, moreover, they attributed contradictory
opinions to him.

The amazing thing about these adversaries is that we find enmity and
hatred flung back and forwards between them since the birth of the sects
they arose from up to our own day, may Allah desire that it cease, for
they are mutually antagonistic adversaries, one against the other, in
the strongest sense of antagonism and adversity, all of them attributing
to the other what a Muslim does not attribute to someone he holds to be
a brother in the religion. Nevertheless, we find that enmity and
adversity have united them against the Imamiyyah in general and Hisham
in particular, and so they befriend one another, and support one
another.

The hostility towards Hisham ibn al-Hakam originated from the
Mu‘tazilah; they were the ones whom Hisham had opposed in argument,
those who attributed to him what was attributed to them, as will be
mentioned below. The adversaries of the Mu‘tazilah, people like ‘Abdu
'l-Qahir al-Baghdadi, al-Malati, Ibn Hazm, al-Isfarayini, Ibn
Taymiyyah, his colleague adh- Dhahabi, and his student Ibnu 'l-Qayyim
al-Jawziyyah, Ibn Kathir and Ibn Hajar accused them at the very least of
extreme innovation and deceit; they did not trust them or what they
narrated, they said of them that they had invented falsehoods and a new
religion for themselves, and that they were not bound by the laws of the
shari‘ah, but rather overstepped them.

This applied to many of them in general, and to many of the distin-
guished Mu‘tazilah in particular. They passed on to unbelief or atheism,
and departed from the religious community who cursed them and washed
their hands of them, but all of whom accepted what the Mu‘tazilah
attributed to the Imamiyyah and Hisham and theologians like him. They
strayed from the religion except when they attacked the Imamiyyah, and
were feeble liars except when they attributed an infamy to the Imamiyyah
or spoke of them degradingly.

I will not extend the discussion to what they said about Wasil ibn
‘Ata’, ‘Amr ibn ‘Ubayd, Abu 'l-Hudhayl, Thumamah ibn Ashras, an-Nazzam,
and others like them among the leading personalities of the Mu‘tazilah
and their scholars. What is worse than this is that they followed and
promoted the methods of their brothers-in-law the Mu‘tazilah, who were
their adversaries in dogma, and distorted and changed, discarded and
added, perfected – as they claim – what they found tacking in the
Mu‘tazili armoury, and patched up any weakness they stumbled on.

I have quoted examples of this above, and a few more will follow. I do
not intend in saying this that these observations should refute what
they wrote about the characteristics of their masters – I have
previously stated that I have given up this kind of hope. I have said
what I have said by way of introduction to some of the ideas of Hisham
ibn al-Hakam and the views attributed to him.

The Mu‘Tazilis found fault with Hisham and fabricated false positions for him, the Anti-Mu‘Tazilis agreed with them here but not always elsewhere
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I shall not be led here to speak in detail of every idea they attributed
to Hisham; it is possible for the reader to refer to what I have said
about Muqatil ibn Sulayman and Dawud al-Jawaribi, which are clear
examples of what they said about Hisham. I will be content here to
clarify the points, which call upon us to refute an imputation like
that, directed at Hisham.

Hisham ibn al-Hakam was, it is said, in the beginning, a Jahmi, a
follower of Jahm ibn Safwan (d. 128/745), and then renounced him after
joining the Imam as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, and his error had been
made clear to him.[^1]

Jahm ibn Safwan, as is understood from his sect, was opposed to
corporeality and anthropomorphism to the greatest extent; concerning the
attributes of Allah, his school was a Mu‘tazilah school when it first
emerged. He was a contemporary of Wasil ibn ‘Ata’ and ‘Amr ibn ‘Ubayd,
the two founders of the Mu‘tazilah, and they held nothing against him
except the doctrine of the impermanence of Paradise and Hell and that
felicity and chastisement were not eternal. They held against him his
belief in irja’ (postponement of judgement about whether the grave
sinner was a believer or an unbeliever), not the doctrine of al-manzilah
bayna 'l-manzilatayn (the state of the sinner as intermediate between
that of a believer and an unbeliever), which was their doctrine
concerning the grave sinner.[^2]

However, the principle point of difference between him and the
Mu‘tazilah as a whole was his belief in predestination, and their belief
in free will, since among the later Mu‘tazilah there were some who
believed in irja’ and some who believed in the impermanence of Paradise
and Hell.  
 However all of them agreed on the doctrine of free will and refuted
predestination. For this reason ash-Shahristani counts him among those
who 'emerged from the Mu‘tazilah in the days of Nasr ibn Sayyar and made
his innovation from the Mu‘tazili position on pre- destination
clear.'[^3]

One of the views of Jahm, which influenced Hisham ibn al- Hakam, was his
statement about Allah, praise be to Him: 'He is a body unlike [other]
bodies', as will be shown. One of Jahm ibn Safwan's doctrines, as
al-Ash‘ari relates, was that he believed that 'Allah is a body,' and
went on to say that 'the meaning of "body" is "existent".[^4] He says
the same about Hisham. From this, he goes on to relate that he believed
that 'God's knowledge is incipient: He did not know then He knew'
[^5]and that he had taken this also from Jahm.[^6]

ash-Shahristani compares 'Jahm and Hisham's assertion that knowledge
(‘ulum) is not in a location [with respect to Allah, praise be to Him,
because since they spoke of the incipience of His knowledge they made
Him a locus for His knowledge, and this contradicts His eternity, which
was their doctrine] with the Ash‘ariyyah's assertion that speech
(taklim) is not in a location.'[^7]

It is mentioned that the famous Mu‘tazili theologian Abu 'l- Husayn,
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn at-Tayyib, al-Basri, al-Hanafi (d. 436/1044)
adopted Hisham's view regarding God's knowledge. ash-Shahristani states:
"He inclined towards the school of Hisham ibn al-Hakam concerning the
belief that things were not known before they existed."[^8]

But two other views are also reported on the authority of Hisham which
contradict the aforesaid: 'The Creator never ceases to know through His
Self, and He knows things after their coming into existence through a
knowledge which cannot be said to be either incipient or eternal, and
because it is an attribute and the attribute is not ascribed, it is not
said about [this knowledge] that it is He or something else. They add
that his belief about Power and Life was not like his belief in
knowledge, except that he did not believe that they were incipient.'[^9]

However, the Shaykh al-Mufid denied the truth of associating this
opinion with Hisham, and his words follow. What was attributed to Hisham
was his belief in strong compulsion (al-ijbaru 'sh-shadid), which the
believers of the Sunnah did not subscribe to, as Ibn Qutaybah
states.[^10]

If this attribution is true and Hisham followed Jahm in it, as stated
above, then he was distinguished from his Mu‘tazili brothers by his
belief in absolute predestination, and their belief in complete choice
(ikhtiyar, or qadar as their adversaries called it).

In the light of what has been said, what was attributed to Hisham can be
divided into two sections: (a) that which confirms with the beliefs of
the Jahmiyyah who preceded him, and this is possibly a correct
attribution as long as the narrations are correct, and these are the
short examples I have quoted; and (b) the greater portion of what his
adversaries attributed to him, and this does not accord with the beliefs
of the Jahmiyyah before him, nor those of the Imamiyyah after him; we
have no alternative but to conclude that this was attributed to him
calumniously and that it is true that Hisham may have held a part of
these beliefs (this is only supposition with no basis in fact), but that
he did not believe them in earnest, as will be shown.

It is necessary to point out that Hisham's Jahmiyyah period was
doubtless during his early adolescence, and, moreover, when he was still
a juvenile, since when he became an adolescent and still 'the first
thing I noticed was his bare cheeks', as has been stated, he did not
believe outright in the Imamate, but rather disputed about it and
debated and argued with his adversaries and critics about it.

I think that it is closer to the truth, and more in line with the
established facts of Hisham's life and behaviour, that his connections
with the Jahmiyyah were limited to following Jahm ibn Safwan and some of
his ideas, which are the three examples I mentioned earlier which are
not incompatible with the doctrine of the Imamate, the requirements of
its concomitants, and its defense, and did not involve an association
with the Jahmiyyah sect in all its dimensions and extent. Hisham was not
for one day a Jahmi except to a limited extent; he did not follow them
in all his ideas and beliefs.

Some opinions incorrectly attributed to Hisham
----------------------------------------------

Past and present scholars of the Imamiyyah have investigated the ideas,
which were attributed to Hisham, and have defended him and refuted their
attribution to him. All of these ideas are summarised with
characteristic brevity in that which is cited by the Sharif al-Murtada,
Abu 'l-Qasim, ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn,

‘Alamu 'l-Huda, al-Musawi (355/966–436/1044), who said: [A]nd as for
what Hisham ibn al-Hakam is charged with regarding belief in
corporeality, the ostensive meaning of what is narrated from him is his
doctrine: 'a body unlike bodies.' There is no contradiction in saying
that this belief is not anthropomorphism, is not inconsistent with any
basic principle (asl), does not oppose any derived doctrine (far‘), but
is an error in expression [since by 'body' the 'existent' is intended,
not the material body, as will be mentioned] which depends upon language
for its affirmation or denial. Most of our followers say that he brought
this up in the course of opposition to the Mu‘tazilah, and said to them:
"If you say that the Eternal is a thing unlike things, say He is a body
unlike bodies."

Not everyone who proposes something and asks questions about it is a
believer in it or upholds it. It is possible that the intention behind
this statement was to draw out their answer to this question and to
understand what they held regarding it, or to reveal their inadequacy in
putting forward a satisfactory answer, or for other reasons, which he
does not express.

As for the narration that he upheld the view that Allah is a body having
the reality of apparent bodies (al-ajsamu 'l- hadirah), and the report
about the spans (ashbar) of God's hand attributed to him,[^11] we only
know of it from the narration of al-Jahiz on the authority of an-Nazzam,
and it contains nothing but an accusation which is clearly unreliable in
its expression.

The whole matter is evidence that the schools must learn from the mouths
of their spokes- men and authorized followers and whoever is reliable in
narrating about them, and should not rely on propagandistic adversaries
. . . That Hisham was innocent of this accusation is demonstrated by
what is related on the authority of the Imam as-Sadiq, peace be upon
him, in his statement: 'O Hisham, continue to be supported by the Spirit
of Holiness as long as you defend us with your tongue', spoken when the
shaykhs came to him [this has been narrated from al-Mufid], and by his
words . . .[^12] He, peace be upon him, marked him out in matters to do
with speculation and proof and urged the people to hasten to face him
and debate with him.

How can an intelligent person believe this statement that his Lord is
seven spans of His own span after what we have mentioned? As for the
incipience of [Divine] knowledge, this is another narration they
circulated, and we do not know that the man wrote about it, nor that the
account is trustworthy.

As for determinism and [God's] obliging [someone] to do what he is
unable [to do], it is something about which we do not know whether it
was his opinion.[^13] To these words of ash-Sharif al-Murtada can be
added a few comments condensed from more extensive discussions:

1. ash-Shahristani states:

This Hisham ibn al-Hakam, who had a profound [know- ledge] of theology,
could not have ignored the objections he made against the Mu‘tazilites.
[This] man in fact went beyond what he made his adversary admit, while
remaining well short of the anthropomorphism, which he professed. This
was how he had objected to al-‘Allaf: 'You say that the Creator knows
through knowledge, that His knowledge is His essence, that He shares
with incipient [created] things in being a knower through knowledge,
that He is distinct from them in that His knowledge is His essence, so
He is a knower unlike [other] knower. So why do you not say that He is a
body unlike [other] bodies, a form unlike [other] forms, that He has
power unlike [any other] power, and so forth.'[^14]

2. The biographers have cited more than thirty books and trea- tises,
which Hisham wrote. Those which are concerned with Unicity and its
aspects are: (1) Kitabu 't-Tawhid, (2) Kitabu 'l- majalis fi 't-tawhid,
(3) Kitabu 'sh-Shaykh wa 'l-ghulam fi 't- tawhid, (4) Kitabu 'r-radd
‘ala Aristatalis fi 't-tawhid, (5) Kitabu 'd-dalalat ‘ala hadathi
(huduthi) 'l-ajsam, (6) Kitabu 'r- radd ‘ala 'z-zanadiqah, (7) Kitabu
'r-radd ‘ala ashabi 'l-ithnayn, (8) Kitabu 'r-radd ‘ala ashabi
't-tabayi‘,[^15] (9) Kitab fi 'l-jabr wa 'l-qadar, (10) Kitabu 'l-Qadar,
(11) Kitabu 'l-Istita‘ah, (12) and in their existence have no need of
God, who is their Creator, this being one of the historical roots of
modern materialist thought; they also came in different degrees, from
those who were plain and simple materialists – common materialism – and
those who were influenced by the thoughts and philosophies of the
Greeks, or Buddhist or Hindu beliefs.

Kitabu 'l-Ma‘rifah, (13) Kitabu 'l-Altaf, (14) Kitabu 'l-Alfaz.[^16] If
these ideas were firmly established ideas of Hisham, then he would have
mentioned them in his books, and his Imami biographers would have
narrated them, and so would those who passed on knowledge and read his
works, not one of which has reached us or been alluded to in the
accounts of the Imamiyyah, although some of his ideas are mentioned in
their accounts, as will be seen.

In addition, that which adversaries do relate about Hisham's ideas they
say that he said in the course of discussion and debate with his
Mu‘tazili adversaries and do not attribute a single one of them to what
he wrote in any of his books. If these adversaries had stumbled upon any
remnant of such ideas in his books then they would have attributed it to
the book itself.

3. The statement of Hisham: 'a body unlike [other] bodies' was
originally one of Jahm ibn Safwan's ideas, and if Hisham held it, then
he was following Jahm in it, as was stated previously. Perhaps, after
the Imam as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, had turned him away from the
Jahmiyyah, Hisham used it when the Mu‘tazilah were disputing with the
adversaries of the Jahmiy- yah. This statement remained fixed in the
minds of his students or other Shi‘ah, and when Hisham came to hold a
high position and rank with the Imams, peace be upon them, and the
Imamiyyah as a whole, the Imams asked about it, as will be shown. It is
not correct for us to refute the honorable word of al-Murtada, that
Hisham used it in the course of debate, employing what comes to us in
the way of accounts which emphasize Hisham's belief in the body.

4. Based on my investigation, and within the bounds of the sources I
posses and they are very limited when weighed against those that have
perished – I am almost certain, for reasons which there is not enough
room here to mention, that Abu 'l-Hudhayl al-‘Allaf is to be considered
the principle source for most of what is attributed to Hisham ibn
al-Hakam.[^17]

As to what is related by others besides Abu 'l-Hudhayl, there are
statements showing us that these accounts can be traced back to him, if
the narrators are truthful and have not fabricated the narration. For
all the narrators the chain of their Mu‘tazili education goes back to
him. Abu 'l-Hudhayl taught an-Nazzam, Thumamah ibn Ashras, an-Numayri
al-Basri (d. 213/828) – one of Hisham's Mu‘tazili contemporaries –, and
Ja‘far ibn Harb al- Basri, then al-Baghdadi (177/793–236/850).[^18]

An-Nazzam taught Zurqan, Muhammad ibn Shaddad ibn ‘Isa al-Basri (d.
278/891), the famous author of Kitabu 'l-maqalat, which is considered
one of the authoritative Islamic reference works concerning treatises
and sects,[^19] and al-Jahiz, ‘Amr ibn Bahr (163/780–255/869).[^20] Ibn
Qutaybah ad-Dinawari, ‘Abdullah ibn Muslim (213/828–276/889) studied
with al-Jahiz.[^21]

Ja‘far ibn Harb was the teacher of Abu 'l-Husayn al-Khayyat, ‘Abdu
'r-Rahman ibn Muhammad al-Baghdadi (d. 300/912), the author of
al-Intisar wa'r-radd ‘ala Ibnu 'r-Rawandi al- mulhid.[^22]

Al-Khayyat taught al-Ka‘bi al-Balkhi, ‘Abdullah ibn Ahmad
(273/886–319/931);[^23] and Mu‘tazili imams who came after these, such
as the two Jubba'is and the Qadi ‘Abdu 'l-Jabbar, drew from them.
Al-‘Allaf is reckoned to be the head of the chain in this list.

Ibnu 'r-Rawandi accused al-Jahiz of having gone too far in his
opposition to Hisham, to the extent that he stood shoulder to shoulder
with the adversaries of the Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon
him, and was 'driven to partisanship and seeking revenge for his two
teachers in the person of Hisham ibn al- Hakam'.[^24]

Ibnu 'r-Rawandi does not specify who the two teachers were; without a
doubt, one of them was an-Nazzam,[^25] and it is clear to anyone who
traces the thread back that the second is Abu '1-Hudhayl.[^26]

Abu 'l-Hudhayl took revenge on others within the Imamiy- yah, e.g.,
their theologians Abu 'l-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Isma‘il ibn Shu‘ayb ibn Maytham
al-Kufi, then al-Basri, famous among them as ‘Ali ibn Maytham:[^27] 'He
was one of the prominent theologians among our followers who disputed
with Abu 'l- Hudhayl and an-Nazzam, and held sessions and wrote
books'.[^28]

There is also what Ibn Hajar narrated from Abu 'l-Qasim at- Taymi in the
"Kitabu 'l-Hujjah": 'He debated with him before the amir of
Basrah.'[^29]

The Imami defense of Hisham
---------------------------

Indeed, there exists in the accounts of the Imamiyyah the attri- bution
of the doctrine of God's having a body to Hisham ibn al- Hakam, and
these accounts contributed to the belief being attri- buted to him; and
yet his belief in it is inexplicable.[^30] His belief is clearly set
forth in a number of places, among them is a Tradition from Yunus ibn
Zabyan, in which he relates Hisham's belief to the Imam as-Sadiq, peace
be upon him, and says:

He claims that Allah is a body, because the matter is two- fold: a body
and the action of the body. It is not possible for 'Maker' to have the
meaning 'doing', while it is possible for it to have the meaning
'doer'.Abu ‘Abdillah, peace be upon him, said:

Woe to him. He knows that a body is limited and finite, that a form is
limited and finite, and if limits are permitted then addition and
subtraction are [also] permissible, and if additions and subtractions
are permitted, then He is a created being.[^31]

There is also a Tradition from Hasan ibn ‘Abdi 'r-Rahman al-Himmani, who
said:

I said to Abu 'l-Hasan Musa ibn Ja‘far, peace be upon him, that Hisham
ibn al-Hakam claimed that God was a body unlike any thing [i.e., a body
unlike (other) bodies], Knowing, Hearing, Seeing, posessing Power,
Conversing and Speaking; Speech, Power, and Knowledge go together,
nothing of them being created. He, peace be upon him, renounced the
doctrine of body, because it is limited, and he pointed out that these
attributes do not go together, since there are among them those which
are attributes of essence, such as Knowledge and Power, and those which
are attributes of action, like Conversing and Speech.[^32]

It is stated in a Tradition from ‘Ali ibn Abi Hamzah:

I said to Abu ‘Abdillah, peace be upon him, that I heard Hisham ibn
al-Hakam relate on your authority that Allah is a body, eternal and
radiant, and that knowledge of Him is necessary, and He bestows [it]
upon whoever of His creatures He wishes.[^33]

However, it is extremely likely that the narrator has con- fused the
words of Hisham ibn al-Hakam with what is at- tributed to Hisham ibn
Salim, as will be seen. Whatever the case may be the meaning of the
hadith is not different from what has been stated previously.

The same statement has been made on Hisham's authority in books of
theological ideas: 'He is a body unlike bodies', and that Hisham said:
'What I intend by saying "body" is that He is existent, that He is a
thing, and that He is self-existent, because whatever exists is either a
body or an attribute of bodies.'[^34] It has already been said that
Hisham took this statement from Jahm ibn Safwan.

Hisham's excuse in this was that he had not come across another term
besides 'body', which conveyed the meaning of 'self-existent being'; the
error or correctness of this expression is a question of language, not
belief, as al-Murtada stated. 'Body' in the Arabic language has a
distinctly defined meaning, and it is incorrect to apply another meaning
to it unless this meaning is qualified and justifiable.

Hisham lived at the beginning of an age in which theological and
philosophical terms were being coined in the Muslim community, and he
was one of those early mutakallims who 'was feeling his way towards an
adequate philosophical vocabu- lary in Arabic', as W. Montgomery Watt
has stated.[^35]

Perhaps the clue to this harshness on the part of the Imams peace be
upon them, and this manifestly cutting denial of what Hisham expressed
goes back to the fact that 'body', as we have indicated previously, has
a clear significance in ordinary speech ,stemming from its meaning in
the Arabic language, and that, if Hisham ascribed 'body' to God and
coupled 'unlike bodies' to it, it would almost certainly induce the idea
of, or lead the ordinary mind to, corporeality and anthropomorphism,
provided 'a body unlike bodies' were interpreted by them in a way close
to the interpretation we have related earlier, based on the statements
of the non-Imami Traditionists who believed in corporeality, limbs, and
the parts of God, but said that He did not resemble in any one of these
things anything belonging to a created body, or limbs, or parts.

The meaning of their doctrine, even if they did not make it clear, was
that Allah has 'a head unlike heads', and 'a hand unlike hands', and 'an
eye unlike eyes', and that He is 'a body unlike bodies' with the word
'body' continuing to carry the same meaning as that which was ordin-arly
understood, and not the precise meaning which Hisham intended and which
was elevated above the ordinary level of comprehension, not to mention
the comprehension of scholars who were not specialists in the science of
theology.

Hisham should not have used the word 'body' without a clear explanation
of its context. For this reason, the expression suggests corporeality
and anthropomorphism in the mind of the listener, even if the speaker
who deployed the term did not intend these concepts, especially a
theologian like Hisham ibn al-Hakam, given the distinguished position he
held with the Imams, peace be upon them, and the indisputable scholarly
and religious position he held with their Shi‘i followers.

The following discussion, concerning the debate surrounding Hisham ibn
Salim, will bear witness to what we have said, since in it the Imam,
peace be upon him, approves of what Hisham ibn al-Hakam and his
followers state, but only when the people being addressed are
specialists in the science of theology who can distinguish between
scholarly terminology and the ordinary meanings of language.

The opinion of Hisham on God's body being unlike other bodies, and the Imami position against him
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is appropriate, although perhaps rather surprising, that I should
pass on an opinion concerning 'a body unlike bodies' from one of the
most stalwart of Muslim scholars, strict and vehement in matters of
belief, one of the many who stood by the Qur’an and the Sunnah in his
opinion, inflexible regarding the way they were formulated, and one of
the greatest critics of what he saw as innovation and heresy in
religion, Abu Muham- mad ‘Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Hazm al-Andulusi
(384/994–456/1064), who stated:

If they say to us: You state that Allah is Living unlike [other] living
beings, Knowing unlike [other] knowers, Powerful unlike those who posess
power, a thing unlike [other] things, and you do not prohibit the
doctrine that He is a body unlike [other] bodies, then it should be said
to them, but let Allah be the judge: Is there not a Text trans- mitted
in the name of the Most High which contains the designation that He is
Living, Powerful, and Knowing in the sense that we designate such
things?

But going no further than the Text is a duty (fard), and no text has
come ascribing a body to Him, and the proof of ascribing a body to him
does not stand, rather proof prohibits this ascrip- tion. If a text were
to come to us which assigned a body to Him, then we would be obliged to
believe that; but we would say that he is unlike bodies, as we state
with respect to Knowing, Powerful, and Living, without any difference.
As for the expression 'thing,' the Qur’an contains it, and proof makes
it necessary.[^36]

He also says:

Whoever states that Allah is a body unlike bodies is not an
anthropomorphist [read mushabbih in place of mushtabih] because it is
the limit of the names of Allah, since 'we name Him the Glorious and
Exalted, which he did not assign to himself. As for he who says that
Allah is like bodies, he is an apostate regarding His names, and an
anthropomorphist because of it.'[^37]

Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid ash-Shafi‘i al-Mu‘tazili says:

As for he who says He is a body unlike bodies, in the sense opposite to
an accident from which it is impossible to imagine an action coming, and
denies it has the sense of 'body', and when he then extends this
expression to mean that He is a thing unlike things, and an essence
unlike essences, then their case is easy, because they differ in
expression, they being: ‘Ali ibn Mansur, as-Sakkak, Yunus ibn ‘Abdi
'r-Rahman, and al-Fadl ibn Shadhan, and all these are Shi‘i elders . . .
And partisans of Hisham ibn al-Hakam in our time claim that he did not
believe in spiritual corporealism (at-tajsimu 'l-ma‘nawi),[^38] but that
he believed that He is a body unlike bodies, with the meaning which we
mentioned for Yunus, as-Sakkak, and the others, although al-Hasan ibn
Musa an-Nawbakhti, who was one of the eminent Shi‘ah, has had pure
anthropomorphism attributed to him in the book al-Ara’ wa
'd-diyanat.[^39]

What an-Nawbakhti mentions he relates from Mu‘tazili adversaries of
Hisham, some of whom al-Murtada names in his preceding discussion. Ibnu
'l-Jawzi spoke about him and his book, saying: "Abu Muhammad
an-Nawbakhti mentions, on the authority of al-Jahiz, on the authority of
an-Nazzam . . ."[^40] but Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid leaves out the chain of
transmission, for obvious reasons.

Shaykh al-Mufid states:

Truly Allah knows everything that is, prior to its existence, and there
is no event which he does not know before its occurance . . . This is a
doctrine of the entire Imamiyyah, and we do not recognize that which the
Mu‘tazilah relate from Hisham ibn al-Hakam with regard to a difference
of opinion [i.e., the attribution to him which was mentioned previously,
that he said God knows of events after their occurrence, the doctrine
which Jahm held].

According to us this is a complete fabrication of theirs about him, and
an error of those Shi‘i who blindly follow them in it and state it on
his authority. We find no listed book or established meeting [in which
he explicitly clarifies his view concerning God's knowledge], and his
statements on the fundamentals of the Imamate and concomitant issues
demonstrate the opposite of what the adversaries narrated from him.[^41]

Thus it appears that the adversaries of the Imamiyyah were more lenient
about 'a body unlike bodies', and the Imams, peace be upon them,
stricter; I have already cited my opinion about the reason for this
strictness.

The opposition of the Non-Imamis to Hisham's opinion
----------------------------------------------------

There is a body of evidence which offers convincing proof of the
innocence of Hisham ibn al-Hakam of that which his adversaries
attributed to him regarding corporeality and anthropomorphism, and,
moreover, that his statement 'a body unlike bodies' did not find favour
with the Imams.

1. Our scholars relate that Hisham retracted his statement 'a body
unlike bodies' after the Imam as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, criticized
him for it.[^42]

2. A statement by Hisham ibn al-Hakam which al-Kulayni transmits in the
chapter on the falsity of the doctrine that God can be seen with ocular
vision (ibtalu 'r-ru’yah), in the context of the hadith of the Imams,
peace be upon them, which the distinguished al-Majlisi explains with his
statement:

Because he was one of the greatest followers of the ma‘sumin (the
infallible ones), peace be upon them, [the statement by Hisham] was well
regarded because it was taken from them.[^43]In this statement, Hisham
proves the impossibility of seeing God under any circumstance, as ocular
sight is incapable of fixing upon anything besides bodies. He states at
the end of it:

'Allah is above comparison with anything'.[^44] If Hisham was among
those who believed in corporeality then it would not have been possible
for him to say what he said.

3. His statement, which as-Saduq narrates on his authority, in reply to
someone who asked: "In what manner do you know your Lord?" He stated: "I
know Allah, exalted be His greatness, through my soul, because it is the
closest thing to me," and then gave proof through the compoundedness of
his body and the principles according to which it was constructed. Then
he said:

It is impossible for there to be a composition for which there is no
composer, and the stability of a form without a former; I know that [my
body] has a creator who created it, and a former who formed it,
different from it in all its aspects [i.e., not having that which is
composed of parts, because they entail imperfection and need]. Allah has
said: And in yourselves, can you not see? (adh-Dhariyat,51:21).[^45]

4. We have already listed the names of those of Hisham's books which
deal with Unicity and the discussion related to it, such as the Kitabu
'd-Dalalah ‘ala hadathi (huduthi) 'l-ajsam – according to at-Tusi:
al-ashya’ instead of al-ajsam.[^46] How could someone who describes
Allah as a body write a book in which he maintains that bodies are
inherently created and incipient and not eternally pre-existent.

However, this book, like Hisham's other books, and like the great mass
of books by Imami scholars written during the first four centuries, has
not come down to us; anyone who refers to the well known catalogues of
Imami books – the catalogue of the Shaykhu 't-Taifah at-Tusi and that of
an-Najashi – will find that ninety per cent of the familiar books whose
names are listed in them have perished, and no trace of them remains
except for their titles listed in the catalogues. I have described some
of the reasons for this in my biography of the Shaykhu 't- Taifah
at-Tusi in the introduction to the "Kitabu 't-Tawhid" from al-Kulayni's
al-Kafi, referring to his famous library which the adversaries burned
many times, just as they did others.

There remains before us no route to the study of Hisham via the many
different books he wrote, except to be guided by their titles to their
contents, and from this tiny ray of light to be guided back to the
doctrines, which the author expounded in them. From a study of Hisham's
books we are able to judge that he argued with atheists (zanadiqah) and
refuted them, argued with dualists, and attacked the materialism which
existed in those days, and which was expressed by upholders of natural
explanations (tabayi‘). Despite all this we find some adver- saries who
accused him and his followers of atheism, and some who accused them of
having taken their beliefs from dualists.

5. That which will follow is a biography of Hisham ibn Salim, whom
Hisham ibn al-Hakam opposed because the doctrines he espoused were based
on hadiths which were untrue or which he had not correctly understood.
Hisham ibn al-Hakam charged him that these opinions only led him to
believe in corporeality, which Hisham ibn al-Hakam refuted.

[^1]: al-Kishshi, pp.256-7; Majma‘u 'r-rijal, vol.6, pp.216-7; Ibnu
'n-Nadim, al- Fihrist, al-Istiqamah ed., Cairo, p.257 (Tajaddud ed.,
Tehran, [to which refernce is usually made] p.224), al-Manaqib, vol.4,
p.244.

[^2]: Ibnu 'l-Murtada, al-Munyah wa 'l-amal, pp.23, 107; and see
al-Balkhi, Dhikru 'l-Mu‘tazilah, p.67; al-Qadi ‘Abdu 'l-Jabbar, Fadlu
'l-i‘tizal, p.241.

[^3]: 100 al-Milal wa 'l-nihal, vol.1, p.32; see the Encyclopaedia of
Islam, new ed., vol.2, p.388, and the Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam,
p.83, and the references given in both of them.

[^4]: Maqalatu 'l-Islamiyyin, vol.l, p.269; vol.2, p.164.

[^5]: al-Intisar, pp.14, 50; al-Fisal, vol.2, p.126, & vol.4, p.182;
Lisanu 'l- mizan, vol.6, p.194.

[^6]: ash-Shahristani, al-Milal wa 'n-nihal, vol.1, p.87; Nihayatu
'l-iqdam, p.215; al-Fisal, vol.2, p.126; al-Mu‘tamad fi usuli 'd-din,
p.45; Ibn Abi 'l- Hadid, vol.11, p.63.

[^7]: Nihayatu 'l-iqdam, p.245.

[^8]: al-Milal wa 'n-nihal, vol.1, p.85; Nihayatu 'l-iqdam, p.221.

[^9]: Maqalatu 'l-Islamiyyin, vol.1, p.268; ash-Shahristani, al-Milal wa
'n-nihal, vol.1, p.185; al-Farq bayna 'l-firaq, p.49; Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid,
vol.3, p.219.

[^10]: Ta’wil mukhtalafi 'l-hadith, p.48; Lisanu 'l-mizan, vol.6, p.194.

[^11]: Hisham said of his Lord: "He is seven spans [the length] of His
own span", this is mentioned in all the non-Imami sources (Ibnu
'l-Murtada az-Zaydi al- Mu‘tazili reduces them by two and gives five
spans): al-Bahru 'z-zakhkhar, vol.1, p.47; al-Munyah wa 'l-amal, p.30.

[^12]: He mentions what was related from Ibn Shahrashub above in the
first part of the biography of Hisham.

[^13]: ash-Shafi, vol.1, pp.83-88.

[^14]: al-Milal wa 'n-nihal, vol.1, p.185, and, citing this, Dr. ‘Ali
Sami an- Nashshar, Nash’atu 'l-fikri 'l-falsafi fi 'l-Islam, vol.2,
p.220, who, however, does not discuss it.

[^15]: By whom he had in mind those who held that things exist of
themselves

[^16]: Perhaps this latter was an explanation of the technical terms,
which he used or which were used in theology. For all these titles see
at-Tusi, al-Fihrist, p.204; an-Najashi, al-Fihrist, pp.304-5; Ibnu
'n-Nadim, al-Fihrist, p.224; Ma‘alimu 'l-‘ulama’, p.115; Majma‘u
'r-rijal, vol.6, pp.233-4; Hadiyyatu 'l-‘arifin, vol.2, p.507; and
others.

[^17]: Refer to the account directly from Abu 'l-Hudhayl, Maqalatu
'l-Islamiy-yin, vol.1, pp.103, 257, 258; and on his authority al-Farq
bayna 'l-firaq, pp.48,216; and al-Firaq madhahabi 'l-Islamiyyin, vol.1,
p.127; and from Abu 'l- Hudhayl, al-Fisal, vol.4, p.184; and on his
authority Minhaju 's-sunnah, vol.1, p.203; Lisanu 'l-mizan, vol.6,
p.194; and from Abu 'l-Hudhayl, Fadlu 'l-i‘tizal, pp.140, 262; al-Huru
'l-‘iyn, p.254; and al-Kirmani, al- Firaqu 'l-Islamiyyah, p.44.

[^18]: Refer to the account of him in Maqalatu 'l-Islamiyyin, vol.1,
p.110; al- Firaq, p.50; Minhaju 's-sunnah, vol.l, p.214.

[^19]: Refer to the account in Maqalatu 'l-Islamiyyin, vol.1, pp.109,
112; vol.2, p.232; Minhaju 's-sunnah, vol.1, p.208; and on the authority
of Zurqan, al-Huru 'l-‘iyn, pp.148-9, 170.

[^20]: Refer to the account of his (which lacks a chain of authority) in
Maqalatu'l-Islamiyyin, vol.1, pp.104, 268; vol.2, pp.161-2; and on his
authority, al- Firaq, pp.49, 216.

[^21]: See his reference to al-Jahiz in ‘Uyunu 'l-akhbar, vol.3, pp.199,
216, 249; and see also what he states about Hisham in Ta’wil mukhtalifi
'l-hadith, p.48, and Lisanu 'l-mizan, vol.6, p.194.

[^22]: 119 Refer to what he explicitly attributes to Hisham in
al-Intisar, pp.14, 37, 50.

[^23]: See the account from him in Maqalatu 'l-Islamiyyin, vol.l,
pp.104, 107-8;vol.2, pp.163-4, 231; al-Firaq, pp.49, 50; Minhaju
's-sunnah, vol.1, pp.207,208; al-Firaqu 'l-Islamiyyah, pp.44-45; and
from al-Ka‘bi, al-Milal wa 'n- nihal, vol.1, p.184.

[^24]: al-Intisar, p.103.

[^25]: Agreeing here with the sources, which give al-Jahiz as a pupil of
an- Nazzam: see Fadlu 'l-i‘tizal, p.265; al-Munyah wa 'l-amal, pp.153,
162; Tarikh Baghdad, vol.7, p.97; vol.12, p.213; Ibn Khallikan, vol.3,
p.471; Mu‘jamu 'l-udaba’, vol.6, p.57; Nuzhatu 'l-alibba’, p.192; and
many other sources. al-Jahiz amplifies accounts from an-Nazzam, and
praises him in his books: refer to the name indexes in al-Bayan wa
't-tabyin, al-Hayawan, etc.

[^26]: al-Hayawan, vol.6, p.166.

[^27]: His report concerning the discussion surrounding Hisham ibn Salim
will follow.

[^28]: an-Najashi, p.176; Majma‘u 'r-rijal, vo1.4, p.167; and refer to
examples of his disputations with Abu 'l-Hudhayl, in which he gained the
upper hand, in al-Fusulu 'l-mukhtarah, vol.1, pp.6, 55; al-Bihar,
vol.10, pp.370-2.

[^29]: Refer to Lisanu 'l-mizan, vol.5, pp.265-6, to see what he
invented about him.

[^30]: See al-Kafi, vol.1, p.105, nos.285/6; at-Tawhid, pp.97, 99;
al-Bihar, vol.3, p.303.

[^31]: 128 al-Kafi, vol.1, p.106, no.287; at-Tawhid, p.99; al-Fusul
'l-mukhtarah, vol.2, p.285; al-Bihar, vol.3, p.302; vol.10, p.453.
Another tradition on the same subject with a clearer and more detailed
explanation about Hisham ibn Salim will be mentioned in his biography.

[^32]: al-Kafi, vol.1, p.106, no.288; at-Tawhid, p.100; al-Ihtijaj,
vol.2, p.155; al-Bihar, vol.3, p.295.

[^33]: al-Kafi, vol.1, p.104, no.282; at-Tawhid, p.98; al-Bihar, vol.3,
p.301.

[^34]: Maqalatu 'l-Islamiyyin, vol.1, p.257; vol.2, p.182; and see ‘Ali
Sami an- Nashshar, Nash’atu 'l-fikri 'l-falsafi fi 'l-Islam, vol.2,
p.230; Sahir Muhammad Mukhtar, at-Tajsim ‘inda 'l-Muslimin, p.127, and
the sources indicated in both of them.

[^35]: The Formative Period of Islamic Thought, Edinburgh, 1973, p.248.

[^36]: al-Fisal, offset print, Daru 'l-Ma‘rifah, Beirut, 1395/1975,
vol.2, pp.118-9.

[^37]: Ibid., vol.2, p.120.

[^38]: Which necessarily implies corporeality, and is opposed to literal
corpor- ealism (at-tajsimu 'l-lafzi), i.e., the declaration that God has
a body in the material sense.

[^39]: Sharh Nahju 'l-balaghah, vol.3, p.228.

[^40]: Talbis Iblis, p.83.

[^41]: Awailu 'l-maqalat fi 'l-madhahib wa 'l-mukhtarat, Tabriz, 2nd
printing, 1371, pp.21-22.

[^42]: al-Mufid, al-Fusulu 'l-mukhtarah, vol.2, pp.284-5; al-Karajiki,
Kanzu 'l- fawaid, pp.198-9; al-Bihar, vol.3, p.290; vol.10, p.452;
Mir’atu 'l-‘uqul, vol.2, p.5.

[^43]: Mir’atu 'l-‘uqul, vol.1, pp.341-2.

[^44]: al-Kafi, "Kitabu 't-Tawhid", vol.1, pp.99-100, no.269.

[^45]: at-Tawhid, p.289; al-Bihar, vol.3, pp.49-50.

[^46]: an-Najashi, al-Fihrist, p.304; at-Tusi, al-Fihrist, p.204; Ibnu
'n-Nadim, p.224; Ma‘alimu 'l-‘ulama’; p.115; Majma‘u 'r-rijal, vol.6,
pp.232-3; Idahu'l-maknun, vol.1, p.476; Hadiyyatu 'l-‘arifin, vol.2,
p.507; adh-Dhari‘ah, vol.8, p.254.


