The Imamis' position on Non-Imami hadith
========================================

From this urgently needed study of ours it appears that those of the
Imamiyyah, who were accused of corporealism and anthropomorphism,
whether correctly or not, were accused on the basis of their belief in
hadith which had leaked over to them from the non-Imami sects, and we
have given examples bearing witness to this. These hadiths themselves
were what led others to corporealism and anthropomorphism, knowingly or
unknowingly; in this their views concurred, or at least those of their
views which are narrated, although it is not proved that they, or some
of them, believed in them.

As a single example of the effect of these hadiths on the environment of
the Imamiyyah, in addition to the examples already given, there is what
as-Saduq narrates with a chain of authority originating with Ya‘qub
as-Sarraj, who stated:

I said to Abu ‘Abdillah, peace be upon him: 'Some of our followers claim
that Allah has a form like human form, and they also say that He is, in
this form, beardless, with short,curly hair [refer to what has been
stated previous-ly].' Abu‘Abdillah, peace be upon him, fallen to the
ground, prostrated, and then he raised his head and said: 'Praise be to
Allah Who does not resemble anything, Who is not perceived by vision,
and not bound by knowledge. He did not beget, because a son would
resemble his father; He was not begotten, for whoever was before Him
would resemble Him.'[^1]

There is another factor, and it suffices that we mention just one piece
of evidence for it without comment or explanation. This is what came
from Ibn Abi ‘Umayr Muhammad ibn Ziyad al-Azdi al-Baghdadi (d. 217/832),
the famous Imami Traditionist and scholar, concerning what al-Kishshi
narrated from al- Fadl ibn Shadhan:

He questioned Abu Muhammad ibn Abi ‘Umayr, saying to him: 'You have met
the non-Imami shaykhs, but how is it that you have not heeded them?' He
said: 'I listened to them; however I saw that many of our followers had
heard knowledge from the ‘ammah (non-Imamis) and from the khassah (the
elite-Imamis), and that they had been con- fused to the point where they
narrated a non-Imami hadith from Imami sources and vice versa. I dreaded
the thought of becoming confused, so I abandonned this and focussed on
that' [i.e., 'I stopped narrating non-Imami hadith and confined myself
to Imami hadith'].[^2]

These two factors, in addition to others, explain the confi- dence which
emanated from the Imams, peace be upon them, and which their partisans
had in taking their beliefs and rulings from them, as well as the
reliance upon the truthful and trust- worthy people who narrated on
their authority. May Allah forgive our brothers for explaining it as a
rupture between Muslim brethren, and transforming it into an indictment,
to be added to the other indictments against us!

It is clear from this study of ours that the adversaries of the
Imamiyyah, no matter how their views differed or their beliefs varied,
did not cease to behave towards the Imamiyyah as they did, or as it was
claimed they did, concerning what was between them. I have presented
many examples of this, and have refrained from commenting on them.

However, here I will relate the opinion of a non-Imami writer concerning
one of the most famous books on treatises and sects, to which Muslims of
all periods have accorded a high status among all books on the subject.
The book is al-Farq bayna 'l-firaq wa bayanu 'l-firqatin-najiyyah minha
by Abu Mansur, ‘Abdu 'l-Qahir ibn Tahir al- Baghdadi, al-Ash‘ari,
ash-Shafi‘i (d. 429/1038), and in the same vein, his other book al-Milal
wa 'n-nihal, both in print; and another book of no less importance, if
not as successful, being al-Milal wa 'n-nihal by Abu 'l-Fath, Muhammad
ibn ‘Abdi 'l- Karim ash-Shahristani (479/1086–548/1153). Fakhru'd-Din
ar- Razi, the famous theologian and commentator, says of the book
al-Milal wa'n-nihal by ash-Shahristani:

It is a book which, it claims, relates the doctrines of the world, but
it is not relied upon because it draws Islamic beliefs from the book
called al-Farq bayna 'l-firaq by Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi, and this
teacher was severely bigoted against those who differed in belief and
scarcely presented their beliefs in a truthful fashion.
ash-Shahris-tani, then, drew the beliefs of the Muslim sects from this
book, and for this reason slandered their honour in the process.[^3]

\* \* \* \* \*

Before concluding the investigation, I must say a word con- cerning the
role of the Mu‘tazilah in this area. The Mu‘tazilah were confronted from
the beginning by two sorts of adver- saries: one group were followers of
hadith and the sunnah, or those who were called al-Hashwiyyah and
an-Nabitah by the Mu‘tazilah, and the second group were the theologians
who differed with them in their views. The Traditionists did not
confront the Mu‘tazilah with the weapons of theology and debate and join
the battle of argument with argument, but rather confronted them with
accusations of heresy and unbelief, and the charge of atheism and going
beyond the legitimate bounds of the religion.

With the influence they had on the general public, their adversity was
transformed into a mere 'physical struggle', in which the Mu‘tazilah
were compelled to grasp the weapon of authority since they had failed to
grasp the weapon of the backing of the general public. The most
important manifestations were the tragedies in which the history of the
time of the ‘Abbasids al-Ma’mun, al-Mu‘tasim, al-Wathiq, and
al-Mutawakkil (198/813–247/861) abound. The Mu‘tazilah were victorious
in the first period of the third caliphate, as they had the authority
and the weapons of the sultan on their side.

This is a tragedy, which the historians hold to have been a struggle
over the issue of the createness of the Qur’an. However the Mu‘tazilah
lost their position after the authorities inclined towards their
opponent theologians, and they lost the weapon of authority, just as
their predecessors had lost the weapon of the general public.

As for their theological adversaries – the most important of these were
the Imami theologians – the controversy the Mu‘tazilah had with them
took place merely in the intellectual arena, since the disputing parties
were, as was pointed out, equal in strength, in posession neither of the
weapon of the sultan or of the community. Rather, the Mu‘tazilah were,
with respect to the Imamiyyah, closer to the heart of the sultan and his
sympathy, and more able to seek the aid of his influence and arms! Here
the Mu‘tazilah sought assistance by all reason and means, and pursued
every avenue, which facilitated their victory.

It was fear of the public in the first instance, and follow- ing that,
fear of both the public and the sultan, which shackled the hands of the
Mu‘tazilah in front of the Traditionists; this did not shackle their
hands before the Imamiyyah, and for this reason we do not find in the
books of the Mu‘tazilah concerned with the Traditionists the offensive
accusations, the continual biting criticism, and the bare-faced
adversity which we find they have with respect to the Imamiyyah.

I think that what the Mu‘tazilah attributed to the Imamiyyah, which
others adopted from them, they heard in the first instance from the
Traditionists. Muqatil ibn Sulayman settled in Basrah towards the end of
his life, and spread his views there,[^4] and so did his contemporary
Hammad ibn Salamah al- Basri (88/707–167/784), the mufti and faqih of
Basrah, and a famous Traditionist.

He was the one with whom are associated most of the hadith concerning
the divine attributes which he used to demonstrate corporealism and
anthropomorphism, and which it was said that his confederate ‘Abdu
'l-Karim ibn Abi 'l-‘Awja’, the well-known atheist, inserted in his own
books, and which Hammad narrated and defended as true.[^5] Mu‘adh
al-‘Anbari, the qadi and Traditionist of Basrah, and Dawud al-Jawaribi
were either from Basrah or had connections with it. The Mu‘tazilah took
everything from them, but they could not at first ridicule them using
these narrations, so they used their statements against the Imamiyyah,
attributing them to the Basrans in the first instance, and the using it
to ridicule them afterwards.

[^1]: at-Tawhid, pp.103-4; al-Bihar, vol.3, p.304.

[^2]: al-Kishshi, pp.590-1; Majma‘u 'r-rijal, vol.5, p.118; Mu‘jam
rijali 'l- hadith, vol.14, p.299.

[^3]: Munazarat Fakhru 'd-Din ar-Razi fi bilad ma warai 'n-nahr, ed. Dr.
Fathullah Khalif, Daru 'l-Mashriq, Beirut, 1966, with English transl.,
p.39-99; and see the translation, p.62-99.

[^4]: As was previously mentioned, according to adh-Dhahabi 'Basrah is a
nest of predestination': Mizanu 'l-i‘tidal, vol.3, p.91.

[^5]: Ibnu 'l-Jawzi, al-Mawdu‘at, vol.1, pp.37, 100, 122; Ibn Furak,
Mushkilu 'l-hadith, p.169; al-Bayhaqi, al-Asma’ wa 's-sifat, p.445;
adh-Dhahabi, Mizanu'l-i‘tidal, vol.l, p.593; Ibn Hajar, Tahdhibu
't-tahdhib, vol.3, p.15; as-Suyuti,al-La’ali 'l-masnu‘ah, vol.1, p.25;
vol.2, p.468; etc.


