Comparison of the Tashihu 'l I‘Tiqad with the I‘Tiqadatu 'l-Imamiyyah
=====================================================================

The final point I wish to mention is that the comparison of Tashihu
'l-i‘tiqad by al-Mufid with I‘tiqadatu 'l-Imamiyyah by as-Saduq only
reveals to us what the Imamiyyah Traditionist and theological schools
shared, and what they differed in, and no more, during the period up to
the fifth/eleventh century. However, to conclude this comparison by
saying that the difference, which we find on al-Mufid's side, can be
traced back to the influence of the Mu‘tazilah is an inference, which is
refuted by many facts resting on correct deduction based on truthful and
comprehensive study.

The Imamiyyah, from the beginning, contained these two schools of
thought. We have stated that while they were different in style and form
of demonstration, they were not adversarial opponents, as we have found
them to be among the non- Imami. I have elsewhere written a continuous
history of Imami theologians, in which I trace them up to the period of
Shaykhu't-Taifah at-Tusi, and I have mentioned the books of theology
that are cited as theirs; it will be published, Allah willing, as a
preface to the English translation of "Kitabu 't-Tawhid" of Usul
al-Kafi.

However, the books which I have cited there have mostly perished, and
only a trifling amount has reached us; nevertheless, they have titles,
and what these titles suggest demonstrates that Imami theology is a
continuous, uninterrupted chain, which thrived and was maintained up to
the time of the Shaykh al-Mufid. Where we do not have actual examples,
the least we can do is study their titles and what little remains of
their contents.

Our study is, therefore, fragmented and incomplete, and it is not
correct for us to judge that what we see as a distinctive feature of
al-Mufid is something he picked up from the Mu‘tazilah. Rather, there
are proofs, which demonstrate that this distinctive feature was
something that had been passed down to him from previous Imami
theologians, in the same way as their doctrine, which he inherited with
its special characteristics.

I have already presented some of the discussion surround- ing the
methodological division between Traditionist and theological styles. It
is apparent from this that these strong judgements, which have been
stated both in the past and at the present, concerning the influence of
the Mu‘tazilah on the Imamiyyah, are unfounded. I have made it clear
that they were not influenced by the Mu‘tazilah in their beliefs; this
was my intention in this introduction, and as for the study of other
aspects, I leave that task to another time.

However, I would like to put forward here a single example of these
biting judgements, being the least weighty of examples, and the least
outrageous and arbitrary in its connection with as- Saduq and al-Mufid.
M. McDermott mentions that the Kitabu 't- Tawhid by as-Saduq was
composed later than his two other books, al-I‘tiqadatu 'l-Imamiyyah and
al-Hidayah, and that as- Saduq was therein closer to the thinking of the
Mu‘tazilah than he was in the other two, since after as-Saduq had
emigrated to Rayy, he lived in the Buyid court there. Perhaps this
difference was due to 'the pressure of the vizier as-Sahib ibn
‘Abbad[^1] or the influence of Mu‘tazilite arguments may well have
changed his thinking.'[^2]

But there is more weighty evidence from an earlier period. Al-Kulayni,
the Shaykh Abu Ja‘far Muhammad ibn Ya‘qub ar- Razi, then al-Baghdadi (d.
329/941), was a Traditionist shaykh of the Imamiyyah who lived in Rayy
and then moved to Baghdad at the end of his life and died there.[^3]
Al-Kulayni gave a chapter in the section on tawhid in al-Kafi the title
Ta’wilu 's- samad (the interpretation of samad), and quoted there two
hadith which explained samad as His eternal mastery over everything,
great or small,[^4] and then went on to state:

This is the correct interpretation of as-samad, not what
anthropomorphism holds about it: that the interpretation of as-samad is
a solid, which has no void within it. That interpretation is nothing
more than an attribute of bodies, and Allah, glory be to His name, is
above this; . . . if the interpretation of as-samad as an attribute of
Allah were solidity, then it would contradict His words:

***There is nothing like Him (ash-Shura, 42:11),***

because solidity is an attribute of solid bodies which have no voids,
like stone, or iron, or other solid objects . . . And as for what is
stated in Tradition concerning this matter, the knower (i.e., the
infallible Imam), peace be upon him, is more knowledgeable by what he
said.

He then goes on to demonstrate the correctness of this explanation with
a linguistic argument;[^5] in this way he anticipated the
Shaykhu't-Tusi, the student of al-Mufid, by many centuries. At-Tusi
said:

Whoever interprets as-samad to mean 'solid' is ignorant of Allah,
because solidity is the compression of parts, and that, which has no
voids; this is anthropomorphism and unbelief in Allah.[^6]

Those Traditions which al-Kulayni indicates but does not quote and which
explain as-samad as that which has no voids, as-Saduq cites and does not
miss out in his Kitabu’t-Tawhid, in which, according to McDermott, he
was more influenced by the Mu‘tazilah than in his Risalah, or his
Hidayah,[^7] and he combines it with the meaning which al-Kulayni
adopted as explaining as-samad, and takes on both of them. He interprets
as-samad in a way, which does not lend itself to corporealism;[^8] from
this it appears that al-Kulayni was more of a Mu‘tazilah than as-Saduq!

It may be that the reverential support given to these judgements which
have been expounded about the Imamiyyah both ancient and modern, and
which opine that they were dependant on the Mu‘tazilah who provided them
with their views and arguments will lead some to claim that another
Mu‘tazili circle existed or came into existence, and that al-Kulayni
lived within it, and that another Mu‘tazili vizier put pressure upon
him.

I do not, in any way, deny that an Imami scholar can be influenced by a
teacher of his who differs from him in belief, or by the atmosphere of
adversity around him, but what I do not accept is what McDermott's
opinion is inspired by, being that as-Saduq renounced some of his ideas,
or covered up aspects of them in deference to his followers or to the
Mu‘tazilah, and this continued reverence for these judgements which
state that any modification of Imami opinion occured as a result of
Mu‘tazili influence upon them. In the view of as-Saduq, as-Sahib
ibn‘Abbad was not that Mu‘tazili whom the Mu‘tazili sources suppose him
to be. Rather he was a Twelver Imami who eulogized the Imams,
particularly ar-Rida, peace be upon him, in many qasidas, in which he
explicitly refers to their Imamate. As-Saduq wrote his ‘Uyun akhbari
'r-Rida, ‘Alay-hi’s-salam for him, and explicitly mentions him in the
beginning of the book. Moreover, he quotes the poems of as-Sahib
therein.[^9]

\* \* \* \* \*

In issues of theology, it is necessary to distinguish between those
which touch directly upon belief, and those, which do not, such as those
issues, which come under the heading of the latif (refinements) of
kalam. Our Shaykh al-Mufid cites many of these kinds of elaborations at
the end of his Awailu 'l- maqalat.[^10] My goal in this introduction is
limited to stating that the Imamiyyah did not take their beliefs from
the Mu‘tazilah, and that anthropomorphism and corporealism did not reign
over them for a single day prior to their contact with the Mu‘tazilah.

As for being influenced in issues like these, or being influenced in the
type of demonstration used in issues connected with them, I do not rule
it out; rather, there is much evidence for its occurence, but there was
a two-way influence. What is most distressing is the ignorance of the
influence Hisham ibn al- Hakam had on the two Mu‘tazili scholars,
an-Nazzam and Abu Tayyib, for example, and the importance given to
al-Mufid's being influenced by the Mu'tazilah.

As for the extent of the Mu‘tazill influence on al-Mufid, in particular,
in matters of the latifu 'l-kalam in questions which did not touch
directly upon doctrine, and especially al-Mufid's pursuance of the ideas
of al-Ka‘bi al-Balkhi, which McDermott uses freely in his book The
Theology of ash-Shaikh al-Mufid, I shall not discuss anything he states,
since I have discussed the principles which he relies upon and given my
opinion of them; as for the details, a discussion of them would form
another article.

It should also be pointed out that taking from a non-Imami theologian
does not necessarily mean that a student follows his teacher's opinions,
especially as far as doctrinal differences he has with him are
concerned. The non-Imami theologians of the earlier time were Mu‘tazili,
and following the period of the Shaykhu’t-Taifah at-Tusi, were mostly
Ash‘ari; a group of our Imami theologians were involved with them. In
addition, and in contrast to this, there is the recorded involvement of
non-Imami with Imami theologians, such as the students of Nasiru’d-Din
at-Tusi, the famous theologian and philosopher.  
 This is only the acquisition of information from a non-Imami shaykh;
how many non-Imami shaykhs of hadith there were from whom al-Mufid,
al-Murtada, at-Tusi, and al-Karajiki learnt, not to mention those who
preceeded them, like as-Saduq, and those who succeeded them, like the
‘Allamah al-Hilli. These men weighed the hadith they heard with the
scales they held to be correct; in their view, it was a necessity for
them to reveal the soundness or otherwise of a hadith. The result of
this is that the lmami Traditionist sought the assistance of what he
heard from his non-Imami shaykh in substantiating what he believed about
the Imamate, and the qualifications of the Imams, peace be upon them, or
in the refutation of arguments of adversaries.

This is the case as well in the sciences of theology, Qur’anic
commentary, positive law, and jurisprudence. This sort of involvement
was beneficial, in the first instance, in learning the usefulness of
what the two sides agreed upon, and secondly, in making use of the
teacher's knowledge in defense of what the student believed to be true.

[^1]: Vizier to the Buyids (326/938–385/995).

[^2]: The Theology of ash-Shaikh al-Mufid, pp.323, 341-9.

[^3]: For his biography see the forward to the English translation of
"Kitabu 'l-‘Aql wa 'l-Jahl" from al-Kafi.

[^4]: al-Kafi, vol.1, pp.123-4, nos.323/324.

[^5]: al-Kafi, vol.1, p.124.

[^6]: at-Tibyan, vol.10, p.431.

[^7]: at-Tawhid, pp.93, 140, 171.

[^8]: Ibid., p.197.

[^9]: 'Uyunu 'l-akhbar, vol.1, pp.3-7.

[^10]: p.72 ff.


