Frequently Used Terms
=====================

**Halal**: permitted, allowed, lawful, legal. The acts or things which
are permitted and lawful. There is neither reward for performing it nor
any punishment for neglecting it. For example: drinking tea.

**Haram**: forbidden, prohibited. lt is necessary to abstain from the
acts which are haram. If someone performs a haram act, then he or she
will be punished either by the Islamic court or in the hereafter or
both. For example: stealing.

**Jaiz**: same as halal. See above.

**Makruh**: reprehensible, disliked, and discouraged. Acts which are
disliked but not haram. If someone docs a makruh act, then he or she
will not be punished for it; however, if people refrain from it, then
they will be rewarded. For example: eating with left hand.

**Mubah**: same as halal, except that the term “mubah” is exclusively
used for lawful things and properties, not for acts.

**Mujtahid**: a jurist. The term is used to describe a Shi'a Muslim
religious scholar who is an expert of' Islamic jurisprudence (*fiqh*).
Commonly it is used for the high ranking mujtahids whose decrees are
followed by the Shi'a people. Such mujtahids arc also known as “marja'”
or "Ayatullah''.

**Mustahab**: recommended, desirable, better. It refers to the acts
which are recommended but not wajib. If one neglects them, then he or
she will not be punished; however, if one performs them, then he or she
will be rewarded. For example: washing hands before eating.

**Shari'ah or Shari'a**: literally means a way, a stream: in Islamic
terminology, it means the laws of Islam.

**Sunnat**: same as Mustahab. See above.

**Wajib**: obligatory, necessary, incumbent. An act which must be
performed. A person will be rewarded for performing it and punished for
neglecting it. For example: the daily prayers.


