7.1 Your Business A: Five Types of Laws
=======================================

Islamic laws are of five types: obligatory (wajib), recommended
(mustahab), discouraged (makruh), permissible (mubah) and forbidden
(haram). Business, trades and professions in Islam would also fall into
these five categories.

1. Wajib/Obligatory”

(a) On an individual level: it is obligatory to maintain yourself and
your family so any legitimate job that fulfills that obligation for you
is obligatory for you.

(b) On a social level: any trade, business or profession which caters to
the essential needs of the society is obligatory in the sense of wajib
kifai.[^1]

For example, the medical profession (especially female doctors,
dentists, and gynecologist’s), religious profession, teaching,
journalism, youth and family counselling are wajib kifai. In the Western
context, in order to create a Muslim community in this society, it is
wajib kifai to provide those facilities without which the community
would not be able to maintain its Islamic identity.

Muslim communities should establish scholarship programs and endowment
funds, and further support such existing organizations that encourage
Muslim youths to go for higher studies in disciplines which are required
for the Muslims in the West.

Remember what lmam 'Ali (a.s) said, "Knowledge is better than wealth.
Knowledge guards you, while you have to guard the wealth. Wealth
decreases by spending, while knowledge multiplies by spending, and the
results of wealth die as wealth decays.....”

2. Mustabab /Recommended: any profession or business that is not
essential but useful for yourself and the society. For example, a food
business that makes halal food more easily available to Muslims or
physical fitness facilities which adhere to the shari'a laws.

3. Makruh/Disliked: it is makruh to involve oneself exclusively in the
profession of butcher, or the trade of selling shrouds (kafan), statues
of living things, etc.

4. Halal/Permissible: any trade or profession that is permissible but
not essential for the society.

5. Haram/ Forbidden: A list of specified kinds of professions and trades
will be listed below.

[^1]: Wajib kifai means an obligation which is upon the entire community
but if one person fulfills it, then the obligation is lifted from
others; however, if no one fulfills it, then the entire community is
responsible. This is opposite of wajib ‘ayni in which each person has to
fulfill that obligation, e.g., salat.


