7.2 Your Business B 1) Haram Business and Trade
===============================================

1. Intoxicating Drinks
----------------------

Almighty Allah says,

***“They ask you about intoxicants and games of chance. Say, ‘In both of
them there is a great sin and profits for men, but their sin is greater
than their profits’.”*** (2:219)

It is haram to deal with intoxicating drinks in any shape or form:
selling, buying, using it as rent or payment for a job, etc.

It is haram to sell grapes and dates to a customer who buys them for
making intoxicant drinks.

It is haram to rent out a real estate property for making, selling or
buying intoxicants.

*Question*: Can I buy a building in which one of the tenants operates a
liquor store or a pub?

*Answer*: You may buy the building but must terminate the lease of that
particular tenant as soon as possible based on the agreement (i.e.,
immediately or at the renewal time).

It is haram to rent out a vehicle for transporting intoxicants.

It is haram to work for a company that produces such drinks, in any form
of job: as a driver, worker, accountant, guard, typist, etc.

It is not permissible for a Muslim to sell or serve intoxicating drinks,
or even to wash the glasses used for that purpose. Wages from such work
are unlawful.

*Question*: Can I work as a cashier in a grocery shop that also sells
alcohol?

*Answer*: Your job as a cashier is okay; however, a portion of your
salary representing the percentage of work for selling alcohol will be
illegitimate.

Similarly, it is not permissible for a Muslim artist, calligrapher,
designer, web-designer, printer, or publisher to prepare and promote an
advertisement for intoxicating drinks. This would amount to promoting
immorality, and it is not permissible even if that Muslim is going to
lose future business from such customers.

Muslims are not allowed to buy intoxicating drinks for their customers
at business lunch or dinner party.

The Prophet said, “Allah has cursed the intoxicating drinks, he who
squeezes it out [from grapes], he who plants [grapes, etc. for
intoxicants], he who drinks it, he who serves it, he who sells it, he
who buys it, he who earns from it, he who transports it and he to whom
it is transported.” [^1]

**Methyl Alcohol**: The above ruling applies to intoxicating drinks.
Therefore, intoxicants that are not made for human consumption are not
covered by prohibition or ritual impurity (najasat). For example, methyl
alcohol (also known as wood spirit) is not najis and is a valid
commodity for trade because it is used for industrial solvents, and for
making synthetic rubber, chemicals, rubbing alcohol, inks, dyes and
stains, antifreeze and other similar products.  
 Similarly, the alcohol found in perfumes is pure and permissible for
use as well as trade.

2. Animal Products
------------------

**i. Pig** and its byproduct it is haram to deal in pigs and their
byproducts in all forms: even selling or serving pork to those who
consider it permissible in their religion is not allowed. This
prohibition also applies to delivering food items which have pork in
them such as pizza, etc.

However, selling, buying or using soaps made of pigs' fat is
permissible; of course, it is najis and one must purify the hand or body
after using that soap. Similarly, selling, buying or using toothbrushes
or paint brushes that contain bristles made from pig's hair is
permissible except wherever ritual purity (taharat) is a condition. So
if someone uses such a toothbrush, then the mouth will become najis, and
it will become pure by taking the toothbrush out and getting rid of the
remaining toothpaste from the mouth.

ii. Animal products from an animal that was **slaughtered Islamically**
(zibh): it is permissible to deal in such products.

i. Animal products from an animal that you know was not **slaughtered
Islamically**:

(a) Parts with no feeling (e.g., hair, feather, fur, bone, horn, beak,
nail. and teeth): it is permissible to trade in them.

(b) Parts with feelings (e.g., skin): it is not permissible to trade in
them.[^2]

iv. Animal products whose method of slaughtering is unknown or
**doubtful**:  
 (a) From Muslim merchant or Muslim market: it is permissible to trade
in them.

(b) From a non-Muslim:

• if there is a probability of Islamic zibh: it is permissible to trade
in them;

• if there is no probability of Islamic zibh: it is not permissible to
trade in them.[^3]

3. Other ‘Ayn Najis
-------------------

Other ‘ayn najis items (like human or animal stool, urine, blood, semen)
can be a legitimate business commodity provided there is a reasonable
use for them . For example, the dung of farm animals can be used for the
purpose of using it as manure; blood of animals for use as a dye, etc.;
blood of human beings for transfusion into a patient who needs it.

*Mutanajjis items:*  
 Mutanajjis means an item that becomes najis by coming into contact with
a wet 'ayn najis. It means, "Acquired impurity" as opposed to 'ayn najis
which means "inherent impurity".

It is permissible to deal in mutanajjis items if there is a permissible
use for it. For example, if lamp oil becomes najis, it can still be used
to light the lamp.

4. Hoarding Common Food Items
-----------------------------

''Hoarding" means storing an item that is in demand with the hope that
its price will increase. It is haram to hoard the common food items that
are low in supply and high in demand. Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w) said,
“None hoards the food items except the sinner.”[^4] Under an Islamic
system, the government has the right to force such a merchant to sell
the food items at the fair market value.  
 According to some Shii scholars, it is also recommended to refrain from
boarding any non-food commodity that is considered as a necessity of
life for people.

5. Tools and Machines for Haram Purposes
----------------------------------------

Manufacturing or dealing in items, tools or machines that are
exclusively used for haram purposes is absolutely forbidden. For
example: gambling machine, idols, etc.  
 Similarly, it is forbidden for a Muslim builder or contractor to build
a place of worship for non-Muslims in a non-Muslim country.

*Question*: Is it permissible to work as a cashier in such a convenience
store that also sells lottery tickets?

*Answer*: Selling lottery is haram. However, working as a cashier in a
convenient store is not haram even though it is haram to sell lottery
tickets. (The implication is that even thought the cashier's job is
legitimate but that portion of the salary which represents the
percentage of work done in selling lottery tickets will not be
considered legitimate.)

However, there is no problem in dealing in machines of dual- or
multi-purpose nature which include haram purposes but are not
exclusively used for such things, like radio, television, etc.

[^1]: Al-Majlisi, Biharu ‘l-Anwar, vol.79, p.126; al-Hindi, Kanzu
‘l-‘Ummal, hadith no.13191.

[^2]: However, according to Ayatullah Sistani, it is permissible to
trade in such items with non-Muslims based on the principles of “raf’u
‘l-yad”. According to Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi also this is permissible
since he does not consider the hide or byproducts slaughtered (even in a
non-Islamic manner) as najis/ritually impure.

[^3]: However, according to Ayatullah Sistani, it is permissible to
trade in such items with non-Muslims based on the principle of “raf’u
‘l-yad”.

[^4]: As-Saduq, Man la Yahduruhu ‘l-Faqih, vol.3,p.169


