7.3 Your Business B 2) Haram Business and Trade
===============================================

6. Money Related Issues
-----------------------

### Riba and Interest

One of the principles of Islamic economics is “the relationship between
one's efforts and the amassing of wealth, and the importance of
participating in the risk of losing one's wealth as well as increasing
it in any economic transaction. That is why riba or interest is
forbidden in  
 Islamic Law ...”[^1]

Almighty Allah says:

***“Those who take interest cannot stand [In their dealing with people]
except like the one who has been confounded by the touch of the
Satan-this is so because they say, that trade is just like
interest.[Whereas] Allah has allowed trade and forbidden interest.***  
***So to whomsoever comes the admonition from his Lord and so he desists
[from interest], he shall have what has already passed and his affair is
in the hands of Allah; but whosoever returns [to it], then they are the
inmates of the Fire, they shall abide in it.***  
***Allah does not bless interest, and He causes the charitable deeds to
grow. And Allah does not love any ungrateful sinner.”*** (2:275-276)

The main difference between trade and interest is that risk is involved
in the former but not in the latter. So any investment in which risk is
involved is allowed but wherever the returns are guaranteed for one
party but not the other, then the investment is not allowed.

Commenting on the present interest based economic system, Bernard
Lietaer, a well-known business professor and former banker, says, “…But
money wasn't created by God. We have forgotten that it's a system
designed by people. And I believe that this design, which dates from
centuries ago, is at the root of most problems in our society...

The monetary system is programmed - albeit not deliberately - to cause
certain behavior. It promotes competition and short-term thinking; it
forces economic growth, and it undervalues care, education and tasks
crucial to maintaining a society. Economics theory teaches us that
people compete for markets and raw materials; I think, in reality,
people compete for money.”[^2]

So how is the money created? Money is created through borrowing from
banks and lending institutions.  
 Professor Lietaer illustrates the ill of interest through an
interesting story:

There once was a town where the people lived in harmony. Their food,
shelter, clothing, and tools came from the land, forests, rivers, and
animals around them. What one family could not make for it itself, it
got from [an] other at the weekly market. There, people bartered what
they had for what they needed - a chicken for cooking pots, firewood for
cloth, and so on.  
 One market day, a stranger showed up and watched. At day's end, the
stranger called the townspeople together and said, “Your trading is
cumbersome and clumsy! Bring me a cowhide and I'll show you a better
way.”

Curious, the townspeople brought the hide. The stranger then cut it into
circles: “I've made ten circles for each family. One circle represents
one chicken. Use these to trade with each other. You'll see, it will be
much easier than carrying your goods to market. And, oh yes, I'll come
back in a year to collect this loan I've made. But at that time, each
family will owe me eleven rounds of hide instead of ten, as a token of
appreciation for the improvement I've brought into your lives.”

The town represents the society. The stranger who brings money -the
rounds- into being by lending it out represents banks. The 11th round
the stranger requests from each family as payment for services
represents the interest payment on the loan.

The money does indeed make trading much easier. However, the
stranger/bank has created only 10 units of money per family, yet each
family must repay 11 units.

One of each 10 families will have to go bankrupt to provide the 11th
round to all the others.  
 In a community where cooperation once flourished, extra effort is now
required to wrest the eleventh round from a neighbor’s hands; this
leaves little time or energy to help anyone out anymore, or even to
enjoy a little socializing.[^3]

### a) Two Types of Interest

In Islamic laws, interest (riba) is of two types:

#### Interest in Business and Trade

Any business deal that has the following three conditions will be
considered riba and haram:

(a) The commodity and the price are of same kind.

(b) They are things that are sold by weight.

(c) The price is more than the commodity.

For example, selling 100 kg wheat for 110 kg wheat would be considered
riba and haram no matter whether the payment is on spot or deterred.

However, if a person were to sell 100 kg wheat for 110 kg raisins or to
sell 100 US dollars for 125 Canadian dollars, then it would be a
legitimate transaction because the items are neither the same nor
weighed. This transaction will be valid even if the payment is deferred.

Similarly, if a person were to sell a dozen eggs for fifteen eggs, then
it would be a legitimate transaction even though the items are of the
same kind because they are not sold by weight. This would be a
legitimate transaction u11less the payment bas been deferred.

\*\*\*\*\*

##### Other related transactions

1. To sell gold in exchange for gold with increment in the
price -whether on spot or in deferred form- is forbidden. Similarly,
selling silver in exchange for silver with increment in the
price-whether on spot or in deferred form- is forbidden.

2. "Buy Now and Pay Later": The merchant is allowed to fix two different
prices for the same item: lower price for cash or higher price for the
payment that is deferred to a fixed date. This is valid only if the
merchant had 'fixed the price for the deferred payment beforehand.

However, if the deferred increased price is negotiated during the deal
itself, then it is riba and is not permissible. For example, if the
merchant says that this item is of $ 100 but the customer says that he
cannot pay now, he can only pay after a year; and the merchant then
proposes that the deferred payment will be $125- that is riba and
haram.  
 Moreover, this only applies to items that are not sold by weight;
otherwise, it is considered riba and is not permissible.

3. “Pay Now andReceive Later”: There is no problem in such a transaction
as long as the commodity and the price both are not in gold or silver
form.

#### Interest in Loan

It is haram to charge interest from a Muslim in loan. As far as charging
interest from a non-Muslim is concerned, most contemporary mujtahidin
have allowed it.[^4]  
 According to the majority of our mujtahids, charging interest is
allowed between father and children, and between husband and wife.

\* \* \*

When discussing the issue of riba with a former Pakistani businessman in
New Jersey a few years ago, I found out that some Pakistani economists
have divided the loan into two types:

1."Loan for consumption" (e.g., for advanced study, treatment of an
illness, marriage of one's daughter) and 2. "Loan for investment''
(e.g., for buying or expanding a business).

They say that the riba forbidden in Islam only applies to "loan for
consumption'' and not to “Loan for investment,” thus allowing charging
of interest on a loan given for investment This was also brought to my
attention by a friend who reviewed the manuscript of this treatise.

I have not yet seen this type of division of loans in the contemporary
works of Shi'i jurists nor am I familiar with any basis for such a
division in the primary shariah sources. The only scholar to my
knowledge who has discussed these two types of loan is Shaykh Murtadha
Mutahhari in his  
*Mas' ala-e Riba.*[^5]

Even he has concluded that the Islamic prohibition of riba covers both
types of loans: *qarz-e masrafi* (loan for consumption) as well as
*qarz-e tawlidi* (loan for investment).

So then how can Muslim businesspeople get loans for investment? The most
practical way would be to use the *mudaraba* partnership format in which
the "creditor" becomes the silent partner, i.e., "investor".

### b) Loan, Debt and al-Qarzu 'l-Hasan

Islam strongly recommends its followers to live within their own means,
to manage their finances wisely, and not be extravagant in spending.
Asking for a loan without necessity is reprehensible (makruh). lmam 'Ali
(a.s) said, “Beware of debt for it causes anxiety at nighttime and
humiliation at daytime.”[^6] Of course, if there is a need, then the
reprehensibility of asking for a loan is lifted.

If you give a loan without the condition of interest, then it is known
as *al-qarzu '1-hasan* (a good loan; an interest­ free loan) and is
considered a very good deed in Islam. Many ahadith say that the reward
for giving charity is multiplied ten times whereas the reward for giving
an interest free loan is multiplied eighteen times.[^7]

Giving such a loan is considered like giving a loan to Almighty Allah
who is going to pay it back with compounded interest:

***“Who*** ***will give a*** ***good*** ***loan*** ***to*** ***Allah so
that He will multiply it for him manifold? Allah straitens and increases
(the sustenance), and to Him you shall return.”*** (2:245)

#### Repaying al-Qurzu ‘l Hasan

There is a misconception among some Muslims that "*al­ qarzu '1-hasan*"
means that the debtor does not have to pay it back and that the creditor
should consider it as “a bad debt”. This is absolutely a wrong notion.
What a debtor does not have to pay back is known as charity, not a loan;
a loan has to be repaid as per the condition agreed between the creditor
and the debtor.

Mu 'awiyah bin Wahab inquired from Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) about the
validity of the story that once a Muslim died in Medina and the Prophet
was requested to lead the funeral prayer for him. When the Prophet found
that the deceased had left a debt of two dinars, he politely declined
and instead asked his companions to say the funeral prayer until some of
his relatives agreed to pay off the debt on his behalf. Imam as-Sadiq
(a.s) replied, "That is the truth. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) only
did that so that people may learn a lesson to pay the debts back to one
another and not to take the debts lightly ...”[^8]

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) also said, ''Being killed in the cause of Allah is
atonement for all sins except the debt; there is no atonement for it
except its repayment ...”[^9]  
 After the verse (2:282), quoted earlier, Almighty Allah even talks
about a security against the loan. He says,

***“And if you are in a journey and you do not find a scribe, then
(there may be) a security taken into possession (by the creditor).***

***However,*** ***if*** ***one of you trusts another, then he who is
trusted should deliver his trust, and let him be careful (of his duty
towards) Allah, his Lord; and do not conceal testimony, and whosoever
conceals it, his heart is surely sinful. And Allah knows what you
do.”*** (2:283)

lmam Zaynu '1-'Abidin (a.s) wrote: "It is the right of your creditor who
demands back the loan that, if you have sufficient money, you must fully
repay him and give him his dues and make him independent of yourself;
and do not make him run around and not tarry [in repayment], because the
Messenger of Allah has said, “Tarrying of the rich is injustice.”

“And if you are facing hard times then you should please him by amiable
talk and kindly request him to allow an extension of time so that he
returns from you content; and do not make him suffer bad dealings in
addition to the loss of money because that is meanness. And there is no
power but with Allah.”[^10]

To the creditor, Almighty Allah says,

***“And*** ***if*** ***(the debtor) is in straitens, then let there be
postponement (of the payment) until he is in ease. However (in such a
case), letting it go as charity is better for you,*** ***if*** ***you
know.”***  
 (2:280)  
 In *al-qarzu '1-hasan* it is recommended for the debtor to pay
something more to the creditor who has given the interest-free loan.

### c) Bank Activities

#### Banks

The rules governing Muslim banks are different from those governing
non-Muslim banks.[^11]

#### Deposits in Non-Muslim Banks

According to most jurists, it is permissible to deposit money in a
non-Muslim bank with the condition of interest because it is permissible
to earn interest from Non­Muslims. [^12]

#### Islamic Banking

How then do banks operate under an Islamic economic system?  
 Ayatullah Khamana 'i, in answer to a question related to money earned
in deposit accounts from banks (in a country governed by shari' a law
like Iran), says:

“If the act of depositing the money in the ban k is like giving the loan
to the bank and the bank gives extra money in that account-then it is
riba and haram.  
 But if the deposit is not as loan but as an investment where the bank
takes that money and invests on behalf of the customer according to one
of the commercial laws of Islam [like mudaraba], and then the bank
divides the profits between itself and the customer-in this case there
would be no problem in the profit that the hank gives to the
customer.”[^13]

According to Ayatullah Nasir Makarim Shirazi, another prominent mujtahid
in Iran, such an act of investing by the bank on behalf of customer will
only be valid if the contract is clearly and really outlined between
them; but if it is just a pretense to get around the issue of interest,
then it is really riba and haram.[^14]

This concept of mudaraba between the bank and the depositors is quite
alien to the financial institutions of the West where the banks (e.g.,
in Canada in J 996) continued to make profits in billions even though
the overall economy was still trying to recover from near depression.

#### iv. Getting Loan from Banks

According to most mujtahidin, it is haram to get loan from a non-Muslim
bank with the condition of paying interest.

However, according to Ayatullah Sistani as well as the late Ayatollah
Khu'i, one can technically get out of the prohibition by taking the
money from a non-Muslim bank with the intention of *istinqadh*-that is,
using the wealth of non-Muslims which is available to you from them
willingly, according to their own laws. In this case, use of that money
will be permissible even if one will be forced to pay interest.[^15]

#### v. Use of Credit Cards

Using credit cards as a convenient way of shopping is permissible.
However, it is haram to delay the payment because that entails paying of
interest. (Of course, using the concept of *istinqadh* mentioned
earlier, it would be permissible to be use credit cards as means of
getting a loan.  
 However, based on what I have written below, I would strongly caution
the reader against being caught in the trap of debt.)

According to a recent survey in the United States of America, 40 percent
of consumers pay off their credit cards in full each month: “They are
doing great...The other 60 percent to varying degrees are buried under
or completely buried under, and getting in deeper. And you see the
results.” [^16] While the Central Banks (in the USA as well as Canada)
have pushed down short-term interest rates, and mortgage rates have
fallen in 2003 to a 45-year low, credit card interest rates have not
followed. The average credit card carries a 15 to 17 percent interest
rate plus penalty fees.

The banks marketing departments know the human element of greed: in the
year 2003, five billion credit card offers were mailed out, including
many to consumers who never would have qualified for credit 20 years
ago. According to Jordon Goodman, “Bankers call it the democratization
of credit - giving people who can't handle credit all the credit they
can't handle.” He also point towards a cultural shift among present
Americans who have embraced debt as a way of life.[^17]

If you are among the 40 percent of those who use the credit cards just
as a means of convenience and pay them off by the due date, the
financial institutions automatically increase your credit limit in order
to entice you to overspend so that you may end up paying the interest.
Beware of this temptation, and control your greed. Constantly remind
yourself of the difference between "need" and “greed”.

It is worth repeating the saying of Imam 'Ali (a.s) quoted earlier:
"Beware of debt for it causes anxiety at nighttime and humiliation at
daytime."

#### vi. Financing a Car Purchase

Am I allowed to buy a car financed by the bank and pay back through
installments to the bank with interest? Based on rule no. iv, mentioned
above, getting the money from a non- Muslim bank would be permissible.  
 However, the option of "lease to own" is probably the best from the
Islamic point of view: you pay more than the normal price but it is not
as interest. Let us hope that this concept of "lease to own" is made
available by the financial institutions towards purchases of homes; this
will greatly eliminate the problem of paying interest on home mortgages.

#### vii. Services of the Bank

Using other services of the bank like transferring money and opening
Letters of Credit to import goods is permissible; and the banks are
allowed to charge commission for their part of the job.

#### viii. Working in the Banks

Working in banks or similar financial institutions: The activities of a
bank are divided into two: halal and haram.  
 Working in sections where interest is involved, is haram. The earning
received from such work is haram. Working in sections where interest is
not involved, is halal. This ruling, according to Ayatullah Sistani, is
relevant to Muslim banks and customers only. Therefore, if the bank in
which you are working is a non-Muslim bank and/or the customers are non-
Muslims, then dealing in interest with them as a bank employee is
permissible; and the earning received from this work is halal.[^18]

### d) The Stock Market and Futures

#### i. Mutual Funds, the Stock Market and Bonds

In light of what we have said, investing in mutual funds and the stock
market in which the returns are not guaranteed would be permissible.

Such investments, however, could become haram because of secondary
reasons: like If one invests in a company that deals in a haram
commodity, such as a brewery or casino. The best option for a Muslim
investing in mutual funds would be the “ethical funds'” since such funds
do not deal in alcohol, tobacco, gambling or environmentally harmful
products.[^19]

However, you must be careful when dealing with the stock market and ask
the following question: Are the shares "earnings driven" or "story
driven''? If the shares are earnings driven (i.e., have proven history
of performance), then it is permissible. However, if the shares are
"story driven", then it is like gambling and is not permissible.[^20]
(An example in recent times was the skyrocketing shares of the Internet
stock that were "story driven", and which then just collapsed.)

Interest-bearing bonds would be allowed except from Muslim banks as per
the ruling of Ayatullah Sistani.

#### ii. Futures Markets

"Futures" means an agreement in which the seller agrees to deliver a
commodity -which does not exist yet- at a future date at a specific
price. For example, a farmer signs an agreement to sell 1000 bushels of
wheat to a buyer at the price of $5.00 a bushel robe delivered after
eight weeks.

Futures have become financial instruments and investors trade them in
large quantities on exchanges. Now investors are not required to
actually deliver or receive the commodities listed in the contracts.

There are two important questions about futures markets:  
 1. Is it permissible for the seller to sell a commodity in futures?

Selling a commodity in the form of futures is permissible with certain
conditions that include:  
 i. there must be a proper description of the commodity;

ii. the payment of the price must be done on spot ;

iii. the amount of the commodity must be clearly specified;

iv. and the time and place of delivery must also be fixed.

This kind of transaction is known as "*as-salaf*" or "*al­ salam*".

2. Is the buyer of futures allowed to sell the commodity to a third
party before actually receiving the commodity?

There are four possibilities:  
 i. If the commodity is not sold by weight, then it is permissible.

ii. If the commodity is sold by weight and the first buyer wants to sell
it at the same price or less than what he paid, then it is permissible.

iii. If the commodity is sold by weight and it is from the category of
fruits, and the first buyer wants to sell it with profit, then it is
permissible.

iv. If the commodity is sold by weight and it is not from the category
of fruits, and the first buyer wants to sell it with profit, then it is
not permissible.

In cases where such a transaction is permissible, the merchandise and
the price cannot be of the same commodity otherwise it is considered
riba and it is haram.

7. Other Professions
--------------------

### Joining the police or armed forces

Can a Muslim join the police or armed force of a non­-Muslim government?

Any trade, business or profession that involves *i'anatu* *'z-*
*zalama*-helping the oppressors is forbidden and considered as one of
the major sins in Islam. The Qur'an says,

***“Do not be inclined towards those who are unjust otherwise the Fire
will get you.”*** (11:13)

So selling any arms, ammunition or apparatus of oppression to an
oppressive (non-Muslim or Muslim) government is absolutely haram.
Similarly, working for an unjust and oppressive government in the
departments that are used to oppress the people is haram for the
followers of Ahlu '1-bayt.  
 Therefore, Muslims who would like to join the law­ enforcing agencies
should seriously study the system or the institution in their countries
before deciding to join. The question they should ask themselves is:
Will I become a tool of oppression of the unjust government, or will I
be a civil servant serving the people in the true sense? If the answer
to the first part of the question is "yes," then do not pursue that
career; if the answer to the second part of the question is "yes," then
you may accept it.

The same would be guide-line for those who would like to participate in
the political process of the western democracies. If they are confident
that they will serve the people, especially their brethren in faith,
then they can participate in the political process. But if they realize
that they will become a tool of oppression in an unjust government, then
have to steer away from that political process.

\*\*\*\*\*

The seriousness of this issue from the Shi''i perspective becomes clear
from the story of Safwan al-Jammal, a companion of the sixth and seventh
Shi''i Imams. Safwan owned a camel-rental business (similar to the car
rental business of our times), and hence his title "al-Jammal" from
*jamal*, camel. Once he rented his camels to Harun ar-Rashid, the
'Abbasid caliph, considered a tyrant ruler by the Sh'ias.

**Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s**): "O' Safwan, everything about you is good
except one."

**Safwan**: "May I be sacrificed for you! What is it?"

**The Imam**: ''The renting of your camels to this man [referring to
Harun)."

**Safwan**: "By God, I did not rent them out to him for arrogance or
adventure-seeking, neither for hunting nor for entertainment, rather I
rented to him for this path [to Mecca for pilgrimage]. Moreover, I am
not handling [the animals] by myself, rather I am sending my slaves with
him.''

**The Imam**: "Safwan, is your rent due on them (i.e., Harun and his
people)?"

**Safwan**: "Yes, may I be sacrificed for you."

**The lmam**: "Do you wish that they should live until you get your
rent?'

**Safwan**: "Yes."

**The lmam**: "Whoever wishes for them to live is one of them; and one
who is from them will enter the Fire."

Safwan al-Jammal went and sold his rental business to someone else.[^21]

\*\*\*\*\*

There are many examples of when the Shi'as had asked the Imams for
permission to work with the establishment of the 'Abbasid caliphs. In
most cases, they were refused permission by the Imams; and whenever they
were exceptionally allowed, the Imams put a condition -you will help
your brethren in faith.  
 A well-known hadith from Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) says, “The penance
for working for an [unjust] ruler is to fulfill the needs of the
brethren.”[^22]

In countries like Canada where multi-culturalism is promoted and where
the presence of minorities in law­ enforcing agencies would help in
preventing racism and discrimination, the Muslims can join in such
agencies provided they always remember the penance mentioned above.

### Sculpting and Painting and Drawing

It is forbidden to make a complete statue or sculpture of a living
being. However, there is no problem in buying or selling pictures of
such statues or sculptures, even though it is makruh.  
 Making a sculpture of a limb by itself is permissible.

Of course, drawing, painting or carving a living being is permissible.
Similarly, making statutes or sculptures of non­ living things like
flowers or trees is permissible.

Sculpting, painting or drawing of living or non-living things or symbols
that are used as objects of worship by other religions is not allowed.
So making, buying or selling idols or religious symbols such as a cross
would not be permissible.

### Astrology and Palmistry

It is haram to make horoscope and predict the future of people by
looking at the movement or alignment of stars. This is, obviously,
different from astronomy that is a proven science.  
 It is also haram to believe in astrology and palmistry. A Muslim should
trust in the intelligence that Allah has given to him or her, work hard,
and rely for success on Divine grace (*tawfiq*).

It is worth making a note on *istakhara* or *khira* (lit.seeking good)
which means seeking God's help in making a decision by praying to God
through the *tasbih* (prayer bead) or the Quran. Firstly, *istakhara* is
only relevant in issues which are religiously permissible where a person
has a choice to do or not to do. There can be no istakhara in issues
which are obligatory or forbidden.

Secondly, there is a famous saying that *'al-istashara qabla
al-istakhara* - seeking counsel comes before seeking *istakhara*' which
means that one should use his or her own intelligence and knowledge to
decide on the issue at hand: and if he or she does not know about that
issue, then he or she should consult and seek counsel from those who
have expertise in that field.

After all the consultations, if there is still doubt and confusion, then
one may do *istakhara*. Finally, even though *istakhara* is based on
religious sources, one should never become "istakhara dependent".

### Legal profession

Is a Muslim allowed to become, or work, as a lawyer? As long as Muslim
lawyers do not get involved in haram activities in pursing their
careers, then it is permissible for them to work as lawyers.

[^1]: S.Hussain Nasr, A Young Muslim’s Guide to Islam,p.58

[^2]: Bernard Lietaer is a Research Fellow at the Centre for Sustainable
Resources of the University of California at Berkeley and former head of
the Organization and Planning Department of the Belgium’s Central Bank.
The quotes are from his interview with Jurriaan Kamp, the editor of Ode
magazine, no.26 (September 2005). Professor Lietaer’s latest books are
the Mystery of Money and The Future of Money.

[^3]: As quoted by Sibylle Preuschat, “The Trouble with Interest,” Why
Magazine (Winter 1997/1998),p.35

[^4]: As-Sistani, Minhaj, vol.1,p.430, Nasir Makarim Shirazi, Tawdihu
‘l-Masa’il,p.337,486; Khamanai, Ajwibatu l’-Istifta’at, vol.2, p.553,847

[^5]: Mutahhari, Mas’ala-e Riba,p.160-162

[^6]: Man la Yahduruhu ‘l-Faqih, vol.3, p.182.

[^7]: Biharu ‘l-Anwar, vol.74, p.311; Kanzu ‘l-Ummal, hadith no. 15373.

[^8]: Al-Furu; vol.5, p.93

[^9]: Ibid.p.94

[^10]: The Charter of Rights, p.26-27

[^11]: Al-Khui, Minhaju ‘s-Salihiyn, vol.2, p. 376; as-Sistani, Minhaju
‘s-Salihiyn, vol.1, p.430

[^12]: As-Sistani,Minhaj,vol.1,p.430, Nasir Makarim Shirazi, Tawdihu
l’-Masail,p.337,486; Khamanai, Ajwibatu ‘l-Istifa’at, vol.2, p.553,847.

[^13]: Khamanai, Duraru ‘l-Fawa’id fi Ajwibatu ‘l-Qaid (Tehran, 1414
AH). P.86

[^14]: Makarim Shirazi, Tawdih,p.485

[^15]: As-Sistani,Minhaj,vol.1,p.430; al-Khui, Minhaj,vol.2, p.167,376;
Ayatullah Khamanai says that such a loan will only be permissible if one
does not have the intention of paying the interest. See Ajwibatu
‘l-Istifta’at,vol.2, p.841

[^16]: Statement of Jordon Goodman, spokesman for Cambridge Consumer
Credit Counselling, in Martin Wolk, “The Pitfalls of Plastic,” (MSNBC)
January 18,2004.

[^17]: Ibid.

[^18]: As-Sistani,Minhaj,vol,1,p.448

[^19]: The concept of “socially responsible investment” or SRI emerged
in mid-eighties. Financial institutions in the West are becoming aware
of their Muslim client’s religious obligations and are offering funds
that reflect the Islamic requirements. For example, Nova Bancorp Group
created a new fund from Navigator, called the Socially Acceptable Market
Investment fund or SAMI, that takes the theme of socially responsible
investing one step further by applying Muslim religious principles.
Aside from excluding companies that make tobacco, booze and weapons,
there are no shares in companies that sell or process pork or the
entertainment companies involved in casinos, cinemas, music and
pornography.

[^20]: The terms “story driven” (i.e., media driven) and “earnings
driven” are from a fund manager who wrote about “The Internet Stock” in
US News & World Report, June 7, 1999.

[^21]: At-Tusi, Ikhtiyar Ma’rifati ‘r-Rijal, vol.2 (Qum: Al al-Bayt,
1404 AH),p.740

[^22]: Man la Yahduruhu ‘l-Faqih, vol.3, p.176


