8. The Non-Muslim Work Environment
==================================

**The Non-Muslim Work Environment**[^1]

Introduction
------------

According to the 2001 census of Canada, the number of Muslim s has
increased considerably, especially in cosmopolitan cities like Toronto,
Montreal, and Ottawa. The census shows that Muslims are the fourth
largest religious group in the country, after Catholics, Protestants and
those who have just identified themselves as 'Christians'.

An important factor in this immigration trend is Canada's fame as a just
society when it comes to dealing with the minorities. How should the
Muslims live as a minority in the West in general and in Canada in
particular? There are two important principles that should guide the
conduct of Muslims as a minority.

### First Principle of Conduct as a Minority

It is the duty of the minority to respect the host society and to treat
it with justice and fairness just as we would expect the host society to
be just and fair to the minorities.

The first migration in the history of Islam took place when Muslims
found themselves being persecuted by the Meccan majority. The Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w) advised the Muslims to migrate to Abyssinia and the
reason why he chose that country was, in his own words, because "it is
ruled by a king under whom no one is dealt with unjustly."

Therefore, justice should be the criterion for migrating to a country.
In addition, it is the duty of the Muslim minority to reciprocate by
dealing with the host society on the basis of justice and fairness,
rather to go even further, and imbibe the sense of concern and
well-being for the good of the society and the country.

### Second Principle of Conduct as a Minority

As a minority, it' is very easy for the next and then the third
generation’s to quickly melt into the host society and lose the
essential values of slam and their Muslim heritage.  
 Therefore, it is important to inculcate within ourselves and in our
next generation the importance of maintaining the essential values of
the Islamic faith and even the wise traditions of our cultures. After
all, Canadian society is a mosaic of multi-culturalism.

There are two aspects of preserving Islamic values and traditions: on
the personal level and on the social level.

(a) In personal and private matters, it is very easy to maintain and
preserve our values: Muslims can abide by their Islamic dress code,
their dietary rules, and their religious way of praying, etc. Nobody is
affected by that at all.

In a multi-cultural society like Canada where everyone is allowed to
dress according to his or her taste and choice, no one can object to
Muslims if they choose to dress in a way they like. Nor can a Muslim be
prevented from adhering to the Islamic dietary rules.

(b) However, it becomes more challenging to maintain and preserve the
Islamic values in the public arena where a Muslim has to interact with
non-Muslims at a formal or business level. Peer pressure has its own
impact and pulls one towards total assimilation. What a Muslim has to
aim for is not total assimilation but smart assimilation and that is in
essence the spirit of multi-culturalism.

In order to pave the way for the next generation so that they face less
of a challenge in living up to Islamic values, it is imperative for the
present Muslims to familiarize the host society -Canadian of other
faiths- with the essential values of Islam.

The legal system of Canada has the suitable environment to recognize and
accept the Muslim ways of doing things. It is not the duty of the host
society to go and find out what are the requirements or, the 'special
needs,' of the Muslims when they interact with non-Muslims at a formal
or business level. It is the duty of the Muslims themselves to let the
host society know about their special requirements.

Problems Faced by Muslim Minorities
-----------------------------------

Here, I would like to mention some of the difficulties that Muslims
generally face when they interact at the formal, business level with
their non-Muslim colleagues. Some Muslims are courageous enough to
explain their values to their co-workers and employers, but many arc not
that courageous and end up violating their own religious laws.

### 1. Beards for Men

According to the majority of Muslims -and I am referring here to the
schools of Shi'as, Hanafis, Malikis, and Hanbilis- it is forbidden for
men to shave their beards. (According to the Shafi’is, it is disliked,
but not forbidden, to shave the beard.) [^2] Of course, they are
allowed, rather, strongly advised, to trim the beard and keep it clean.

Therefore, when you see that a Muslim employee does not shave his beard,
this should not be taken as a sign of an unhygienic attitude; rather it
is part of his religious requirement.

Of course, if the nature of the work is such that having the beard is
going to endanger the life of that worker or others around him (e.g., if
that Muslim worker is required to wear a protective mask to prevent him
from inhaling dangerous gases, then the presence of facial hair will
make the mask useless), then there is room to reconsider that
prohibition. However, this is just an exception to the rule.

Many times, I have been asked: "Why do Muslim men keep beards?" My
response is that: this question is not valid. Growing a beard is very
natural and you do not need justification for doing natural things. The
question "why" is more appropriate and logical for things which arc
against nature. Therefore, my response is one that rephrases the
question: "Why do you shave your beard?" and not "Why do you keep a
beard?"

### 2. Hijab or Dress Code for Women

One of the challenges for a practicing Muslim woman who joins the
Canadian work force is abiding by her Islamic dress code. She is
required according to Islamic laws to dress modestly in such a way that
she covers her whole body except her face and hands. This also means
that she has to put on a scarf over her head.[^3]

It is encouraging to see that major corporations are accommodating this
requirement. I have seen Muslim bank tellers working with their scarves
as well as a crewmember of Air Canada with a green scarf (matching with
the airline's uniform) checking the boarding passes at the Pearson
International Airport of Toronto.

No employer has a right to reject the job application of a Muslim woman
or dismiss her from her work just because of her hijab or Islamic dress.
Based on the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the Federal Court
of Appeal in Calgary ruled in 1995 that a Sikh RCMP officer be allowed
to wear his turban on the job. Therefore, it is evident that the law is
in favor of those Muslims who would like to abide by their religious
requirements in the workplace.

### 3. Shaking Hands

A practicing Muslim man or woman would avoid or refuse to shake hands
with a person of the opposite sex who is not related to him or her by
blood or marriage.[^4] Instead of shaking hands, a practicing Muslim
will politely bow the head as a sign of respect while greeting others.

This is a long-standing Islamic tradition and is based on the rules of
decent interaction between the genders. For example, whenever the
Prophet asked the Muslims to pledge allegiance to him, the men would
shake his hand but the women were asked to pledge allegiance in a
different way: a bucket full of water would be brought, the Prophet
Mul1ammad would then dip his hand in, and then the women would dip their
hands in that bucket-and that would be considered their allegiance to
the Prophet.

Therefore, if you see a Muslim man or woman avoiding shaking your hand
or refusing to do so, please do not take that as a sign of disrespect or
insult; he or she is only following the Islamic law of not touching
anyone of the opposite sex except those who are related by blood or
marriage. This has nothing to do with the intention of anyone. No one
would question the intention of the Prophet or the women when he asked
them to pledge allegiance to him through the water bucket instead of
touching his hand directly.

This is probably the most difficult challenge that practicing Muslims
face in their interaction with non­ Muslims. Once the non-Muslim
colleagues are told about il, they do not feel offended. I know of young
Muslims who were born or raised in Canada and who do not shy away from
following this religious requirement and can easily communicate the same
to their non-Muslim colleagues. Many times the problem is not with the
non-Muslims, it is with the non-practicing Muslims who, by their
behavior, give a very conflicting message to the non-Muslims. [^5]

### 4. Religious Holidays

As a multi-cultural society, Canada has been gradually accommodating the
minorities even in matters of their religious holidays. Most school
boards in the Greater Toronto Area have a policy of not scheduling exams
during the holidays of a variety of religions, including lslam. Some
universities now allow students who must miss a test for religious
holidays to make it up at another date.

The work force in Canada has been somewhat slower in following the
educational institutions. There is recognition for the holidays of
Judeo-Christian faiths, but not for the ones of the Muslim faith. At the
least, Muslim employees should be given vacation with pay for the two
major *'idds* in the Islamic calendar. For other religious events of
importance, they may negotiate with their employer(s) to work on the
days when their co-workers are absent for their religious holidays.

### 5. Daily and Friday Prayers

As far as the daily prayers arc concerned, Muslim workers should be able
to find time to say their noon and after-noon prayers during lunch or
coffee breaks. If the lunch and coffee breaks arc very short, then they
should approach the employer(s) to get a longer break-time and commit to
make up the lost time by working a little longer at the end of the day
or at the end of the week.  
 Friday Prayer is also an issue for Muslim workers.

As part of their religious requirement, Muslims have to go to the
closest mosque or Islamic center for the special weekly prayer at
mid-day time on Fridays. I have been asked many times to write letters
to employers to certify that their employee's request for time off to go
for Friday prayer is a bona fide religious request. On this issue also,
I would advise the Muslims to negotiate with the employers and offer to
make up the lost time by working overtime on other days.

### 6. Participation in the Christmas Party

Giving best wishes for Christmas to Christians or giving cards and gifts
to them is not against our teachings even though we do not believe that
Jesus was born on the 25th of December. However, no employee can be
forced to participate in or even decorate for the Chritmas party,
especially if it involves drinking and dancing.

In year 2001, a Jehovah's Witness who worked at a pharmacy in B.C. was
asked to decorate the store for the Christmas selling season. He
refused. He was given an ultimatum: decorate or be fired. The B.C. Human
Rights Tribunal found that the employer knew that the employee's
religious beliefs prevented him from participating in any celebration of
Christmas, including decorating the store, and the store did not attempt
to accommodate those beliefs. The Tribunal ruled in the employee's favor
and awarded damages to him.

Conclusion
----------

The above are some of the challenges that Muslims face while interacting
with the non-Muslims at the work place, and how they deal with these
challenges depends on the Muslims themselves.

They have to educate the non-Muslim colleagues about their values and
their traditions, and, trusting on the accommodating nature of the
Canadian people and the legal safeguards to protect the rights of the
individuals and minorities, Muslims cannot complain that Canada does not
allow them to abide by their religious requirements.

May Almighty Allah give courage to the Muslim men and women who strive
to practice Islam in Canada, and grant wisdom to those who are not
practicing, and may He bless the Canadian people for their tolerance and
accommodating nature.

[^1]: This section is an extended version of a talk that I gave on
'Islam On Focus' TV program on 5th July 2003.

[^2]: Abdu’r-Rahman al-Jazari,al-Fiqh ‘ala ‘l-Madhahibi ‘l-Arba
‘ah,vol.2 (Beirut:Dar ath-Thaqalayn, 1998)p.78-90. Among the Shi’a
jurists there are differences in defining the beard; for some, like the
late Sayyid al-Khu’i, the “French cut” (goatee) was sufficient but for
the majority, there has to be at least a continues line going from side
to side.

[^3]: For more details on this subject, you may refer to my Hijab: a
Muslim woman’s dress (2005) published by ISIJ of Toronto

[^4]: This is not only unique to Muslims. Even the Orthodox Jewish
communities avoid shaking hands with a member of the opposite sex and
this prohibition is known as shmirath negiah or shomer negiah.

[^5]: An interesting report from the U.S is worth narrating here: On
April 24, 2003, President Bush declared military victory in Iraq to a
large Iraqi audience in Dearborn (the famous ‘Arab town’ in the USA). He
finished his speech and turned around to shake the hands of the people.
He stuck his hand out to a woman with hijab but she did not shake it. He
tried the next head-covered woman and she reacted the same way as the
first one. Bush turned to the mayor and asked: “What’s wrong, why won’t
these women shake my hand?” The mayor answered, “They are believers.”
The President said, “I believe in God but I still shake people’s hands.”
Somebody should have explained to Bush that some Muslim women consider
it haram to shake a strange man’s hand, even if it were the hand of
Ceaser. ( Neal AbuNab, “Halal vs. Haram: Blessed vs. Sinful,” The Arab
American News (December 3-9, 2005) p.17


