Introduction
============

It is sometimes said that "business ethics" is an oxymoron. How can one
do business and still be an ethical person? Isn't business all about
self-interest, greed and making exuberant profits?

Yes, it is true that the physical, earthly dimension of a human is based
on two main characteristics: greed and anger. The former attracts
whatever it perceives to be beneficial and the latter repels whatever it
perceives to be harmful.

But the spiritual, heavenly dimension consists of mind and conscience
which have the potential of controlling the elements of greed and anger.
One whose spiritual powers control the physical powers is indeed an
ethical person; and one who lives life only by the elements of anger and
greed has not actualized the potential of soaring from the worldly level
to the heavenly level.

Adding the adjective "Islamic" to "business ethics" might surprise some.
But one has to realize that Islam is more than just a religion in the
spiritual sense of the word; it is a way of life. Even the secular
aspects of life are greatly influenced by spiritual values.

There is no difference between the sphere of worship and the sphere of
business; Islamic laws govern the family life of Muslims well as their
social conduct.

\*\*\*\*\*\*

The foundation of Islamic business ethics depends on delineating the
purpose of human life. When Adam and Eve as well as the Satan were sent
down to the earth, Almighty God declared:

***“All of you get down from the Garden to the earth, some of you being
the enemies of the others, and there is on the earth your abode and the
necessities of life for a fixed period of time.”*** (The Qur'an 2:36)

***“All of you get down from the Garden. Once you are on the earth, the
guidance will certainly come to you from Me, and then whoever follows My
guidance there will be no fear for them nor shall they grieve. But those
who do not follow My guidance, who disbelieve and reject Our revelation,
they are the inmates of the Fire, in it they shall abide”.*** (2:38-39)

The Quran further tells us that this earth and its surrounding
atmosphere have the resources for us to sustain our lives on it:

***“Allah is he who created the heavens and the earth, and send down the
water from the sky with which He brought forth fruits as sustenance for
you. He made the ships subservient to you so that they may flow in the
sea with His command. He (also) made the rivers subservient to you, and
He made the sun and the moon-which are persistent (upon their course) –
subservient to you, and He made the night and the day subservient to
you. (In short), He gave you all that you asked Him. If you count
Allah’s blessings, (they are so many that) you will never be able to
number them – (but still) the human is very unjust (and) very
ungrateful!”*** (14: 32-34)

These verses clearly state the followings:

• This earth is our abode.

• This earth and its surrounding atmosphere have the resources to
sustain our lives on it.

• Divine guidance will come to us and we are expected to follow it.

• Satan is our enemy and will try his best to misguide us.

• The life on this earth is for a fixed time only.

• The hereafter is the final destination. Whether the final destination
will be blissful or painful depends on whether or not we follow the
divine guidance.

So a human being is a creation of God, a citizen of this earth,
surviving by wisely using its natural resources alone or with the,
cooperation of fellow humans. Human interaction may be pictured as
following:

As a creation of God, a human being is expected to obey the Divine
commandments in relation to the self, to fellow humans, and also towards
the earth. We cannot forget the satanic temptations that overwhelm many
people.

This three way interaction defines the perimeter of Islamic ethics in
the business sphere. The guiding principles in these interactions are:

1. Obeying the Divine commandments. (2:38 above)

2. Dealing with others on the basis of justice and fairness. ***“O you
who believe! Be upright for the sake of Allah, in testifying for
fairness: and do not let the hatred of a people urge you to be unjust,
be just (since) that is closer to piety. Fear (from displeasing) Allah,
verily Allah*** ***is*** ***Aware of what you do.”*** (5:8)

3. Being moderate in one's personal life and in the use of natural
resources. ***“O*** ***you who believe! Neither forbid the (use of) good
(things) that Allah has allowed for you nor exceed the limits because
Allah does*** ***not*** ***love those who exceed the limits.”*** (5:87)


