1. This World and the Hereafter
===============================

A. The Relationship
-------------------

In the Islamic worldview, God has created human beings with a specific
purpose: to attain the highest level of perfection in order to have a
blissful life in the hereafter. The process of attaining perfection is
to be done in this world by willingly submitting ourselves to God.

The relationship between this world and human beings can be clearly and
simply put as the following:

• The world has been created for humans; it is only here that a person
can attain the levels of perfection.

• Humans have been created for God: it is here that they have to submit
by their own choice to the commandments of God.

In a *hadith qudsi,* God says: “I have created all things for you, but
you I have created for Myself.”[^1] In the Quran, God says:

***“And the earth- We have spread it forth and made in it firm mountains
and cause it to grow in it of every suitable thing. And We made in it
means of subsistence for you and persons for whom you are not the
sustainers.”*** (The Qur'an, 15:19-20)

Muslims have to maintain a balance between their outlook towards this
world and the hereafter. They cannot exclusively bind themselves to one
without the other; neither is the world to be forsaken for the hereafter
nor the hereafter for this world. A Muslim uses this world for the
hereafter; or, to put it in a stronger form, one cannot prepare for the
hereafter without this world.

\*\*\*\*\*

When Imam 'Ali deputed Muhammad bin Abi Bakr as the governor to Egypt.
He wrote the following document as an advice to him and the Egyptians:

"Know, O people, that the righteous ones have acquired [the joys of]
this transient world as well as the forth-coming hereafter. They shared
with the worldly people in their mundane matters while the worldly
people did not share with them in [the blessings of] their hereafter.

"They lived in this world in the best manner of living and ate the
choicest food and so they enjoyed herein all that the worldly people
enjoyed and achieved from it what the haughty and arrogant had achieved.

“Then they departed from it with the sufficient provision and profitable
bargain [for the hereafter]. Thus they tasted the pleasure of renouncing
the world in their world and were assured of being neighbors of Allah in
their hereafter where neither their prayer shall be rejected nor their
share of pleasure shall be diminished.”[^2]

\*\*\*\*\*

Upon hearing a man abusing the world, Imam Ali (a.s) said, “O you who
abuse the world, O you who have been deceived by its deceit and cheated
by its wrongs. Do you covet the world and then abuse it? Do you accuse
it or should it accuse you?

"Certainly, this world is a house of truth for him who appreciates it; a
place of safety for him who understands it: a house of riches for him
who collects provision from it (for the next world) ... [it is] the
market-place for those devoted to Allah. Herein they earned mercy and
therein they acquired Paradise by way of profit.

"Therefore, who can abuse it when it has announced its transitory nature
and called out that it would leave! lt has given news of its own
destruction and the death of its people. By its hardship, it set an
example of their hard ship. By its pleasures it created eagerness for
the pleasures (of the next world) ...The world recalled to them the next
life and they bore it in mind. It related to them (things of the next
lire) and they acknowledged them. lt preached to them and they took
lesson there from it."[^3]

B. The Attachment
-----------------

The wealth of this world is a blessing of God: and. therefore, Islam
does not condemn the world and its wealth. However, Islam has always
emphasized to its followers that the attachment of humans to this world
should be of a nature where you are in control of your life, and not the
slave of this world and its pleasures.

***“Say: If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your wives, your
clan, possessions that you have acquired, business that you fear may
slacken and dwellings which you love- if*** ***these are dearer to you
than Allah, His Messenger and to struggle in His way, then wait till
Allah brings about*** ***His*** ***decision”.*** (9:24)

The .key word in this verse is "dearer;" a person can love the family
and the worldly possessions but not more than the love that he or she
has for God and His Messenger.

The Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w) said, ''The best help in piety is being
free from need.''[^4] Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) said, "The best help
for the hereafter is this world."[^5] Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s) said,
"One who forsakes his world for his hereafter or his hereafter for his
world is not from us."[^6]

\*\*\*\*\*

Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s) has very elegantly described the relationship
of the believer to this world and the hereafter. He said,

**Work for your world as if you are to live forever and work for your
hereafter as if you are to die tomorrow.**[^7]

\*\*\*\*\*

### Wealth versus Poverty and Asceticism

However, a question comes to mind: Docs not Islam, like other religions,
prefer poverty to wealth and affluence? The reality is that Islam does
not consider poverty or affluence as the goal; the ultimate goal is to
submission to the will of God and whatever helps that submission is
preferred.

Therefore, Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) said, "Wealth which prevents you from
injustice is better than poverty which pushes you towards sin.''[^8]

So what does Islam say about asceticism (zuhd)?

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq explains the real meaning of asceticism as follows:
"Asceticism (zuhd) in this world is neither neglecting your wealth nor
making the permissible (halal things) into forbidden (haram); instead,
zuhd in this world means that your wealth should not be stronger to you
[in attachment] than what is with Allah." [^9]

### Affluence and Charity

Once people have amassed enough wealth to ensure a comfortable standard
of living for themselves and their dependents, then they must realize
that it is better to share the extra wealth with the less fortunate
members of the society.

They must engage in public service. After all, the affluent people are
to consider themselves as the trustees of God's wealth and the poor as
the dependents of God­ should not the trustees of God take care of His
dependents?

Referring to the lack of concern for the society's well­being by
corporate America in the nineties, Harvey Pitt, the chair of the
Securities and Exchange Commission said, "We are coming off a period of
enormous and probably excessive exuberance in the markets ...I don't
want to condemn corporate America. I do condemn the fact that in the
excesses of the 90s, the people really lost sight of fundamental
values.''[^10]

Even Alan Greenspan, the chairman of US Federal Reserve, talked about
the "infectious greed" that has gripped "much of our business
community.''

Sama'ah once asked Imam as -Sadiq (a.s) about a people who had excessive
wealth while their brethren in faith were in such dire need that even
the zakat was not sufficient for their needs: "Is it permissible for
them to eat their fill while their brethren are hungry, since they are
in financially depressing time?" The lmam replied,

"A Muslim is a brother of a Muslim, neither does he oppress him nor does
he abandon him or deprive him. It is a duty upon the Muslims to work
diligently on this matter, to connect and cooperate in it, to be
charitable towards the needy, to show sympathy as Allah has commanded
about them, and to be beneficent to one another."[^11]

\*\*\*\*\*

'Abdullah bin Abi Ya 'fur narrates that at a person came to Imam
as-Sadiq (a.s) and said, "By Allah, I like to seek the world (i.e.,
wealth) and love to be given of it."

Imam: "What would you like to do with it?"

The answer was "[I would like] to maintain myself and my family; to help
my relatives and to give in charity; to do hajj and 'umra."

Imam said, ''Then what you are doing is not seeking of the world;
instead, it is seeking the hereafter."[^12]

\*\*\*\*\*

Once al-'Ala ' bin Ziyad al-Harithi, a companion of Imam 'Ali (a.s)
became sick. The Imam went to visit him. After greeting him and
inquiring about his health, when the Imam noticed the vastness of
al-"Ala's house, he said:

"What will you do with this vast house in this world, while you need
this house more in the next world? Of course, if you want to take it to
the next world, then you should entertain guests in it, be charitable to
the relatives, and discharge through it the dues as they should be
discharged. In this way you will be able to take it to the next
world.”[^13]

\*\*\*\*\*

Let me conclude this section with an advice of a saint that I learnt
from my late father:

"Son, if you want to be a fly, be a fly which sits on sugar; but, for
God's sake, don't be a fly which sits on honey. Because a fly sitting on
sugar leaves it the moment it wants; but a fly which sits on honey
becomes imprisoned in it, unable to leave it and dies miserably."[^14]

C. Seeking Livelihood
---------------------

Islam is not an exclusively otherworldly religion. It strongly
emphasizes that you work hard to fulfill the needs of yourself, your
family, and to help others. A Muslim is expected to be financially
independent.

Working hard to earn your livelihood is not in any way reprehensible in
slam. The lives of our Prophet and the Imams of Ahlul Bayt clearly
encourage us to hard work for our financial independence.  
**Examples:**

The Prophet himself engaged in trade and business when he lived with his
uncle Abu Talib. He was in charge of the trade caravan of Lady Khadija
who later became his wife. lt is well known that Imam 'Ali emancipated a
thousand slaves from the earnings of the toil of his own hands.[^15]

'Ali bin Abu Hamzah saw lmam Abu’1 Hassan al-Kazim (a.s) working in his
farm while his feet had become dirty with mud. He went forward and said,

''My life be ransom for you! Where are your men?”

The Imam said. "O 'Ali, those who were superior to me and my father have
worked with their own hands in their farms."

'Ali asked, "Who can that be?"

The Imam said, "The Messenger of Allah. Amiru '1- mu'minin, and all my
forefathers; they have toiled with their hands and this is the tradition
of the prophets, the messengers, their successors and the good
people."[^16]

\*\*\*\*\*

Muhammad bin al-Munkadir used to think that Imam Zaynu '1-'Abidin (a.s.)
could not have left a successor as good as himself until he met Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s). While strolling once on a hot summer afternoon
outside Medina, al-Munkadir saw Imam al-Baqir soaked in sweat and tired
from working on his farm. Al-Munkadir said to himself, "Praise be to
Allah! An elder from the elders of Quraysh at this hour of the day in
this state of seeking livelihood for this world- I should surely
admonish him." He went to the lmam and after greeting him , said:

"May Allah reform you-an elder from the elders of Quraysh at this hour
of the day in this state of seeking worldly sustenance? What do you
think of yourself if death comes to you in this state?"

Imam al-Baqir said, 'If death comes to me in this state,then let it come
because I am in the state of obedience to the Almighty Allah by which I
intend to make myself and my family independent of you and the people. I
would indeed fear if death came to me while I was in the state of
committing a sin."

Al-Munkadir said, "You have spoken the truth; may Allah shower His mercy
on you! I intended to admonish you but am the one who stands to be
admonished." [^17]

\*\*\*\*\*

'Abdu '1-A'la once saw Imam Ja'far as -Sadiq (a.s) in Medina on a very
hot afternoon and said to him.  
 ''May I be your ransom! With your status in the eyes of Almighty Allah
and your relationship with the Messenger of Allah, you are exerting
yourself [for your worldly needs] on such a day?”

Imam said, "O 'Abdu 'l-A'la, I have come out seeking the sustenance so
that I may be independent from people like you."[^18]

### Sayings

Imam Ja·far as-Sadiq (a.s): "The person who works hard for his family is
like one who fights in the way of Allah.''[^19]

Imam ar-Rida (a.s): 'The person who seeks the blessings of Allah to
maintain his family has more rewards than one who fights in the way of
Allah."[^20]

Imam as-Sadiq: "Verily Allah, the exalted and high, dislikes long sleeps
and long idle times.”[^21]

Imam al-Baqir: "I strongly dislike the person who is lazy in his worldly
affairs because one who is lazy in the affairs of his world is lazier in
the affairs of his hereafter."[^22]

The Prophet: "Accursed is the person who puts his burden on the
people.”[^23]

When the verse  
***"And whoever fears Allah, He will find a way out [for him] and
provide for him from sources he never thought of,"***  
 Was revealed, some people went to their homes and got busy in worship
and said, "Allah will take care of us." When the Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w) came to know about it, he sent for them and said,  
 "What has caused you to behave in this manner?”  
 They said, "Allah [in the verse recently revealed to you] has
guaranteed our sustenance, therefore we have devoted ourselves to
worship."  
 The Prophet said, ''Whosoever does like this, his prayers will not be
answered. I urge you to go out and seek [your livelihood]...” [^24]

\*\*\*\*\*

"Learn three characteristics from the crow," said Imam as-Sadiq (a.s):  
 "1. It conceals its act of cohabitation;  
 "2. It rises early for seeking sustenance;  
 "3. It is [always] alert.''[^25]

[^1]: Hadi as-Sabzwari, Sharhu ‘l - Asmai ‘l-Husna, vol.1 (Qum:
Basirati, n.d.)p.139

[^2]: Sayyid Radi, Nahju’l-Balagha, instruction no.27

[^3]: Nahju ‘l-Balagha, saying 131

[^4]: Al Kulayni, al-Furu’mina’l-Kafi, vol.5, p,71; al-Hurr al-Amili,
Wasa’ilu sh-Shi’ah, vol.12, p. 16

[^5]: Al-Fu’ru, vol 5, p.72; Wasa’ilu sh-Shi’ah, vol.12, p.17

[^6]: As-Suduq, Man la Yahduruhu ‘l-Faqih, vol 3 ( Tehran: Daru ‘l-Kutub
al-Islamiyya, 1367 A.H) p.94

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: AI-Furu, vol. 5. p. 72

[^9]: Tahdhib, vol. 6. p. 327.

[^10]: In an interview in USA Today, 2 July 2002.

[^11]: Wasa’ilu’ sh- Shi'ah, vol. I I , p. 597.

[^12]: At-Tusi, Tahdhibu ‘l-Ahkam,vol.6 ( Tehran: Daru l’Kutub
al-Islamiyya, 1365 AH [solar]) p.327-8

[^13]: Nahju '1-Balagha. Sermon no. 209.

[^14]: S.S. Akhtar Rizvi, Inner Voice (Dar-es-salaam: BMM , 1989) p. 58

[^15]: This has also been narrated by Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s). See
Al -Furu ', vol. 5, p. 74.

[^16]: Man la Yahduruhu '1-Faqih. vol. 3, p. 162

[^17]: Al ·Furu ', vol. 5,p. 73.

[^18]: Ibid, vol. 5,p.74.

[^19]: Ibid, vol. 5,p. 88

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Ibid, vol. 5,p. 84.

[^22]: Ibid. vol. 5, p. 85.

[^23]: Ibid, vol 5, p.72; vol.4, p. 12.

[^24]: Ibid, vol.5.p. 84

[^25]: Man la Yahduruhu 'l-Faqih, vol. 1. p.482


