Introduction
============

Bismillah al-Rahmaan al-Raheem

Praise is to the Lord of the Worlds, and Blessings and Peace is upon
Muhammad and his pure and impeccable progeny, and curse is upon all of
their enemies.

This book is the translation of the work “Manaasik al-Hajj”, explaining
the various issues of Hajj together with its rulings and rites. Before
dealing with the rulings of Hajj it would be appropriate to present some
of the hadith narrated about the significance of Hajj.

Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih said, “The Hajj has Paradise as
its reward, and the Umrah is atonement for all sins”.1

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin alayhis-salaam said, “Perform Hajj and Umrah, for
your bodies will be healthy, your sustenance will be increased, and the
expenses of your families will be met.”2

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin alayhis-salaam also said, “The pilgrim is
forgiven, Paradise is [made] compulsory for him, the good deed is
continued for him, and his family and wealth are protected.”3

Imam Baqir alayhis-salaam said, “Islam has been built on five
[aspects]: on Salaat (the daily prayers), Zakat (the monetary
contributions), Hajj (pilgrimage), Sawm (fasting),

1 al-Kaafi, vol. 4, p 253
2 al-Kaafi, vol. 4, p 252
3 Wasaa’el al-Shi’a, vol. 11, p 9

and the Wilaayah (the authority and guardianship of the Ahl-ul-Bayt),
and nothing is as important as the Wilaayah.”4 Imam Sadiq alayhis-salaam
said, “The pilgrim continues to have the Light of Allah upon him so long
as he does not sin.”5

Imam Sadiq alayhis-salaam also said, “If you spend one Dirham for the
Hajj is better than spending twenty thousand Dirham in a good cause.”6
Imam Sadiq alayhis-salaam also said, “If one dies and has not performed
Hajjat-al-Islam, while a need, sickness, or a Ruler does not prevent
him, let him die as a Jew or a Christian.”7

This is in addition to the fact that Hajj is one of the fundamental
principles of Islam, and its obligation, while meeting the prescribed
criteria, is amongst the necessities of religion, and abandoning it is a
great sin.

4 al-Kaafi, vol. 2, p 18
5 Wasaa’el al-Shi’a, vol. 11, p 98
6 al-Kaafi, vol. 4, p 255
7 Man La Yadheroho al-Faqih, vol. 2, p 447


**PART 1 – The Categories of Hajj**

1. The Hajj is either obligatory or mostahab (desirable, optional), and
the obligatory Hajj is classified in three categories:

I. Hajjat-al-Islam, which is obligatory upon the individual when s/he
meets all the prescribed criteria, which shall be mentioned shortly
InSha’Allah. According to the fundamentals of Islam, the Hajj is not
obligatory except once.

II. The Hajj that becomes obligatory through nadhr (vow), promise, and
oath.

III. The Hajj that becomes obligatory by proxy, thorough the hiring of
agents.

As for the mostahab Hajj, it is any Hajj other than the above.

**The Conditions of Obligation of Hajjat-al-Islam**

2. The conditions that if met make Hajjat-al-Islam obligatory are
five:

a. Adolescence,
b. Sanity of the mind,
c. Freedom,
d. Ability – to be able to afford going to the Hajj and come back, as
well as leaving behind enough for his family to live on,

“Returning to Sufficient” means of living. e. Absence of hindrance on
the way [to the Hajj].

3. The obligation of the Hajj is immediate when its requirements are
all met. That is, if the individual meets all the preconditions and
prerequisites of the Hajj – thus considered “able” and “eligible”, or in
technical terms mostatee’ 8 – it becomes compulsory upon him [to go to
Hajj] in the same year of eligibility, and it is not permissible for him
to 8 This meeting of the all preconditions and prerequisites is referred
to as mostatee’ literally meaning “able”.

delay [going to Hajj]. Delaying the Hajj without having a valid
[Islamically] legal reason constitutes a sin, and [from then onwards]
the Hajj remains “established” as his responsibility [regardless of his
ability or the lack of it]. It is mandatory for him to perform the Hajj
in the following year [and if not] as soon as possible.

4. It is obligatory upon the mostatee’ to prepare all the necessary
means and requirements of the Hajj journey in the first year of his
ability/eligibility, even if they were many and lengthy.

5. It is obligatory upon the individual going to Hajj to learn the Hajj
rites and rulings.

6. If it is not possible for him to go to Hajj on his own, he may
choose a group that he trusts to go with, and if there are many groups
that he trusts, it would not be obligatory for him to go with the first
one. If he travelled with other than the first one, but, due to certain
circumstances, he did not manage to get to the Hajj;

if in the future, he were not to meet all the prerequisites of the
Hajj, he would not be regarded as having committed disobedience, nor the
Hajj remains “established” in his responsibility. 7. If he travelled
with a group that he is not sure of, and it happened that he did not get
to Hajj, he has sinned, and the Hajj remains “established” in his
responsibility. It is obligatory for him to perform the Hajj in the
following year, or as soon as possible.

**The Hajj of Underage Children**

8. It is desirable for the underage child, who distinguishes [the good
and the bad], to perform the Hajj, and the validity of the Hajj is
conditional upon the permission of his guardian such as his father. If
he met all the criteria for Hajj other than that of adolescence, his
Hajj is correct, but it would not qualify as Hajjat-al-Islam [and
therefore when s/he is at or over the adolescence age, s/he is obliged
to go to Hajj whenever becoming mostatee’].

9. If the under aged distinguishing child went on the Hajj [journey]
but reached adolescence before declaring and assuming ihraam, and if he
met all criteria to be considered as mostatee’, his Hajj is correct and
qualifies as Hajjat-al-Islam.

10. If one performed the Hajj with the mostahab intention, believing
that he is not adolescent, but then it became apparent that he is, his
Hajj is correct and qualifies as Hajjat-al-Islam,

unless that his Hajj has been considered with the specific intention of
mostahab such that if the Hajj is considered to be obligatory for him he
would not perform it, which is an extremely rare supposition.

11. It is mostahab – desirable – for the guardian of the
non-distinguishing child – male or female – to wear him the two garments
of ihraam, after removing his normal clothing, and dictate to him the
talbiyah word by word. If it is not possible to dictate the wordings to
the child, the guardian should intend and say it on the child’s behalf,
and he should prevent the child from committing prohibited acts of the
ihraam. He should help the child perform any rite of the Hajj if he
could do so, or do it on his behalf if the child could not do so.

The father should take him to do the tawaaf around the House, the sa‘y,
observe the woquf in Arafaat and Mash‘ar al-Haraam, go to Mina, perform
the stoning, shaving or trimming, and all other rites of the Hajj such
as prayer of the tawaaf, etc.

12. The expenses of the child should come out of the child’s own
assets, unless that would leave him penniless, in which case it is the
guardian’s responsibility.

13. The cost of the Had’y should be from the assets of the child, and
if latter did not have any, should come out of his guardian’s, and he
should offer the Had’y by proxy on the child’s behalf.

14. The kaffaarah of hunting, if the child committed it, is from the
assets of the guardian if the guardian was the father, or from the
assets of the child if the guardian was not the father. However, the
kaffaarah [of committing prohibited acts] other than hunting is from the
wealth of the child regardless of the guardian being the father or
not.

15. If the kaffaarah were to be paid from the assets of the child, if
the guardian deducted them from the wealth of the child it is
sufficient, otherwise, it is obligatory upon the child to deduct them
from his assets after the age of adolescence.

**The Mind**

16. The insane, even if the insanity was periodical – i.e. insanity
appears on certain occasions – is not obliged to the Hajj, unless he was
mostatee’ and able to perform most of the rites of the Hajj – including
the fundamental rites of the Hajj – in his state of sanity. In that case
he is obliged to perform the Hajj. The same ruling applies to an
individual who is in a state of unconsciousness.

**Freedom**

17. The slave – male or female – is not obliged to the Hajj even if
s/he was mostatee’ and had the permission of the master. If with the
permission of the master, his mostahab Hajj is correct, but this would
not qualify as Hajjat-al-Islam. If they were freed and were mostatee’
they would then be obliged to the Hajjat-al-Islam.

**Freedom of passage**

18. One of the conditions of the obligation of the Hajj is the freedom
of the passage, and absence of hindrance en route to the Hajj. If there
were a danger threatening the life of the individual, his family or his
assets and possessions, he would not be obliged to the Hajj. Similarly
if there was a religious prohibition, such as if [the performance of]
the Hajj would result in abandoning a more important obligation such as
a mandatory jihad [which the individual is liable to], or committing a
disobedience the repercussion of which is greater than the outcome of
the Hajj, then the Hajj is not obligatory upon him.

19. One of the conditions of the obligation of the Hajj is the
availability of enough time to perform the rites of the Hajj. If one met
all the criteria for the Hajj at a time when he would not be able to get
there in time, or he would manage to get there but with great difficulty
that is normally unbearable, then the Hajj is not obligatory upon him.

**Physical ability**

20. Physical ability is one of the criteria of the obligation of the
Hajj. Thus if one was ill, or had lost a limb, or too old such that he
would not be able to perform the Hajj himself, it is obligatory for him
to perform the Hajj by proxy, i.e. to appoint someone else to perform
the Hajj on his behalf, if he has met other criteria required for the
obligation of the Hajj.

21. The individual who was financially able, if he was also physically
able, it would be obligatory for him to perform the Hajj himself, and it
would not be sufficient if someone else performs the Hajj on his behalf,
whether voluntarily or by hire. In the case of a mostahab Hajj, however,
if someone performs the Hajj on his behalf, it would be correct.

**The expenses cover**

22. One of the conditions of the obligation of the Hajj, is the
availability of the expenses to cover for the journey [to the Hajj], and
back – both for the trip and living expenses – according to his social
status, even by the minimum amount. If he does not have both, the Hajj
is not obligatory upon him.

23. The criteria for the amount of the expenses are that he should have
available to him from the place where he wants to depart from. For
example if one went on business trip to Medina or Jeddah and it
coincided with the Hajj season, and he was able to provide for the
expenses from there, the Hajj would be obligatory for him, even if he
would not be able to cover the expenses if it were from his hometown.

24. If providing the expenses means selling something he owns at a
lessthan- normal price, and selling it would not put him in difficulty,
it would be obligatory for him to sell and perform the Hajj with the
proceed. However, if selling the item(s) would put him in difficulty,
the Hajj would not be obligatory upon him.

25. If the costs of the Hajj expenses temporarily increased in one of
the years, such that they would go back to normal afterwards, if paying
the extra cost does not put him in difficulty, it is not permitted for
him to delay the Hajj, and the Hajj becomes obligatory upon him in the
same year.

26. The ability to provide for the expenses is conditional on covering
the cost of the trip there and back, and during his stay in Makkah, but
if he wanted to reside in Makkah permanently, providing the cost of the
journey back is not conditional for him.

**Return to Sufficiency**

27. Return to Sufficiency is another prerequisite in the obligation of
the Hajj, which means that when he returns back home from Hajj he should
have [or be in] a position to manage himself and his family, actually
and potentially. Thus if he does not have [a surplus sum] other than the
capital with which he runs his and his family’s affairs, such that if he
spends that capital for the Hajj, he would come back with no sufficient
[funds to manage his family], the Hajj would not be obligatory for
him.

28. It is not obligatory to sell the basic essentials of life, such as
the house, furniture or clothing that fit his status, even books in the
case of students, to use the proceeds to go to Hajj. However, if he had
things superfluous to his need, such as having two houses, for one of
which he has no need, it is obligatory for him to sell the [second]
house in order to go to Hajj. The same is applicable to other
superfluous stuff.

29. If something is no longer considered as essential, such as
jewellery for a woman who either no longer wears them and it is not
befitting for her status to keep them, or if she has grown old and it is
not customary for her to wear them, if the proceeds of the sale would be
sufficient for the Hajj, it would be obligatory for her to sell them and
go to Hajj.

30. If he owned a house, and also had a house under his control such
that he would be able to live in the latter house with his family
without any difficulty or finding himself morally obliged to the owner
of the house, it is not obligatory for him to sell the house he owns to
go to Hajj.

However, if he and his family were living in the house under his
control, such that normally he is not considered to need the house he
owns, it would be obligatory for him to sell his house to go to Hajj.
The same ruling apply to other things too if the sale proceeds cover the
Hajj expenses.

31. If he had sufficient funds for the Hajj expenses, but he was not
married yet, or he did not have a house to live in, or does not have the
furniture for the house, the obligation of the Hajj has a higher
priority. Unless his remaining unmarried, or without a house to live in,
or without furniture constitutes such difficulty that he would not
normally bear, in which case the Hajj is not obligatory for him.

**Borrowing**

32. If one does not have the fund [to go to the Hajj], but can borrow
[the amount], it is mostahab for him to perform the Hajj through
borrowing. [although this would not qualify for Hajjat-al-Islam.]

33. If one was [potentially] able to borrow sufficient money to go to
Hajj, it is not obligatory for him to borrow. Furthermore, if one
borrowed the money, the Hajj would not be obligatory for him, even if he
would be able to pay the money back afterwards.

34. If one does not have sufficient fund available to him for the Hajj
expenses, but someone owes him some money that would be sufficient for
the purpose, and the time for the payment is due, it is obligatory for
him to ask him [the debtor] for the money, and use it for the purpose of
the Hajj.

Furthermore, if the payment time is not due, but if the debtor were to
realise that the individual need the money for the Hajj and he would
give him the money, it is also obligatory for him to ask the debtor for
the money to use it for the Hajj. If the debtor would not deal with the
matter amicably, and the creditor could use the offices or mediation of
a third party to get the money for him, it is obligatory for him to do
so and use the money for the purpose of the Hajj.

35. If the debtor denied the debt, it would be obligatory upon the
creditor to take his case to the court of law – even if non-Islamic – to
prove his right and recover the debt, in order to use it for the purpose
of the Hajj.

If the debtor could not pay him back, or if the debtor denied the debt
and the creditor could not force him to pay him back, or forcing debtor
would be difficult for creditor, or if the debt payment is not due yet
and the debtor would not pay him if he asked him, the Hajj would not be
obligatory for him.

36. If one had in his possession enough fund for the purpose of the
Hajj, but at the same time he also owed [others] money, such that if he
went to Hajj he would not be able to pay back his debt, the Hajj would
not be obligatory for him, regardless of whether his debt is due now or
in the future, and whether the debt was prior to obtaining that money or
following it. However, if he would be able to repay the debt when it is
due, the Hajj would be obligatory for him.

37. If he had enough money for the purpose of Hajj, but he was in debt
in terms of the Religious taxes, such as Khums, Zakat, kaffaaraat such
that if he paid those dues he would not be able to go to Hajj, it is
obligatory for him to pay his dues, rather than going to Hajj.

38. If anyone of certain skill or expertise, who lives off his skill or
expertise, inherits a sum that is sufficient for the Hajj purpose, as
well as for his family while he is on the Hajj trip, he would be obliged
to the Hajj.

39. If one, because of his poverty, receives payments from the
Religious taxes such as the Khums and Zakat, inherits a sufficient sum,
it is obligatory for him to refrain from accepting those payments, and
it is not obligatory for him to go to Hajj with the amount he had
inherited. Unless the amount he inherited is such that it would prevent
him from accepting payments as well as enabling him to go to the Hajj,
in which case the Hajj would be obligatory for him.

40. The Hajj is not obligatory for an individual that, if he wanted to
go to the Hajj, he would have to spend everything that he owns to the
extent that he would be destitute, even though it would then be possible
for him to survive by accepting donation collected for the poor, for
example.


