Part 2 – the Types of Hajj
==========================

114. There are three categories of Hajj:

1. The Tamattu‘ Hajj,
2. The Qiraan Hajj,
3. The Ifraad Hajj.

115. The Tamattu‘ Hajj is obligatory upon any able – mostatee’ – adult
whose hometown is at a distance of 16 Farsakh (88 km) or more from the
Holy City of Makkah, from any direction. (Each Farsakh is about 5.5
km.)

116. The Qiraan and Ifraad Hajj are obligatory upon any able adult who
lives at less than that distance (i.e. 88 km) from the Holy City of
Makkah.

117. If one has not discharged his/her obligatory duty of the Tamattu‘
Hajj – also known as Hajjat-al-Islam, i.e. the first obligatory Hajj for
those who live outside that distance, it is not sufficient for them to
perform the Qiraan or the Ifraad Hajj.

118. An adult individual has the choice of performing any of these
three types of Hajj, if the Hajj is a mostahab one, or if it is
performed as a nadhr or vow without the type being specified, or if he
has been entrusted to perform it, without specification as to which type
to perform. However, the preferred choice in these cases is the Tamattu‘
Hajj.

119. If the adult individual was considered to have two hometowns,
[i.e. permanently lived in two hometowns], one being outside the limit
[of 88 km] and the other inside, he is obliged to perform [the Hajj]
according to [where s/he spends] more time. So if he spent most of his
time outside the limit, then he is obliged to perform the Tamattu‘ Hajj,
otherwise the Qiraan or the Ifraad Hajj. In the case of him spending
equal time between the two locations, he has the choice [of which Hajj
to perform] even if he was mostatee’ to perform one rather than the
other, and the preferred choice is to perform the Tamattu‘ Hajj.


**A brief outline of the Tamattu‘ Hajj**

120. The Tamattu‘ Hajj consists of Umrah and Hajj, and a brief outline
of various stage of the Hajj is as follows:

Umrah

• The individual declares and assumes the state of ihraam from the
miqaat to start the Umrah of the Hajj.

• He travels to the holy city of Makkah, and on arrival he goes to the
Grand Mosque to perform the tawaaf around the Ka‘bah.

The tawaaf consists of going round the Ka‘bah seven times.

• He then should perform the tawaaf prayers – of two rak‘ah – by Maqaam
Ibrahim, or behind it.

• He should then go to perform the sa‘y – which is to go from the mount
of Safa to the mount of Marwah, and back. The sa‘y is completed when all
together seven laps have been covered between the mounts.

• At this stage one does not need to perform the Tawaaf an-Nisa.

• He then performs taqseer, which is the trimming of the hair or
fingernails.

• After taqseer, the state of ihraam is lifted, and so too all
restrictions and prohibitions imposed on the muhrim as a result of
[being in] the state of ihraam.

Having performed and completed the Umrah, one must perform the Hajj:

Hajj

• The individual must declare and assume the state of ihraam in Makkah.
It is preferable, or even recommended as a precaution, that this
declaration is made on the day of Tarwiyah, the 8th day of Dhil-Hejjah,
although it is permissible to delay this until later, such that he could
ensure that he would be in [the location of] Arafaat in time for midday
or noon time on the 9th day of Dhil- Hejjah.

• He should ensure that he is in Arafaat in time for midday, and that
he must remain in Arafaat – woquf – from noontime to sunset.

• After [sunset], he should head for [the location of] Mash‘ar al-
Haraam. He must observe the woquf (remain) in Mash‘ar al- Haraam between
the times of Fajr and Sunrise.

• After sunrise he must head for [the location of] Mina in order to
perform its three rituals, which are Ram’y (stoning of the obelisks
representing Satan), Had’y (Sacrifice), and Halq (Shaving) the head (or
taqseer where applicable).

• When he performs these rituals, it is preferable that the adult
returns to Makkah on the same day, and if it was not possible, then he
could go there on the following day.

• In Makkah, he must perform the Tawaaf of the Hajj, prays the two
rak‘ah of the tawaaf by the Maqaam or behind it, perform the sa‘y as
mentioned before, then performs Tawaaf an-Nisa’ or the Women Tawaaf,
around the Ka‘bah seven times, and performs its two rak‘ah prayers.

• It is imperative that he goes back to Mina before sunset, or [if by
the time of sunset, he was still busy performing the rites of Makkah he
should go back to Mina] whenever he finishes his rites, even if one
third of the night has passed, in order to perform the rest of the
rituals there, which is mabeet, [or overnight stay], in Mina during the
nights of Tashreeq, and Ram’y [or stoning of the Jamaraat – the three
obelisks or monoliths representing the Satan], during the days of
Tashreeq11.

• Having completed all these, his Hajj is complete, and s/he has
discharged his duty in respect of Tamattu‘ Hajj. 11 These are the 10th,
11th, and 12th day of Dhil-Hejjah.

**Tamattu‘ Hajj requirements**

121. A number of conditions must be observed for the Tamattu‘ Hajj:

a) The niyyah or the intention when declaring and assuming ihraam at
the miqaat, when he should intend to perform the Hajj seeking nearness
to Allah Almighty.

b) To perform the Hajj and the Umrah in the months of the Hajj, which
are Shawwal, Dhil-Qa‘dah, and Dhil-Hejjah.

c) That the Hajj and the Umrah occur in the same year.

d) Declaring and assuming ihraam of the Hajj – not the Umrah – from the
holy city of Makkah, and it is preferable that this is made in the Grand
Mosque – Masgid al-Haraam. If, due to any peculiar circumstances, it was
not possible to do this from the holy city of Makkah, then he should do
it from wherever is possible between Makkah and Arafaat. If, due to an
oversight or not being conversant with the ruling, one declared the
ihraam from elsewhere,

and realised this oversight afterwards, it would be imperative for him
to go back to Makkah and renew the ihraam from there. If it was not
possible to do so, he must declare ihraam from where he is. However, if
one deliberately declares and assumes ihraam from other than Makkah, his
ihraam would be void, and it would be imperative for him to go back to
Makkah and renew his ihraam from there, for otherwise his Hajj would be
null and void.

e) The Umrah and Hajj12 must be performed as “one-by-one”, i.e. one may
not hire two people to perform the Umrah and Hajj by proxy, in that one
of them performs the Umrah and the other performs the Hajj. Likewise it
is not permissible for one individual to volunteer to perform by proxy,
the Umrah on behalf of a person, and the Hajj on behalf of another.

12 The Umrah and Hajj are considered as one act, not two separate
ones.

**Ifraad Hajj Procedure**

122. The second type of Hajj is the Ifraad Hajj, and the procedure for
it is as follows:

• An adult declares and assumes ihraam from a miqaat, or from his house
if it was closer to Makkah than the miqaat. • He should then go to
Arafaat directly and observe the woquf from the midday of the 9th day of
Dhil-Hejjah until sunset.

• After sunset he should head towards Mash‘ar al-Haraam and observe
woquf during the period between Fajr and sunrise.

• After sunrise of the 10th day – the day of Eid – he should go to Mina
to perform its rituals; which are Ram’y, the stoning, of the Jamaraat
(the obelisks) and then Halq or taqseer – i.e. Shaving or trimming. No
sacrifice is required.

• He should then go to Makkah on that day, or later, to perform the
Hajj Tawaaf around the Ka‘bah seven times, then perform the two-rak‘ah
prayers of the tawaaf by the Maqaam or behind it.

• He should then proceed to perform the sa‘y between Safa and Marwah
seven times, • Followed by Tawaaf an-Nisa and its prayers.

• He should then perform the remaining rituals of Mina, the mabeet and
Ram’y, which complete the Hajj.

• After this, he would also have to perform the Mufradah Umrah, where
he should declare and assume ihraam from “adnal-hill”.13 He may perform
this Umrah throughout the year, although as a precaution, he should do
so as soon as possible.

123. If the Ifraad Hajj was a mostahab one, or was due to a vow to
perform an Ifraad Hajj only without an Umrah, it is sufficient for him
to perform the Hajj only, and he is not required to Mufradah Umrah. 124.
The conditions for the validity of the Ifraad Hajj are three: 13 which
literally means the nearest point where one can be without ihraam, in
other words, the nearest point where the ihraam can be declared outside
the Haram. For more details see case \# 143.

a) the declaration of the niyyah or intention at the time of the
ihraam,

b) that it is performed during the months of Hajj,

c) to declare and assume the ihraam from the miqaat or from his
house.

125. If one declares and assumes the ihraam with the intention of
performing a mostahab Ifraad Hajj, it would not be valid for him to
change his intention to perform the Mufradah Umrah in order to perform
the Tamattu‘ Hajj on behalf of someone else.

**Qiraan Hajj Procedure**

The third category of Hajj is the Qiraan Hajj, and the procedure for it
is as follows:

The procedure for the Qiraan Hajj is exactly the same as that for
Ifraad, with the exception that in this case the person performing this
Hajj must have the sacrificial animal accompany him at the time of
ihraam, [and it should accompany him until the time of slaughter]
whereas in the case of Ifraad he does not need to offer a sacrifice.

The person who performs this Hajj has the option of uttering the
talbiyah, or marking the animal with a sign or a collar.

**Tamattu‘ Hajj Details**

127. The Tamattu‘ Hajj consists of two acts of worship:

1. The Tamattu‘ Umrah
2. The Tamattu‘ Hajj
The Rites of the Tamattu‘ Umrah

128. The Umrah of Tamattu‘ consists of five rites: 1. Ihraam.
2. Tawaaf around the Holy Ka‘bah seven cycles.
3. Salaat al-Tawaaf or the tawaaf prayer of two rak‘ah by Maqaam
Ibrahim or behind it.

4. Sa‘y between the Safa and Marwah seven times.

5. Taqseer or trimming of some of one’s hair or fingernails.

129. In the Umrah of Tamattu‘ the declaration of the niyyah or
intention is obligatory, and so too is to perform the Umrah and Hajj
together during the months of Hajj, which are Shawwaal, Dhil-Qa‘dah, and
Dhil-Hejjah in the same year, as mentioned previously.

130. The niyyah in the Umrah of Tamattu‘ – or in any other act of
worship – is the mental intention, and the person intends in his heart
that, “I perform the Hajj of Tamattu‘, beginning with the Umrah of
Tamattu‘, whilst seeking nearness to Allah Almighty”. It is recommended
to verbally utter the intention in all rites of Hajj and Umrah.

1. IHRAAM

131. The first of the rites of Umrah of Tamattu‘ is ihraam, and it is
obligatory for the ihraam to take place in one of the designated
locations known as the miqaat.

**The various Miqaat’s**

132. It is obligatory to declare and assume the ihraam at one of the
designated miqaat’s. The locations of the various miqaat’s have been
specified by Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih for the people
(coming from the) various countries, directions and horizons. It is not
permitted for the Haajj – the person performing the Hajj – to cross the
limits, the miqaat, unless one has declared and assumed ihraam from one
of the miqaat’s or from their proximity. The various miqaat locations
are as follows:

1. Masgid al-Shajarah
2. Waadi al-Aqiq
3. al-Juhfah
4. Qern al-Manaazel
5. Yalamlam
6. adnal-hill
7. The house of the pilgrim if it was closest to Makkah than any of the
other miqaat locations.

[See case \# 145 for the special case of using Jeddah airport as a
“miqaat” location.]

133. The miqaat of Masgid al-Shajarah (The Tree Mosque) is also known
as Dhul-Hulayfah, and it is the miqaat for the people of the holy city
of Medina or those from other countries who pass from the city.

134. Masgid al-Shajarah is the furthest miqaat from the holy city of
Makkah, and it is about seven km outside the holy city of Medina. Thus
it is not permissible for one to cross Masgid al-Shajarah without
ihraam. Also it is not permissible to postpone the ihraam until
al-Juhfah, unless it is for exceptional circumstances such as illness or
weakness, etc.

However, if one chooses an alternative route that does not pass through
the location of the Masgid al-Shajarah, or even through the proximity of
it at any stage, then it is permissible for him to postpone the ihraam
until the al-Juhfah miqaat, or any other miqaat. But if one were at the
proximity of Masgid al-Shajarah, then he is not allowed to leave
location of the proximity (of the miqaat) except by declaring and
assuming ihraam.

135. The legal definition of proximity here is that if one stands
facing the [direction] of the sacred Ka‘bah, the miqaat would be on his
right or left, without being too far from him.

136. One who is in a state of Janaabah14 or (a woman) who is
experiencing haydh – the monthly menstruation period – may not enter the
Masgid al-Shajarah and declare and assume ihraam from it, unless they
are passing through it without stopping, such that they enter one door
and leave from another, when they can declare and assume the ihraam and
say the talbiyah en route as they pass through the mosque.

If it was not possible to pass through, it is obligatory for them to
declare and assume the ihraam from outside the mosque, but closely
adjacent to it, with the mosque being either on their left or right, as
a precaution. 137. Declaring and assuming ihraam under the ceiling of
the Masgid al- Shajarah is not considered sheltering. [Generally
sheltering is prohibited for a muhrim when on the move.]

138. It is permitted to declare and assume ihraam in the extension to
the Masgid al-Shajarah, as there is no difference between the old
building and the new. The same is applicable to other miqaat’s.

139. Wadi al-Aqiq, is the second of the miqaat’s, and is about 100 km
from the holy city of Makkah. This miqaat is for the people of Iraq and
Najd and those people coming through this route to Makkah. The beginning
location of this miqaat in the direction of Iraq is known as al-
Maslakh, and the mid location is known as Ghamrah, and the ending
location of this miqaat is known as Thaat-Erq.

14 A person is in the state of Janaabah whenever s/he engages in
penetrative sexual intercourse, or (in the case of men) whenever
ejaculation of semen occurs even without the any sexual intercourse.

140. al-Juhfah is the miqaat for the people of the Shaam and Egypt. It
is also the miqaat for those people coming from other countries through
their route, if they do not pass by another miqaat, or if they passed by
the other miqaat without declaring and assuming the ihraam, and it is
not possible for them to go back to declare the ihraam. In this case it
is incumbent on them to declare and assume ihraam from al-Juhfah.

141. Qern al-Manaazel is about 94 km from Makkah, and it is the miqaat
for the people of Ta’ef, and those coming from their direction. 142.
Yalamlam is a mountain from the mountain series of Tahamah, and is also
some 94 km from Makkah. It is the miqaat for the people of Yemen, and
those coming from their direction to Makkah.

143. adnal-hill,15 is the limit/border of the Haram. [The Haram
encompasses the holy city of Makkah from all sides, and it is an area of
about 500 square kilometres approximately.] This limit is the miqaat for
those who do not come to Makkah by crossing any of the above five
miqaat’s or their not too distant proximities, while not being able to
go to other miqaat’s.

144. He whose house is closer to Makkah than the miqaat’s, then his
house is his miqaat.

145. The Haajj (pilgrim) who arrives at Jeddah by airplane, and wishes
to go to Makkah [directly], may declare and assume ihraam from Jeddah by
making a [prior] nadhr (vow), by saying “I make it my duty to Allah to
declare and assume ihraam from Jeddah.” As for declaring and assuming
ihraam in the aircraft while it is flying in the proximity (of a
miqaat), it is not normally achievable.

146. If one failed to declare and assume the ihraam from one of the
designated miqaat’s, due to reasons of not knowing, or forgetting the
mandatory nature of ihraam from the miqaat, or if he did not know that
15 literally meaning “the nearest point one can be without ihraam”, in
other words, the nearest point ihraam can be declared outside the
Haram.

this was the actual place of the miqaat – provided he was not
moqassir16 in his forgetting or not knowing, as a precaution – or if he
did not intend to perform the rites nor entering Makkah, and therefore
passed through the miqaat with that purpose, and afterwards he decided
to enter Makkah or perform the rites, as a precaution,

it is mandatory for him to go back to the particular miqaat if it is
possible, even if there is another miqaat ahead of him. However if it is
not possible for him to go back to the first miqaat, it is incumbent on
him to declare and assume ihraam from the miqaat ahead of him.

If there is no miqaat ahead of him, he should then declare and assume
ihraam from where he is. However, if he had entered the Haram he must go
back to the borders of the Haram, and declare and assume the ihraam
outside the Haram if it was possible, and if it was not possible in
anyway to go back [to the borders of the Haram], he must declare and
assume the ihraam from where he is, and his Umrah is valid.

147. If one forgot to declare and assume the ihraam until he performed
all the obligatory (rites), his Umrah is valid. So too, if he did not
declare and assume ihraam because he did not know it was mandatory for
him to do so, or if he assumed ihraam from a place other than the
proximity of a miqaat thinking that it was [the proximity], and other
such reasons, in all such cases his Umrah is valid, provided, as a
precaution, this is due to him being a qaasir17 not moqassir [in his
failure to learn and understand the issues concerned].

16 Moqassir means one who does not know the ruling regarding certain
aspect (of a religious duty) and he is aware of this ignorance or
shortcoming and where to find the answer for, e.g. through certain
books, references, or individuals with the appropriate expertise, but
does not make the effort to seek the answer. In this way he has failed
to discharge his duty. For comparison also see qaasir.

17 Qaasir means one who does not know the ruling of a certain aspect of
a religious duty, but in fact he is not aware of this ignorance and
naturally does not seek the answer to the case concerned since he
believes that what he is doing is correct. Thus one should not assume
that what he is doing is always correct, and ensure to check with
reference books or expert individuals. As a matter of fact it is
imperative and obligatory for the individual to learn and know all
aspects that s/he may come across in the course of one’s life concerning
the relevant issues.

148. If one deliberately did not perform the ihraam, and then it became
impossible or impractical for him to go back to the particular miqaat to
perform the ihraam, in this case there are three scenarios to consider:
a) If he intended to enter Makkah only, without meaning to perform the
(Hajj) rites, in this case he has committed a sin by not performing the
ihraam, and by entering Makkah without it, and generally there is not
need for qadha’ – i.e. no need to perform the ihraam later on.

b) If he had decided to do the Mufradah Umrah, it is sufficient to
perform the ihraam from adnal-hill, even though he has committed a sin
by crossing the miqaat without an ihraam.

c) If he had decided to perform the Hajj, then he must perform the
ihraam in a similar way to the case of the one who had forgotten to do
it, as described previously. He must go back to the miqaat [that he came
from] if it were possible to do so, and perform the ihraam there, even
if there is another miqaat en route. If this was not possible, then he
should go to the miqaat en route, [i.e. the nearest miqaat], and his
Hajj is valid.

149. If one performs the ihraam before arriving at the miqaat, without
having made any legal vow, his case is the same as the one who has not
performed the ihraam, and therefore it is not allowed for him to enter
the Haram and perform the rites, until he performs the correct procedure
as mentioned earlier.

He must renew his ihraam from the miqaat by renewing his niyyah, and
the talbiyah, etc. as it is required at the declaration and assuming of
ihraam from a miqaat.

150. It is not allowed for an adult to enter the holy city of Makkah,
and not even to enter the Haram with intention of entering Makkah,
unless with a valid ihraam observing all the required conditions from
the (appropriate) miqaat. As for entering the Haram without the
intention of entering Makkah, [he does not have to assume ihraam,
although] it is preferable to observe precaution by performing it
[before entering the Haram, in which case he would have to go to Makkah
to do the Mufradah Umrah, and thus be released from the ihraam].

151. If the adult needed to enter and leave the holy city of Makkah
frequently because of his job, then such an individual may enter Makkah
without ihraam.

152. It is also permissible to enter Makkah without ihraam for one who
had originally entered it with a valid ihraam observing all the required
conditions, then left it, and then return to the city within the month
in which he had performed the ihraam. However, if one month after his
ihraam he wishes to enter Makkah, he must perform a new ihraam from the
miqaat.

153. It is important to note that the references made to the month in
this respect do not suggest lunar months, but the criterion is the
passage of thirty days.


