Some of the Issues Concerning Women
===================================

357. If the monthly menstruation bleeding starts before performing the
tawaaf prayer or during the tawaaf, if she had done completed four
rounds or more she should abort the tawaaf and /or prayer and leave the
Mosque immediately.

She could perform the rest of rites in terms of the sa‘y and taqseer if
[these rites] were for the Umrah. She should wait until she is taahir in
order to perform the rest of the tawaaf and prayer, starting with the
tawaaf first. It is not necessary for her to repeat the sa‘y.

358. If the bleeding started after completing the fourth round, but she
continued to perform the rites, if she is not taahir by the time of
woquf [in Arafaat] on the 9th day of Dhil-Hejjah, it is recommended that
she appoints someone to perform what she has missed in terms of the
remainder of the tawaaf and its prayer before she leaves [Makkah] for
woquf in Arafaat.

The woman concerned must perform the remainder of the tawaaf and its
prayer after she is taahir.

359. If the bleeding starts after completing the tawaaf and before
performing its prayer, she is liable to performing the prayer after she
is taahir, and as a precaution, she should appoint someone to perform
the prayer on her behalf.

360. If the bleeding starts before completing the fourth round, i.e.
during the first, second, third, or fourth round, she must abort her
tawaaf, and leave the House immediately. If she became taahir before the
woquf in Arafaat, she must perform the entire tawaaf and its prayer,
after being taahir. If she is not taahir by the time of the woquf, she
has the choice between:

1) Revert her Hajj to Ifraad as mentioned previously, and proceed to
Arafaat and [from there to] the Mash‘ar al-Haraam and perform all the
rites of Mina and the rest of the rites of Makkah.

When she completes all the rites of Hajj, she should perform the
Mufradah Umrah.

2) Alternatively it is also permissible for her to remain on the
Tamattu‘ [Umrah] and proceed to perform the sa‘y and taqseer to be
released from the state of ihraam, and then perform the tawaaf and its
prayer after becoming taahir.

361. In cases of Istihaadha – undue or lesser menses, if a woman acts
according to that that is obligatory for her to do for the obligatory
prayers, she would be considered taahir [for the rites of Hajj].

4. Sa‘y

362. The fourth rite of the Tamattu‘ Umrah is the sa‘y, which is to
walk seven laps between [the mounts of] Safa and Marwah, after
performing the tawaaf prayer, and it is considered a rukn or a principal
element, such that the Hajj would be void if deliberately abandoned.

363. It is permitted to delay the sa‘y to have some rest and cool off,
but it is not permitted to delay it to the next day, although it is
permitted to delay it until the evening.

364. There is no objection to separate between an obligatory tawaaf and
sa‘y with a mostahab tawaaf.

365. If one failed to perform the sa‘y by forgetting it or due
oversight, compulsion, or ignorance of the ruling, he must perform it
whenever he remembers. If he had left the city of Makkah, as a
precaution he should return to Makkah whenever he remembers the
oversight, and perform the sa‘y himself if possible. If this proved too
hard and difficult for him, he should appoint someone to perform the
sa‘y on his behalf. One would not be released from his ihraam – even if
it was breached – until it [the sa‘y] is completely performed by himself
or by his agent.

366. It is not conditional in the sa‘y to attain tahaarah, say from
janaabah or faeces/urine, nor from passing wind, and a woman who is
experiencing menses may perform the sa‘y.

367. It is permitted to perform the sa‘y while riding an animal or a
vehicle or on a wheelchair, or being carried by someone, although
walking is the best [option].

368. It is recommended that the vehicle is medium in speed, from Safa
to the first landmark27 – these days marked by green colour fluorescent
light – he should brisk walk from the first landmark to the second– also
marked by green colour fluorescent light. Brisk walking is not required
for women. If he was riding an animal he should make his animal to brisk
walk without annoying anyone, and then walk normally from the second
landmark to Marwah. He should do the same on return.


**The Obligations of Sa‘y**

369. The following are mandatory in sa‘y

1. niyyah
2. starting the sa‘y from Safa,
3. finishing the sa‘y at Marwah
4. the number of rounds
5. the normal accepted route
6. facing the destination during each lap
7. legality of the animal used
8. the order of the sa‘y

1. Niyyah

370. [To declare] the niyyah for sa‘y is mandatory, and it must be
[declared] at the start of the sa‘y with the intention of seeking
nearness to Allah Almighty. It is preferable to verbally utter the
niyyah as follows: “I 27 There are two landmarks en route between Safa
and Marwah, some 50 yards apart, they are closer to Marwah mount than
Safa.

perform the sa‘y between the Safa and the Marwah seven rounds for the
Tamattu‘ Umrah seeking nearness to Allah Almighty”.

2. Starting the sa‘y from the Safa

371. It is mandatory to start the sa‘y from the Safa, and for this it
is not mandatory to step on the rocks of the mount.

3. Finishing the sa‘y at the Marwah

372. It is mandatory to finish the sa‘y at Marwah, and for this it is
not mandatory to touch one’s toes to the rocks of the mount of Marwah.
373. If he contradicted this and began [the sa‘y] at Marwah, even by
oversight, his sa‘y is invalidated and as a precaution he should perform
a new sa‘y.

4. The number of rounds

374. It is obligatory to cover the distance between the mounts of Safa
and Marwah seven times with nothing more or less. Thus there will be
four journeys from Safa to Marwah and three journeys from Marwah to
Safa, all together seven rounds.

5. The normally accepted route

375. It is mandatory to go through the route that is normally accepted,
thus if he deviated from the route by entering the Mosque and leaving it
to re-enter the route of the sa‘y again, or if he left the route of the
sa‘y to go to the shops and come back to the route of the sa‘y again,
that [excursion] would not be accepted [as part of the sa‘y]. However,
it is permissible to drink water from the designated areas en route.

376. There is no objection to performing the sa‘y on the first floor or
the roof – the second floor – if one opted to do so.

6. Facing the destination

377. In the course of performing the sa‘y, it is mandatory to be facing
the destination, and therefore if he was heading for the mount of Marwah
he should be facing Marwah, and if he departed Marwah, heading for Safa,
he should be facing Safa. It is not permitted to walk backwards or
sideways. There is no objection, however, to turn the head to the left
or right, or even to the back, so long as the body is in the direction
of the journey of the sa‘y.

While standing, there is no objection to turning the whole body even if
that constitute turning one’s back to the destination direction,
similarly there is no objection if one deviated to the right when coming
down from the Safa.

7. Animals or other things used must be legal

378. It is not permitted to perform the sa‘y on an animal that is
usurped and such like. In fact this is applicable to clothing or
slippers [worn by the person]. Furthermore, as a precaution, it is also
not permitted to even carry anything that is usurped.

8. Order

379. The sa‘y must be performed after the tawaaf and its prayer. It is
not permitted to wilfully bring forward the sa‘y before the tawaaf,
neither in the Hajj nor in the Umrah. If one deliberately performed the
sa‘y before the tawaaf for no reason, he must repeat it. However, if
this was for a compelling concern, that should be sufficient.

This is also applicable if this was done due to an oversight, although
it is recommended to repeat it. The same applies to one who is not
conversant with ruling of the case. 380. Continuity is not a requirement
for the rounds of sa‘y, in fact it is permitted for him to engage in
prayers, or even eating and drinking for example, or stopping for a rest
on either mountain, or in between, and then resuming the sa‘y.

381. If one started his sa‘y, and during the sa‘y he realized that his
tawaaf was incomplete, if the incompleteness concerned the second half
of the tawaaf, he should abort the sa‘y and go back to complete the
tawaaf, and then return to complete the sa‘y from the point he stopped,
if he had finished four laps [of the sa‘y].

The same applies if he had not finished four rounds of the sa‘y,
although it is recommended to renew the sa‘y altogether. On the other
hand, if the incompleteness of his tawaaf was more than half, he should
also complete the tawaaf and then the sa‘y, even though it is
recommended,

as a mostahab precaution, to renew the tawaaf from the beginning and
then renew the sa‘y too. In the case of repeating the tawaaf and the
sa‘y without completing them, he may do so with the intention of
discharging his duty; whether by completing the remaining ones, or
repeating them altogether.

382. If after finishing the sa‘y he had a doubt about the number of
sa‘y laps [he had done] or its requirements, he should ignore his doubt.
383. If one doubted the number of laps he had done in the course of the
sa‘y, then if he was at Safa and was sure that he had done an even
number of rounds but not sure as to whether he had done say four or six
rounds,

or if he was at Marwah and was sure that he had done an odd number of
rounds but not sure as to whether he had done say three or five rounds,
he should assume the minimum [number of rounds], and [go on to] complete
his sa‘y, and it is valid.

384. If one doubted the number of rounds he had done in the course of
the sa‘y, but contrary to the case above, in that he was at Safa and was
sure that he had done an odd number of rounds, but not sure whether they
were three or five, or he was at Marwah and was sure he had done an even
number of rounds, but not sure whether they were four or six, his sa‘y
is invalid and he must renew his sa‘y.

385. If he had a doubt either in Safa or Marwah as to whether he had
done an odd or even number of rounds, or if in the middle of sa‘y route
could not tell which direction he should go to – like when stopped for a
rest for a while and he wanted to resume his sa‘y he forgot the
direction of his journey – his sa‘y is invalidated and he must restart
the sa‘y anew.

386. If after completing the sa‘y he was sure that he had missed one or
more laps, it is sufficient for him to perform the lacking ones, and if
he could not do so he should assign someone to do it for him by proxy.

5. Taqseer or Trimming

387. The fifth rite of the Tamattu‘ Umrah, which is its final
obligation, is the taqseer or Trimming. The Trimming must be performed
after completing the sa‘y, and by doing so one is released from the
state and therefore restrictions of the ihraam, [this release is known
in Arabic as Ihlaal].

388. The taqseer is accomplished by trimming some hair from the head or
the beard (if applicable), or some of the finger or toenails. This may
be performed anywhere and it is not necessary to be performed
immediately. [Until the Haajj performs this rite, he would not be
released from ihraam, and therefore the sooner he performs this rite the
better.] 389.

It is not permitted to shave the head in the Tamattu‘ Umrah, and if he
does he must give a kaffaarah of a sheep. This is applicable, as a
precaution, even if he did so due to an oversight or ignorance of the
ruling. If one shaved part of his head he is not liable to the
kaffaarah. 390. At the time of performing the taqseer one must state the
niyyah which is, “I perform the taqseer for ihlaal from the ihraam of
the Tamattu‘ Umrah seeking nearness to Allah Almighty”.

391. When one has performed the taqseer, everything that was prohibited
for him as a result of the ihraam becomes permissible, even sexual
intercourse with one’s spouse. It is not mandatory, nor is it a legal
requirement, to perform Tawaaf al-Nisa’ in the Tamattu‘ Umrah, and thus
[after taqseer] a wife becomes halaal for her husband and a husband
becomes halaal for his wife, without the need for Tawaaf al-Nisa’28.

392. One who fails to perform the taqseer until he declares and assumes
ihraam for the Hajj, and headed for Arafaat, if this [failure] was due
to an oversight or ignorance, his Tamattu‘ Umrah is correct, but he must
give a kaffaarah of a sheep, as a precaution.

If his failure was deliberate, his Tamattu‘ Umrah is invalidated and
his Hajj is reverted to Ifraad, he thus must perform the rest of the
rites in the order [required], and he should perform his Hajj in the
following year.

393. If one deliberately engages in sexual intercourse before
performing the taqseer, s/he is liable to kaffaarah.

394. If a pilgrim releases himself [from the ihraam] after performing
the tawaaf prayer of his Tamattu‘ Umrah and before performing the
taqseer, he is still not discharged from his ihraam, and his case is
that of a muhrim who has committed some of the prohibited acts while in
the state of ihraam.


**Miscellaneous issues**

395. After completing the rites of Tamattu‘ Umrah, the pilgrim must
wait until the time for declaring and assuming the ihraam for the Hajj.
It is recommended that he declares and assumes ihraam on the eighth day
of Dhil-Hejjah, otherwise it would be obligatory to do so on the ninth
in preparation for performing the rites of the Hajj.

396. It is permitted to leave the holy city of Makkah – after
completing the Tamattu‘ Umrah and before the Hajj – for a long or short
distance without ihraam, although it is makruh – discouraged – to do so.
However, it is permitted for one to leave [Makkah] for the suburbs of
Makkah and Mina, without it being makruh.

28 Tawaaf al-Nisa’ is only applicable for the Tamattu‘ Hajj, and
husband and wife only become halaal to each other after performing this
tawaaf and its prayer.


