The Rites of the Tamattu‘ Hajj
==============================

474. The obligations of the halq and taqseer are three:

I. to be in Mina
II. the niyyah
III. the order, as a precaution

1. Being in Mina

475. It is obligatory that the halq or taqseer is performed in Mina,
and it is not permissible elsewhere.

476. If one left Mina without performing the halq or taqseer, whether
deliberately, or due to an oversight or forgetting, it is mandatory for
him to return to Mina to perform the halq or taqseer, if this was
possible, otherwise he should do so where he is, and it is desirable to
send his hair or fingernails to Mina to be buried or dropped there.

2. The niyyah

477. It is obligatory to have the niyyah or the intention for the halq
or the taqseer, just like any other acts of worship or rite. For halq,
he should say, “I perform the halq as part of the Hajj duty, seeking
nearness to Allah Almighty.” In the case of trimming – taqseer – one
should use the word taqseer instead of halq in the niyyah declaration.

3. Order

478. As a precaution, one should observe the order for the halq /
taqseer, in that they should be performed after the [slaughter of the]
Had’y. If one contravened that either deliberately or due to an
oversight or ignorance, he is not obliged to anything. Although in the
case of deliberate contravention, or that without an excuse, one should
as an obligatory precaution, repeat it such that the order is
maintained.

479. It is obligatory to observe the order of the halq / taqseer in
that it should be executed before performing the Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah,
which will be mentioned InSha’Allah. Thus if one performed the tawaaf
before halq / taqseer, he should repeat [them in the correct order] even
if his action was due to oversight.

**Miscellaneous issues**

480. If one completed the three rites of Mina; the Ram’y of Jamarat-al-
Aqabah, the Had’y slaughter, and the halq / taqseer, all restrictions
due to ihraam are lifted with the exception of [wearing] perfume and
[contact with] women. Hunting is also forbidden for him, although this
is not due to ihraam, but because of Makkah, as hunting in Makkah is
prohibited.

However, it is makruh – discouraged – for a man to cover his head or
wear sewn clothing before performing Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah and its
prayer.

481. If [the pilgrim] returned to Makkah and performed Tawaaf al-
Ziyaarah and its two-rak‘ah prayer, and then performed the sa‘y between
Safa and Marwah, then wearing perfume becomes permissible for him,
although it is makruh – discouraged.

Then if he performed Tawaaf al- Nisa’ and its two-rak‘ah prayer, women
become permissible for him too [i.e. sexual contact with one’s spouse
becomes permissible]. At that stage he is released from any restriction
that was imposed on him due to ihraam. Hunting remains forbidden for
him, not due to ihraam but because it is one of the prohibited acts of
the Haram as mentioned earlier.

7. Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah

482. The seventh act of the Hajj is Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah also known as
Tawaaf al-Hajj. After performing the rites of Mina, it is obligatory to
return to the holy city of Makkah to perform the rest of the obligatory
rites.

483. Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah is like the tawaaf in the Tamattu‘ Umrah, and
its obligations are like those of the latter too, as well as the acts
that are mostahab or makruh, or those acts that invalidate it. The only
exception is the niyyah, which should be uttered as follows: “I perform
tawaaf around this House seven rounds [for] Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah for the
Tamattu‘ Hajj seeking nearness to Allah Almighty”.

8. The Prayer of Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah

484. The eighth rite of the Hajj is the Salaat or prayer of Tawaaf al-
Ziyaarah. After completing Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah, it is obligatory to
perform two-rak‘ah prayer of the tawaaf by Maqaam Ibrahim alayhissalam
or behind it, as mentioned for the prayer of the Umrah tawaaf. The only
exception is the niyyah, in which he should state; “I perform two rak‘ah
of prayer of Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah, seeking nearness to Allah Almighty”.

9. Sa‘y between Safa and Marwah

485. The ninth rite of the Hajj is the sa‘y between Safa and Marwah,
which is exactly like the sa‘y for the Tamattu‘ Umrah, with the
exception of the niyyah, which should read, “I perform the sa‘y between
the Safa and Marwah for the Tamattu‘ Hajj seeking nearness to Allah
Almighty”. 486. Contrary to that of the Umrah, this sa‘y is not followed
by taqseer.

10 – 11. Tawaaf al-Nisa’ and its prayer

487. The tenth and eleventh rites of the Hajj are Tawaaf al-Nisa’ and
its prayer, which come after the sa‘y. Neither women are halaal for men,
nor men are for women until after this tawaaf and its prayer [are
performed].

488. Tawaaf al-Nisa’ and its prayer is just like Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah and
its prayer, with the exception of the niyyah. He declares the niyyah for
Tawaaf al-Nisa’ by stating, “I perform Tawaaf al-Nisa’ seven rounds
seeking nearness to Allah Almighty”, and for its prayer, the niyyah is
“I perform the two rak‘ah prayer of Tawaaf al-Nisa’ seeking nearness to
Allah Almighty”.

489. The obligation of Tawaaf al-Nisa’ and its prayer is applicable to
all regardless of their age or their state of mind, etc. It is
obligatory upon everyone whether the [pilgrim] is young or old,
adolescent or under age, even if the child is so young that he does not
distinguish the good and bad, etc.

or whether the pilgrim is sane or insane, whose guardian declared the
ihraam for him, and the free or slave, who declared ihraam with the
permission of his master.

490. The distinguishing child [should] perform the tawaaf himself as
well as its prayer, but in the case of the non-distinguishing child, his
guardian should perform the tawaaf and its prayer on his behalf. If the
distinguishing child, or the guardian of the non-distinguishing child
failed to perform Tawaaf al-Nisa’,

[in each case] the child shall remain in his state of ihraam, thus
women35 are not halaal to him until he performs the tawaaf himself, or
seek an agent to do so after [the child reaches] the age of adolescence,
and it is permissible for the guardian to seek an agent before [the
child reaches] the age of adolescence.

491. If one ignored Tawaaf al-Nisa’ either by forgetting about it or
due to an oversight, but instead performed Tawaaf al-Widaa’ – the
Farewell tawaaf, due to a misunderstanding in doing so, this should
qualify, even though, as a precaution, [he should] repeat it or get
someone to do it [repeat Tawaaf al-Nisa’] on his behalf.

492. If he does not come to Makkah on the tenth day after completing
the rites of Mina [for that day], he should come to Makkah the following
day or the day after to perform what he is liable to in terms of the
rites of Makkah. As a mostahab precaution, he should come back to Makkah
for the tawaaf and its prayer before midday on the 13th, even though it
is permissible to delay this until the end of the month of
Dhil-Hejjah.

493. After completing the rites of Makkah, which are 35 or vice
versa.

• Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah and its prayer,
• Sa‘y between the Safa and Marwah,
• Tawaaf al-Nisa’ and its prayer,

If he performed them on the day of Eid, or the following day, he must
go back to Mina to complete the rest of the rites of Mina, and to
observe the mabeet there as mentioned in the following section
InSha’Allah.

**Miscellaneous issues**

494. It is not permissible to voluntary perform Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah and
its sa‘y prior to the two Woquf’s in Arafaat and Mash‘ar, and the rites
of Mina. It is permissible under exceptional circumstances, but if one
voluntarily performed the tawaaf and the sa‘y, they would be null and
void.

495. If one is compelled to bring forward the tawaaf and the sa‘y, then
it is permissible to do so. For example if a woman knew that her menses
would start after the rites of Mina, and it would not be possible for
her to remain until she is cleansed, as her tour party would not wait
for her, then it is permissible for her to perform the tawaaf prior to
the two woquf’s.

The same is applicable to a woman [who is experiencing] postpartum, as
well as the sick and the elderly, etc. who may not be able to perform
the tawaaf after completing the rites in Mina due to overcrowding. It is
therefore permissible for them all to perform the tawaaf prior to the
two woquf’s and the rites of Mina.

496. If the above excused were able to perform the tawaaf after their
return from Mina, they should repeat the tawaaf and the sa‘y as it is a
precaution and a priority for them.

12. Mabeet in Mina

497. The twelfth rite of the Hajj is the mabeet [stay] in Mina, for it
is obligatory on the eve of the 11th and 12th, and on certain occasions
on the eve of the 13th too.

498. It is obligatory to observe the mabeet on the eve of the 13th if
the sun of the 12th day set while he had not left Mina, or if he did not
abstain from women36 or hunting. However, if one had abstained from
women and hunting, or the sun did not set while he was in Mina, it is
permitted for him to leave Mina, after midday / noontime on the 12th [of
Dhil- Hejjah].

If one deliberately leaves Mina before midday of the 12th, he has
sinned and must return before noontime if possible. In the case of
forgetting or oversight, there is no liability.

499. If the sun set on the 12th day while he was in Mina or had not
left its limits, even if he was getting ready to leave, or even if he
was travelling in a car but still within the limits of Mina, it is
obligatory for him to observe the mabeet on the eve of the 13th, as well
as performing the Ram’y – stoning – of the Jamaraat on the 13th day, and
may not leave Mina before midday.

500. It is a priority for the [pilgrim] who is performing his First
Hajj to observe the mabeet on the eve of the 13th too. This is also
applicable to anyone who has breached some of the prohibited acts of the
ihraam, or committed a major sin. In fact it is preferred for every
pilgrim.

501. The necessary amount of mabeet is one half of the night, whether
the first or the second half. Night is defined as from the Adhaan of
Maghrib to Adhaan of Fajr. Therefore it is permitted for one to leave
Mina after midnight if he had observed mabeet during the first half of
night, although it is preferred to observe the mabeet throughout the
night until Fajr.

502. It is obligatory to state the niyyah for the mabeet in Mina for
the eves of 11th, 12th and 13th in the same way as in other duties and
rites. niyyah should be stated after the time of ‘Esha if he had not
done so at the time of Maghrib. He should state, “I observe the mabeet
this night in Mina seeking nearness to Allah Almighty”. Abandoning [the
declaration of] the niyyah constitutes a sin, but he is not liable to
kaffaarah, although, as a precaution, it is mostahab to give one.

36 and vice versa.

503. If one left Makkah but did not reach Mina or fell asleep on the
way [to Mina], or he who had forgotten, or were ignorant of the ruling,
or due to an oversight, or was overcome by illness or sleep, and
therefore did not manage to observe the mabeet in Mina,

he is not liable to anything. The same is applicable if there was no
space in Mina to stay for mabeet, or if there was an excuse preventing
him from observing the mabeet in Mina, such as fear of an enemy, or
disease and such like.

504. It is permissible to engage in acts of worship in Masgid al-Haraam
or the Mas‘a [the route between Safa and Marwah], as a substitute for
observing the mabeet in Mina. He could go to these two sites, and engage
in acts of worship such as prayers, recitation of the Qur’an,

reading various Du‘a and supplications, seeking forgiveness –
istighfaar – performing tawaaf and sa‘y. Doing so for one half of the
night seems to satisfy the requirement [of mabeet], having the choice
between the first half of the night, which is from the Maghrib Adhaan
until midnight, and the latter half, which is from midnight to the Fajr
Adhaan. In that case, [the requirement] of observing mabeet in Mina is
waved.

13. Ram’y of the Jamaraat

505. The thirteenth rite of the Hajj is the Ram’y of the Jamaraat in
the Days of Tashreeq. It is obligatory to perform the Ram’y – stoning –
of the three Jamaraat – Obelisks – on the days of 11th and 12th, and
also on the day of the 13th if he observed the mabeet in Mina that
evening. The three Jamaraat are the Sughra [Lesser], the Wusta [Middle],
and the Kubra [Greater] ones.

506. It is obligatory to Ram’y (stone) each of the three Jamaraat with
seven stones, as mentioned earlier in the section of the Ram’y on the
Day of Eid.

507. It is obligatory to comply with the order of Ram’y or stoning the
Jamaraat;

• First to stone Lesser Jamara, which is the closest Jamara to Mina,
• Then the Middle Jamara, which is the one after,

• Then Jamarat-ul-Aqabah also known as Kubra or the Greater, which is
the one stoned on the day of Eid, last of the Jamaraat to be stoned.

508. If one stoned the Jamaraat without adhering to the order
mentioned, say if he started with Jamarat-ul-Aqabah or the Wusta, he
should repeat the Ram’y adhering to the order mentioned.

509. The time for performing the Ram’y – stoning – of the Jamaraat is
from sunrise to sunset, which is the Designated time. It is permissible
for the excused to perform the Ram’y during the nighttime under
emergency circumstances, like women, the sick, the shepherd, the log
collector, and the fearing (who can perform the Ram’y during the night
instead of day). If the excused cannot perform the Ram’y on every night,
then he can do so by performing the rites of the three nights in one
night.

510. If one performed the Ram’y – stoning – of the Sughra Jamara for
four times or more and then, due to oversight, proceeded to the next
Jamara to perform the stoning seven times, it is satisfactory to amend
for the missing throws.

However, if he stoned [the Sughra Jamara] three times or less, he must
repeat the stoning of the Sughra Jamara and then repeat the stoning of
the one after it. If the deficiency concerned the third Jamara
(al-Aqabah) he should throw to make up for the shortfall only.

511. If one stoned the Sughra Jamara, which is stoned first, four times
or more, and stoned the second and the third Jamara seven times [each],
it is sufficient for him to make up for the missing throws of the first
Jamara, without the need to return to the second and the third [Jamara].
However, if he had stoned [the first] less than four times, it is
obligatory for him to repeat [the Ram’y] of the three Jamaraat in
[correct] order.

512. If he stoned the Sughra Jamara seven times, then [stoned] the
second [Jamara] three times, and then [stoned] the third [Jamara] seven
times, he must repeat the stoning of the second and the third Jamara
seven times each, and he does not need to repeat [the stoning of] the
first.

If he stoned the second four times, but the first and third seven times
each, it is sufficient for him to make up for the missing throws of the
second Jamara only.

However, as a mostahab precaution, in all cases one should repeat [the
stoning of] all three Jamaraat if the order and continuity was breached.
513. If the Haajj forgot to perform the Ram’y on one of the days of
Mina, or deliberately failed to do so, he is obliged to perform it – as
qadha’ – on the following day.

He should start to perform the Ram’y for the day he has missed, and
then [upon completion] perform the Ram’y for the current day. It is
mostahab – desirable – to perform the missed Ram’y of the previous day
[soon] after sunrise, and that for the current day by midday.

514. If he missed [the stoning] one of the Jamaraat, and he does not
know whether it was the first (Sughra), or the second, or the Aqabah, he
is obliged to repeat the stoning of the three Jamaraat in order,
starting from the first, (the Sughra), then the second, and then the
Aqabah. The same applies if he missed hitting a Jamara four times and he
does not know which Jamara it is.

If he missed less than four [times] for a Jamara, and he is not sure
which one it is, he should repeat the Ram’y for the three Jamaraat, but
order of the Jamaraat is not obligatory.

515. If he scored four and missed three, but he was not sure whether
these [missed ones] were for one [Jamara] or more, he is obliged to
stone each one of them [the Jamaraat] with three stones in order,
starting with the first (the Sughra), then the Wusta, followed by the
Aqabah. If he hit the target three times and missed four, he should
repeat the Ram’y anew.

516. If one forgot to perform the Ram’y of the three Jamaraat, and
entered Makkah but then remembered his oversight, it is obligatory for
him to return to Mina to do so. If one did not remember his oversight
until he left Makkah, he must perform it as qadha’ the following year,
or appoint an agent to do so on his behalf. If one deliberately failed
to perform it, his Hajj is not corrupted and as a mostahab precaution he
must perform it as qadha’ the following year.

517. If a woman threw three stones, but then could not continue to
complete [the Ram’y], if delaying for later on the day, and resuming the
Ram’y was possible for her without difficulty, then she may not appoint
an agent to do the Ram’y on her behalf. Otherwise Ram’y by proxy is
permissible for her, provided the order and continuity [of the Ram’y] is
maintained, as a precaution. If the woman delayed the Ram’y, and
performed it as qadha’ in the following day, it is considered
qualified.

518. It is permissible for a woman to perform the Ram’y by proxy if she
is apprehensive about the overcrowding.

519. If a sick person does not consider himself able to perform the
Ram’y when it is due, if he picks the stones in his hand and someone
else helps him to throw them he should do so. Otherwise he could do so
by proxy. If the person concerned recovered during the period of Ram’y,
as a mostahab precaution he should also perform the Ram’y himself.

520. If one completed the rites of Mina in the three days mentioned and
performed the Ram’y in each of those days, he has concluded the rites of
his Hajj, if he had also finished the rites of Makkah. He is therefore
able to return back to his hometown. However, it is preferred that he
returns to Makkah to perform Tawaaf al-Widaa’ – the Farewell tawaaf –
for it is mostahab.


