The Mufradah Umrah
==================

521. The Mufradah Umrah falls into two categories: obligatory, and
mostahab. The obligatory one is of two classifications: fundamental
obligation, and secondary obligation.

522. The fundamental obligation of the Mufradah Umrah: is to be
preformed [at least] once, along with the particular criteria of the
Hajj, as specified by the Shar‘.

The obligation of the [Mufradah] Umrah upon the people of Makkah, or
those to whom the ruling of people of Makkah apply, is not conditional
upon their ability to perform the Hajj as well, for they may be
mostatee‘ – able – to perform the Umrah but not the Hajj, or the Hajj
but not the Umrah, since the Hajj and the Mufradah Umrah are two
different rites, independent of one other.

523. One who is remote from Makkah is not obliged to perform the
Mufradah Umrah, but he is obliged to perform the Tamattu‘ Umrah and the
Tamattu‘ Hajj. However, if he was able to perform the [Mufradah] Umrah
but not the Hajj, then it is obligatory for him to perform the Mufradah
Umrah, as a precaution. If he failed to perform it [The Mufradah Umrah]
and died, as a precaution it should be perform as qadha’ by proxy.

524. The agent who himself is not mostatee’ to perform the Hajj, after
finishing his proxy Hajj job, as an obligatory precaution should perform
the Mufradah Umrah for himself, if he became mostatee’ only to do the
Umrah.

525. The secondary obligation of the Mufradah Umrah arises through
nadhr [vow], promise, oath, hire, as a condition of a contract, or
through corruption of the Hajj, or through missing the Hajj, where, in
the latter case, he would only be released from the ihraam [of the Hajj]
by [performing] the Mufradah Umrah.

526. The Mufradah Umrah is obligatory for one who wishes to enter the
holy city of Makkah, since it is not permitted for one who wishes to
enter Makkah to cross any of the miqaat’s except by declaring and
assuming ihraam.37 As for the individual who wish to enter the Haram but
not the 37 and he can only be released from the state of ihraam by
performing the Umrah.

holy city of Makkah, the likelihood is that he is not obliged to the
Mufradah Umrah [i.e. he is not obliged to assume ihraam]. 527. Apart
from the obligatory grounds, it is mostahab – desirable – to perform the
Mufradah Umrah once a month, and its desirability is emphasised during
the month of Rajab.

528. If one performs two consecutive [Mufradah] Umrah – either in
person or by proxy – the reward is greater if there is a time gap of ten
days, than if there were less. In any case, the reward for them is
great. If [one was performing] the two Umrah’s for two different
persons, then the issue of time gap [between the two Umrah’s] would not
be applicable.


**The Rites of the Mufradah Umrah**

529. The rites of the Mufradah Umrah are eight:

I. The niyyah.

II. To declare and assume ihraam from one of the miqaat’s – designated
locations – previously mentioned, if the adult passed by one of them. If
one did not pass by one of them, he should declare and assume ihraam
from his hometown, if it was outside the [borders of] Haram, but closer
to the Haram than the miqaat.

If the adult was within the limits of the Haram, he should then declare
the ihraam from the borders of the Haram. As for the one who was inside
the holy city of Makkah, he should leave Makkah for Masgid al-Tan‘eem –
al-Tan‘eem mosque – to declare and assume the ihraam from.

III. tawaaf of seven rounds around the sacred Ka‘bah, as mentioned
previously.

IV. Two-rak‘ah prayer of tawaaf by Maqaam Ibrahim or behind it.

V. sa‘y between Safa and Marwah.

VI. halq or taqseer.

VII. Tawaaf al-Nisa’, as previously mentioned in the rites of the
Tamattu‘ Hajj.

VIII. Two-rak‘ah prayer of Tawaaf al-Nisa’.

**The Rulings of the Masdood (The Barred)**

530. The Masdood is he who is barred [from performing the Hajj or
Umrah], after declaring and assuming the ihraam, regardless of whether
this barring was at the two woquf’s (Arafaat and the Mash‘ar), if his
ihraam was only for the Hajj, or he was barred from entering Makkah to
perform the tawaaf and sa‘y when he was in state of ihraam for Umrah,
and thus not being able to perform the tawaaf and sa‘y until their time
had ran out. In that case he should release himself from the ihraam by
Had’y, i.e. by slaughtering the animal, at the place he was barred [from
proceeding further on].

531. It is permissible for the Masdood to slaughter the animal before
the day of Eid, and as a precaution, one should also perform the halq –
shaving – on the same day too.

532. It is permitted for the Masdood to remain in his ihraam, and
release himself from it by performing the Mufradah Umrah, which is by
performing the tawaaf around the Ka‘bah, then the prayer of the tawaaf
by the Maqaam or behind it, then the sa‘y between Safa and Marwah, then
the taqseer, then Tawaaf al-Nisa’, and then its prayer by the Maqaam or
behind it.

533. The Masdood has discharged his duty to the Hajj if he acted
accordingly, as mentioned above, unless he had become mostatee‘ – liable
to performing the Hajj in the previous year or before it [by meeting all
the criteria required for the Hajj], or if he continued to meet those
criteria in the next year(s).

534. If he managed to observe the two woquf’s (Arafaat and Mash‘ar) but
from there he was barred from performing the rites of Mina – the Ram’y
[stoning], the Had’y (slaughtering), and the Shaving/Trimming – if he
was barred from entering Makkah and performing its rites too throughout
the month of Dhil-Hejjah, the previous ruling applies to him.

535. If the barring covered the rites of Mina only, and it was possible
for him to perform them by proxy, it is obligatory for him to do so,
i.e. to arrange for someone to perform those rites – stoning,
slaughtering, shaving – on his behalf.

On the completion of those acts, he is released from his ihraam, and he
then should perform the rest of the rites. If he could not do them by
proxy, and he was not able to find an agent to do them for him on his
behalf, as a precaution he should slaughter his animal, and remain in
his ihraam until he can be released [from it] by the Mufradah Umrah.

536. If he completed the rites of Makkah, which are the tawaaf and its
prayer, the sa‘y, Tawaaf al-Nisa’ and its prayer, but was then barred
from returning to Mina for the mabeet there for the Nights of Tashreeq,
and for the Ram’y of the Jamaraat during their days, he is obliged to
perform the Ram’y by proxy, and he could engage in acts of worship in
Makkah during the nights of the mabeet in Mina, if possible. Otherwise,
as a precaution, he should give a kaffaarah for not observing the mabeet
in Mina. If it was not possible to perform the Ram’y by proxy in that
year, he should do so in the following year, and his Hajj is correct.

**The Rulings of the Mahsoor (The Sick)**

537. The Mahsoor is the pilgrim who declares and assumes the ihraam for
either Hajj or Umrah, and then falls ill such that he is not able to
perform the rites, in a similar way to the case of the Masdood. If
during the declaration of the ihraam he had made it conditional that
Allah Almighty releases him [from his ihraam] if he were to be confined,
he would then be released from his ihraam without the need to send his
Had’y to the site [for slaughtering].

538. The pilgrim who had declared and assumed ihraam for the Tamattu‘
or Ifraad Hajj, the ruling above applies to him. However, if the pilgrim
declared and assumed ihraam for the Qiraan Hajj, and had his Had’y
accompanying him, he is released from his ihraam as soon as he sends his
Had’y away [for slaughter] and he does not need to wait for the Had’y to
reach the [slaughtering] site.

539. If during the declaration of the ihraam he had not made it
conditional that Allah Almighty releases him [from his ihraam] if he
were to be confined, he would remain in his [state of] ihraam, and as a
precaution, he should send his Had’y for slaughtering, and when it
reaches the [slaughtering] site, and the time of its slaughter had
passed he could trim and release himself from ihraam. It is permissible
to slaughter the animal in the locality [of the ill pilgrim].

540. It is obligatory for the Mahsoor to perform the Hajj again if he
had previously met all the criteria for the Hajj requirements – become
mostatee‘ – but did not perform the Hajj on that year. If, however, in
the future years he did not manage to perform the Hajj himself, [he
remains liable to the Hajj] and must do so by proxy.

541. If the pilgrim became Mahsoor in the ihraam of the Hajj,
regardless of whether the Hajj was Tamattu‘, Ifraad, or Qiraan, the
[slaughtering] site of the Had’y is in Mina. If the pilgrim became
Mahsoor in the ihraam of the Umrah, regardless of whether the Umrah is
Tamattu‘ or Mufradah, the spot of the Had’y is in the holy city of
Makkah.

542. If the cause [i.e. illness] disappeared, the pilgrim should join
his group to perform the rites. If he managed to observe the two sites
of woquf (Arafaat and Mash‘ar), or one of them, as mentioned previously
– about the obligation of performing [the rites of] these two sites38 –
he has complied with the Hajj, and he has not missed anything. If he
does not manage to reach two or one of those sites, he has missed the
Hajj, and thus he should perform the Mufradah Umrah and release himself
from his ihraam.

543. If, due to his illness, he could not perform the rites of the day
of Eid, and those after, he must perform the Ram’y and slaughter by
proxy, and then perform the shaving himself, [i.e. not by proxy].

If he could, he should perform the tawaaf and the sa‘y himself or with
the help of others, otherwise he should do them by proxy too. He should
say the prayer of the tawaaf if he was present in the [Grand] Mosque,
otherwise, as a precaution, he should perform the prayer himself and
also do so by proxy in its place [by Maqaam Ibrahim or behind it]. He
should observe the mabeet in the Mina if he could, or engage in acts of
worship in Makkah instead, and his Hajj is correct, otherwise he should
give a kaffaarah for not observing the mabeet, as a precaution.

544. If due to sickness he was prevented from performing all the rites
of Mina and Makkah, it is obligatory for him to send his Had’y [for
slaughter], and release himself from his ihraam, and repeat his Hajj
again if he still was mostatee’ next year, unless he was liable to Hajj
previously [and had not performed it, in which case, he must perform the
Hajj next year regardless of him being mostatee’ or not].

**Prayers in Makkah and Medina**

545. It is permissible for the traveller to the holy cities of Makkah
and medina to perform his prayers ‘complete’39 in those cities, whether
inside the Mosque or outside it, in the old city or in the new.

This is the last of what we wished to state concerning the rites of the
Hajj and Umrah, for Allah is All-Knowing.

The Holy City of Qum
Sadiq al-Shirazi
38 See case \# 425.
39 i.e. four rak‘ah instead if two, where applicable.


**PART 3 – Glossary**

Bismillah al-Rahmaan al-Raheem Aba The usually black cloak worn by
women in Arab countries as the means of hijaab or part of.

Arafaat An area outside the holy city of Makkah and beyond Mina and
Mash‘ar al-Haraam. Arafah Day of Arafah is the ninth day of Dhil-Hejjah,
when woquf is observed in Arafaat from midday until sunset in solitude
supplication and intimate discourse with the Almighty.

This day is considered to be of supreme significance to the extent that
the hadith states, “the Hajj is Arafah”.

Adhaan The call to the daily obligatory prayers. Adnal-hill The nearest
point to the Haram where one can be without ihraam, or the nearest point
to the Haram where one can declare and assume ihraam.

al-Tan‘eem Reference to Masgid al-Tan‘eem, or the al- Tan‘eem mosque,
which also serves as a miqaat for Umrah al-Mufradah.

al-Tashreeq Reference to al-Tashreeq days / nights, which are the 10th,
11th, 12th of Dhil-Hejjah. Anbar A substance that releases scent when
burnt. Arafaat A district outside the holy city of Makkah, where the
pilgrim must observe woquf there between noontime and sunset.

awrah Areas of the body that are obligatory to be covered. In the case
of a male, it is area from the abdomen, around the navel level, to the
knees. In the case of a female, it is the entire body.

Dhil-Hejjah The twelfth month of the Islamic lunar calendar. Also
written as Dhul-Hejjah.

Dhil-Qa‘dah The eleventh month of the Islamic lunar calendar. Also
written as Dhul-Qa‘dah.

Dirham A unit of currency used during the Islamic era, which is still
used as a currency unit in Fiqh discussions. Ten Dirhams is equivalent
to one Dinaar, which is equal to one mithqaal, which is equal to 3.153
grams of gold. Thus one Dirham is equal to 0.3153 grams of gold, or
one-hundredth of an ounce of gold.

**Du‘a Supplication.**

Eid Festival / Celebration. Fajr The start time when the sky begins to
lighten up. It is normally one-and-a-half to two hours before sunrise,
depending on the geographical coordinates of the locality.

Farsakh Unit of length measurement, which is about 5.5 km, or 3.4
miles.

Ghusl The complete head-to-toe wash. Some ghusl are obligatory and some
are optional.

A ghusl becomes mandatory for both husband and wife every time they
engage in penetrative sexual intercourse. It is also obligatory for a
man if semen discharge occurs outside sexual intercourse. A ghusl is
also obligatory for a woman after the end the menses period, before she
can resume her various acts of worship.

Ha’edh A woman who is experiencing the monthly menstruation. Had’y The
Sacrifice that is offered on the day of Eid in Mina.

Hadath Any discharge of urine, faeces, semen, or wind is referred to as
hadath. Hadith Narration of the saying of the prophet or the imams
alayhum-as-slaam.

Hajj Pilgrimage.

Hajjar al-Aswad The Black Stone, placed in a corner of the sacred
Ka‘bah. Hajjat-al-Islam The Pilgrimage of Islam. Halaal Permitted.

Halq Shaving. Haraam Illegal, prohibited, forbidden. Haram The Sacred,
or the Sanctuary. This is in reference to the area that encompasses the
holy city of Makkah.

Haydh The monthly menstruation period. Hemyaan A belt that is permitted
for men to wear during ihraam. Hijamah Bloodletting or cupping that is
performed in order to extract ‘bad’ blood from the body. Hijr Isma’el
The stonewall of Isma‘el, a few meters from the Ka’bah.

Ihraam The state of consecration that the pilgrim assumes in which s/he
refrains from a number of particular acts seeking forbearance, pleasure
and adornment in humility before Allah Almighty.

InSha’Allah By the will of Allah. Istighfaar Seeking forgiveness from
Allah Almighty. Jabirah Wound dressing. Jamaa’ah Congregation.

Jamaraat Plural for Jamara, the three obelisks representing the three
appearances Satan made to Prophet Ibrahim alayhis-salaam, in an attempt
to discourage him from executing the orders of Allah Almighty.

Jamarat-al-‘Aqabah Also known as the Jamarat-al-Kubra, it is the third
obelisk – representing the temptation of Satan – that is stoned on the
days of Eid and the following two days.

Janaabah One is in the state of Janaabah whenever engages in sexual
intercourse with one’s spouse. A man is in a state of Janaabah whenever
seminal discharge occurs. Ka‘bah The cubic building that is the symbolic
House of Allah Almighty. Also referred to as Baytal- Haraam.

kaffaarah Compensation, atonement for breaching prohibited acts, or
failure to do something obligatory. Plural kaffaaraat. Khatam
Traditional ring. Khums Meaning one-fifth, Khums is the contribution of
20 % of the annual superfluous un-Khumsed income.

Ma‘soomeen Meaning the infallible or impeccable individuals, this is a
reference to the Prophet Muhammad, his daughter Fatima, and the twelve
imams, the first of whom is Imam Ali, and the twelfth, Imam Mahdi
alayhum-as-salaam 126 Mabeet Literally meaning to remain, this is one of
the rites of the Hajj, which is required to observe in Mina.

Madhhab Sect.

Maghrib The time for maghrib prayer. Maghrib is the time when the
redness of the central part of the sky, which is visible during the time
of sunset, vanishes. Maghrib is some ten to twenty minutes after sunset,
depending on the geographical location.

Mahram Two people are said to be mahram if there is no hijaab
restriction between them, like husband and wife, or mother and son, or
father and daughter, brother and sister, etc. Makruh Discouraged,
undesirable, etc. Manaasik Rites.

Masgid al-Haraam The Grand Mosque, which houses the Ka‘bah. Masgid
al-Shajarah A mosque outside the holy city of Medina, which serves as
the miqaat for the pilgrim heading to Makkah from the city of Medina.

Mash‘ar al-Haraam Also known as Muzdalafah, it is an area between
Arafaat and the holy city of Makkah. Meetah Meat of an animal that has
not been slaughtered in an Islamic way, or that has died or been killed
in other ways.

Mina An area in the vicinity of the holy city of Makkah where mabeet is
observed. Miqaat A designated place that pilgrims must declare and
assume ihraam from.

modd A unit of weight equivalent to 750 grams approximately.

moqassir Moqassir means one who does not know the ruling regarding
certain aspect (of a religious duty) and he is aware of this ignorance
or shortcoming and where to find the answer for, e.g. through certain
books, references, or individuals with the appropriate expertise, but
does not make the effort to seek the answer. In this way he has failed
to discharge his duty. For comparison also see Qaasir.

mostatee‘ Literally means able, and when used in reference to the Hajj
program, one is considered as mostatee‘ if s/he is physically and
financially able to perform the Hajj as well as meeting other
prerequisites. Mu’min The faithful, the believer.

muhrim An individual who is in the state of ihraam. mostahab
Encouraged, desirable. Muzdalafah Another name for Mash‘ar al-Haraam
nadhr Vow. nafilah Literally meaning extra, or optional, it refers to
acts of worship that are not mandatory for the individual to perform,
but one is encouraged to do so, such as the nafilah associated with each
of the daily obligatory prayers, or the Night nafilah, etc.

nagis The definition of something being “filthy” or “impure” by coming
into contact with a source of impurity, such as urine, faeces, semen,
blood, wine, dog, pig, etc. Antonym of taahir.

niyyah Literally meaning the intention, it refers to having or making
the right intention for an act of worship and it is obligatory for any
act of worship. Normally it is not necessary to verbally state the
intention and it is sufficient that one make a mental note of act that
one intends to do, unless otherwise stated.

qaasir Qaasir means one who does not know the ruling of a certain
aspect of a religious duty, but in fact he is not aware of this
ignorance and naturally does not seek the answer to the case concerned
since he believes that what he is doing is correct.

Thus one should not assume that what he is doing is always correct, and
ensure to check with reference books or expert individuals. As a matter
of fact it is imperative and obligatory for the individual to learn and
know all aspects that s/he may come across in the course of one’s life
concerning the relevant issues.

qadha’ If an obligatory act of worship was not performed when it was
due, it must still be performed past its time as qadha or ‘missed’.
rak‘ah A cycle or round of prayer in any of the daily prayers.

ram’y Literally, it means to throw, and in the Hajj rites, this refers
to stoning of the obelisks. rukn A principal element.

Sa‘y The Hajj rite relating to requirement of covering the distance
between the mounts of Safa and Marwah, by walking or otherwise, seven
times.

Safa One of the two mounts – now almost vanished – in the vicinity of
the Ka‘bah.

sahar The second part of the night, from midnight to fajr.

salaat Arabic for prayers. Salaat al-Tawaaf Tawaaf prayer. sawm
Fasting.

Shaam, The area including Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan. Shawwal 10th
month of the Islamic lunar calendar. Shi‘a Literally meaning follower,
it is traditionally used to refer to the Muslims who follow Imam Ali
alayhis-salaam as the leader of the Muslims after Rasulollah
salla-llahu-alayhiwa- aalih, in compliance with the order of the
prophet. Rasulollah salla-llahu-alayhi-waaalih specifically appointed
Imam Ali alayhissalaam as his caliph and successor on specific
instructions from Allah Almighty.

Sughra The Lesser.

Sunnah Tradition or teaching (of the prophet). Tahaarah The state of
purity or being in a state of wudhu. Taahir ‘Pure’ – as opposed to
nagis. Talbiyah Means compliance, fulfilment, or carrying out the orders
of Allah Almighty. Taqseer Trimming.

tawaaf One of the Hajj rites, which is to walk around Ka‘bah seven
rounds. Tawaaf al-Widaa‘ The Farewell Tawaaf Tawaaf al-Ziyaarah Also
known as the Hajj Tawaaf, which is the first rite of Makkah after Mina.
Tawaaf al-Nisa The Women Tawaaf. It is obligatory to both male and
female pilgrims, regardless of their age, status, etc. A husband would
not be halaal to his wife unless he performs this tawaaf, and vice
versa. Tayammum The means of attaining the state of wudhu by using earth
or dust as opposed to water, where water is either not available or it
is harmful to use.

wali Guardian, heir Warce A kind of perfume Wilaayah authority and
governorship Wudhu Ablution or the ritual washing required prerequisite
for the performing of the obligatory daily prayers. Woquf The mandatory
rite of ‘being’ in the two sites of Arafaat and Mash‘ar al-Haraam as
part of the Hajj program.

Wusta Middle.

Zakat Literally means purification, it is the religious duty of
contribution of a rate of 1 – 2.5% due to nine items when over certain
threshold. The nine items are Wheat, Barley, Dates, Raisins, Camel, Cow,
Sheep, Gold, and Silver.

1. Fundamentals of Islam

In this book the author outlines the five fundamental principles of
Islam, namely Tawheed (the Indivisible Oneness of God), Adl (Divine
Justice), Nubowwah (Prophethood), Imamah (Leadership of mankind), and
Me’ad (Resurrection). For each principle, the author presents a brief,
and to the point, discussion on the significance of the issue concerned.
The book could serve as a good introduction to Islamic beliefs.

2. What is Islam? Beliefs, principles and a way of life

Few would dare to attempt to summarize the Islamic faith in a book of
this size but this is the aim of the late Grand Ayatollah Muhammad
al-Shirazi, one of the most eminent Islamic authorities of modern times.
Eschewing complicated jargon and deliberately using succinct and lucid
language within a "question and answer" format, he has sought to convey
the richness and profound spirituality of the Islamic message in all its
aspects to the widest possible audience. There are necessarily some
Arabic and technical terms but these have been kept to a minimum.

The late Sayyid Shirazi covers all the main aspects of Islam, from the
fundamental beliefs such as the Oneness of God and His justice and
prophethood to topics like ablutions, praying, fasting, and making the
Hajj and also deals with such diverse subjects as Islamic law,
economics, politics, the Islamic view of society, the issue of freedom
in Islam, and so on. This is a book which will not only be useful for
Muslims who want to find out more about their religion but also for
non-Muslims who seek a concise introduction to what Islam is all
about.

3. The Family

In this book the author highlights the problems he sees both in Islamic
societies and in west societies today that arise from the phenomenon of
unmarried young men and women, through to birth control and
contraception. He surveys the idea of marriage in various religions and
schools of thought, and discusses polygamy from the Islamic perspective.
As well as being a call to the Muslim world to revert to the true
teachings of Islam, this book can also be of use as an introduction to
others who seek some answers to the social problems of today.

This is because Islam provides detailed teachings that promise success
in every area of human life on individual and societal levels, and
furthermore the practicality and success of those teachings have been
proven in the course of history.

4. The Qur’an: When was it compiled? In this book the author addresses
the issues of when the Holy Qur’an was compiled, on what and whose
instructions was this task carried out, and who accomplished its
compilation in the form that it is available today. In this work the
author presents undisputable evidence as to address these crucial
questions. Through historical, methodical and logical analyses, the
author establishes how and when the compilation of the Holy Qur’an was
achieved. In the latter half of the book the author cites many Prophetic
traditions (hadith) on the significance of the learning and recitation
of Holy Qur’an. It is a must read for every Muslim, and any non-Muslim
who follows Islamic issues.

5. The Bible and Christianity: an Islamic view

In this work the author carries out a brief investigation into the
Bible and presents his findings. They show that some of the most noble
men, i.e. the Prophets, who have been chosen by God Almighty as His
messengers to mankind, are accused in the Bible to have committed some
of the most vile and immoral conducts known to man. Prophets are accused
of deception, lying,

fornication, rape, incest, murder, and the list goes on. Even God does
not escape unscathed in the Bible . . . false characteristics are
attributed to Him, or He is accused of making His messengers to commit
foul and disgusting acts. In the second part of this work the author
presents some of the debates he had with the Christians who visited him
in his residence in Karbala, Iraq.

The debates concerned their impression of Islam and its doctrine as
well as their own religious beliefs. In this presentation the author
shows how he invited non- Muslims to Islam through calm but rational and
intellectual debates with them. The book makes an interesting read,
especially when the reader can see the simple arguments put forward in
these debates.

6. If Islam were to be established

This book can serve as the Muslim's guide to the Islamic government. If
an Islamist opposition group has a plan for an Islamic government, this
book would help to check various aspects of the plan. In the absence of
such a plan, this book would present one. To the non-Muslims, the book
presents a glimpse of a typical Islamic system of government. The book
would also serve as a yardstick for anyone to check the practices of any
government that claims to have implemented an Islamic system of
government.

7. War, Peace and Non-violence: An Islamic Perspective

In this work the author addresses three controversial issues, which
have come to be associated with Islam. Through his extensive knowledge
of the teachings of Islam, the author presents the Islamic stand on war,
peace and non-violence, as found in the traditions and teachings of the
Prophet of Islam, which could serve as exemplary models for the Mankind.
Detailed accounts of the traditions of Prophet in his dealings with his
foes during war or peace times are presented in this book, which gives
the reader a clear insight into the way and the basis upon which the
Prophet of Islam used to conduct his affairs in this respect.

8. The Islamic System of Government

In this introductory book the author outlines the basic principles of a
government based on the teachings of Islam. The author begins with the
aim and objectives of the government according to Islam and the extent
of its authority in that framework. He then addresses, from the Islamic
viewpoint, the significance and fundamental nature of such issues as
consultative system of government, judicial system, freedoms, party
political pluralism, social justice, human rights, foreign policy, etc.
The author also outlines the policies of a government on issues such as
education, welfare, health, crime, services, etc. as well as such
matters as the government's income, and authority.

9. Islamic Beliefs for All

In this book the author discusses the five fundamental principles of
Islam. These principles are Tawheed or the Indivisible Oneness of God,
Adl or Divine Justice, Prophethood, Imamah or the Leadership of mankind
after the prophet, and Resurrection. What distinguish this book are the
author's subtle approach in addressing the issues concerned and the
simple examples given to illustrate the discussion. This authoritative
work is not only important to Muslims, but it would also be of interest
to those non-Muslims who seek to explore Islam and its doctrine. This
easy to read book would be a valuable reference for Religious
Education.

10. Husayn - The Sacrifice for Mankind

This is a collection of articles about a totally unique individual who,
through his remarkable sacrifices, managed to change the course of
history and the direction that mankind was heading for. He is none other
than Husayn, the grandson of the Prophet of Islam, Muhammad, and the
second son of Fatima and Ali, peace be upon them.

Imam Husayn peace be upon him stood up to tyranny and oppression and
gave everything he had, including his life and the lives of his most
beloved sons and brothers as well as those of his closest allies, in
order to awaken the masses, reform society and rectify the distortion
that has been inflicted on Islam.

The articles in this work cover some aspects of the aims and objectives
of Imam Husayn’s movement, the difference between his strategy and that
of his brother Imam Hasan in facing tyranny and despotism, the examples
he set, and the lessons that are learnt from the events that lead up to
Karbala fourteen centuries ago. Besides the benefits of his movement,
the personality of Imam Husayn peace be upon him as reflected by the
many hadith and teachings of Prophet Muhammad is also discussed. Also
included in this work are a number of questions and answers about the
commemoration ceremonies observed by the Muslims around the world on the
occasion of Ashura.

11. The rights of prisoners according to Islamic teachings

In general, Islam considers imprisonment as a case of last resort in
many circumstances, however, according to Islamic teachings there are
only a few offences that would lead to imprisonment. Under non-Islamic
system, of course the offender should be reprimanded, but any
chastisement prescribed by Islamic teachings may only be implemented if
all the relevant criteria and the preconditions prescribed are also met.
If the criteria are not met, then the prescribed punishment may not be
executed.

In this book the author addresses such issues as the fundamental nature
of freedom, the rights of prisoner, and the harmful effects of
imprisonment on the individual concerned as well as on society, and the
kind of offences that would lead to imprisonment under an Islamic
system. The author also cites a few cases to demonstrate the attitude
the Islamic ruler should take towards offence; to try to find reasons to
waive the punishments in any particular case. The author also addresses
the issue of torture in general, and mental and physical ill treatment
that is carried out under the guise of interrogation and extracting
confession from a detainee or a suspect.

12. Aspects of the political theory of Imam Shirazi

Muhammad G. Ayub is a well-known Islamist political activist within the
Iraqi circle who has established a long history of political struggle
over the past three decades. He was attracted by the views of the Imam
Muhammad Shirazi in the fields of social and political sciences. This
prompted the author to write this book to introduce the reader to these
views that have remained relatively unknown amongst Muslim activists and
reformists. It covers such aspects on politics as freedom of expression,
party-political pluralism and organisation, social justice, peace and
non-violence, human rights, consultation system of government, etc.


