Foreword
========

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الذي انزل على عبدة الكتاب ولم يجعل لة عوجا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وافضل صلوات الله واكمل تسليماته على رسوله الذي ارسلة بالهدى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعلى آله المصطفين الاخيار الذين آمنوا به وعزروه ونصروه واتبعوا النور
الذي معه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful. Praise be to Allah
Who has sent to His servant The Book and has allowed no deviation
therein. And the best of Allah's blessings and His most complete peace
upon His Apostle whom he sent with His Guidance. And upon his chosen,
virtuous progeny who believed in him, honoured him, helped him and
followed the Light Which was sent down to him".*

Amid all the diversity of thoughts, leanings and inter­pretations,
Muslims are united by a single cohesive force, an eternal and abiding
miracle of Muhammad (‘s); Holy Qur'an. A prince among the revealed
Books, Qur'an has remained pristine and unsullied by the profane hands.

The external forces working restlessly to wreck the Mus­lim unity and
consensus have now resorted to a new ploy. From among the Muslims
themselves, they have succeeded to instigate sectarian differences based
on Qur'an. We now see scholars of one sect accusing the followers of
another sect of disbelieving in Qur'an, or believing in a Book which has
disappeared or been interpolated.

From Saudi Arabia, South Africa and particularly Pakistan, recent
publications against the *Shi’a* sect harp on one and the same note.
They go to wearisome and tedious lengths, just to prove that the Shi’as
are not Muslims because they do not believe in the existing Qur'an. It
is surprising to find a man of Abul Hasan Nadawis' calibre joining the
notorious band and entering inextricably into the quagmire. The forces
of *kufr* have thus successfully created a wider chasm between the two
main sects of Islam, the Shi’a and the Sunni; and some scholars have
played into their hands.

The fact is neither Sunni nor Shi’a Muslims believe in any Our'an other
than the existing one, nor do they sub­scribe to the views supporting
interpolations, distortions, omissions, additions or any sort of
tampering in the Holy Book.

In our selection of two chapters from Ayatullah Sayyid Abul Qasim
al-Khu’i's famous work *al Bayan fi Tafsiril Qur'an* we have
deliberately given a prime choice to the subjects of *Tahrif* and
collection of the Qur'an. Later, we hope to translate and publish
further chapters so that, eventually, whole book is placed in the hands
of the Mus­lim as well as non‑Muslim readers.

Ayatullah al-Khu’i completed this work decades ago. He is one of the
great Shi’a *mujtahids* of this era, internationally known for his
erudition. The book was acclaimed as a masterpiece by Shi’a as well as
Sunni scholars, leaving no doubt in the minds of its readers that Qur'an
as a great force binding all the Muslims together has come to stay for
ever.

The line of argument pursued by Ayatullah al-Khu’i is unique. While he
enumerates and discusses all the reports from Shi’a as well as Sunni
sources, he very ably conclu­des that according to the reliable and
authentic traditions, Qur'an has remained pure, pristine and unprofaned.
His arguments proving that the belief in *Tahrif* goes against
*al‑Kitab* (i.e. Qur'an), *as‑Sunnah, al‑Aql* and *al‑Ijma',* are
compelling and persuasive. His analysis of all those reports which
indicate desultory, unmethodical and haphazard later day collection of
Qur'an leaves no shred of doubt that they are false and fabricated.

In his preface to the first edition of *al‑Bayan fi Tafsir il Qur'an*,
al Khui writes:‑

*"I was enamoured by Qur'an from the childhood, always keen to unravel
its secrets and to discover its meaning. It behoves every true Muslim,
and even non‑Muslim thinkers to ponder over Qur'an, to unfold its hidden
meaning and to benefit from its light. For it is a Book which has a
message for human welfare and guides it to success and salvation. Qur'an
is a reference for the linguist, a guide to the grammarian, an authority
for the jurist, an example for the refined, a lost treasure for the
wise. It even guides those who admonish and shows the goal in life. It
is a source of social as well as political sciences, and upon it rest
the sciences of Islam. It will reveal to you the fascinating secrets. of
Nature, and introduce you to the laws of crea­tion. Qur'an is the
abiding miracle of this ever lasting religion, and a code of conduct
based on the high and esteemed Shari’ah".*

It is our earnest hope that this publication will serve to bridge the
gap between Muslims, created by the subtle forces of *kufr.* Further, it
will Inshallah enable them, both Shi’a and Sunni, to realize that Qur'an
is their only hope of deliverance from the unscrupulous manipulations of
un­-Islamic and anti‑Islamic propagandists. Let no Muslim be deceived
into believing that he or his brother, despite the sectarian
differences, believes in any authority other than that of the existing
Qur'an. It is complete, pure, pristine and unaltered.

Secretariat  
 The World Federation of K.S.I. Muslim Communities  
 London


