The Claim that Tahrif was caused by the Caliphs
===============================================

Some hold that the interpolation, alteration, omission may have occurred
after the death of the Prophet (‘s), perpetra­ted by the first two
Caliphs or by Uthman when he came to power, or by someone of the later
period. All these claims are invalid. If abu Bakr or Umar did it, then
there can be two assumptions. They either did it unintentionally,
because, as it is believed, the Qur’an was not available in its entirety
as it had not yet been compiled. Or they did it intentionally. In any
case, the verses in which they interfered by way of *Tahrif* would be
those concerning their leadership or even others. In all, there are
three considerations:

First, to say that they had no access to the whole of the Qur’an is
totally out of question. The Prophet (‘s) had taken great pains to see
that it was committed to memory, and was constantly recited, slowly and
elegantly, and the companions had compiled during the Prophet's time and
after his passing away. This makes us certain that the Qur’an was with
them, well guarded, all in one place or at various places, in the hearts
of people or noted down on the papers. They were the people who had
proudly preserved the poems and speeches of the pre-­Islamic era. How
could they be expected to ignore the great Book whose laws they
proclaimed, for which they had staked their lives, left their homes,
spent their wealth, abandoned their families and children, and had taken
a firm stand in the brilliant history of Islam. Can a reasonable person
believe that they would be so indifferent so as to cause any loss of the
Qur’an? A loss which could not be retrieved without the evidence of two
witnesses? Is it not tantamount to believing that there has been an
addition or an omission in the Qur’an which was revealed to the Prophet
(‘s)?

Then there is the famous and widely acknowledged tradition of
*thaqalayn* which invalidates all presumption, about *Tahrif.* The
Prophet (‘s) said:

**'I leave behind me two invaluable things: the Book of Allah and my Ahl
ul-Bayt'.**

This statement becomes meaningless if it is believed that the Qur’an had
been lost during his time, because that which was lost would definitely
be parts of the Book. In fact, this tradition points to the collection
of the Qur’an during the Prophet's era; because scattered or memorised
literature cannot be termed a book. We will deal with the subject of the
collection of the Qur’an later. The question is that if the Muslims did
not care to collect the Qur’an while the Prophet (‘s) lived, why did the
Prophet (‘s) himself neglect it, in spite of his vehement emphasis on
its importance? Did he not foresee the result of such carelessness? Or
was it impossible for him to do so? Obviously, these are all invalid
excuses.

If we were to propose that the first two Caliphs effected *Tahrif* in
those verses which did not deal with their leadership, and the
leadership of their friends, then this seems to be unlikely because it
serves no purpose. Definitely, this did not occur. The Caliphate was a
political matter, ostensibly based on their concern for the religion,
and as such there was no need for touching the Qur’an. Even those like
Sa’ad b. Ubadah and his companions who objected to the rule of Abu Bakr,
and those who refused to swear oath of allegience to both of them, never
accused the Caliphs of having tampered with the Qur’an. Did Ali b. Abi
Talib (‘a), in his famous discourse of *Shaqsha­qiyyah* or elsewhere
where he objected to Abu Bakr taking precedence over him, mention
anything about the Caliphs ef­fecting any changes in the Qur’an? It is
not conceivable that the Muslims cited any such instance without us
knowing about it. Therefore, this proposition cannot be true.

Finally, it is an indisputable fact that the two Caliphs did not cause
any purposeful interpolation or omission of those verses which may have
dealt adversely with their leadership. Ali b. Abi Talib (‘a) along with
his wife Fatimah Zahra (‘a) and certain friends from the companions of
the Prophet (‘s) protested against the two Caliphs on matter of
Caliphate, basing their objection on what they had heard from the
Prophet (‘s), presenting witnesses from among the Muhajirin and Ansar,
and also on the famous tradition of *Al Ghadir* and others. In the book
of *Al‑Ihtijaj,* it is reported that twelve men protested against the
Caliphate of Abu Bakr, quoting the text of what they said. Allamah
Majlisi has set out a complete chapter on the subject of the objections
by Ali b. Abi Talib in the matter of Caliphate[^1].

Had there been anything in the Qur’an disparaging their leadership, they
would have definitely quoted them in their protests, and so would all
the Muslims. The Caliphate is a matter which came to transpire well
before the so‑called collection of the Qur’an. The silence of the
companions on this subject, from the beginning till the end when Ali b.
Abi Talib (‘a) became the Caliph, is an indisputable evidence that such
an interpolation or omission never occurred.

It is all the more difficult to accept that *Tahrif* was caused by
Uthman, for the following reasons:

(a) Islam had gained a strong foothold by the time of Uthman, and was
widely spread. It was not possible for Uthman to tamper with the Qur’an,
nor for anyone else more influential and higher in status than him.

(b) If it were presumed that he tampered with the verses which had no
bearing on the question of *wilayah* or the Caliphate of his
predecessors, then it would be a futile exercise. And if he tampered
with those verses which had such connections, then the Caliphate, in the
first instance, would not have come to him, because the Qur’an would
have guided the Muslims against him.

(c) His tampering with the Qur’an would have become a major and
prominent reason for his assassination. There would have been no need to
ascribe to Uthman other reasons like squander­ing the Baitul Mal of the
Muslims unlike his predecessors, or other such reasons.

(d) It would have become incumbent upon Ali (‘a) to restore to the
Qur’an what had been interpolated or omitted, and to bring it up to date
with the original as it existed during the time of the Prophet (‘s) and
the first two Caliphs. In so doing he could not have been censured. In
fact, Ali (‘a) could have advanced a convincing reason against those who
accused him of having condoned the killing of Uthman, and sought revenge
from him.

It is known that Ali (‘a) returned all the lands to their rightful
owners which had been wrongfully granted to others by Uthman. In his
sermon, he said:

*"By God, if I were to find that some women were married by that wealth
or some maidservants were owned by it, I would return it to their
rightful owners. Whoever finds justice stifling, must find injustice and
tyranny all the more so"*.[^2]

This is what Ali (‘a) said in respect of the wealth. One can easily
imagine what his stand would be if he found out that the Qur’an was
interpolated or tampered with. The fact that he accepted the Qur’an as
it existed in his time is a convincing proof against any *Tahrif.*

No attempt at the interpolation of the Qur’an are known to have occurred
after the era of the four Caliphs, except a report that Hajjaj omitted
many verses from the Qur’an, which dealt disparagingly with the rule of
the Umayyids, and also added to it some which were not there originally.
Then he is alleged to have prepared a new codex for distribution in
Egypt, Syria, Mecca, Medina, Basrah and Kufah. Thus, it is presumed that
the present Qur’an is the one prepared by Hajjaj, who meth­odically
destroyed all the previous copies, allowing not a single one to
remain[^3].

Obviously, this is a claim based on conjecture and it smacks of
delirium. For Hajjaj was merely one of the generals in the Umayyid
regime, with little influence and almost no ability to do the Qur’an any
harm. In fact, he was incapable of effecting any change in the most
elementary laws of Islam, not to speak of the Qur’an which is the
foundation of our faith, and pillar of Islamic Laws. One wonders how he
could influence any change in the Qur’an after it had gained currency in
so many Muslim countries. Not a single historian or commentator has
chronicled this change which because of its importance should not have
escaped their notice. No contemporary Muslim ever objected to this, and
even after his rule, the Muslims seem to have con­doned this abominable
act.

If at all it is believed that he managed to withdraw all the previous
copies of the Qur’an, replacing it with his new codex, how could he
eradicate it from the hearts of the Muslims who had committed it to
memory, and whose great number is known by none but Allah? Had there
been anything in the Qur’an which was uncomplimentary to the Umayyids,
Muawiyah would have been the first to see it omitted because, compared
to *Hajjaj,* he was more influential and powerful. Of course, if
Muawiyah had done this, the companions of Ali (‘a) would have argued
with him, the way they did on many occasions, as recorded in the books
of History, Hadith and Theology. As we said earlier, the pretence that
the Qur’an has been tampered with has no substance whatsoever.

[^1]: Bihar al anwar, Majlisi, v8, p.79

[^2]: Nahj al balaghah

[^3]: Manahilul Irfan p257


