The Traditions about Tahrif
===========================

It is imperative to investigate the correct interpretations of these
reports and to clarify that they have different applications. The
reports are of various types, and we must explain and comment on each
type specifically.

The first type: These are traditions which speak of *Tahrif* in its
literal meaning. They are twenty in all but we would confine ourselves
to some, leaving out those which are repetitive.

Tradition n. 1
--------------

1. Reported by Ali b. Ibrahim al‑Qummi, with his own chain of narrators
from Abu Dharr: "When this *ayah* was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يوم تبيضّ وجوه وتسودّ وجوة ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

the Prophet (‘s) said:

*"My people will come to me on the Day of Judgment under five banners".
Then it mentions that the Prophet (‘s) will ask them about their
dealings with thaqalayn (i.e. the Qur’an and Ahl ul-Bayt). The people of
the first banner will say: "As for the greater one (i.e. the Qur’an), we
tampered with it, and discarded it. And the smaller one, (i.e. Ahl
ul-Bayt) we offended it, hated it and dealt with it unjustly". The
second group will say: "As for the greater one, we tampered with it,
tore it into pieces, and turned hostile to it. And the smaller one, we
offended it and fought against it ...."*

Tradition n. 2
--------------

2. Reported by Ibn Ta'us and Sayyid al‑Muhaddith al Jaza’ari with their
chains of narrators from Hasan bin al‑Hasan As­ Samarri, a lengthy
tradition in which the Prophet (‘s) spoke to Hudhaifa about one who
would desecrate the *haram,*

*"He will lead people astray from the path of Allah, tamper with His
Book and change my Sunnah".*

Tradition n. 3
--------------

3. Reported by Sa'ad b. Abdillah al‑Qummi with his chain of narrators
from Jabir al Jufi' who reported from Abu Ja'far (Imam Muhammad Baqir
(‘a).

*"The Prophet (‘s) called people to assemble at Mina and announced: "O
people! I leave behind two invaluable things; you will not go astray as
long as you adhere to them: the Book of Allah, and my Ahl ul-Bayt ‑ and
Ka'ba, the sacred House of God". Then Abu Ja'far (‘a) said: "As for the
Book of Allah, they tampered with it, and Ka'ba, they demolished, and
the Ahl ul-Bayt they massacred. They discarded every trust of God
deposited with them, and dissociated themselves from it".*

Tradition n. 4
--------------

4. Reported by as Saduq in *"al‑Khisaal"* with his chain of narrators
from Jabir who reported from the Prophet (‘s):

*"On the Day of Judgement, three shall rise to complain: the Qur’an, the
Mosque and the Ahl ul-Bayt. The Qur’an will say: "O Allah, they tampered
with me, and they tore me apart. The Mosque will say: "O Allah, they
left me idle, and they ruined me. And the Ahl ul-Bayt will say: "O
Allah, they killed us, they discarded us and they drove us away.”*

Tradition n. 5
--------------

5. Reported in *al-Kafi* and by as‑Saduq with their chains of narrators
from Ali b. Suwaid:

*"I wrote a letter to Abul Hasan Musa (‘a) (i.e. Imam Musa b. Ja'far
al‑Kadhim) ‑ when he was in prison". Then he proceeds to quote fully his
reply in which he said: "They were entrusted with the Book of Allah, but
they tampered with it and changed it"*

Tradition n. 6
--------------

6. Reported by Ibn Shahr Ashub with his chain of reporters from Abdullah
who quoted the sermon of Imam Husayn (‘a) on the day of *Ashura.* In it,
it is mentioned:

*"Surely, you are the despots of the Ummah, a strange lot, insubordinate
to the Book, inspired by Satan, league of sinners and corrupters of the
Book".*

Tradition n. 7
--------------

7. Reported in *Kamiluz Ziyarat* by its chain of narrators from Hasan b.
Atiyyah who reports from Abu Abdillah (Imam Ja’far as‑Sadiq (‘a)):

*"When you enter al‑Haer (in the shrine of Imam Husayn (‘a)) say: "O
Allah, curse those who disbelieved in your prophets, desecrated your
Ka'bah, and tampered with your Book ."*

Tradition n. 8
--------------

8. Reported from al Hajjal who reports from Qatbah b. Maimun who reports
from Abdul A'ala:

*"Abu Abdillah (‘a) said: The scholars of Arabic language displace the
words of Allah, Most High, from their rightful places".*


