A Reflection on the Collection of the Holy Qur’an
=================================================

The question how the Qur'an was collected into a book form is among
those topics which has led some to believe in interpol­ation or
tampering having occurred in the Qur'an. The process, as generally
described, makes such changes appear inevitable.

It was therefore necessary to attend to this discussion with a view to
establishing that no interpolation, alterations or omis­sions have
occurred in the Qur'an.

Actually, the pristine quality of the Qur'an became doubtful because it
was believed that Abu Bakr ordered its compilation after 70 reciters of
the Qur'an were killed in the battle of Bir Maunah, and four hundred in
the battle of Yamamah. Fearing that the Qur'an would be lost and
forgotten by the believers, Umar and Zaid b. Thabit undertook the task
of collection from scripts found on palm branches, pieces of cloth and
covers, and also from the memory of the Muslims, provided that two
witnesses gave testimony that it was from the Qur'an. There are several
reports which indicate that such an exercise was indeed carried out.
When a compiler is not infallible, one can safely expect an element of
error to creep in. Those who compile the widely scattered poems of one
single poet could give you various versions of the couplets. These
variations are usual, leading finally to the belief that some tampering
has occurred. It is quite possible that someone, in spite of having
actually heard the Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny) recite
verses from the Qur'an, did not venture to present them because he could
not provide two witnesses. Thus, an omission becomes quite probable.

The answer to this is that the doubt becomes valid only if the reports
about compilation of Qur'an are deemed credible. So, it is imperative
that we mention those reports and analyse them critically.


