The Traditions about the Compilation of the Qur’an
==================================================

Report n. 1
-----------

1. Zaid b. Thabit says:

*"Abu Bakr sent for me after the battle of Yamamah, and I found Umar
also present. Abu Bakr said: \`Umar has come to tell me that the day of
Yamamah has been hard for the reciters of the Qur'an, and he fears that
other such occasions may be harder still, resulting in the loss of
greater part of the Qur'an. He says I must give orders for compilation
of the Qur'an. I told Umar that how could he do a thing which the
Messenger of Allah did not do? Umar said: "But this, by God, is
desirable". And Umar has been referring this matter to me persistently,
till at last Allah opened up my chest for that undertaking, and I began
to hold the same view as Umar's.*

Zaid says:

*"Abu Bakr said: \`You are a young intelligent man, and we find no fault
in you. You were also a scribe, writing down the revelations for the
Messenger of Allah. So attend to the Qur'an, and compile it'. By God, if
they had entrusted me with removing a mountain from among the mountains,
the task would not have been heavier for me than that of collecting and
compiling the Qur'an. I asked: \`Why do you undertake someth­ing the
Prophet himself never did?' He answered: \`By God, this is desirable'.
And then Abu Bakr never left me without re­minders, till Allah opened up
my chest, the way He did for Abu Bakr and Umar, and I attended to the
work, compiling the Qur'an from palm‑branches, pieces of cloth, and from
the memory of the people, till I found the last part of Surah al‑Tawbah
with Abu Khuzaimah Al Ansari, which no one else had.*

**  
**
لقد جاءكم رسول من انفسكم عزيز عليه ما عنتم حريص عليكم بالمؤمنين رؤوف
رحيم. فان تولوا فقل حسبي الله لا اله الا هو علية توكلت وهو رب العرش
العظيم

*till the end of Bara’ah. These compiled pages were with Abu Bakr till
he died, then with Umar in his lifetime, and then with Hafsa, daughter
of Umar"*.[^1]

Report n. 2
-----------

2. Ibn Shihab reports from Anas b. Malik:

*“When Huzaifah b. al‑Yaman, with the Iraqis, was fighting the people of
Syria, in the conquest of Armenia and Azerb­aijan, he once came to
Uthman and expressed his fears about variations in the recitations of
Qur'an. Huzaifa told Uthman: \`O master of the faithfuls! Come to the
rescue of this ummah, before it is entangled into disagreements about
the Book, the same way as Christians and Jews have been.*

*\`Uthman sent a message to Hafsa asking her to submit the notes of
Qur'an she held so that they could be copied into books, promising that
they would be returned to her care and trust. Hafsa submitted the notes
to Uthman who ordered Zaid b. Thabit, Abdullah b. az‑Zubair, Saeed b.
al‑Aas, Abdur­ Rahman b. al‑Harth b. Hisham, to transcribe. And Uthman
told the group of three Qureishites: \`If you differ with Zaid b. Thabit
on any parts of the Qur'an, write down according to the dialect of
Qureish, because it has come down in their dialect'.*

*\`So they did the work, and when they had transcribed the notes into
the books, Uthman returned the notes to Hafsa. Then he sent a copy to
every place, ordering that all other versions of the Qur'an, found in
pages or books must be set on fire'.*

Ibn Shihab says:

*"Kharijah b. Zaid b. Thabit informed me that he heard Zaid b. Thabit
report the following: \`When we were copying the notes, I found that an
ayah from the Surah Al‑Ahzab was missing. It was an ayah I had been
hearing the Messenger of Allah himself recite. So we went in search of
it, and found it with Khuzaimah b. Thabit al‑Ansari:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من المؤمنين رجال صدقوا ماعاهدوا الله عليه...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*and we added it to its Surah in the book.*[^2]

Report n. 3
-----------

3. Ibn Abi Shaybah, on his own chain , of authorities, reports from Ali:

"*Abu Bakr deserves the best reward for the copies of Qur'an, for he was
the first one to compile what exists between the two covers".*

Report n. 4
-----------

4. Ibn Shihab reports from Salim b. Abdillah and Kharijah:

*"Abu Bakr had compiled the Qur'an in some papers, and then asked Zaid
b. Thabit to go through them. Zaid refused, till Abu Bakr asked Umar to
intervene. So Zaid agreed. These books were with Abu Bakr till he died,
then with Umar till he died, and thereafter with Hafsa, the Prophet's
wife. When Uthman sent for them, she refused to part with them, till he
pledged that they would be returned to her. Then she gave them. Uthman
transcribed them into the books, and returned the original to Hafsa with
whom they remained.”*

Report n. 5
-----------

5. Hisham b. Urwah reports from his father, who said:

*"When the participants of Yamamah were killed, Abu Bakr ordered Umar b.
al‑Khattab and Zaid b. Thabit: \`Sit at the door of the Mosque, and when
anyone brings something from the Qur'an which you suspect, write it down
if it is witnessed by two men'. This is because those companions of the
Prophet (‘s) who had compiled the Qur'an had been killed at Yamamah".*

Report n. 6
-----------

6. Muhammad b. Sheen says:

*"Umar got killed, without having compiled the Qur'an".*

Report n. 7
-----------

7. Al‑Hasan says:

*"Once Umar b. al‑Khattab inquired about a verse in the Qur'an. Someone
said: "It was with so and so, but he was killed on the day of Yamamah".*

*Umar replied: "To Allah we belong!" Then he ordered the compilation of
the Qur'an. So he was the first to compile it into a book form".*

Report n. 8
-----------

8. Yahya b. Abdir Rehman b. Hatib says:

*"Umar wished to compile the Qur'an, so he stood among the people and
said: Anyone from you who had heard part of the Qur'an from the
Messenger of Allah, should come to us with it'. They had written down
parts of the Qur'an on pages, boards and palm‑branches. Umar did not
accept anything unless it was supported by two witnesses. He was killed
while the compilation continued.*

*Then Uthman took over. He said: \`Anyone who has someth­ing of the
Qur'an with him should bring to us'. And he never accepted anything
without having two witnesses. Then Khuzaimah b. Thabit came to him and
said: "I find that you have left out two verses which you have not
recorded". They asked: "Which are they"? He said: "I have received from
the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his progeny):*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لقد جاءكم رسول من انفسكم عزيز عليهما عنتم..
  </p>
</blockquote>

*till the end of the Surah. So Uthman said: "And I bear witness that
these two verses are from Allah. Now, tell us where do you want us to
place them?" Khuzaimah said: "Place them at the end of what was last
revealed of the Qur'an". So Baraah was ended with them".*

Report n. 9
-----------

9. Ubaid b. Umair said:

*"Umar never recorded any verse in the compilation till it was witnessed
by two men. Then a man from Ansar brought to him these two verses:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لقد جاءكم رسول من انفسكم عزيز عليه ماعنتم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*till its end. Umar said: I shall never ask you to substantiate these.
The Messenger of Allah was indeed like that'.* [^3]

Report n. 10
------------

10. Sulaiman b. Arqam reports from Al‑Hasan and Ibn Sirin and Ibn Shihab
Az‑Zuhri. They said:

*"In the battle of Yamamah, massacre spread among reciters of the
Qur'an, killing four hundred men. Then Zaid b. Thabit met Umar b.
al‑Khattab and told him: \`This Qur'an binds us to our faith. If Qur'an
vanishes, our faith vanishes also. I have decided to compile the Qur'an
in a book form'. Umar asked him to withhold till he had consulted Abu
Bakr. They went to Abu Bakr and informed him about the intention. He
said: \`Do not make haste. Wait till I have consulted the Muslims'. Then
he stood to address the people and informed them about the intention.
They said: "You have made the right decision". So they compiled the
Qur'an. Then Abu Bakr ordered a herald to announce among people:
"Whoever has any part of the Qur'an with him should come up with it".*

Report n. 11
------------

11. Khuzaimah b. Thabit reports:

*"I brought the following ayah to Umar b. al‑Khattab and Zaid b.
Thabit:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لقد جاءكم رسول من انفسكم...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Zaid asked: "Who bears witness with you?" I said: "No. I do not know
anyone". So Umar said: "I bear witness with him for the ayah".*

Report n. 12
------------

12. Abu Ishaq reports from some of his friends. They said:

*"When Umar had completed the collection of the Qur'an, he inquired:
"Who is most well versed in Arabic?" They said: "Saeed b. al‑Aas". Then
he asked: "Who is most proficient writer?" They said:* *"Zaid b.
Thabit". He said: "Then Saeed should dictate and Zaid should write
down". So they transcribed four copies of the Qur'an. A copy each was
sent to Kufah, Basrah, Syria and Hijaz".*

Report n. 13
------------

13. Abdullah b. Fadhalah says:

*"When Umar decided to write down the master copy of the Qur'an, he
appointed a group of his companions for it and they said: "When you have
any disagreement over the language. write it down in the dialect of
Mudhar. Because Qur'an came down to a man from the family of Mudhar".*

Report n. 14
------------

14. And Abu Qalabah said:

*"In the days of Uthman's caliphate, a tutor would teach recitation
according to a particular person, while another would teach recitation
according to another person; so when the boys (students) met, they
disagreed about each other's recitations. This finally came to the
attention of the tutors who labelled each other's recitations as
profane.*

*When Uthman learnt about this, he stood up to address the people and
said:*

*"If you who are near me have so much of disagreements and confusion,
then those who are farther away must have worse differences and errors.
So, O Companions of Muhammad, join hands to write down a master copy of
the Qur'an".*

Abu Qalabah says:

*Malik b. Anas told me: (According to Abu Bakr b. abi Dawud this Malik
b. Anas is the grandfather of the known Malik b. Anas) "I was among
those to whom the copy was dictated. So whenever there was any
disagreement about an ayah, they would try to remember somebody who had
heard it from the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his
progeny). And if he was away, or lived in the deserts, they would write
the preceding and the following words, leaving the disputed part till
the person they wanted to refer to appeared, or was sent for. When the
copy was finally ready, Uthman wrote to all the towns saying: "I have
done this way, and have struck off what I had, so you strike off what
you have"*

Report n. 15
------------

15. Masa'b b. Sa'ad reported:

*"Uthman stood to address the people and said: 'O people, you are only
thirteen years away from the era of the Prophet (‘s) and have already
begun to dispute about the Qur'an. Some of you talk of the recitation by
Ubayy, while others quote the recitation by Abdullah. And one tells the
other that his recitation has no value. So I command everyone who has
any part of the Qur'an with him to come up with it'. Then people started
coming with the Qur'an written on pieces of papers and patches of skin,
till most of it was compiled. Then Uthman called them individually,
imploring each of them to confirm that he had heard the Prophet (‘s)
recite for him, and each confirmed. When it* *was over, Uthman said:
"Who is the best scribe?" They said: "The scribe of the Prophet (‘s),
Zaid b. Thabit". He said: "Who is most proficient in Arabic?" They said;
"Saeed b. al‑Aas". Uthman said: "Then Saeed should dictate and Zaid
should write". So Zaid started writing and made out several copies which
were distributed among men. Then I heard a companion of Muhammad say:
"He has done well".*

Report n. 16
------------

16. Abul Malih says:

*"When Uthman decided to have the Qur'an copied, he said: "People of
Huzail would dictate and people of Thaqif would write".*

Report n. 17
------------

17. Abdul A'la b. Abdillah b. Abdillah b. Amir al Qarshi says:

*"When he had completed the work of compilation, Uthman came up with it,
and looking in it said: \`I see some minor errors which Arabs will mend
on their tongues"'.*

Report n. 18
------------

18. Ikramah said:

*"When the transcribed Qur'an was brought before Uthman, he saw some
minor error. So he said: "Had it been dictated by someone from Huzail
and written by one from Thaqif, this error would not have occurred.*

Report n. 19
------------

19. Ata says:

*"When Uthman compiled the Qur'an, he sent for Ubayy b. Ka'ab who
dictated it to Zaid b. Thabit, Saeed b. al‑Aas gave grammatical
inflections. So this copy is according to the recitation by Ubayy and
Zaid".*

Report n. 20
------------

20. Mujahid reported:

*Uthman ordered Ubayy b. Ka'ab to dictate, Zaid b. Thabit to write down
and Saeed b. al‑Aas and Abdur‑Rahman b. al‑Harth to give grammatical
inflections".*

Report n. 21
------------

21. Zaid b. Thabit said:

*"When we transcribed the Qur'an, I found that an ayah which I had been
hearing from the Prophet (‘s) was mis­sing, I found it with Khuzaima b.
Thabit*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من المؤمنين رجال صدقوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

up to

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تبديلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And two witnesses. Khuzaima was known as one equal to Prophet (‘s) had
accepted his testimony as equal to two".*

Report n. 22
------------

22. Laith b. Sa'd said:

*"The first person who collected Qur'an was Abu Bakr, and Zaid wrote it
down. And people came to Zaid b. Thabit, but he would not write down any
ayah except when supported by two witnesses. The ending part of Bara’ah
was not found except with Abu Khuzaimah b. Thabit. He said: "Write it
down, because the Messenger of Allah (‘s) had accepted his witness as
equal to two witnesses". So it was written. And when Umar came up with
the ayah of Rajm (i.e. stoning the adult­erer or adulteress to death) it
was not recorded because he was alone".*[^4]

These are the important traditions reported on the subject of
compilation of the Qur'an. Apart from being isolated reports which give
no benefit of certitude, they have various def­iciencies.

[^1]: Sahih, Bukhari, bab jamul Qur’an, v6, p.98

[^2]: Sahih, Bukhari, bab jamul Qur’an, v6, p.99, note, these two
reports, and the following ones till No. 11 are mentioned in Muntakhab
of Kanz al Ummal, on the margin of Ahmad Hanbal's Musnad, v2, p. 43‑52.

[^3]: This tradition in Muntakhab of Kanzul Ummal has been repor­ted by
Yahya b. Ju'dah.

[^4]: al Itqan, v1, p.101


