Introduction
============

*To things immortal, time can do no wrong,*

*And that which never is to die, for ever must be young.*

With the passage of time, many great messages have been lost, and those
which have survived must be subjec­ted to close scrutiny. How often do
we hear and learn a corrupt version of a statement or an event, even if
the lapse of time in between was short? It was perhaps for this reason
that even Emerson, the famous and comparatively cheerful sage, declared:
*"The surest poison is time.".* His­tory has always been haunted by this
ravaging and devour­ing aspect of time.

Ever since man was created, the principle message to him has been that
of absolute unity of God, and that all men and women are his slaves.
Today, the defaced form of this message is visible in the form of
numerous deities, some openly polytheistic, others under the guise of
mon­otheism. The great books revealed to the early Prophets have been
victims of profane hands which succeeded even to convert some parts of
the sacred texts into the most tasteless and immoral anecdotes and
parables. The subst­ance of the original message was deliberately
allowed to disappear with a growing number of interpolations.

Humanity today would have had no chance whatsoever to know about the
message in its pristine form, had it not been redeemed by the great
Prophet of Islam, Muhammad (peace be upon him and his progeny). Among
the hostile people of various shades of faith, some engaged in
poly­theism while others in dualism and trinity of godhead, his famous
simple dictum was: "*Say: There is no* *God but Allah, and you will be
saved*". All gods, made of metal wood or other materials, and those
comprising of pious prophets and virtuous men and women, were asked to
succumb before one God, Allah, and His Will. He told humanity then, and
continues to do so even today, that the eternal message from Allah is
that of His absolute unity, and that none be worshipped; not even human
desire which lies like a venomous viper in the bosoms.

This great message is enshrined in the Qur'an, the only book of God,
which has remained unsullied, untainted, pure and unprofaned. The sure
greedy hands of *time could* not destroy the sacrosanct quality of
Qur'an, not because it was not tried, ‑ but because Qur'an is inherently
incorruptible. It has a style and form which is inimitable, rendering
any change or alteration creeping stealthily into it easily detect­ible.
The transmission of every verse of this great Book has been continuous
ever since it left the lips of the Prophet as a revelation from Allah.
And then there is the content of the Book, destined to remain an
illuminating, ever shining light for those who grope in darkness. Qur'an
is irreplaceable.

Our sixth Imam, Ja’far as‑Sadiq (‘a) has said:

"*Qur'an is living, its message never died. It turns like the turn of
day and night, it is in motion like the sun and the moon. It will
embrace the last of us, the way it embraced the first of us*"[^1]

Sadly enough, Muslims have recently initiated a mud slinging match
amongst themselves, accusing each other of disbelief in the Qur'an or
interpolation. Such an attack from non‑Muslims is understandable,
because Qur'an stands in a sharp contrast to the corrupted divine texts
they hold in their hands. *But why the Muslims?*

Ayatullah Sayyid Abul Qasim al Khui, the great Mujtahid of our era,
examines here the subject with an insight singular­ly his own.

[^1]: Al‑Ayyashi


