Their Conflict with Consensus
=============================

These reports contradict the unanimous belief of all the Muslims that
the only way of establishing the authenticity of the Qur'an is
*tawattur,* which means \`a continuous and wide spread acknowledgement'.
If we believe these reports, then it would follow that the Qur'an is
established as authentic by reliance on two witnesses at every stage of
compilation, or one witness whose testimony was accepted as equal to
two. This means that the authenticity is proved by an isolated report
also, a concept unthinkable to a Muslim. I wonder how can we reconcile
between the two; one telling us that the Qur'an depends upon evidence,
and the other telling us that it had an unbroken, widespread currency
among the people ‑ *tawattur,* needing no further corroboration. If we
accept the consensus that the Qur'an is evidenced by *tawattur,* then we
have no alternative but to reject all the reports contradicting it.

Surprisingly enough, Ibn Hajar interprets two witnesses as "written
evidence" and "evidence of memorization". I believe he had to take
recourse to this interpretation so as to avoid a conflict with the fact
that the Qur'an is based on *tawattur.* But even this interpretation has
many faults:

(a) It is contrary to the evident meaning of all the reports you have so
far seen.

(b) This would mean that no parts of the Qur'an, however explicitly
based on *tawattur*, would be accepted if they were not written down by
someone. It becomes quite probable that certain parts of the Qur'an
which, though current and wide­spread, were omitted because there was no
written evidence.

(c) When *tawattur* exists, the written or memorized evidence is
superfluous and redundant. In fact, such evidences would not be
acceptable as parts of the Qur'an, if they do not comply with
*tawattur*.

In fact, there is no alternative but to reject all these reports,
because they prove the authenticity of the Qur'an on things other than
*tawattur*. And the consensus of the Muslims lends no support either.


