The Meaning of Tahrif
=====================

**The Meaning of** ***Tahrif*** **(interpolation or tampering)**

This word is used with common denotations, some of which are acceptably
applicable to the Qur’an; and the others are either inapplicable or
disputed. The details are as below.

First, the meaning is to transfer an object from its place to another.
Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ الَّذِينَ هَادُوا يُحَرِّفُونَ الْكَلِم عَنْ مَوَاضِعه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muslims are agreed upon the fact that such an interference has occurred
in the Qur’an, because whenever someone interprets the Qur’an without
understanding its true meaning and transforms its real meaning to
something irrelevant, he tampers with it.

Many have introduced innovations and unfounded beliefs into Islam by
basing their arguments on interpretation of the Qur’an according to
their own whims and opinions.

There are several traditions which forbid this type of inter­pretations,
and condemn its perpetrators. In *al-Kafi*, a tradition by Imam Muhammad
al‑Baqir (‘a) says that he wrote to Sa'ad al‑Khayr:

*"One of the examples of their repudiation of the Book has been that
they stood by its letters and distorted its injunctions; they narrate
it, but do not have deference to its teachings. The ignorant are
impressed by their narrations and recitations, while the learned are
grieved to see their disregard for its protec­tion..."*[^1]

Secondly, the meaning of *Tahrif* is an omission or an addition of a
letter or a change in grammatical in­flections, without effecting any
change in the content of the Qur’an. This change may sometimes not be
discernible from the rest of the Qur’an.

This type of change has definitely occurred in the Qur’an. We have
already pointed out earlier that the so called various readings of the
Qur’an were not based on *tawattur,* which means that the Qur’an was
really based on only one authentic system of reading, and the rest were
either additions or omissions.

The third meaning of *Tahrif* is an omission or an addition of a word or
two, at the same time leaving the essence of the Qur’an untouched.

It is the type of interpolation which surely occurred in the first
century of Islam, and in the days of the companions of the Prophet (‘s).
The fact that Uthman burnt up all other copies of the Qur’an, and
ordered his emissaries to do away with all the copies other than the
codex prepared by himself, is an ample proof that there existed some
difference between his copy and the others, else he would not have asked
for their destruc­tion.

In fact, some of the scholars have recorded those differences, like
Abdullah b. Abi Dawud as‑Sajistani who wrote a book titled: *Kitabul
Masahif.* It could be inferred that some interpolation had occurred,
either on the part of Uthman or on the part of the scribes who prepared
their copies. But we will soon establish that the copy of Uthman was
actually the one already known to the Muslims. It was the one which was
handed over from the Prophet (‘s) and widely used. The *Tahrif* by way
of addition or omission had occurred in those copies which ceased to
exist after the era of Uthman. As for the existing Qur’an, it is totally
free from any omission or addition.

In short, those who rightly believe that those extra codices of the
Qur’an were not authenticated by *tawattur,* that is to say that their
authenticity was not established by wide currency and acceptance among
Muslims, for them it is also right to believe that this sort of
tampering had occurred in the beginning, but it ceased to exist after
the time of Uthman. This leads us to believe that only that Qur’an
remained authentic which was supported by a continuous chain joined with
the Prophet (‘s).

Those who hold that all the codices, despite their variations, were
based on *tawattur*, will have to subscribe to the disputed view that
*Tahrif* has occurred in the Qur’an, and that some parts of it is lost.
Tabari has classified, as you have noticed earlier, that Uthman
dismissed the six variations of reading, and allo­wed only one to
sustain.

The fourth meaning of *Tahrif* is addition or suppression of an *ayah*
or a *Surah*, at the same time preserving the revealed Qur’an intact,
and accepting the fact that the Prophet (‘s) recited it as a part of the
Qur’an.

And this has definitely occurred in the Qur’an. The *"basmalah"* for
example, is an *ayah* for which Muslims unanimously hold that the
Prophet (‘s) recited it before every *Surah* except the *Surah* of
*al‑Tawbah*. Yet, among the *Ulama’* of Ahlus ­*Sunnah*, it is a subject
of dispute. Some of them suggest that it is not a part of the Qur’an,
and the Malikites have gone to the extent as to consider it Makruh to
recite it before the *Surah* of *Fatihah* in the daily prayers, except
when one intends to thereby digress from another *Surah*. And then there
is a group among them who say that it is a part of the Qur’an.

The Shi’as are unanimous that *basmalah is* a part of every *Surah*
except *al‑Tawbah,* and this has been accepted by some Sunni scholars as
well. When we start our commentary of the Surah al‑Fatihah, we will
enlarge upon this subject. So we see that *Tahrif* in the form of
exclusion or suppression has certainly taken place.

The fifth meaning of *Tahrif is* that an addition of such a nature has
taken place which rendered certain parts un­authentic. This indeed is
totally inapplicable to the Holy Qur’an. Such a change has not occurred
in the Qur’an, and this must be believed in as cardinal part of the
faith.

The sixth meaning is *Tahrif by* omission. This would imply that the
Qur’an we have today is incomplete and that people are deprived of some
parts of Qur’an.

It is over this implication that the dispute arose, with certain people
rejecting it altogether, and certain group conceding it.

[^1]: al-Wafi, p.274


