Abrogation of Recitation a Fact or a Myth
=========================================

Most of the Sunni *Ulama’* have mentioned that the recitation of some
parts of the Qur’an was abrogated, confirming at the same time, through
the reports, that those abrogated parts were in the Qur’an during the
days of the Prophet (‘s). We will quote some of those reports here to
prove that such a belief makes it necessary to also believe that an
interpolation took place.

Tradition n. 1
--------------

(a) Ibn Abbas reports that Umar said while on the pulpit:

*"God sent Muhammad (‘s) with Truth, and sent down unto him the Book.
And among that which was revealed was an ayah about rajm which we read,
understood and heeded. And based on that, the Prophet (‘s) stoned, and
after him, we stoned. I fear that with the lapse of time, people may
say: \`we do not find the ayah of rajm in the book of God', and thus go
astray by abandoning that which* *God has ordained. The ordi­nance of
stoning was indeed prescribed for the adulterers in the book of God …..
And then, among verses we read, there was a verse which said*[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان لا ترغبوا عن ابائكم فانه كفر بكم أن ترغبوا عن آبائكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*or it was*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان كفرا بكم أن ترغبوا عن آبائكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Suyuti has mentioned: Ibn Ashtah has reported from Layth b. Sa'ad,
who said:

"*The first person to collect the Qur’an was Abu Bakr and Zaid wrote it
down … And Umar came up with the ayah of rajm, but he did not record it
because Umar was the sole reporter*".[^2]

This verse of *rajm* which Umar claimed to have been in the Qur’an, and
was rejected, has been reported in several forms; among them are:

(i)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا زنى الشيخ والشيخة فارجموهما البتة . نكالا من الله والله عزيز حكيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

and (ii)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشيخ والشيخة فارجموهما البتة بما قضيا من اللذة
  </p>
</blockquote>

and (iii)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان الشيخ والشيخة اذا زنيا فارجموهما البتة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whatever be the case, there is nothing in the Qur’an today which
indicates the law of stoning the adulterers. And if the reports are to
be considered true, then it follows that an *ayah* has definitely
disappeared from the Qur’an.

Tradition n. 2
--------------

(b) Tabrani has reported with reliable chain of narration from Umar b.
al‑Khattab:

"*The Qur’an had one million and twenty seven thousand letters*".[^3]

While the existing Qur’an does not have even one third of the number.
So, one is led to believe that more than two‑third of the Qur’an has
been lost.

Tradition n. 3
--------------

(c) Ibn Abbas reports from Umar:

*"God sent Muhammad (‘s) with Truth and sent down unto him the Book. And
among things revealed was an ayah of rajm. So the Prophet (‘s) stoned
and after him we stoned too*". Then Umar added: "*We used to recite*[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا ترغبوا عن آبائكم فانه كفربكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

or

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان كفرا بكم ان ترغبوا عن آبائكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tradition n. 4
--------------

(d) Nafe' reports that Ibn Umar said:

"*One of you might claim that he has taken the complete Qur’an, but what
does he know of the Complete Qur’an? Much from the Qur’an has
disappeared, so he should say: I have taken what has been traced*"[^5].

Tradition n. 5
--------------

(e) Urwah b. Zubair reports from Aisha:

"*The Surah of al‑Ahzab as read during the times of the Prophet (‘s)
comprised of two hundred verses. When Uth­man prepared the codex, we did
not get except what it has remained to be*"[^6].

Tradition n. 6
--------------

(f) Hamidah binti Anas says:

*It was read before my father who was 80, from the codex of Aisha*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان لله وملئكته يصلون على النبي يا ايها الذين آمنوا صلو عليه وسلموا
تسليما وعلى الذين يصلون الصفوف الاولى
  </p>
</blockquote>

She says: \`*This was before Uthman changed the texts*'.

Tradition n. 7
--------------

(g) Abu Harb b. Abil Aswad reports from his father:

"A*bu Musa Al‑Asha'ri sent for the Qura' (the reciters of Basrah), and
three hundred men called upon him, who had all read the Qur’an. Then he
said : \`You are the best of the people of Basrah, and their reciters.
Read the Qur’an constantly, otherwise. before too long, your heart may
harden the way the hearts of your predecessors had hardened. We used to
read a Surah which we compared, in length and severity, with the Surah
of Bara’ah, but I have now forgotten it, except a verse which says*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو كان لابن آدم واديان من مال لا بتغى واديا ثالثا ولا يملأ جوف ابن آدم
الا التراب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And we used to read a Surah which we compared with one of the
musabbihat (Surahs which begin with sabbaha or yusab­bihu) but I have
forgotten it except a verse I remember*[^7]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا ايها الذين آمنوا لم تقولون ما لا تفعلون, فتكتب شهادة في اعناقكم
فتسألون عنها يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tradition n. 8
--------------

(h) *Zarr says: Ubayy b. Ka'b told me, O Zarr: "How much of Surah of al
Ahzab do you read?" I said: "Seventy three verses". He said: "though it
was equal to the Surah of al Baqarah, or it was longer than that"*. [^8]

Tradition n. 9
--------------

(i) Ibn Abi Dawud and Ibn Ambari report from Ibn Shihabi: "*We have been
informed that much more of the Qur’an had been revealed ‑ but those who
knew it were killed at Yamamah. They had preserved it, and it was never
known or written after them.*.."[^9]

Tradition n. 10
---------------

(j) Umrah reports from Aisha: "*Among that which was revealed in the
Qur’an, is the follow­ing verse*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عشر رضعات معلومات يحرمن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*then it was abrogated to read*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خمس معلومات
  </p>
</blockquote>

*and they remained in the Qur’an till the Prophet (‘s) died.*[^10]

Tradition n. 11
---------------

(k) Miswar b. Makhramah reports: "*Umar inquired from Abdul Rahman b.
Awf if he had found the following ayah in the Qur’an*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
............أن جاهدوا كما جاهدتم اول مرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Abdul Rahman answered that the ayah had disappeared along with the lost
parts of the Qur’an*.[^11]

Tradition n. 12
---------------

(l) Abu Sufyan al‑Kala'i says that Muslimah b. Mukhallad al‑Ansari told
them one day: *"Inform me about those two verses of the Qur’an which
were never recorded". None would answer, not even Abul Kanood, Sa'ad b.
Malik who was there. Then Ibn Muslimah recited*[^12]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان الذين آمنوا وهاجروا و جاهدوا في سبيل الله باموالهم وانفسهم الا
أبشروا انتم المفلحون والذين آووهم ونصروهم وجادلوا عنهم قوم الذين غضب
الله عليهم اولئك لا تعلم نفس ما اخفي لهم من قرة اعين جزاء بما كانوا
يعلمون
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it has been narrated in various ways that the copies of Ibn Abbas
and Ubayy b. Ka'ab contained two extra *Surah*s: Al‑Khala' and Al‑Hafd.
It reads[^13]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم انا نستعينك ونستغفرك ونثني عليك ولا نكفرك ونخلع ونترك من يفجرك
اللهم اياك نعبد ولك نصلى ونسجد واليك نسعى ونحفد نرجو رحمتك ونخشي عذابك
ان عذابك بالكافرين ملحق
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is now evident that to say that certain parts of the Qur’an have been
excluded from recitation means to confirm interpola­tion and omission in
the Qur’an.

This can be further explained this way. The abrogation of those
recitations was either recommended by the Prophet (‘s) himself, or it
was done by those who came to power after the Prophet's death. If one
says that the Prophet (‘s) himself recommended it, then it is a claim
which calls for substantiation.

All *Ulama’* are agreed upon the principle that the Qur’an cannot be
superseded or abrogated by an isolate report ‑ i.e. a tradition which
has been reported singly. The jurists have made this abundantly clear in
their works on the principles of jurispru­dence. In fact, Shafi’i and
many other scholars go further to say that the Book of God, (i.e. the
Qur’an) cannot be superseded or abrogated by even those traditions which
have reached con­tinuity and acquired wide spread currency. This has
been con­firmed by Ahmed b. Hanbal in one of the two traditions reported
by him. Even those who proposed that a continuous and widespread
*Sunnah* may potentially supersede the Qur’an, have confirmed that such
a situation has in reality never occurred. In view of the foregoing, it
is incorrect to ascribe the abrogation to the Prophet (‘s). Even those
reports which mention the omissions clearly say that it occurred after
the Prophet (‘s).

But if it is proposed that the abrogation was perpetrated by those who
assumed leadership after the Prophet (‘s), then that indeed is tampering
with the Qur’an. It can safely be asserted that the occurence of
*Tahrif* in the Qur’an is supported by the majority of Sunni *Ulama’*,
because they believe that certain *ayah*s of the Qur’an were abrogated,
in as far as their recitation was concerned, irrespective of whether the
law con­tained in that *ayah* remained in force or not. Interestingly
enough, we find certain scholars among them disputing whether a person
in the state of *janabah* can recite those verses whose reading have
been reportedly abrogated, or whether a person without *wudhu* would be
permitted to touch the script of such a verse. Some of them have adopted
a view that this would not be permissible. Yes, among the Mutazilites,
there is a group which believes that an abrogation of recitation never
occurred[^14].

Is it not surprising to find Sunni *Ulama’* disputing the fact that some
of them are supporters of *Tahrif.* Alusi has censured Al‑Tabrasi of
having falsely accused *Hashawiyyah.* He wrote: "Not a single scholar
among the Sunnis has ever supported that view". Then he proceeds to
presume that al‑Tabrasi has been insisting on the absence of *Tahrif* to
alleviate the harm done by some Shia scholars who believed to the
contrary. All this makes a pathetic reading especially when it is well
known that the Shi’a scholars do not subscribe to *Tahrif* in the
Qur’an, while Al‑Tabrasi himself has extensively quoted Sayyid Murtadha,
enumerating all his arguments in support of the Qur’an's purity.

[^1]: Sahih, Bukhari v8, p.26.; Sahih, Muslim v5, p.116, without the
last sentence "And then, among verses .... "

[^2]: Al‑Itqan, v1, p.101

[^3]: Al‑Itqan, v1, p.121

[^4]: Musnad, Ahmed Hanbal, v1, p.48

[^5]: Al‑Itqan, V. 2, p. 40-41

[^6]: Al‑Itqan, V. 2, p. 40-41

[^7]: Sahih, Muslim v3, p.100

[^8]: Muntakhab Kanzul Ummal, on the margin of Musnad, Ahmad Hanbal v2,
p.43

[^9]: Muntakhab Kanzul Ummal, on the margin of Musnad, Ahmad Hanbal v2,
p.50

[^10]: Muslim, Sahih, v4, p.168

[^11]: al Itqan, v2, p.42

[^12]: al Itqan, v2, p.42

[^13]: al-Itqan, v1, p.122, 213

[^14]: Al‑Ahkam fi Usul il Ahkam, Amedi v3 p.217


