Tahrif and the Book Itself
==========================

Considering the foregoing, the fact is that *Tahrif,* in the sense which
has been a subject of disputation and contradictory opinions, has never
occurred in the Qur’an. Here we give proofs from the Qur’an itself:

First, Allah says in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Surely, We have sent down the reminder, and We will most surely be
its guardian". (Qur’an, 15:9)***

This *ayah* adequately proves that the Qur’an has been guar­ded from all
tampering, and that the profane hands shall have no wily access to it.

Some have tried to interpret this ayah differently, stating that
(reminder) represents the Prophet (‘s) as mentioned in the following
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْرًا رَّسُولًا يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Allah has indeed revealed to you a reminder: An Apostle who recites
to you the clear communications.” (Qur’an, 65:10-11)***

But this interpretation has many faults. The word “ذِكْرًا” has been
used in the context of **((تنزيل-انزال))** sending down", and therefore,
it befittingly applies to the Qur’an. Had it been for the Prophet, the
appropriate word would have been **((الارسال))** (sending our or sending
away) or something synonymous. And if we were to accept that represents
the Prophet (‘s) in the second ayah, it certainly does not in the first
ayah wherein Allah guarantees the protec­tion, because it preceded by
the following ayah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُواْ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِي نُزِّلَ عَلَيْهِ الذِّكْرُ إِنَّكَ
لَمَجْنُونٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And they say: O you to whom the reminder has been sent down! You are
most surely insane". (Qur’an, 15:6)***

This *ayah* undoubtedly refers to the Qur’an as **الذكر** and it becomes
easy to deduce that **الذكر** occurring in the subsequent *ayah* has the
same meaning.

Other interpreters have said that the preservation and protec­tion
promised by Allah refers to guarding the Qur’an against vilifications
and protecting it from any repudiation of its tea­chings. This
interpretation is also far‑fetched, because if it was meant to be
protected from vilification by the disbelievers, then the Qur’an has had
enough of it from the enemies of Islam. And if it is held to mean that
the teachings of the Qur’an are above any vilifications because of their
majesty, sublimity and the inherent strength in the arguments, then this
is true, but this kind of protection does not become necessary
***after*** the revelation. The inspiring quality of the Qur’an is
self‑protecting, needing no further protection. The *ayah*, as you will
observe, tells about protection ***after*** the revelation.

There is a third interpretation advanced by some which maintains that
the guardianship promised in the *ayah* is related to the whole of the
Qur’an as an entity, and does not apply to its individual verses and
chapters. According to them, the Qur’an in its complete form is safe
with the Twelfth Imam (‘a) who is in concealment, and thus the promise
has been fulfilled.

This interpretation is the most defective, because the Qur’an has to
remain guarded for the benefit of the people, for whom it was revealed.
To say that it is safe in the possession of the twelfth Imam (‘a), the
way it was fully entrenched in *lawhe mahfuz* or in the possession of an
angel, is just like someone saying: "I am sending you a gift and I shall
keep it in safe custody, or in the custody of my chosen one".

The suggestion that the guardianship is related to the Qur’an as a whole
emanates from the presumption that the Qur’an is what exists among us in
a book form, or what is on our tongues as a spoken word. This is not so,
because a book or a word may not exist for ever. Actually, the Qur’an,
or **الذكر** mentioned in the *ayah*, is that which was revealed to the
Prophet (‘s), and guarding it means warding off all possibilities of
distortions, interpolations and tampering, and protecting it from being
lost so as to ensure that people have access to it in full. When we say
that a particular eulogy or poem is guarded, we mean the original has
been preserved, and protected from being lost.

Yes, there is another doubt which could creep into the minds of those
who insist on *Tahrif.* They would say that it is unfair to base an
argument against *Tahrif* on this *ayah* because it is quite possible
that the *ayah* itself might have been tampered with. So, in order to be
able to rely on this *ayah* as a basis of our argument, we have to
revert to proving that there has been no *Tahrif* in the Qur’an. Thus a
vicious circle is formed.

This doubt is the result of alienating the *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* from
divine authority. Those who do not consider them an authority should
find this argument irrefutable. As for those who believe that they are
the authority divinely appointed, and that they are the rightful
companions of the Book with whom we must acquiesce, for them there is no
room for such a doubt. The fact that *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* based all their
deductions and conclusions on the Qur’an, and instructed their
companions implicitly as well as explicitly to accept it, amply
demonstrates that this Qur’an is an authority, even if it is claimed
that *Tahrif* had occurred. Ulti­mately, the evidence from the Qur’an,
against any interpolation having occurred,. is based on their
attestation.

The second proof from the Qur’an is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ لَكِتَابٌ عَزِيزٌ لَا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِن بَيْنِ
يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ تَنزِيلٌ مِّنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***" .... and most surely, it is a mighty book. Falsehood shall not come
to it from before it nor from behind it; a revelation from the Wise, the
praised One". (Qur’an, 41:41-42)***

This verse clearly indicates that the Book is free from all sorts of
falsehood, and when this type of general negation occurs, it denotes
totality. No doubt, *Tahrif* is a kind of falsehood and therefore it
cannot find its way to the holy Book.

This submission has been opposed by some who maintain that the
prevention of falsehood means the absence of any contradic­tion in its
laws, and that its message is far from being untrue. They seek support
from Ali b. Ibrahim al‑Qummi who has quoted this tradition in his
*Tafsir* from Imam Muhammad al‑Baqir (‘a):

*"No falsehood can be imputed to it from Torah, nor from injil or zabur;
and nor from behind it, which means no book will ever come to render it
false"*.

And they also quote another tradition from both Imam Muhammad al‑Baqir
and Imam Ja’far as‑Sadiq (‘a), recorded in *Majma ul Bayan*, which says:

*"There is no falsehood in what it has reported of the past, nor in what
it has conveyed of the future".*

In reply I submit that these traditions do not in anyway confine the
meaning of the word \`falsehood' to any single interpretation, nor do
they forbid us from accepting its general connotation. In the foregoing
chapter on "The excellence of the Qur’an", I have cited many reports
which indicate that the meanings of the Qur’an are not restricted. This
*ayah* exempts the Qur’an from all falsehood at all times, and since
inter­polations and tampering are a type of falsehood, they are also
precluded. A further evidence is provided by the *ayah* itself when it
describes the Qur’an as a Mighty Book. The \`might' is contained in its
ability to fortify itself against all loss or changes. To restrict the
meaning of falsehood to contradictions or false­hood within the book
would not fully justify the use of the word **al-‘izza**.


