Tahrif and Sunnah
=================

The third proof is from the traditions of *thaqalayn,* two invaluable
things left behind by the Prophet (‘s), wherein he said that they would
hold together till they arrive near him at the *Hawdh* (the pool of
*Kawthar*) and he asked his fol­lowers to remain adhered and attached to
them. These two things are the Qur’an and the *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* (his
true progeny). These traditions have been overwhelmingly reported by the
accepted chains of narration from both the sects of Islam[^1].

This tradition helps us establish the purity of the Qur’an from *Tahrif*
in two ways. First, the adherence would not be practical nor conceivable
if parts of the Qur’an were lost by way of interpolation or change. But
as the tradition clearly sets out, the adherence is required of the
ummah for ever, till the Day of Judgement. Therefore, *Tahrif* cannot be
accepted to have occurred.

Further, these traditions show that the *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* and the
Qur’an will remain together, present among men till the Day of
Judgement. It is therefore absolutely imperative that a person should
exist whom Qur’an accompanies, and also, the Qur’an must exist to be in
company with the *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)*, till they reach the Prophet
together at the *Hawdh*. And as the Prophet (‘s) has said in this
tradition, adherence to both of them would guard the Ummah from going
astray.

Obviously, the adherence to *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* is brought about by
affinity to them, by following what they enjoin and refraining from what
they forbid, and by walking on their guided path. It does not at all
need a direct contact with the Imam or talking to him personally. In
fact, such a contact is not possible for all Muslims even when an Imam
is visibly present, to say nothing of the days of concealment. Those who
insist on a contact of this nature do so without any reasonable
argument. The Shi’as, for example, are adherents of their Imam in
concealment (‘a) by way of love for him, and by following his behests,
which include following the *Ulama’* who carry their traditions, to
guide in matters which are contingent or incidental.

As for adherence to the Qur’an, it is not possible without direct access
to it, and therefore it is absolutely essential for it to be present
among the Ummah for guidance and prevention from going astray. This
explains why it is unnecessary to discuss about the guarded Qur’an being
in possession of the Imam (‘a) in concealment, because mere existence of
the Qur’an is not enough for Ummah to be able to follow; it has got to
be available.

It may be argued that the traditions of *Thaqalayn* indicate that only
those verses of the Qur’an have remained unaltered which deal with the
divine rules and laws, for they are the ones to be followed. They do not
necessarily cover other parts which do not enunciate any laws.

They forget that the Qur’an is a book of guidance to men, as a whole,
with all its verses, conducive to perfection in all aspects of life.
Thus there is no difference between the parts which contain the laws and
the others. In the foregoing chapter on excellence of the Qur’an, we
have explained how even those verses which apparently deal with the past
history have morale and admonition in them. The basic issue of
controversy has been the claim by some who say that the verse of
*wilayah* and related subjects have been omitted. The answer is that if
those had been proved to be parts of the Qur’an, then it would have been
obligatory upon the Ummah to adhere to them as well.

The benefit of this tradition is that if interpolation, dis­tortions,
deformations, alteration or omissions are allowed in the Qur’an, then
its authority lapses, and it would not be incumbent to follow the
outward or literal texts of the Qur’an. In such circumstances, the
believers *Tahrif* have no choice but to refer to *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* for
getting the Qur’an certified as an aut­hentic book, worthy of reference
by the people, in spite of the tampering having occurred.

This means that the authority of the Qur’an primarily depends upon the
sanction by *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)*, or upon any one having two authorities
for which the Prophet (‘s) ordered adherence. But of these two, the
Qur’an is greater and therefore its authority cannot be subservient to
the ratification of a lesser authority, i.e. *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)*. The
reason why we say that the authority of the Qur’an would lapse if
*Tahrif* is allowed is that because of such changes, there is every
possibility that the postulations of the Qur’an had some contextual link
with other qualifying parts which are lost.

An argument running counter to this maintains that it is not rational to
anticipate a contradictory or qualifying part if it does not readily
exist. One has to rely upon the literal text which is manifest and
existing. We have ourselves explained in our discussions of the
principles of jurisprudence that it is not rational to anticipate any
context which is not syntactic or which does not appear immediately in
the construction of a sentence. In fact, even those contexts, which are
in the syntax, can be ignored if they have been caused by the
carelessness of the speaker or negligence of the listeners.

But in this case, we maintain that this principle does not apply. Here,
there are the believers in *Tahrif,* who say that something is lost, and
therefore, reason will guide us to restrain from relying solely upon the
existing literal text of the Qur’an. Let us say, for example, a
scripture is found which instructs its followers to buy a house. Now if
a follower found out that certain parts of the scripture have been
ruined or missing, suspecting that those missing parts may have further
specifica­tions with regard to the size of a house to be bought, or its
value or location, it would be quite rational for him to refrain from
purchasing a house. He cannot take the existing text as complete, and if
he bought a house he would not be sure that he has carried out the
intended instruction of his Lord.

The reader may think that with this analogy, the whole foundation of
*fiqh,* together with the system of deductions and inferences of the
divine laws would collapse; because they depend chiefly on the
traditions reported from the *masumin* (‘a) (the Prophet (‘s) and his
pure progeny). And in these, there is a possibility that their saying
may not have been reported with the qualifying contexts. But with little
extra effort, this doubt can be allayed. In the case of the traditions,
what is to be followed is the report of a narrator in its complete form.
If there was any contextual evidence, he would include it in the
narration. The absence of any contextual qualifications or
contradictions in the tradition would simply mean that they did not
exist.

It is now an established fact that belief in *Tahrif* necessarily means
that the text of the Qur’an cannot be taken as an authority. Some people
say that, before accepting this conclu­sion, one must at least have a
comprehensive knowledge about those *ayahs* in which any deficiency may
have occurred. I maintain that this does not apply in the case of
*Tahrif,* because comprehensive knowledge becomes credible only when its
effect is seen in practice. Most of the verses of the Qur’an in which
*Tahrif is* believed to have occurred do not deal with any laws, and
therefore they would not be requiring this consideration.

There might be a claim that since the Imams of *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* have
based their guidance on the text of the Qur’an, and since their
followers and companions have acquiesced to their directive, therefore
the authority of the text of the Qur’an has been reinstated, even though
it may have lapsed before due to *Tahrif.* This claim has no substance
because the Imams of *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* did not initiate the authority
of the Qur’an. What they did was to confirm the authority of the Qur’an
by instruct­ing their followers to adhere to the scriptural text, giving
full recognition to the Qur’an as an independent, autonomous auth­ority.

[^1]: Musnad, Hanbal, v3, p14,17,26,59 reported from Abu Saeed
al-Khudri;v4, p.366,371 from Zaid b. Arqam.; v5, p.182, 189from Zaid b.
Thabit.) Jalal-ud-din Suyuti in his Jama’us Saghir reported from Tabrani
by Zaid b. Thabit, declaring it as authentic. Allamah al-Manawi in his
commentary: v3, p15 wherein he reports al-Haythami having said: \`All
the narrators are trustworthy'. Abu Ya'la reported it with an
unblemished chain of reporters, and Hafiz Abdul Aziz b. al-Akhdhar
quoted this with an addition: This was said by the Prophet (‘s) at the
time of the last Hajj. He also castigated those like Ibn Jawzi who have
classified this tradition as false. As-Samhudi says: This is among those
chapters wherein more than twenty companions of the Prophet (‘s) have
reported. al-Hakim has reported in al-Mustadrak v3, p.109 from Zaid b.
Arqam and has authenticated it. al-Dhahabi has not criticized it. The
words in the actual traditions vary, but the meaning conveyed is
constant.


