Permission to Recite the Surah in the Prayers
=============================================

The fourth proof is contained in the directive of the Imams of *Ahl
ul-Bayt (‘a)* to read a complete Surah in the first two *raka’ats* of
every obligatory prayer, after the Surah of al­ Fatihah. And they
allowed to divide a Surah or more in the case of *Salat ul ayat*
(prayers which become incumbent due to natural phenomena like eclipses
or earthquakes etc.), the details of which can be found in its place in
*Fiqh.*

Obviously, these laws are established parts of Shari’ah ever since the
prayers became obligatory, and they were not prompted by *taqiyyah* or
dissimulation. For those who hold that *Tahrif* or interpolation has
taken place in the Qur’an, it is important that they do not recite those
Surahs which they consider to have been tampered with, because restraint
is the only sure alternative in the case of doubt. Their excuse that
since a complete, unvaried Surah is not available, therefore they have
to accept whatever is available, cannot be accepted because that would
apply only if they believe that all the Surahs have been interpolated.
Since there is a Surah, like Surah of *Ikhlas,* which has remained
intact, they would have to resort to its recitation excluding the
others.

The directive by the Imams of *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* would not be of any
help to them as any authority, because the very fact that the Imams have
permitted and directed to read a complete Surah from the existing Qur’an
indicates satisfactorily that there has been no *Tahrif* whatsoever.
Otherwise, a Muslim unable to fulfil the, required condition of reciting
a complete Surah after *al‑Fatihah* would have to be exempted from the
obligatory prayers. We find that the Imams have directed us to read the
Surahs of *Ikhlas* and *Qadr,* recommended for every prayer. Since the
question of *taqiyyah* was never relevant here, the recommendation and
directive to read these two complete Surahs extends to all other Surahs
of the Qur’an.

A pretext that the obligation to recite a complete *Surah* has been
abrogated in the favour of reading whatever is currently available in
the present Qur’an is unacceptable, and I do not think the believers in
interpolation would seek refuge under it. The fact is that no abrogation
of this type could lave occurred after the Prophet (‘s). Some scholars
have hypothetically discussed the possibility or otherwise of such an
abrogation, but we are not concerned with those hypotheses here.

In short, there is no doubt that the Imams of *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* have
directed to recite the Surahs from the Qur’an we have among us in the
prayers. This ordinance has no room for *taqiyyah* either. One has to
believe that this was also the established directive given by the
Prophet (‘s) himself. It could not be a later development because that
would imply an abrogation ‑ and no abrogation ever occurred after the
Prophet (‘s), in spite of the hypothetical possibility. When it is
established beyond doubt that the ordinance of reciting complete Surahs
existed in the days of the Prophet (‘s), it follows that there has been
no *Tahrif.* This is evidenced in every law of Shari’ah, and it has been
successfully applied by the *Ahl ul-Bayt (‘a)* to their directive to
recite a complete Surah or a complete *ayah*.


