Imam and Imam Mahdi (aj)
========================

![](/sites/default/files/image9.jpg)

At the beck and call of Imam Mahdi’s orders
-------------------------------------------

* *  
 An old sheikh from Mazandaran used to be negative about the Imam for no
apparent reason, and even said to some people: “Don’t go to Imam’s
classes.”   
    
 Imam used to go to class every day at a quarter past ten. In order that
Imam would not be alone, I used to come in a hurry in order to go to
class with him.  One day, I saw that the old Sheikh was kissing the
outer door of Imam’s house and crying. With surprise I looked at him. 
When the Sheikh saw me he said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَمْدُ لِلّهِ الَّذِي هَدَانَا لِهَـذَا وَمَا كُنَّا لِنَهْتَدِيَ
لَوْلا أَنْ هَدَانَا اللّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
 “All praise is due to Allah who guided us to this, and we would not
have found the way had it not been that Allah had guided us.”[^1]   
 I asked: “What’s happened?”  He said: “Are you going to class?  Is Agha
coming to class?”  I said: “Yes.”  He said: “I will also come to the
mosque for class.”  At that moment the door opened and Imam came out. 
We both set off to the mosque with Imam, but out of embarrassment, the
Sheikh came to the mosque from another street.   
    
 I was sitting at the door of the mosque and Imam was busy giving a
lesson.  The Sheikh came and sat next to me and said: “You know that I
used to be negative towards the Imam, but one night I saw in my dream
that I was in the presence of Imam Ali (as) and a number of people were
sitting in a circle in order.  I looked at them one by one and saw that
the physiognomy of each one was according to their age.  They said the
12th one was Imam Mahdi (aj); holy light (*Nur*) was shining from him
and he was very beautiful and spiritual and was sitting at the end of
the line.  
    
 Then scholars from the past came out of the holy grave of
Ardabili[^2]one by one.  When each one of these scholars entered, the 12
people honoured them.  I suddenly saw that Imam Khomeini entered from
the door and you also were behind him.  When the 12th person saw Imam,
he stood up, then the 11th also stood up, then I saw that all of them
stood up.  Thereafter all of them sat but the 12th remained standing and
said:  
    
 “*Ruhullah* (Spirit of Allah)!”  Imam Khomeini gathered his robe
together and said: “Yes.”  Agha said: “Come forward.”  Imam Khomeini
came forward quickly.  When he reached Imam Mahdi (aj), I saw that for
15 minutes his ear was near the mouth of Imam Mahdi (aj) and orders were
being given and the Imam said: “Yes, I have done that, or inshallah I
will do that.”  For exactly 15 minutes Imam spoke quickly into the ear
of Imam Khomeini.  When this finished, Imam Khomeini moved slightly away
and Imam Mahdi (aj) went to sit. Imam Khomeini waved his hand and the 11
people bowed down and Imam Khomeini walked out backwards (i.e. did not
turn his back on them) and did not go to the shrine.  I asked: “Why
didn’t Imam Khomeini go to the shrine?”  They said: “Imam Ali (as) is
sitting here, where should he go?” ”[^3]  
* *  
*Ne’matullah Jazairiye Husayni*  
  

Hazrat Baqiyatullah has commanded so:
-------------------------------------

* *  
 One day I was at the house of Agha Fadhl Lankarani, one of the teachers
of the Islamic Seminary in Qom.  He narrated from one of his friends
that:  
    
 “We were with the Imam in the holy city of Najaf and the conversation
turned to Iran.  I said: “What is your command about removing the Shah
from Iran?  One cannot remove a tenant from his house, and you want to
want to remove the Shah of the nation?”  
    
 Imam sat silent.  I thought maybe he hadn’t heard me.  I repeated my
words.  Imam got upset and said: “So-and-so!  What are you saying? 
Would Hazrat Baqiyatullah Imam Mahdi (aj) tell me anything wrong?  The
Shah must go.”[^4]  
** **  
*Hujjatul Islam Kausari*

[^1]: Sura A’raf, Verse 43

[^2]: The grave is in Najaf, in the shrine of Imam Ali (as)

[^3]: Mardan Ilm dar Maidan Amal, Pg. 387-388

[^4]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 4, Pg. 125


