Imam and Prayers
================

![](/sites/default/files/image11.jpg)

He used to perform wudu facing Qibla
------------------------------------

* *  
 Whenever Imam used to peform *wudu*, he would carry out all the actions
of *wudu* facing the *Qibla*.  Even if the bathroom was not facing the
*Qibla*, every time after taking a palmful of water, he would close the
tap and put the water on his face or hand while facing the
*Qibla*.[^1]  
    
*Dr. Burujurdi*  
    
  

You are going towards the mercy of Allah
----------------------------------------

   
 Imam greatly stressed the secrets of prayers.  I particularly remember
that he paid great attention to Martyr Thani’s book ‘*Aadab-e-Prayers*’
(Manners of Prayers) and used to say: “It is better if we say (call it)
secrets of prayers.”  
    
 Imam paid attention to the (inner) meaning of praying from the
beginning of performing *wudu*, i.e. from the time when a person goes
towards water to perform *wudu*, until the end of prayers.  
    
 He used to say this tradition many times, which I think is from Misbah
Al-Sharee’e, that one of Imams has said: “When you go towards water to
perform *wudu*, you are really going towards the mercy of Allah.”  Imam
used to emphasise this statement a lot.[^2]  
    
*Ayatullah Eezadi Najaf Abaadi*  
  

Prayers first
-------------

* *  
 Imam gave a lot of importance to prayers and emphasised it very much;
he always used to say: “Don’t be negligent in your prayers.”  He used to
say to us: “When you say, first I will do this and then I will pray,
this is wrong, don’t say this.  Give your prayers importance.  Prayers
come first.”  In short, he used to emphasise (the importance of) prayers
very much.[^3]  
* *  
*Farida Mustafavi (Imam’s daughter)*  
* *

He prayed Salaat-ul-Layl despite breathing tubes
------------------------------------------------

* *  
 During the days when Imam was in hospital, he was under treatment and
surgeries and breathing tubes were placed in his windpipe. When these
pipes are in the breathing passage, a person cannot speak.  
    
 However, despite the fact that tubes had been inserted into his
windpipe, Imam prayed that day’s *Dhuhr* and *Asr* in this very state,
and did not even leave his *Salaat-ul-Layl*.[^4]  
    
*Dr. Eeraj Fadhil*  
* *

[^1]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 3, Pg. 90

[^2]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 2, Pg. 290

[^3]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 1, Pg. 118

[^4]: Ruznameye Ithila’at, 28/3/68


