Imam and Islam
==============

![](/sites/default/files/image12.jpg)

Oh Allah, make us turn to you
-----------------------------

* *  
 An interesting memory that I have of Imam’s lessons is his first
sentence in his first lesson in Najaf.  After a period of exile in
Turkey, and after several journeys back and forth, Imam Khomeini began
giving lessons.  
    
 In the Shaikh Ansari Mosque that was filled with people, he sat on a
pulpit of two small stairs and then began speaking.  Everyone was
waiting and eager to hear his words.  They wanted to see what the Imam
would say after the exiles and imprisonments affairs in Iran.  
    
 After beginning with the Name of Allah, Imam said: “Oh Allah, make us
turn to you!  Oh Allah, make us turn away from anything that is other
than you!”  At that moment, it occurred to me that this supplication has
been granted for the Imam himself.[^1]  
    
*Ayatullah Qadeeri*  
  

The issue is nearing the grave
------------------------------

* *  
 In his first speech to students after entering Najaf, Imam said: “Be
thinking from now, be thinking from youth, every step you take now is
towards the grave.  Every minute you spend from your noble life, you are
getting a little closer to the grave and the place where you will be
questioned.  
    
 Think about this. The issue is nearing the grave and nobody has given
you a deed that will allow you to live for 120 years.  It is possible
that one dies at 25 years, it is possible that one dies at this very
moment, God forbid.  You don’t have a deed in your hands; you must pay
attention and refine your ethics.[^2]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Sayyid Hamid Ruhani*  
  

The best advice
---------------

* *  
 I remember one day in Najaf, I wrote a letter to the Imam along these
lines: “Please give us some advice; however it should be a general and
complete piece of advice.”  
    
 In his reply, he said: “The best advice is that which Allah has stated
in the Qur’an:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَعِظُكُم بِوَاحِدَةٍ أَن تَقُومُوا لِلَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
 “Say: I exhort you only to one thing, that (you) rise up for Allah's
sake.” [^3][^4]  
    
*Ayatullah Mu’min*  
  

Try to send knowledge to your heart
-----------------------------------

* *  
 The advice of the Imam was this: “After you have brought knowledge in
line with your intellect, try and give it to your heart; when it goes to
the heart, it will be the promoter of affairs (i.e. affect your
actions).  This will be the knowledge that moves you.  
    
 When you don’t send knowledge to your heart and just learn it, it
becomes a box that you have stored memories in, like a library, and this
knowledge itself will become a veil.”[^5]  
    
*Fatema Tabatabai (Imam’s daughter-in-law)*  
  

Shaytan comes to a person this way
----------------------------------

* *  
 Hajj Ahmad (Imam’s son) relates: Once I requested some brothers from
the sentries who were at the house of Imam to erect a hand-rail at the
front of the veranda of the house.  When they were doing this, Imam
entered and said: “Ahmad!  What are you doing?”  I told Imam that to
protect Ali (my son) that God Forbid he should not fall down, I have
requested the brothers to erect a hand rail at the front of the veranda,
and this is normal (custom) everywhere.   
    
 Imam said: “*Shaytan* comes to a person through this very way; first he
tells them that your house needs a hand-rail, then he says it needs to
be painted, and afterwards he says that your house is small and is below
your dignity, and he wants a bigger house, and slowly slowly, the person
falls into the grip of *shaytan*.”[^6]  
    
 Note: Imam’s point was not that measures should not be taken to protect
children, rather that it should not be a means of *Shaytan* leading one
astray  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Muhammad Ali Ansari Karmani*  
  

Don’t back-bite
---------------

* *  
 Imam’s wife narrates: One night after prayers, Agha was sitting and I
was also with him.  Our maid Fatema Khanom brought tea and placed it in
front of us.  Another maid was also busy gathering (things) in the
corner.  I said to Agha that Fatema Khanom is a very good maid.  
    
 Imam said: “Don’t backbite.”  I said: “Agha, but I didn’t backbite.  I
said that she is very good.”  He said: “What you said is good (enough to
be backbiting) because the other maid can hear and it seems that you
want to say that she is not good, and this is backbiting.”[^7]  
    
*Ali Saqafi*  
    
  

Do you know how much sin backbiting has?
----------------------------------------

* *  
 One time, Imam called his family and said: “I had the intention to tell
you something at a time when you are altogether.”  Then he said: “Do you
know how much sin backbiting has?”  We said: “Yes.”  Then he said: “Do
you know how much sin killing a person has?”  We said: “Yes.”  He said:
“Backbiting has more (sin)!”  He then said: “Do you know how much sin
unlawful acts and acting against chastity (i.e. adultery) is?”  We said:
“Yes.”  He said: “Backbiting has more (sin).”[^8]  
    
*Zahra Mustafavi (Imam's granddaughter)*  
  

Luxurious clothes
-----------------

* *  
 Every time Imam saw something that was against the dignity of a person,
he would object; for example, one member of our family had worn
something that was black on the outside, but that seemed luxurious to
the Imam.  It was the day of *Eid* and we were at Imam’s house.  Imam
said: “These clothes are not suitable, don’t wear them.”  She said:
“It’s black.”  He said: “Yes, but it is below your dignity.”  She
accepted this and went to change her clothes.[^9]  
    
*Zahra Mustafavi (Imam's granddaughter)*  
  

‘Bismillah’ (In the Name of Allah), rather than ‘Befarmaid’:
------------------------------------------------------------

* *  
 In the smallest and finest details of affairs of life, Imam was not
only particular about carrying out the compulsory acts and to shun the
forbidden acts, but was just as particular about carrying out the
recommended acts that are in the traditions and customs of Islam.  
Furthermore, between those acts that hold no reward or sin and
recommended acts, he used to choose the best and most advisable act, and
therefore acted on the recommended acts. On the whole it can be said his
life was an incarnation of perfect Islamic lifestyle.  
    
 For example, going on the tens and hundreds of times that it occurred
when we went to see him, it was necessary that we get permission to
enter by knocking the door. Rather than use the word *‘Befarmaid’*,
[^10] Imam would say, *‘Bismillah.’*  Despite the fact that
*‘Befarmaid’* was agreeable and common, Imam used to say *‘Bismillah’*
so that while doing *dhikr* of Allah, he would give permission to enter
and couple the start of the meeting with the name of Allah.  
    
 It is this very Godly way and manner of Imam that led the society in
the direction of the rites and values of Islam. He spread the culture of
Islam in even the most simplest of affairs.  
    
 The followers of his method chose the recitation of *Takbirs* and
*Salawats* rather than clapping as a method of encouragement and
confirmation, ‘*Alhamdulillah*’ (Praise be to Allah) rather than the
foreign word *‘Merci’* as a method of thanking, and adopted *dhikr* and
praise of Allah and *Salawat* rather than foreign acts.[^11]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Rahimian*  
  

He wasn’t negligent on even a single point of akhlaaq
-----------------------------------------------------

* *  
 One time, after I had met Imam in Jamaaraan, somebody working for the
government came to Imam for some work that he had.  His aged father also
came with him.  When he returned from his meeting with the Imam, he
said:  
    
 When I wanted to go to the Imam, I fell in front and my father came
following me. After greeting him, I introduced my father.  Imam looked
(at me) and said: “This Agha is your father?  Then why were you walking
in front of him and why did you enter first?”  
    
 See how careful and exact the Imam was!  Someone who had all these
enemies and supervised the politics of the East and the West did not
stay negligent of even a single point of ethics.[^12]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Jami*  
  

This sentence is more exact
---------------------------

* *  
 One day, Imam wrote a message addressed to the *Baseejees* (war
volunteers) and had sent it to be broadcast on radio and T.V.  Suddenly
he wanted the message to be returned before it was broadcast.  I saw
that he changed a word and said: “In my message I had written, ‘I am
praying for you with all my efforts,’ then I changed it to ‘most of my
efforts’.  This sentence is more exact.”  
    
 He never said or wrote a word that was against reality and if it was
ever possible that he wouldn’t act on what he had written, he would
immediately take steps to change the expression and words so that he
would not be held responsible in the presence of The Exalted
Creator.[^13]  
    
*Farida Mustafavi (Imam’s daughter)*  
  

I will be thankful to you until the Day of Judgement
----------------------------------------------------

* *  
 After the death of Ayatullah Hakim, one of his representatives in one
of the cities of Iran wrote a letter to Imam in Najaf and asked for
permission to be Imam’s agent after Ayatullah Hakim.  
    
 Imam wrote a general permission for him and sent it.  However, the
representative was not content with the common permission, and wanted to
be the agent of the Imam in that city and that province.  Marhum Hag
Agha Mustafa also mediated and told the Imam that not only was this man
the agent and representative of Ayatullah Hakim, but also was suitable
for this job.  However, Imam replied: “No, the amount of permission we
have written is enough.”  
    
 Afterwards it is said that the man wrote a threatening letter to the
Imam in Najaf – and I understood this from the Imam’s reply – that if
Imam did not give the post to him, he would tell the people to stop
doing the *taqlid* of Imam.  In reply to this letter, Imam wrote: “If
you do such a service to me, I will be thankful to you until the day of
Judgement as you will have lightened my load.  If people stop doing my
*taqlid*, my load of responsibility becomes lighter.”[^14]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam IravaniHujjatul Islam Iravani*  
  

Progress to perfection is human
-------------------------------

* *  
 The comment of a female reporter: “Because you have accepted me as a
woman, this shows that our movement is a progressive movement; even if
others try to show that it is a backward movement.”  
    
 Imam: “That I have accepted you is not true.  You have come here and I
didn’t know you wanted to come here.  And this is not an indication that
Islam is progressive just because you came here.  Nor does
progressiveness mean that which some of our men and women think;
(rather) it is progression to the perfection of humanity and of the
soul.[^15]  
  

I will personally kill him
--------------------------

* *  
 When Ayatullah Taliqani found out that his child has been arrested, he
stayed away from sight for several days to protest.  
    
 (Afterwards) when he went to Imam, Imam said to him: “Your son is one
of the deviators connected with the leftist groups, and you should not
become so upset that he has been arrested.”  He then added: “By Allah,
if Ahmad gets involved in the slightest deviation and his verdict is
death, I will personally kill him.”[^16]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Ali Akber Aashtiani*  
  

This ring is haraam for men
---------------------------

   
 After the death of Ayatullah Kashani, a number of people from various
social classes of Tehran came to Qom to see the Imam.  There, they said
with loud voices a sentence in Arabic which translates to: If Kashani
left, in his place Khomeini returned to us, and he (Khomeini) is a
*marja*, i.e. somebody has been given to us who has all the
characteristics of Ayatullah Kashani, but in addition he is also a
*marja*, whereas Ayatullah Kashani was not a *marja*.  
    
 In this gathering, one person who went forward to kiss the hand of the
Imam had a gold ring on his hand.  At the time he wanted to kiss the
hand of the Imam, Imam kept him away and said: “My dear!  This ring is
*haraam* for men.  Take this ring off and put another one on.”  Most
willingly and obediently, the man took off the ring right there and put
it in his pocket.   
    
 From this incident, we can clearly understand that Imam considered it
his duty to do *Amr bil Ma’roof* (enjoining good) under all
circumstances, and if a situation arose, he would do it there and
then.[^17]   
*Hujjatul Islam Ali Akber Mas’oodi*  
  

The importance of a healthy nafs
--------------------------------

* *  
 During the first few days that Imam came to A’zam Mosque, instead of
giving a lesson he would give advice to the students.  His advice was
such that he would break the connection and attachment between man and
the world, and bring his attention to gnosticism, the hereafter and
Allah.  
    
 One day, as part of his advice he said: “Look there. That picture up
there, it is a picture of Agha Burujurdi while he is studying.  In the
picture below, his corpse is in the hands of the people.  (In the
picture) a little bit below that, Agha Burujurdi is under the ground.   
    
 That thing which will be of use to Agha Burujurdi is a healthy nafs,
which is what Agha Burujurdi had.  Otherwise these positions of power,
these noises, these worldy matters, these are of no use to man when he
goes under the ground.[^18]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Taahiriye Khorram Abaadi*  
  

I never heard something that even had the resemblance of being back-biting
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

* *  
 I was with my great teacher, the grand leader of the Revolution, for 30
years and I swear on the life of this great personality that I never
heard something that even had the resemblance of being back-biting. 
Forget back-biting, I didn’t even see the resemblance of back-biting.  
    
 I will not forget, one time he came to Sulemasi Mosque to give a lesson
in a state whereby he was breathing heavily and slowly; he said: “By
Allah, I have never been so scared as I am now.”  He then added: “I have
not come to give a lesson; I have come to speak a bit.”  
    
 I, who had been going to his classes for approximately 15 years, had
never seen such boldness from him towards his students.  Imam while in
this state said: “If you don’t have knowledge and if you don’t have
religion, be wise, and don’t desire to spoil the identity of
humankind.”  He then went home and his Malta fever returned and he
stayed at home for 3 days because of this fever.  
    
 All this was because he had heard a student back-biting about one of
the *marja*.  Imam himself hadn’t back-bitten but rather had heard
someone back-bite and this caused his breathing to become heavy and
slow![^19]  
* *  
*Ayatullah Madhahari*  
  

Have some lawful recreations
----------------------------

* *  
 Imam used to say to students: “If youth spend too much time carrying
out recommended acts, they lag behind in their compulsory acts.”   
    
 He even said: “Those that were very holy (and religious), because of
immoderation in these actions, they went away from the Islamic seminary.
 Excessive religiousness is tiring for children who are 15 or 16 years
old.  One should have lawful recreations but not sin.[^20]  
    
*Ayatullah Shahid Sheikh Fadhlullah Mahallati*  
  

I myself am the nullifier of witchcraft
---------------------------------------

* *  
 On one of the days when Imam was at Madressa Alavi, a *sayyid*
(descendant of the Imams) and a non-turbaned man who had a wrinkled coat
and small white cap (like the ones worn for prayers), had come, such
that they were very moved, upset, scared and had pale faces.   
    
 I was in charge of the order and discipline there; I said: “What is
it?”  They said: “We have particular work with the Imam, and our worry
is that magic and witchcraft has been carried out against the Imam. 
What we see (happening) is that it is possible he will become sick and
like a candle, will dissolve.  We are upset and have come to give Imam
supplications and incantations to nullify this witchcraft.   
    
 We said: “What is this talk?”  They replied: “No, we are worried. 
Because of the love we have for Imam, even if there was a one in a
million chance of danger, our hearts would shake.”  We said: “Let it not
be that God Forbid there is something and we take it lightly.”  We went
to the Imam and told him the situation.  Imam smiled and said: “Tell
them that I myself am the nullifier of witchcraft.”[^21]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Natiq-e-Nuri*  
  

You saw a pointless dream!
--------------------------

* *  
 Towards the end of the year 1328, I had invited Imam to come to our
house for the occasion of the *walima* (feast) of the birth of our first
child.  A group of scholars were present in this meeting.  One of the
scholars turned to Marhum Hajj Agha Mustafa, who at that time was a thin
youth, very witty by nature, cheerful and likeable, and said: “Agha
Mustafa, I have heard that you have seen a strange dream, have you also
narrated it for Hajj Agha (Imam)?”  
    
 Marhum Hajj Agha Mustafa looked at Imam and waited for his permission. 
Imam looked at him out of the corner of his eyes.  He (Marhum Hajj Agha
Mustafa) said: “No.”  That scholar said: “Say it.  Hajj Agha (Imam) will
give permission.”  
    
 However, Marhum Agha Mustafa, while having a smile on his face as
always, refused to say it, while in actuality, with his looks towards
the Imam, he was waiting for his permission.  
    
 The scholar kept insisting, Imam was silent, and Agha Mustafa was
surprised and waiting.  Finally, Marhum Hajj Agha Abdullah Ale Agha said
to the Imam: “Hajj Agha, give him permission to say it.  It is a strange
dream, and should be heard.  Many have heard it.”  
    
 In the same way that he was silent and relaxed and looking at one
point, Imam smiled and told Agha Mustafa: “What is it?  Say it.”  The
Marhum said: “A few nights ago I saw a dream that I am at a gathering
where all the sages and philosophers are sitting in order: Farabi,
Shaikh Al Rais Ibn Sina, Biruni, Fakhrarazi, Khawaje Nasir Toosi, Allama
Hilli, Mulla Sadr, Hajj Mullahadi Sabzwari and a number of others.  
    
 In that same state, I saw that you entered and all the sages and
philosophers stood up and came to welcome you, and took you and made you
sit in the seat of honour.”  When Marhum finished talking, Imam turned
to him and said:  “You saw this dream?”  He said: “Yes.”  Imam said:
“You saw a pointless dream!”  With these words of the Imam, everyone
laughed heartily and Imam himself smiled.[^22]  
* *  
*Hujjatul Islam Muhammed Redha Sajjadi Isfahani*

[^1]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 4, Pg. 100

[^2]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 5, Pg. 180

[^3]: Sura Saba, Verse 46

[^4]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 4, Pg. 221-222

[^5]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 1, Pg. 55

[^6]: Ruznameye Risalat, 9/3/72

[^7]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 3, Pg. 302

[^8]: Ruznameye Ithila’at, 17/3/1367

[^9]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 1, Pg. 48

[^10]: Befarmaid is the Iranian way of saying, ‘Please, come in’, or
‘sit down,’ etc and is used in many instances of niceties

[^11]: Majalleye Paaasaar Islam, No. 214, Pg. 41

[^12]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 3, Pg. 15

[^13]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 1, Pg. 126

[^14]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 2, Pg. 282

[^15]: Sahifeye Nur, Vol 4, Pg. 250, 3/11/1357

[^16]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 1, Pg. 253

[^17]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 4, Pg. 150

[^18]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 3, Pg. 319

[^19]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 3, Pg. 299

[^20]: Ummeede Inquilab, No. 142

[^21]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 4, Pg. 279

[^22]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 3, Pg. 284


