Imam and Women
==============

![](/sites/default/files/image3.jpg)

His advice to guard hijab
-------------------------

* *  
 The Imam believed that the covering of a woman should be such that it
should not incite evil and should not show the contours of the body. 
The colours of clothes should also be dark, i.e. it is possible that a
bright red colour could incite mischief.  
    
 Imam also believed that one’s tone (of voice) and looks should also be
pure.  In the work place, he didn’t think laughing loudly or speaking
out of turn was at all suitable.  On the whole, his advice was to always
observe chastity and guard *hijab*.  
    
 On the whole, he thought the *chador* (a long piece of black cloth that
is normally worn by Iranian women over their clothes) was better and
believed that it was more becoming.  Imam considered the *chador* to be
the symbol of the Revolution.  When he used to see women in poor
*hijab*, he would get very upset at the person who had acted contrary to
the Islamic laws, and it would be evident from his expression.  If at
dinner, our hand would come out more than allowable from our sleeves, he
would remind us.[^1]  
    
*Tabatabai*  
  

Raising a child cannot be accomplished by a man
-----------------------------------------------

   
 Imam believed the role of the mother to be very determining and gave a
lot of importance to the upbringing of children.  Sometimes when we
would joke and say that a woman must always stay at home, he would say:
“Don’t think little of the home; the upbringing of children is no small
matter.  If somebody is able to raise one person (properly), she has
done a great service to society.  
    
 He believed that the upbringing of a child could not be accomplished by
a man.  This was a job specifically designed for a woman because a woman
is kinder and the order of a family also had to be based on kindness and
love.[^2]  
    
*Fatema Tabatabai (Imam’s daughter-in-law)*  
    
    
  

The women have removed the Shah
-------------------------------

* *  
 It was the 15th of the Iranian month of Bahman, the 3rd day of meeting
Imam Khomeini that woman came to meet the Imam.  That night, we received
statistics from the emergency (area) [first aid station] that we had
established in the madressa that on that day approximately 817 women had
fainted.   
    
 When they fainted, we had no choice but to place them on a stretcher
and be careful that their hair, hands, or legs did not show.  We related
this to the Imam and suggested: “Give us permission that women should
not be allowed to come and meet you.”  
    
 When Imam heard this sentence, he said: “Do you think that my
announcements or your speeches have removed the Shah?!  It is these very
women that have removed the Shah.  Treat them with honour.”[^3]  
    
*Agha Muhsin Rafiq Doost*  
  

Young ladies should cover themselves more
-----------------------------------------

* *  
 Imam always used to tell us: “It is correct that they said that the
face and palms (can) be visible; however, it is better that youth cover
up a little bit more”.  He also emphasised a lot that no type of perfume
should be used out of the house.  
    
 I remember on one of the *Eids*, Imam gifted his grandchild (of one of
his other daughters) perfume and gave me something else and said:
“Because you haven’t married yet, therefore you don’t have the need to
perfume.”[^4]  
* *  
*Atife Ishraqi*

[^1]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 1, Pg. 177

[^2]: Wijhe Name Ruznameye Ithila’at, 14/3/69

[^3]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 3, Pg. 140-141

[^4]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 1, Pg. 285


