Imam and Paris
==============

![](/sites/default/files/image6.jpg)

There are 10 minutes left until dinner time
-------------------------------------------

   
 Some brothers had brought a film about the events of the Revolution to
France, and suggested that we ask Imam to watch this film after dinner. 
I went and asked Imam: “Dinner is ready, shall I bring it?”  Imam looked
at his watch and said: “There are 10 minutes left until dinner time.”   
    
 The hours of Imam’s day and night had been divided in such a way that
without seeing him, we could say that right now, he is busy in what
work.[^1]  
    
*Marzieh Hadide Chi (Dabagh)*  
  

A strange order
---------------

* *  
 The order in the arrangement of Imam’s life in Paris even had an effect
on the work and timetable of the French police.  From inside Imam’s
house, I once saw from one of the room windows that the door of Imam’s
house had still not opened yet, but they (the police) had gotten out of
their car to see the Imam off (knowing the Imam would leave the house at
this time).  
    
 The police mentioned several times to some brothers that if their
watches were sometimes behind or in front, they could get the correct
time from the punctuality with which Imam said his prayers; this was
very strange for them.[^2]  * *  
* *  
*Marzieh Hadide Chi (Dabagh)*  
* *

Christmas Day in Paris
----------------------

* *  
 On Christmas day, Imam gave a message to all the Christians of the
world that the news agents broadcast.  As well as this message, he told
us to distribute gifts to the residents of Neauphel-le Chateau.  These
were usually *Gaz* (a type of confectionary), *Aajeel* (dried nuts or
seeds or fruits) and S*hireeni* (sweet items) that some brothers had
brought from Iran.  We carried this out and next to each package, we
placed a flower stem.  
    
 In the places we went to, we sensed that many in the West were not
familiar with this kindness and love, even between fathers and their
children, They felt it very strange that the night of the birth of the
Prophet of the Christians, a non-Christian Iranian leader was so close
to them and felt love for them.  For example there was a woman who, when
she took the Imam’s gift, was so overcome that tears rolled down her
face.[^3]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Ali Akber Muhtashami*  
  

Respect towards the1000 year old ceremonies and customs of Muslims
------------------------------------------------------------------

* *  
 The love and attachment of the Imam towards the Imams (as) was of a
specific characteristic of his.  The 9th day of *Muharram* (Islamic
month in which the martyrdom of the Imam Husayn (as) is commemorated),
Agha Ishraqi came to me and said: “Imam has said that you should prepare
to recite *masaib* when he comes out an hour before *Dhuhr*.”  Then Imam
gave the following message: “Tell so-and-so I want this very *masaib*
and this very *masaib* should be recited.”  
    
 From this I sensed that firstly, the attachment that Imam has for the
Imams (as) is not subject to conditions.  Secondly, that he respects the
environment, country and ceremonies of the country that he is fighting
for, as well as the ceremonies and customs that are part of Islam and
that the Muslims have lived with for more than 1000 years. He is seeking
those very ceremonies even though he is in Paris and the heart of the
Western land.  
    
 On that day, there was a large crowd.  Many reporters had also come to
prepare their news reports.  Imam, who was very sorrowful, came at 11
o’clock in the morning.  I sat next to him.  He indicated to me to
recite the *masaib* and I started.  For those people who had come to see
the Imam from all over the world and for those from Western countries,
this was very unexpected.  
    
 Although Imam had the Shah and America against him, on the 9th day of
*Muharram*, he sat and cried for Imam Husayn (as).  Nobody can ever
fully comprehend this.[^4]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Muhtashami*  
  

But do they want to make Cyrus enter Iran?
------------------------------------------

* *  
 One day in Paris, there was a phone call from the Welcoming Committee
from Tehran.  I was in charge of the office and telephone of the Imam. 
It was Martyr Dr. Beheshti, who said: “For the entrance of Imam we have
arranged a programme; tell the Imam that we will carpet the airport,
decorate it with lights, we will go between the airport to
Behesht-e-Zahra (as) by helicopter and …”  
    
 When I told the Imam this, he, according to his habit of always of
listening carefully to the person who is speaking and then replying,
after listening to me carefully, with his particular decisiveness and
clearness said:  
    
 “Go and tell the men that do they want to make Cyrus[^5] enter Iran? 
This is not necessary at all!  A student has left Iran and that same
student is returning to Iran.  I want to be among my people and go with
them, even if I get trampled upon.”[^6]  
** **  
*Hujjatul Islam Firdosi Pur*

[^1]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 2, Pg. 9

[^2]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 2, Pg. 37

[^3]: Bardashthayi az Seereye Imam Khomeini, Vol 2, Pg. 204-205

[^4]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 2, Pg. 146-147

[^5]: Cyrus was a previous king of Iran, who ruled approximately 2,500
years ago

[^6]: Ruznameye Kaihan, 14/4/1368


