Imam and the Revolution
=======================

![](/sites/default/files/image7.png)

Exceptional joy
---------------

* *  
 The night of the 21st of the Iranian month of Bahman[^1] (February
10th, 1979), Imam was sitting with his head down listening to the
radio.  I was also sitting by his side.  It was announced that the radio
and television stations had fallen from the government’s control.   
    
 Imam clapped two hands together and stood up without thinking.  I have
only seen him clap his hands that once.  He was very happy and this
happiness was apparent on his face.   
    
 At that very time, he said:  “Now it’s finished, now it’s finished.”  I
did not understand then what this sentence meant!  Afterwards I
understood that when the radio fell into the hands of the nation, the
world would understand that the regime had fallen out of power.  Perhaps
I can say that I have at no other time seen the happiness of that day on
his face.[^2]  
    
*Farida Mustafavi (Imam’s daughter)*  
  

A bag of Aajeel (dried nuts, seeds or fruits)
---------------------------------------------

* *  
 If we helped the Revolution, Imam would become very happy.  During the
war, the residents of Jamaaraan would gather at Imam’s house and at the
house of our brother to help from behind the war front.  Imam would come
and always express happiness and satisfaction when he would see that we
were all sitting working, one stitching a quilt, another pouring
*Aajeel* into a nylon bag, and another doing something else.   
    
 I even said one time: “Give us permission to write on the back of this
bag of *Aajeel* that it has been filled by the Imam himself and sent for
the war front so that the soldier that receives this *Aajeel* becomes
happy.”  However, Imam did not accept this.[^3]  
    
*Farida Mustafavi (Imam’s daughter)*  
    
  

Attachment to the families of martyrs
-------------------------------------

* *  
 Imam who stood firm and solid against oppressors and the forces of
*shaytan*, was very humble with the child and mother of a martyr.  
    
 As an example, a mother of a martyr had come from Ahwaaz to meet the
Imam.  She had also written him a letter but was not successful in
meeting him.  She stayed for 2 or 3 days in the same area, and then
returned to Ahwaaz.  There she wrote a letter along the following lines:
“Hazrat Imam!  I came to Tehran but was not successful in meeting you.” 
Imam had written on the top of this letter: “Until you bring this
martyr’s mother to meet me, I will not go to meet anyone.”  
    
 Another time I also remember that we had gone to meet him.  Imam had
finished his *Dhuhr* prayers.  I entered and said that a number of the
families of martyrs want to come and kiss your hand.  Imam came and
sat.  The people who were there lined up so that they could kiss the
Imam’s hand.  
    
 In this state, they were crying and would not pass after seeing the
Imam.  We were really ashamed that this inconvenience had been created
for him, and that there was an interruption between his prayers.  Upset,
we finally decided to tell them to pass through.  At one point, Imam
turned to me cheerfully and said: “How are you?  No, allow them to
be.”[^4]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Karubi*  
  

His special attention to Ayatullah Khamenei
-------------------------------------------

* *  
 As per his extreme order and discipline in his work, after the summary
of the news, Imam appointed 8 o’clock in the morning for office work and
stamping bills.   He never changed this timetable.  
    
 Even on those days that occasionally, because of slight illness or
intense cold weather and frost, that he didn’t come to his work room, we
were authorised to go to his room, so that no matter what, the work of
the office and businesses did not get delayed or suspended.  So that
order and timing did not clash, if he foresaw a certain issue that would
prevent him being on time, he would inform us the day before.  
    
 After the completion of this portion of his work, he carried out the
programme of reciting *aqd* (marriage contracts for couples) and then
hand-kissing, and after that, if a private meeting for heads or various
persons had been arranged beforehand, they were carried out.  Despite
all these scheduled programmes, exceptions also occurred whereby Imam
ordered the schedule to be suspended.  
    
 One of these exceptions related to Ayatullah Khamenei. When Imam became
aware that he was present in the office at the start, i.e. at 8 o’clock
in the morning, he instructed us: “All of you leave your work until
later.”  In this manner, against the norm, first the meeting with
Ayatullah Khamanei was carried out and then we got busy in our work.  
    
 At that time, we did not understand the distinction and special
attention given by Imam to Ayatullah Khamenei, but it wasn’t long, that
with the passing of time, another example of the foresight and deep
thinking of the Imam became apparent.[^5]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Rahimian*

[^1]: The 22nd of Bahman was the Day of the Victory of the Revolution

[^2]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 1, Pg. 114

[^3]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 1, Pg. 117

[^4]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Bol 4, Pg. 109-110

[^5]: Majalleye Paasdaar Islam, No. 214, Pg. 41


