Imam and Knowledge of the Unseen
================================

![](/sites/default/files/image8.jpg)

It is not advisable that I take this money from you
---------------------------------------------------

* *  
 One of the events that I can 100% attest to is that during the time
when the tyrannical government (of Iran) followed anyone who went to
Najaf and to visit Imam, an Iranian businessman took a large sum of
money with him to Najaf, to give *Sehm-e-Imam* money (half of the
*khums*) to him.  
    
 The government were also aware that this person had taken a large sum
of money with him and wanted to give *Sehm-e-Imam*.  The businessman
reached the Imam and said: “This money is for *Sehm-e-Imam* and I have
brought it from Iran to present it to you for use for the Islamic
seminary.”  Imam did not accept it.  The businessman said: “Agha!  I
have brought this money from far, it is *Sehm-e-Imam* and it is
especially for you.”  
    
 Imam said: “It is not advisable for you that I take this money.  Go
give it to one of the other *marja* and get a receipt from him as
well.”  Basically, no matter how much the businessman insisted, he did
not have an effect on the Imam and so he took the money to the house of
another *marja* and got a receipt.   
    
 On his way back, the businessman was arrested at the border and they
said to him: “You went to Imam Khomeini in Najaf and also took a large
sum of money with you there. We are aware of all your actions.”  Then
they began the procedure to imprison him for at least a few years.   
    
 The businessman in his reply said: “I have not given him even one
*Shahy* (Iranian currency at that time).  I gave the money for
*Sehm-e-Imam* to another person.”  He then took out the receipt from his
pocket and showed it to them.  
    
 He saw such a day the likes of which Imam had told him at that time:
“It is not advisable for you to give me this money.”  If he had given
Imam the money and taken a receipt from him, he might have been in a
corner of a prison until the last days of his life, and would definitely
have been tortured.  This is yet another (demonstration) of Imam’s
greatness.[^1]   
*Ayatullah Shahid Saduqi*  
    
  

Imam was aware of the affair:
-----------------------------

* *  
 In those days, getting money into Iraq was very difficult.  One of the
scholars of Isfahan narrates:  
    
 I brought a sum of money to Sham, and from Sham I entered Baghdad.  
However I saw at the airport that they (the Ba’thi police) were going
around everywhere.  I became very agitated and upset.  To help me in
this entanglement, I sought intercession from the 7th Imam, Imam Musa
Kadhim (as).  I said: “Agha!  I have this sum of money and I am bringing
it for your son.  Come to my rescue.”  
    
 During this time, one of the officials of the Iraqi government came
near, called me, and let me leave.  When I entered Najaf, I went to the
Imam.  I sat down and greeted him.  Imam smiled and said: “You had a
problem at the airport and sought intercession from Imam Musa Kadhim
(as).”  I understood that Imam was aware of the affair.[^2]  
    
*Hujjatul Islam Sayyid Muhammed Sajjadi Isfahani*

[^1]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 3, Pg. 303

[^2]: Paa be Paaye Aaftaab, Vol 3, Pg. 231


