Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله رب العالمين بارئ الخلائق أجمعين وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وأل
بيته الطيبين الطاهرين سيَما الإمام المنتظر المهديِّ صاحب الزمان عليه
أفضل التحية والسلام واللعن الدائم على أعدائهم أجمعين إلى يوم الدين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

**In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful**

* *  
*All praise belongs solely to Allah, the Lord of all the Worlds, the
Fashioner of all the Creations. And prayers of Allah be upon our Master
Muhammad and his family ‑ the Righteous and the Pure, especially al‑Imam
al‑Muntazar al‑Mahdi, Sahib az‑Zaman, may the best greetings and
salutations be upon him and may the perpetual curse be upon all of their
enemies until the Day of Resurrection.*  
    
 And then, Allah the Highest has said in His Noble book and His
established great speech:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي أَسْرَىٰ بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلًا مِنَ الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ إِلَى الْمَسْجِدِ الْأَقْصَى الَّذِي بَارَكْنَا حَوْلَهُ
لِنُرِيَهُ مِنْ آيَاتِنَا ۚ إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Glorified be He who carried His servant from Masjid* *al‑Haram to
Masjid al‑Aqsa, the precincts of which We have blessed, so that We may
show him of Our Signs. Verily He is the All‑Hearing, the All‑Seeing.
"*  
* *  
 One of the spiritual and soul inspiring events that took place during
the lifetime of our distinguished Prophet Muhammad (S) was the Mi’raj.
This incident is considered as one of the indisputable events of history
and is a part of our religious belief. Every Muslim, in accordance with
the clear verses of the Qur'an, in addition, to the reliable chains of
history, believe in the Mi’raj.  
    
 In the Shi'a teachings, the belief in the Mi’raj is a part of the
principal beliefs such that is has been narrated from Imam Ja'far ibn
Muhammad al‑Sadiq and from Imam 'Ali ibn Musa al‑Rida that:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أنكر ثلاثة أشياء فليس من شيعتنا – المعراج – المسئلة في القبر
والشفاعة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
 "One who denies (any of these) three things is not among our Shi\`a
(followers): the Me\`raj, the questioning in the grave and ash­
Shafa\`ah (intercession). "  
    
 The book that you have in your hands deals with the event of Mi’raj of
the Final Prophet that this base servant, after research from various
books, ahadith and reliable events of history has compiled in the form
of a booklet.  
    
 My purpose for (compiling) this was to keep it condensed, since up
until now, the Mi’raj of that great man (Muhammad) has not been
presented in a summarized and beneficial manner. It is hoped that the
dear readers will forgive the mistakes and slips of the pen.  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعلى الله الإتكال وهو حسبي ونعم الوكيل نعم المولى ونعم المصير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
 Muhammad Faidh al‑Kashani  
  


