Ahadith, the Traditions
=======================

Hadith n. 1: The Location of Ascent
-----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإسراء والمعراج
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
 Among the writers of history and the elucidators of the Holy Qur\` an
there is a dispute in regards to the place of commencement of the Mi’raj
of the Noble Prophet (S). Did it start from the house of Umm Hani (the
sister of Amir al‑Mo'minin 'Ali ibn Abi Talib) or from Masjid al‑Haram ‑
since the complete city of Makkah was called and referred to as Masjid
al‑Haram? From the apparent reading of the verse, it began from Masjid
al‑Haram. Thus, the Mi’raj journey of the Prophet of Allah (S) was from
Masjid al­-Haram to Masjid al‑Aqsa ‑ the Bayt al‑Muqaddas.  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سبحان الذي أسرى
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
 This trip ‑ meaning the Mi’raj of the Noble Prophet (S) took place at
night and the meaning of Masjid al‑Aqsa (the Furthest Masjid) is the
same as the Bayt al‑Muqaddas.  
    
 Allah (SWT) in the Noble Qur'an says:  
  

> أَفَتُمَارُونَهُ عَلَىٰ مَا يَرَىٰ {12} وَلَقَدْ رَآهُ نَزْلَةً
> أُخْرَىٰ {13} عِنْدَ سِدْرَةِ الْمُنْتَهَىٰ {14} عِنْدَهَا جَنَّةُ
> الْمَأْوَىٰ {15} إِذْ يَغْشَى السِّدْرَةَ مَا يَغْشَىٰ {16} مَا زَاغَ
> الْبَصَرُ وَمَا طَغَىٰ {17} لَقَدْ رَأَىٰ مِنْ آيَاتِ رَبِّهِ
> الْكُبْرَىٰ {18}

**In** **the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful**

* *  
*"By the declining star. Your companion is not in error nor has he gone
astray. He does not speak out of his* *own desire. It is a revelation
which has been revealed to him and taught to him by the Great Mighty
One, the Strong One who appeared on the uppermost horizon. He then came
nearer and nearer, until he was as close to Him as the distance of two
bows, or even less. He revealed to Allah's servant whatever He wanted.
His (Muhammad's) heart did not lie to him about what his eyes had seen.
Will you then argue with him about what he saw? He certainly saw Him
during his other ascent to the Lote‑tree near which is Paradise. When
the tree was covered with a covering, (Muhammad's) eyes did not deceive
him, nor did they lead him to falsehood. He certainly saw the greatest
(signs) of the existence of his Lord.* " [^1]  
    
  

Hadith n. 2: Method of Mi’raj
-----------------------------

   
 Some people say: the Mi’raj of the Prophet (S) took place during his
sleep, while others say that the Mi’raj was simply spiritual. However,
since the Noble Prophet (S) had mentioned that: *"During the Me\`raj, I
met with the various Prophets; I saw the Angels; Heaven and Hell were
shown to me; I was brought to the Arsh and reached to Sidratul Muntaha.
I also met people in Heaven who were being showered with the blessings
of Allah and also I saw people in Hell who were being punished by the
harshest types of punishment; I was also informed as to why they were in
such a state, "*thus, it is not possible that the Prophet (S) went to
the Mi’raj in the physical body made of clay (as it is not possible for
the physical body to travel through these various stages).  
    
 It has been narrated from 'Ali ibn Ibrahim al‑Qummi that Imam Ja'far
ibn Muhammad al‑Sadiq had said:  
    
 "Jibra'il, Mika'il and Israfil brought Buraq [^2] to the Prophet (S).
One of these (three) held the reigns of Buraq, while the other one held
on the saddle and the third one held on to the clothing of the Prophet
(S) while he was ascending it. When the Prophet (S) mounted onto the
Buraq, its entire body started to tremble. Jibra'il pointed with his
hand towards Buraq and told him, \`O' Buraq! Keep calm! Before the Noble
Prophet (S) ‑ no other Prophet has ever ridden you and after him too no
one like him will ever ride upon you again."  
    
 Buraq became tranquil and took the Prophet (S)  towards the heavens.
Jibra'il accompanied the Prophet and pointed out the signs of Allah
(SWT) in the heavens and the earth."  
    
 The Prophet of Islam (S) stated that: "We were continuing when I heard
someone call me by name. I did not pay any attention to it and continued
on our course. Another time, I heard someone else call me by name. Again
I did not pay any attention to it. Then, I saw a woman whose hands were
uncovered and all the beauties of the world were on her. She said, \`O'
Muhammad! Wait, I have something to say to you.' However, I paid no
attention to her either. After this, I heard another sound, which really
scared me. That sound too, I ignored."  
    
 "After some time, Jibra'il stopped and said to me, \`Perform the
Salat.' I dismounted from Buraq and performed my Salat. Jibra'il said to
me, \`Do you know where you just prayed?' I replied to him in the
negative. He said, \`In Tayyibah (Madinah), that place where your
travellers will go.' After this, I got back onto Buraq and we continued
on our journey."  
    
 "Once again, Jibra'il stopped us and said, \`Perform the Salat.' I once
again dismounted Buraq, and performed my Salat there. He asked me, \`Do
you know where you just prayed? It is the Mountain of Saina ‑ the place
where Prophet Musa spoke to Allah (SWT).'  
    
 "Once again, I ascended Buraq and continued on my way until Allah would
decree something else. Shortly afterwards, Jibra'il said, \`Get down and
recite a Salat.' Then again he questioned, \`Do you know where you just
prayed?' I replied in the negative, to which he answered, \`In Bayt
al‑Laham ‑ the place which is near to Bayt al‑Muqaddas ‑ and this is the
place where Prophet \`Isa was born.'  
    
 We reached Bayt al‑Muqaddas and I proceeded to tie the reins of Buraq
to the same ring that the great Prophets (before me) used to tie their
animal to. After this I entered the Masjid and it was here that I met
Ibrahim, Musa, \`Isa and the rest of the Prophets yes. They all gathered
around me and we proceeded to get ready for Salat. I had no doubt that
the Salat would be lead by Jibra'il, however when the lines for the
Salat were being formed, Jibra'il placed his hand on my shoulder and
pushed me forward.  
    
 Jibra'l also took part in the Salat behind me along with the various
Prophets; however, this did not cause any pride or vanity in me.
Following this, the custodian of the Masjid brought three vessels in
front of me. In the first vessel was milk, in the second was water, and
in the third one was wine. All of a sudden I heard someone say: \`If he
takes the vessel of water, he will perish, and his nation too will
perish. If he takes the vessel of wine, he and his nation will all be
lead astray. However, if he drinks the milk, then he has been guided and
his nation too will be guided.' I proceeded to take the vessel
containing the milk and drank from it. Jibra'il said, \`Know that you
have been guided and your nation too has been guided.'"  
    
 Then I was asked, \`What did you see while you were on your journey?' I
replied, \`From my right side, I heard someone call out to me.' Jibra'il
asked, \`Did you reply him?' I said, \`No, I did not reply.' Jibra'il
told me, \`That person who called you was a Jew.  
    
 Had you answered his call, then after you pass away, your nation would
have changed to the religion of the Jews.'  
    
 Jibra'il then asked, \`What else did you see?' I replied, \`I then
looked to my left and someone called me from that direction too.'
Jibra'il asked, \`Did you reply to that call?' I replied, \`No, I did
not pay any attention to him either.' Jibra'il replied, \`He was one who
was inviting people to the religion of Christianity. Had you paid any
attention to him and replied to him, then after your death your nation
would change their religion to Christianity.'  
    
 Jibra'il then asked, \`Who welcomed you?' I replied, \`I saw a woman
whose arms were open (with no clothing on them), and upon them were
various beauties of the world. She said to me, \`O' Muhammad! Come near
me so that I may speak with you.' Jibra'il asked, \`Did you speak to
her?' I replied, \`No, I did not speak with her.' Jibra'il then said,
\`That woman was the physical manifestation of the world. If you would
have answered or spoken to her, then your nation would have preferred
this world over the next life.'  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 319-320*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat
al-Mi\`raaj wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi
wa wasf al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.  
    
  

Hadith n. 3: A Stone in Hell
----------------------------

   
 I said, "After that, I heard a sound that really frightened me. When I
asked as to what it was, the reply came: \`That sound was from a rock
which had been thrown into the fire of hell seventy years ago, that just
now landed in its spot and just settled.'"  
    
 It has been said that from that time on, the Prophet was never seen to
laugh as long as he was alive.  
    
 "We continued our trip upwards until we reached the upper atmosphere of
the world. There, I saw an angel named Isma'il. He was the custodian of
Khitfah which the Qur'an explains as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا مَنْ خَطِفَ الْخَطْفَةَ فَأَتْبَعَهُ شِهَابٌ ثَاقِبٌ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Some of them who covertly steal words from the heavens are pursued by
a glistening flame.*" [^3]  
    
 "Under the supervision of Isma'il was seventy thousand angels and under
the supervision of each of these (seventy thousand) angels were another
seventy thousand angels. He (Isma'il) asked Jibra'il, "Who is this
person with you?" The answer was given that: "He is Muhammad" who has
been raised up with The Message."  
    
 "That Angel opened the door and we entered into the heavens. I greeted
him and prayed for his forgiveness. He too greeted me and prayed for my
mercy. He said, \`Welcome O' Brother and O' Great Prophet.' At that time
a group of Angels greeted me. All of them were smiling and were
cheerful; except for one of them who had a very hideous appearance
(whose name is Khazin), who was upset and crying. No sign of happiness
could be seen on his face.  
    
 "We were all awed by this Angel. Jibra'il said, \`This Angel is the
igniter of the fire of Hell. From the time that Allah (SWT) appointed
him as the one who would ignite the fire of hell up until now, he has
never smiled. Every day, his anger on the enemies of Allah (SWT) those
who commit sins increases. It is through this Angel that Allah
(SWT) will punish the sinners. If it was decreed that there should be a
smile on his face, then because of you it would have been, but never has
he smiled, nor will he ever ‑ neither before you nor after you.' I
greeted him and he replied my greeting and he gave me the glad tidings
of paradise.  
    
 Khazin asked, \`Do you give me permission to show (you) the fire of
Hell?' Jibra'il replied, \`Yes, show the Prophet the fire of hell.'
Khazin lifted up the cover of the hellfire and opened the door. Flames
from the fire shot up into the sky ‑ flames that were boiling and
continuously shooting up. I thought that soon the flames would come
close to me. I said, \`Jibra'il, tell the Angel to cover up the fire.'
He gave the command and the fire went back to its place and Khazin
closed the doors of hell and fire."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 320-321*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat
al-Mi\`raaj wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi
wa wasf al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.  
  

Hadith n. 4: Prophet Adam
-------------------------

   
 "Jibra'il and I continued along. On the way, we met a strong, muscular
man. I asked, \`Who is this person?' Jibra'il replied, \`He is your
father, Prophet Adam ‑ Abu al‑Bashar.' Prophet Adam (a.s) introduced his
children to me and said, \`A pleasing aroma is coming from your pure
body.' I read the following Surah to him:  
  

> كَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْأَبْرَارِ لَفِي عِلِّيِّينَ {18} وَمَا
> أَدْرَاكَ مَا عِلِّيُّونَ {19} كِتَابٌ مَرْقُومٌ {20} يَشْهَدُهُ
> الْمُقَرَّبُونَ {21}

> إِنَّ الْأَبْرَارَ لَفِي نَعِيمٍ {22} عَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ يَنْظُرُونَ
> {23} تَعْرِفُ فِي وُجُوهِهِمْ نَضْرَةَ النَّعِيمِ {24} يُسْقَوْنَ مِنْ
> رَحِيقٍ مَخْتُومٍ {25} خِتَامُهُ مِسْكٌ ۚ وَفِي ذَٰلِكَ
> فَلْيَتَنَافَسِ الْمُتَنَافِسُونَ {26} وَمِزَاجُهُ مِنْ تَسْنِيمٍ {27}
> عَيْنًا يَشْرَبُ بِهَا الْمُقَرَّبُونَ {28}

   
*"However, the records of the deeds of the virtuous ones will certainly
be in 1lliyin. Would that you knew what Illiyin is! It is a
comprehensively written Book (of records). The ones nearest to God will
bring it to public. The virtuous will live in bliss, reclining on
couches, reviewing (the bounties given to them). You can trace on their
faces the joy of their bliss. They will be given pure wine out of sealed
containers which have the fragrance of musk. This is the kind of place
for which one should really aspire. With the wine is a drink from a
spring (Tasnim) ‑ the nearest ones to God will drink from it.* [^4]  
    
 I greeted Prophet Adam (a.s) and prayed for his forgiveness. He too
greeted me, then prayed for my forgiveness and said, \`Welcome O'
Prophet and O' Righteous Offspring who has been designated at a good
time.'  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 321-322*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat
al-Mi\`raaj wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi
wa wasf al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.  
    
  

Hadith n. 5: Angel of Death
---------------------------

   
 "We continued on our way until we saw an Angel sitting down and in his
hand was a tablet of light. That Angel looked at what was written on the
tablet with sadness and gloom on his face and paid no attention to what
was happening around him except when someone came close to him.  
    
 I asked Jibra'il, \`Who is this Angel?' Jibra'il said, \`This is the
Angel of Death *(Malak ul‑Mawt),* and he is busy taking the souls (of
people).' I said, \`Take me closer to him.'  
    
 We went closer to him and Jibra'il introduced me to the Angel. I
greeted him. He welcomed me, returned the greeting and sent salutations
upon me. He said to me, \`O' Muhammad give the glad tidings to your
Ummah since I see good and moral works only from them.'  
    
 I thanked Allah (SWT) only because of this blessing and said to him
that this was from the grace of my Lord. Jibra'il said, \`The Angel of
Death is the most diligent Angel when it comes to carrying out his
responsibility.' I asked him, \`Does \`Izra'il (another name for the
Angel of Death) take the soul of anyone who has died or anyone who will
die?' Jibra'il replied, \`Yes, it is so.'  
    
 I then asked the Angel of Death, \`Do you see where the people are?' He
replied, \`Yes. I see then and (I also see) the entire universe which is
in front of me.' The Angel of Death continued, \`Allah (SWT) has given
me the permission to have complete awareness over all of them. They are
to me just like a dirham (coin) in the hand of a person, such that any
way he wants to hold the coin, he can (so too, he has control and
perception over all of Allah's creations). There is not a single house
which I do not visit five times per day. I say to the people of each
house, "Do not cry over your deceased because I will continuously come
and go from your house, until the time comes when not a single person
will remain there."'  
    
 "I asked Jibra'il, \`Is death enough for the one who is facing trials
and tribulations?' He replied, \`After death, the trials are
increased.'"  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 322-323*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat
al-Mi\`raaj wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi
wa wasf al-buraaq, Hadith* 34. 

Hadith n. 6: People who Eat forbidden Food
------------------------------------------

   
 We continued on our journey until we reached a group of people, in
whose hands were dishes with both good and bad food in them. However,
they were eating only from the bad meat.  
    
 I asked, \`Who are these people that are leaving the good food and are
busy eating only the bad and putrid food?' Jibra il replied, \`These are
the people of your Ummah who used to eat forbidden (haram) food.'  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 323*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 7: The Angel who was Supplicating
-------------------------------------------

   
 After this, I saw an Angel whose physique was very interesting. One
half of the body of this Angel was fire, and the other half of it was
ice. Even stranger than this was the fact that neither the heat of the
fire made the ice turn to water nor did the coldness of the ice put out
the flames. With a very quiet voice he said, "I praise the One who is
sufficent (to praise) such that the heat of this fire does not melt the
ice, nor does the cold of the ice put out the fire. O' Allah! O' the One
who has placed such a thing between the fire and ice! You (too) place
agreement and love between the hearts' of Your servants!"  
    
 I asked Jibra'il concerning this Angel. He replied to me that "Allah,
the Glorious and Most High, has appointed him as the Angel who will
offer advice to the believers on earth and is the guardian of the
heavens and earth ‑ from the time this Angel was created, he has been
praying for the people on earth.  
    
 There are also two other angels in this heaven, one of them supplicates
as such, \`O' Allah! Whosoever gives a contribution or donation (in your
way), have Mercy upon him. The other one says, \`O' Allah, destroy he
who is stingy and miserly!'"  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 323*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 8: Backbiters
-----------------------

   
 Again, we continued on our way. During the journey, we approached a
group of people whose lips were like the lips of a camel (large in
size), and were being cut with scissors. The meat that had been cut was
then forced into their mouths.  
    
 I asked, "Jibra'il, who are these people?" He replied, "These are the
people who used to backbite and look for faults in their believing
brothers."  
    
 I saw another group of people whose skulls were being crushed with
rocks and whose brains were flowing out. I asked, ".Who are these
people?" He said, "These are people who would go to sleep without having
prayed Salat al‑\`Isha."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 323-324*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat
al-Mi\`raaj wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi
wa wasf al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 9: Those who take the Wealth of the Orphan or Take Interest
---------------------------------------------------------------------

   
 I saw a group of people in which fire was being poured into their
mouths and it was coming out of their rear‑ends.  
    
 I requested an explanation on who they are. Jibra'il replied, "These
were people who took the property of the orphans unlawfully."  
    
 Then I saw another group of people whose stomachs were so large that
they could not even get up.  
    
 I asked a question regarding these people and the answer I was given
was that they were people who used to take interest, were deceived by
the Devil and followed the ways of the People of Fira'un. Every morning
and evening, fire is given to them. They say, "O' Allah! When will the
Day of Judgement take place so that we will have some respite from this
life, which is taking away our strength?"  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 324*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 10: Women Who Committed Indecent Acts
-----------------------------------------------

   
 We came across a group of women during our journey who were being hung
by their chest.  
    
 I asked Jibra'il, "Who are these women?" He replied, "These are women
who lied and attributed children (that they had from someone else) to
their husbands and therefore claimed that these children were their
inheritors.'  
    
 The Prophet of Allah said, "The harshest punishment of Allah is on that
woman who attributes a child to a family who is not really from that
family, simply to take control of her husband's wealth."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 324*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34. 

Hadith n. 11: Praising of the Angels
------------------------------------

   
 We proceeded from those people and arrived to a group of Angels, who
Allah the Glorious and High ‑ by His own desire had created ‑ whose
complete existence was spent in the glorification and remembrance of
Allah (SWT).  
    
 These Angels, in a high voice, were praising and thanking the One God
and out of their love and fear for Him were crying.  
    
 I asked regarding them and Jibra'il told me, "Just as you can see, each
Angel is standing beside another Angel yet they do not talk to one
other. Their only task is to glorify and praise Allah the High and
Glorious ‑ thus they do not even look up or down."  
    
 I greeted them to which they replied by moving their head without even
looking at me. Jibra'il said to them, "This is Muhammad, the seal of the
Prophets and the Prophet of Mercy. He is the Leader and Master of all
the Prophets. Why are you not speaking to him?" When they heard this,
they greeted me, extended their respect to me and gave good tidings to
me and to my Ummah."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 324*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 12: Prophet Yahya and Prophet Isa
-------------------------------------------

   
 We continued up into the second heaven. I saw two people who resembled
one another. I asked, "Jibra'il, who are these two people?'  
    
 He replied, "They are Yahya and \`Isa, two Prophets and cousins of one
another." I greeted them both and prayed to Allah (SWT) for this
forgiveness. They both greeted me back and prayed for my forgiveness;
and after welcoming me said: "Welcome O' Righteous and good brother of
ours!" In that place, there were also Angels present who were
prostrating with humbleness and humility. Allah (SWT) the Almighty had
created them in various forms, and in various voices they were busy in
praising and glorifying Allah."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 325*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 13: Prophet Yusuf
---------------------------

   
 We then went up into the third heaven. It was there that I saw a man
who had more excellence and virtues than anyone else I had seen. He was
a person who was glowing just like the moon on the 10 of a month.  
    
 I asked Jibra'il, "Who is he?" He replied, "This is your brother Yusuf"
I greeted him and prayed for his forgiveness. He returned my greeting
and prayed for my mercy and said, "Welcome O' my brother, O' Prophet
with exemplary morals who has been sent down at a good and appropriate
time." At this place, there were also Angels present who in all
humility, were prostrating and busy in the remembrance of Allah (SWT). I
was introduced to them and just like the other Angels they too treated
me with great respect.  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 325*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 14: Prophet Idris
---------------------------

   
 Following this, we continued up to the fourth heaven. There I saw a
person and asked Jibra'il, "Who is he?" He replied: "This is Idris, the
one whom Allah the Great, brought up to a high station." I greeted him
and prayed for his forgiveness; he too prayed for my forgiveness. In
this heaven too there were Angels who like in the previous heavens gave
me good tidings. I then saw another Angel who was leaning against a
throne and had seventy thousand Angels under his command. In a loud
voice, Jibra'il called out to him to stand ‑ he obeyed and stood up and
until the Day of Judgement, he will remain in that state."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 325*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34. 

Hadith n. 15: Prophet Harun
---------------------------

   
 We reached the fifth heaven where I saw a tall man, and up until now, I
had not seen someone like him. He had large eyes and was very old. His
nation (Ummah) was surrounding him.  
    
 I asked Jibra'il, "Who is this man?" He said: "This is Harun ‑ the son
of \`Imran ‑ who had gained the approval of his nation. I greeted him as
well and prayed to Allah for his forgiveness. He too greeted me and
prayed for my forgiveness. In this heaven as well there .were Angels who
in all humility and humbleness, were busy in the praise of Allah
(SWT)."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 325*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 16: A Very Tall Man
-----------------------------

   
 We continued on towards the higher heaven. In the sixth heaven I saw a
very tall man whose body was covered in hair, such that if he were to
wear a shirt, the hair would come out of it.  
    
 The man said, "The Bani Isra'il say that I am the best of the children
of Islam in the sight of Allah (SWT), however this man, the Noble
Prophet of Islam (S) is much better and beneficent in the sight of Allah
(SWT) than I am."  
    
 I greeted him and prayed for his forgiveness; he replied to my greeting
and prayed for my forgiveness. In this place as well, Angels in humility
and humbleness were busy praising Allah (SWT), just as in the previous
heavens.  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 326*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 17: Commanded to Perform “Cupping”
--------------------------------------------

   
 After this, we reached the seventh heaven. While here, whichever Angel
we came into contact with said to me, "Perform \`cupping' [^5] and
command your Ummah to do so as well."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 326*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.  
  

Hadith n. 18: Prophet Ibrahim
-----------------------------

   
 We then reached a man whose hair colour was a mix of black and white. I
asked Jibra'il, "Who is this man sitting at the door of Bayt al‑Ma'mur,
near Allah?" [^6] Jibra'il replied, "He is your father, Prophet Ibrahim,
and your house is in this place as well as a group of people from your
Ummah who have Taqwa." At that'time, I read the following verse of the
Qur'an:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ لَلَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ وَهَٰذَا
النَّبِيُّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ۗ وَاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
*"Verily the best* of *people to Ibrahim are those who follow him and
(those who follow) the Prophet (Muhammad) and those who believe and
Allah is a Guardian for the Believers.* " [^7]  
    
 I greeted him, to which he replied and said, "Welcome O' Prophet and O'
virtuous offspring, O' one who has been chosen in a good time.'  
    
 In this place too, Angels, in full humility and humbleness were
present. They gave me and my Ummah the glad tidings of goodness.  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 326*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.  
    
  

Hadith n. 19: Rivers of Light and Darkness
------------------------------------------

   
 In the seventh heaven I saw rivers of light, such that the light that
was coming from them made the eyes blind. Rivers of Darkness were also
there that were covered over with ice and the sound of thunder crashing
could be heard. I was busy looking at these rivers when Jibra'il said to
me, "O' Muhammad ‑ be thankful to Allah (SWT) for the graces and
bounties that have been chosen for you."  
    
 I prayed, "O' Allah by the truth of Your Power and Glory, keep my faith
firm." Then I said to Jibra'il, "This is a beautiful and amazing scene."
He replied, "This is just a portion of the creations of your Lord ‑ the
Creator who has created everything ‑ some of which you have seen and
some of which you have not even yet seen.  
    
 Jibra'il continued by saying, "Between Allah and His creations, there
exists 90,000 layers of concealment and the closest of creations to
Allah are Isra'fil and myself; and between Allah and us exist four
veils: Light, Darkness, Cloud and Water."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 326-327*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat
al-Mi\`raaj wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi
wa wasf al-buraaq, Hadith* 34. 

Hadith n. 20: An Amazing Creation
---------------------------------

   
 The most amazing creation that I had witnessed on the Mi’raj was a
being whose feet were on the seventh ground and whose body continued
upwards, such that his head was above in the High Throne, under the
command of Allah (SWT).

There was also an Angel whose feet were on the seventh ground and whose
body continued upwards until his head reached to the High Throne."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 327*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 21: Angels with Feathers
----------------------------------

   
 We continued on our path until we reached to the end of the seventh
heaven. It was there at the end of the heaven that we witnessed the
Throne of Allah (SWT). Here I saw an Angel who was glorifying Allah
(SWT) such:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سبحان ربي حيث ما كنت لا تدري أين ربُك من العظيم شأنه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

*"Wherever I may be, glory is to my Lord. I do not know where your Lord
is due to His great status. "*  
    
 This Angel had two wings such that if they were to spread open, it
would cover the east to the west of the Universe. Every morning he would
open up his wings, rest against something and cry out such:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سبحان الله الملك القدُّوس. سبحان الله الكبير المتعال. لا إله إلا الله
الحيّ القيوم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
 "Glory be to Allah, the King, the Holy. Glory be to Allah, the Great,
the Most High. There is no god except Allah, the Living and Self­
Subsisting. "  
* *  
 Whenever the Angel would say this tasbih, all the peacocks that are on
the Earth would start to praise Allah (SWT) and open their wings up in
respect (of Allah ).  
    
 Whenever this Angel in the heaven would become quiet, the peacocks on
the Earth would become quiet. The Angel in the heaven had green hair and
white wings ‑ so white that no one has ever seen anything that white
before. Under its green hair, there are white wings which are very
beautiful ‑ the green which until now has never been seen before."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 327*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 22: Bayt al Ma’mur
----------------------------

   
 Along with Jibra'il, we entered into Bayt al‑Ma'mur. A group of my
friends were with me all of whom were wearing new clothing. Others from
amongst them were wearing old clothing, and when they tried to enter
this area, they were prevented. Only those who were wearing new clothing
were permitted to enter with me into Bayt al‑Ma'mur. In this place, I
performed a two Rak'at Salat, and then left.  
    
 Two rivers passed by me ‑ one was al‑Kawthar and the other was the
river of Mercy. I drank from the river of al‑Kawthar and performed a
Ghusl with the river of Mercy. I was then guided to enter into Paradise.
In one area of Paradise, I saw my house and that of my wife. The ground
and the dirt of Paradise had the smell of Musk and Amber. In the rivers
of Paradise, I saw a servant of Allah who was bathing. I asked her, "O'
servant! Who are you for?" She replied to me, "I am (here) for Zaid ibn
Harith." When I saw Zaid (after this event), I gave him the good tidings
of this.  
    
 "The birds of Paradise were as the camels of Khurasan (in size). The
pomegranates that were hanging on the trees were so large and glowing
and incomparable to anything else. It was here that I saw a huge tree
such that if a bird were to fly around it for seven hundred years, he
would still not be able to go around the entire tree. In Paradise, there
is not a single house in which one of the branches of this tree does not
cover. I asked Jibra'il regarding this tree an he told me, "This is the
tree of Tuba about which, Allah has said in the Qur'an:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ طُوبَىٰ لَهُمْ وَحُسْنُ
مَآبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
*"...Tuba shall be theirs and a goodly return.* " [^8]  
    
 Thus this tree of Tuba is in Paradise and all of the houses in there
are under (the shade) of this tree.  
    
 I asked Jibra'il concerning all the wonderful things that we had
witnessed including the rivers, and those things which frightened me,
and he replied, "These are all various levels of veils which are placed
between Allah (SWT) the High and His creations. If these curtains were
not there, then the Throne of Allah would have been visible however, it
is not possible for any of His creations to see His Light *(Nur).'"*  
     
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 327-328*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat
al-Mi\`raaj wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi
wa wasf al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 23: At Sidratul Muntaha
---------------------------------

   
 We reached to an area known as Sidratul Muntaha. We saw a place where
there was a tree whose one leaf would be able to cover an entire nation.
Then we went to that place known (in the Qur'an) as: \`...So he was the
measure of two bows or closer still." [^9]  
    
 Allah (SWT) called out:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ رَبِّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
*"The Prophet believes in that which His Lord has revealed unto him. "*
[^10]  
    
 On behalf of myself and my Ummah, I replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ ۚ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ
وَرُسُلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
*"And the believers too, they all believe in Allah and His Angels and
His Books and His Messengers. We do not differentiate between any of His
Messengers. "*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا سَمِعْنَا وَأَطَعْنَا ۖ غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ
الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
*"...And they say: We hear and we obey, Our Lord! Thy forgiveness (do we
crave), and to Thee is the eventual course. "*  
    
 Allah (SWT) then said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا ۚ لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
*"Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent* of its
*ability; for it is (the benefit of) what it has earned and upon it (the
evil of) what it has wrought"*  
    
 Then I said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا لَا تُؤَاخِذْنَا إِنْ نَسِينَا أَوْ أَخْطَأْنَا ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
*"Our Lord! do not punish us if we forget or make a mistake! "*  
    
 Allah (SWT) replied  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا أُو أخذك
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
*"I will not punish you."*  
    
 Then I continued:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَلَا تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَا إِصْرًا كَمَا حَمَلْتَهُ عَلَى
الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

*"Our Lord! do not lay on us a burden as Thou didst lay on those before
us! "*  
    
 Allah (SWT) replied

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا أحملك
  </p>
</blockquote>

* *

*"I will not lay upon you a burden. "*

   
 I once again said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا ۚ لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ
وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ ۗ رَبَّنَا لَا تُؤَاخِذْنَا إِنْ نَسِينَا
أَوْ أَخْطَأْنَا ۚ رَبَّنَا وَلَا تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَا إِصْرًا كَمَا
حَمَلْتَهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِنَا ۚ رَبَّنَا وَلَا
تُحَمِّلْنَا مَا لَا طَاقَةَ لَنَا بِهِ ۖ وَاعْفُ عَنَّا وَاغْفِرْ
لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا ۚ أَنْتَ مَوْلَانَا فَانْصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ
الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

*"Our Lord do not impose upon us that which we have not the strength to
bear; and pardon us and grant us protection and have mercy on us, Thou
art our Patron, so help us against the unbelieving people.* " [^11]  
    
 Allah the Glorious and High said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد أعطيتك ذلك لك ولأمتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

*"Verily I have bestowed this upon you and your nation. "*

   
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 328-329*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat
al-Mi\`raaj wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi
wa wasf al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.  
  

Hadith n. 24: Discourse of Imam Ja’far as Sadiq
-----------------------------------------------

   
 Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq, has said, "Never has anyone more noble than the
Prophet of Islam (S) attained the honour of such closeness."  
    
 The Prophet of Islam (S) asked from Allah (SWT) for his \`Ummah such:
"O' Allah! Whatever specialties you have given to your prophets, also
bestow upon me." Allah replied, "I give you the following two
supplications which are under My Throne:"  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاحول ولا قوة إلا بالله – لا منجا منك إلا إليك
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
*"There is no power or strength save with Allah ‑ there is no saviour
for you except from Him."*  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 329*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 25: Supplication
--------------------------

   
 During the Mi’raj, an Angel taught me the following supplication and
instructed me to recite it during the Morning and the Evening:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إن ظلمي أصبح مستجيراً بعفوك وذنبي مستجيرا بمغفرتك وذلي مستجيراً
بوجهك الباقي الذي لا يفنى
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
*"O' Allah! Verily I appeal for relief from my oppression through Your
pardon, and I appeal for relief from my sins through Your forgiveness,
and I appeal for relief from my own insignificance through your
Everlasting Countenance which will never cease to exist. "*  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 329-330*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat
al-Mi\`raaj wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi
wa wasf al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 26: Adhan
-------------------

   
 Thereafter, I heard the sound of the Adhan. An Angel in the heavens was
busy reciting this Adhan. And up until now, 1 had not heard the Adhan
being called out from the heavens. When he said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله أكبر الله أكبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

*Allah is greater than any words that can describe Him.*

*Allah is greater than any words That can describe Him.*

   
 Allah said, "My servant has spoken the truth. I am the Greatest."  
    
 The Angel then said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أشهد أن لا إله إلا الله أشهد أن لا إله إلا الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

*I bear witness that there is no creature worthy of worship except
Allah.*

*I bear witness that there is no creature worthy of worship except
Allah.*

 

Allah said, "My servant has spoken the truth, other than Me there is no
other god."  
    
 The call of:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أشهد أن محمد رسول الله أشهد أن محمد رسول الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

*I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.*

*I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.*

 

was then heard.  
    
 Allah (SWT) said, "My servant has spoken the truth. Muhammad is My
Servant and Prophet. I have appointed him as a Prophet."  
    
 The Muaddhin then said:

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حيَّ على الصلاة حيَّ على الصلاة
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

*Hasten towards the Salat.*

*Hasten towards the Salat.*

   
 Allah (SWT) said, "My servant has spoken the truth ‑ he has invited
others to worship Me. Whomsoever comes towards the Salat with complete
love and with full accountability, (the Salat) will be a kaffarah for
his previous sins."  
    
 The Muaddhin then said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حيَّ على الفلاح حيَّ على الفلاح
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

*Hasten towards salvation.*

*Hasten towards salvation.*

   
 Allah (SWT) said, \`Salat is the means of success of my Servants. Salat
is the key to success, salvation and truthfulness of My servants. ''
[^12]  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 330*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat al-Mi\`raaj
wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi wa wasf
al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.  
  

Hadith n. 27: Salat
-------------------

   
 Here I led the Angels of Paradise in Salat just as in Bayt al ­Muqaddas
I led the previous Prophets in Salat. When I went into Sajdah, Allah
called out, "I had made fifty Salat for each day incumbent upon the
Prophets who came before you; and upon you and your Ummah, I make these
incumbent too for these fifty Salat I have confirmed."  
    
 After the Salat, I continued on my back and while on the path, I met
Prophet Ibrahim al‑Khalil. He did not ask me a single question.  
    
 Then I met Musa ibn \`Imran. He asked me, "O' Muhammad what did you
do?" I replied, "My Allah told me that he had made fifty daily Salat
obligatory on the Prophets before me, and upon me and my Ummah too, He
has made this amount obligatory."  
    
 Prophet Musa (a.s) said to me, "O' Muhammad! Your Nation is the final
and the weakest of all the Nations. Allah's commands must be followed,
however your Nation does not have the ability to perform fifty daily
Salat; thus, return to Allah and request Him to lighten the load on your
Ummah."  
    
 I returned to Sidratul Muntaha and fell into prostration. I said, "O'
Allah! You have made fifty daily Salat obligatory on my Ummah and me.
However, my Ummah and I do not have the ability to perform this much.
From your Holy Presence, I request a reduction in this."  
    
 Allah, Glorious and High ‑ reduced the number of Salat by ten.  
    
 I returned back and informed Musa (a.s) what happened. He replied, "Go
back as they do not have the power to perform even this much."  
    
 I returned once again, and Allah reduced the number of Salat by ten. I
was going back when Musa (a.s.) said, "Still they do not have the
ability to perform even this."  
    
 I once again returned, fell into sajdah, and asked for a reduction in
the Salat. Allah once more reduced the number by ten.  
    
 I returned to where Musa (a.s.) was and told him what happened. Again
he said to me, "Go back since they will not be able to even handle
this."  
    
 I once again returned, fell into sajdah and again asked Allah for a
reduction in the Salat. I said, "O' Allah, my Nation is weak and they
will not have the ability to handle even this." Allah reduced the Salat
by ten more. From a total of fifty Salat, only ten were made
obligatory.  
    
 Again, I passed by Musa (a.s.) and he said, "Your Ummah does not have
the ability to even handle ten Salat."  
    
 For the last time I returned and fell into sajdah. Allah reduced the
Salat by five. I went to where Musa was and he said to me, "Your Ummah
does not even have the ability to perform five daily Salat." I said to
him, "I am embarrassed to go back to Allah again. I will just be patient
in relation to these five Salat."  
    
 Then I heard a voice that said, "Since you have had patience, these
five Salat will be counted as fifty Salat. Each Salat will be counted as
ten Salat, and if one person from your Ummah performs a good act, then
ten good acts will be written for him, but if he performs one bad act,
then only that one bad act will be written in his record."  
    
 Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq had said, "May Allah give Musa (a.s.) great reward
since because of him, the daily (obligatory) Salat were reduced to only
five."  
    
 From *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 18, p. 330-331*, Bab* 3 *- Ithbaat
al-Mi\`raaj wa ma\`anaahu wa kayfiyyatuhu wa sifatuhu wa ma jaraa feehi
wa wasf al-buraaq, Hadith* 34.

Hadith n. 28: Returning from Mi’raj
-----------------------------------

   
 In the book \`*Amali*' by Shaikh as‑Saduq (may Allah raise his rank),
it has been narrated that Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq had said, "When the
Prophet along with Jibra'il mounted onto Buraq, one of the horses of
Paradise ‑ to go on the Mi’raj, they first went to Bayt al‑Muqaddas. The
Mehrab (prayer Niche) of the previous Prophets was shown to the Holy
Prophet, and he also performed Salat there.  
    
 After the Mi’raj, the Prophet (S) once again returned to Bayt al­
Muqaddas and there he met up with a Caravan from the tribe of Quraish.
This group has lost one of their camels and was busy searching for it.  
    
 The Prophet asked them for a glass of water, drank some of it and
poured the rest of it on the ground. Finally, he returned to Makkah.  
    
 When the morning came, he told the Quraish: "In the night, Allah took
me to Bayt al‑Muqaddas and in that land, He showed me the after effects
and the houses of the previous Prophets. On my return, I met up with a
Caravan from the Quraish who had lost one of their camels; I requested a
glass of water from them of which I drank some of it, and the rest I
poured onto the ground."  
    
 Abu Jahl (L) who was one of the staunch enemies of the Noble Prophet 
said: "Ask him (the Prophet) how many pillars, lights and Mehrabs are in
Bayt al‑Muqaddas."  
    
 At that time, Jibra'il came to the Prophet (S) and placed an image of
Bayt al‑Muqaddas in front of him, with which he was able to answer all
the questions posed to him. When the people of the Quraish heard this,
they said, "Let us wait until the Caravan returns and we can ask
them."  
    
 The Prophet replied to them, "The Caravan will return to Makkah around
the time of sunrise and in front of the Caravan will be an exquisite
looking camel."  
    
 Once the morning came, everyone was in anticipation for the Caravan to
arrive. They said, "The sun is rising but the Caravan still has not
arrived!" Just as this was said and the sun began to rise above the
horizon, the Caravan appeared. At the head of the Caravan, the same
beautiful looking camel that the Prophet had mentioned, could be seen. 
[^13]  
  

Hadith n. 29: The Voice of ‘Ali During the Mi’raj
-------------------------------------------------

   
 In the book *Kashf al‑Ghummah,* it has been narrated from \`Abdullah
ibn \`Umar that: "I heard someone ask the Prophet of Allah (SWT), \`With
what voice did Allah, the Glorified and High, speak to you in on the
night of the Mi’raj?"  
    
 The Prophet replied, "My Lord spoke to me with the voice of 'Ali ibn
Abi Talib (a.s.) and said, \`O' Ahmad! I am an Entity that is not like
anything else. I can not be compared to anything else and I know all the
secrets of your heart. With the exception of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) ,
you have no other close friend. Thus, I speak to you with the voice of
'Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) so that your heart will be at ease.""  
    
 From *Kashf al-Ghummah,* Vol. 1, p. 106*,* *Fee mahabbati al-rasooli
(s) iyyahu wa tahreedahu alaa mahabbatihi wa muwaalaatihi wa nahyuhu an
baghdihi*.

[^1]: Surah al‑Najm (53), Verses 1‑18

[^2]: Buraq: the name of the ride that the Prophet (s) was on during his
Mi’raj. Historians state that the body of it was similar to that of a
horse while the head resembled that of a human being.

[^3]: Surah Saffat (37), Verse 10

[^4]: Surah Mutaffin (83), Verse 18-28

[^5]: Cupping is a form of medical treatment that has been mentioned in
various ahadith. For more information on Cupping, see books such as Tibb
an‑Nabi, Tibb al‑A'immah. (Tr.)

[^6]: Allah (SWT) has no fixed place or station as he has no physical
body to make Him limited to a certain place. Thus, the meaning of being
\`near to Allah' is more of spiritual or esoteric meaning.

[^7]: Surah Aale Imran (3), Verse 68

[^8]: Surah al‑Ra'd (13), Verse 29

[^9]: Surah al‑Najm (53), Verse 9

[^10]: Surah al‑Baqarah (2), Verse 285

[^11]: This supplication that the Prophet (S) prayed in the Mi’raj for
his Ummah is also the last verse of Surah al‑Baqarah. The nations before
used to get severe punishments and were not given a chance to repent as
mercifully as the followers of the Prophet Muhammad are and this is due
to the supplication of the Prophet for his Ummah during this holy
journey. (Tr.)

[^12]: The Adhan as has been mentioned in this hadith which is also
found in various books including Bihar al‑Anwar is \`incomplete'
according to the ahadith from the Prophet and A'immah who have taught us
how the Adhan must be performed and as has been detailed in the various
books of Fiqh and Ahkam by our \`Ulama. Various copies of Bihar al‑Anwar
were checked and all narrated the incident the same way. Thus, it is
possible that the entire hadith has not been narrated completely from
the Prophet or because the books of ahadith of the Ahl al‑Bayt have been
constantly under attack and desecration in the past by tyrant
governments, the entire hadith may have been lost. (Tr. ‑ as answered by
the office of the Grand Marja \` Ayatullah al‑ Uzma Hajn Nasir Makarim
Shirazi)

[^13]: Amali Saduq, Page 363, Section 69, Hadith 1


