Prelude
=======

A General View of the Topic of Economy
--------------------------------------

The economic or financial issue of each community is considered one of
the vital constituents of the general system without which no community
can endure political and social pressures, evolve, or attain perfection.

As a divine message proposed for the mental and spiritual perfection of
man, Islam has paid great attention to the economic and financial
aspect. Financial issues generally play an important role in achieving
perfection. This fact is visible in the following points:

Significance of the Economic System
-----------------------------------

**A.** On various occasions the Holy Qur'an has mentioned *zakat* (in
its general sense almsgiving, and specifically, as an obligation, a tax
imposed on Muslims under certain conditions) along with the religious
duty of performing prayers, with the purport that these two obligations
cannot be separated. Likewise, *zakat* has been attached to
self-sacrifice for the sake of Almighty Allah and has been presented—in
the form of spending for the sake of Almighty Allah on the poor, the
needy, and the financially distressed, such as the indebted and their
like—as one of those acts of obedience to Almighty Allah through which
His nearness can be attained.

**B.** Just as Islam has organized the issues of family; society; one’s
relationship with Almighty Allah, nature, and humankind; and other
aspects of life so also has it organized the issue of spending, by
laying down public and private duties in this domain at the family and
individual levels of the virtuous community as well as maintenance of
the social and political existence of both the virtuous community and
the general public.

**C.** In the beginning of its existence, the promulgation of Islam
rested on substantial funds that were owned by Lady Khadijah al-Kubra
(the great), the Holy Prophet’s first wife, who played an extremely
great role in saving the mission of Islam in its early stages by
standing against a variety of pressures brought on by the polytheists.

**D.** Because the polytheists assessed the significance of economic
aspects at the outset of the advance of the Islamic mission, they laid
an economic siege upon its propagation to try to stop it. For instance,
they tried to stop the Islamic mission when they blockaded the Muslims
in the mountain pass of Abu-Talib (*shi’b abi-talib*) and boycotted them
economically, using different methods to maintain pressure.

Goals of the Economic System
----------------------------

There are three basic goals of the Islamic economic system when applied
to Muslim society in particular and all societies in general:

**(i)** To ensure the welfare and internal stability of social relations
and establish a vital system for spiritual perfection. This depends, to
a great extent, on finding proper solutions to the problems of poverty,
destitution, helplessness, and iniquitous discrimination in the levels
of wages.

**(ii)** To grant the virtuous community independence and ability to
move and progress freely and make correct decisions. Of course, the
achievement of this goal depends, for the most part, on economic
independence and financial power.

**(iii)** To establish common social, cultural, and utility services to
facilitate the progress of the virtuous community as a political and
social entity; to practice cultural, social and defensive activities to
defend the entity of the virtuous community and help it achieve its
goals.

Ahl al-Bayt’s concept of the Economic System
--------------------------------------------

From the outset the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) depended upon the genuine view of
Islam and its all-inclusive economic concept because Islam, in all its
features, includes the Ahl al-Bayt’s concept of building the virtuous
community. They emphasized the necessity of observing collective
financial duties, as is deduced from their traditions on *zakat*.

Shaykh al-Saduq, through an authentic chain of authority, has reported
‘Abdullah ibn Sinan as quoting Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا نَزَلَتْ آيَةُ الزَّكَاةِ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ صَدَقَةً تُطَهِّرُهُمْ وَتُزَكِّيهِم بِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي شَهْرِ رَمَضَانَ، فَأَمَرَ رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ، مُنَادِيَهُ فَنَادَى فِي النَّاسِ: إِنَّ اللهَ، تَبَارَكَ
وَتَعَالَى، قَدْ فَرَضَ عَلَيْكُمُ الزَّكَاةَ كَمَا فَرَضَ عَلَيْكُمُ
الصَّلاَةَ. فَفَرَضَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِنَ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ وَالإِبِلِ
وَالْبَقَرِ وَالْغَنَمِ وَمِنَ الْحِنْطَةِ وَالشَّعِيرِ وَالتَّمْرِ
وَالزَّبِيبِ، وَنَادَى فِيهِمْ بِذَلِكَ فِي شَهْرِ رَمَضَانَ، وَعَفَا
لَهُمْ عَمَّا سِوَى ذَلِكَ. ثُمَّ لَمْ يَتَعَرَّضْ لِشَيْءٍ مِنْ
أَمْوَالِهِمْ حَتَّى حَالَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْحَوْلُ مِنْ قَابِلٍ.
فَصَامُوا وَأَفْطَرُوا، فَأَمَرَ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
وَسَلَّمَ، مُنَادِيَهُ فَنَادَى فِي الْمُسْلِمِينَ: أَيُّهَا
الْمُسْلِمُونَ، زَكُّوا أَمْوَالَكُمْ تُقْبَلْ صَلاَتُكُمْ. ثُمَّ
وَجَّهَ عُمَّالَ الصَّدَقَةِ وَعُمَّالَ الطُّسُوقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When in the month of Ramadhan this holy verse was revealed:*

***“Take charity out of their property in order to cleanse them and
purify them thereby, (9:103)”***

*the Holy Prophet (S) ordered his caller to call out, “O people,
Almighty Allah has prescribed for you as an obligation to pay zakat just
as He has prescribed for you performance of the prayers. Hence, He is
imposing on you (a proportion) of gold, silver, camels, cows, sheep,
wheat, barley, dates, and raisins.” The Holy Prophet (S) announced this
to the people in the month of Ramadhan excluding other items (from zakat
taxation). However, he did not ask them to pay their zakat until
completion of one complete year. The next year, after they had observed
fasting and broken their fast, He (S) ordered his caller to call out, “O
Muslims, pay out the zakat from your assets so that your prayers may be
accepted.” He then appointed a collector to collect alms and
payments.*[^1]

According to another authentic narration, Abu-Basir reported the
following tradition.

Some wealthy men were in the presence of Abu-’Abdullah (Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a)) in our presence. As they mentioned the *zakat*, the Imam (‘a)
commented:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الزَّكَاةَ لَيْسَ يُحْمَدُ بِهَا صَاحِبُهَا. إِنَّمَا هُوَ
شَيْءٌ ظَاهِرٌ، إِنَّمَا حَقَنَ اللهُ بِهِ دَمَهُ وَسُمِّيَ بِهِ
مُسْلِماً، وَلَوْ لَمْ يُؤَدِّهَا لَمْ تُقْبَلْ لَهُ صَلاَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Payment of zakat is not a source of praise for the payer; rather, it is
something apparent, due to which Almighty Allah saves the payer’s blood
from being shed and grants him the title of Muslim. Hence, the prayers
of the person who does not pay it will not be accepted.*[^2]

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) planned the economic system of the virtuous
community, based on the observance of Islamic precepts and common
commitments to the Islamic state, because this community is meant to
live within the Islamic state and Muslim society.

The Topic of Discussion
-----------------------

In this discussion, we do not intend to thrash out the viewpoint of the
Ahl al-Bayt on the economic theory of Islam comprehensively because this
topic has been discussed elsewhere[^3] showing the Ahl al-Bayt’s
exclusive and genuine understanding of Islam in a way quite distinctive
from the founders of other Muslim jurisprudential sects. Our main point
in the present discussion is to explore, based on the general economic
theory of Islam, two major problems related to the building of the
virtuous community that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) had to deal with. These
were:

(i) Coordination between the economic system adopted by the governing
authorities and the resulting financial duties with the Islamic economic
system as applied by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). Of course, such combined
duties increased the burden and financial commitments of the virtuous
community.

(ii) Making available financial resources to cover expenses of
development and management of the affairs of the virtuous community in
order to provide genuine economic independence, achievement of which was
a veritable problem bearing in mind the exceptional circumstances of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers.

The coming discussions will deal with situations and procedures that the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) adopted to remedy these two problems. Subsequently,
some features will be mentioned that characterize the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
school from a legislative point of view and also procedures adopted in
the field of finance. Some distinctive features of the economic system
of the virtuous community are as follows:

• social solidarity as an obligation

• *khums*

• sectors of the society for which the funds of *zakat* must be used

• the significance of *waqf* (endowment of property under which the
proceeds are to be devoted to a religious or charitable purposes)

• important economic activities including commerce and agriculture

• special contributions

These economic topics will be considered in three chapters:

The **first chapter** explains **general economic legislation** by which
Islamic states have abided. The **second chapter** deals with
**restricted economic legislation** of Islam administered by the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) but by which the Islamic state of the time did not abide.
The **third chapter** discusses **economic activies** and the Ahl
al-Bayt’s attitude towards them.

[^1]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:3, H. 1.

[^2]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:28, H. 3.

[^3]: - The reader is advised to refer to the book of Iqtisaduna (Our
Economy) by Ayatollah Martyr Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, especially part II
where the author treats these issues elaborately.


