Chapter 1: General Economic Legislation
=======================================

**1. Zakat**

**2. Derelict Lands**

**3. Annexed Lands**

**4. Endowments (Waqf)**

Preamble
--------

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) instructed their followers to accept and conform to
general economic legislation, including commercial transactions and
contracts and their financial resultants and commitments. These
instructions also dealt with disagreements by jurisprudents about
transactions and the degree of obligation towards a certain law. Such
differences between the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) school and other
jurisprudential schools are trivial.

Laws regarding transactions and contracts depend upon the Holy
Legislator’s consent according to the rationally approvable line of
conduct (i.e. *al-Sirah al-’uqala'iyyah*), with a few exceptions like
usury and transactions which include illegal profit about which there is
a slight disagreement among the Muslim jurisprudential schools.

According to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) school, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are the
rightful rulers of the Muslim nation as designated by Almighty Allah. In
the field of economic legislation, it might be strange if there were no
disagreement among the Muslim jurisprudential schools in spite of being
firmly based on the laws of Islam, and strongly related to the interests
of the Muslim leadership and the virtuous community.

We will refer to **four of the most important rulings** in the field of
finance and economy by looking at the instructions given to the
partisans and followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in order to demonstrate
the standpoint of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) regarding these issues.

Zakat
-----

Confirmed by the Holy Qur'an and the traditions of the Holy Prophet (S),
*zakat* is held to be the most important legislation in the field of
finance. Islam has very accurately delineated private assets owned by
Muslims that are subject to this tax. These assets are nine in number
and include two monetary standards: gold and silver; four types of
produce: wheat, barley, dates, and raisins; and the three types of
livestock: camels, cows, and sheep.

Furthermore, Islam has designated the ruler of the Muslim community as
the supervisor and custodian of these taxes whose mission is to
estimate, calculate, assess, and collect the correct amount of *zakat*
from the owners of these assets. The Holy Qur'an has also regulated the
use of these taxes and dedicated them to the following categories that
are mentioned in this holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الصَّدَقَاتُ لِلْفُقَرَاءِ وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَالْعَامِلِينَ
عَلَيْهَا وَالْمُؤَلَّفَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَفِي الرِّقَابِ
وَالْغَارِمِينَ وَفِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَابْنِ السَّبِيلِ ۖ فَرِيضَةً
مِّنَ اللَّهِ ۗ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The alms are only for the poor, the needy, those who collect them, to
influence hearts (to belief), to free captives and debtors, for the
cause of Allah, and for the wayfarer—a duty imposed by Allah. Allah is
Knower, Wise. (9:60)***

Four major aspects of *zakat* are as follows:

(i) Significance and origin of *zakat*

(ii) Items subjected to *zakat*

(iii) Expenditure of *zakat*

(iv) Supervision of *zakat*

### Ahl al-Bayt’s view of the significance of zakat

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) adopted the same level of emphasis on this
religious duty as adopted by other Muslim groups, although among other
groups the funds of *zakat* were often held by unjust rulers.

According to an authentic narration, Muhammad ibn Muslim, Abu-Basir,
Burayd, and Fudhayl have reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) and Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَضَ اللهُ الزَّكَاةَ مَعَ الصَّلاَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah has deemed zakat obligatory along with the (duty of)
prayer.*[^1]

According to another authentic narration, Muhammad ibn Muslim has
reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ عَبْدٍ مَنَعَ مِنْ زَكَاةِ مَالِهِ شَيْئاً إِلاَّ جَعَلَ
اللهُ ذَلِكَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ثُعْبَاناً مِنْ نَارٍ مُطَوَّقاً فِي
عُنُقِهِ يَنْهَشُ مِنْ لَحْمِهِ حَتَّى يَفْرِغَ مِنَ الْحِسَابِ.
وَهُوَ قَوْلُ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيُطَوَّقُونَ مَا بَخِلُوا بِهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As for any servant (of Allah) who refrains from paying zakat (out of
his wealth), Almighty Allah will certainly transform his assets into a
fiery serpent, encircling his neck and biting his flesh until the
settlement of accounts with him is finished. This is the meaning of
Almighty Allah’s saying,* ***“They shall have that, whereof they were
niggardly, cleave to their necks on the Day of Resurrection.
(3:180)**”*[^2]

One who refuses to pay *zakat* and violates this duty or denies *zakat*
as a religious obligation is deemed *kafir* (apostate from Islam)
because *zakat* is one of the essential duties of Islam.

Abu-Basir has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ مَنَعَ قِيرَاطاً مِنَ الزَّكَاةِ فَلَيْسَ بِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلاَ
مُسْلِمٍ. وَهُوَ قَوْلُ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ ارْجِعُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَلِّي أَعْمَلُ صَالِحًا فِيمَا تَرَكْتُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever refrains from paying even a carat of zakat is neither a
believer (mu'min) nor Muslim. This is the meaning of Almighty Allah’s
saying, “(Until when death overtakes one of them, he says:)* ***‘Send me
back, my Lord, send me back! Haply I may do good in that which I have
left.’ (23:99-100)**”*[^3]

According to another authentic narration, Abu-Basir has reported Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ مَنَعَ قِيرَاطاً مِنَ الزَّكَاةِ فَلْيَمُتْ إِنْ شَاءَ
يَهُودِيّاً أَوْ نَصْرَانِيّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who refrains from paying even a carat of zakat may die a Jew or
Christian, whichever he likes.*[^4]

Funds Subject To Zakat
----------------------

Regarding the items subject to *zakat*, there is some disagreement among
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) school and other Muslim jurisprudential schools.
The disagreement lies in two major points and arises from the difference
between the jurisprudential ijtihad-based outcome of the followers of
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and the followers of other Muslim sects. Such
difference, however, is not found in narrations and traditions reported
from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

• According to the general and familiar jurisprudential opinion of the
Ahl al-Bayt’s followers, assets of commerce and goods that are in
merchants’ shops and stores are not subject to *zakat*; however, the
general jurisprudential opinion of other Muslim sects maintains that
these items are subject to *zakat*. Several traditions, reported from
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), do declare such items as obligatory for *zakat*
and, as a result, some scholars from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) school have
adopted this opinion; however, these traditions have been understood by
the master scholars of this school as *recommending* the payment of
*zakat* on such items or as having been said as a consequence of
*taqiyyah* because of the fact that other sacred texts and traditions
restrict this tax to the nine aforementioned categories of property.

• Like the previous point, disagreement on the ruling concerning
additional produce and livestock—such as rice, corn and horses—arises
from the difference in the jurisprudential, deductive outcome between
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) school and other Muslim schools of jurisprudence.
Once again, there are some traditions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
involving the possible obligation of paying *zakat* on these items, but
these traditions have been understood by the scholars of this school *as
being only a recommendation* or as having been said as a consequence of
*taqiyyah*.[^5]

We can give two explanations for this minor difference supported by some
points of evidence notwithstanding the scope of their accuracy.

**(a)** In Islamic legislation, *zakat* is in fact obligatory on the
nine previously mentioned items, while it is only *recommended* to pay
*zakat* for other items. The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are well known for their
in-depth knowledge of this fact (i.e., the distinction between the items
on which *zakat* is obligatory and those on which it is recommended),
while other Muslims show confusion about it. Some authentic traditions
support this observation.

‘Abdullah ibn Sinan quoted Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا نَزَلَتْ آيَةُ الزَّكَاةِ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ صَدَقَةً تُطَهِّرُهُمْ وَتُزَكِّيهِم بِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي شَهْرِ رَمَضَانَ، فَأَمَرَ رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ، مُنَادِيَهُ فَنَادَى فِي النَّاسِ: إِنَّ اللهَ، تَبَارَكَ
وَتَعَالَى، قَدْ فَرَضَ عَلَيْكُمُ الزَّكَاةَ كَمَا فَرَضَ عَلَيْكُمُ
الصَّلاَةَ. فَفَرَضَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِنَ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ وَالإِبِلِ
وَالْبَقَرِ وَالْغَنَمِ وَمِنَ الْحِنْطَةِ وَالشَّعِيرِ وَالتَّمْرِ
وَالزَّبِيبِ، وَنَادَى فِيهِمْ بِذَلِكَ فِي شَهْرِ رَمَضَانَ، وَعَفَا
لَهُمْ عَمَّا سِوَى ذَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When this holy verse was revealed:* ***“Take charity out of their
property, in order to cleanse them and purify them thereby, (9:103)”***
*the Holy Prophet (S), in the month of Ramadhan, ordered his caller to
call out, “O people, Almighty Allah has prescribed for you as an
obligation to pay zakat just as He has prescribed for you performance of
the prayers. Hence, He is imposing on you (a proportion) of gold,
silver, camels, cows, sheep, wheat, barley, dates, and raisins.” The
Holy Prophet (S) announced these to people in the month of Ramadhan,
excluding all other items…*[^6]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) and Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) are reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَضَ اللهُ، عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، الزَّكَاةَ مَعَ الصَّلاَةِ فِي
الأَمْوَالِ، وَسَنَّهَا رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ،
فِي تِسْعَةِ أَشْيَاءَ، وَعَفَا رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ، عَمَّا سِوَاهُنَّ: فِي الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ وَالإِبِلِ
وَالْبَقَرِ وَالْغَنَمِ وَالْحِنْطَةِ وَالشَّعِيرِ وَالتَّمْرِ
وَالزَّبِيبِ. وَعَفَا رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ،
عَمَّا سِوَى ذَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah has imposed (as a religious duty) the payment of zakat
from assets along with the (religious duty of) prayers. The Messenger of
Allah (S) enacted zakat to be paid from nine things only and he excluded
everything else: from gold, silver, camels, cows, sheep, wheat, barley,
dates, and raisins. The Messenger of Allah (S) excluded everything
else.”*[^7]

Muhammad (ibn Ja’far) al-Tayyar has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) about the items that are as an obligation subjected to *zakat*.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي تِسْعَةِ أَشْيَاءَ: الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ وَالْحِنْطَةِ
وَالشَّعِيرِ وَالتَّمْرِ وَالزَّبِيبِ وَالإِبِلِ وَالْبَقَرِ
وَالْغَنَمِ. وَعَفَا رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ،
عَمَّا سِوَى ذَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*These are nine things; gold, silver, wheat, barley, dates, raisins,
camels, cows, and sheep. The Messenger of Allah (S) excluded everything
else.*

The reporter said, “May Allah lead you to ever more righteousness! We
have other grains.”

“Which ones?” the Imam (‘a) asked.

“Rice,” answered the reporter.

“Yes,” the Imam (‘a) commented, “there is much.”

“Is it subjected to *zakat*?” the reporter asked.

The Imam (‘a) reproached him and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَقُولُ لَكَ إِنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، عَفَا
عَمَّا سِوَى ذَلِكَ، وَتَقُولُ: إِنَّ عِنْدَنَا حَبّاً كَثِيراً،
أَفِيهِ الزَّكَاةُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I have told you that the Messenger of Allah (S) excluded everything
else, yet you tell me that you have other grains and ask me whether they
are subjected to zakat or not!*[^8]

According to another authentically reported narration, Zurarah said that
he was sitting with Imam al-Baqir (‘a) and no one else was with the Imam
except his son Ja’far (al-Sadiq). At that time, the Imam (‘a) narrated
to me:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا زُرَارَةُ، إِنَّ أَبَا ذَرٍّ وَعُثْمَانَ تَنَازَعَا عَلَى عَهْدِ
رَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، فَقَالَ عُثْمَانُ: كُلُّ
مَالٍ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ أَوْ فِضَّةٍ يُدَارُ بِهِ وَيُعْمَلُ بِهِ
وَيُتَّجَرُ بِهِ فَفِيهِ الزَّكَاةُ إِذَا حَالَ عَلَيْهِ الْحَوْلُ.
فَقَالَ أَبُو ذَرٍّ: أَمَّا مَا يُتَّجَرُ بِهِ أَوْ دِيرَ وَعُمِلَ
بِهِ فَلَيْسَ فِيهِ زَكَاةٌ؛ إِنَّمَا الزَّكَاةُ فِيهِ إِذَا كَانَ
رِكَازاً كَنْزاً مَوْضُوعاً، فَإِذَا حَالَ عَلَيْهِ الْحَوْلُ فَفِيهِ
الزَّكَاةُ. فَاخْتَصَمَا فِي ذَلِكَ إِلَى رَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، فَقَالَ: الْقَوْلُ مَا قَالَ أَبُو ذَرٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Zurarah, during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (S), Abu-Dharr
and ‘Uthman disagreed about a question. ‘Uthman said, “Every item of
finance, be it gold or silver, that is used in one’s business, trade and
profession is subjected to zakat after the passage of a complete year
(of earnings).” Abu-Dharr said, however, “Assets that are used in one’s
business, trade, and profession are not subjected to zakat. Zakat is
paid only from assets that are stored or saved like treasure. Hence,
when a year passes, such assets become subject to zakat.” They then
presented the matter before the Messenger of Allah (S) who said,
“Abu-Dharr’s opinion is correct.”*

Abu-’Abdullah al-Sadiq (‘a) said to his father, “If this narration is
announced, people will stop giving to the poor and needy. Do you want
this?”

The Imam (‘a) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَيْكَ عَنِّي! لاَ أَجِدُ مِنْهَا بُدّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Stop this here! I have no other alternative.*[^9]

**(b)** The Islamic legislation with regard to finance decides that
*zakat* (in the sense of charity) is obligatory upon the wealthy who are
thus required to satisfy and meet the needs of the poor. Almighty Allah,
having introduced the nine aforementioned assets as obligatory charity,
entrusted the mission of identifying the extent of these funds to the
Guardians (*wali*) appointed by Him—the Holy Prophet (S) and the
Infallible Imams (‘a).

In the beginning of the formulation of Islamic law the Holy Prophet (S),
in his capacity as the guardian of Muslims, completely restricted this
religious duty to nine items which were obligatorily subject to *zakat*,
and he exempted all others because the interests of Muslims at that
stage required such and also because this amount of *zakat* could
achieve the purpose behind its legislation.

However, it is acceptable for a succeeding Guardian, alone or with the
participation of others, to subject other finances to this religious tax
in the light of the supreme interest of Islam or in order to make sure
that the purpose of establishing the law of paying *zakat* is achieved.
Unfortunately, the origin of this law has been confused with other types
of local authoritarian legislation[^10] by both jurisprudents of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) school and the other Muslim schools. However, it is worth
mentioning that exercise of this political authority is quite clearly
entrusted to the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

Zurarah and Muhammad ibn Muslim have reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ، عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، فَرَضَ لِلْفُقَرَاءِ فِي مَالِ
الأَغْنِيَاءِ مَا يَسَعُهُمْ، وَلَوْ عَلِمَ أَنَّ ذَلِكَ لاَ
يَسَعُهُمْ لَزَادَهُمْ. إِنَّهُمْ لَمْ يُؤْتَوْا مِنْ قِبَلِ فَرِيضَةِ
اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، وَلَكِنْ أُوتُوا مِنْ مَنْعِ مَنْ مَنَعَهُمْ
حَقَّهُمْ لاَ مِمَّا فَرَضَ اللهُ لَهُمْ، وَلَوْ أَنَّ النَّاسَ
أَدَّوْا حُقُوقَهُمْ لَكَانُوا عَايِشِينَ بِخَيْرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Almighty Allah has ordained a sufficient share for the poor to
be taken from the assets of the wealthy that meets all their needs. If
He had known that this determined share would not meet the needs of the
poor, He would certainly have added to it. People have not remained poor
because of a duty that Almighty Allah has prescribed or because of the
share that Almighty Allah has determined for them but because they have
been deprived of what was due to them. Had people given the poor their
due, they would certainly have lived in welfare.*[^11]

‘Ali ibn Mahziyar has reported that Imam al-Ridha (‘a) wrote the
following statement in a letter he sent to ‘Abdullah ibn Muhammad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّكَاةُ عَلَى كَيْلِ مَا كِيلَ بِالصَّاعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Zakat is levied from everything that can be measured by sa’.*[^12]

So, that is what ‘Abdullah recorded.

Another man has reported that he once asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) about
*zakat* on grains. “What kind of grain do you mean?” the Imam (‘a)
asked.

“They are sesame, rice, and millet,” the man answered, “and these are
all grains, just like wheat and barley.”

The Imam (‘a) responded:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي الْحُبُوبِ كُلِّهَا زَكَاةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All grains are subject to zakat.*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have answered the question of
someone, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا دَخَلَ الْقَفِيزَ فَهُوَ يَجْرِي مَجْرَى الْحِنْطَةِ وَالشَّعِيرِ
وَالتَّمْرِ وَالزَّبِيبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whatever is measured by qafiz*[^13] *is treated just like wheat,
barley, dates, and raisins.*

The questioner continued, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you! Please
tell me whether rice and its likes, such as chick-pea and lentils are
subject to *zakat* or not?”

The Imam (‘a) answered in writing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّكَاةُ فِي كُلِّ شَيْءٍ كِيلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Everything that is measured is subject to zakat.*[^14]

Zurarah has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) whether corn is
subject to *zakat* or not, and the Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذَّرَّةُ وَالْعَدَسُ وَالسِّلْتُ وَالْحُبُوبُ فِيهَا مِثْلُ مَا فِي
الْحِنْطَةِ وَالشَّعِيرِ، وَكُلُّ مَا كِيلَ بِالصَّاعِ فَبَلَغَ
الأَوْسَاقَ الَّتِي يَجِبُ فِيهَا الزَّكَاةُ فَعَلَيْهِ فِيهِ
الزَّكَاةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Corn, lentils, shelled barley, and all cereals are subject to zakat
just like wheat and barley. Everything that is measured by sa’ and
amounts to wasqs*[^15] *that are subject to zakat, is subject to this
tax.*[^16]

Abu-Basir has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) whether rice is
subject to *zakat*, and the Imam (‘a) answered affirmatively and then
added:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمَدِينَةَ لَمْ تَكُنْ يَوْمَئِذٍ أَرْضَ أَرُزٍّ فَيُقَالُ
فِيهِ، وَلَكِنَّهُ قَدْ جُعِلَ فِيهِ. وَكَيْفَ لاَ يَكُونُ فِيهِ
وَعَامَّةُ خَرَاجِ الْعِرَاقِ مِنْهُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Because there were no rice farms in al-Madinah at that time (of
legislation), nothing was mentioned about its taxation. Nevertheless,
rice was included in the taxable grains. How could it be excluded when
the majority of the taxes of Iraq are levied from rice?*[^17]

Suma’ah has reported that he asked the Imam (‘a) whether the working
partner must pay *zakat* on assets used in a partnership.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْبَغِي لَهُ أَنْ يَقُولَ لأَِصْحَابِ الْمَالِ: زَكُّوهُ. فَإِنْ
قَالُوا: إِنَّا نُزَكِّيهِ، فَلَيْسَ عَلَيْهِ غَيْرُ ذَلِكَ. وَإِنْ
هُمْ أَمَرُوهُ بِأَنْ يُزَكِّيَهُ فَلْيَفْعَلْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A working partner in a partnership who does the business with the money
of the other partners is required to advise the owner of the money to
pay the zakat of the money. If the owners say that they have done so,
then he is not required to do more, but if they order him to pay the
zakat, then he is required to do so.*

The reporter further asked, “What if the owner of the money claims that
he is paying the *zakat* of the money, while the other party knows for
sure that he (i.e. the owner) is not?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا هُمْ أَقَرُّوا بِأَنَّهُمْ يُزَكُّونَهُ، فَلَيْسَ عَلَيْهِ
غَيْرُ ذَلِكَ. وَإِنْ هُمْ قَالُوا: إِنَّا لاَ نُزَكِّيهِ، فَلاَ
يَنْبَغِي لَهُ أَنْ يَقْبَلَ ذَلِكَ الْمَالَ وَلاَ يَعْمَلَ بِهِ
حَتَّى يُزَكِّيَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If the owner of the money declares that he is paying the zakat of the
money, the other partner is not required to do more than that; however,
if the owner professes that he is not paying the zakat, then the working
partner must not accept that money and must not do business with it
until the partner pays the zakat.*[^18]

Muhammad ibn Muslim has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) when
*zakat* must be paid in the case of a person who bought goods with money
for which *zakat* had been paid, and later the goods remained unsold.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ كَانَ أَمْسَكَ مَتَاعَهُ يَبْتَغِي بِهِ رَأْسَ مَالِهِ فَلَيْسَ
عَلَيْهِ زَكَاةٌ، وَإِنْ كَانَ حَبِسَهُ بَعْدَ مَا يَجِدُ رَأْسَ
مَالِهِ فَعَلَيْهِ الزَّكَاةُ بَعْدَ مَا أَمْسَكَهُ بَعْدَ رَأْسِ
الْمَالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If the man withheld the goods in order to recuperate his capital, the
goods are not taxable, but if he withheld the goods after he had
recuperated his capital, then this money becomes subject to zakat for
withholding it after regaining his capital.*

The reporter further asked, “If one is given money to do business, is
this money subject to *zakat*?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا حَالَ الْحَوْلُ، فَلْيُزَكِّهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*After the passage of a complete year, he must pay its zakat.*[^19]

Usage of the Money Of Zakat
---------------------------

As for categories that are entitled to the money of *zakat*, the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) confirmed that these are exclusively the eight categories
mentioned in verse 60 of Surah al-Tawbah (*Surah* 9). However, it is not
obligatory to include all these eight categories when paying the money
of *zakat*; rather, it is acceptable to restrict payment to one or more
category. The religious authority who supervises the distribution of
*zakat* decides the details of this issue. Apart from some minor
details, this issue is unanimously agreed upon by all Muslims.

Additionally, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) instructed their Shi’ah to distribute
the money of *zakat* to the individuals of the virtuous community
restrictedly, where possible. This instruction was made as a result of
the Ahl al-Bayt’s understanding of the nature of needs imposed upon the
virtuous community which was besieged economically and politically.

Consequently, the individuals of this community had become the worthiest
to receive the money of *zakat* because of being exposed to various
sorts of pressures that caused their deprivation, especially considering
the fact that the majority of the *zakat* money went to the ruling
authorities and nothing of it was kept at the disposal of individuals
except a very small amount that could be excluded from the tax itself.

In addition, the individuals of the virtuous community deserve the money
of *zakat* as much as other Muslims. Accordingly, it was necessary to
compensate the virtuous community for the deprivation caused them by the
rulers because of their adherence to the doctrine of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a). Hence, these funds were restricted to these individuals.

It is not improbable that this very idea has been intended in the
authentic report of Zurarah and Muhammad ibn Muslim, which has been
cited by the three master scholars—Shaykh al-Kulayni, Shaykh al-Saduq,
and Shaykh al-Tusi.

Zurarah and Muhammad ibn Muslim report that they asked Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) about Almighty Allah’s saying:

***‘The alms are only for the poor, the needy, those who collect them,
to influence hearts (to belief), to free captives and debtors, for the
cause of Allah, and for the wayfarer—a duty imposed by Allah. Allah is
Knower, Wise.’ (9:60)***

They asked whether the categories entitled to the funds of *zakat*
included those who do not recognize (the divinely commissioned loyalty
to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)).

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الإِمَامَ يُعْطِي هَؤُلاَءِ جَمِيعاً لأَِنَّهُمْ يُقِرُّونَ لَهُ
بِالطَّاعَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Imam gives to all these categories only because they recognize
obedience to him.*

Zurarah asked, “What if they do not recognize him?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا زُرَارَةُ، لَوْ كَانَ يُعْطِي مَنْ يَعْرِفُ دُونَ مَنْ لاَ
يَعْرِفُ لَمْ يُوجَدْ لَهَا مَوْضِعٌ؛ وَإِنَّمَا يُعْطَى مَنْ لاَ
يَعْرِفُ لِيُرَغَّبَ فِي الدِّينِ فَيَثْبُتُ عَلَيْهِ. فَأَمَّا
الْيَوْمَ فَلاَ تُعْطِهَا أَنْتَ وَأَصْحَابُكَ إِلاَّ مَنْ يَعْرِفُ،
فَمَنْ وَجَدْتَ مِنْ هَؤُلاَءِ الْمُسْلِمِينَ عَارِفاً فَأَعْطِهِ
دُونَ النَّاسِ. سَهْمُ الْمُؤَلَّفَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَسَهْمُ الرِّقَابِ
عَامٌّ، وَالْبَاقِي خَاصٌّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Zurarah, if the Imam gives only to those who recognize (loyalty to
him) and deprives those who do not, then these funds will not find
people to receive them! The Imam gives also to those who do not
recognize (loyalty to him) so as to attract them to this faith and so
that they embrace it firmly. However, you and your acquaintances should
give only to those who recognize. Hence, if you find such people among
Muslims, you may give them rather than others. The shares of those whose
hearts have inclined towards the truth (al-mu'allafah qulubuhum) and the
share for the ransoming of captives (al-riqab) are common, while the
other shares are restricted.*

Zurarah asked, “What if we cannot find any of the mentioned groups?”

The Imam answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَكُونُ فَرِيضَةٌ فَرَضَهَا اللهُ، عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، وَلاَ يُوجَدُ
لَهَا أَهْلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Any duty that Almighty Allah has made incumbent must be practicable and
there must be deserving individuals.*

Zurarah asked, “What if the charity (of *zakat*) is not sufficient to
cover the needs of recipients?”

The Imam’s answer is already cited on p. 31.

Rooted in this concept, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) instituted an economic
directive that dealt with some of the needs of the individuals of the
virtuous community. This directive bound the wealthy individuals of this
community to pay *zakat* to the poor individuals of their community
exclusively and defined the distribution of these funds.

Isma’il ibn Sa’d al-Ash’ari has reported that he asked Imam al-Ridha
(‘a), “Is it possible to distribute *zakat* funds to those who do not
recognize (loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt)?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ، وَلاَ زَكَاةُ الْفِطْرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Neither zakat funds nor zakat al-fitrah*[^20] *(can be distributed to
them).*[^21]

®urays has reported that al-Mada’ini asked Imam al-Baqir (‘a), “There is
a portion of the *zakat* that we pay from our money. Who should we give
it to?”

The Imam answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي أَهْلِ وِلاَيَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Give it to the people of your faith.

Al-Mada'ini said, “I am living in a country where no one of my faith
lives.”

The Imam (‘a) instructed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِبْعَثْ بِهَا إِلَى بَلَدِهِمْ تُدْفَعُ إِلَيْهِمْ، وَلاَ تَدْفَعْهَا
إِلَى قَوْمٍ إِذَا دَعَوْتَهُمْ غَداً إِلَى أَمْرِكَ لَمْ يُجِيبُوكَ،
وَكَانَ وَاللهِ الذَّبْحُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You may send these funds to a country where people of your faith live.
Do not pay them to people who will not respond to you if you call them
to your faith and may even slay you!*[^22]

To reconcile these traditions with the previously cited report of
Zurarah and Muhammad ibn Muslim, it seems that this special and
restricted instruction was a local decision that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
took on the strength of their recognition of the common interests of the
virtuous community within their surroundings but not a law that is found
in original Islamic legislation. However, Almighty Allah knows best.

At the same time, this decision stands for a policy that must be
observed at all times according to the general rule of “the nearer, the
worthier.”

Nevertheless, there are some exceptions, as shown in the following
tradition:

Ya’qub ibn Shu’ayb al-Haddad has reported that he asked the Righteous
Servant (i.e. Imam al-Kazim (‘a)), “What should one of our creed who
lives in a remote region do with the funds of the *zakat* that he must
pay?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَضَعُهَا فِي إِخْوَانِهِ وَأَهْلِ وِلاَيَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He must distribute them on his brethren-in-faith and followers of his
belief.*

The reporter asked, “What if he cannot find such people?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَبْعَثُ بِهَا إِلَيْهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He may send them the funds.

The reporter asked, “What if he cannot find any means to transfer these
funds to them?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَدْفَعُهَا إِلَى مَنْ لاَ يَنْصِبُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He may then distribute the funds among those known for bearing no
hostility (against the Ahl* *al-Bayt).*

The reporter asked, “What if these cannot be found either? Should he pay
others?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا لِغَيْرِهِمْ إِلاَّ الْحَجَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The others’ share is nothing but stones!*[^23]

‘Ubayd ibn Zurarah has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “A man
of our faith paid the *zakat* funds to unworthy people for a
considerable time, but later he found worthy recipients. Should he again
pay the former funds to the worthy people?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

*“Yes, he should.”*

The reporter asked, “What if a person had not found worthy recipients
and, therefore, had not paid *zakat*, or he had not known that it was
obligatory upon him to pay but came to know recently?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُؤَدِّيهَا إِلَى أَهْلِهَا لِمَا مَضَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He must pay all the previous to worthy people.*

The reporter asked, “What if he could not find worthy people and paid
his *zakat* to unworthy people, but after investigation he concluded
that he was wrong (about them being unworthy)?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ عَلَيْهِ أَنْ يُؤَدِّيَهَا مَرَّةً أُخْرَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In this case, he is not liable to pay it once more.*[^24]

In the light of these traditions, we can conclude that this procedure is
one of the clear-cut distinguishing attitudes of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) on
the issue of *zakat*—an attitude that ensures the virtuous community an
important financial resource.

Supervision of Zakat Funds
--------------------------

In accordance with the procedures of the Islamic state, supervision of
the *zakat* funds was done by the Muslim ruler.[^25] It is not
improbable that this was enacted in the original Islamic legislation,
since the supervision of the *zakat* funds entails giving the poor a
part of the fortunes of the rich, transferring these funds to their
beneficiaries or spending them in doctrinally defined fields; therefore,
it must be carried out by the ruler of the Islamic state who collects
these taxes, just as the Holy Prophet (S) and the caliphs used to do.

The problem is that the majority of so-called Islamic governments
throughout history have been illegitimate and, according to the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a), not suited to supervise the *zakat* funds for reasons too
numerous to be mentioned in this discussion.[^26]

Consequently, the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) encountered a
problem:

The illegitimate ruling authorities would collect the *zakat* and not
leave the option for the payers to distribute it themselves to worthy
recipients. The followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) were not sure as to
whether it was correct or not to pay their *zakat* to these unjust
ruling authorities. If this payment were mandatory but at the same time
would not discharge the religious responsibility, would it then be
obligatory to pay these taxes once more (putting additional economic
pressure on the virtuous community)?

To remove this legal problem, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) offered the following
solution:

They advised their followers not to pay the governmental tax collectors
to the extent possible so that they could carry out their religious duty
themselves with the remaining amount. In the event that they could not
escape payment because of political or social circumstances (the
necessity to practice *taqiyyah*), they were permitted to pay it to the
governmental officials.

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) delegated the assessment of the situations to the
owners of the taxable funds and determined that payment under such
circumstances would fulfill the religious responsibility of the payers,
justifying this action with the concept that although such governments
might be unqualified for supervision of religious taxes, they are still
Muslims. In addition, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) wanted the virtuous community
to associate and coexist under this Islamic rule within the Muslim
society lest they, in the case that they refrain from defraying the
*zakat* funds to the government tax collectors, become exposed to
additional political or economic pressure—which they certainly did not
want.

In a set of traditions, this solution has been discussed and explained.

According to the authentic report of Ya’qub ibn Shu’ayb, which has been
recorded by Shaykh al-Kulayni, in *al-Kafi*, and Shaykh al-Saduq, in
*man-la-yahdhuruhu’l-faqih*, the reporter asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
whether *‘ushur* tithes([^27]) that are taken as taxes are or are not
accounted as *zakat.*

The Imam (‘a) answered:

*“They are so accounted, God willing.”*

According to another authentic narration of al-’Ays ibn al-Qasim that is
reported by Shaykh al-Kulayni, in *al-Kafi*, and Shaykh al-Tusi, in
*Tahdhib al-Ahkam* and *al-Istibsar*, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said the
following about the *zakat* tax:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَخَذُوا مِنْكُمْ، بَنُو أُمَيَّةَ، فَاحْتَسِبُوا بِهَا وَلاَ
تُعْطُوهُمْ شَيْئاً مَا إسْتَطَعْتُمْ، فَإِنَّ الْمَالَ لاَ يَبْقَى
عَلَى هَذَا أَنْ يُزَكِّيَهُ مَرَّتَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As for anything that is taken from you (as zakat) by the ruling
authorities of the Umayyads, you may account it as zakat. However, try
to give them as little as you can. It is not feasible to pay zakat for
the same money twice.*

According another authentic report of Sulayman ibn Khalid that is also
reported by Shaykh al-Kulayni, in *al-Kafi*, and Shaykh al-Tusi, in
*Tahdhib al-Ahkam* and *al-Istibsar*, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَصْحَابَ أَبِي أَتَوْهُ فَسَأَلُوهُ عَمَّا يَأْخُذُ
السُّلْطَانُ، فَرَقَّ لَهُمْ، وَإِنَّهُ لَيَعْلَمُ أَنَّ الزَّكَاةَ
لاَ تَحِلُّ إِلاَّ لأَِهْلِهَا، فَأَمَرَهُمْ أَنْ يَحْتَسِبُوا بِهِ،
فَجَالَ فِكْرِي، وَاللهِ، لَهُمْ، فَقُلْتُ لَهُ: يَا أَبَه، إِنَّهُمْ
إِنْ سَمِعُوا إِذاً لَمْ يُزَكِّ أَحَدٌ. فَقَالَ: يَا بُنَيَّ، حَقٌّ
أَحَبَّ اللهُ أَنْ يُظْهِرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*His companions came to my father and queried about the taxes that were
being levied by the ruling authorities. My father sympathized with them
even though he knew that zakat was illegitimate if not paid to worthy
beneficiaries. Still, he ordered them to account it as their zakat. I
thought considerably about the question for their sake and then said to
my father, “If they hear this ruling, none will give alms (or pay
zakat).” My father replied, “Son, this is a right that Almighty Allah
likes to make manifest.”*[^28]

Derelict Lands
--------------

Derelict lands[^29] are uncultivated and uninhabitable lands forsaken
because of a dearth of water, waterlogging, salinity, dense brush, or
any natural barrier to benefit.

The Imamiyyah Shi’ah scholars believe that such lands are basically
owned by the Imam of each age because they are *anfal* (windfalls),
which have been specified in the following holy verse as being owned by
Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْأَنفَالِ ۖ قُلِ الْأَنفَالُ لِلَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ
ۖ فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَصْلِحُوا ذَاتَ بَيْنِكُمْ ۖ وَأَطِيعُوا
اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They ask you about windfalls (anfal). Say: Windfalls are for Allah
and the Messenger. So be careful of (your duty to) Allah and set aright
matters of difference among yourselves, and obey Allah and His Messenger
if you are believers. (8:1)***

The Imam, being the legal successor of the Holy Prophet (S) and his
representative, enjoys all his rights of leadership and supervision.
Many traditions, some of which have openly declared the Imam’s ownership
of such properties (*anfal*), indicate this ownership. For instance, in
an authentic narration that is reported by Shaykh al-Kulayni, in *Usul
al-Kafi*, Hafs ibn al-Buhtari reports Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأَنْفَالُ مَا لَمْ يُوجَفْ عَلَيْهِ بِخَيْلٍ وَلاَ رِكَابٍ، أَوْ
قَوْمٌ صَالَحُوا، أَوْ قَوْمٌ أَعْطَوْا بِأَيْدِيهِمْ، وَكُلُّ أَرْضٍ
خَرِبَةٍ وَبُطُونُ الأَوْدِيَةِ فَهُوَ لِرَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، وَهُوَ لِلإِمَامِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ يَضَعُهُ حَيْثُ
يَشَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Windfalls (anfal properties) include estates towards which neither
horse nor riding camel are pressed forward,*[^30] *estates that are
gained due to reconciliation or gift, any useless land, and the bottoms
of valleys—all these are owned by the Holy Prophet (S) and then by the
Imam, who has the right to use them as he determines.*[^31]

In *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*, Shaykh al-Tusi has reported Muhammad ibn Muslim
to have said that he heard Imam al-Baqir (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْفَيْءُ وَالأَنْفَالُ مَا كَانَ مِنْ أَرْضٍ لَمْ يَكُنْ فِيهَا
هَرَاقَةُ الدِّمَاءِ، وَقَوْمٌ صُولِحُوا وَأَعْطَوْا بِأَيْدِيهِمْ،
وَمَا كَانَ مِنْ أَرْضٍ خَرِبَةٍ أَوْ بُطُونِ أَوْدِيَةٍ فَهُوَ
كُلُّهُ مِنَ الْفَيْءِ. فَهَذَا للهِ وَلِرَسُولِهِ، فَمَا كَانَ للهِ
فَهُوَ لِرَسُولِهِ يَضَعُهُ حَيْثُ شَاءَ، وَهُوَ لِلإِمَامِ بَعْدَ
الرَّسُولِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The fay’ and anfal are lands which have been seized without bloodshed,
lands given as gifts due to a reconciliation contract with their owners,
all useless lands, and valley floors—all these are regarded as fay’
properties and they are owned by Almighty Allah and His Messenger (S).
The Messenger (S) has the right to do whatever he wills with properties
that are owned by Almighty Allah. After the Messenger (S), the Imam has
the right to make use of these properties.*[^32]

Generally, Muslim jurisprudents have determined such derelict lands to
be legitimate for common use, just like the water of rivers and oceans,
fish, birds and sand that can be owned privately only by means of
control or seizure.

For that reason, the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), who represent
the virtuous community, had to face a real problem concerning their
economic activities in this vital and important field. When they wanted
to invest time in or make use of a derelict land, the ruling authorities
did not interfere because the authorities had no reason to ban processes
of utility and investment in these lands since they themselves
considered them to be legitimate for common use.

However, the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) faced a problem related
to the religious ruling regarding use of such lands which the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) included with *anfal* properties that are legitimately
owned by the Imam; therefore, to invest in or use such lands required
permission of the Imam.

However, this matter has been solved and such permission, which seems to
be local (i.e. restricted) permission, was declared by the Holy Prophet
(S) not disregarding the fact that such lands are before all else owned
by the Imam. Following the course adopted by the Holy Prophet (S) the
Holy Imams (‘a) also gave their followers and other Muslims permission
to develop these lands.

In his book of *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*, Shaykh al-Tusi, through an authentic
chain of authority, has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّمَا قَوْمٍ أَحْيَوْا شَيْئاً مِنَ الأَرْضِ أَوْ عَمَرُوهَا فَهُمْ
أَحَقُّ بِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Any people who cultivate or improve any area of land are the worthiest
to own it.*[^33]

According to another authentic tradition, Shaykh al-Kulayni, in
*al-Kafi*, and Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam* and *al-Istibsar*,
have also reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) and Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as quoting
the Holy Prophet (S) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحْيَا أَرْضاً مَوَاتاً فَهِيَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever cultivates a derelict land possesses it.*[^34]

Scholars of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) school, however, have disagreed about
the significance of this permission. According to the opinion of some
Shi’ite scholars, this permission entails that investment in or
cultivation of an area of land results in the investor or the cultivator
owning that land. Other scholars have argued that this broad permission
gives the investor or the cultivator a right to use that land, but the
ownership of the land is still in the hand of the Imam.[^35] The
following authentic tradition, which has been reported by Shaykh al-Tusi
in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam* and Shaykh al-Kulayni in *al-Kafi*, supports the
latter opinion:

‘Umar ibn Yazid has reported that Musmi’ ibn ‘Abd al-Malik delivered
some money to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) but the Imam refused to accept it from
him. I met Musmi’, at al-Madinah, and asked him the reason. He narrated:

During my meeting with him, I said to the Imam (‘a), “In Bahrain, I
worked as a diver and extracted items from the sea worth four hundred
thousand dirhams. As a consequence, I have brought eighty thousand
dirhams as the *Khums* (one-fifth tax) of my gain. I do not wish to
withhold this amount from you; therefore, I am offering it to you
because it is your right that Almighty Allah has made obligatory from
our wealth.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَمَا لَنَا مِنَ الأَرْضِ وَمَا أَخْرَجَ اللهُ مِنْهَا إِلاَّ
الْخُمْسُ، يَا أَبَا سَيَّارٍ؟ إِنَّ الأَرْضَ كُلَّهَا لَنَا، فَمَا
أَخْرَجَ اللهُ مِنْهَا مِنْ شَيْءٍ فَهُوَ لَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Abu-Sayyar, is our share from our lands and their extracts only
one-fifth? Verily, the entire land is ours and whatever thing that
Almighty Allah allows to be extracted from it is also ours.*

I said, “I have the entire amount with me and I offer it to you.”

The Imam (‘a) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا سَيَّارٍ، قَدْ طَيَّبْنَاهُ لَكَ وَأَحْلَلْنَاكَ مِنْهُ،
فَضُمَّ إِلَيْكَ مَالَكَ. وَكُلُّ مَا فِي أَيْدِي شِيعَتِنَا مِنَ
الأَرْضِ فَهُمْ فِيهِ مُحَلَّلُونَ حَتَّى يَقُومَ قَائِمُنَا
فَيَجْبِيهِمْ طَسْقَ مَا كَانَ فِي أَيْدِيهِمْ، وَيَتْرُكَ الأَرْضَ
فِي أَيْدِينَا. وَأَمَّا مَا كَانَ فِي أَيْدِي غَيْرِهِمْ فَإِنَّ
كَسْبَهُمْ مِنَ الأَرْضِ حَرَامٌ عَلَيْهِمْ حَتَّى يَقُومَ قَائِمُنَا،
فَيَأْخُذَ الأَرْضَ مِنْ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَيُخْرِجَهُمْ صَغَرَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Abu-Sayyar, I now declare our property as valid and legitimate for you.
You can now add it* *to your money. Everything from the lands that is
obtained by our Shi’ah is lawful to them to own until the uprising of
the Rising Imam (the Mahdi). He will then levy from them land tributes
and leave the lands at their disposal. As for others (i.e. non-Shi’ah),
all that which is possessed by them and all their gains therefrom are
illegitimate up to the uprising of our Rising Imam. He will then take
these lands from them and dismiss them with humiliation
(empty-handed).*[^36]

Annexed Lands
-------------

Annexed lands are cultivated lands owned by polytheists or Scripturists
that Muslims had seized through conquests, or lands that were cultivated
or mortmained by the Islamic state for the common interests of Muslims.

Islamic authorities would treat such lands as being possessed by all
Muslims and managed by the Islamic state. These lands were often
developed by Scripturists or others who converted to Islam afterwards.
They would pay tributes to the Islamic state on such lands that were
either definite amounts of money called *kharaj* (land tribute) or a
percentage of the yields. The Islamic government would distribute this
tribute for the welfare of Muslims.

As previously cited, during the first period of Islam, after 11 A.H, a
question concerning such lands was raised. Some believed that the lands
should be distributed among the warriors who participated in the
conquest, while others adopted other opinions. The second caliph, with
the help of Imam ‘Ali (‘a), solved the problem by deciding that all such
lands should be owned by all Muslims, and this method was used for the
lands of Iraq.[^37]

Thus, the Ahl al-Bayt’s traditions on this issue correspond with this
decision by which Muslim rulers abided.

In *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*, Shaykh al-Tusi, through an authentic chain of
authority, has reported that Muhammad al-Halabi asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
about the ruling on the lands of Iraq. The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ لِجَمِيعِ الْمُسْلِمِينَ؛ لِمَنْ هُوَ الْيَوْمَ وَمَنْ يَدْخُلُ
فِي الإِسْلاَمِ بَعْدَ الْيَوْمِ وَلِمَنْ لَمْ يُخْلَقْ بَعْدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*They are for all Muslims, including those who will convert to Islam in
the future and Muslims who have not been born yet.*

The reporter asked, “What is the ruling on purchasing lands from
non-Arab chiefs of peasants?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَصْلُحُ إِلاَّ أَنْ يَشْتَرِيَ مِنْهُمْ عَلَى أَنْ يُصَيِّرَهَا
لِلْمُسْلِمِينَ، فَإِنْ شَاءَ وَلِيُّ الأَمْرِ أَنْ يَأْخُذَهَا
أَخَذَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is illegal for anyone to do so unless those who purchase such lands
dedicate them to all Muslims commonly. Then, the legal (religious)
authority has the right to take them, if he wishes.*

The reporter asked, “If the legal authority takes them, what should he
give in compensation?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَرُدُّ إِلَيْهِ رَأْسَ مَالِهِ، وَلَهُ مَا أَكَلَ مِنْ غِلَّتِهَا
بِمَا عَمِلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He (i.e. the legal authority) may give the purchaser back his capital
and allow him (a share) in the yields that he produces in return for his
work.*[^38]

There is no real problem in the issue of annexed lands except the
question of whether payment to unjust rulers is or is not considered
payment to the legal religious authority. As clarified by this tradition
and the conduct of the companions of Holy Imams (‘a), such payment
releases a person from religious liability. These lands were marked and
recorded in the official records of the government of that time;
therefore, it was inescapable to pay their tribute to the ruling
authorities.

Private and Public Awqaf
------------------------

*Waqf*[^39] is considered vital in the Islamic economic concept, because
it contributes fundamentally to the distribution of fortunes and
prevents accumulation of wealth, on the one hand, and organizes spending
of wealth by directing it towards the common interests of Muslims, on
the other. Furthermore, *waqf* represents one of the *resources of
common expenditure* of the Islamic state and nurtures its welfare
programs for the poor and the needy.

*Waqf* was one of the common regulations or laws of Islam by which
Muslims and the Islamic state abided. An endower of a *waqf* used to be
granted authority to specify his/her private stipulations and direct the
method of utility of that *waqf* in the most suitable way he/she might
see fit.

Making use of this common Islamic financial resource to supply the
virtuous community with financial aid, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) endowed many
of their assets as *waqf*. Such charitable endowments have been reported
from the Holy Prophet, Imam ‘Ali, Lady Fatimah, and the rest of the Holy
Infallibles, peace be upon them, as an ongoing practice that history has
left no Imam (‘a) without mentioning a number of his contributions of
designating properties as *waqf*. More specifically, Imam ‘Ali Amir
al-Mu'minin and Imam al-Kazim (‘a) are known for their vast activities
in this field. This may be because these two Imams (‘a) had more
opportunities than the other Infallibles (‘a) to do so.

Imam al-Ridha (‘a) has reported that the Holy Prophet (S) endowed as
*waqf* the Seven Walls (i.e. orchards); namely, *al-dalal*, *al-’awaf*,
*al-husna*, *al-safiyah*, *mali-ummi-ibrahim*, *al-manbat*, and
*Barqah*.[^40]

Sharif al-Radhi has recorded in *Nahj al-Balaghah* that Imam ‘Ali (‘a),
immediately after the Battle of Siffin, endowed his property as *waqf*
in a will.[^41]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said that Lady Fatimah
al-Zahra' (‘a) endowed her property as *waqf* and made Imam ‘Ali (‘a)
the custodian.[^42]

Shaykh al-Kulayni, Shaykh al-Saduq, and Shaykh al-Tusi have reported a
detailed precept on *waqf* from Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a).[^43]

Having attracted attention to the significance of *waqf* in improving
the financial conditions of the virtuous community, the Holy Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) persuaded their followers to involve themselves in
such charitable deeds in order to gain great rewards. In authentic
traditions reported from them, *waqf* is connected to two matters of
great importance in man’s life: **first**, true guidance and exemplary
tradition and, **second**, a righteous son who benefits his parents and
the people.

Husham ibn Salim has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ يَتْبَعُ الرَّجُلَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهِ مِنَ الأَجْرِ إِلاَّ ثَلاثُ
خِصَالٍ: صَدَقَةٌ أَجْرَاهَا فِي حَيَاتِهِ فَهِيَ تَجْرِي بَعْدَ
مَوْتِهِ، وَسُنَّةُ هُدىً سَنَّهَا فَهِيَ يُعْمَلُ بِهَا بَعْدَ
مَوْتِهِ، أَوْ وَلَدٌ صَالِحٌ يَدْعُو لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Only three things reward man after his death: (1) a recurrent
charitable deed that he established in his lifetime; thus, it continues
after his death, (2) a course of true guidance that he established in
his lifetime such that it is still activated after his death, and (3) a
righteous son who prays for him.*[^44]

Mu’awiyah ibn ‘Ammar has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a),
“What is attached to man after his death?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(مَا يَلْحَقُ الرَّجُلَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهِ) سُنَّةٌ يُعْمَلُ بِهَا بَعْدَ
مَوْتِهِ، فَيَكُونُ لَهُ مِثْلَ أَجْرِ مَنْ عَمِلَ بِهَا مِنْ غَيْرِ
أَنْ يَنْقُصَ مِنْ أُجُورِهِمْ شَيْءٌ، وَالصَّدَقَةُ الْجَارِيَةُ
تَجْرِي مِنْ بَعْدِهِ، وَالْوَلَدُ الطَّيِّبُ يَدْعُو لِوَالِدَيْهِ
بَعْدَ مَوْتِهِمَا، وَيَحِجُّ وَيَتَصَدَّقُ وَيَعْتِقُ عَنْهُمَا،
وَيُصَلِّي وَيَصُومُ عَنْهُمَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(Rewards of the following deeds are linked to a person after his
death:) An observance that is continued after a man’s death for which
the dead man receives an equal reward to those who continue to observe
his practice; a recurrent charitable deed that continues after his
death; and a good son who prays for his parents after they have died
and, on behalf of them, goes on Hajj pilgrimage, gives alms, manumits
slaves, offers prayers, and observes fasting.*

The reporter asked, “Is it acceptable to give my (dead) parents a share
in my Hajj pilgrimage?”

The Imam (‘a) answered affirmatively.[^45]

Complying with such instructions, *waqf* has become one of the common
features in the general social and financial system of the virtuous
community. Although it is common among other Muslims, the activity of
*waqf endowments* is, to a great extent, practiced distinctively by the
individuals of the virtuous community. This matter has therefore been
discussed by the messages, known as *tawqi’* (signed document), coming
from Imam al-Mahdi (‘a) during his minor occultation.

Shaykh al-Saduq, in his book of *Ikmal al-Din*, has reported from
Abu’l-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Asadi, a document signed by Imam
al-Mahdi (‘a) involving several paragraphs about *waqf*, the last of
which was the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَا سَأَلْتَ عَنْهُ مِنْ أَمْرِ الرَّجُلِ الَّذِي يَجْعَلُ
لِنَاحِيَتِنَا ضَيْعَةً وَيُسَلِّمُهَا مِنْ قَيِّمٍ يَقُومُ بِهَا
وَيَعْمُرُهَا وَيُؤَدِّي مِنْ دَخْلِهَا وَخَرَاجِهَا وَمَؤُونَتِهَا،
وَيَجْعَلُ مَا يَبْقَى مِنَ الدَّخْلِ لِنَاحِيَتِنَا، فَإِنَّ ذَلِكَ
جَائِزٌ لِمَنْ جَعَلَهُ صَاحِبُ الضَّيْعَةِ قَيِّماً عَلَيْهَا.
إِنَّمَا لاَ يَجُوزُ ذَلِكَ لِغَيْرِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As for your question about the man who dedicates an orchard to us and
appoints a custodian to manage and cultivate it, and pays religious dues
from its income, tributes, and provisions and devotes the rest to us,
the answer is that this is lawful only for the custodian appointed by
the owner of the orchard, but unlawful for anyone else.*[^46]

In the Islamic law, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), according to the common social
conditions of the virtuous community, have classified *waqf* into two
categories: public and private.

**Public Waqf** is the endowment of property that is purposed to achieve
the common interest of Muslims or the virtuous community, such as
mosques, schools, Husayniyyahs, libraries, lands, arches, houses of
residence for pilgrims, and the like.

Such endowments can include all people or be dedicated to the people of
a certain country or a certain category. Yet, the purpose is still
public even if it is dedicated to a certain group for the purpose of
maintaining a certain status quo or because of deficiency in funds.

**Private Waqf** is the endowment of a property to the endower’s
offspring; hence, this category of *waqf* is also called “lineal
*waqf*.” It is spent on the private affairs of all of one’s offspring,
such as residence, provisions, marriage, and other affairs.

As a result of such flexibility in spending and peculiarity in benefit,
*waqf* has played a vital role building the virtuous community and in
supporting its financial needs, similar to the role that *khums* played
in improving the economic conditions of the virtuous community and in
contributing to the establishment of foundations restricted to this
community.

Due to such contribution, the public social life of the virtuous
community has witnessed large properties endowed as *waqf,* including
mosques, schools, Husayniyyahs, libraries, and other public services. In
addition to private *waqf*, these endowments have acted as an important
pillar in the economic structure of the virtuous community.

[^1]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:5, H. 8.

[^2]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:11, H. 3.

[^3]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:18, H. 3.

[^4]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:18, H. 5.

[^5]: - In the current discussion, we do not intend to discuss this
topic in detail and display the points of evidence according to Muslim
jurisprudence; rather, we just bring up the jurisprudential result and
try to explain it from an economic and political viewpoint in a probable
mode.

[^6]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:3, H. 1.

[^7]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:34, H. 4.

[^8]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:36, H. 12.

[^9]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:48, H. 1.

[^10]: - ‘Local authoritarian legislation’ (al-tashri’at al-sultaniyyah
al-wila'iyyah) stand for laws and regulations that are enacted by the
political authority or ruler as the guardian of Muslims to organize the
social lives of Muslims. By virtue of the authority vested in him, the
ruler implements the universal laws originally enacted by religious
legislation and uses the latitude that is given by the Holy Legislator
for the guardian to make decisions with the supreme interests of
religion in mind. All such authority must be exercised within the
framework of the general goals of legislation.

[^11]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:3, H. 2.

[^12]: - Sa’ is a unit of mass or weight, usually used for grains; one
sa’ is equal to approximately three kilograms.

[^13]: - Qafiz is a unit of weight. Its value differs in each country;
however, one qafiz is equal to approximately 26064 grams.

[^14]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:39, H. 1.

[^15]: - 1 wasq = 60 sa’s.

[^16]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:41, H. 10.

[^17]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:41, H. 11.

[^18]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:50, H. 1.

[^19]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:46, H. 3.

[^20]: - Zakat al-fitrah is a payment given after the termination of the
obligatory fasting in Ramadhan, with certain conditions and regulations.

[^21]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:152, H. 1.

[^22]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:152, H. 3.

[^23]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:153, H. 7.

[^24]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:147, H. 1.

[^25]: - According to reference books on local laws of Islam, there is a
difference between funds designated as ‘visible funds’ which include
produce and livestock, and those classified as ‘invisible funds’ such as
savings, business investments, and the like. Supervision over visible
funds is delegated to the Muslim ruler while payment of invisible funds
is the responsibility of the payer of zakat. (Refer to Abu-Ya’li
al-Farra' the Hanbalite scholar, al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah, pp. 115;
al-Mawardi, al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah, pp. 113)

[^26]: - This topic will be discussed in the coming book of Imamate and
Religious Authority.

[^27]: - ‘ushur is the proportion of zakat on produce. This word may
also be used as zakat in general.

[^28]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:173-174, H. 1, 3, 4.

[^29]: - As has been previously indicated, we do not aim at discussing
this topic (usually mentioned with zakat) from a jurisprudential aspect
and will not cite the specific points of evidence representing the
various opinions here; rather, we only intend to display the general
opinions in order to discuss the relationship between this topic and
economic issues from the viewpoint of the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) and the virtuous community.

[^30]: - This is an indication of the following verse of the Holy
Qur'an:

[^31]: وَمَا أَفَاءَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ مِنْهُمْ فَمَا
أَوْجَفْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ خَيْلٍ وَلَا رِكَابٍ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ
يُسَلِّطُ رُسُلَهُ عَلَىٰ مَن يَشَاءُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ And whatever Allah restored to His Messenger from them you did
not send forward towards it any horse or riding camel but Allah gives
authority to His messengers against whom He pleases, and Allah has power
over all things. (59:6) - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:364, H.
1.

[^32]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:368, H. 12.

[^33]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 17:326, H. 3.

[^34]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 17:327, H. 5.

[^35]: - Refer to Martyr Ayatollah Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, Iqtisaduna
(Our Economy), 2:744, Appendix IV.

[^36]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 1:408, H. 3.

[^37]: - This historical fact has been mentioned by some researchers,
such as ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Mawardi, in his book of al-Ahkam
al-Sultaniyyah pp. 176. Although Sunni jurisprudents had various and
diverse opinions about the question and its explanation, they generally
agreed on applying this decision to the lands of Iraq at least.

[^38]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 7:147, S. Laws of Lands, H. 1.

[^39]: - An endowment made by a Muslim to a religious, educational, or
charitable cause.

[^40]: - Al-Himyari al-Qummi, Qurb al-Isnad, pp. 363, H. 1301; ‘Allamah
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 103: 183, H. 10 as quoted from the previous
reference book. The Seven Walls were the heritage of the Holy Prophet
(S) who dedicated them to his daughter, Lady Fatimah al-Zahra, as
private waqf.

[^41]: - Nahj al-Balaghah, Epistle No. 24. The same has been recorded by
Shaykh al-Kulayni, in Furu’ al-Kafi, and Shaykh al-Tusi, in Tahdhib
al-Ahkam, with further details.

[^42]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, Misbah al-Anwar, pp. 262; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar 103:184-85, H. 13 as quoted from the previous reference
book.

[^43]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 13:314, H. 5.

[^44]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 13:292, H. 1.

[^45]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 13:293, H. 4.

[^46]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, Ikmal al-Din, pp. 530-531, H. 49; Shaykh
al-Tabrisi, al-Ihtijaj 2:298-300; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 53:
182-183, H. 11.


