Chapter 2: Restricted Economic Legislation
==========================================

**1. Khums paid from profits**

**2. Restricted Social Solidarity**

Preamble
--------

This chapter deals with some other Islamic economic policies, unobserved
by the Islamic state, that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) carried out, confirming
that these policies and duties had been enacted in the religious law of
Islam of which details are known by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) more than
anyone else.

They also determined certain strategies, duties and teachings that were
restricted to the individuals of the virtuous community because they
helped treat urgent problems that arose or helped put their economic
activity on the right track.

In this respect, we touch on three main areas:

• The Imam and the general political system

• The individuals of the virtuous community and their responsibilities
towards one another

• The economic activities of the virtuous community

These areas include the following measures:

• *Khums* paid from profits

• Restricted social solidarity (rights of brethren-in-faith)

• Focused economic activity

Khums Paid From Profits
-----------------------

*Khums* is believed to be one of the most important economic
legislations in the religious, economic theory of Islam, especially as
viewed by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). The origin of its enactment and related
laws are derived from the Holy Qur'an as well as authentic, clear-cut
texts of the Holy Sunnah. *Khums*, because of its high percentage (20%)
and the large circle of finances subject to it, creates one of the most
vital resources of the Islamic state.

Muslims are almost in full agreement that spoils of war and treasures
are subject to *khums*, but a number, after having delved into many
divergent details, have claimed that minerals were subject to *zakat*,
not *khums*.[^1]

Based on the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) maintained
that the following seven categories were subject to *khums*:

(1) Spoils of war

(2) Minerals discovered as natural resources

(3) Discovered treasures

(4) Precious stones extracted from oceans and seas, such as pearls and
corals gathered while diving

(5) Lawful money intermixed with illegally acquired assets

(6) Lands purchased by Dhimmis from Muslims

(7) Profits of earnings

There is a great difference between the concept of the Ahl al-Bayt and
other Muslim jurisprudents about financial rights restricting *khums* to
a very narrow scope and keeping the door wide open for other financial
duties, such as *zakat* which has a percentage of less than one-fifth
and, in addition, restricting stipulations regarding the payment of
*khums*.

*Khums* is a tax dedicated to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), who are the
recipients of this tax. The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) also enjoy some rights
regarding the *fay'* money. In fact, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), as the Holy
Prophet’s *qurba* (relatives), have been mentioned in relation to
*khums* and *fay'* in the Holy Qur'an. The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are
unanimously accepted as the kin (*dhawu’l-qurba*) to whom the Holy
Qur'an has referred to on more than one occasion, such as the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُم مِّن شَيْءٍ فَأَنَّ لِلَّهِ خُمُسَهُ
وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَىٰ وَالْيَتَامَىٰ وَالْمَسَاكِينِ
وَابْنِ السَّبِيلِ إِن كُنتُمْ آمَنتُم بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أَنزَلْنَا
عَلَىٰ عَبْدِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for Allah, the
Messenger, the near of kin, the orphans, the needy, and the wayfarer, if
you believe in Allah and in that which We revealed to Our servant…
(8:41)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا أَفَاءَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْقُرَىٰ فَلِلَّهِ
وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَىٰ وَالْيَتَامَىٰ وَالْمَسَاكِينِ
وَابْنِ السَّبِيلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whatever Allah has restored to His Messenger from the people of the
towns, it is for Allah and for the Messenger and the near kinsmen and
the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer… (59:7)***

Conforming to these holy verses, the Holy Prophet (S), the first caliph
and the second caliph (in a part of his reign) would pay a share of the
*khums* to the relatives of the Holy Prophet (S). However, ‘Umar, the
second caliph, deemed it too much to give them such a share; therefore,
he suggested to them that such payment would be made only for urgent
needs of their members (i.e. the Holy Prophet’s relatives). From the
beginning, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) denounced such wrong interpretation of
the religious law and refused to take anything less than their entire
due, so ‘Umar deprived them of it completely. This deprivation continued
into the successive reigns as a result of ‘Umar’s act and
misinterpretation.[^2]

In *Sahih Muslim*,[^3] Yazid ibn Hurmuz is reported to have said that
Najdah ibn ‘Amir al-Haruri, a Kharijite, wrote a letter to Ibn ‘Abbas.
Yazid confirmed that he was present when Ibn ‘Abbas received and replied
to that letter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكَ سَأَلْتَنِي عَنْ سَهْمِ ذِي الْقُرْبَى الَّذِينَ ذَكَرَهُمُ
اللهُ، مَنْ هُمْ. وَإِنَّا كُنَّا نَرَى أَنَّ قَرَابَةَ رَسُولِ اللهِ،
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، هُمْ نَحْنُ، فَأَبَى ذَلِكَ عَلَيْنَا
قَوْمُنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“You have asked me about the share of the near of kin,” Ibn ‘Abbas
wrote, “and about those relatives whom Almighty Allah mentioned. We have
always considered ourselves the near of kin of Allah’s Messenger (S),
but our people deprived us of it.”*[^4]

According to another narration, Ibn ‘Abbas is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَهْمُ ذِي الْقُرْبَى لِقُرْبَى رَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ، قَسَّمَهُ لَهُمْ رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ. وَقَدْ كَانَ عُمَرُ عَرَضَ عَنْ ذَلِكَ فَرَأَيْنَاهُ دُونَ
حَقِّنَا، فَرَدَدْنَاهُ عَلَيْهِ وَأَبَيْنَا أَنْ نَقْبَلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The share of the near of kin (qurba) is for the relatives of Allah’s
Messenger (S) according to the distribution that he used to make. ‘Umar
then made us an offer, which we deemed less* *than our due; therefore,
we rejected it insisting on our legal share.*[^5]

According to a third narration, Ibn ‘Abbas is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ لَنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ، وَقَدْ كَانَ عُمَرُ دَعَانَا إِلَى أَنْ
يُنْكِحَ مِنْهُ أَيِّمَنَا، وَيُحْذِي مِنْهُ عَائِلَنَا، وَيَقْضِي
مِنْهُ عَنْ مُغْرَمِنَا، فَأَبَيْنَا إِلاَّ أَنْ يُسَلِّمَهُ لَنَا،
وَأَبَى لَنَا ذَلِكَ فَتَرَكْنَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The share of the near of kin (out of khums) is for us, the Ahl al-Bayt.
However, ‘Umar suggested that he would restrict it to urgent occasions,
such as marrying off the poor among us, aiding the destitute, and
settling the debts of the indebted, but we insisted that he should give
us our complete share. ‘Umar, however, rejected; therefore, we left it
as his responsibility.*[^6]

In *Sunan al-Bayhaqi*, ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi-Ya’la is reported to have
said that he once met (Imam) ‘Ali (‘a) at Ahjar al-Zayt and said, “(I am
amazed) how Abu-Bakr and ‘Umar violated your rights—you, the Ahl
al-Bayt—regarding *khums*!”

(Imam) ‘Ali (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…أَنَّ عُمَرَ قَالَ: لَكُمْ حَقٌّ وَلاَ يَبْلُغُ عِلْمِي إِذَا كَثُرَ
أَنْ يَكُونَ لَكُمْ كُلُّهُ، فَإِنْ شِئْتُمْ أَعْطَيْتُكُمْ مِنْهُ
بِقَدْرِ مَا أَرَى لَكُمْ. فَأَبَيْنَا عَلَيْهِ إِلاَّ كُلَّهُ،
فَأَبَى أَنْ يُعْطِيَنَا كُلَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*…’Umar then said, “It is true that you enjoy a right, but as much as I
know, it should not be given to you entirely when it is such a large
amount! If you wish, I will give you an amount that I see sufficient for
you.” However, we rejected receiving any amount less than our entire
right, but ‘Umar refused to give us our entire due.*[^7]

Many narrations, reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), substantiate that
*khums*, including the shares of the orphans, the needy, and the
wayfarers in addition to the near of kin, are dedicated to the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) as compensation for their deprivation from *zakat* and
alms, which are considered surplus for people. *Khums*, on the other
hand, is a duty that Almighty Allah has made for the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in
public funds or gains. It is thus goes beyond surplus funds.

In *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*, Shaykh al-Tusi has reported on the authority of
‘Abdullah ibn Bukayr on the authority of some of his companions that
Imam al-Baqir (‘a) or Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي قَوْلِهِ تَعَالَى: {وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ
فَأَنَّ لِلَّهِ خُمُسَهُ…}
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ: خُمُسُ اللهِ لِلإِمَامِ، وَخُمُسُ الرَّسُولِ لِلإِمَامِ،
وَخُمُسُ ذَوِي الْقُرْبَى لِقَرَابَةِ الرَّسُولِ: الإِمَامِ،
وَالْيَتَامَى يَتَامَى الرَّسُولِ، وَالْمَسَاكِينُ مِنْهُمْ،
وَأَبْنَاءُ السَّبِيلِ مِنْهُمْ، فَلاَ يَخْرُجُ مِنْهُمْ إِلَى
غَيْرِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As regarding the interpretation of this verse,* ***“Know that whatever
you gain, a fifth of it is for Allah”,*** *the one-fifth that is
Almighty Allah’s is for the Imam. One-fifth of the Messenger’s share is
for the Imam. One-fifth of the near of kin is for the Messenger’s
relatives. The orphans, here, stand exclusively for the orphans among
the Messenger’s relatives. The same thing applies to the needy and the
wayfarers. Hence, khums never departs from them to join anyone
else.*[^8]

As is understood from the ‘verse of gains’ (*ghanimah* 8:41) and the
‘verse of restoration’ (*fay'* 59:7), as well as some traditions
reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), *khums* is dedicated to the Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) exclusively; while the other details (i.e.
reference to the orphans, needy, etc.) have been mentioned to define the
categories that legally deserve shares from *khums* apportioned by the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).[^9]

In (his book of) *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through a
valid series of narrators, that Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي قَوْلِهِ تَعَالَى: ﴿وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ
فَأَنَّ لِلَّهِ خُمُسَهُ…﴾ قَالَ: هُمْ قَرَابَةُ رَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، وَالْخُمُسُ للهِ وِلِلرَّسُولِ، صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، وَلَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Regarding the interpretation of this verse,* ***“Know that whatever you
gain, a fifth of it is for Allah”,*** *the near of kin are exclusively
the relatives of the Holy Prophet (S). So, khums is only for Almighty
Allah, the Messenger (S), and us.*[^10]

Shaykh al-Kulayni, through an authentic chain of authority, has also
reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأَنْفَالُ مَا لَمْ يُوجَفْ عَلَيْهِ بِخَيْلٍ وَلاَ رِكَابٍ، أَوْ
قَوْمٌ صَالَحُوا، أَوْ قَوْمٌ أَعْطَوْا بِأَيْدِيهِمْ، وَكُلُّ أَرْضٍ
خَرِبَةٍ وَبُطُونُ الأَوْدِيَةِ فَهُوَ لِرَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، وَهُوَ لِلإِمَامِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ يَضَعُهُ حَيْثُ
يَشَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The anfal properties include estates towards which neither horse nor
riding camel are sent forward, estates that are gained due to
reconciliation or gift, derelict lands, and the bottoms of valleys. All
these are owned by the Holy Prophet (S) and then by the Imam (‘a) who
has* *the right to use them as he wills.*[^11]

However, the ownership of *khums* has been exposed to meticulous
argument. Some scholars have argued that *khums* is possessed by the
Holy Imams (‘a) personally and the position of Imamate is a stipulation
that is specified for gaining this ownership; therefore, *khums* cannot
be inherited by the lineal heirs of the Holy Imams (‘a) because their
capacity as Imams has been the reason for granting them ownership of
such large properties. Other scholars, on the other hand, have argued
that *khums* is owned by the *position* of Imamate (not the Imams
themselves); therefore, it is not dedicated only to the Holy Imams (‘a)
and this ownership may be transferred to their representatives and
agents who will thus have the right to utilize the funds of
*khums*.[^12]

However, the evidence on these opinions, from a Muslim jurisprudential
point of view, as well as the sectarian disagreements between the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) school and the other Muslim schools, or between the
different inferences of the scholars of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) school, are
not our primary concern in this discussion; rather, we only intend to
deal with the distinctive features of the Ahl al-Bayt’s jurisprudence
concerning the funds of *khums* as much as they reflect on the economic
system of the virtuous community.

There are three generally accepted views towards this topic:

• The Holy Imams’ (‘a) view towards the one-fifth tax being obligatory
on the funds obtained by people from spoils of war, minerals, treasures,
gains from diving, lands purchased by Dhimmis from Muslims, legal funds
intermixed with illegally acquired assets and the profit of one’s
earnings.

• The Holy Imams’ (‘a) view about the one-fifth tax regarding the profit
of earnings and the explanation of imposing this tax in later times.

• The role of *khums* in the economic life of the virtuous community.

People-obtained funds subject to khums
--------------------------------------

Based on the Ahl al-Bayt’s teachings about *khums*, their followers
encountered general problems while dealing with the money used by
Muslims publicly, which included the funds subject to *khums* in the
view of non-Shi’ite jurisprudents (such as spoils of war and treasures)
and some funds not subjected to this tax in their view (such as tax on
minerals, etc.), in view of the fact that some properties brought up
sensitive issues, such as bondwomen and slaves captured in battles that
were considered to be spoils of war, a fifth of which belonged to the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).[^13] As a result, marrying such bondwomen was illegal
without obtaining the permission of the owner.

This ruling is fixed. Whether the individuals of the virtuous community
participated in such battles or not, purchased from participants in it,
or possessed such captured bondwomen or slaves is another matter. In
reality, the problem was wide-ranging and it clashed with the doctrinal
aspect and the economic and spiritual pressures on the virtuous
community. Sometimes, the problem could not be solved even if *khums*
was paid again.

Having noticed the existence of this problem from its beginning and
before the growth and perfection of the virtuous community, the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) declared a part of this type of *khums* lawful for their
followers and Shi’ah to use—yet to the extent related to the problem.
This declaration included even fathers and mothers of individuals of the
virtuous community. The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) explained
this permissibility as being to alleviate the economic and psychological
pressures imposed on the virtuous community and ensure the legitimacy of
their births and origins.

Foreseeing this problem, Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' and Imam ‘Ali Amir
al-Mu'minin (‘a) were the first to permit their followers to use the Ahl
al-Bayt’s one-fifth share before the emergence of the problem.

Shaykh al-Saduq, in his book of *‘Ilal al-Shara'i’*, Shaykh al-Mufid, in
his book of *al-Muqni’ah*, and Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam* and
*al-Istibsar*, through an authentic chain of authority, have reported on
the authority of Abu-Basir, Zurarah, and Muhammad ibn Muslim on the
authority of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (‘a) that Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin
(‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلَكَ النَّاسُ فِي بُطُونِهِمْ وَفُرُوجِهِمْ لأَِنَّهُمْ لَمْ
يُؤَدُّوا إِلَيْنَا حَقَّنَا. أَلاَ وَإِنَّ شِيعَتَنَا مِنْ ذَلِكَ
وَآبَاءَهُمْ فِي حِلٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*People are perishing because of their stomachs and private parts, since
they have not fulfilled our rights over them. Our Shi’ah and their
fathers are exempted from this (for they fulfill our rights).*[^14]

Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*, has reported on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, through an authentic series of
narrators, that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ وَجَدَ بَرْدَ حُبِّنَا فِي كَبِدِهِ فَلْيَحْمِدِ اللهَ عَلَى
أَوَّلِ النِّعَمِ... طِيبِ الْوِلاَدَةِ. قَالَ أَمِيرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ،
عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ، لِفَاطِمَةَ، عَلَيْهَا السَّلاَمُ: أَحِلِّي
نَصِيبَكِ مِنَ الْفَيْءِ لآِبَاءِ شِيعَتِنَا لِيَطِيبُوا... إِنَّا
أَحْلَلْنَا أُمَّهَاتِ شِيعَتِنَا لآِبَائِهِمْ لِيَطِيبُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever finds the serenity of love for us in his heart must express
thanks to Almighty Allah for the first of graces…the legitimacy of
birth. Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) asked Lady Fatimah (‘a) to permit her share
of the fay’ funds for the fathers of our Shi’ah so that births would be
lawful. As for us, we have legalized the marriage of the mothers of our
Shi’ah to their fathers so that the birth of our Shi’ah would be
legitimate.*[^15]

In addition to Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*, Shaykh al-Kulayni,
in *Usul al-Kafi*, has reported Duraysh al-Kunnasi, through a valid
chain of authority, as quoting the following from Imam al-Sadiq (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَدْرِي مِنْ أَيْنَ دَخَلَ عَلَى النَّاسِ الزِّنَا؟... مِنْ قِبَلِ
خُمُسِنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ، إِلاَّ لِشِيعَتِنَا الأَطْيَبِينَ،
فَإِنَّهُ مُحَلَّلٌ لَهُمْ وَلِمِيلاَدِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do you know why adultery has afflicted people?...It has afflicted them
because they have not paid their one-fifth duty to us, i.e. the Ahl
al-Bayt. Exempted from this are our pure Shi’ah.* *We have permitted
this share for them and their offspring.*[^16]

Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*, and Shaykh al-Mufid, in
*al-Muqni’ah*, have reported the following from Salim ibn Mukrim:

I was present when a man said to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “Please, permit me
the private parts.”

The Imam (‘a) became furious on this request. Another man explained, “He
is not asking you to permit him to violate chastity; rather, he is
asking you to permit him to purchase a servant, marry a woman, own a
legacy, gain business profit, or dispose of a gift that has been given
to him.”

The Imam (‘a) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذَا لِشِيعَتِنَا حَلاَلٌ: الشَّاهِدِ مِنْهُمْ وَالْغَائِبِ،
وَالْمَيِّتِ مِنْهُمْ وَالْحَيِّ، وَمَا يُولَدُ مِنْهُمْ إِلَى يَوْمِ
الْقِيَامَةِ، فَهُوَ لَهُمْ حَلاَلٌ. أَمَا وَاللهِ، لاَ يَحِلُّ إِلاَّ
لِمَنْ أَحْلَلْنَا لَهُ، وَلاَ وَاللهِ مَا أَعْطَيْنَا أَحَداً
ذِمَّةً، وَمَا عِنْدَنَا لأَِحَدٍ عَهْدٌ وَلاَ لأَِحَدٍ عِنْدَنَا
مِيثَاقٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Those are legal for our Shi’ah—the present and the absent, the deceased
and those alive, and those who have not yet been born up to the Day of
Resurrection. Those are legal for them. By Allah (I swear), nothing of
that is legal except that which we permit. Verily, we have neither given
anybody (else) permanent permission, nor have we been engaged in a
pledge with anybody, nor have we had any covenant with anybody.*[^17]

Other narrations have borne the indication that the Holy Imams of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), in order to alleviate the consequences of the economic
pressures and sieges that overburdened their followers by the ruling
authorities (and sometimes by individuals) widened the scope of this
permission to include all situations of need and destitution, although
such broadening of the scope of permission was considered an executive
procedure restricted to that age.

Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*, and Shaykh al-Saduq, in
*man-la-yahdhuruhu’l-faqih*, have reported the following from ‘Ali ibn
Mahziyar:

In a letter sent to Imam al-Baqir (‘a) which I myself read, a man asked
him to give him permission to utilize *khums* to purchase food and
drink.

The Imam (‘a) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَعْوَزَهُ شَيْءٌ مِنْ حَقِّي فَهُوَ فِي حِلٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Anyone who needs any of my right is allowed to utilize it.*[^18]

The same result is concluded from the following narration of Yunus ibn
Ya’qub, which is reported by Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*,
Shaykh al-Saduq, in *man-la-yahdhuruhul-faqih*, and Shaykh al-Mufid, in
*al-Muqni’ah*:

I was present with Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) when a reed-house builder (*or*
baby-dressmaker) visited him and said, “May Allah accept me as ransom
for you! We have gained funds, profits, and money from business and we
know for sure that you have a fixed share in these. However, we have
neglected your right.”

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَنْصَفْنَاكُمْ إِنْ كَلَّفْنَاكُمْ ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If today we impose upon you to give us our rights out of these, then we
will not have treated you fairly.*[^19]

Profit of Earnings Subject To Khums
-----------------------------------

The Imamiyyah Shi’ite jurisprudents have almost no doubt about the
ruling that the profit of earnings are subject to *khums* after
deduction of annual provisions.[^20] In this ruling, they rely on the
unrestrictedness of the holy verse verifying that all that which is
gained by man—be it spoils of war, treasures, minerals, diving gains, or
gains of business, work, and professions—is subject to *khums*.

It is true that the holy verse has been revealed on the occasion of
spoils of war, but the unanimously agreed upon rule in the fundamentals
of Muslim jurisprudence (*Usul al-Fiqh*), which entails that “a specific
cause cannot restrict an unrestricted cause” necessitates that the
ruling derived from the holy verse must be kept unrestricted.

In a validly reported tradition, ‘Ali ibn Mahziyar reported Imam
al-Jawad (‘a) to have said the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا الْغَنَائِمُ وَالْفَوَائِدُ فَهِيَ وَاجِبَةٌ عَلَيْهِمْ فِي
كُلِّ عَامٍ. قَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَى: ﴿وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُمْ
مِنْ شَيْءٍ فَأَنَّ لِلَّهِ خُمُسَهُ وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَى
وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَابْنِ السَّبِيلِ إِنْ كُنتُمْ
آمَنْتُمْ بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أَنزَلْنَا عَلَى عَبْدِنَا يَوْمَ
الْفُرْقَانِ يَوْمَ الْتَقَى الْجَمْعَانِ وَاللَّهُ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ﴾ فَالْغَنَائِمُ وَالْفَوَائِدُ، يَرْحَمُكَ اللهُ، فَهِيَ
الْغَنِيمَةُ يَغْنَمُهَا الْمَرْءُ وَالْفَائِدَةُ يُفِيدُهَا،
وَالْجَائِزَةُ مِنَ الإِنْسَانِ لِلإِنْسَانِ الَّتِي لَهَا خَطَرٌ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As for gains and profit, they are obligatorily subject to taxation each
year. Almighty Allah* *has said,* ***“Know that whatever thing you gain,
a fifth of it is for Allah, the Messenger, the near of kin, the orphans,
the needy, and the wayfarer, if you believe in Allah and in that which
We revealed to Our servant, on the day of distinction, the day on which
the two parties met. Allah has power over all things. (8:41)”***

*By gains and benefits we mean the following: gains are whatever is
gained by man, and benefits are whatever is utilized by man and the
gifts that one gives to another, bearing in mind that they are
considerable in value…*[^21]

Many traditions that decisively confirm this fact have been reported
from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) who are the second ‘Weighty Thing’, the
counterparts of the Holy Qur'an, and the most knowledgeable of all
regarding the Holy Qur'an, the Prophetic traditions, and the laws of the
religion of Islam.

Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam* and *al-Istibsar*, has reported
through a valid chain of authority that Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Ash’ari
said:

Some of our acquaintances wrote a letter to Imam al-Jawad (‘a) asking
him whether *khums* is applied to all gains that one may obtain, be they
few or much, to all professions and crafts, and how they are applied.

The Imam’s reply (in a written form) was the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْخُمُسُ بَعْدَ الْمَؤُونَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All is subjected to khums after excluding the (annual)
provisions.*[^22]

Ibn Shuja’ al-Nayshaburi has reported that he asked Imam al-Hadi (‘a)
about the taxes imposed on the gains of a man who obtained one hundred
*kurr* (a unit of measurement) from the yield of wheat. He used
one-tenth of the yield as expenditures, expended thirty *kurr* on
reconstructing his farm, and only sixty *kurr* remained for him…

The Imam (‘a) answered (in a written form):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِي مِنْهُ الْخُمُسُ مِمَّا يَفْضُلُ مِنْ مَؤُونَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Out of the remainder, after he deducts his annual provisions, one fifth
is for me.*[^23]

‘Ali ibn Mahziyar has reported that Abu-’Ali ibn Rashid said to the Imam
(‘a), “When you ordered me to represent you and collect your rights, I
informed your adherents, but some of them asked me to identify (the
amount of) your right, but I could not answer.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَجِبُ عَلَيْهِمُ الْخُمُسُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is obligatory upon them to pay khums (one-fifth portion).*

“What are the things subject to this tax?” I asked.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي أَمْتِعَتِهِمْ وَصَنَائِعِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The money of their belongings and their crafts is subjected to khums.*

“Is the money of businessmen and craftsmen included?” I asked.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا أَمْكَنَهُمْ بَعْدَ مَؤُونَتِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Yes, when possible (i.e. when something remains) after setting apart
their annual provisions.*[^24]

The Emergence of this Ruling in Later Times
-------------------------------------------

The matter of the origin of the legislation of *khums* and most details
are clear from a Muslim jurisprudential aspect. Nevertheless, there are
some points of obscurity attached to this legislation that require some
explanation and clarification.

The first point of obscurity ensues from the fact that some details of
*khums* were not known in general to the Muslim nation and we cannot
find any reference to or indication of such details from the first age
of Islam up to the age of Imam al-Baqir and Imam al-Sadiq (‘a),[^25]
despite the fact that *khums* on earnings were existent since the first
age of Islam and during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S). This fact
may arouse some questions about gains on earnings that are subject to
*khums*.

The second point of obscurity ensues from the fact that this religious
law seemed to have been nonexistent even in the milieus of the virtuous
community although, firstly, such profits of earnings were existent and,
secondly, there was a profound connection between the individuals of the
virtuous community and the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

To explain the earlier point of obscurity, we may refer the reader to
the previous chapter about the religious referential authority of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) where we have stated that the Holy Prophet (S) did not
reveal all the religious laws of Islam before all Muslims, for tangible
reasons appertaining to the Holy Prophet (S) personally and to the
Muslim nation; rather, he (S) revealed these rulings and laws to special
individuals, including Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) and some of his
elite companions.

He (S) referred the Muslim nations to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) if they, in
the future, would desire to learn these laws—a fact that is corroborated
by traditions authentically reported from the Holy Prophet (S), such as
the famous *Hadith al-Thaqalayn* (Tradition of the Two Weighty Things)
and others, as well as verbal and practical confessions of the caliphs
to this fact shown in their referrals to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) to solve
enigmatic problems.

As a result, details of this religious law were undisclosed to the
Muslim nation because of the political and cultural circumstances that
deprived the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) of their political position. Hence,
*khums* was one of the matters firmly related to this issue, because the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) were the one and only authority to decide about this
tax.[^26]

As another justification, it may also be said that the Holy Prophet (S)
did not demonstrate details of this religious law; rather, he delayed
the question and entrusted it to the Imams (‘a) to reveal it at the
appropriate time when required.[^27]

In addition, the gains of earnings being subject to *khums* was not
within the affairs that could be manipulated by the authorities because
it became operative only after gaining profits in business and deducting
annual provisions. Like the amount of *zakat* on gold, silver and
business income, these conditions could not be controlled or defined by
the religious authority. Therefore, the jurisprudents of the other
Muslim sects exclude these funds from being delivered to the ruler
because they are considered ‘invisible funds’. ‘Visible funds’, such as
cattle and yields, which could be estimated and assessed, had to be
delivered to the ruler.[^28]

Moreover, profit on earnings during the age of the Holy Prophet (S) was
a small amount and restricted to a certain number of people.

It can be seen that non-Shi’ite Muslim jurisprudents maintain that it is
obligatory to pay *zakat* on business investments, while Shi’ite
jurisprudents clearly maintain the opposite. This may stand in as
evidence to conclude that according to Islamic legislation, *khums* is
on the *profit* of earnings; however, *khums* might have been changed by
non-Shi’ite jurisprudents into *zakat* because of lack of scrutiny of
the religious laws or because of the many attempts at modification and
distortion to which Muslim society and Islam were exposed such that even
evident issues of Islamic legislation became ambiguous, such as some
rulings of *zakat*, *Hajj* (pilgrimage) and others.[^29]

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), however, did not make efforts to
publically elucidate this religious law because such efforts would
certainly result in political conflicts, since elucidation of this
religious law would grant the tyrannical ruling authorities more power
and potency. The tyrannical authorities believed that *khums* should be
possessed by the caliph, and in this case these funds would be
transferred to the treasury of the caliphs most of whom would consider
such funds to be their pure ownership.

As for the explanation of the second point of ambiguity, it can be
explained by one of the following probabilities:

(1) The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) had not wanted to burden
their Shi’ah, who were few in number at that time, with more financial
loads. Moreover, they did not consider the existence of an urgent need
for such funds because the virtuous community had not yet spread over a
large scale to have big expenses. As a result, the Holy Imams (‘a)
allowed their followers to make disposition of the funds because the
funds were possessed by the position of Imamate and the Imams had the
right to determine their disposition. They also allowed their Shi’ah to
make disposition of *khums* received from the funds of the other people.

All this was based on the ruling that profit from earnings was subject
to *khums*, as being originally enacted by Islamic legislation which the
Holy Prophet (S) explained as a whole to the people and in detail to
Imam ‘Ali (‘a), as indicated by the unrestrictedness of the holy verse
involved and the purport of some traditions.

(2) Some scholars, however, have argued that the question of profits on
earnings that are subject to *khums* was not clarified in the original
Islamic legislation; rather, it was one of the issues left for the Holy
Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) to determine within the expansive
authorities that the Holy Prophet (S) gave them in the field of enacting
certain laws appertaining to the general affairs of the Muslim community
within the boundaries of financial issues.[^30]

On the grounds of this opinion, we can explain the unfamiliarity of the
Shi’ah, in general, that profit of earnings were subject to *khums* up
to the age of Imam al-Baqir and Imam al-Sadiq (‘a). This explanation is
as follows:

The Holy Imams (‘a) had not executed this ruling before the age of these
two Imams (‘a) because there had been no need for this financial
resource before that age. However, when need for it surfaced, because of
the growth and perfection of the virtuous community and the need for
funds to fill the financial gap of meeting its needs and spending on the
individuals of this community, this law was carried out.

The Role of Khums in Improving the Economic Conditions of the Virtuous Community
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Khums* on profits of earnings have continually been the most important
financial resource in the economic system of the virtuous community. A
large variety of public and private expenses of the virtuous community
depends, in essence, on these funds, especially in the field of public
affairs. Besides, there are other aspects which assign an additional
significance to *khums* in the general system of the virtuous community.

To get a good idea of the complete portrait of the hypothetical and
applied functions of *khums* in relation to the economic conditions of
the virtuous community, we will display a number of general aspects.

### Khums as a Financial Resource

*Khums*, along with properties for public and restricted use endowed as
*waqf*, largely represent the main financial resources on which the
general system of the virtuous community depended, especially after the
doors were blocked to other financial resources, including *zakat* which
was paid to the ruling authorities or to needy people directly, tributes
which were seized by the ruling authorities, and other public funds that
found their way to the public treasury after being levied from the
Muslim regions.

As has been previously maintained, no community can build its social,
political and cultural structure without the existence of funds to cover
its expenses. As for the virtuous community which was built by the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a), the political and social circumstances did not allow any
other financial resources on which this community could depend, like
common contributions or investments, because such economic activities
became more of a menace and, at times, an extra economic burden that the
majority of the individuals of the virtuous community, who were
generally poor, would not be able to pay.

### Flexibility in Khums Taxation

*Khums* has always been owned by the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a),
or was the right of Imamate and the leadership restricted to the Imams
(‘a), and they had unrestrained authority to dispose these funds. The
circle of expending these funds has widened, for it includes the rights
of poor Sayyids and Hashemites for whom Almighty Allah determined as
compensation for *zakat* and alms which are prohibited for their use.
These rights have been granted to these Sayyids and Hashemites because
the funds were originally possessed by the Holy Imams (‘a); therefore,
the Imam (‘a) is responsible for meeting any deficiency in the expenses
of the Sayyids and spending the remainder of these funds on public
affairs. As a matter of fact, the logic of meeting the financial needs
of Sayyids from *khums* is that they are clean and pure funds and not
excess or left over funds of people, as stated previously.

The Imam (‘a), or the religious referential authority that represents
him, are granted flexibility and opportunity to use these funds in
various fields of public interest. The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) confirmed this in the expenditure of *khums* to such a great degree
that they allowed their Shi’ah to dispose the *khums* funds, and even
give them back to their owners when interest necessitated, as is in the
aforesaid narration of Abu-Sayyar Musmi’ ibn ‘Abd al-Malik.[^31]

### Expansive Financial Capacities

Because *khums* entails a high percentage of the totality of public
wealth, it grants the the Imam (the custodian of this fund) vast
financial capacity to serve Muslims and the sacred goals of the Islamic
mission. *Khums* is levied from all essential funds that man may gain—in
the words of the Holy Qur'an—minerals, earnings from diving, spoils of
war and other income. Accordingly, *khums* is very much more important
than alms and *zakat* because of this high percentage. The importance of
*khums* in the profit of earnings increases when we recognize there was
a general economic inclination among the Ahl al-Bayt’s followers towards
commerce and agriculture. Being a vital element in *khums*, there was
much attention paid to commerce by the Ahl al-Bayt.

### Security Against Enemies

Being ‘invisible funds’, according to the jurisprudential classification
of funds, the payment of *khums* on net earnings to the Holy Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) does not draw the attention of their enemies;
therefore, it is not considered a menace that threatens the security of
the Holy Imams (‘a), unlike the payment of the ‘visible funds’, such as
the *zakat* of cattle and yields, which were usually assessed and
estimated by the ruling authorities.

Additionally, earnings subject to *khums* was not familiar among Muslims
in general; therefore, the payment of this tax to the Holy Imams (‘a)
did not arouse doubts about the movement or promulgation of the concept
of Imamate in the milieus of their followers. As a result, their
security was maintained and dangers stemming from the process of payment
and collection of these taxes avoided.

### Doctrinal and Spiritual Aspects

There are some doctrinal and spiritual aspects in the process of payment
and collection of *khums* which increases the importance of the role
this tax plays in the life of the virtuous community. To put this in
plain words, *khums* is the right of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a); therefore,
paying it manifests a belief in their right and in the fact that their
rights had been violated. Likewise, it expresses loyalty to them, which
includes love, affection, fulfillment of covenants and pledges made to
them, and financial support.

According to a tradition, *khums* is the right of leadership; hence, to
pay it to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) denotes believing in their Imamate and
leadership. A doctrinal aspect that exists in *khums* exclusively is
that it is unlike *zakat* which is paid to the poor. Therefore, to pay
*khums* to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) is also another form of showing
preference to them over other groups in the society, elevating them far
above people’s unused excess funds and confirming their exclusive right
to receive the *khums* funds. funds.

### Organizational Aspect

The payment of *khums* to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) represents an
organizational aspect in the system of the virtuous community. It
symbolizes the connection of its individuals to the leadership and the
*religious referential authority* through financial participation in the
administration of the virtuous community and meeting public expenses
made through the Imam (‘a) or the *religious authority*. Of course, such
participation implies affiliation to and membership in the virtuous
community. It is thus similar to the financial contributions of members
of collective organizations and associations.

### Actual aspect

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and the virtuous community
historically demonstrate that *khums* was the most vital axis of all
financial resources on which the virtuous community depended in
administering its various affairs.

We now refer to a set of important faculties, issues and projects that
were financially run through the funds of *khums*:

(1) Religious seminaries and cultural schools in various countries: in
such faculties and schools, study is free-of-charge and instructors and
teachers, in addition to researchers and investigators, usually receive
nothing as remuneration for their efforts.

(2) Expenses of foreign scholars, propagators, and instructive
missionaries.

(3) Expenses of printing and publishing religious books, such as books
of practical laws and verdicts, religious teachings, theses in fields of
Muslim jurisprudence, fundamentals of jurisprudence (*usul*), and
reporting the traditions (*hadith*), as well as other articles,
magazines, and periodicals.

(4) Construction and administration of mosques, Husayniyyahs, shrines of
the Holy Imams (‘a) and their saintly descendants, religious schools and
dormitories therein, housing for married students of religious studies,
public libraries, and all sorts of religious establishments.

(5) Funds needed for managing religious associations of various
activities founded for serving Islam.

(6) Funds needed for holding religious festivities and public ceremonies
for commemorating the uprising and martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (‘a).

(7) Aid for unexpected events, such as earthquakes, floods, and other
natural disasters, as well as some public services, such as public
baths, bridges and overpasses, and public accommodations for pilgrims
and the like.

(8) Meeting the financial needs of the poor, the destitute, and the
needy who are in urgent need of financial help, whether they are
Hashemites or descendants of the Holy Prophet (S), in particular, who
are entitled to something from the share of the Sayyids, or the poor,
the destitute, and the needy individuals of the virtuous community. Of
course, all uses of *khums* must be under the supervision and permission
of the supreme religious referential authority.

From the above, we can perceive the great role that this financial duty
has played in the building of the virtuous community, especially *khums*
from the profit of earnings.

Restricted Social Solidarity
----------------------------

Social solidarity, shown by undertaking individual responsibility
towards financial issues related to the lives and livelihoods of
Muslims, is one of the principles towards which Islam has called people.
This is maintained by many traditions some of which will be cited in
this chapter.

Through a valid chain of authority, Shaykh al-Kulayni, in his book of
*al-Kafi*, has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُسْلِمُ أَخُو الْمُسْلِمِ؛ لاَ يَظْلِمُهُ وَلاَ يَخْذُلُهُ وَلاَ
يَخُونُهُ. وَيَحِقُّ عَلَى الْمُسْلِمِينَ الإجْتِهَادُ فِي
التَّوَاصُلِ وَالتَّعَاقُدِ عَلَى التَّعَاطُفِ وَالْمُوَاسَاةُ
لأَِهْلِ الْحَاجَةِ وَتَعَاطُفِ بَعْضِهِمْ عَلَى بَعْضٍ حَتَّى
تَكُونُوا كَمَا أَمَرَكُمُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، رُحَمَاءَ بَيْنَكُمْ
مُتَرَاحِمِينَ مُغْتَمِّينَ لِمَا غَابَ عَنْكُمْ مِنْ أَمْرِهِمْ عَلَى
مَا مَضَى عَلَيْهِ مَعْشَرُ الأَنْصَارِ عَلَى عَهْدِ رَسُولِ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muslims are brothers of each other. They neither wrong, nor disappoint,
nor betray each other. The duties that are incumbent on Muslims towards
each other include establishing communication, showing mutual sympathy,
treating the needy as they treat themselves and empathizing with one
another. If you abide by this, you will be as Almighty Allah has ordered
you to be: compassionate and merciful towards one another and regretful
upon missing any opportunity to help your brethren-in-faith, just like
the conduct of the Ansar during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah
(S).*[^32]

As far as the virtuous community is concerned, the Ahl al-Bayt (S)
emphasized this as a serious responsibility to be undertaken by the
wealthy individuals of the virtuous community towards their
brethren-in-faith.

Traditions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) emphasize two main areas:

### (1) Public Alms

Many texts and traditions, reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a),
demonstrate the significance of giving alms and the good results ensuing
from them. However, the most important point manifested in this regard
is that some traditions have confirmed that there is another *public*
financial duty, in addition to *zakat*, imposed on Muslims. This duty
has been mentioned in the following holy verse, which avers the
obligation of paying an amount out of the funds of yields in the season
of harvest before estimating the percentage of *zakat*. Accordingly,
some scholars, such as Shaykh al-Tusi, issued a verdict deeming it
obligatory to pay such an amount.[^33]

The holy verse involved is the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لُوا مِن ثَمَرِهِ إِذَا أَثْمَرَ وَآتُوا حَقَّهُ يَوْمَ حَصَادِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Pay the due of it on the day of its reaping. (6:141)***

Through a valid chain of authority, Shaykh al-Kulayni, in his book of
*al-Kafi*, has reported Zurarah, Muhammad ibn Muslim, and Abu-Basir as
quoting Imam al-Baqir (‘a) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لُوا مِن ثَمَرِهِ إِذَا أَثْمَرَ وَآتُوا حَقَّهُ يَوْمَ حَصَادِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذَا مِنَ الصَّدَقَةِ. يُعْطِي الْمُسْلِمُونَ الْقَبْضَةَ بَعْدَ
الْقَبْضَةِ وَمِنَ الْجِدَادِ الْحَفْنَةَ بَعْدَ الْحَفْنَةِ حَتَّى
يَفْرُغَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The verse,* ***“pay the due of it on the day of its reaping”
(6:141),*** *mentions a sort of alms. Muslims give one sheaf after
another and from the fruit of date trees one handful after another until
it pours out.*[^34]

Bearing the same purport, other narrations, interpreting the holy verse
that reads, ***“Those, in whose wealth there is a fixed portion for him
who begs and for him who is denied good” (70:24-25)*** have confirmed
that this portion is a financial duty, other than *zakat*, which is
flexible. Its amount has been left for the owner of the property to give
at a definite time but in any amount that he identifies.

In this connection, Shaykh al-Kulayni, in his book of *al-Kafi*, has
reported through a valid chain of authority that al-Qasim ibn ‘Abd
al-Rahman al-Ansari said that he heard Imam al-Baqir (‘a) relating the
following:

One day, a man came to my father, ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (‘a), and asked him
to identify the *fixed portion* mentioned in this holy verse, ***“Those
in whose wealth there is a fixed portion for him who begs and for him
who is denied good. (70:24-25)”***

The Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَقُّ الْمَعْلُومُ، الشَّيْءُ يُخْرِجُهُ مِنْ مَالِهِ لَيْسَ مِنَ
الزَّكَاةِ وَلاَ مِنَ الصَّدَقَةِ الْمَفْرُوضَتَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The fixed portion is a duty, other than zakat and alms, which one pays
from one’s funds.*

The man asked, “If it is neither *zakat* nor alms, what is it then?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الشَّيْءُ يُخْرِجُهُ الرَّجُلُ مِنْ مَالِهِ، إِنْ شَاءَ أَكْثَرَ
وَإِنْ شَاءَ أَقَلَّ، عَلَى قَدْرِ مَا يَمْلِكُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is the portion that one pays from one’s funds according to one’s
property. One can pay much or little, according to one’s will.*

The man asked, “What is that portion used for?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَصِلُ بِهِ رَحِماً، وَيُقَوِّي بِهِ ضَعِيفاً، وَيَحْمِلُ بِهِ كَلاًّ،
أَوْ يَصِلُ بِهِ أَخاً لَهُ فِي اللهِ، أَوْ لِنَائِبَةٍ تَنُوبُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*One may make firm relations with one’s relatives, financially
strengthen a destitute person, alleviate someone’s burden, improve
relations with one’s brothers-in-faith, or aid someone in misfortune.*

Impressed by the Imam’s knowledge, the man quoted:

***“Allah knows best where He places His message. (6:124)”***[^35]

However, master jurisprudents have not determined these two matters to
be obligatory although authentically and validly reported traditions
indicate the latter,[^36] assuming that there are other traditions
contradicting these. As a result, these financial duties must be thought
of as recommended (according to the principles of *Usul al-Fiqh*).
Additionally, there is a scholarly consensus on the non-obligation of
paying such financial duties openly, i.e. under all circumstances.
Excepted from this consensus is the verdict of Shaykh al-Tusi who, in
one of his opinions, has decided the payment of the earlier financial
duty as obligatory.

From the previous discussion, we may conclude that such inconsistency in
the traditions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) on this topic should
be taken to mean one of the following two probabilities:

(1) Such sorts of payments are strongly recommended (*mustahabb*),
because they achieve social solidarity to an extent that corresponds
with the circumstances surrounding each individual of the Muslim
community.

(2) Such payments are provisionally obligatory; i.e. obligatory under
certain circumstances and conditions. The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) deemed these payments obligatory out of their understanding of the
nature of the social obligations of that age, which would have been
inescapably observed by the individuals of that community. Having not
been decided as obligatory in the original Islamic legislation, this
duty was, therefore, deemed obligatory by the religious referential
authorities within the general responsibilities that they had to
undertake towards the Muslim community and interests that contributed to
social solidarity with the poor.[^37]

No matter which probability is closer to the fact, the Holy Imams of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), having worked towards building the virtuous community,
took much interest in the issue of social solidarity, seeing it as one
of the foundations of attaining an ideal economic condition.

### (2) Rights of Brethren-in-Faith

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) laid much emphasis on the
existence and observation of a set of rights and duties that a faithful
believer must undertake towards his brethren-in-faith; i.e. the members
of the virtuous community. Among these duties are aiding others
financially to cover their needs and meet their requirements.

This emphasis has been taught in a number of ways.

**First**: The Holy Imams (‘a) confirmed that the observation of these
rights is one of the actual and real obligations that must be carried
out by faithful people, just like other religious duties and
responsibilities.

According to a validly reported tradition, Shaykh al-Kulayni, in his
book of *al-Kafi*, has reported Suma’ah to have said:

I asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “If some people are wealthy, but their
brethren-in-faith are too needy to be satisfied with *zakat* funds, are
the wealthy people permitted to fill themselves in difficult times while
their brethren-in-faith are hungry?”

Besides the tradition already cited on p. 92, as reported by Shaykh
al-Kulayni in his book of *al-Kafi* from Furat ibn Ahnaf, Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّمَا مُؤْمِنٍ مَنَعَ مُؤْمِناً شَيْئاً مِمَّا يَحْتَاجُ إِلَيْهِ
وَهُوَ يَقْدِرُ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ عِنْدِهِ أَوْ مِنْ عِنْدِ غَيْرِهِ،
أَقَامَهُ اللهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ مُسْوَدّاً وَجْهُهُ، مُزْرَقَّةً
عَيْنَاهُ، مَغْلُولَةً يَدَاهُ إِلَى عُنُقِهِ، فَيُقَالُ: هَذَا
الْخَائِنُ الَّذِي خَانَ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ. ثُمَّ يُؤْمَرُ بِهِ إِلَى
النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If any believer (mu'min) refrains from meeting the needs of another
believer while he can do so or he can mediate with another person who
can do it, Almighty Allah will resurrect him black-faced, downcast-eyed,
and having his hands attached to his neck. Then, he will be introduced
as a traitor who has betrayed Almighty Allah and His Messenger and will
be led to the Hellfire by a divine command.*[^38]

Thus, this financial duty is a restricted obligation upon wealthy
individuals under circumstances of harsh destitution. It becomes
obligatory when a government or the Muslim society fails to assure the
livings of deprived destitute people.

**Second**: The Holy Imams (‘a) explained that this duty was obligatory
on individuals; however, it was still regarded as one of the duties that
is difficult to impose generally and all-inclusively because people may
abandon their faith or individuals of the virtuous community may shun
carrying it out. This means that this duty is one of the private
obligations that must be carried out in general for the purpose of
solidifying the organizational structure of the virtuous community,
strengthening the general relations among its individuals and promoting
feelings of responsibility towards this duty even if it is treated as
recommended. However, it becomes obligatory under certain conditions of
harsh destitution.

Mufadhdhal ibn Yazid has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُنْظُرْ مَا أَصَبْتَ فَعُدْ بِهِ عَلَى إِخْوَانِكَ، فَإِنَّ اللهَ
يَقُولُ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْحَسَنَاتِ يُذْهِبْنَ السَّيِّئَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: ثَلاَثَةٌ لاَ
تُطِيقُهَا هَذِهِ الأُمَّةُ: الْمُوَاسَاةُ لِلأَخِ فِي مَالِهِ،
وَإِنْصَافُ النَّاسِ مِنْ نَفْسِهِ، وَذِكْرُ اللهِ عَلَى كُلِّ حَالٍ.
وَلَيْسَ هُوَ: سُبْحَانَ اللهِ وَالْحَمْدُ للهِ وَلاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ
اللهُ وَاللهُ أَكْبَرُ، فَقَطْ؛ وَلَكِنْ إِذَا وَرَدَ عَلَى مَا
يُحَرَّمُ، خَافَ اللهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whatever you gain (from the money of the ruler), you may donate it to
your brethren-in-faith, for Almighty Allah says,* ***“Surely, good deeds
take away evil deeds.” (11:114)*** *Allah’s* *Messenger (S) has said,
“Three acts of conduct cannot be neglected by the individuals of this*
*nation: (1) Halving one’s funds with brethren-in-faith, (2) treating
people justly in personal issues, and (3) remembering Almighty Allah
under all circumstances. To remember Almighty Allah does not mean just
to utter such statements of praise for Him like ‘Glory be to Allah’,
‘praise be to Allah’, ‘there is no god save Allah’, and ‘Allah is the
All-great’; rather, it means to fear Him before committing a forbidden
act.*[^39]

**Third:** The Holy Imams (‘a) confirmed that such duties symbolized a
morally perfect character without which one fell short of the required
qualification of a true faithful believer, which is the main purpose
behind the building of a virtuous community.

Aban ibn Taghlib has reported the following:

*While I was performing the ritual circumambulation (tawaff) in the
company of Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), one of our fellows, who had previously
asked me to accompany him on a mission, appeared before me. As he
signaled to me, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saw us, “O Aban, are you the one
intended by that man?” asked the Imam (‘a).*

*“Yes, I am,” I answered.*

*“Is he of the same faith as you?” wondered the Imam (‘a).*

*“Yes, he is,” I answered.*

*“Then,” the Imam (‘a) instructed, “Go with him and break your
circumambulation.”*

*“Should I do so even if the circumambulation is obligatory?” I asked.*

*“Yes, you should,” he (‘a) answered.*

*So, I went with that man. When I returned, I visited the Imam (‘a) and
asked him about the duties towards brethren-in-faith.*

*“Leave the matter. Do not ask me about them,” said the Imam (‘a).*

*Nevertheless, I repeated the same question insistently until the Imam
(‘a) answered me, saying, “O Aban, (the duty towards one’s
brother-in-faith is that) you give him half of your wealth.”*

*As he looked at me and noticed my surprise, the Imam (‘a) said, “O
Aban, you should have known that Almighty Allah has mentioned (with
praise) those who give others preference over themselves?”*

*“Yes, I knew that,” I answered.*

*The Imam (‘a) said:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا قَاسَمْتَهُ لَمْ تُؤْثِرْهُ، إِنَّمَا تُؤْثِرُهُ إِذَا أَنْتَ
أَعْطَيْتَهُ مِنَ النِّصْفِ الآخَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If you give your brother-in-faith half of what you have, you have not
yet given him preference over yourself. Only when you give him from the
other half, have you given him* *preference.”*[^40]

Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِتُّ خِصَالٍ مَنْ كُنَّ فِيهِ كَانَ بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللهِ وَعَنْ
يَمِينِهِ: إِنَّ اللهَ يُحِبُّ الْمَرْءَ الْمُسْلِمَ الَّذِي يُحِبُّ
لأَِخِيهِ مَا يُحِبُّ لِنَفْسِهِ، وَيَكْرَهُ لَهُ مَا يَكْرَهُ
لِنَفْسِهِ، وَيُنَاصِحُهُ الْوِلاَيَةَ، وَيَعْرِفُ فَضْلِي، وَيَطَأُ
عَقِبِي، وَيَنْظُرُ عَاقِبَتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever enjoys the following six features will be before and on the
right hand side of Almighty Allah: Almighty Allah surely loves the
Muslim individual who (1) loves for his brother-in-faith all that which
he loves for himself, (2) hates for him whatever he hates for himself,
(3) acts towards him sincerely on account of bonds of faith, (4)
recognizes my leadership, (5) patterns himself after my example, and (6)
accepts the government of my progeny.*[^41]

Master jurisprudents are not known for having determined that this sort
of spending is obligatory although there are a good number of traditions
and reported texts indicating this obligation. Thus, they have specified
this matter to be emphatically recommended (*istihbab mu'akkad*).[^42]
The reason for this may be to achieve the principle of social
solidarity, or that this duty is an executive, local (i.e. temporary)
procedure taken by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) to put this originally
obligatory principle into practice by leaving its application to the
*religious referential authority*.

[^1]: - Refer to: Abu-Ya’li al-Farra' al-Hanbali (the Hanbalite),
al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah, pp. 115; Abu’l-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad
al-Mawardi, al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah, pp. 113.

[^2]: - Some historical reports bear out that this prohibition was
initially decided by Abu-Bakr, the first caliph; while others confirm
that it was decided by ‘Umar. There are additional traditions upholding
this fact. In his introduction to Mir'at al-Uqul (1:153-155), ‘Allamah
Murtadha al-’Askari has discussed this topic elaborately.

[^3]: - One of the most reliable reference books of hadith for Sunnis.

[^4]: - Sahih Muslim, Kitab (Section) al-jihad wa’l-siyar, No. 48.

[^5]: - These narrations can be found in the introduction of Mir'at
al-’Uqul (1:153-155). The author has quoted them from famous reference
books relied on by Sunni Muslims.

[^6]: - Murtadha al-’Askari, Mir'at al-’Uqul 1:153-155.

[^7]: - Murtadha al-’Askari, Mir'at al-’Uqul 1:153-155.

[^8]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:356, H. 2.

[^9]: - For more information in this regard, refer to Buhuth fi’l-Fiqh
by Sayyid Mahmud al-Hashimi (Chapter: Khums) 2:374-397.

[^10]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:357, H. 5.

[^11]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:364, H. 1.

[^12]: - For further information, refer to Buhuth fi’l-Fiqh by Sayyid
Mahmud al-Hashimi (Chapter: The Khums) as well as Buhuth al-Khums by
Shaykh al-Muntazari. In truth, traditions give preponderance to the
latter opinion over the earlier if we restrict our study to the purports
of traditions. However, it is claimed that there is a consensus among
the scholars of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) school on the earlier opinion.

[^13]: - This is legal only when the battle is founded on a religious
basis and permitted by the actual religious authority of Muslims;
otherwise, it is illegal for the warriors to utilize such spoils of war,
such as occurred in some deviant instances, and these are totally at the
Imam’s disposal.

[^14]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:379, H. 1.

[^15]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:381, H. 10.

[^16]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:379, H. 3.

[^17]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:379, H. 4.

[^18]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:379, H. 2.

[^19]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:380, S. 4 (Deeds
Restricted to the Imam), H. 6.

[^20]: - Sayyid Abu’l-Qasim al-Khu'i, Mustanad al-’Urwah al-Wuthqa,
Kitab al-Khums, pp. 193-194.

[^21]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:350, H. 5.

[^22]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:348, H. 1.

[^23]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:348, H. 2.

[^24]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:348, H. 3.

[^25]: - Sayyid Abu’l-Qasim al-Khu'i, Mustanad al-’Urwat al-Wuthqa,
Kitab al-Khums, pp. 196. However, the author made efforts to find any
hint of such details from the traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and
found one mentioned in Sahih al-Bukhari. See pp. 197.

[^26]: - This detail is confirmed by the aforementioned discussion of
the caliphs’ depriving the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) of their one-fifth share of
the spoils of war, which is their right as openly declared by the Holy
Qur'an.

[^27]: - Sayyid Abu’l-Qasim al-Khu'i, Mustanad al-’Urwah al-Wuthqa,
Kitab al-Khums, pp. 196.

[^28]: - Abu-Ya’li al-Farra' the Hanbalite scholar, al-Ahkam
al-Sultaniyyah, pp. 115; al-Mawardi, al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah, pp. 113.

[^29]: - Sayyid Abu’l-Qasim al-Khu'i, Mustanad al-’Urwah al-Wuthqa,
Kitab al-Khums, pp. 197-198.

[^30]: - Refer to Sayyid Abu’l-Qasim al-Khu'i, Mustanad al-’Urwat
al-Wuthqa, Kitab al-Khums, pp. 196; Buhuth fi’l-Fiqh, Kitab al-Khums
2:43.

[^31]: - Refer to al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:382, H. 12.

[^32]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:542, H. 2.

[^33]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Khilaf 2:5. The same verdict was issued by
al-Jawad al-Kazimi, as is understood from his defense of Shaykh
al-Tusi’s school of jurisprudence. Refer to al-Jawad al-Kazimi, Masalik
al-Afham ila Ayat al-Ahkam 2:70.

[^34]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 3:565, H. 2.

[^35]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:29, H. 6.

[^36]: - Refer to al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 6:27-32, S.
Financial Duties other than zakat (bab al-huquq fi’l-mal siwa al-zakat).

[^37]: - This notion can be treated as a religious principle on the
strength of which the Muslim government imposes taxes according to its
understanding of public interests.

[^38]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:599, H. 1.

[^39]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:415, H. 4.

[^40]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:547-548, H. 16.

[^41]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:549, H. 23.

[^42]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili seems to have decided these sorts of
almsgiving as obligatory. This idea is derived from the titles that he
uses for the sections containing traditions involved in this topic. For
instance, he uses the title bab tahrim man’ al-mu'min shay'an min
‘indihi aw min ‘indi ghayrihi ‘inda dharuratihi (Chapter on prohibition
against depriving a faithful believer of anything from himself or from
others when necessary) and also bab tahrim tark ma’unat al-mu'min ‘inda
dharuratihi (Chapter on prohibition of forsaking necessary aid to
faithful believers). Likewise, Martyr al-Sadr, in his book of iqtisaduna
(Our Economy), seems to believe in the obligation of the first duty, yet
with the aforementioned stipulation. Finally, Almighty Allah knows best.


