Chapter 3: Economic Activity
============================

**1. Encouraging Economic Activity**

**2. General Trend of Economic Activity**

**3. Direction of Economic Activity**

Preamble
--------

The general economic activity of the virtuous community, as well as its
financial capacity and public income, is looked upon as one of the most
important issues on which the fiscal power of the virtuous
community—plus its capability of movement and protection against dangers
and perils and steadfastness against difficulties and pressures—depends.
Without taking this issue into consideration, no community can attain
perfection or survive the vicissitudes of time.

We have previously referred to the fact that Islam has paid much
attention to the economic aspect. For instance, the great financial
potential of Lady Khadijah al-Kubra (‘a) played an extremely vital role
in helping Muslims withstand ordeals and resist the financial siege
which was imposed upon them at the beginning of the promulgation of
Islam.

Encouraging Economic Activity
-----------------------------

While establishing the economic aspect, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) instituted
a general principle for their followers, educated them about it and
implanted it in their social culture. This general principle was the
principle of work and exertion of all possible efforts to earn a
livelihood. The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) disallowed reliance on others to meet
one’s financial needs, considering work to this end to be among the
obligatory sacred deeds that draw one nearer to Almighty Allah.

In an authentic tradition, Shaykh al-Kulayni reported ‘Umar ibn Yazid to
have said to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “A man decides to stay at home and he
offers prayers, fasts and performs devotional acts, believing that his
sustenance will inevitably find its way to him. What is your opinion
about such an act?”

The Imam (‘a) commented:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذَا أَحَدُ الثَّلاَثَةِ الَّذِينَ لاَ يُسْتَجَابُ لَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*This man is among one of the three categories of people whose prayers
are never responded to.*[^1]

According to another authentic tradition that is reported from ‘Umar ibn
Yazid, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرَأَيْتَ لَوْ أَنَّ رَجُلاً دَخَلَ بَيْتَهُ وَأَغْلَقَ بَابَهُ،
أَكَانَ يَسْقُطُ عَلَيْهِ شَيْءٌ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If a man were to enter his house and lock its door, would anything fall
on him from the heavens?*[^2]

Ayyub, the brother of Adim ibn Bayya’ al-Harawi, is reported to have
said that he and some others were sitting in the presence of Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) when al-’Ala' ibn Kamil came and sat in front of the Imam
(‘a) and asked, “Pray to Almighty Allah to provide me with easy
sustenance.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ أَدْعُو لَكَ! أُطْلُبْ كَمَا أَمَرَكَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No, I will not. You must seek sustenance as Almighty Allah has ordered
you to do.*[^3]

This struggle to seek sustenance has been elevated to such a degree that
it has attained the rank of *jihad* or even higher.

In an authentic tradition, al-Halabi has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْكَادُّ عَلَى عِيَالِهِ كَالْمُجَاهِدِ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who works to provide his dependents with sustenance is like a
mujahid who fights for the* *sake of Almighty Allah.*[^4]

According to another authentic tradition, Zakariyya ibn Adam has
reported Imam al-Ridha (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي يَطْلُبُ مِنْ فَضْلِ اللهِ، عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، مَا يَكُفُّ بِهِ
عِيَالَهُ أَعْظَمُ أَجْراً مِنَ الْمُجَاهِدِ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ، عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who seeks the grace of Almighty Allah to provide enough sustenance
for his dependents will have a greater reward than fighting for the sake
of Almighty Allah.*[^5]

Muhammad ibn Marwan has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي حِكْمَةِ آلِ دَاوُودَ: يَنْبَغِي لِلْمُسْلِمِ الْعَاقِلِ
أَنْ لاَ يُرَى ظَاعِناً إِلاَّ فِي ثَلاَثٍ: مَرَمَّةٍ لِمَعَاشٍ، أَوْ
تَزَوُّدٍ لِمَعَادٍ، أَوْ لَذَّةٍ فِي غَيْرِ ذَاتِ مُحَرَّمٍ.
وَيَنْبَغِي لِلْمُسْلِمِ الْعَاقِلِ أَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُ سَاعَةٌ يُفْضِي
بِهَا إِلَى عَمَلِهِ فِيمَا بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ،
وَسَاعَةٌ يُلاَقِي إِخْوَانَهُ الَّذِينَ يُفَاوِضُهُمْ
وَيُفَاوِضُونَهُ فِي أَمْرِ آخِرَتِهِ، وَسَاعَةٌ يُخْلِي بَيْنَ
نَفْسِهِ وَلَذَّاتِهَا فِي غَيْرِ مُحَرَّمٍ، فَإِنَّهَا عَوْنٌ عَلَى
تِلْكَ السَّاعَتَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The following statement is written in the book of wisdom of (Prophet)
David’s household: A Muslim of sane mind must not be seen busy except in
three pursuits: improving his livelihood, supplying himself with
provisions for the life to come, and seeking lawful pleasures. A
rational Muslim is also required to dedicate an hour to acts directed to
Almighty Allah, another hour to meeting his brethren-in-faith to discuss
the affairs of the Hereafter, and a third hour to gain lawful pleasures.
The third hour helps him do the work of the first two hours
properly.*[^6]

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) provided excellent practical examples in order to
emphasize the importance of work and clarified this principle
empirically so that their followers would follow their examples.

According to an authentic tradition, ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj has
reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as recounting the following:

*Muhammad ibn al-Munkadir used to say: I never thought that ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn (‘a) would leave a successor as excellent as himself until I
saw his son, Muhammad (‘a). I wanted to give him a lesson, but he gave
me one. On a hot day, I went to al-Madinah where I saw Imam al-Baqir
(‘a). I said to myself, “A great man of Quraysh working at this hour of
day in search of the material world! I will certainly give him some
advice.” I approached and gave a salutation. Still catching his breath,
he returned my greeting. Sweat was pouring from his head and face
because of the heat. I said, “May Allah help you! A great man of Quraysh
is seeking worldly provisions at this time of the day! What will happen
if death overtakes you in this situation?” He said, “If death overtakes
me in this situation, I will be in a state of obedience to Almighty
Allah. I am afraid of death only when I am committing a sin!” I said,
“May Allah bless you! You are thoroughly right. I intended to give you
advice but you gave it to me!”*[^7]

Muhammad ibn ‘Adhafir has reported his father as saying:

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) gave my father one thousand and seven hundred dinars
asking him to use it in business. The Imam (‘a) then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لِي رَغْبَةٌ فِي رِبْحِهَا، وَإِنْ كَانَ
الرِّبْحُ مَرْغُوباً فِيهِ، وَلَكِنِّي أَحْبَبْتُ أَنْ يَرَانِيَ
اللهُ، جَلَّ وَعَزَّ، مُتَعَرِّضاً لِفَوَائِدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, I do not have the desire to gain profits from this business
even though profit is something desired; rather, I just want Almighty
Allah to see me seeking His interests.*

My father made a one hundred dinar profit from the business he
undertook. The Imam (‘a), having been informed of this, rejoiced and had
my father add the profit to the capital. When my father died and the
investment was still with him, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) summoned me and wrote
down, “May Allah grant wellbeing to you and us! I have given
Abu-Muhammad one thousand seven hundred dinars to use them in business.
So, please hand this amount over to ‘Umar ibn Yazid.”

When I searched in my father’s register, I found the following written
therein: “Abu-Musa has one thousand and seven hundred dinars invested
with me, and I made a profit of one hundred dinars for him. ‘Abdullah
ibn Sinan and ‘Umar ibn Yazid have full acquaintance with the
matter.”[^8]

General Trend of Economic Activity
----------------------------------

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) founded a set of principles to be
the general trend in the economic activities of their followers. The
first principle was to seek sustenance without indolence by exerting all
possible effort to provide for oneself through work.

Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported, through a valid chain of authority, that
Sadir asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “What is a man required to do to seek
sustenance?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا فَتَحْتَ بَابَكَ وَبَسَطْتَ بِسَاطَكَ فَقَدْ قَضَيْتَ مَا
عَلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If you open the door [of your store] and stretch your rug [on which you
exhibit your goods], you will have done perfectly what you are required
to do.*[^9]

Al-Tayyar is reported to have said that Imam al-Baqir (‘a) asked him,
“What is your current profession or what kind of job are you currently
doing?”

He answered, “I have no job.”

The Imam (‘a) instructed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَخُذْ بَيْتاً وَاكْنُسْ فَنَاءَهُ وَرُشَّهُ وَابْسُطْ فِيهِ بِسَاطاً،
فَإِذَا فَعَلْتَ ذَلِكَ فَقَدْ قَضَيْتَ مَا وَجَبَ عَلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Betake yourself a store, sweep the confines, and stretch a rug
therein. If you do so, you will have done perfectly what you are
obligated to do.”*

The reporter said, “When I carried out the Imam’s instruction, I was
given ample sustenance.”[^10]

Ibn al-Qaddah has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَدُوُّ الْعَمَلِ الْكَسَلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Laziness is the enemy of work.*[^11]

Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَبِي، عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ، لِبَعْضِ وِلْدِهِ: إِيَّاكَ
وَالْكَسَلَ وَالضَّجَرَ، فَإِنَّهُمَا يَمْنَعَانِكَ مِنْ حَظِّكَ مِنَ
الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My father said to one of his sons, “Beware of laziness and tedium, for
they deprive you of your share of this world and the Hereafter.”*[^12]

The second principle was commitment to seeking only legal sustenance.
Almighty Allah, ordered man to seek of His sustenance and guaranteed it
to him—provided it was sought through lawful means.

He, the Almighty, has thus said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي السَّمَاءِ رِزْقُكُمْ وَمَا تُوعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In heaven is your sustenance, and (also) that which you are promised.
(51:22)***

Complying with this divine instruction, the Holy Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) asserted that, while seeking sustenance, it is necessary to
maintain balance between obligation and what Almighty Allah has
determined for each individual. As a result, man is required to seek
sustenance and, at the same time, be committed to the regulations and
general rules determined by Islam, avoiding squandering or violations of
these regulations.

Abu-Hamzah al-Thumali has reported on the authority of Imam al-Baqir
(‘a) that the Holy Prophet (S) said in his famous sermon at the Farewell
Pilgrimage:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ إِنَّ الرُّوحَ الأَمِينَ نَفَثَ فِي رَوْعِي أَنَّهُ لاَ تَمُوتُ
نَفْسٌ حَتَّى تَسْتَكْمِلَ رِزْقَهَا، فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
وَأَجْمِلُوا فِي الطَّلَبِ وَلاَ يَحْمِلَنَّكُمُ إسْتِبْطَاءُ شَيْءٍ
مِنَ الرِّزْقِ أَنْ تَطْلِبُوهُ بِشَيْءٍ مِنْ مَعْصِيَةِ اللهِ،
فَإِنَّ اللهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى قَسَّمَ الأَرْزَاقَ بَيْنَ خَلْقِهِ
حَلاَلاً وَلَمْ يُقَسِّمْهَا حَرَاماً. فَمَنِ إتَّقَى اللهَ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ وَصَبَرَ أَتَاهُ اللهُ بِرِزْقِهِ مِنْ حِلِّهِ، وَمَنْ هَتَكَ
حِجَابَ السِّتْرِ وَعَجَّلَ فَأَخَذَهُ مِنْ غَيْرِ حِلِّهِ قُصَّ بِهِ
مِنْ رِزْقِهِ الْحَلاَلِ وَحُوسِبَ عَلَيْهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, the Trustworthy Spirit (the Angel Gabriel) inspired in me that
no single soul will die before fully receiving its sustenance. So, (you
must) fear Almighty Allah and seek sustenance. Do not make the delay in
an amount of your sustenance incite you to seek it through an act of
disobedience to Almighty Allah, for He, the Blessed and Exalted, has
divided lawful sustenance, never unlawful sustenance, among His
creatures. Therefore, whoever fears Almighty Allah and waits patiently,
Almighty Allah will give him his lawful sustenance, but whoever ravages
the curtain of protection and rushes to take his sustenance unlawfully,
Almighty Allah will reduce it from his lawful sustenance and leave him
to compensate for it on the Day of Resurrection.*[^13]

Ibrahim ibn Abi’l-Ballad has reported on the authority of his father
that Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ مِنْ نَفْسٍ إِلاَّ وَقَدْ فَرَضَ اللهُ، عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، لَهَا
رِزْقَهَا حَلاَلاً يَأْتِيهَا فِي عَافِيَةٍ، وَعَرَضَ لَهَا
بِالْحَرَامِ مِنْ وَجْهٍ آخَرَ. فَإِنْ هِيَ تَنَاوَلَتْ شَيْئاً مِنَ
الْحَرَامِ قَاصَّهَا بِهِ مِنَ الْحَلاَلِ الَّذِي فُرِضَ لَهَا،
وَعِنْدَ اللهِ سِوَاهُمَا فَضْلٌ كَثِيرٌ، وَهُوَ قَوْلُ اللهِ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْأَلُوا اللَّهَ مِن فَضْلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There is no single soul but that Almighty Allah has decided for it its
sustenance to be gained in a lawful and wholesome way, but He has also
determined the same sustenance if gained unlawfully; therefore, if a
soul takes any of its sustenance in an unlawful manner, Almighty Allah
will reduce it from its lawfully-earned sustenance, which He has
determined. With Almighty Allah, however, there is much more grace than
sustenance that is gained either lawfully or unlawfully, to which He has
referred, saying,* ***“Ask Allah of His grace.(4:32)”***[^14]

The third principle was to take considerable interest in preserving
one’s funds and maintaining equilibrium in spending in order to avoid
both squandering and parsimoniousness.

Almighty Allah has said in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَنفَقُوا لَمْ يُسْرِفُوا وَلَمْ يَقْتُرُوا وَكَانَ
بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ قَوَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who, when they spend, are not extravagant and not niggardly,
but hold a just balance between those extremes. (25:67)***

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) also instructed that one’s funds must be cared for
and managed personally, especially when such funds are considerable.

Tha‘labah and other narrators have reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِصْلاَحُ الْمَالِ مِنَ الإِيـمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Proper management of funds is part of faith.*[^15]

Dawud ibn Sarhan has reported that he once saw Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
weighing dates with his own hands. He thus said to him, “May Allah
accept me as ransom for you! You could have ordered one of your sons or
servants to save you from this deed.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا دَاوُودُ، إِنَّهُ لاَ يُصْلِحُ الْمَرْءَ الْمُسْلِمَ إِلاَّ
ثَلاَثَةٌ: التَّفَقُّهُ فِي الدِّينِ، وَالصَّبْرُ عَلَى النَّائِبَةِ،
وَحُسْنُ التَّقْدِيرِ فِي الْمَعِيشَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Dawud, three matters can lead a Muslim to uprightness: (1) mastery in
religious knowledge, (2) steadfastness against misfortune, and (3) good
management of livelihood.*[^16]

Yunus has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) instructed him saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَاشِرْ كِبَارَ أُمُورِكَ بِنَفْسِكَ، وَكِلْ مَا شَفَّ إِلَى
غَيْرِكَ... ضَرْبَ أَشْرِيَةِ الْعَقَارِ وَمَا أَشْبَهَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Manage your major affairs in person, and employ others to manage minor
dealings…major affairs include purchasing real estate and matters of a
similar nature.*[^17]

The fourth principle is commitment to a policy of economization, which
includes saving one’s annual provisions, according to the religious law
of Islam, so as to eliminate neediness and avoid requiring aid from
others.

Al-Hasan ibn al-Jahm has reported that he heard Imam al-Ridha (‘a)
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الإِنْسَانَ إِذَا أَدْخَلَ طَعَامَ سَنَتِهِ خَفَّ ظَهْرُهُ
وَاسْتَرَاحَ. وَكَانَ أَبُو جَعْفَرٍ وَأَبُو عَبْدِاللهِ، عَلَيْهِمَا
السَّلاَمُ، لاَ يَشْتَرِيَانِ عُقْدَةً حَتَّى يُحْرِزَا طَعَامَ
سَنَتِهِمَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If one saves the provisions of a year, one’s burdens will be light and
one will rest. Abu-Ja’far (al-Baqir) (‘a) and Abu-’Abdullah (al-Sadiq)
(‘a) did not purchase even a knot before they would have already saved
provisions for that whole year.*[^18]

Ibn Bukayr has reported on the authority of Imam al-Ridha (‘a) that the
Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ النَّفْسَ إِذَا أَحْرَزَتْ قُوتَهَا إسْتَقَرَّتْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, after a person saves his (annual) provisions, he will certainly
be stable.*[^19]

The fifth principle was autonomy in business such that the investments
and profit of one’s business would be one’s own concern rather than
dealing with partners.

Al-Mufadhdhal ibn ‘Umar has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ آجَرَ نَفْسَهُ فَقَدْ حَظَرَ عَلَى نَفْسِهِ الرِّزْقَ. وَكَيْفَ
لاَ يَحْظُرُهُ وَمَا أَصَابَ فِيهِ فَهُوَ لِرَبِّهِ الَّذِي آجَرَهُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever becomes an employee of another has in fact banned sustenance on
himself.*[^20] *This* *is because whatever he gains goes to his
employer.*[^21]

‘Ammar al-Sabati has reported that he once said to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a),
“Men who are employed in business give whatever they earn to their
employers.”

The Imam (‘a) commented:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُؤَاجِرُ نَفْسَهُ، وَلَكِنْ يَسْتَرْزِقُ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
وَيَتَّجِرُ، فَإِنْ آجَرَ نَفْسَهُ حَظَرَ عَلَى نَفْسِهِ الرِّزْقَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*They must not accept to be used as employees; rather, they should seek
Almighty Allah’s sustenance and work in business for themselves. If they
accept to be used as employees, then they will have banned sustenance on
themselves.*[^22]

The sixth principle was to distribute funds in a number of economic
occupations and not invest everything in one area.

According to a valid tradition, Mu’ammar ibn Khallad has reported that
he heard Imam al-Ridha (‘a) recounting the following:

A man came to Ja’far al-Sadiq (‘a) to try to give him advice. “O
Abu-’Abdullah,” said the man, “Why have you separated the funds in
scattered sectors. If they were all put in one occupation, it would be
easier to supervise and provide greater benefit.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِتَّخَذْتُهَا مُتَفَرِّقَةً، فَإِنْ أَصَابَ هَذَا الْمَالَ شَيْءٌ
سَلِمَ هَذَا الْمَالُ، وَالصُّرَّةُ تَجْمَعُ بِهَذَا كُلِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I have distributed them among various sectors so that if one sector
loses, the other funds will be saved. At any rate, the total is the
composite of all these funds.*[^23]

The seventh principle was avoidance of saving, storing, or transferring
all of one’s funds into currency, gold, or silver. One should conduct
business with one’s funds or transfer them into real estate, farms, or
commercial enterprises.

Zurarah has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يُخَلِّفُ الرَّجُلُ شَيْئاً أَشَدَّ عَلَيْهِِ مِنَ الْمَالِ
الصَّامِتِ... يَجْعَلُهُ فِي الْحَائِطِ، يَعْنِي فِي الْبُسْتَانِ أَوِ
الدَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No legacy is worse than money that lays stagnant…money must be
transferred into estates; i.e. farms or houses.*[^24]

Through these principles, we get an idea about the general economic
activities that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) determined for their followers.

Directing Economic Activity
---------------------------

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) did not stop at principles; rather, they directed
the economic activities of the virtuous community after examining the
social, political and economic circumstances under which the Muslim
community in general and the virtuous community in particular lived.

### Common Activities

A general view of professions that produced greater benefit pointed out
the following fields of economic activity:

(1) **Agriculture:** cultivating lands of the ruling regime (i.e.
annexed lands), cultivating derelict lands, entering into a farm-sharing
contract (*muzara’ah*), or irrigating lands by digging wells and canals.

(2) **Animal Husbandry:** shepherding, providing fodder and in-house
breeding.

(3) **Trade**: facilitating processes of exchanging money for goods,
distribution of goods internally and externally through transport of
goods to various regions and countries (i.e. import and export).

(4) **Manual labor**: weaving, saddle making, blacksmithing,
construction, etc.

(5) **Extracting natural resources**: mining, diving, hunting and
fishing.

(6) **Professions and crafts**: tailoring, goldsmithery, tanning,
preparation of medications, and similar professions and services.

(7) **Clerical jobs**: clerks, constabulary, jobs in the military
forces, tax collection, employment, governorship and the like.

(8) **Cultural, educational, and the arts**: teaching, writing, oration,
poetry, novel writing, drawing, sculpture, ornamentation, calligraphy,
etc.

(9) **Complete avoidance of religiously forbidden professions**:
sorcery, witchcraft, black arts, sale of wine and intoxicants, managing
brothels and so on.

Of course, economic activities vary with regard to the social conditions
and circumstances. However, except for forbidden earnings, these
activities are necessary for human societies because they help in their
perfection and, sometimes, some of these activities are even obligatory
according to the religious code of Islamic law; that is, they are
obligatory collectively upon the society and when some individuals carry
out those activities such that the needs of society are met, the others
will be released from responsibility in that regard.

In the past, the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) would engage in a
large variety of economic activities, other than those that were
forbidden—a fact that can be understood from the reports on the
religious laws appertaining to such activities. Other reports have also
asserted that the followers practiced various activities and would ask
the Holy Imams (‘a) about the details of laws pertaining to their jobs.

### Forbidden Activities

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) prohibited their followers from practicing certain
activities, previously mentioned as religiously forbidden professions.

According to an authentic tradition, Abu-Basir has reported that he
asked Imam al-Baqir (‘a) about the legality of occupying offices in the
ruling regimes of unjust rulers.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا مُحَمَّدٍ، لاَ وَلاَ مُدَّةُ قَلَمٍ. إِنَّ أَحَدَهُمْ لاَ
يُصِيبُ مِنْ دُنْيَاهُمْ شَيْئاً إِلاَّ أَصَابُوا مِنْ دِينِهِ
مِثْلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Abu-Muhammad, never help them in any matter even if it be as trivial
as handing them over a pen. No one can obtain any worldly benefits from
them without losing a part of their faith in the same amount as the
benefit.*[^25]

According to another authentic tradition, Ibn Abi-Ya’fur has reported
the following:

I was once in the presence of Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) when one of our
acquaintances (i.e. followers of our faith) visited him and said, “May
Allah lead you to more success! One of us who is exposed to penury or
indigence might be offered (by the despotic ruling authorities)
employment to construct a building, clear waste from a river, or fix a
beaver-dam. What is your opinion in this regard?”

The Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أُحِبُّ أَنِّي عَقَدْتُ لَهُمْ عُقْدَةً أَوْ وَكَيْتُ لَهُمْ
وِكَاءً وَإِنَّ لِي مَا بَيْنَ لاَبَيَتْهَا، لاَ وَلاَ مُدَّةُ قَلَمٍ.
إِنَّ أَعْوَانَ الظَّلَمَةِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِي سُرَادِقَ مِنْ
نَارٍ حَتَّى يَحْكُمَ اللهُ بَيْنَ الْعِبَادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I would never desire to do anything for them, even if it be as trivial
as untying a knot or sewing a bag, even if they give me whatever lies
between its (i.e. al-Madinah) two extremes (i.e. mountains on either
side). Definitely not! Even if it be handing over a pen. On the Day of
Resurrection, the assistants of the tyrants shall be put under a canopy
of fire and kept there until Almighty Allah finishes settling accounts
with all His worshippers.*[^26]

Likewise, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) forbade their followers from practicing
other banned activities that were common in that age, such as rearing
girls for singing, using them as slaves, or selling them; selling
forbidden things like corpses, blood, filthy things, and intoxicants;
working for the benefit of the singing profession, sorcery, witchcraft,
or black arts; cheating, counterfeiting, or working in prostitution in
addition to other banned activities mentioned in the books of practical
laws.

They also instructed their followers to avoid certain activities and
occupations which were considered by them to be objectionable or
requiring precaution. The reason for this was that such occupations
required high proficiency in religious law to be practiced
properly—either because ordinary people do not pay enough attention to
details of religious requirements or because of certain subtle spiritual
and moral aspects. Money-changing, goldsmithery, and butchery are
examples of these objectionable economic activities.

According to a valid tradition, Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar has reported that he
once visited Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) and informed him about the birth of his
son, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you!” said Ishaq, “Which craft
should I teach him?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا عَدَلْتَهُ عَنْ خَمْسَةِ أَشْيَاءَ فَضَعْهُ حَيْثُ شِئْتَ؛ لاَ
تُسَلِّمْهُ صَيْرَفِيّاً فَإِنَّ الصَّيْرَفِيَّ لاَ يَسْلَمُ مِنَ
الرِّبَا، وَلاَ تُسَلِّمْهُ بَيَّاعَ الأَكْفَانِ فَإِنَّ صَاحِبَ
الأَكْفَانِ يَسُرُّهُ الوّبَاءُ إِذَا كَانَ، وَلاَ تُسَلِّمْهُ
بَيَّاعَ الطَّعَامِ فَإِنَّهُ لاَ يَسْلَمُ مِنَ الإحْتِكَارِ، وَلاَ
تُسَلِّمْهُ جَزّاراً فِإِنَّ الْجَزَّارَ تُسْلَبُ مِنْهُ الرَّحْمَةُ،
وَلاَ تُسَلِّمْهُ نَخَّاساً فَإِنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، قَالَ: شَرُّ النَّاسِ مَنْ بَاعَ النَّاسَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If you turn him away from the following five crafts, you may then teach
him any craft you like: (1) You must not put him in the craft of
money-changing, because a moneychanger cannot avoid usury. (2) You must
not involve him in the craft of coffin-selling, because a coffin-seller
is pleased when a plague comes upon the people. (3) You must not involve
him in food-brokerage, because monopoly rarely leaves a food-broker. (4)
You must not teach him to be a butcher, because mercy and sympathy has
been divested from butchers’ hearts. (5) You must not put him in the
slave-trade, because Allah’s Messenger (S) has said, “The most evil of
all people are those who sell people.”*[^27]

According to another validly reported tradition, Talhah ibn Zayd
reported on the authority of Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (‘a) that the Holy
Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي أَعْطَيْتُ خَالَتِي غُلاَماً وَنَهَيْتُهَا أَنْ تَجْعَلَهُ
قَصَّاباً أَوْ حَجَّاماً أَوْ صَائِغاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I have given my (maternal) aunt a slave-boy and I warned her against
teaching him to be a butcher, a cupper, or a goldsmith.*[^28]

Abu-Isma’il al-Razi (i.e. of Ray, currently Tehran), the sword-polisher,
has reported that he visited Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) carrying two garments.
“Abu-Isma’il,” The Imam (‘a) said, “I have been gifted many garments by
you but none of them was as fine as these two.”

Abu-Isma’il said, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you! These were
spun by my wife and woven by me.”

The Imam (‘a) asked astonishingly, “Are you a weaver?”

“Yes, I am” Abu-Isma’il answered.

The Imam (‘a) warned, “Do not be a weaver!”

Abu-Isma’il asked, “If I do not, then what should I be?”

The Imam (‘a) instructed, “You may be a sword-polisher!”

Abu-Isma’il commented: I had two dirhams with which I bought swords and
antique mirrors. I then went to Ray and sold them at great profit.[^29]

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), of course, demonstrated that these crafts are not
objectionable in themselves, but rather are undesirable because they
were attached to some complicated matters. They clarified that the
warning against engagement in such crafts was because of confusing
ethical and legal matters attached to them. On other occasions, they
also confirmed that honesty must be present in every job.

According to a validly reported tradition, Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin
(‘a) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ، عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، يُحِبُّ الْمُحْتَرِفَ الأَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Almighty Allah loves trustworthy professionals.*[^30]

### Unambiguous Economic Activities

In addition to their directives in this field, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
chose for their followers a set of economic activities to be the main
object of their attention and the center of their activities. In this
respect, we will refer to three activities: commerce, agriculture (in
its common sense), and utilization of real estate.

Commerce
--------

Commerce is considered the chief and most important economic profession.
It identifies market value and balances prices within the frame of
supply and demand and in the field of production. Accordingly, commerce
contributes largely to provide the vital necessities of human societies.

Founded on this fact, commerce had a special significance in the Islamic
economic theory and was preferred over other economic activities.

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) used various methods of expression to urge
engagement in business and commerce.

Clarifying the vital role of commerce, they are reported to have said
that **nine tenths of sustenance or blessings lie in commerce.**[^31]

They also declared that **commerce increased the dignity of man.**

Shaykh al-Saduq has reported al-Mu’alla ibn Khunays as saying:

As he noticed that I was late for work, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) urged me
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُغْدُ إِلَى عِزِّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Go and join your dignity.*

According to another tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said to one of his
servants:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَبْدَ اللهِ، إِحْفَظْ عِزَّكَ... غُدُوَّكَ إِلَى سُوقِكَ
وَإِكْرَامَكَ نَفْسَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O servant of Allah, watch over your dignity…it is to go to markets and
honor yourself therein.*[^32]

Furthermore, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) declared that **doing business keeps
men’s intellects sound.**

According to another valid tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَرْكُ التِّجَارَةِ يُنْقِصُ العَقْلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Abandonment of business reduces faculty of reason.*[^33]

Mu’adh, a garment seller, has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) asked
him, “O Mu’adh, have you become too weak to do business or have you
forsaken it?”

Mu’adh answered, “Neither of these two!”

The Imam (‘a) thus asked for justification (about why he was not
working), and Mu’adh explained, “I have more than enough money for my
livelihood and I am not indebted to anyone. Hence, I do not think that I
will consume all my savings up to my death.”

The Imam (‘a) instructed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَتْرُكْهَا، فَإِنَّ تَرْكَهَا مُذْهِبَةٌ لِلْعَقْلِ. إِسْعَ عَلَى
عِيَالِكَ، وَإِيَّاكَ أَنْ يَكُونُوا هُمُ السُّعَاةَ عَلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not forsake business, because forsaking it decreases one’s reason.
Work for your dependents and never let them work for you.*[^34]

Burayd al-’Ujali is reported to have asked his son-in-law Muhammad ibn
Muslim to ask Imam al-Sadiq’s opinion about a matter that he had decided
to undertake, “Many deposits and funds have been given to me for
safekeeping and I am anxious because of them. I would like now to
forsake all worldly affairs and give these back to their owners.”

When Muhammad conveyed the matter to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), the Imam said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مُحَمَّدُ، أَيَبْدَأُ نَفْسَهُ بِالْحَرْبِ؟ لاَ، وَلَكِنْ يَأْخُذُ
وَيُعْطِي عَلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Muhammad, is he intending to wage war against himself? No, he must
not do thus; rather, he can receive (income) and give (to others) for
the sake of Almighty Allah.*[^35]

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) also declared that doing business saves the
virtuous community from begging.

Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim
on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) that Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin
(‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعَرَّضُوا لِلتِّجَارَةِ، فَإِنَّ فِيهَا غِنىً لَكُمْ عَمَّا فِي
أَيْدِي النَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Engage yourselves in business, because this will save you from being in
need of what others hold in possession.*

According to another tradition, the Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ طَلَبَ التِّجَارَةَ إسْتَغْنَى عَنِ النَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever engages in business will cope without the help of others.*[^36]

Because of the significance and merits of commerce, the Holy Prophet (S)
engaged in business both with the capital of Lady Khadijah (‘a) and
independently.

Referring to the noble characteristics of righteous people, the Holy
Qur'an indicates that the righteous are engaged in business:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِجَالٌ لَّا تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلَا بَيْعٌ عَن ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
وَإِقَامِ الصَّلَاةِ وَإِيتَاءِ الزَّكَاةِ ۙ يَخَافُونَ يَوْمًا
تَتَقَلَّبُ فِيهِ الْقُلُوبُ وَالْأَبْصَارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…men whom neither merchandise nor selling divert from the remembrance
of Allah and the keeping up of prayer and the giving of poor-rate; they
fear a day in which the hearts and eyes shall turn about. (24:37)***

Shaykh al-Kulayni, through a valid chain of authority, has reported that
Asbat ibn Salim said that he once visited Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) who asked
him about the manners of ‘Umar ibn Muslim. When he was informed that
‘Umar had given up business, the Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَمَلُ الشَّيْطَانِ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

*This is the act of Satan!*

Having repeated the same statement three times, the Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا عَلِمَ أَنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ،
إشْتَرَى عِيراً أَتَتْ مِنَ الشَّامِ فَاسْتَفْضَلَ فِيهَا مَا قَضَى
دَيْنَهُ، وَقَسَّمَ فِي قُرَابَتِهِ؟ يَقُولُ اللهُ، عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: {ﭑ
ﭒ ﭓ ﭔ ﭕ ﭖ ﭗ ﭘ ﭙ…} يَقُولُ الْقُصَّاصُ إِنَّ الْقَوْمَ لَمْ يَكُونُوا
يَتَّجِرُونَ. كَذِبُوا! وَلَكِنَّهُمْ لَمْ يَكُونُوا يَدَعُونَ
الصَّلاَةَ فِي مِيقَاتِهَا، وَهُمْ أَفْضَلُ مَِمَّنْ حَضَرَ الصَّلاَةَ
وَلَمْ يَتَّجِرْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He should know that the Messenger of Allah (S) purchased some camels
that had been brought from Sham, settled his debts from the profits and
distributed the remainder among his relatives. Almighty Allah says, “Men
whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the remembrance of
Allah….” Some storytellers claim that the men praised in this verse did*
*not work! Such storytellers are liars. These (praised) men were engaged
in business, but they would also never miss performing all the prayers
in their (prescribed) times. They were superior to those who performed
prayers but forsook business.*[^37]

As has been previously cited, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) used to do business
with his money through sleeping partnerships although he was not himself
in need of money.

However, at the same time that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) urged their
followers to engage in commercial activities, they warned them against
involvement in ethical and religious problems that might accompany such
activities.

Al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah has reported that he heard Imam ‘Ali Amir
al-Mu'minin (‘a) saying from the *minbar* (pulpit):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مَعْشَرَ التُّجَّارِ، الْفِقْهَ ثُمَّ الْمُتَّجَرَ، الْفِقْهَ
ثُمَّ الْمُتَّجَرَ، الْفِقْهَ ثُمَّ الْمُتَّجَرَ. وَاللهِ، لَلرِّبَا
فِي هَذِهِ الأُمَّةِ أَخْفَى مِنْ دَبِيبِ النَّمْلِ عَلَى الصَّفَا.
شُوبُوا إِيـمَانَكُمْ بِالصِّدْقِ. التَّاجِرُ فَاجِرٌ، وَالْفَاجِرُ
فِي النَّارِ، إِلاَّ مَنْ أَخَذَ الْحَقَّ وَأَعْطَى الْحَقَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O group of traders, give priority to learning religious laws over
engagement in business. Give priority to learning religious laws over
engagement in business. Give priority to learning religious laws over
engagement in business. By Allah (I swear), usury in this nation is more
observed than ants’ creeping on the Hillock of Safa. So, fuse your faith
with honesty. Except those who give duly and take duly, a dealer is
wicked and the wicked will be in Hellfire.*[^38]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ بَاعَ وَإشْتَرَى فَلْيَحْفَظْ خَمْسَ خِصَالٍ وَإِلاَّ فَلاَ
يَشْتَرِيَنَّ وَلاَ يَبِيعَنَّ: الرِّبَا، وَالْحِلْفَ، وَكِتْمَانَ
الْعَيْبِ، وَالْحَمْدَ إِذَا بَاعَ، وَالذَّمَّ إذَا إشْتَرَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who is engaged in buying or selling must avoid the following five
things and, if not, must neither buy nor sell: (1) usury, (2) taking
oaths, (3) concealment of an item’s defects, (4) speaking highly of a
commodity to be sold, and (5) finding fault with the commodity to be
purchased.*[^39]

### Objectives of Encouraging Commerce

In particular, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) encouraged their followers to engage
in commerce because they intended to achieve definite objectives for the
virtuous community. These objectives can be summed up in the following
points:

(1) Economic activity begets positive moral and spiritual results as
mentioned in traditions already referred to. In plain words, economic
activity is regarded as one of the most important social activities and
people that engage in commerce gain the respect and esteem of others.
All high-ranking personalities have engaged in economic commerce.

(2) Such business activities produce flexibility, freedom, and
continuous motion. The nature of doing business requires activity,
travel, and building expansive relations with various social milieus and
provides flexibility in choosing how to spend one’s time, how to invest
one’s capital, and what categories of people to deal with.

(3) Such activities earn sizeable profits for those who participate in
them. According to some traditions one attains up to nine tenths of his
sustenance through commerce. Such wealth increases the financial
capacity of the virtuous community and ensures a definite and
considerable financial resource to its administration through the
*khums* that are levied from such assets.

Agriculture
-----------

In its all-inclusive sense (which includes animal-husbandry) agriculture
and agricultural investment are counted among the most important
economic means for nations and communities both because they are chief
sources of food and major sources of raw materials that are used in many
essential, transformative and manual industries.

Therefore, the Islamic economic theory has conferred upon agriculture
the second level of importance after commerce and even the highest level
under certain economic circumstances (such as a besiegement) or for
certain social classes (such as working class). Moreover, no nation or
community can ever achieve ideal independence unless there is
sufficiency in agricultural production.

Increasing its importance, the funds obtained from agricultural
activities are usually pure, legal, and free from legal obscurity. As a
result, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are reported to have classified agriculture
as the most lawful and pleasant of all professions.

In his book, *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through a valid
chain on the authority of Sayyabah that a man seeking certainty said to
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “May Allah accept me as ransom for you! I heard some
people saying that agriculture is disapproved of.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِزْرَعُوا وَاغْرِسُوا، فَلاَ وَاللهِ مَا عَمِلَ النَّاسُ عَمَلاً
أَحَلَّ وَلاَ أَطْيَبَ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You may sow and plant. By Allah (I swear), people have never been
engaged in any job that is more lawful and more pleasant than
agriculture.*[^40]

According to another tradition, the Imam (‘a) is reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَيْرُ الأَعْمَالِ الْحَرْثُ، يَزْرَعُهُ فَيَأْكُلُ مِنْهُ الْبَرُّ
وَالْفَاجِرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The best of jobs is the sowing of a cultivated land from which both the
good and the bad eat.*[^41]

According to a third tradition, the Imam (‘a) is reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّارِعُونَ كُنُوزُ الأَنَامِ، يَزْرَعُونَ طِيباً أَخْرَجَهُ اللهُ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، وَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَحْسَنُ النَّاسِ مَقَاماً
وَأَقْرَبُهُمْ مَنْزِلَةً. يُدْعَوْنَ الْمُبَارَكِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Farmers are the treasures of all creatures. They plant pleasant things
that Almighty Allah causes to grow. On the Day of Resurrection, they
shall be the best of people in rank and the nearest in standing. They
shall be called the blessed ones.*[^42]

According to an acceptably reported tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is
also reported as relating the following:

When he was asked about the best of income, the Holy Prophet (S)
answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَرْعٌ زَرَعَهُ صَاحِبُهُ وَأَصْلَحَهُ وَأَدَّى حَقَّهُ يَوْمَ
حَصَادِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is (the income from) a crop that is tended and refined by the
planter who then gives its due on its harvest day.*

When he was asked about the next category in superiority, the Holy
Prophet (S) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَجُلٌ فِي غَنَمٍ لَهُ قَدْ تَبِعَ بِهَا مَوَاضِعَ الْقَطْرِ، يُقِيمُ
الصَّلاَةَ وَيُؤْتِي الزَّكَاةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is the money of a man who tends his sheep leading them to rainwater
and, at the same time, maintains prayers and defrays the zakat
tax.*[^43]

Due to the significance of agriculture and the fortune and reformation
found therein, the Prophets and Imams used to work in agriculture in
various stages of their lives.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ جَعَلَ رِزْقَ أَنْبِيَاءِهِ فِي الزَّرْعِ وَالضَّرْعِ
لِئَلاَّ يَكْرَهُوا شَيْئاً مِنْ قَطْرِ السَّمَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Almighty Allah has made the sustenance of His prophets in
agriculture and shepherding so that they would not resent any drops from
the sky (i.e. rain).*[^44]

According to another tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا بَعَثَ اللهُ نَبِيّاً إلاَّ زَرَّاعاً، إِلاَّ إدْرِيسَ فَإِنَّهُ
كَاَن خَيَّاطاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All the prophets that Almighty Allah has sent were farmers except
(Prophet) Idris (‘a) who was a tailor.*[^45]

The Holy Prophet (S) and Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) worked in
agriculture. In this respect, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ أَمِيرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ، صَلَوَاتُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ، يَضْرِبُ
بِالْمُرِّ وَيَسْتَخْرِجُ الأَرَضِينَ، وَكَانَ رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، يَمُصُّ النَّوَى بِفِيهِ وَيَغْرِسُهُ
فَيَطْلُعُ مِنْ سَاعَتِهِ، وَإِنَّ أَمِيرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَعْتَقَ
أَلْفَ مَمْلُوكٍ مِنْ مَالِهِ وَكَدِّ يَدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Commander of the Faithful, peace of Allah be upon him, used a
shovel and cultivated the soil. The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him and his Household, used to take out the* *seeds (of date-palm trees)
and then plant them, and they would grow from that moment. The Commander
of the Faithful manumitted one thousand (bonded slaves) out of the money
he had obtained from work with his own hands.*[^46]

In his book, *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni through a valid chain of
authority has also reported the following account on the authority of
Imam al-Baqir (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقِيَ رَجُلٌ أَمِيرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ، عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ، وَتَحْتَهُ
وَسْقٌ مِنْ نَوًى، فَقَالَ لَهُ: مَا هَذَا، يَا أَبَا الْحَسَنِ،
تَحْتَكَ؟ فَقَالَ: مِائَةُ أَلْفِ عِذْقٍ، إِنْ شَاءَ اللهُ. فَغَرَسَهُ
فَلَمْ يُغَادِرْ مِنْهُ نَوَاةً وَاحِدَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*One day, a man met the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) and found a small
quantity of seeds (of the date-palm tree) beside him. “Abu’l-Hasan,” the
man asked, “What is this beneath you?” The Commander of the Faithful
(‘a) answered, “These shall be a thousand bunches, Allah willing.”
Hence, the Imam (‘a) planted all these seeds without leaving even a
single one.*[^47]

According to many traditions, Imam al-Baqir, Imam al-Sadiq, and Imam
al-Kazim (‘a) worked in agriculture.[^48] that The other Holy Imams (‘a)
also worked in this field when they had a chance. Traditions have
asserted that agriculture was the general means of livelihood practiced
by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

It goes without saying that all economic activities are contingent upon
God-wariness and defraying religious dues, including *zakat* and others,
because success and prosperity are conditional upon observation of such
religious duties.

In this regard, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زَرَعَ حِنْطَةً فِي أَرْضٍ فَلَمْ يَزْكُ زَرْعُهُ، أَوْ خَرَجَ
زَرْعُهُ كَثِيرَ الشَّعِيرِ، فَبِظُلْمٍ عَمِلَهُ فِي مُلْكِ رَقَبَةِ
الأَرْضِ، أَوْ بِظُلْمٍ لِمُزَارِعِهِ، أَوْ أَكْرَتِهِ، لأَِنَّ اللهَ
يَقُولُ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِظُلْمٍ مِّنَ الَّذِينَ هَادُوا حَرَّمْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ طَيِّبَاتٍ
أُحِلَّتْ لَهُمْ وَبِصَدِّهِمْ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ كَثِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If someone plants wheat but the crop fails to produce or much barley
grows in its place, this means that the planter must have committed a
wrongdoing in ownership of that land or in employment of workers; that
is, he must have wronged an employee in work or in wage. Almighty Allah
says,* ***“Wherefore, for the iniquity of those who are Jews, did We
disallow to them the good things which had been made lawful for them.
(4:160)”***[^49]

### Social Objectives of Agriculture

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) intended to achieve definite social objectives for
the virtuous community in particular and wanted to create an accord
between this economic activity and the political and social conditions
of the community. Some of these objectives can be summed up in the
following points:

(1) Agricultural activities have been presented as the best of deeds, as
shown by the previously mentioned traditions, because they highlight
man’s spiritual connection with Almighty Allah and because they are the
most pleasant, most lawful and purest means of earning money.

(2) Engagement in agricultural activities procures self-sufficiency for
the individuals of the virtuous community. It also teaches them reliance
on Almighty Allah alone in addition to self-dependency in managing their
affairs. Under harsh social conditions a self-sufficient farmer can
dispense with the help of others completely and has the freedom to
manage his life, worship Allah and carry out his duties on his own
initiative.

(3) Engagement in agricultural activities provides the members of the
virtuous community with a safe refuge and averts direct contact with the
despotic authorities and their officials. As a result, a good, yet
proportional level of security is achieved for the individuals of the
virtuous community who, under such circumstances, can practice their
activities and private rituals freely, because the ruling authorities
usually lack influence or power in the rural and agricultural regions.
Therefore, such regions were important shelters for the descendants and
followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) who were pursued by the ruling
authorities. These regions were also good grounds for promulgating the
true guidance that is represented by the faith of Shi’ism.

(4) Agriculture, in its capacity as a vital economic activity, provides
good income. It is regarded as one of the best means of production and
the best method of investment. It also increases the financial capacity
of the virtuous community and ensures a considerable financial resource
to the governing system of the community through *khums* and *zakat*, as
well as other dues which are levied from its assets.

Real Estate
-----------

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) held real estate as one means of earning important
funds. They also persuaded their followers to buy and keep real estate,
preferring real property to ‘silent’ properties (i.e. currency).

Real estate contributes to construction and improvement of derelict
lands. It thus can be a means of production when used as a farm or an
orchard, a means of service and aid when used as a dwelling place, or a
place of offering commercial services when used as a hotel, hospital, or
commercial shop. Real estate, therefore, plays a vital role in human
life in general.

A view at the narrations reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) shows that
they laid stress on a number of aspects concerning real estate:

(1) Real estate helps achieve a livelihood and guarantees commercial
work and reciprocal movement. Therefore, it is better than ‘silent’
property.

Through a valid chain of authority, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported on
the authority of Murazim that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) advised Musadif, his
servant, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِتَّخِذْ عُقْدَةً أَوْ ضَيْعَةً، فَإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ إِذَا نَزَلَتْ
بِهِ النَّازِلَةُ أَوِ الْمُصِيبَةُ فَذَكَرَ أَنَّ وَرَاءَ ظَهْرِهِ
مَا يُقِيمُ بِهِ عِيَالَهُ كَانَ أَسْخَى لِنَفْسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Betake yourself a building or a farm. When one is exposed to a
misfortune or a conflict, one becomes readier to make self-sacrifice if
one realizes that there is something left for the dependents to live
on.*[^50]

Through a valid chain of authority, Shaykh al-Saduq has reported that
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) used to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يُخَلِّفُ الرَّجُلُ بَعْدَهُ شَيْئاً أَشَدَّ عَلَيْهِ مِنَ
الْمَالِ الصَّامِتِ... يَجْعَلُهُ فِي الْحَائِطِ؛ البُسْتَانَ أَوِ
الدَّارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No legacy is worse than silent property…it must be transferred into
estates; i.e. in gardens or houses.*[^51]

(2) There is a moral and spiritual aspect in acquiring real estates
which is associated with selflessness and altruism. To put in plainer
words, the possession of a piece of real estate can bring comfort that
there is security for one’s family members; as a result, this can be
encouragement to sacrifice oneself for the sake of one’s faith if the
need arises, given that individuals of the virtuous community have
always been objects of pursuit and persecution by the tyrannical ruling
authorities. This aspect has been confirmed by the previously mentioned
report of Murazim.

(3) The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) cautioned their followers against selling their
real estate unless they wanted to substitute it with a better piece of
real estate. They therefore encouraged their followers to hold real
estate because it is blessed and brings about sustenance and good
fortune unlike ‘silent’ money, which is unblessed and diminishes in
value.

Referring to this fact, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَمَنُ الْعَقَارِ مَمْحُوقٌ إِلاَّ أَنْ يُجْعَلَ فِي عَقَارٍ مِثْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The financial return on an estate is unblessed unless it is used to
purchase another estate.*

Musmi’ has reported that, seeking the advice of Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), he
said, “I have a land that many are asking me to sell and offering good
prices.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا سَيَّارٍ، أَمَا عَلِمْتَ أَنَّ مَنْ بَاعَ الْمَاءَ
وَالطِّينَ وَلَمْ يَجْعَلْ ثَمَنَهُ فِي الْمَاءِ وَالطِّينِ ذَهَبَ
مَالُهُ هَبَاءً؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Abu-Sayyar, know that whoever sells water and mud (i.e. land or estate)
but does not put its* *financial return in some other water and mud has
verily lost his money in vain.*

Musmi’ said, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you! I will sell it at a
good price and purchase a larger plot of land.”

The Imam (‘a) answered, “If so, there is no objection to selling it.”

According to another narration, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are reported to
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُشْتَرِي الْعُقْدَةِ مَرْزُوقٌ، وَبَائِعُهَا مَمْحُوقٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A purchaser of real estate will be granted sustenance, but the seller
of it will be deprived of blessing.*[^52]

(4) It is more highly recommended to purchase various estates in
different places rather than in one place, as has been confirmed in the
aforementioned report of Mu’ammar ibn Khallad from Imam al-Ridha (‘a).

As a distinctive feature, real estate assets are so blessed that they
are free from suspicion and legal and moral confusion, which can
accompany merchandise, transactions, or even manual professions.

[^1]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:77, H. 1.

[^2]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:77, H. 2.

[^3]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:78, H. 3.

[^4]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:88, H. 1. This section and the
following ones bear positive traditions that demonstrate this concept.

[^5]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:88, H. 2.

[^6]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:87, H. 1.

[^7]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi: 5:73-74, H 1. Muhammad ibn
al-Munkadir was one of the superior master and most trustworthy scholars
of Sunnis. He died in AH 130 or 131. This section of the previous
reference book comprises many narrations about the Ahl al-Bayt’s acting
as examples to be followed.

[^8]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:76, H. 12.

[^9]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:79, H. 1.

[^10]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:79, H. 2.

[^11]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:85, H. 1.

[^12]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:85, H. 2.

[^13]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:80, H. 1.

[^14]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:80, H. 2.

[^15]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:87, H. 3.

[^16]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:87, H. 4.

[^17]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:90-91, H. 1.

[^18]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:89, H. 1.

[^19]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:89, H. 2.

[^20]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:90, H. 3.

[^21]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:90, H. 1.

[^22]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:90, H. 3.

[^23]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:91, H. 1.

[^24]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:91, H. 2.

[^25]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:129, H. 5; Shaykh
al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, 5:107, H. 5.

[^26]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:106-107, H. 5.

[^27]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:114, H. 4.

[^28]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:114, H. 5.

[^29]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:114, H. 6.

[^30]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:113, H. 1.

[^31]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:3-5, H. 3, 4, 5, 8, 12.

[^32]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:3-5, H. 2, 10, 12.

[^33]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:6, H. 1.

[^34]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:6, H. 4.

[^35]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:7, H. 9.

[^36]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:4, H. 11, 8.

[^37]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:6, H. 5.

[^38]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:150, H. 1.

[^39]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:150-151, H. 2.

[^40]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 13:193, H. 1.

[^41]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 13:194, H. 6.

[^42]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:261, H. 7.

[^43]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:260-261, H. 6.

[^44]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:260, H. 2.

[^45]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:25, H. 3. The same is
recorded in ‘Awali al-La'ali and other reference books of tradition, yet
with a very little difference.

[^46]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:74, H. 2.

[^47]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:74-75, H. 6.

[^48]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:73-77, H. 1, 3, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13,
14, 15.

[^49]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:306, H. 9; Tafsir al-’Ayyashi
1:284-285, H. 304; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 103:66, H. 15.

[^50]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:92, H. 5; al-Hurr al-’Amili,
Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:44, H. 3 as quoted from the previous reference
book.

[^51]: - Sayyid al-Borojerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 17:136, H. 8 as
quoted from Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:91, H. 2, 7 & Shaykh al-Saduq,
man-la-yahdhuruhul-faqih 3:170, H. 3642.

[^52]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:92, H. 6, 8, 4.


