Epilogue
========

The principles that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) formulated for this system can
be summarized in the following points:

(1) **The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) laid special emphasis on work,** making use
of all possible opportunities and prospects that are permitted by the
general economic system of the Muslim community, such as **cultivating
unused lands**; pursuing economic activities like **trade and
agriculture**; **owning real estate**; **adopting** **professions and
careers** as well as other economic activities; and **avoiding banned
activities**, such as **working with and assisting tyrannical rulers
against the virtuous community** (with particular exceptions).

(2) **The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)** instructed their followers to **maintain
equilibrium**—between **financial and religious duties** imposed on them
and between **social and individual** **duties. For instance, they
specified that paying** ***zakat*** **to the ruling authority releases
the people from liability in this matter. Likewise, they exempted**
***khums*** **(one-fifth) from spoils of war, extracted minerals and
profits on diving, but levied it on the profit of earnings, to be paid
as an equivalent of** ***zakat*** **of commercial profits as is
specified by non-Shi’ite Muslims.**

(3) They regulated economic and financial activities in both earning and
spending. In addition to emphasizing general alms, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
instructed that religious dues must be spent on the individuals of the
virtuous community exclusively.

(4) **They utilized the common economic legislations of Islam, such as**
***khums,*** **in domains that served the individuals of the virtuous
community, in particular, to maintain self-balance and
self-sufficiency.**

(5) They deemed specific financial measures to be obligatory to bring
about social solidarity through fulfilling the rights of one’s
brethren-in-faith by, for example, aiding them financially to meet their
needs.

(6) **They put forward certain economic policies and guided the
individuals of the virtuous community to work, economize, do business
with their money, and use their property in the most appropriate ways.
They also took much interest in the moral and spiritual aspects
regarding earning profits and avoidance of dependence on others through
working and doing business.**


