To the Reader
=============

A special chapter is assigned to the collapse of the theory of
evolution because this theory constitutes the basis of all
anti-spiritual philosophies. Since Darwinism rejects the fact of
creation-and therefore, Allah's Existence-over the last 140 years it has
caused many people to abandon their faith or fall into doubt.

It is therefore an imperative service, a very important duty to show
everyone that this theory is a deception. Since some readers may find
the chance to read only one of our book, we think it appropriate to
devote a chapter to summarize this subject.

All the author's books explain faith-related issues in light of
Qur'anic verses, and invite readers to learn Allah's words and to live
by them. All the subjects concerning Allah's verses are explained so as
to leave no doubt or room for questions in the reader's mind. The books'
sincere, plain, and fluent style ensure that everyone of every age and
from every social group can easily understand them.

Thanks to their effective, lucid narrative, they can be read at one
sitting. Even those who rigorously reject spirituality are influenced by
the facts these books document and cannot refute the truthfulness of
their contents.

This and all the other books by the author can be read individually, or
discussed in a group. Readers eager to profit from the books will find
discussion very useful, letting them relate their reflections and
experiences to one another.

In addition, it will be a great service to Islam to contribute to the
publication and reading of these books, written solely for the pleasure
of Allah. The author's books are all extremely convincing. For this
reason, to communicate true religion to others, one of the most
effective methods is encouraging them to read these books.

We hope the reader will look through the reviews of his other books at
the back of this book. His rich source material on faith-related issues
is very useful, and a pleasure to read.

In these books, unlike some other books, you will not find the author's
personal views, explanations based on dubious sources, styles that are
unobservant of the respect and reverence due to sacred subjects, nor
hopeless, pessimistic arguments that create doubts in the mind and
deviations in the heart.


**ABOUT THE AUTHOR**

Now writing under the pen-name of HARUN YAHYA, he was born in Ankara in
1956. Having completed his primary and secondary education in Ankara, he
studied arts at Istanbul's Mimar Sinan University and philosophy at
Istanbul University. Since the 1980s, he has published many books on
political, scientific, and faith-related issues. Harun Yahya is
well-known as the author of important works disclosing the imposture of
evolutionists, their invalid claims, and the dark liaisons between
Darwinism and such bloody ideologies as fascism and communism.

His pen-name is a composite of the names Harun (Aaron) and Yahya
(John), in memory of the two esteemed Prophets who fought against their
people's lack of faith. The Prophet's seal on his books' covers is
symbolic and is linked to the their contents. It represents the Qur'an
(the final scripture) and the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him), last
of the prophets.

Under the guidance of the Qur'an and the Sunnah (teachings of the
Prophet), the author makes it his purpose to disprove each fundamental
tenet of godless ideologies and to have the "last word," so as to
completely silence the objections raised against religion. He uses the
seal of the final Prophet, who attained ultimate wisdom and moral
perfection, as a sign of his intention to offer the last word.

All of Harun Yahya's works share one single goal: to convey the Qur'
an's message, encourage readers to consider basic faith-related issues
such as Allah's Existence and Unity and the hereafter; and to expose
godless systems' feeble foundations and perverted ideologies.

Harun Yahya enjoys a wide readership in many countries, from India to
America, England to Indonesia, Poland to Bosnia, and Spain to Brazil.
Some of his books are available in English, French, German, Spanish,
Italian, Portuguese, Urdu, Arabic, Albanian, Russian, Serbo-Croat
(Bosnian), Polish, Malay, Uygur Turkish, and Indonesian.

Greatly appreciated all around the world, these works have been
instrumental in many people recovering faith in Allah and gaining deeper
insights into their faith. His books' wisdom and sincerity, together
with a distinct style that's easy to understand, directly affect anyone
who reads them.

Those who seriously consider these books, can no longer advocate
atheism or any other perverted ideology or materialistic philosophy,
since these books are characterized by rapid effectiveness, definite
results, and irrefutability. Even if they continue to do so, it will be
only a sentimental insistence, since these books refute such ideologies
from their very foundations. All contemporary movements of denial are
now ideologically defeated, thanks to the books written by Harun
Yahya.

This is no doubt a result of the Qur'an's wisdom and lucidity. The
author modestly intends to serve as a means in humanity's search for
Allah's right path. No material gain is sought in the publication of
these works.

Those who encourage others to read these books, to open their minds and
hearts and guide them to become more devoted servants of Allah, render
an invaluable service.

Meanwhile, it would only be a waste of time and energy to propagate
other books that create confusion in people's minds, lead them into
ideological chaos, and that clearly have no strong and precise effects
in removing the doubts in people's hearts, as also verified from
previous experience. It is impossible for books devised to emphasize the
author's literary power rather than the noble goal of saving people from
loss of faith, to have such a great effect. Those who doubt this can
readily see that the sole aim of Harun Yahya's books is to overcome
disbelief and to disseminate the Qur'an's moral values. The success and
impact of this service are manifested in the readers' conviction.

One point should be kept in mind: The main reason for the continuing
cruelty, conflict, and other ordeals endured by the vast majority of
people is the ideological prevalence of disbelief. This can be ended
only with the ideological defeat of disbelief and by conveying the
wonders of creation and Qur'anic morality so that people can live by it.
Considering the state of the world today, leading into a downward spiral
of violence, corruption and conflict, clearly this service must be
provided speedily and effectively, or it may be too late.

In this effort, the books of Harun Yahya assume a leading role. By the
will of Allah, these books will be a means through which people in the
twenty-first century will attain the peace, justice, and happiness
promised in the Qur'an.


**Introduction**

The End Times (or the Last Days) may not be a familiar concept to many
people. Therefore, we first give a brief explanation of it. The End
Times means 'the last era.' According to Islamic literature, it is a
period of time that is close to Doomsday.

The signs in the Qur'an and the extensive references to the End Times
provided by the Hadith literature brings us to a very important
conclusion. Verses and hadiths indicate that there are two phases of the
End Times. The first phase is a period when all people will suffer
material and spiritual problems. Following this, Earth will enter upon a
period of salvation called the 'Golden Age,' which is characterized by
bounty and blessings due to the prevalence of true religion. With the
end of the Golden Age, there will be a rapid social collapse and people
will begin to wait for Doomsday.

In this book, we examine the End Times in the light of verses and
hadiths. It is clear that the signs in question have now started to
appear one after another, just as described in these references. The
advent of these signs heralded fourteen centuries ago are great
occurrences that increase believers' faith in and loyalty to Allah. It
is surely not a coincidence that, in such a short period of time, all of
these signs appeared one after another. These signs are good news to
Allah's servants.

The account of events related in the following pages is prepared
according to the guidance of the verse, 'Say: 'Praise be to Allah. He
will show you His Signs, and you will recognize them. Your Lord is not
unaware of what you do'' (Surat an-Naml: 93).

Say: 'Praise be to Allah. He will show you His Signs, and you will
recognize them. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do'' (Surat
an-Naml: 93). Another issue we need to stress here is that Allah knows
the best of everything. As is in every other subject, we have no
knowledge other than that about which He informs us.


