Signs of the Last Day in the Qur'an
===================================

What are they awaiting but for the Hour to come upon them suddenly? Its
Signs have already come. What good will their Reminder be to them when
it does arrive? (Surah Muhammad: 18) From this verse we learn that the
Qur'an describes signs that announce the coming of the Last Day. In
order to understand the signs of this 'great announcement' we must
reflect upon these verses. Otherwise, as the verse indicates, our
thinking will be of no use when the Last Day is suddenly upon us.

**The Hour is near**

Allah reveals in the Qur'an that there can be no doubt that the Last
Day is near.

And the Hour is coming without any doubt ... (Surat al-Hajj: 7)

We did not create the heavens and earth and everything between them,
except with truth. The Hour is certainly coming. (Surat al-Hijr: 85)
There may be some who think that the message of the Qur'an concerning
the Last Day was revealed more that 1400 years ago and that this is a
long time compared to the length of a human life. But here, it is a
question of the end of the world, the sun and the stars, in short, of
the universe. When we consider that the universe is billions of years
old, fourteen centuries is a very short period of time.

**The supremacy of the morality of Islam in the world**

Allah announces that those who serve Him purely, without associating
any of His creatures as divinities besides Him, and do good works to win
His favor, will be endowed with power and authority.

Allah has promised those of you who believe and do right actions that
He will make them successors in the land as He made those before them
successors, and will firmly establish for them their religion with which
He is pleased and give them, in place of their fear, security. 'They
worship Me, not associating anything with Me.' Any who are disbelievers
after that, such people are deviators. (Surat an-Nur: 55)

In a number of verses, it also says that it is a divine law that those
servants who are faithful and live the true religion in their hearts
will be made the inheritors of the world:

We wrote down in the Psalms, after the Reminder came: 'It is My
righteous servants who will inherit the earth.' (Surat al-Anbiya': 105)
We will leave you the land to live in after them. That is the reward of
those who fear My station and fear My threat. (Surah Ibrahim: 14)

There is no doubt that Allah will keep His promises. The high morality
that will conquer perverse philosophies, distorted ideologies and false
religious understanding is Islamic morality. The disbelievers and pagans
cannot prevent this from happening.


**The splitting of the moon**

The 54th Surah of the Qur'an is called 'Surat al-Qamar.' In English
qamar means moon. In several instances, this Surah tells about the
destruction that befell the people of Nuh, Ad, Thamud, Lut and Pharaoh,
because they rejected the warnings of the prophets. At the same time,
there is a very important message stated in the first verse, concerning
the Last Day. The Hour has drawn near and the moon has split. (Surat
al-Qamar: 1)

The word 'split' used in this verse is the Arabic shaqqa, which in
Arabic it has various meanings. In some commentaries on the Qur'an, the
meaning 'split' is preferred. But shaqqa in Arabic can also mean
'ploughing' or 'digging' the earth. As an example of the first usage, we
can refer to the 26th verse of Surat al-Abasa:

We pour down plentiful water, then split the earth into furrows. Then
We make grain grow in it, and grapes and herbs and olives and dates.
(Surah 'Abasa: 25-29)

It can be clearly seen that the meaning of shaqqa here is not to
'split.' It means to plough the earth in order to grow various plants.
If we went back to the year 1969, we would see one of the great wonders
of the Qur'an. The experiments carried out on the surface of the moon on
July 20, 1969, may be hinting at the fulfillment of news given 1,400
years ago in Surat al-Qamar. On that date, American astronauts set foot
on the moon. Digging at the lunar soil they carried out scientific
experiments and collected samples of stones and soil. It is surely very
interesting that these developments are in complete agreement with the
statements in the verse.

We must make this clear, however: The phenomenon of the splitting of
the moon is, of course, one of the miracles vouchsafed by Allah to our
Prophet (saas). This miracle is revealed as follows in one hadith:

The people of Mecca asked Allah's Apostle to show them a miracle. So he
showed them the moon split in two halves between which they saw the
Hiram' mountain. (Bukhari)

The miracle described above is the phenomenon of splitting of the moon
revealed in the verse. However, since the Qur'an is a book which
addresses all times it is also possible that it is referring to the
landing on the moon in our own age. (Allah surely knows best)

**The signs described by the Prophet (saas) are occurring one after the
other**

In the hadiths that have come down to us from the Prophet (saas), news
is given concerning the End Times and the Golden Age of Islam. When we
compare these signs with the events that are taking place in our time,
we can see many indications that we are living through the End Times and
which also herald the arrival of the Golden Age of Islam.

The hadiths used in the coming sections of this book contain such
information given by the Prophet (saas) in this regard.

At this point, there may arise some doubt in the reader in regards to
the truth and authenticity of these hadiths about the end. There is a
method to distinguish those that are true from those that are false. As
we know, hadiths about the Doomsday relate to events that are to take
place in the future. For this reason, when a hadith comes true in the
course of time, all doubt as to the source of the words is removed.

Several Islamic scholars who conducted research on the subject of the
End Times and of the signs of the Last Day have used this criterion. An
expert on the subject, Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, said that the fact that
the hadiths concerning the End Times correspond to events observed in
our day shows the truth of the hadiths.1

Some of the signs related in the hadiths were observable in some part
of the world in any period during the 1400 year history of Islam, but
that would not have proven that that period was the the End Times. For a
certain period to be called the End Times, all the signs of the Last Day
must be observed to be occurrence in that same period. This is expressed
in a hadith:

Signs following one another like the pieces of a necklace falling one
after the other when its string is cut. (Tirmidhi)

In the hadiths, the beginning of the End Times is described as when
discord grows, and war and conflict are on the increase, when there is
chaos and moral degeneration rears its head and people turn away from
the morality of religion. At the time in question, natural disasters
will occur all over the world, poverty will reach unseen levels, there
will be a large increase in the crime rate, and murder and brutality
everywhere. Yet this will be only the first stage. During the second
phase, Allah will rescue mankind from this chaos and replace it with a
blessed existence full of plenty, peace and security.

**Wars and anarchy**

Allah's Messenger (saas) said: 'The Harj (will increase).' They asked,
'What is the Harj?' He replied, '(It is) killing (murdering), (it is)
murdering (killing).' (Bukhari)

The Hour will come when violence, bloodshed, and anarchy become common.
(Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Muntakhab Kanzul Ummaal) The world will not come
to an end until a day would come to the people on which there will be
general massacre and bloodshed. (Muslim)

If we look at the last fourteen centuries, we see that wars were
regional before the twentieth century. However, wars that affected
everyone in the world, political systems, entire economies and social
structures, have happened only comparatively recently, in the two world
wars. In World War I, more than 20 million died; in World War II, the
toll was more than 50 million. At the same time, World War II is
acknowledged to have been the bloodiest, the greatest and the most
destructive war in history.

The conflicts that occurred after World War II-the Cold War, the Korean
War, the Vietnam War, the Arab-Israeli conflict, and the Gulf War-are
among the most critical events of our time. Likewise, regional wars,
conflicts and civil wars, have caused destruction in many parts of the
world. In places such as Bosnia, Palestine, Chechnya, Afghanistan,
Kashmir and many others, problems continue to afflict humanity.

Another instance of a type of 'chaos' that concerns human beings as
much as war is organized international terror. As authorities on the
subject also agree, acts of terror have multiplied in the latter half of
the twentieth century.2 Indeed, it is even possible to say that terror
is a phenomenon particular to the twentieth century.2 Organizations
devoted to racism, communism and similar ideologies, or with
nationalistic aims, have engaged in acts of brutality with the help of
the developing technology. Within the world's recent history, acts of
terror have, time and again, fomented chaos. Much blood has been shed
and countless innocent people have been maimed or killed.

**The destruction of great cities:**

wars and disasters

Great cities will be ruined and it will be as if they had not existed
the day before. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir
al-Zaman, p. 38)

The ruin of great cities spoken of in this hadith brings to mind the
destruction that now arises from war and various natural disasters.
Recently developed nuclear weapons, aircraft, bombs, missiles, and other
modern weapons, have caused untold destruction. These weapons with their
enormous destructive power have brought about a degree of destruction
never before seen. Indeed, the great cities targeted are most affected
by this destruction. The incomparable destruction of the Second World
War is an example of this. With the use of the atom bomb in world's
greatest war, Hiroshima and Nagasaki were completely destroyed. As a
result of heavy bombing, European capitals and other important cities
suffered a great amount of damage.

In the last few years, hurricanes, storms, typhoons and other such
disasters have had a destructive effect on the American continent as
well as in several other places in the world. In addition, floods have
caused mudslides, which have engulfed certain centers of population.
Furthermore, earthquakes, volcanoes and tidal waves have also caused
great devastation. Therefore, all this destruction brought upon the
great cities by these calamities is an important sign in each case.

**Earthquakes**

The Hour (Last Day) will not be established until ... earthquakes will
be very frequent. (Bukhari) There are two great incidents before the Day
of Judgment... and then years of earthquakes. (Narrated by Umm Salama
r.a.) In the last few years, major earthquakes have occurred repeatedly
and are among the foremost fears of people around the world. If we look
at the data collected by the American National Earthquake Information
Center for 1999, we find that 20,832 earthquakes happened somewhere in
the world. As a result, an estimated 22,711 persons lost their lives.3

When the figures of the past are examined, we see that the number of
earthquakes was very few. According to US Geological Survey (USGS)
reports, the number of earthquakes with a magnitude of 5.0 or greater
that took place during the four hundred years between 1955 and 1975 was
only 110. According to the data of the same institution, within only the
23 years between 1980 and 2003, the number of earthquakes with a
magnitude of 6.5 or more was 1685.4

**Poverty**

The poor will grow in number. (Amal Al-Din Al-Qazwini, Mufid Al-'ulum
Wa-mubid Al-humum)

Gains will be shared out only among the rich, with no benefit to the
poor. (Tirmidhi) Obviously, that period indicated by the Prophet (saas)
describes conditions in our day. If we look at past centuries, we see
that the difficulties and anxiety brought about by drought, war and
other calamities were temporary and limited to a particular region.
However, today, the poverty and difficulty of earning a living are
permanent and endemic.

In the world today, poverty has reached grave proportions. The last
report by UNICEF stated that one in four people of the world's
population lives in 'unimaginable suffering and want.'5 1.3 billion of
the world's people survive on less than $1 a day. Three billion people
in the world today struggle to survive on $2 a day.6 Approximately 1.3
billion people lack safe water. 2.6 billion people are without access to
adequate sanitation.7

**The collapse of moral values**

The Hour will come when adultery becomes widespread. (Al-Haythami,
Kitab al-Fitan)

The Last Hour will not be established until they (wicked people) commit
adultery on the roads (public ways). (Ibn Hibban and Bazzar)

Men will imitate women; and women will imitate men. (Allama Jalaluddin
Suyuti, Durre-Mansoor)

People will indulge in homosexuality and lesbianism. (Al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, Muntakhab Kanzul Ummaal)

There will be prevalence of open illegal intercourse. (Bukhari)

The Hour (Last Day) will not be established until murders will
increase. (Bukhari)

In our day, there is a great danger that threatens the world's social
fabric. In the same way as a virus kills the human body, this danger
brings about subtle social collapse. This danger is the degradation of
those moral values that help to maintain a healthy society.
Homosexuality, prostitution, pre-marital and extra-marital sex, sexual
misdemeanors, pornography, sexual harassment and the increase of
sex-related illnesses, are a number of important indications of the
collapse of moral values.

Hadiths on the rejection of the true religion and the moral values of
the Qur'an Near the establishment of the Hour there will be days during
which (religious) knowledge will be taken away (vanish) and general
ignorance will spread... (Bukhari)

There will be a little black trial which will not fail to afflict
everyone of this community and then when people think it is finished it
will start all over again. During it a man may be a believer in the
morning and an unbeliever in the evening. (Abu Dawud) There will come a
time upon the Ummat when people will recite the Qur'an, but it will not
go further than their throats, (into their hearts). (Bukhari)

Before the Last Hour there will be commotions like pieces of a dark
night in which a man will be a believer in the morning and an infidel in
the evening, or a believer in the evening and infidel in the morning.
(Abu Dawud) A time will come when a man will not care about how he gets
things, whether lawful or unlawful. (Bukhari) The Last Hour will not be
established until there will remain those people who will neither be
aware of the virtues and never prevent the vices. (Ahmad)

The Last Hour will not come before Allah takes His religion away from
the people of the earth, leaving no one in it but heathens who do not
recognize right or object to wrong. (Reported by Abdullah ibn 'Amr ibn
al-'As)


**The emergence of false prophets**

The Last Hour will not come before there come forth thirty Dajjals
(imposters), each presenting himself as an apostle of Allah. (Abu Dawud)
Experts have noted that there has been a proliferation of so-called
messiahs that began to appear in the 1970's and which has since
increased substantially. According to these experts, there are two basic
reasons for this increase. First is the collapse of communism, and the
other is the possibilities afforded by Internet technology.8

**The Qur'an tells of 'Isa's return to earth**

Allah did not allow the disbelievers to kill 'Isa (as), but took him up
into His own presence, and announced the good news to humanity that he
will return to Earth in the End Times. The Qur'an provides information
about 'Isa's (as) return in several instances:

o One verse says that the disbelievers who set a trap to kill 'Isa (as)
did not succeed; (And We cursed them) for their saying, 'We killed the
Messiah, 'Isa son of Maryam, Messenger of Allah.' They did not kill him
and they did not crucify him but it was made to seem so to them. Those
who argue about him are in doubt about it. They have no real knowledge
of it, just conjecture. But they certainly did not kill him. (Surat
an-Nisa': 157)

o Another verse says that 'Isa (as) did not die, but was taken from the
human sphere into the presence of Allah.

Allah raised him up to Himself. Allah is Almighty, All-Wise. (Surat
an-Nisa': 158)

o In the 55th verse of Surah Al 'Imran, we learn that Allah will place
the people who follow 'Isa (as) above those who disbelieve until the Day
of Rising. It is an historical fact that, 2000 years ago, 'Isa's (as)
disciples had no political power. Christians who lived between that
period and our own have believed a number of false doctrines, the chief
of which is the doctrine of the Trinity.

Therefore, as is evident, they will not be able to be referred to as
followers of 'Isa (as), because, as it says in several places in the
Qur'an, those who believe in the Trinity have slipped into denial. In
such a case, in the time before the Hour, the true followers of 'Isa
(as) will overcome the deniers and become the manifestation of the
divine promise contained in Surah Al 'Imran. Surely, this blessed group
will be made known when 'Isa (as) returns again to earth.

o Again, the Qur'an states that all the People of the Book will believe
in 'Isa (as) before he dies.

There is not one of the People of the Book who will not believe in him
('Isa) before he dies; and on the Day of Rising he will be a witness
against them. (Surat an-Nisa': 159)

We learn clearly from this verse that there are still three unfilled
promises concerning 'Isa (as). First, like every other human being, the
Prophet 'Isa (as) will die. Second, all the People of the Book will see
him in bodily form and will obey him while he is alive. There is no
doubt that these two predictions will be fulfilled when 'Isa (as) comes
again before the Last Day. The third prediction about 'Isa's (as)
bearing witness against the People of the Book will be fulfilled on the
Last Day.

o Another verse in Surah Maryam discusses the death of 'Isa (as).

Peace be upon me the day I was born, and the day I die and the day I am
raised up again alive. (Surah Maryam: 33) When we compare this verse
with the 55th verse of Surah Al 'Imran, we can recognize a very
important fact. The verse in Surah Al 'Imran speaks about 'Isa's (as)
being raised to the presence of Allah. In this verse, no information is
given as to whether 'Isa (as) died or not. But in the 33rd verse of
Surah Maryam, 'Isa's (as) death is referred to. This second death is
possible only if 'Isa (as) came to earth again and died after living
here for some time. (Allah surely knows best)

o Another verse that alludes to 'Isa's (as) return to earth reads:

He will teach him ('Isa) the Book and Wisdom, and the Torah and the
Gospel. (Surah Al 'Imran: 48)

To understand the reference to the 'Book' mentioned in this verse, we
must look at other verses in the Qur'an that are relevant to this
subject: if the Book is stated in one verse together with the Torah and
the Gospel, then it must mean the Qur'an. The third verse of Surah Al
'Imran serves as such an example:

Allah, there is no god but Him, the Living, the Self-Sustaining. He has
sent down the Book to you with truth, confirming what has there before
it. And He sent down the Torah and the Gospel, previously, as guidance
for mankind, and He has sent down the Furqan (the criterion of judgment
between right and wrong). (Surah Al 'Imran: 2-4)

o In that case, the book referred to in verse 48, that 'Isa (as) is to
learn, can only be the Qur'an. We know that 'Isa (as) knew the Torah and
the Gospel during his lifetime, that is, approximately 2000 years ago.
Clearly, it will be the Qur'an that he will learn when he comes to earth
again.

o What verse 59 of Surah Al 'Imran offers is very interesting: 'The
likeness of 'Isa in Allah's sight is the same as Adam...' In this verse
we can see there must be a number of similarities between the two
prophets. As we know, both Adam (as) and 'Isa (as) had no father, but we
may draw a further similarity from the above verse, between Adam's (as)
descending to earth from Paradise and 'Isa's (as) descent from Allah's
presence in the End Times.

o The Qur'an says this about 'Isa (as):

He ('Isa) is a Sign of the Hour. Have no doubt about it. But follow me.
This is a straight path. (Surat az-Zukhruf: 61)

We know that 'Isa (as) lived six centuries before the Qur'an was
revealed. Therefore, this verse must refer, not to his first life, but
to his coming again during the End Times. Both the Christian and the
Islamic world are eagerly awaiting 'Isa's (as) second coming. This
blessed guest's honored presence on the earth will be the important sign
of the Last Day.

o Further evidence of the second coming of 'Isa (as) can be found in
the use of the word wakahlan in Surah Maida, 110 and Surah Al 'Imran 46.
In these verses, we are revealed these commands:

Remember when Allah said, ''Isa, son of Maryam, remember My blessing to
you and to your mother when I reinforced you with the Purest Spirit so
that you could speak to people in the cradle and when you were fully
grown (wakahlan) ...' (Surat al-Ma'ida: 110)

He will speak to people in the cradle, and also when fully grown
(wakahlan), and will be one of the righteous. (Surah Al 'Imran: 46)

This word occurs only in these two verses and only in reference to 'Isa
(as). The word is used to describe 'Isa's (as) more mature age. The word
refers to the age between 30 and 50, that is, to the end of youth and
the beginning of old age. Islamic scholars are agreed in translating
this word to refer to a period after the age of 35.

Islamic scholars rely on a tradition related by Ibn Abbas to the effect
that 'Isa (as) was raised to the presence of Allah when he was young,
that is, at the beginning of his 30's, and that when he comes to earth
again, he will have 40 years left to live. 'Isa (as) will progress into
his old age after he has returned to earth, so this verse may be said to
be a proof of 'Isa's (as) second coming to earth.9

**The Prophet (saas) told of 'Isa's second coming**

There are a few hadiths from the Prophet (saas) that refer to the
second coming of 'Isa (as). The Islamic scholar Shawkani stated that
there are 29 hadiths about 'Isa's (as) return, and that the information
contained in these hadiths could not have been falsified. (Ibn Majah)

By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, son of Maryam, 'Isa, will shortly
descend amongst you people (Muslims) as a just ruler. (Bukhari)

The Hour will not be established until the son of Maryam (i.e. 'Isa)
descends amongst you as a just ruler. (Bukhari)

The Prophet (saas) tells what 'Isa (as) will do when he returns:

'Isa (as), son of Maryam (as), will descend, rule for 40 years with the
book of Allah and my sunnah, and die. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi
Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-Zaman)

Isa (as), son of Maryam (as), will be a just judge and just ruler (in
my community), break and crush the cross and kill the pig ... The earth
will be so filled of peace as a vessel is filled with water. The entire
world shall recite and follow one and the same Word and none shall be
worshipped except Allah. (Ibn Majah)


