The End Times Andd the Emergence of the Mahdi
=============================================

Some important explanations about the End Times are as follows: During
the terrible chaos of the final times, Allah will use a servant having
superior morality known as the Mahdi (the guide to the truth), to invite
humanity back to the right path. The Mahdi's first task will be to wage
a war of ideas within the Islamic world and to turn those Muslims who
have moved away from Islam's true essence back to true belief and
morality. At this point, the Mahdi has three basic tasks:

1. Tearing down all philosophical systems that deny Allah's Existence
and support atheism.

2. Fighting superstition by freeing Islam from the yoke of those
hypocritical individuals who have corrupted it, and then revealing and
implementing true Islamic morality based on the rules of the Qur'an.

3. Strengthening the entire Islamic world, both politically and
socially, and then bringing about peace, security and well-being in
addition to solving societal problems.

According to many hadiths, Prophet 'Isa (as) will return to Earth at
the same time, and will call upon all Christians and Jews, in
particular, to abandon their current superstitions and to live by the
Qur'an. As the Christians harken to him, the Islamic and Christian
worlds will come together in one faith, and the world will experience
that period of great peace, security, happiness, and well-being known as
the Golden Age.


**SIGNS OF THE MAHDI'S EMERGENCE**

**Pervasive corruption**

While a corrupt environment enables believers with strong faith to
increase their faith and patience, and their rewards in the Hereafter,
it leads those with weak and superficial faith to lose their faith or
weaken it further. The Mahdi will come when the existing corrupt
environment is extremely intense and severe.

The Mahdi, one of my children, comes into being, by the blessing of
Allah, upon the approach of the Day of Judgment and the weakening of the
hearts of the faithful because of death, hunger, and the disappearance
of the sunnah, and the emergence of innovations and the loss of means by
which to enjoin the right and forbidding the wrong. His justice and
prosperity will ease the hearts of the faithful, and friendship and love
will settle between the non-Arab and Arab nations. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi,
Al-Burhan fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-Zaman, p. 66)

Disorder, corruption, and fear will emerge in the West... Corruption
will proliferate. (Mukhtasar Tazkirah Qurtubi) A kind of corruption will
surface, from which no party will be able to protect itself, and spread
immediately to every direction. This situation will persist until one
comes and says: 'O people, from now on your leader is the Mahdi.' (Ibn
Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi'Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar,
p. 23)

The hadiths speak of a corruption that will touch everybody and spread
quickly. In other words, a certain type of corruption that is known to
everybody and opposes religion and Allah will target the people's faith.
Today, materialist philosophy is the largest and most comprehensive
trend designed to deny Allah's Existence and creation.

Underlying this philosophy is the 'theory of evolution,' which provides
it with a self-proclaimed 'scientific' basis. Even though it is not
based on any scientific and logical evidence, certain materialist
circles throughout the world continue to work for its acceptance by
using methods associated with strong propaganda, deceit, and even
fraud.

Today, as this theory has penetrated almost every household by means of
both the press and television, almost everyone in the Muslim world and
everywhere else has heard of it. This theory is first presented as fact
when people are children by means of countless lies and deceit. As they
grow older, they continue to be misled by such funny nonsense that they,
and humanity as a whole, came into being merely as a result of
coincidences and that they descended from monkeys. Youths of all age are
brainwashed at all stages of their education by evolutionist lies.

There is a noteworthy point here. As our Prophet (saas) noted in one of
his hadiths, corruption's global pervasiveness and rapid spread can
materialize only when suitable technological means are available, as
they are today (e.g., the press, publications, broadcasting, the
Internet, and satellite communication).

As the relevant technology did not exist in the past, corruption could
not spread throughout the world. As a result, no other worldwide
corruption that had declared war against Allah's Existence, creation,
and religion was seen in the past. All of these are among the important
signs that the Mahdi's advent coincides with the present time.


**Religious prohibitions gaining acceptance**

The prevailing lifestyle of our own time, which has spread so widely in
the last several decades and makes no distinction between what religion
prohibits and allows, while tolerating all kinds of debauchery, reflects
the environment depicted in the hadiths. Several hadiths describe this
dark environment, the harbinger of the Mahdi's emergence, as follows:

The Mahdi will not emerge unless disbelief invades everywhere and is
openly committed in the public. What rules in such times is the invasion
by disbelief... That is its power. (Mektubat-i Rabbani, 2:259)

The Mahdi will emerge following the instance of such vile corruption
(fitnah) whereby all of the prohibitions are regarded as lawful. (Ibn
Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi
al-Muntazar, p. 23)

**The Occupation of Afghanistan**

Pity poor Taliqan (a region in Afghanistan) that at that place are
treasures of Allah, but these are not of gold and silver. (Al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-zaman, p. 59) There is
an indication that Afghanistan will be occupied during the Last Days.
The Russian invasion of Afghanistan took place in 1979 (1400, according
to the Islamic calendar).

In addition, this hadith draws attention to Afghanistan's material
riches. Today, large oil deposits, iron basins, and coal mines that have
not been commercially exploited yet have been detected there.

**Stopping the flow of the Euphrates river**

Stopping and interrupting the flow of the Euphrates river is one sign
of the Mahdi's emergence. Soon the river Euphrates will disclose the
treasure (the mountain) of gold, so whoever will be present at that time
should not take anything of it. (Bukhari)

It (the Euphrates) will uncover a mountain of gold (under it). (Abu
Dawud) Many respected books of hadith mention both of these events.
Al-Suyuti mentions this hadith as 'the stopping of water.' Indeed, the
Keban Dam has stopped the flow of the River Euphrates.

The surrounding land has become as valuable as gold for various
reasons, such as electricity production and higher soil fertility
through the irrigation and transport facilities that Keban dam has made
possible. The Keban dam and the others constructed over the River
Euphrates resemble a concrete mountain, and wealth as valuable as gold
comes out of it. Therefore, dam takes on the properties of 'the golden
mountain.' (Allah knows best).

**Eclipse of the moon and sun in Ramadan**

There are two signs for the Mahdi... The first one is the lunar eclipse
in the first night of Ramadan, and the second is the solar eclipse in
the middle of this month. (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar
fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p. 47) There will be two solar
eclipses in Ramadan before the Mahdi's advent. (Mukhtasar Tazkirah
Qurtubi) ... The solar eclipse in the middle of Ramadan, and the lunar
eclipse at the end... (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi
Akhir al-zaman, p. 37)

It has reached me that before the Mahdi emerges the moon will be
eclipsed twice in Ramadan. (Related by Abu Nu'aym in al-Fitan) The most
striking point here is that two solar as well as two lunar eclipses take
place within one month (Ramadan). If these incidents are examined
carefully, some differences become apparent. The best thing to do in
such a situation is to locate the areas of agreement. These are the
following: There will be solar and lunar eclipses during Ramadan, these
will be spaced about 14-15 days apart, and the eclipses will be repeated
twice.

In line with these calculations, there was a lunar eclipse in 1981
(Hijri 1401) on the 15th day of Ramadan, and a solar eclipse on the 29th
day of the month. There was a "second" lunar eclipse in 1982 (Hijri
1402) on the 14th day of Ramadan, and a solar eclipse on the 28th day of
the month. It is also particularly significant that in that particular
instance, there was a full lunar eclipse in the middle of Ramadan, a
most striking prophecy.

The occurrence of these incidents during the same period coinciding
with the signs of the Mahdi's emergence, and their miraculous recurrence
at the onset of the fourteenth Islamic century for two consecutive years
(1401-02) makes it possible for these events to be the signs foretold by
the hadiths.

Moreover, an astoundingly similar eclipse occurred in the years 2002
and 2003.

ACTUAL ECLIPSE DATE
Lunar Eclipse November 20, 2002
In Hijri 1423 (in the middle of Ramadan)

15 days later
Solar Eclipse December 4, 2002
In Hijri 1423 (at the end of Ramadan)

Lunar Eclipse November 9, 2003
In Hijri 1424 (in the middle of Ramadan)

15 days later
Solar Eclipse November 23, 2003
In Hijri 1424 (at the end of Ramadan)

**The rise of a comet**

A star with a luminous tail will rise from the East before the Mahdi
emerges. (Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rasul Barzanji, Al-Isha'ah li-ashrat
al-sa'ah, p. 200)

A comet will be appearing in the East, giving out illumination before
he arrives. (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat
al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p. 53)

The rise of that star will occur after the eclipse of the Sun and the
Moon. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-zaman,
p. 32)

As referred to by the hadiths, In 1986 (Hijri 1406), Halley's comet
passed by Earth. The comet is a bright, shining star that travels from
East to West. This happened after the lunar and solar eclipses of 1981
and 1982 (Hijri 1401-1402). The concurrence of this star's rise with
other signs of the Mahdi's emergence indicates that Halley's comet is
the star pointed to in the hadith.

**Storming the Ka\`ba and the subsequent bloodshed**

People will perform hajj together and gather without an Imam. The
Hajjis will be looted and there will be a battle at Mina in which many
will be slain and blood will flow until it runs over the Jamra
al-'Aqaba. (Jamra: a stone pillar, which represents Satan, that is
stoned during the pilgrimage.) (Narrated by 'Amr ibn Shu'ayb, al-Hakim
and Nu'aym ibn Hammad)

People make pilgrimage without an imam leading them. Big wars break out
when they come down to Mina, and they are entwined just the way dogs
entwine, and tribes attack on each other. This strife is so widespread
that legs are buried in lakes of blood. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan
fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-zaman, p. 35)

The phrase 'the year in which he will emerge' draws attention to a
massacre that will occur on the date of the Mahdi's emergence. In 1979,
a massacre very like this one occured during the Ka'ba raid, which took
place during the pilgrimage month. It is very interesting that this raid
occured at the very beginning of the period during which the signs of
Mahdi's advent appeared, that is, the first day of the Islamic year 1400
(21 November 1979).

The hadiths also mention bloodshed and massacres. The killing of 30
people during the clashes between Saudi soldiers and attacking militants
during the raid confirms the rest of this hadith.

Seven years later, an even bloodier incident happened during the
pilgrimage. In this incident, 402 demonstrating pilgrims were killed,
and vast amounts of blood was shed. Both the Saudi soldiers and the
Iranian pilgrims committed great sins, for they killed one another.
These bloody incidents have great parallels to the environment described
in the hadith.

There come the cries of war in (the month of) Shawwal with the outbreak
of war, massacre, and carnage in (the month of) Dhu'l-Hijja. The
pilgrims are plundered in this month, the streets cannot be crossed
because of the blood shed, and religious prohibitions are violated. Big
sins are committed near the Magnificient House (the Ka\`ba). (Al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-zaman, p. 37)

This hadith draws attention to the incidents that will occur near the
Ka\`ba. The incidents during 1407 actually took place near the Ka\`ba,
and not inside it, unlike the event of 1400. Both incidents happened
just the hadiths indicated that they would.


**Sighting a flare in the East**

In its section on the signs of the Mahdi's emergence, the book
Ikdiddurer states: 'The emergence of a big flare which is seen in the
East up on the sky for three nights. Sighting of an extraordinary
redness, not as red as the usual color of the dawn, and its spread over
the horizon. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir
al-zaman, p. 32)

I swear that a flame will engulf you. That flame is presently in an
extinguished state at the valley called Berehut. That flame swallows up
people with terrible pain inside it, burns down and destroys people and
property, and spreads all over the world by flying like a cloud with the
assistance of winds. Its heat at night is much higher than its daytime
temperature. By going as deep as the center of Earth from the heads of
people, that flame becomes a terrible noise just like the lightning
between the earth and sky, he narrated. (Mukhtasar Tazkirah Qurtubi)

A brief explanation of this flame, a sign of the Mahdi's advent, is as
follows:

In July 1991, after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, a huge fire spread
through Kuwait and the Persian Gulf after the Iraqis fired Kuwait's oil
wells. In addition, the first part of the hadith says that the flame 'is
in an extinguished state.' Given that the flame is the result of burning
an inflammable substance, what waits in an extinguished state is not the
flame itself but the material to be burnt by the flame. In this context,
this may mean underground oil. Berehut is the name of a well-an oil
well. When the time comes, oil extracted from these wells will become a
fire ready to be burned.

**A sign out of the Sun**

He (the Mahdi) will not come unless a sign emerges out of the Sun. (Ibn
Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi
al-Muntazar, p. 47)

The Mahdi will not emerge unless the Sun rises as a sign. (Al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-zaman, p. 33) The large
explosions detected on the Sun during the twentieth century may well be
this sign. Also, the August 11, 1999 solar eclipse was the last of the
century. It was the first time that so many people had been able to
watch and study an eclipse for so long.

**The Rebuilding of Ruined Places**

The rebuilding of the ruined places in the world, and the ruination of
constructed places are signs and portents of Doomsday. (Agreed Upon)
Various hadiths reveal that the Qur'an refers to the Mahdi The Mahdi
will rule Earth, just like Dhu'l-Qarnayn and Sulayman. (Ibn Hajar
al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p.
29) The Companions of the Cave (Ahl al-Kahf) will be the Mahdi's
helpers. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir
al-zaman, p. 59) The number of the Mahdi's helpers will be as many as
those who crossed the river with Talut. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan
fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-zaman, p. 57)

**THE GOLDEN AGE**

The Prophet (saas) describes the End Times with its heavenly features
Many hadiths indicate the existence of a period when the Qur'an's values
will pervade Earth. This period, known as the Golden Age, will last for
more than half a century and, in many ways, will resemble 'the Blessed
Period' of our Prophet (saas).

According to one hadith, people will be so content that they will spend
their days with no idea as to how time passes and how one day turns into
the next. They will pray to Allah to prolong their lives in order to
receive more benefits from these graces. Another Prophetic hadith states
that; The younger ones wish they were grown-ups, while the adults wish
they were younger... The good become even more good, and even the wicked
ones are treated well. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat
al-Mahdi Akhir al-zaman, p. 17)

**Unprecedented Abundance**

Many hadiths reveal that there will be an unprecedented abundance of
crops and goods, all of which will be distributed without measure:
During this (period), my ummah (people) will lead a kind of comfortable
and carefree life that they have never known before. (The land) will
bring forth its yield and will not hold anything back... (Ibn Majah)

In the last of times there will be a khalifa (successor) who will
distribute wealth without even counting it. (Muslim) The inhabitants of
the heavens and the inhabitants of the earth will be pleased with him
and such plants will be produced by the earth that the living will wish
the dead could come back to life. (At-Tabarani and Abu Nu'aym) The land
will turn like the silver tray growing vegetation... (Ibn Majah)

**Technological developments will provide abundance in the Golden
Age**

People will reap 700 measures of wheat for every one they sow ...
People will throw down a few handfuls of seeds and reap 700 handfuls ...
Although much rain will fall, none will be wasted. (Ibn Hajar
al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p.
43) This hadith refers to an increase in agricultural production that
will occur in the End Times by transitioning to modern agriculture,
developing new agricultural techniques, improving seed stocks, and using
rainwater more efficiently by constructing new dams and artificial
lakes.

The high cost of living and poverty will end As the Golden Age will be
a time of welfare and great wealth, all people will receive more than
they demand. Nothing will be measured or counted.

Our Prophet (saas) said that his people will live in blessings,
especially during the Last Days: A time will come when a person, with
his golden alms in his hand, will go around, finding no one (in need)
who is willing to receive the alms. (Mukhtasar Tazkirah Qurtubi) Then
will my Ummah be blessed, the number of animals will increase and the
land will bear its fruits. (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar
fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p. 26) Definitely possessions will be
in abundance then, flowing like water. Yet no one will (condescend) to
take any. (Mukhtasar Tazkirah Qurtubi)

**Religion will be restored to its original state**

Another news revealed by the Hadith literature regarding the End Times
is that the original religion will no longer be misunderstood. In the
Golden Age, all heretical misunderstandings that entered Islam after the
Prophet (saas) will be eliminated, and the original religion will be
restored. Just as in the case of the Prophet, the requirements of the
religion will be fulfilled. After the death of our Prophet (saas) and
his Companions, history records that unrelated heresies and forms of
worship were introduced into the original religion, and that countless
hadiths and judgments, most of which have survived to our day, were
fabricated and attributed to our Prophet (saas). Despite the best
efforts of true Muslims to eliminate these fabrications, many practices
done in the name of Islam today are not based upon the Qur'an.

As the Qur'an is the only source that can distinguish between the
correct and mistaken practices, only its guidance can expose and remove
these fabricated heresies. This way, the true religion will resurface.
In the End Times, Allah will restore the religion to its original state
and make the Qur'an's morality prevail. When this time comes, He will
remove all deviations that hinder people from living by His religion,
and will purify Islam from all heresies, false beliefs, and forms of
worship.


