Signs of the End Times From Surat Al-kahf
=========================================

**The Prophet Muhammad (saas)
highlighted this sura**

Many prophetic hadiths connect Surat al-Kahf with the End Times. Some
of these are given below: Related by An-Nawwas ibn Sam'an: 'He who among
you will survive to see him (the Dajjal) should recite over him the
opening verses of Surah al-Kahf.' (Muslim) Related by Abu Umamah
al-Bahili:

Whoever enters his (the Dajjal's) Hell, let him seek refuge with Allah
and recite the opening verse of Surat al-Kahf, and it will become cool
and peaceful for him, as the fire became cool and peaceful for Ibrahim.
(Ibn Kathir)

**Signs and secrets about the End Times**

One reason why the Prophet (saas) recommends that believers read Surat
al-Kahf is that it contains very important signs about the End Times,
such as those that are required to defend and fight against the Dajjal
and the irreligious movements that bring so much evil to humanity, and
which he wants to spread around the world. It also contains many lessons
for Muslims. Our Prophet's (saas) recommendation to memorize and to read
this surah attentively is a clear indication of this.

As we will see throughout this chapter, the experiences of the
Companions of the Cave (Ashab al-Kahf), who lived in an unbelieving
society, the lessons that Musa (as) learned from Khidr (as), and the
rule over the world that Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) established in order to
disseminate the values of Islam, are matters upon which believers need
to reflect.

**The extraordinary situation of the People of the Cave**

Do you consider that the Companions of the Cave and Ar-Raqim were one
of the most remarkable of Our Signs? When the young men took refuge in
the cave and said: 'Our Lord, give us mercy directly from You and open
the way for us to right guidance in our situation.' (Surat al-Kahf:
9-10)

These verses touch upon this group's extraordinary situation. As the
narrative unfolds, we see that their experiences are of an unusual and
metaphysical nature. Their entire life is full of miraculous
developments. Their situation is subject to our Prophet's (saas) hadith,
which make the connection between them and the End Times. This indicates
that people living in the End Times may have supernatural experiences.

The tenth verse tells us that those young people sought refuge in the
cave from the existing oppressive system, which did not allow them to
express their views, tell the truth, and call to Allah's religion. Thus,
they distanced themselves from their society.

However, this should not be understood as an idle period away from
society, for they took refuge there while asking for Allah's grace and
help. They also sought to improve and develop themselves. Muslims of the
End Times living under oppressive regimes will conceal themselves and
hope for Allah to increase His grace upon them, and also to make their
lives and struggle against anti-religious movements easier.

**Their secrecy continued for some time**

So We sealed their ears with sleep in the cave for a number of years.
Then We woke them up again so that We might see which of the two groups
would better calculate the time they had stayed there. (Surat al-Kahf:
11-12)

The reason for this state of sleep was their surrender to fate and
peace, because Allah, Who created the universe out of nothing, arranges
everything for the benefit of Muslims. In our own time, some Muslims
have adopted a similar spiritual detachment. This way, they remain
uncorrupted by the materialist ideologies that seek to distance people
from their faith, and also are untouched by the violence to which these
ideologies lead. Thus, they can continue to live according to the Qur'an
without being affected by the surrounding moral degeneration, cruelty,
and chaos. TheCompanions of the Cave remained hidden for some time, and
Allah roused them at a time of His choosing.

**They proclaimed Allah's religion to their people**

Our people have taken deities apart from Him. Why do they not produce a
clear authority concerning them? Who could do greater wrong than someone
who invents a lie against Allah? (Surat al-Kahf: 15)

As this verse states, the Companions of the Cave called their
idolatrous people to faith, invited them to Allah's religion, asked them
to stop associating others with Allah, and demanded that they bring
forth the evidence upon which they based their denial. When they could
not do this, they exposed their idolatrous people as liars and
slanderers. Today, Muslims also demand proof from those who take idols
besides Allah. In the End Times, there exists an idolatrous belief that
idolizes matter and chance: Darwinism.

Darwinism claims that the universe has no purpose, was formed by random
occurrences, and that only the fittest members of nature survive. This
anti-religious system is based on conflict and violence. In reality,
these claims of random occurrences being responsible for everything are
no more than acts of slander by the Darwinists against Allah, Who is
All-powerful and has created everything that exists.

**They distanced themselves utterly from the surrounding idolatrous
worldview**

When you have separated yourselves from them and everything they
worship except Allah, take refuge in the cave, and your Lord will unfold
His mercy to you and open the way to the best for you in your situation.
(Surat al-Kahf: 16) Due to the unbelievers' oppression, the Companions
of the Cave felt the need for total segregation. Thus, they severed all
links with the unbelievers by seeking refuge in the cave. During this
period, Allah's grace descended on them, and He made things easier for
them in many respects. The most important aspect of His help and support
was sparing them from the negative impact of the unbelievers.

**They hid themselves**

For if they find out about you, they will stone you or make you revert
to their religion, and then you will never have success. (Surat al-Kahf:
20) 'They will stone you' describes a form of terror. This character
trait is clearly recognizable today in people who are under the
influence of godless ideologies. For example, terrorists who subscribe
to communism are led by their hostility to the state to throw stones and
attack its officials, as well as at the police forces. These attacks aim
to weaken and demoralize them so that the communists can realize their
anti-religious ideals and establish their rule by dragging the country
into chaos and conflict.

Given this, it is vital for the people of the End Times to stay clear
of the bloodstained ideologies that have brought nothing but evil to the
world, not to side with those who corrupt others, and not to be
influenced by the provocations of anti-religious ideologies or their
agitations.

**Only Allah and a handful of people knew their number**

They will say: 'There were three of them, their dog being the fourth.'
They will say: 'There were five of them, their dog being the sixth,'
guessing at the Unseen. And they will say: 'There were seven of them,
their dog being the eighth.' Say: 'My Lord knows best their number.
Those who know about them are very few.' So do not enter into any
argument concerning them, except in relation to what is clearly known.
And do not seek the opinion of any of them regarding them. (Surat
al-Kahf: 22)

'Those who know about them are very few' indicates also that a few
people could have this knowledge. For instance, one such person could be
Khidr (as), whose miraculous circumstances we will explore shortly. It
is also possible that Khidr's disciples might have this knowledge, with
Allah's will and revelation. The Qur'an reveals that Allah reveals some
of the Unseen to His Messengers.

**The journey of Prophet Musa (as) and his young servant to the
'meeting-place of the two seas'**

Remember when Musa said to his young servant: 'I will not give up until
I reach the meeting-place of the two seas, even if I must press on for
many years.' (Surat al-Kahf, 60) Here, 'young' suggests that when doing
something, one should seek the assistance of young people and work with
them. Young people should be motivated to use their energy, dynamism,
strength, ambition, and excitement for right action for Allah's
pleasure. Some of the verses speak of youth, and the following verse
states that only some young people of his nation believed in Musa
(as):

No one believed in Musa, except (some) offspring (i.e., youths) among
his people, out of fear that Pharaoh and the elders, would persecute
them. Pharaoh was high and mighty in the land. He was one of the
profligate. (Surah Yunus, 83)

The sixtieth verse of Surat al-Kahf refers to the meeting point toward
which Musa (as) is traveling. Musa (as) knows that he will meet with
someone, and he knows that this will take place at the 'meeting-place of
the two seas.' This place could be any place on Earth that fits this
description.

**Prophet Musa (as) meets with the blessed and merciful Khidr (as)**

They found a servant of Ours whom We had granted mercy from Us and whom
We had also given knowledge direct from Us. (Surat al-Kahf, 65) Allah is
most compassionate, graceful, and merciful toward His servants. Musa
(as) set out to meet Khidr (as), someone to whom Allah has given mercy.
Therefore, Allah's attributes of grace and mercy are reflected on him,
which has caused him to receive a superior knowledge from Allah and to
become one of His distinguished servants.

**Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as)**

They will ask you about Dhu'l-Qarnayn. Say: 'I will tell you something
about him that is worthy of remembrance and mention.' (Surat al-Kahf,
83) Throughout history, many scholars have interpreted the narrative of
Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) in many ways. The verse says that it was revealed as
a reminder to Muslims and is connected with the revelations of hidden
meanings and reasons.

**Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) had power and was enlightened**

We gave him power and authority on Earth, and granted him a way to
everything. So he followed a way. (Surat al-Kahf, 84-85) From these
verses, we understand that Dhu'l-Qarnayn's country is away from
problems. In other words, his rule is solid, rational, and strong. 'We
granted him a way to everything' suggests that Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) was
given the ability to solve every problem, which means that he was a very
intelligent, sagacious, and perceptive believer. With these Allah-given
faculties, he solved all complex issues quickly and removed the
obstacles.

**Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) was also a spiritual guide**

He (Dhu'l-Qarnayn) said: 'As for those who do wrong, We will punish
them. Then they will be returned to their Lord, and He will punish them
with a dreadful punishment. But as for him who believes and acts
rightly, he will receive the best of rewards, and we will issue a
command, making things easy for him." (Surat al-Kahf: 87-88)

When Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) spoke, he reminded his people of Allah and the
Hereafter. He spoke in a Muslim manner. From the expressions used in the
verse, we understand that he was a Muslim leader who ruled a Muslim
nation. Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) proceeded straight away to call the people he
met to believe in Allah, devotion, the good deeds prescribed by the
Qur'an, and to perform the prayers and acts of worship. He drew their
attention, in order to encourage them, to the rewards that they are
promised in this world and the next, and thus called them to faith.

**Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) helped people**

They said: 'Dhu'l-Qarnayn! Yajuj and Majuj are causing corruption in
the land. Can we, therefore, pay tribute to you in return for your
constructing a barrier between us and them?' (Surat al-Kahf: 94) For the
corruption of Yajuj and Majuj, the people in trouble sought
Dhu'l-Qarnayn's (as) help and offered to pay him a tax in return. From
this, we understand that Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) did not represent a single
person; rather, he ruled a nation. Just like Sulayman (as), he ruled a
nation and commanded an army.

This verse indicates that he must have had teams of construction
experts and civil engineers with him. From the people's request, we can
deduce that Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) was interested in, and was knowledgeable
about, construction and civil engineering. He might even have been
renowned for his expertise in these fields. Accordingly, other nations
requested his assistance. All of these factors demonstrate the size and
power of his nation. That Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) was well respected and
effective in the East and the West could indicate that he was ruling a
nation whose power was extensive. Therefore, he was a leader, aware of
his responsibility to bring peace, justice, and security not only to his
own nation, but also to every part of the world.

The narrative of Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) indicates that in the End Times,
just as it was during his own time, the values of Islam will rule the
world.

**A different interpretation**

Another possibility is that this narrative conveys events that will
happen in the future. In Allah's presence, all time is one. Future,
past, and present are experienced all at once. In some verses, the
events of the Day of Judgment in Hell and Paradise are related as if
they have already taken place. The following verses are an example of
this technique.

The Trumpet is blown, and all who are in the heavens and all who are on
the earth swoon away, save him who Allah wills. Then it is blown a
second time, and behold them standing waiting! And the earth shone with
the light of her Lord, and the Book is set up, and the prophets and the
witnesses are brought, and it is judged between them with truth, and
they are not wronged. (Surat az-Zumar: 68-69)

The events related in this verse are told as if they have already taken
place, even though to us, they are future events yet to happen.
Therefore it is possible that the Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) narrative is from
the future, related to us in the past tense. The eighty-fourth verse
says: '... (We) granted him a way to everything.' This might indicate
that Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) will rule the world in the future.

In today's world, a leader or a nation that has dominion over the world
must have both communication technology and conventional power. As the
leader cannot inspect all of them personally, we can assume that he will
stay in a central capital city and control the other areas through
satellites and other means of communication. As the ninety-fifth verse
expresses, "He said: 'The power my Lord has granted me is better than
that,'' it is probable that Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) had an established
power.

If we look at the narrative from this perspective, we realize that each
verse could be conveying a different message. For example, Dhu'l-Qarnayn
(as) went first to the West, then to the East, and then back again.
These verses might be implying that he communicates with different areas
by changing channels broadcasting from satellites. The verses speak
constantly of 'finding.' Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) 'found' a people by the
'spring,' that he 'found' a people in the East, who did not understand.
These acts of 'finding' happen by searching, and this could be a finding
based on looking up satellite channels.

The verses say that the people of the East had no shelter from the sun.
If we consider this information in the light of communication
technology, there are two possible messages here. Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as)
could be watching or gathering intelligence via satellite from these
areas (Allah knows best). Or they could be implying infrared technology,
which is used in many different areas today.

Infrared cameras are used in medicine, criminal pathology, meteorology,
criminology, intelligence, industry, and other fields. Such cameras also
can observe the human body in great detail. If Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) was
addressing a nation, he could do so via satellite and TV broadcasts.
This would enable him to learn of the people's needs and complaints,
regardless of where they lived, and then rule the areas under his
control accordingly.

The Yajuj and Majuj corruption could be a classic act of terror or
anarchy or even be committed by means of broadcasting. For example, they
could be disrupting other broadcasts in order to broadcast their corrupt
ideas. Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) could have prevented this broadcast and thus
the corruption. For instance, he could have used the copper and iron
mentioned in the verse to create an electromagnetic field and disrupt
the radio and TV broadcasts. Transformers, which are made by winding
copper wire around an iron core, are one of the sources of
electromagnetic fields. A powerful electromagnetic field can disrupt
radio and TV broadcasts.

Another possibility is that a huge communal satellite dish is implied.
The reason for it being so big could have been to overcome Yajuj and
Majuj's global disruptive system. The surfaces of these dishes are
usually made of the cheaper and lighter aluminum, which is not the ideal
material for performance. Copper is a much better conductor, and might
have been preferred for this reason. However, covering such a huge dish
with copper sheets is not rational. On the other hand, copper-plating
the dish with molten copper would give it the smoothest surface and
deliver the highest possible performance.

The wall or barrier created by the competing broadcasts or by creating
a magnetic field could be termed an 'invisible barrier.' Some scholars
read the word saddayn in the ninety-third verse as suddayn, and sadd in
the following verse as sudd. In the first case, the meaning would be a
'visible barrier'; in the second, it means an 'invisible barrier' (Allah
knows best).

'They were, therefore, unable to climb over it, nor were they able to
make a breach in it,' as stated in the ninety-seventh verse, might be
referring to this, because Yajuj and Majuj attempt to overcome or breach
the transmitter's broadcast. Significantly, the current expression used
for pirate stations that broadcast by interfering with another broadcast
is 'breaching transmission.'

Considering the expression 'scarcely able to understand speech' in this
light might mean that this satellite broadcast is sometimes not
understood by some people. When the broadcast is disrupted, the people
cannot understand; but when the normal broadcast is restored, they begin
to understand (Allah knows best).

The expression 'a muddy spring' in the eighty-sixth verse is also
interesting, because seeing the sunset on the TV screen is just like the
sun setting in a spring. The colors on the screen change as the sun sets
in the distance over the sea, and this appears grayer on the screen.
Thus, for someone viewing this, it will appear as if setting in a muddy
spring. The aynin hami'ah expression, made up of 'ayn (spring) and
hami'ah (muddy) could be implying this unclear view.

Also, his contact with the East and the West could indicate that he is
in touch with the various parts of the globe. While the sun rises over
one part, it sets on the other.

**THE NUMERICAL VALUES (ABJAD) IN SOME OF THE VERSES IN SURAT AL-KAHF
POINT TO TIMES VERY CLOSE TO OUR OWN DAY**

We fortified their hearts... (Surat al-Kahf: 14) 1400 A.H. (Anno
Hegirae, the Islamic calendar) or 1979 A.D. (Anno Domini, 'In the year
of our Lord,' the Christians' Gregorian calendar) He said: 'The power my
Lord has granted me is better than that...' (Surat al-Kahf: 95) 1409
A.H., or 1988 A.D. (Without shaddah)

We gave him power and authority on Earth... (Surat al-Kahf: 84) 1440
A.H., or 2019 A.D. (With shaddah)

A sign pointing at the beginning of the Islamic 1400s and the end of
the twentieth and the beginning of the twenty-first Christian century is
the number 1980, which is obtained by multiplying Surat al-Kahf's number
of verses with its numerical order in the Qur'an. Sura 18: Surat al-Kahf
(contains 110 verses) 18 x 110 = 1980.

Bediuzzaman Said Nursi also often indicated that this time was the
beginning of the End Times. He says, for example: Thus, unfair people
who do not know this truth say: 'Why did the Companions of the Prophet
with their vigilant hearts and keen sight, who had been taught all the
details of the hereafter, suppose a fact that would occur one thousand
four hundred years later to be close to their century, as though their
ideas had deviated a thousand years from the truth?'10

Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, by saying '1400 years after' the Companions of
the Prophet indicated the years around 1980 as the end times. Here it is
important to note that he said 1400, not 1373, 1378, and not 1398. In
other words, the Islamic 1400s. Surat al-Kahf contains very good news
for the Muslims. This news, as our Prophet (saas) revealed, is the
approaching blessed period of the End Times. If Surat al-Kahf is viewed
from this perspective, it is pointing at the different phases,
beginning, development, and conclusion of Islam in the End Times,
culminating in the rule of Islam and concluding with the arrival of 'Isa
(as).


