Prophet Suleyman (as)
=====================

Prophet Sulayman (as) was give unprecedented wealth He (Sulayman) said:
'My Lord, forgive me and give me a kingdom the like of which will never
be granted to anyone after me. Truly You are the Ever-Giving.' (Surah
Sad: 35)

Allah responded to his prayer by giving him great blessings and
knowledge, as well as bestowing upon him a magnificent dominion and
powerful authority. In the verses 'that recount his life, many details
are offered about his wealth, authority, and how he used his
knowledge.

**Prophet Sulayman (as) communicated with birds**

Allah taught Prophet Sulayman (as) the language of birds, and he used
this knowledge to form orderly ranks of birds (Surat an-Naml:17). He
communicated with birds and ruled them as he saw fit. This situation
occurred as a result of Allah's favor on Sulayman (as). (Sulayman said:)
O mankind, we have been taught the speech of birds and have been given
everything. This is indeed clear favor. (Surat an-Naml: 16)

We can derive important conclusions from this account:

- Birds have a special way of communicating with each other on a
frequency beyond the range of human hearing. Prophet Sulayman (as) was
given a special skill that allowed him to understand this language. This
might have happened through a technological innovation.

- Using this skill, he gave orders to the birds so they might fulfill
his wishes (Allah knows best).

- He sometimes used birds to send news and collect intelligence. This
method was very successful. His knowledge made it easier for him to
communicate with other countries, and effectively brought distant lands
within his reach (Allah knows best).

- This verse might be drawing our attention to technological advances
that will be used in the End Times. Perhaps it is not speaking of birds,
but rather of unmanned aircraft in use today.

- It migh have been that he placed transmitters on the birds to gather
intelligence about his enemies. This way he might have obtained both
audio and visual records, which he used to rule his nation.

- He also had great control over jinns and satans. As the Qur'an
states, Allah said, 'And some of the jinn worked in front of him by his
Lord's permission' (Surah Saba, 12) and 'And some of the satans dived
for him and did other things apart from that. And We were watching over
them' (Surah al-Anbiya'). If we think about this aspect, birds might
symbolize an army of jinns.

- Another possibility is that the birds are led by jinns. Prophet
Sulayman (as) might have commanded birds to perform certain tasks
through using jinns.

- Allah made the Qur'an humanity's holy book until Doomsday. Thus,
incidents similar to those related about Prophet Sulayman might occur in
the End Times. These verses might signal to us that during this time
Allah might place satans and jinns at humanity's beck and call, or that
humanity will use and benefit greatly from advanced technology at that
time. (Allah knows best).


**Sulayman (as) communicates with a female ant**

(Sulayman) smiled, laughing at its words, and said: 'My Lord, keep me
thankful for the blessing You have bestowed on me and on my parents, and
keep me acting rightly, pleasing You, and admit me, by Your mercy, among
Your servants who are righteous.' (Surat an-Naml: 19)

- Prophet Sulayman (as) could hear the speech of ants, and this may be
pointing to the existence of advanced computer technology in the end
times. - Today, California's Silicon Valley is known as the capital of
the technological world. It is very curious that the account of Prophet
Sulayman (as) speaks of the Ant Valley. Allah might be pointing to an
advanced technology that will appear in the End Times.

- Moreover, ants and other insects are used extensively in high
technology. Robot projects developed by studying these creatures closely
have advanced a number of fields, including technology and the defense
industry. The verse might be pointing to this fact as well.

**Blessings relevant to the End Times**

Prophet Sulayman's (as) and Dhu'l-Qarnayn's (as) dominion over the
world is good news indeed for all Muslims, for these narratives contain
significant signs for the End Times. Truly, Muslims who preserve Allah's
limits, work hard to spread Islamic morality worldwide, and refuse to
shrink in the face of hardship will prevail in all eras of history.
Allah will always be behind them with His help and support. Both of
these Messengers, due to their above-mentioned abilities (and, of
course, many other blessings of Allah), exercised a strong dominion in
the world. This same dominion will certainly happen during the End
Times.

The great dominion of Islamic morality, as we emphasized earlier, was
defined in the hadiths through similar incidents during the dominion of
these two Messengers of Allah. Some of these are as follows: The Mahdi
(the rightly guided one) will rule the world like Prophet Dhu'l-Qarnayn
and Prophet Sulayman. (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi
\`Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p. 29)

There have been four great kings on the earth:two were believers and
two unbelievers. The believers were Dhu'l-Qarnayn and Sulayman, and the
unbelievers were Nimrod and Bakhtinasr. There will be a fifth king, from
the People of my House. (Ibn al-Jawzi)

**The situation before the Mahdi's emergence**

o At the end of time, their rulers will cause My people severe trouble
in such a way that there will be no comfort for Muslims anywhere.
(Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir az-Zaman, p.
12)

This hadith points out that before the Mahdi comes, those who lack
religious morals and have a cruel and merciless character will come to
power in some Muslim countries. As a matter of fact, some contemporary
Muslim rulers oppress Muslims and crush people with their oppressive and
despotic regimes. In other countries, people are subjected to trouble
because their rulers are unqualified to rule. Muslims in some countries,
particularly Iraq, Libya, Syria, Somalia, Ethiopia, Afghanistan,
Tunisia, and Djibouti, are oppressed by their respectives, and so are
subjected to various hardship and problems. Muslims are prevented from
practicing their religion and worshipping, and economic difficulties
make life harder.

o There will be a dusty and smoky tribulation like patches of dark
night... (Abu Dawud) The word 'tribulation (fitnah)' implies anything
that turns peoples' reason and hearts away from the true path, or war,
incitement, chaos, disorder and conflict. The tribulation in the hadith
will leave smoke and dust behind it, we learn.

Furthermore, the way that tribulation is described as 'darkness' in the
hadith, can be seen as an indication that its origins are unclear, that
it is unexpected. Looking at it from that regard, it is probable that
the hadith is referring to one of the world's worst terrorist attack, on
the cities of New York and Washington in the United States on September
11, 2001. Therefore, this most saddening act of terror, which caused the
lives and injuries of thousands of innocent people, may well be that
'tribulation like patches of dark night' foretold by the hadith as the
sign of the Mahdi's emergence.

o The Mahdi will only appear at a time when people are experiencing
great fear and are afflicted by disturbances and civil war and other
disasters.(Reported by Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn 'Ali) Most hadiths about
the Mahdi's advent focus on the prophecy that turmoil, insecurity, and
disorder will rule the world before his coming. Massacres, wars, and
confrontations are one of the major features of such a period. Besides,
the hadith draws attention to the fact that massacres will occur all
over the world.

During the two world wars of the twentieth century, an estimated 65
million people were killed. The number of the civilians slaughtered for
political reasons during the same century is estimated to be well over
180 million. This is an extraordinarily high figure compared with
previous centuries.

o The Mahdi will not emerge unless innocent people are massacred, and
he will appear when those on Earth and up in the sky can no longer put
up with such massacres... (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar
fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p. 37) While the hadiths about his
emergence mention such massacres as commonplace, they also emphasize
that such massacres will target innocent people. As we discussed
earlier, almost all of the wars today target people. So, civilians and
such innocent people as children, the elderly, and women are
slaughtered. Targeting these defenseless people in particular has
resulted in more comprehensive massacres, while the number of people
dying as a result continues to climb.

Since terror seeks to spread fear and horror, the very group on which
such attacks focus are often innocent civilians. o Corruption that no
one can escape will occur and spread immediately to another place from
where it stays. (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat
al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, pp. 21-22)

The term 'corruption (fitnah)' also means 'war, disorder, quarrel,
dispute.' Thus, civil and other wars and disorder, 'which spreads to
another place from where it stays,' continues unceasingly all over the
world during the current century. In particular, the twentieth century
is remembered as 'the century of wars.' And, this new century again
started off with wars and terror that continues.

o Allah Almighty will send the Mahdi after despair has reached the
point that people will say, "There is no Mahdi." (Narrated by Nu'aym ibn
Hammad) This hadith informs us that one sign of the End Times is the
people's despair of the Mahdi's coming. People who struggle with war,
starvation, injustice, epidemics, and all forms of depravity in the End
Times lose their hope that such disasters will ever end. Many Muslims,
on the other hand, start to despair that Islamic morality will ever
prevail and believe that evil will spread even further. Indeed in our
day, we frequently see the examples of this spirit. Despite the
existence of countless hadiths about the Mahdi's coming and the Golden
Age marked with great blessings, many people believe that such a period
will never come.

This assumption is also a sign of the End Times. In a time of despair,
people will enjoy the benefits of the prevalence of the morality of the
Qur'an, thanks to Allah's mercy on people.

o People will prosper until the ninety-fifth year, that is, their
business will prosper. In the ninety-seventh and the ninety-ninth year,
their possessions will go to waste... (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl
al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p. 54)

It is highly probable that this refers to the year 1995, a period when
people had a relatively better life and its conditions have not become
so difficult. Indeed, as described in the hadith, in this year, people
will have enough income to earn a living and have some possessions.
However, 1997 and 1999 was a period during which the economy
deteriorated and poverty spread. In this time, possessions lost their
value. Such an event can happen very quickly, as exemplified by
Argentina's economic crisis in the recent past.

o The inhabitants of Egypt and Sham will kill their ruler and his
commands... (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat
al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p. 49) When we examine Egypt's recent history, we
see that a ruler was killed: Anwar Sadat, who ruled Egypt from 1970-81,
was killed by his opponents during a military review in 1981. Other
Egyptian leaders who have been killed include Prime Ministers Boutros
Ghali (1910), and Mahmoud Nukrashy Pasha (1948).

The word 'Sham' is not only used for Damascus, for it also means 'left'
and has long been used to refer to those countries to the left of the
Hijaz (where the cities of Makka and Madina stand). Many leaders have
been killed in the region, among them former Syrian prime ministers
Salah al-Deen Beetar (1920), Droubi Pasha (1921), and Muhsin al-Barazi
(1949), King Abdullah of Jordan (1951), and Lebanese Phalange leader
Bashir Gemayel (1982).

o The people of Sham will take prisoner the tribes of Egypt... (Ibn
Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi 'Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar,
p. 49) Today, the states in the region in question include Israel. That
is why the hadith could be pointing to the war between the State of
Israel and Egypt, and the invasion of Egyptian territory.

o People will compete with one another in constructing high buildings.
(Bukhari)

Time will pass quickly. (Bukhari)

Great distances will be traversed in short spans of time. (Ahmad,
Musnad)

The Last hour will not come before time contracts, a year being like a
month, a month like a week, a week like a day, a day like an hour, and
an hour like the kindling of a fire. (Tirmidhi)

The century we are living in has seen the capability of constructing
supersonic aeroplanes, and the ability, thanks to trains and other
improvements in means of transport, to make journeys in a few minutes
that would once have taken months, and in great comfort. What this
hadith indicates is also taking place in this manner.

Communication between continents would take weeks hundreds of years
ago, but is now a matter of seconds, thanks to the Internet and
improvements in technology. Goods that used to take weeks to arrive,
following a long journey, can now be delivered at a moment's notice.
Billions of books can now be printed in the time it would take to write
a single letter just a few centuries ago. As well, other technological
developments have meant that we no longer waste large amounts of time on
cooking, cleaning and child minding. One could go on citing similar
examples. Yet, the important thing here, of course, is that the signs of
End Times, as set out by the Prophet (saas) in the seventh century, are
now happening one by one.

o The end of a man's whip will speak to him. (Tirmidhi)

The whip is known as a tool used in earlier times when riding or
guiding pack animals such as horses or camels. When we look closely at
this hadith, we can see that the Prophet (saas) is making a comparison.
Let us ask people living at the present time a question, 'Is there a
modern implement that talks and resembles a whip?'

The most logical reply to that question is the mobile telephone, with
its long antenna, or similar communications equipment. If we bear in
mind that mobile or satellite phones are comparatively recent
developments, then the wisdom behind the Prophet's (saas) description of
1,400 years ago is even clearer. That is just one more indication that
we are living through the End Times. o A person's own voice will speak
to him. (Mukhtasar Tazkirah Qurtubi)

The message in the hadith is quite clear: A person's hearing the sound
of his own voice is another sign of the End Times. There is no doubt
that in order to hear the sound of one's own voice, one first needs to
record it, and then to play it back to himself. Sound recording and
reproduction equipment are products of the twentieth century. That
development marked a scientific turning point, and led to the birth of
the communications and media industries. Sound reproduction is nearly
perfect now, thanks to computer and laser technologies. In short, the
electronic gadgets of our time, microphones and speakers, allow us to
record sound and play it back, and are also manifestations of that
related in the above hadith.

o A hand will be extended from the sky, and people will look and see
it. (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi 'Alamat al-Mahdi
al-Muntazar, p. 53)

The sign of that day is a hand extended in the sky and people stopping
to look at it. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir
al-zaman, p. 69)

The Arabic word for 'hand' in the above hadiths is 'yed.' As well as
'hand,' the dictionary also provides such meanings as 'power, force,
strength, means etc.' It is probable that in these hadiths the word is
used in those senses. The idea of a 'power, force, strength or means'
extending from the sky and looked upon by people might not make much
sense in the context of past ages. Yet, it sheds considerable light on
equipment such as the television, camera and computer, which have become
such indispensable parts of modern life, as described in the hadiths. In
other words, the 'hand' mentioned in these hadiths is used in the sense
of force. It clearly points to pictures coming down from the sky in
waves, in other words television broadcasting.

o Life spans will grow longer. (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl
al-Mukhtasar fi 'Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p. 43) Fourteen centuries
have passed since the Prophet (saas) brought forward that news. The
average expected lifespan is much higher now than it has been at any
other time in recent history. A great difference can be seen even
between the figures for the beginning and the end of the twentieth
century. For instance, it is estimated that a baby born in 1995 will
live some 35 years longer than one born around 1900.11 Another striking
example on the same subject is that in the past very few people lived to
be 100, whereas now it is a great deal more common.

**SIMILARITIES BETWEEN THE MAHDI'S TIME AND THOSE
OF PROPHETS SULAYMAN (AS) AND DHU'L-QARNAYN (AS)**

The Mahdi is the rebirth of the noble ethics of Prophets Sulayman (as)
and Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) in the End Times, but on a different and larger
scale. Their noble ethics' spiritual, rational, social, and mental
manifestations will reappear in the End Times. The eras of Mahdi and
these two Prophets are times when the noble Islamic morality is
practiced widely. All three of these eras are pleasing to Allah. The
Qur'an and the Prophet's hadiths also refer to the periods of
Bakhtinasr, Nimrod, and Pharaoh, which are times of wickedness and
unbelief. Immediately after these evil periods, Allah made Islamic
morality prevail. Similarly, our Lord will offer a time ruled by Islamic
morality in the End Times: the Golden Age.

This Golden Age will be a grander reflection of Prophets Sulayman's
(as) and Dhu'l-Qarnayn's (as) times. Mahdism means the prevalence of
peace, happiness, love, brotherhood, graciousness, sacrifice, humane
behavior, and the spirit of cooperation. Here are some examples of the
similarities between these two Prophets' times and the Golden Age.

**The Mahdi's Worldwide Rule**

As stated earlier, Prophet Sulayman (as) and Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) made
Islamic morality rule the world. They ruled wide territories and had
very powerful armed forces. This shows a similarity to the Golden Age.
During the Golden Age, Islamic morality also will rule the world. People
will convert to Islam in great numbers, while ideologies that deny Allah
will wither away and Islam will be practiced as it was in the time of
our Prophet Muhammad (saas). Some of the hadiths describe the Golden Age
as follows:

The Mahdi will own the entire world. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi
\`Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-Zaman, p. 10) The Mahdi will invade all the
places between East and West. (Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl
al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p. 56)

**The Mahdi's Rare and Noble Knowledge Bestowed upon Prophets Sulayman
(as) and Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as)**

Earlier we mentioned the knowledge Allah bestowed upon Prophet Sulayman
(as), such as the ability to rule jinns and devils, speak with birds,
hear the ants' communication, and had power over the wind and used
copper as he wished. Each of these skills separates him from ordinary
people. Of Prophet Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as), the Qur'an says: 'Our knowledge
encompasses all that happened to him' (Surat al-Kahf: 91). He was one of
the people blessed by knowledge.

The Mahdi also will have certain special skills. In his book Mevzuatu'l
ulum (11/246), Taskopruluzade Ahmet Efendi wrote that the Mahdi will
possess ilm-e-jafr (the art of divination through numbers). Another
account says that: He is called the Mahdi because he is given guidance
for a situation unknown to anyone. (Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi
\`Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-Zaman, p. 77)

Our Prophet (saas) said that the Mahdi will understand the language of
animals and have dominion over people and jinns, just like Prophet
Sulayman (as) did. The Mahdi is a person who speaks the language of
birds and other animals. Therefore, his justice will manifest itself
over all people and jinns. (Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rasul Barzanji,
Al-Isha'ah li-ashrat al-sa'ah, p. 188)

**Their support for peace and preference for diplomacy**

We stressed earlier that Prophet Sulayman (as) was very peaceful,
loving, tolerant, and forgiving in his relations with neighboring
countries. He preferred to solve problems through diplomacy and used
democratic means. Prophet Sulayman (as) created a superior culture and
strengthened his dominion through diplomacy, art, and culture. Despite
his irresistible and overwhelmingly powerful armies, however, he never
used military force. Prophet Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as), was also known as the
'person who prevents strife and disorder,' and brought peace and calm to
people. Therefore, the times of these two Prophets look strikingly
similar to the Golden Age. In the Golden Age, people will become Muslims
out of their own will, Islamic morality will prevail worldwide, and
there will be no war. Accounts of this age say:

No one will be woken up from their sleep or have a bleeding nose. (Ibn
Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi
al-Muntazar, p. 42) The Mahdi will follow the way of the Prophet. He
will not wake up a sleeping person or shed blood. (Muhammad ibn 'Abd
al-Rasul Barzanji, Al-Isha'ah li-ashrat al-sa'ah, p. 163) As these
hadiths tell it, the Mahdi will bring Islamic morality and peace to the
entire world and therefore end all war and violence. He will work to
begin a cultural transformation and lead people toward Islam's moral
code. During that time, with Allah's permission, the following verse
will be realized:

When Allah's help and victory have arrived and you have seen people
entering Allah's religion in droves, then glorify your Lord's praise and
ask His forgiveness. He is the Ever-Returning. (Surat an-Nasr: 1-3)

**Urging people to religious morality, and their quick action**

Prophet Sulayman's (as) quick, rational decisions are an important
example for all believers. The letters he wrote to the Queen of Saba, in
which he urged her and her people to start believing in Allah, showed
his power of communication. His bringing the Queen of Saba's throne by
using a person who possessed knowledge of the Book proved his power for
quick decision-making. Prophet Dhu'l-Qarnayn's (as) decision to build a
strong wall-so strong that it would last until Doomsday-against the
attacks of the Yajuj and Majuj tribes show his power and rationality.
The Golden Age will witness very similar events.

During the Golden Age, people will embrace Islam, and there will be
wide-ranging, sweeping activities toward this end. All nations, one
after another, will adopt Islamic morality, and opposing ideologies will
be wiped away through quick and lasting action. All cruel systems will
be buried in the sands of time. In the words of the renowned Islamic
theologian Muhyiddin Ibn Arabi:

Allah will give so much power to the Mahdi. He will remove cruelty from
the world overnight, religion will be established, and Islam will be
revived. The Mahdi will restore its lost value to it, and it will come
to life after its apparent demise ... Ignorant people, misers and
cowards alike, will be very knowledgeable, generous, and brave. ... They
will practice religion as in the time of Prophet Muhammad (saas)....
(Muhyiddin Ibn Arabi, Al-Futuhat al-Makkia, p. 66; Muhammad ibn 'Abd
al-Rasul Barzanji, Al-Isha'ah li-ashrat al-sa'ah, p. 186)

**Importance Placed on Construction**

We know that Prophet Sulayman (as) focused on construction projects. He
built high arches, statues, huge dishes like cisterns, and great
built-in cooking vats by using the jinns and devils who did his bidding.
Everybody who saw his splendid palace, especially the Queen of Saba,
greatly admired it. The technology that Prophet Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as)
employed to build the wall was so advanced that it cannot be destroyed,
unless Allah wills it. In the hadiths of Prophet Muhammad (saas), we are
told that construction will be important during the Golden Age. During
this age, peace, tranquility and a very developed civilization will be
brought to cities. For example,

The Mahdi works in the construction of Constantinople and other places.
(Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi
al-Muntazar, p. 40)

**Using Wealth and Splendor for Islam's Benefit and Allah's Good
Pleasure**

Prophet Sulayman (as) used his wealth to explain Allah's religion and
spread Islamic morality throughout the world. In the countries he
invaded, he first called on people to believe in Allah and salvation.
The letter which he sent to the Queen of Saba, in which he invited both
her and her people to Islam, is powerful testimony of that. Prophet
Dhu'l-Qarnayn (as) also had strong dominion, as is seen in his words:
'The power my Lord has granted me is better than that.' (Surat al-Kahf:
95). He used his great power to prevent disorder.

During the Golden Age, people will enjoy great wealth, prosperity, and
peace. The Mahdi will use all of his wealth to spread Allah's religion,
and will follow the noble morality and the dictates of peace in the
countries he comes victorious. His unparalleled practices will soften
people's hearts and lead them to Islamic morality. Thus, within a very
short time this morality will rule the world. Some of the hadiths
concerning this time are as follows:

The Mahdi will remain in my community for at least seven, or perhaps
eight or nine years. In those years my community will enjoy a time of
happiness such as they have never experienced before. Heaven will send
down rain upon them in torrents, the earth will not withhold any of its
plants, and wealth will be available to all. (At-Tabarani) Before
pledging their allegiance to him, people will flock to where he resides,
and everyone who goes there will enjoy the divine plenty. (Ibn Hajar
al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi \`Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, p.
25)


