Conclusion
==========

In the Qur'an, Allah states that He has brought about many miracles by
means of the prophets. When the Prophet Musa (as) threw down his staff,
for instance, it turned into a serpent, and when he smote the sea with
that staff it divided into two, leaving a dry path down the middle. The
Prophet 'Isa (as) came into the world without a father, and spoke while
he was still in the cradle. Another miracle is the way he was able to
heal the sick... All these miracles were support and help given to them,
in the sight of Allah, to allow them to convince the people and lead
them to believe in them.

Allah supported the Prophet Muhammad (saas) by means of both the
miracles in the Qur'an and with information given him regarding the
unknown. The Prophet (saas) supplied details about events that would
happen in the near and distant future. Seeing these actually come to be
is both a means of increasing the excitement of believers and of warming
the hearts of unbelievers towards Islam.

Events that would have seemed impossible to happen in his own time, and
that no one could even have imagined, which are now occurring one after
the other, are clear evidence of the fact that the Prophet (saas) was
relating special knowledge. We must make it clear that those who refuse
to be guided to the true path will nevertheless still refuse to believe,
despite the clear evidence and miracles of the Prophet (saas) and the
Qur'an. Allah reveals that fact in the Qur'an:

They have sworn by Allah with their most earnest oaths that if a Sign
comes to them they will believe in it. Say: 'The Signs are in Allah's
control alone.' What will make you realise that even if a Sign did come,
they would still not believe? (Surat al-An'am: 109)

**THE DECEPTION OF EVOLUTION**

In the present day, there are people who live in a manner far removed
from Allah, and who even reject faith and deny the existence of Allah
for their own ends. On account of their blindness and mindless
fearlessness, they try to influence others and turn them away from
Allah. They have put forward a whole range of inconsistent ideas and
twisted ideologies by which to do this. One of these is the theory of
evolution.

**The Ideological Collapse of Darwinism**

The aspect of Darwinism that stops it from being a claim of interest
only to the scientific world and makes it of great importance to society
as a whole is its ideological dimension. The answer it gives to the
question of how living things, including mankind, came into existence
makes Darwinism the basis of a number of philosophies, worldviews and
political ideologies.

Here, we shall consider the relationship between Darwinism and
materialist philosophy. Materialist philosophy, or "materialism," is a
system of thought going as far back as ancient Greece. Materialism rests
on the assumption that matter is the only thing that exists. According
to materialist philosophy, matter has always existed, and will continue
to do so for all time. Again according to this philosophy, nothing
exists beyond matter. Naturally, materialism is also reflected in the
political arena, with communism indisputably taking pride of place in
this regard. Karl Marx (1818-83) and Friedrich Engels (1820-95),
regarded as the founders of communism, were also the founders of
dialectical materialism. In any case, communism is nothing more than
materialist philosophy adapted to the social sciences by Marx and
Engels.

Communism is today regarded as an ideology consigned to the wastes of
history, whereas the fact is that it is still exceedingly influential.
The destructive effects of this ideology can still be felt in many
countries.

This is where Darwinism assumes great importance. Since Darwinism, or
the theory of evolution, maintains that living things were not created
but came into being by chance, it has received a wide acceptance among
materialist ideologies, and has been adopted as the "basic foundation"
of communism in particular. All the main communist ideologues have
accepted the theory word for word, and have based their ideologies upon
it.

In a letter to Friedrich Engels in 1860, for instance, Karl Marx said
of Darwin's book that "This is the book which contains the basis in
natural history for our view."12 In another letter the following year,
this time to Ferdinand Lassalle (1825-64), Marx said: "Darwin's book is
very important and serves me as a basis in natural science for the class
struggle in history."13 Similarly Mao Tse Tung, the founder of Chinese
communism,

openly stated that "The foundations of Chinese socialism rest on Darwin
and the theory of evolution."14 Thus the intellectual struggle against
communism must be aimed at materialist philosophy and, therefore, the
theory of evolution. It is also clear that the wide acceptance of the
theory of evolution in society will further nourish materialism as well
as communism.


**The Scientific Collapse of Darwinism**

Although this doctrine goes back as far as ancient Greece, the theory
of evolution was advanced extensively in the nineteenth century. The
most important development that made it the top topic of the world of
science was Charles Darwin's The Origin of Species, published in 1859.
In this book, he denied that Allah created different living species on
Earth separately, for he claimed that all living beings had a common
ancestor and had diversified over time through small changes. Darwin's
theory was not based on any concrete scientific finding; as he also
accepted, it was just an "assumption." Moreover, as Darwin confessed in
the long chapter of his book titled "Difficulties of the Theory," the
theory failed in the face of many critical questions.

Darwin invested all of his hopes in new scientific discoveries, which
he expected to solve these difficulties. However, contrary to his
expectations, scientific findings expanded the dimensions of these
difficulties. The defeat of Darwinism in the face of science can be
reviewed under three basic topics:

1) The theory cannot explain how life originated on Earth.
2) No scientific finding shows that the "evolutionary mechanisms"
proposed by the theory have any evolutionary power at all.
3) The fossil record proves the exact opposite of what the theory
suggests.

In this section, we will examine these three basic points in general
outlines:

The First Insurmountable Step:

**The Origin of Life**

The theory of evolution posits that all living species evolved from a
single living cell that emerged on the primitive Earth 3.8 billion years
ago. How a single cell could generate millions of complex living species
and, if such an evolution really occurred, why traces of it cannot be
observed in the fossil record are some of the questions that the theory
cannot answer. However, first and foremost, we need to ask: How did this
"first cell" originate?

Since the theory of evolution denies creation and any kind of
supernatural intervention, it maintains that the "first cell" originated
coincidentally within the laws of nature, without any design, plan or
arrangement. According to the theory, inanimate matter must have
produced a living cell as a result of coincidences. Such a claim,
however, is inconsistent with the most unassailable rules of biology.

**"Life Comes from Life"**

In his book, Darwin never referred to the origin of life. The primitive
understanding of science in his time rested on the assumption that
living beings had a very simple structure. Since medieval times,
spontaneous generation, which asserts that non-living materials came
together to form living organisms, had been widely accepted. It was
commonly believed that insects came into being from food leftovers, and
mice from wheat. Interesting experiments were conducted to prove this
theory. Some wheat was placed on a dirty piece of cloth, and it was
believed that mice would originate from it after a while.

Similarly, maggots developing in rotting meat was assumed to be
evidence of spontaneous generation. However, it was later understood
that worms did not appear on meat spontaneously, but were carried there
by flies in the form of larvae, invisible to the naked eye. Even when
Darwin wrote The Origin of Species, the belief that bacteria could come
into existence from non-living matter was widely accepted in the world
of science.

However, five years after the publication of Darwin's book, Louis
Pasteur announced his results after long studies and experiments, that
disproved spontaneous generation, a cornerstone of Darwin's theory. In
his triumphal lecture at the Sorbonne in 1864, Pasteur said: "Never will
the doctrine of spontaneous generation recover from the mortal blow
struck by this simple experiment."15

For a long time, advocates of the theory of evolution resisted these
findings. However, as the development of science unraveled the complex
structure of the cell of a living being, the idea that life could come
into being coincidentally faced an even greater impasse.

**Inconclusive Efforts in the Twentieth Century**

The first evolutionist who took up the subject of the origin of life in
the twentieth century was the renowned Russian biologist Alexander
Oparin. With various theses he advanced in the 1930s, he tried to prove
that a living cell could originate by coincidence. These studies,
however, were doomed to failure, and Oparin had to make the following
confession:

Unfortunately, however, the problem of the origin of the cell is
perhaps the most obscure point in the whole study of the evolution of
organisms.16 Evolutionist followers of Oparin tried to carry out
experiments to solve this problem. The best known experiment was carried
out by the American chemist Stanley Miller in 1953. Combining the gases
he alleged to have existed in the primordial Earth's atmosphere in an
experiment set-up, and adding energy to the mixture, Miller synthesized
several organic molecules (amino acids) present in the structure of
proteins.

Barely a few years had passed before it was revealed that this
experiment, which was then presented as an important step in the name of
evolution, was invalid, for the atmosphere used in the experiment was
very different from the real Earth conditions.17 After a long silence,
Miller confessed that the atmosphere medium he used was unrealistic.18

All the evolutionists' efforts throughout the twentieth century to
explain the origin of life ended in failure. The geochemist Jeffrey
Bada, from the San Diego Scripps Institute accepts this fact in an
article published in Earth magazine in 1998: Today as we leave the
twentieth century, we still face the biggest unsolved problem that we
had when we entered the twentieth century: How did life originate on
Earth?19

**The Complex Structure of Life**

The primary reason why the theory of evolution ended up in such a great
impasse regarding the origin of life is that even those living organisms
deemed to be the simplest have incredibly complex structures. The cell
of a living thing is more complex than all of our man-made technological
products. Today, even in the most developed laboratories of the world, a
living cell cannot be produced by bringing organic chemicals together.
The conditions required for the formation of a cell are too great in
quantity to be explained away by coincidences. The probability of
proteins, the building blocks of a cell, being synthesized
coincidentally, is 1 in 10950 for an average protein made up of 500
amino acids. In mathematics, a probability smaller than 1 over 1050 is
considered to be impossible in practical terms.

The DNA molecule, which is located in the nucleus of a cell and which
stores genetic information, is an incredible databank. If the
information coded in DNA were written down, it would make a giant
library consisting of an estimated 900 volumes of encyclopedias
consisting of 500 pages each. A very interesting dilemma emerges at this
point: DNA can replicate itself only with the help of some specialized
proteins (enzymes). However, the synthesis of these enzymes can be
realized only by the information coded in DNA. As they both depend on
each other, they have to exist at the same time for replication. This
brings the scenario that life originated by itself to a deadlock. Prof.
Leslie Orgel, an evolutionist of repute from the University of San
Diego, California, confesses this fact in the September 1994 issue of
the Scientific American magazine:

It is extremely improbable that proteins and nucleic acids, both of
which are structurally complex, arose spontaneously in the same place at
the same time. Yet it also seems impossible to have one without the
other. And so, at first glance, one might have to conclude that life
could never, in fact, have originated by chemical means.20

No doubt, if it is impossible for life to have originated from natural
causes, then it has to be accepted that life was "created" in a
supernatural way. This fact explicitly invalidates the theory of
evolution, whose main purpose is to deny creation.

**Imaginary Mechanisms of Evolution**

The second important point that negates Darwin's theory is that both
concepts put forward by the theory as "evolutionary mechanisms" were
understood to have, in reality, no evolutionary power. Darwin based his
evolution allegation entirely on the mechanism of "natural selection."
The importance he placed on this mechanism was evident in the name of
his book: The Origin of Species, By Means of Natural Selection… Natural
selection holds that those living things that are stronger and more
suited to the natural conditions of their habitats will survive in the
struggle for life. For example, in a deer herd under the threat of
attack by wild animals, those that can run faster will survive.
Therefore, the deer herd will be comprised of faster and stronger
individuals. However, unquestionably, this mechanism will not cause deer
to evolve and transform themselves into another living species, for
instance, horses.

Therefore, the mechanism of natural selection has no evolutionary
power. Darwin was also aware of this fact and had to state this in his
book The Origin of Species:

Natural selection can do nothing until favourable individual
differences or variations occur.21

**Lamarck's Impact**

So, how could these "favorable variations" occur? Darwin tried to
answer this question from the standpoint of the primitive understanding
of science at that time. According to the French biologist Chevalier de
Lamarck (1744-1829), who lived before Darwin, living creatures passed on
the traits they acquired during their lifetime to the next generation.
He asserted that these traits, which accumulated from one generation to
another, caused new species to be formed. For instance, he claimed that
giraffes evolved from antelopes; as they struggled to eat the leaves of
high trees, their necks were extended from generation to generation.

Darwin also gave similar examples. In his book The Origin of Species,
for instance, he said that some bears going into water to find food
transformed themselves into whales over time.22 However, the laws of
inheritance discovered by Gregor Mendel (1822-84) and verified by the
science of genetics, which flourished in the twentieth century, utterly
demolished the legend that acquired traits were passed on to subsequent
generations. Thus, natural selection fell out of favor as an
evolutionary mechanism.


**Neo-Darwinism and Mutations**

In order to find a solution, Darwinists advanced the "Modern Synthetic
Theory," or as it is more commonly known, Neo-Darwinism, at the end of
the 1930's. Neo-Darwinism added mutations, which are distortions formed
in the genes of living beings due to such external factors as radiation
or replication errors, as the "cause of favorable variations" in
addition to natural mutation.

Today, the model that stands for evolution in the world is
Neo-Darwinism. The theory maintains that millions of living beings
formed as a result of a process whereby numerous complex organs of these
organisms (e.g., ears, eyes, lungs, and wings) underwent "mutations,"
that is, genetic disorders. Yet, there is an outright scientific fact
that totally undermines this theory: Mutations do not cause living
beings to develop; on the contrary, they are always harmful.

The reason for this is very simple: DNA has a very complex structure,
and random effects can only harm it. The American geneticist B.G.
Ranganathan explains this as follows:

First, genuine mutations are very rare in nature. Secondly, most
mutations are harmful since they are random, rather than orderly changes
in the structure of genes; any random change in a highly ordered system
will be for the worse, not for the better. For example, if an earthquake
were to shake a highly ordered structure such as a building, there would
be a random change in the framework of the building which, in all
probability, would not be an improvement.23

Not surprisingly, no mutation example, which is useful, that is, which
is observed to develop the genetic code, has been observed so far. All
mutations have proved to be harmful. It was understood that mutation,
which is presented as an "evolutionary mechanism," is actually a genetic
occurrence that harms living things, and leaves them disabled. (The most
common effect of mutation on human beings is cancer.) Of course, a
destructive mechanism cannot be an "evolutionary mechanism." Natural
selection, on the other hand, "can do nothing by itself," as Darwin also
accepted. This fact shows us that there is no "evolutionary mechanism"
in nature. Since no evolutionary mechanism exists, no such any imaginary
process called "evolution" could have taken place.


**The Fossil Record: No Sign of Intermediate Forms**

The clearest evidence that the scenario suggested by the theory of
evolution did not take place is the fossil record. According to this
theory, every living species has sprung from a predecessor. A previously
existing species turned into something else over time and all species
have come into being in this way. In other words, this transformation
proceeds gradually over millions of years. Had this been the case,
numerous intermediary species should have existed and lived within this
long transformation period.

For instance, some half-fish/half-reptiles should have lived in the
past which had acquired some reptilian traits in addition to the fish
traits they already had. Or there should have existed some
reptile-birds, which acquired some bird traits in addition to the
reptilian traits they already had. Since these would be in a
transitional phase, they should be disabled, defective, crippled living
beings. Evolutionists refer to these imaginary creatures, which they
believe to have lived in the past, as "transitional forms."

If such animals ever really existed, there should be millions and even
billions of them in number and variety. More importantly, the remains of
these strange creatures should be present in the fossil record. In The
Origin of Species, Darwin explained: If my theory be true, numberless
intermediate varieties, linking most closely all of the species of the
same group together must assuredly have existed.... Consequently,
evidence of their former existence could be found only amongst fossil
remains.24

**Darwin's Hopes Shattered**

However, although evolutionists have been making strenuous efforts to
find fossils since the middle of the nineteenth century all over the
world, no transitional forms have yet been uncovered. All of the
fossils, contrary to the evolutionists' expectations, show that life
appeared on Earth all of a sudden and fully-formed.

One famous British paleontologist, Derek V. Ager, admits this fact,
even though he is an evolutionist: The point emerges that if we examine
the fossil record in detail, whether at the level of orders or of
species, we find - over and over again - not gradual evolution, but the
sudden explosion of one group at the expense of another.25 This means
that in the fossil record, all living species suddenly emerge as fully
formed, without any intermediate forms in between. This is just the
opposite of Darwin's assumptions. Also, this is very strong evidence
that all living things are created. The only explanation of a living
species emerging suddenly and complete in every detail without any
evolutionary ancestor is that it was created. This fact is admitted also
by the widely known evolutionist biologist Douglas Futuyma:

Creation and evolution, between them, exhaust the possible explanations
for the origin of living things. Organisms either appeared on the earth
fully developed or they did not. If they did not, they must have
developed from pre-existing species by some process of modification. If
they did appear in a fully developed state, they must indeed have been
created by some omnipotent intelligence.26 Fossils show that living
beings emerged fully developed and in a perfect state on the earth. That
means that "the origin of species," contrary to Darwin's supposition, is
not evolution, but creation.


