The Tale of Human Evolution
===========================

The subject most often brought up by advocates of the theory of
evolution is the subject of the origin of man. The Darwinist claim holds
that modern man evolved from ape-like creatures. During this alleged
evolutionary process, which is supposed to have started 4-5 million
years ago, some "transitional forms" between modern man and his
ancestors are supposed to have existed. According to this completely
imaginary scenario, four basic "categories" are listed:

1. Australopithecus
2. Homo habilis
3. Homo erectus
4. Homo sapiens

Evolutionists call man's so-called first ape-like ancestors
Australopithecus, which means "South African ape." These living beings
are actually nothing but an old ape species that has become extinct.
Extensive research done on various Australopithecus specimens by two
world famous anatomists from England and the USA, namely, Lord Solly
Zuckerman and Prof. Charles Oxnard, shows that these apes belonged to an
ordinary ape species that became extinct and bore no resemblance to
humans.27

Evolutionists classify the next stage of human evolution as "homo,"
that is "man." According to their claim, the living beings in the Homo
series are more developed than Australopithecus. Evolutionists devise a
fanciful evolution scheme by arranging different fossils of these
creatures in a particular order. This scheme is imaginary because it has
never been proved that there is an evolutionary relation between these
different classes.

Ernst Mayr, one of the twentieth century's most important
evolutionists, contends in his book One Long Argument that "particularly
historical [puzzles] such as the origin of life or of Homo sapiens, are
extremely difficult and may even resist a final, satisfying
explanation."28 By outlining the link chain as Australopithecus \> Homo
habilis \> Homo erectus \> Homo sapiens, evolutionists imply that each
of these species is one another's ancestor. However, recent findings of
paleoanthropologists have revealed that Australopithecus, Homo habilis,
and Homo erectus lived at different parts of the world at the same
time.29

Moreover, a certain segment of humans classified as Homo erectus have
lived up until very modern times. Homo sapiens neandarthalensis and Homo
sapiens sapiens (modern man) co-existed in the same region.30

This situation apparently indicates the invalidity of the claim that
they are ancestors of one another. A paleontologist from Harvard
University, Stephen Jay Gould, explains this deadlock of the theory of
evolution, although he is an evolutionist himself:

What has become of our ladder if there are three coexisting lineages of
hominids (A. africanus, the robust australopithecines, and H. habilis),
none clearly derived from another? Moreover, none of the three display
any evolutionary trends during their tenure on earth.31 Put briefly, the
scenario of human evolution, which is "upheld" with the help of various
drawings of some "half ape, half human" creatures appearing in the media
and course books, that is, frankly, by means of propaganda, is nothing
but a tale with no scientific foundation.

Lord Solly Zuckerman, one of the most famous and respected scientists
in the U.K., who carried out research on this subject for years and
studied Australopithecus fossils for 15 years, finally concluded,
despite being an evolutionist himself, that there is, in fact, no such
family tree branching out from ape-like creatures to man.

Zuckerman also made an interesting "spectrum of science" ranging from
those he considered scientific to those he considered unscientific.
According to Zuckerman's spectrum, the most "scientific"-that is,
depending on concrete data-fields of science are chemistry and physics.
After them come the biological sciences and then the social sciences. At
the far end of the spectrum, which is the part considered to be most
"unscientific," are "extra-sensory perception"-concepts such as
telepathy and sixth sense-and finally "human evolution." Zuckerman
explains his reasoning: We then move right off the register of objective
truth into those fields of presumed biological science, like
extrasensory perception or the interpretation of man's fossil history,
where to the faithful [evolutionist] anything is possible - and where
the ardent believer [in evolution] is sometimes able to believe several
contradictory things at the same time.32

The tale of human evolution boils down to nothing but the prejudiced
interpretations of some fossils unearthed by certain people, who blindly
adhere to their theory.

**Technology in the Eye and the Ear**

Another subject that remains unanswered by evolutionary theory is the
excellent quality of perception in the eye and the ear. Before passing
on to the subject of the eye, let us briefly answer the question of how
we see. Light rays coming from an object fall oppositely on the eye's
retina. Here, these light rays are transmitted into electric signals by
cells and reach a tiny spot at the back of the brain, the "center of
vision." These electric signals are perceived in this center as an image
after a series of processes. With this technical background, let us do
some thinking.

The brain is insulated from light. That means that its inside is
completely dark, and that no light reaches the place where it is
located. Thus, the "center of vision" is never touched by light and may
even be the darkest place you have ever known. However, you observe a
luminous, bright world in this pitch darkness.

The image formed in the eye is so sharp and distinct that even the
technology of the twentieth century has not been able to attain it. For
instance, look at the book you are reading, your hands with which you
are holding it, and then lift your head and look around you. Have you
ever seen such a sharp and distinct image as this one at any other
place? Even the most developed television screen produced by the
greatest television producer in the world cannot provide such a sharp
image for you.

This is a three-dimensional, colored, and extremely sharp image. For
more than 100 years, thousands of engineers have been trying to achieve
this sharpness. Factories, huge premises were established, much research
has been done, plans and designs have been made for this purpose. Again,
look at a TV screen and the book you hold in your hands. You will see
that there is a big difference in sharpness and distinction. Moreover,
the TV screen shows you a two-dimensional image, whereas with your eyes,
you watch a three-dimensional perspective with depth.

For many years, tens of thousands of engineers have tried to make a
three-dimensional TV and achieve the vision quality of the eye. Yes,
they have made a three-dimensional television system, but it is not
possible to watch it without putting on special 3-D glasses; moreover,
it is only an artificial three-dimension. The background is more
blurred, the foreground appears like a paper setting. Never has it been
possible to produce a sharp and distinct vision like that of the eye. In
both the camera and the television, there is a loss of image quality.

Evolutionists claim that the mechanism producing this sharp and
distinct image has been formed by chance. Now, if somebody told you that
the television in your room was formed as a result of chance, that all
of its atoms just happened to come together and make up this device that
produces an image, what would you think? How can atoms do what thousands
of people cannot?

If a device producing a more primitive image than the eye could not
have been formed by chance, then it is very evident that the eye and the
image seen by the eye could not have been formed by chance. The same
situation applies to the ear. The outer ear picks up the available
sounds by the auricle and directs them to the middle ear, the middle ear
transmits the sound vibrations by intensifying them, and the inner ear
sends these vibrations to the brain by translating them into electric
signals. Just as with the eye, the act of hearing finalizes in the
center of hearing in the brain.

The situation in the eye is also true for the ear. That is, the brain
is insulated from sound just as it is from light. It does not let any
sound in. Therefore, no matter how noisy is the outside, the inside of
the brain is completely silent. Nevertheless, the sharpest sounds are
perceived in the brain. In your completely silent brain, you listen to
symphonies, and hear all of the noises in a crowded place. However, were
the sound level in your brain was measured by a precise device at that
moment, complete silence would be found to be prevailing there.

As is the case with imagery, decades of effort have been spent in
trying to generate and reproduce sound that is faithful to the original.
The results of these efforts are sound recorders, high-fidelity systems,
and systems for sensing sound. Despite all of this technology and the
thousands of engineers and experts who have been working on this
endeavor, no sound has yet been obtained that has the same sharpness and
clarity as the sound perceived by the ear. Think of the highest-quality
hi-fi systems produced by the largest company in the music industry.

Even in these devices, when sound is recorded some of it is lost; or
when you turn on a hi-fi you always hear a hissing sound before the
music starts. However, the sounds that are the products of the human
body's technology are extremely sharp and clear. A human ear never
perceives a sound accompanied by a hissing sound or with atmospherics as
does a hi-fi; rather, it perceives sound exactly as it is, sharp and
clear. This is the way it has been since the creation of man.

So far, no man-made visual or recording apparatus has been as sensitive
and successful in perceiving sensory data as are the eye and the ear.
However, as far as seeing and hearing are concerned, a far greater truth
lies beyond all this.

**To Whom Does the Consciousness
That Sees and Hears within
the Brain Belong?**

Who watches an alluring world in the brain, listens to symphonies and
the twittering of birds, and smells the rose?

The stimulations coming from a person's eyes, ears, and nose travel to
the brain as electro-chemical nerve impulses. In biology, physiology,
and biochemistry books, you can find many details about how this image
forms in the brain. However, you will never come across the most
important fact: Who perceives these electro-chemical nerve impulses as
images, sounds, odors, and sensory events in the brain? There is a
consciousness in the brain that perceives all this without feeling any
need for an eye, an ear, and a nose. To whom does this consciousness
belong? Of course it does not belong to the nerves, the fat layer, and
neurons comprising the brain. This is why Darwinist-materialists, who
believe that everything is comprised of matter, cannot answer these
questions.

For this consciousness is the spirit Allah created, which needs neither
the eye to watch the images nor the ear to hear the sounds. Furthermore,
it does not need the brain to think.

Everyone who reads this explicit and scientific fact should ponder on
Almighty Allah, and fear and seek refuge in Him, for He squeezes the
entire universe in a pitch-dark place of a few cubic centimeters in a
three-dimensional, colored, shadowy, and luminous form.


**A Materialist Faith**

The information we have presented so far shows us that the theory of
evolution is a incompatible with scientific findings. The theory's claim
regarding the origin of life is inconsistent with science, the
evolutionary mechanisms it proposes have no evolutionary power, and
fossils demonstrate that the required intermediate forms have never
existed. So, it certainly follows that the theory of evolution should be
pushed aside as an unscientific idea. This is how many ideas, such as
the Earth-centered universe model, have been taken out of the agenda of
science throughout history.

However, the theory of evolution is kept on the agenda of science. Some
people even try to represent criticisms directed against it as an
"attack on science." Why?

The reason is that this theory is an indispensable dogmatic belief for
some circles. These circles are blindly devoted to materialist
philosophy and adopt Darwinism because it is the only materialist
explanation that can be put forward to explain the workings of nature.
Interestingly enough, they also confess this fact from time to time. A
well-known geneticist and an outspoken evolutionist, Richard C. Lewontin
from Harvard University, confesses that he is "first and foremost a
materialist and then a scientist":

It is not that the methods and institutions of science somehow compel
us accept a material explanation of the phenomenal world, but, on the
contrary, that we are forced by our a priori adherence to material
causes to create an apparatus of investigation and a set of concepts
that produce material explanations, no matter how counter-intuitive, no
matter how mystifying to the uninitiated. Moreover, that materialism is
absolute, so we cannot allow a Divine Foot in the door.33

These are explicit statements that Darwinism is a dogma kept alive just
for the sake of adherence to materialism. This dogma maintains that
there is no being save matter. Therefore, it argues that inanimate,
unconscious matter created life. It insists that millions of different
living species (e.g., birds, fish, giraffes, tigers, insects, trees,
flowers, whales, and human beings) originated as a result of the
interactions between matter such as pouring rain, lightning flashes, and
so on, out of inanimate matter. This is a precept contrary both to
reason and science. Yet Darwinists continue to defend it just so as "not
to allow a Divine Foot in the door."

Anyone who does not look at the origin of living beings with a
materialist prejudice will see this evident truth: All living beings are
works of a Creator, Who is All-Powerful, All-Wise, and All-Knowing. This
Creator is Allah, Who created the whole universe from non-existence,
designed it in the most perfect form, and fashioned all living beings.

**The Theory of Evolution is the Most Potent Spell in the World**

Anyone free of prejudice and the influence of any particular ideology,
who uses only his or her reason and logic, will clearly understand that
belief in the theory of evolution, which brings to mind the
superstitions of societies with no knowledge of science or civilization,
is quite impossible.

As explained above, those who believe in the theory of evolution think
that a few atoms and molecules thrown into a huge vat could produce
thinking, reasoning professors and university students; such scientists
as Einstein, Mendel and Newton; such artists as Humphrey Bogart, Frank
Sinatra and Luciano Pavarotti; as well as antelopes, lemon trees, and
carnations. Moreover, as the scientists and professors who believe in
this nonsense are educated people,

it is quite justifiable to speak of this theory as "the most potent
spell in history." Never before has any other belief or idea so taken
away peoples' powers of reason, refused to allow them to think
intelligently and logically and hidden the truth from them as if they
had been blindfolded. This is an even worse and unbelievable blindness
than the Egyptians worshipping the Sun God Ra, totem worship in some
parts of Africa, the people of Saba worshipping the Sun, the tribe of
Prophet Ibrahim (peace be upon him) worshipping idols they had made with
their own hands, or the people of the Prophet Musa (peace be upon him)
worshipping the Golden Calf.

In fact, Allah has pointed to this lack of reason in the Qur'an. In
many verse, He reveals in many verses that some peoples' minds will be
closed and that they will be powerless to see the truth. Some of these
verses are as follows:

As for those who do not believe, it makes no difference to them whether
you warn them or do not warn them, they will not believe. Allah has
sealed up their hearts and hearing and over their eyes is a blindfold.
They will have a terrible punishment. (Surat al-Baqara: 6-7)

… They have hearts with which they do not understand. They have eyes
with which they do not see. They have ears with which they do not hear.
Such people are like cattle. No, they are even further astray! They are
the unaware. (Surat al-A'raf: 179)

Even if We opened up to them a door into heaven, and they spent the day
ascending through it, they would only say: "Our eyesight is befuddled!
Or rather we have been put under a spell!" (Surat al-Hijr: 14-15)

Words cannot express just how astonishing it is that this spell should
hold such a wide community in thrall, keep people from the truth, and
not be broken for 150 years. It is understandable that one or a few
people might believe in impossible scenarios and claims full of
stupidity and illogicality. However, "magic" is the only possible
explanation for people from all over the world believing that
unconscious and lifeless atoms suddenly decided to come together and
form a universe that functions with a flawless system of organization,
discipline, reason, and consciousness; a planet named Earth with all of
its features so perfectly suited to life; and living things full of
countless complex systems.

In fact, the Qur'an relates the incident of Prophet Musa and Pharaoh to
show that some people who support atheistic philosophies actually
influence others by magic. When Pharaoh was told about the true
religion, he told Prophet Musa to meet with his own magicians. When Musa
did so, he told them to demonstrate their abilities first. The verses
continue:

He said: "You throw." And when they threw, they cast a spell on the
people's eyes and caused them to feel great fear of them. They produced
an extremely powerful magic. (Surat al-A'raf: 116)

As we have seen, Pharaoh's magicians were able to deceive everyone,
apart from Musa and those who believed in him. However, his evidence
broke the spell, or "swallowed up what they had forged," as the verse
puts it.

We revealed to Musa, "Throw down your staff." And it immediately
swallowed up what they had forged. So the Truth took place and what they
did was shown to be false. (Surat al-A'raf: 117-119)

As we can see, when people realized that a spell had been cast upon
them and that what they saw was just an illusion, Pharaoh's magicians
lost all credibility. In the present day too, unless those who, under
the influence of a similar spell, believe in these ridiculous claims
under their scientific disguise and spend their lives defending them,
abandon their superstitious beliefs, they also will be humiliated when
the full truth emerges and the spell is broken. In fact, the renowned
British writer and philosopher Malcolm Muggeridge also stated this:

I myself am convinced that the theory of evolution, especially the
extent to which it's been applied, will be one of the great jokes in the
history books in the future. Posterity will marvel that so very flimsy
and dubious an hypothesis could be accepted with the incredible
credulity that it has.34

That future is not far off: On the contrary, people will soon see that
"chance" is not a deity, and will look back on the theory of evolution
as the worst deceit and the most terrible spell in the world. That spell
is already rapidly beginning to be lifted from the shoulders of people
all over the world. Many people who see its true face are wondering with
amazement how they could ever have been taken in by it.


