The Sixth Imam
==============

Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad, the son of the fifth Imam, was born in
83/702. He died in 148/765 according to Shi'ite tradition, poisoned and
martyred through the intrigue of the Abbasid caliph Mansur. After the
death of his father he became Imam by Divine Command and decree of those
who came before him.

During the imamate of the sixth Imam greater possibilities and a more
favorable climate existed for him to propagate religious teachings. This
came about as a result of revolts in Islamic lands, especially the
uprising of the Muswaddah to overthrow the Umayyad caliphate, and the
bloody wars which finally led to the fall and extinction of the
Umayyads. The greater opportunities for Shi'ite teachings were also a
result of the favorable ground the fifth Imam had prepared during the
twenty years of his imamate through the propagation of the true
teachings of Islam and the sciences of the Household of the Prophet.

The Imam took advantage of the occasion to propagate the religious
sciences until the very end of his imamate, which was contemporary with
the end of the Umayyad and beginning of the Abbasid caliphates. He
instructed many scholars in different fields of the intellectual and
transmitted sciences, such as Zararah, Muhammad ibn Muslim, Mu'min Taq,
Hisham ibn Hakam, Aban ibn Taghlib, Hisham ibn Salim, Hurayz, Hisham
Kalbi Nassabah, and Jabir ibn Hayyan, the alchemist. Even some important
Sunni scholars such as Sufyan Thawri, Abu Hanifah, the founder of the
Hanafi school of law, Qadi Sukuni, Qadi Abu'l-Bakhtari, and others, had
the honor of being his students. It is said that his classes and
sessions of instructions produced four thousand scholars of hadith and
other sciences. The number of traditions preserved from the fifth and
sixth Imams is more than all the hadith that have been recorded from the
Prophet and the other ten Imams combined.

But toward the end of his life the Imam was subjected to severe
restrictions placed upon him by the Abbasid caliph Mansur, who ordered
such torture and merciless killing of many of the descendants of the
Prophets who were Shi'ite that his actions even surpassed the cruelty
and heedlessness of the Umayyads. At his order they were arrested in
groups, some thrown into deep and dark prisons and tortured until they
died, while others were beheaded or buried alive or placed at the base
of or between walls of buildings, and walls were constructed over
them.

Hisham, the Umayyad caliph, had ordered the sixth Imam to be arrested
and brought to Damascus. Later, the Imam was arrested by Saffah, the
Abbasid caliph, and brought to Iraq. Finally, Mansur had him arrested
again and brought to Samarrah where he had the Imam kept under
supervision, was in every way harsh and discourteous to him, and several
times thought of killing him. Eventually the Imam was allowed to return
to Medina where he spent the rest of his life in hiding, until he was
poisoned and martyred through the intrigue of Mansur.

Upon hearing the news of the Imam's martyrdom, Marsur wrote to the
governor of Medina instructing him to go to the house of the Imam on the
pretext of expressing his condolences to the family, to ask for the
Imam's will and testament and read it. Whoever was chosen by the Imam as
his inheritor and successor should be beheaded on the spot. Of course
the aim of Mansur was to put and end to the whole question of imamate
and to Shi'ite aspirations. When the governor of Medina, following
orders, read the last will and testament, he saw that the Imam had
chosen four people rather than one to administer his last will and
testament: the caliph himself, the governor of Medina, 'Abdallah Aftah,
the Imam's older son, and Musa, his younger son. In this way the plot of
Mansur failed.


