The Eighth Imam
===============

Imam Rida (Ali ibn Musa) was the son of the son of the seventh Imam and
according to well-known accounts was born in 148/765 and died in
203/817. The eighth Imam had reached the imamate, after the death of his
father, through Divine Command and the decree of his forefathers. The
period of his imamate coincided with the caliphate of Harun and then his
sons Amin and Ma'mun. After the death of his father, Ma'mun fell into
conflict with his brother Amin, which led to bloody wars and finally the
assassination of Amin, after which Ma'mun became caliph. Until that day
the policy of the Abbasid caliphate toward the Shi'ites had been
increasingly harsh and cruel. Every once in a while one of the
supporters of Ali ('alawis) would revolt, causing bloody wars and
rebellions which were of great difficulty and consequence for the
caliphate.

The Shi'ite Imams would not cooperate with those who carried out these
rebellions and would not interfere with their affairs. The Shi'ites of
that day, who comprised a considerable population, continued to consider
the Imams as their religious leaders to whom obedience was obligatory
and believed in them as the real caliphs of the Holy Prophet. They
considered the caliphate to be far from the sacred authority of their
Imams, for the caliphate had come to seem more like the courts of the
Persian kings and Roman emperors and was being run by a group of people
more interested in worldly rule than in the strict application of
religious principles. The continuation of such a situation was dangerous
for the structure of the caliphate and was a serious threat to it.

Ma'mun thought of finding a new solution for these difficulties which
the seventy-year old policy of his Abbasid predecessors had not been
able to solve. To accomplish this end he chose the eighth Imam as his
successor, hoping this way to overcome two difficulties: first of all to
prevent the descendants of the Prophet from rebelling against the
government since they would be involved in the government themselves,
and secondly, to cause the people to lose their spiritual belief and
inner attachment to the Imams. This would be accomplished by having the
Imams become engrossed in worldly matters and the politics of the
caliphate itself, which had always been considered by the Shi'ite to be
evil and impure. In this way their religious organization would crumble
and they would no longer present any dangers to the caliphate.
Obviously, after accomplishing these ends, the removal of the Imam would
present no difficulties to the Abbasids.

In order to have this decision put into effect, Ma'mun asked the Imam
to come to Marw from Medina. Once he had arrived there, Ma'mun offered
him first the caliphate and then the succession to the caliphate. The
Imam made his apologies and turned down the proposal, but he was finally
induced to accept the successorship, with the condition that he would
not interfere in governmental affairs or in the appointment or dismissal
of government agents.

This event occurred in 200/814. But soon Ma'mun realized that he had
committed an error, for there was a rapid spread of Shi'ism, a growth in
the attachment of the populace to the Imam and an astounding reception
given to the Imam by the people and even by the army and government
agents. Ma'mun sought to find a remedy for this difficulty and had the
Imam poisoned and martyred. After his death the Imam was buried in the
city of Tus in Iran, which is now called Mashhad.

Ma'mun displayed great interest in having works on the intellectual
sciences translated into Arabic. He organized gatherings in which
scholars of different religions and sects assembled and carried out
scientific and scholarly debates. The eighth Imam also participated in
these assemblies and joined in the discussions with scholars of other
religions. Many of these debates are recorded in the collections of
Shi'ite hadiths.


