The Tenth Imam
==============

Imam Ali ibn Muhammad Naqi (sometimes referred to by the title of
Hadi), was the son of the ninth Imam. He was born in 212/827 in Medina
and according to Shi'ite accounts was martyred through poisoning by
Mu'tazz the Abbasid caliph, in 254/868.

During his lifetime the tenth Imam was contemporary with seven of the
Abbasid caliphs: Ma'mun, Mu'tasim, Wathiq, Mutawakkil, Muntasir,
Musta'in and Mu'tazz. It was during the rule of Mu'tasim in 220/835 that
his noble father died through poisoning in Baghdad. At that time Ali ibn
Muhammad Naqi was in Medina. There he became the Imam through Divine
Command and the decree of the Imams before him. He stayed in Medina
teaching religious sciences until the time of Mutawakkil. In 243/857, as
a result of certain false charges that were made, Mutawakkil ordered one
of his government officials to invite the Imam form Medina to Samarrah
which was then the capital. He himself wrote the Imam a letter full of
kindness and courtesy asking him to come to the capital where they could
meet. Upon arrival in Samarrah the Imam was also shown certain outward
courtesy and respect. Yet at the same time Mutawakkil tried by all
possible means to trouble and dishonor him. Many times he called the
Imam to his presence with the aim of killing or disgracing him and had
his house searched.

In his enmity toward the Household of the Prophet Mutawakkil had no
equal among the Abbasid caliphs. He was especially opposed to Ali, whom
he cursed openly. He even ordered a clown to ridicule Ali at voluptuous
banquets. In the year 237/850 he ordered the mausoleum of Imam Husayn in
Karbala and many of the houses around it to be torn down to the ground.
The water was turned upon the tomb of the Imam.

He ordered the ground of the tomb to be plowed and cultivated so that
any trace of the tomb would be forgotten. During the life of Mutawakkil
the condition of life of the descendants of Ali in the Hijaz had reached
such a pitiful state that their womenfolk had no veils with which to
cover themselves. Many of them had only one old veil which they wore at
the time of the daily prayers. Pressures of a similar kind were put on
the descendants of Ali who lived in Egypt. The tenth Imam accepted in
patience the tortures and afflictions of the Abbasid caliph Mutawakkil
until the caliph died and was followed by Muntasir, Musta'in and finally
Mu'tazz, whose intrigue led to the Imam's being poisoned and martyred.


