The Twelfth Imam ( the Imam of Our Time )
=========================================

The promised Mahdi, who is usually mentioned by his title of Imam-i
'Asr (the Imam of the "Period") and Sahib al-Zaman (the Lord of the
Age), is the son of the eleventh Imam. His name is the same as that of
the Holy Prophet. He was born in Samarrah in 256/868 and until 260/872
when his father was martyred, lived under his father's care and
tutelage. He was hidden from public view and only a few of the elite
among the Shi'ah were able to meet him.

After the martyrdom of his father he became Imam and by Divine Command
went into occultation (ghaybat). Thereafter he appeared only to his
deputies (na'ib) and even then only in exceptional circumstances.

The Imam chose as a special deputy for a time Uthman ibn Sa'id 'Umari,
one of the companions of his father and grandfather who was his
confidant and trusted friend. Through his deputy the Imam would answer
the demands and questions of the Shi'ah. After Uthman ibn Sa'id, his son
Muhammad ibn Uthman Umari was appointed the deputy of the Imam. After
the death of Muhammad ibn Uthman, Abu'l Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh Nawbakhti
was the special deputy, and after his death Ali ibn Muhammad Simmari was
chosen for this task.

A few days before the death of Ali ibn Muhammad Simmari in 329/939 an
order was issued by the Imam stating that in six days Ali ibn Muhammad
Simmari would die. Henceforth the special deputation of the Imam would
come to an end and the major occultation (ghaybat-i kubra) would begin
and would continue until the day God grants permission to the Imam to
manifest himself.

The occultation of the twelfth Imam is, therefore, divided into two
parts: the first, the minor occultation (ghaybat-i sughra) which began
in 260/872 and ended in 329/939, lasting about seventy years; the
second, the major occultation which commenced in 329/939 and will
continue as long as God wills it. In a hadith upon whose authenticity
everyone agrees, the Holy Prophet has said, "If there were to remain in
the life of the world but one day, God would prolong that day until He
sends in it a man from my community and my household. His name will be
the same as my name. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as
it was filled with oppression and tyranny."

**On the Appearance of the Mahdi**

In the discussion on prophecy and the imamate it was indicated that as
a result of the law of general guidance which governs all of creation,
man is of necessity endowed with the power of receiving revelation
through prophecy, which directs him toward the perfection of the human
norm and the well-being of the human species. Obviously, if this
perfection and happiness were not possible for man, whose life possesses
a social aspect, the very fact that he is endowed with his power would
be meaningless and futile. But there is no futility in creation.

In other words, ever since he has inhabited the earth, man has had the
wish to lead a social life filled with happiness in its true sense and
has striven toward this end. If such a wish were not to have an
objective existence it would never have been imprinted upon man's inner
nature, in the same way that if there were not food there would have
been no hunger. Or if there were to be no water there would be no thirst
and if there were to be no reproduction there would have been no sexual
attraction between the sexes.

Therefore, by reason of inner necessity and determination, the future
will see a day when human society will be replete with justice and when
all will live in peace and tranquillity, when human beings will be fully
possessed of virtue and perfection. The establishment of such a
condition will occur through human hands but with Divine succor. And the
leader of such a society, who will be the savior of man, is called in
the language of the hadith, the Mahdi.

In the different religions that govern the world such as Hinduism,
Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism and Islam there are
references to a person who will come as the savior of mankind. These
religions have usually given happy tidings of his coming, although there
are naturally certain differences in detail that can be discerned when
these teachings are compared carefully. The hadith of the Holy Prophet
upon which all Muslims agree, "The Mahdi is of my progeny," refers to
this same truth.

There are numerous hadiths cited in Sunni and Shi'ite sources from the
Holy Prophet and the Imams concerning the appearance of the Mahdi, such
as that he is of the progeny of the Prophet and that his appearance will
enable human society to reach true perfection and the full realization
of spiritual life. In addition, there are numerous other traditions
concerning the fact that the Mahdi is the son of the eleventh Imam,
Hasan al-'Askari. They agree that after being born and undergoing a long
occultation the Mahdi will appear again, filling with justice the world
that has been corrupted by injustice and iniquity.

As an example, Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (the eighth Imam) has said, in the
course of a hadith, "The Imam after me is my son, Muhammad, and after
him his son Ali, and after Ali his son, Hasan, and after Hasan his son
Hujjat al-Qa'im, who is awaited during his occultation and obeyed during
his manifestation. If there remain from the life of the world but a
single day, Allah will extend that day until he becomes manifest, and
fill the world with justice in the same way that it had been filled with
iniquity. But when? As for news of the 'hour,' verily my father told me,
having heard it from his father who heard it from his father who heard
it from his ancestors who heard it from Ali, that it was asked of the
Holy Prophet, 'Oh Prophet of God, when will the "support" (qa'im) who is
from thy family appear?' He said, 'His case is like that of the Hour (of
the Resurrection). "He alone will manifest it at its proper time. It is
heavy in the heavens and the earth. It cometh not to you save unawares"
(Quran, VII, 187).'"

Saqr ibn Abi Dulaf said, "I heard from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali
al-Rida [the ninth Imam] who said, 'The Imam after me is my son Ali; his
command is my command; his word is my word; to command is the command of
his father ; to obey him is to obey his father.' After these words the
Imam remained silent. I said to him, 'Oh son of the Prophet, who will be
the Imam after Hasan?' The Imam cried hard, then said, 'Verily after
Hasan his son is the awaited Imam who is "al-qa'im bi'l-haqq" (He who is
supported by the Truth).'"

Musa ibn Ja'far Baghdadi said, "I hear from the Imam Abu Muhammad
al-Hasan ibn Ali [the eleventh Imam] who said, 'I see that after me
differences will appear among you concerning the Imam after me. Whoso
accepts the Imams after the Prophet of God but denies my son is like the
person who accepts all the prophets but denies the prophethood of
Muhammad, the Prophet of God, upon whom be peace and blessing. And whoso
denies [Muhammad] the Prophet of God is like one who has denied all the
prophets of God, for to obey the last of us is like obeying the first
and to deny the last of us is like denying the first. But beware! Verily
for my son there is an occultation during which all people will fall
into doubt except those whom Allah protects."

The opponents of Shi'ism protest that according to the beliefs of this
school the Hidden Imam should by now be nearly twelve centuries old,
whereas this is impossible for any human being. In answer it must be
said that the protest is based only on the unlikelihood of such an
occurrence, not its impossibility. Of course such a long lifetime or a
life of a longer period is unlikely. But those who study the hadiths of
the Holy Prophet and the Imams will see that they refer to this life as
one possessing miraculous qualities. Miracles are certainly not
impossible nor can they be negated through scientific arguments. It can
never be proved that the causes and agents that are functioning in the
world are solely those that we see and know and that other causes which
we do not know or whose effects and actions we have not seen nor
understood do not exist. It is in this way possible that in one or
several members of mankind there can be operating certain causes and
agents which bestow upon them a very long life of a thousand or several
thousand years. Medicine has not even lost hope of discovering a way to
achieve very long life spans. In any case such protests from "peoples of
the Book" such as Jews, Christians and Muslims are most strange for they
accept the miracles of the prophets of God according to their own sacred
scriptures.

The opponents of Shi'ism also protest that, although Shi'ism considers
the Imam necessary in order to expound the injunctions and verities of
religion and to guide the people, the occultation of the Imam is the
negation of this very purpose, for an Imam in occultation who cannot be
reached by mankind cannot be in any way beneficial or effective. The
opponents say that if God wills to bring forth an Imam to reform mankind
He is able to create him at the necessary moment and does not need to
create him thousands of years earlier. In answer it must be said that
such people have not really understood the meaning of the Imam, for in
the discussion on the imamate it became clear that the duty of the Imam
is not only the formal explanation of the religious sciences and
exoteric guidance of the people. In the same way that he has the duty of
guiding men outwardly, the Imam also bears the function of walayat and
the esoteric guidance of men. It is he who directs man's spiritual life
and orients the inner aspect of human action toward God. Clearly, his
physical presence or absence has no effect in this matter. The Imam
watches over men inwardly and is in communion with the soul and spirit
of men even if he be hidden from their physical eyes. His existence is
always necessary even if the time has not yet arrived for his outward
appearance and the universal reconstruction that he is to bring about.


