The Spiritual Message of Shi'ism
================================

The message of Shi'ism to the world can be summarized in one sentence:
"To know God." Or in other words, it is to instruct man to follow the
path of Divine realization and the knowledge of God in order to gain
felicity and salvation. And this message is contained in the very phrase
with which the Holy Prophet commenced his prophetic mission when he
said: "Oh men ! Know God in His Oneness (and acknowledge Him) so that
you will gain salvation."

As a summary explanation of this message we will add that man is
attached by nature to many goals in this worldly life and to material
pleasures. He loves tasty food and drink, fashionable dress, attractive
palaces and surroundings, a beautiful and pleasuring wife, sincere
friends and great wealth. And in another direction he is attracted to
political power, position, reputation, the extension of his rule and
dominion and the destruction of anything that is opposed to his wishes.
But in his inner and primordial, God-given nature man understands that
all these are means created for man, but man is not created for all
these things. These things should be subservient to man and follow him
and not vice versa. To consider the stomach and the region below it as a
final end of life is the logic of cattle and sheep. To tear up, cut and
destroy other is the logic of the tiger, the wolf and the fox. The logic
inherent in human existence is the attainment of wisdom and nothing
else.

This logic based upon wisdom with the power which it possesses to
discern between reality and the unreal, guides us toward the truth and
not toward things our emotions demand or toward passions, selfishness
and egoism. This logic considers man as a part of the totality of
creation without any separate independence or the possibility of a
rebellious self-centeredness. In contrast to the current belief that man
is the master of creation and tames rebellious nature and conquers it to
force it to obey his wishes and desires, we find that in reality man
himself is an instrument in the hand of Universal Nature and is ruled
and commanded by it.

This logic based upon wisdom invites man to concentrate more closely
upon the apprehension he has of the existence of this world until it
becomes clear to him that the world of existence and all that is in it
does not issue from itself but rather from an Infinite Source. He will
then know that all he beauty and ugliness, all these creatures of the
earth and the heavens, which appear outwardly as independent realities,
gain reality only through another Reality and are manifested only in Its
Light, not by themselves and through themselves. In the same way that
the "realities" of today no more than vaguely remembered dreams in
relation to what will appear as "reality" tomorrow. In the last
analysis, everything in itself is no more than a tale and a dream. Only
God is Reality in the absolute sense, the One Who does not perish. Under
the protection of His Being, everything gains existence and becomes
manifested through the Light of His Essence.

If man becomes endowed with such vision and power of apprehension, then
the tent of his separative existence will fall down before his eyes like
a bubble on the surface of water. He will see with his eyes that the
world and all that is in it depend upon an Infinite Being who possesses
life, power, knowledge and every perfection to an infinite degree. Man
and every other being in the world are like so many windows which
display according to their capacity the world of eternity which
transcends them and lies beyond them.

It is at this moment that man takes from himself and all creatures the
quality of independence and primacy and returns these qualities to their
Owner. He detaches himself from all things to attach himself solely to
the One God. Before His Majesty and Grandeur he does nothing but bow in
humility. Only then does he become guided and directed by God so that
whatever he knows he knows in God. Through Divine guidance he becomes
adorned with moral and spiritual virtue and pure actions which are the
same as Islam itself, the submission to God, the religion that is in the
primordial nature of things.

This is the highest degree of human perfection and the station of the
perfect man (the Universal Man; insan-i kamil), namely the Imam who has
reached this rank through Divine grace. Furthermore, those who have
reached this station through the practice of spiritual methods, with the
different ranks and stations that they possess, are the true followers
of the Imam. It becomes thus clear that the knowledge of God and of the
Imam are inseparable in the same way that the knowledge of God is
inextricably connected to the knowledge of oneself. For he who knows his
own symbolic existence has already come to know the true existence which
belongs solely to God who is independent and without need of anything
whatsoever.


