The Imamate and Succession
==========================

Man through his God-given nature realizes without any doubt that no
organized society, such as a country or city or village or tribe or even
a household consisting of a few human beings, can continue to subsist
without a leader and ruler who puts the wheel of the society in motion
and whose will govern each individual's will and induces the members of
that society to perform their social duty. Without such a ruler the
parts of this society become dispersed in a short time and disorder and
confusion reign. Therefore, he who is the ruler and governor of a
society, whether it be great or small, if he is interested in his own
position and the continued existence of his society, will appoint a
successor for himself if he is to be absent from his function
temporarily or permanently. He will never abandon the domain of his rule
and be oblivious to its existence or annihilation. The head of a
household who bids farewell to his house and household for a journey of
a few days or months will appoint one of the members of the household or
someone else as his successor and will leave the affairs of the house in
his hands. The head of an institution, or the principle of a school, or
the owner of a shop, if he is to be absent even for a few hours will
select someone to represent him.

In the same way Islam is a religion which according to the text of the
Holy Book and the Sunnah is established upon the basis of the primordial
nature of things. It is a religion concerned with social life, as has
been seen by every observer near and far. The special attention God and
the Prophet have given to the social nature of this religion can never
be denied or neglected. It is an incomparable feature of Islam. The Holy
Prophet was never oblivious to the problem of the formation of social
groupings wherever the influence of Islam penetrated. Whenever a city or
village fell into Muslim hands he would, in the shortest time possible,
appoint a governor or ruler in whose hands he would leave the affairs of
the Muslims. In very important military expeditions ordered for the Holy
War (jihad), he would appoint more than one leader and commander, in
order of succession. In the war of Mu'tah he even appointed four
leaders, so that if the first were to be killed the second would be
recognized as the head and his command accepted and if the second were
to be killed, then the third, and so on.

The Prophet also displayed great interest in the problem of succession
and never failed to appoint a successor when necessary. Whenever he left
Medina he would appoint a governor in his own place. Even when he
migrated from Mecca to Medina and there was as yet no idea as to what
would occur, in order to have his personal affairs managed in Mecca for
those few days and to give back to people what had been entrusted to
him, he appointed Ali - may peace be upon him - as his successor. In the
same way, after his death Ali was his successor in matters concerning
his debts and personal affairs. The Shi'ites claim that for this very
reason it is not conceivable that the Prophet should have died without
appointing someone as his successor, without having selected a guide and
leader to direct the affairs of Muslims and to turn the wheels of
Islamic society.

Man's primordial nature does not doubt the importance and value of the
fact that the creation of a society depends on a set of common
regulations and customs which are accepted in practice by the majority
of the groups in that society, and that the existence and continuation
of that society depend upon a just government which agrees to carry out
these regulations completely. Any one who possesses intelligence does
not neglect of forget this fact. At the same time one can doubt neither
the breadth and detailed nature of the Islamic Shari'ah, nor the
importance and value the Prophet considered it to possess, so that he
made many sacrifices for its application and preservation. Nor can one
debate about the mental genius, perfection of intelligence, perspicacity
of vision or power of deliberation of the Prophet (beside the fact that
this is affirmed through revelation and prophecy).

According to established traditions in both Sunni and Shi'ite
collections of hadith (in the chapter on temptations and seditions and
others) transmitted from the Prophet, the Prophet foretold seditions and
tribulations which would entangle Islamic society after his death, and
the forms of corruption which would penetrate the body of Islam, and
later worldly rulers who would sacrifice this pure religion for their
own impure, unscrupulous ends. How is it possible that the Prophet
should not neglect to speak of the details of events and trials of years
or even thousands of years after him, and yet would neglect the
condition that had to be brought into being most urgently after his
death? Or that he should be negligent and consider as unimportant a duty
that is on the one hand simple and evident and on the other significant
to such a degree? How could he concern himself with the most natural and
common acts such as eating, drinking and sleeping and give hundreds of
commands concerning them, yet remain completely silent about this
important problem and not appoint someone in his own place?

Even if we accepted the hypothesis (which Shi'ism does not accept) that
the appointment of the ruler of Islamic society is given by the Shari'ah
to the people themselves, still it would be necessary for the Prophet to
give an explanation concerning this matter. He would have had to give
the necessary instructions to the community so that they would be aware
of the problem upon which the existence and growth of Islamic society
and the life of religious symbols and observances depended and relied.
Yet there is no trace of such a prophetic explanation or religious
instruction. If there had been such a thing, those who succeeded the
Prophet and held the reins of power in their hands would not have
opposed it. Actually, the first caliph transferred the caliphate to the
second caliph by bequest. The second caliph chose the third caliph
through a six-man council of which he was himself determined and
ordered. Mu'awiyah forced Imam Hasan to make peace and in this way
carried away the caliphate. After this even the caliphate was converted
into a hereditary monarchy. Gradually many religious observances
identified with the early years of Islamic rule (such as holy war,
commanding what is lawful and prohibiting what is forbidden, the
establishment of boundaries for human action) were weakened or even
disappeared from the political life of the community, nullifying in this
domain the efforts of the Prophet of Islam.

Shi'ism has studied and investigated the primordial nature of man and
the continuous tradition of wisdom that has survived among men. It has
penetrated into the principal purpose of Islam which is to revivify
man's primordial nature, and has investigated such things as the methods
used by the Prophet in guiding the community ; the troubles which
entangled Islam and the Muslims and which led to division and separation
; and the short life of the Muslim governments of the early centuries,
which were characterized by negligence and lack of strict religious
principles. As a result of these studies Shi'ism has reached the
conclusion that there are sufficient traditional texts left by the
Prophet to indicate the procedure for determining the Imam and successor
of the Prophet. This conclusion is supported by Quranic verses and
hadiths of Ghadir, Safinah, Thaqalayn, Haqq, Manzilah, Da'wat-i
'ashirah-i aqrabin and others. But of course these hadiths, most of
which are also accepted by Sunnism, have not been understood in the same
way by Shi'ism and Sunnism. Otherwise the whole question of succession
would not have arisen. Whereas these hadiths appear to Shi'ites as a
clear indication of the Prophet's intention in the question of
succession, they have been interpreted by Sunnis in quite another way so
as to leave this question open and unanswered.

To prove the caliphate of Ali ibn Abi Talib, Shi'ites have had recourse
to Quranic verses, including the following: "Your friend [wali] can be
only Allah; and His messenger and those who believe, who establish
worship and pay the poor-due, and bow down (in prayer) [or, and this
reading is accepted by 'Allamah Tabataba'i: "....pay the poor-due while
bowing down (in prayer)"]" (Quran, V, 55). Shi'ite and Sunni
commentators alike agree that this verse was revealed concerning Ali ibn
Abi Talib, and many Shi'ite and Sunni traditions exist supporting this
view. Abu Dharr Ghifari has said: "One day we prayed the noontime
prayers with the Prophet. A person in need asked people to help but no
one gave him anything, 'Oh God! Be witness that in the mosque of the
Prophet no one gave me anything.' Ali ibn Abi Talib was in the position
of genuflection in the prayers. He pointed with his finger to the
person, who took his ring and left. The Prophet, who was observing the
scene raised his head toward heaven and said: 'Oh God! My brother Moses
said to Thee, "Expand my breast and make easy my tasks and make my
tongue eloquent so that they will comprehend my words, and make my
brother, Harun, my help and vizier" [cf. Quran, XXVIII, 35]. Oh God! I
am also Thy prophet ; expand my breast and make easy my tasks and make
Ali my vizier and helper.'" Abu Dharr says, "The words of the Prophet
had not as yet finished when the verse [cited above] was revealed."

Another verse which the Shi'ites consider as proof of the caliphate of
Ali is this: "This day are those who disbelieve in despair of (even
harming) your religion ; so fear them not, fear Me! This day have I
perfected your religion for you and completed My favour unto you, and
have chosen for you as religion AL-ISLAM" (Quran, V, 3). The obvious
meaning of this verse is that before that particular day the infidels
had hopes that a day would come when Islam would die out, but God
through the actualization of a particular even made them lose forever
the hope that Islam would be destroyed. This very event was the cause of
the strength and perfection of Islam and of necessity could not be a
minor occasion such as the promulgation of one of the injunctions of
religion. Rather, it was a matter of such importance that the
continuation of Islam depended upon it.

This verse seems to be related to another verse which comes toward the
end of the same chapter: "O Messenger! Make known that which hath been
revealed unto thee from thy Lord, for if thou do it not, thou will not
have conveyed His message. Allah will protect thee from mankind."
(Quran, V, 67). This verse indicates that God commanded a mission of
great concern and importance to the Prophet which if not accomplished
would endanger the basis of Islam and prophecy. But the matter was so
important that the Prophet feared opposition and interference and in
awaiting suitable circumstances delayed it, until there came a definite
and urgent order from God to execute this command without delay and not
to fear anyone. This matter also was not just a particular religious
injunction in the ordinary sense, for to preach one or several religious
injunctions is not so vital that if a single one of them were not
preached it would cause the destruction of Islam. Nor did the Prophet of
Islam fear anyone in preaching the injunctions and laws of religion.

These indications and witnesses add weight to the Shi'ite traditions
which assert that these verses were revealed at Ghadir Khumm and concern
the spiritual investiture (walayat) of Ali ibn Abi Talib. Moreover, many
Shi'ite and Sunni commentators have confirmed this point.

Abu Sa'id Khudari says: "The Prophet in Ghadir Khumm invited people
toward Ali and took his arm and lifted it so high that the white spot in
the armpit of the Prophet of God could be seen. Then this verse was
revealed: 'This day have I perfected your religion for you and completed
My favor unto you, and have chosen for you as religion AL-ISLAM.' Then
the Prophet said, 'God is great (Allahu akbar) that religion has become
perfected and that God's bounty has been completed, His satisfaction
attained and the walayat of Ali achieved.' Then he added, 'For whomever
I am the authority and guide Ali is also his guide and authority. Oh
God! Be friendly with the friends of Ali and the enemy of his enemies.
Whoever helps him, help him, and whoever leaves him, leave him.'"

In summary we can say that the enemies of Islam who did everything
possible to destroy it, when they lost all hope of achieving this end,
were left with only one hope. They thought that since the protector of
Islam was the Prophet, after his death Islam would be left without a
guide and leader and would thus definitely perish. But in Ghadir Khumm
their wishes were brought to nought and the Prophet presented Ali as the
guide and leader of Islam to the people. After Ali this heavy and
necessary duty of guide and leader was left upon the shoulders of his
family.

Some of the hadiths pertaining to Ghadir Khumm, the investiture of Ali,
and the significance of the Household of the Prophet are cited here:

Hadith-i ghadir: The Prophet of Islam upon returning from the farewell
pilgrimage stopped in Ghadir Khumm, assembled the Muslims and after
delivering a sermon, chose Ali as the leader and guide of Muslims.

Bara' says: "I was in the company of the Prophet during the farewell
pilgrimage. When we reached Ghadir Khumm he ordered that place to be
cleaned. Then he took Ali's hand and placed him on his right side. Then
he said, 'Am I the authority whom you obey?' They answered, 'We obey
your directions.' Then he said, 'For whomever I am his master (maula)
and the authority whom he obeys, Ali will be his master. Oh God! Be
friendly with the friends of Ali and enemy of the enemies of Ali.' Then
Umar ibn al-Khattab said to Ali, 'May this position be pleasing to you,
for now you are my master and the master of all the believers.'"

Hadith-i safinah: Ibn 'Abbas says, "The Prophet said, 'My household is
like the ship of Noah ; whoever embarks upon it will be saved and
whoever turns away from it will be drowned.'"

Hadith-i thaqalayn: Zayd ibn Arqam has recounted that the Prophet said,
"It seems that God has called me unto Himself and I must obey His call.
But I leave two great and precious things among you : the Book of God
and My Household. Be careful as to how you behave toward them. These two
will never be separated from each other until they encounter me at
Kawthar (in paradise)." Hadith-i thaqalayn is one of the most strongly
established hadiths, and has been transmitted through many chains of
transmission and in different versions. Shi'ites and Sunnis agree
concerning its authenticity. Several important points can be deduced
from this hadith and its like:

(1) In the same way that the Holy Quran will remain until the Day of
Judgment, the progeny of the Holy Prophet will also remain. No period of
time will be without the existence of the figure which Shi'ism calls the
Imam, the real leader and guide of men. (2) Through these two great
trusts (amanat), the Prophet has provided for all the religious and
intellectual needs of the Muslims. He has introduced his Household to
Muslims as authorities in knowledge and has pronounced their words and
deeds to be worthy and authoritative. (3) One must not separate the Holy
Quran from the Household of the Prophet. No Muslim has a right to reject
the "sciences" of the members of the Household of the Prophet and remove
himself from under their direction and guidance. (4) If people obey the
members of the Household and follow their words they will never be led
astray.

God will always be with them. (5) The answers to the intellectual and
religious needs of men are to be found in the hands of the members of
the Household of the Prophet. Whoever follows them will not fall into
error and will reach true felicity ; that is, the members of the
Household are free from error and sin and are inerrant. From this it can
be concluded that by "Members of the Household" and "progeny" is not
meant all the descendants and relatives of the Prophet. Rather, specific
individuals are meant who are perfect in the religious sciences and are
protected against error and sin so that they are qualified to guide and
lead men. For Shi'ism these individuals consist of Ali ibn Abi Talib and
his eleven descendants who were chosen to the imamate one after another.
This interpretation is also confirmed by the Shi'ite traditions. For
example, Ibn 'Abbas has said, "I said to the Prophet, 'Who are your
descendants whose love is obligatory [upon Muslims]?' He said, 'Ali,
Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn.'" Jabir has transmitted that the Prophet has
said, "God placed the children of all prophets in their 'backbone' but
placed my children in the backbone of Ali."

Hadith-i haqq : Umm Salmah has said, "I heard from the Prophet of God
who said, 'Ali is with the Truth (haqq) and the Quran, and the Truth and
the Quran are also with Ali, and they will be inseparable until they
come upon me at Kawthar.'"

Hadith-i manzilah : Sa'd ibn Waqqas has said, "The Prophet of God said
to Ali, 'Are you not satisfied to be to me what Harun was to Moses
except that after me there will not be another prophet?'"

Hadith-i da'wat-i 'ashirah : The Prophet invited his relatives for
luncheon and after the meal told them, "I know of no one who has brought
to his people better things than I have brought to you. God has
commanded me to invite you to draw toward Him. Who is there who will
assist me in this matter and be my brother and inheritor (wasi) and
vicegerent (khalifah) among you?" All remained silent, but Ali, who was
the youngest of all, exclaimed, "I shall be your deputy and aide." Then
the Prophet put his arms around him and said, "He is my brother,
inheritor and vicegerent. You must obey him." Then the group began to
depart laughing and telling Abu Talib, "Muhammad has ordered you to obey
your son."

Hudhayfah has said, "The Prophet of God said, 'If you make Ali my
vicegerent and successor - which I do not think you will do - you will
find him a perspicacious guide who will direct you toward the straight
path !"

Ibn Marduyah has said that the Prophet said, "Whoever wishes that his
life and death be like mine and that he enter paradise should after me
love Ali and follow my household, for they are my descendants and have
been created from my clay. My knowledge and understanding have been
bestowed upon them. Therefore woe unto those who deny their virtues. My
intercession [on the Day of Judgment] will never include them."


