Affirmation of the Previous Section
===================================

Much of the argument of Shi'ism concerning the succession to the
Prophet rests on the belief that during the last days of his illness the
Prophet in the presence of some of his companions asked for some paper
and ink so that something could be written which, if obeyed by the
Muslims, would prevent them from going astray. Some of those present
considered the Prophet to be too ill to be able to dictate anything and
said, "The Book of God is sufficient for us." There was so much clamor
raised over this matter that the Holy Prophet told those present to
leave, for in the presence of a prophet there should not be any noise or
clamor.

Considering what has been said above about hadiths concerning
succession and the events that followed upon the death of the Prophet,
especially the fact that Ali was not consulted in the question of
selecting the Prophet's successor, Shi'ites conclude that the Holy
Prophet had wanted to dictate his definitive views about the person who
was to succeed him but was not able to do so.

The purpose of the utterances of some of those present seems to have
been to cause confusion and prevent this final decision from being
clearly announced. Their interruption of the Holy Prophet's discourse
does not seem to be what it appears outwardly, that is concern with the
possibility that the Prophet might utter incongruous words due to the
intensity of his illness. For, first of all, throughout his illness the
Holy Prophet was not heard to have uttered any meaningless or
incongruous words and no such things has been transmitted concerning
him. Moreover, according to the principles of Islam the Prophet is
protected by God from uttering delirious or senseless words and is
inerrant.

Secondly, if the words mentioned by some of those present on that
occasion before the Prophet were meant to be of a serious nature there
would have been no place for the next phrase, "The Book of God is
sufficient for us." In order to prove that the Prophet might utter
incongruous words under unusual circumstances the reason of his serious
illness would have been used rather than the claim that with the Quran
there was no need of the Prophet's words. For it could not be hidden
from any Muslim that the very text of the Book of God considers the
obedience to the Holy Prophet to be obligatory and his words to be in a
sense like the Word of God. According to the text of the Holy Quran,
Muslims must obey the injunctions of both God and the Prophet.

Thirdly, an incident involving illness occurred during the last days of
the life of the first caliph, who in his last will and testament chose
the second caliph as his successor. When Uthman was writing the will
according to the order of the caliph, the caliph fainted. Yet the second
caliph did not repeat the words that had been uttered in the case of the
Prophet according to the hadith of "Pen and Paper." This fact has been
confirmed in a hadith related by Ibn Abbas. And it has been accounted of
the second caliph that he said, "Ali deserved the caliphate but the
Quraysh would not have been able to bear his caliphate, for had he
become caliph he would have forced the people to accept the pure truth
and follow the right path. Under his caliphate they would not have been
able to transgress the boundaries of justice and thus would have sought
to engage in war with him."

Obviously according to religious principles one must force him who has
deviated from the truth to follow the truth; one must not abandon the
truth for the sake of one who has abandoned it. When the first caliph
was informed that some of the Muslim tribes had refused to pay religious
tax, he ordered war and said, "If they do not give me the tithes which
they gave to the Prophet, I shall fight against them." Eventually by
this saying he meant most of all that truth and justice must be revived
at all costs. Surely the problem of the legitimate caliphate was more
important and significant than tithes, and Shi'ism believes that the
same principle applied by the first caliph to this matter should have
been applied by the whole early community to the problem of succession
to the Holy Prophet.


