The Second Imam
===============

Imam Hasan Mujtaba - upon whom be peace - was the second Imam. He and
his brother Imam Husayn were the two sons of Amir al-mu'minin Ali and
Hadrat Fatimah, the daughter of the Prophet. Many times the Prophet had
said, "Hasan and Husayn are my children." Because of these same words
Ali would say to his other children, "You are my children and Hasan and
Husayn are the children of the Prophet."

Imam Hasan was born in the year 3 A.H. in Medina and shared in the life
of the Prophet for somewhat over seven years, growing up during that
time under his loving care. After the death of the Prophet which was no
more than three, or according to some, six months earlier than the death
of Hadrat Fatimah, Hasan was placed directly under the care of his noble
father. After the death of his father, through Divine Command and
according to the will of his father, Imam Hasan became Imam; he also
occupied the outward function of caliph for about six months, during
which time he administered the affairs of the Muslims. During that time
Mu'awiayh, who was a bitter enemy of Ali and his family and had fought
for years with the ambition of capturing the caliphate, first on the
pretext of avenging the death of the third caliph and finally with an
open claim to the caliphate, marched his army into Iraq, the seat of
Imam Hasan's caliphate. War ensued during which Mu'awiyah gradually
subverted the generals and commanders of Imam Hasan's army with large
sums of money and deceiving promises until the army rebelled against
Imam Hasan. Finally, the Imam was forced to make peace and to yield the
caliphate to Mu'awiyah, provided it would again return to Imam Hasan
after Mu'awiyah's death and the Imam's household and partisans would be
protected in every way.

In this way Mu'awiyah captured the Islamic caliphate and entered Iraq.
In a public speech he officially made null and void all the peace
conditions and in every way possible placed the severest pressure upon
the members of the Household of the Prophet and the Shi'ah. During all
the ten years of his imamate, Imam Hasan lived in conditions of extreme
hardship and under persecution, with no security even in his own house.
In the year 50 A.H. he was poisoned and martyred by one of his own
household who, as has been accounted by historians, had been motivated
by Mu'awiyah.

In human perfection Imam Hasan was reminiscent of his father and a
perfect example of his noble grandfather. In fact, as long as the
Prophet was alive, he and his brother were always in the company of the
Prophet who even sometimes would carry them on his shoulders. Both Sunni
and Shi'ite sources have transmitted this saying of the Holy Prophet
concerning Hasan and Husayn: "These two children of mine are Imams
whether they stand up or sit down" (allusion to whether they occupy the
external function of caliphate or not). Also there are many traditions
of the Holy Prophet and Ali concerning the fact that Imam Hasan would
gain the function of imamate after his noble father.


