The Fifth Imam
==============

Imam Muhammad ibn Ali Baqir (the word baqir meaning he who cuts and
dissects, a title given to him by the Prophet) was the son of the fourth
Imam and was born in 57/675. He was present at the event of Karbala when
he was four years old. After his father, through Divine Command and the
decree of those who went before him, he became Imam. In the year 114/732
he died, according to some Shi'ite traditions poisoned by Ibrahim ibn
Walid ibn 'Abdallah, the nephew of Hisham, the Umayyad caliph.

During the imamate of the fifth Imam, as a result of the injustice of
the Umayyads, revolts and wars broke out in some corner of the Islamic
world every day. Moreover, there were disputes within the Umayyad family
itself which kept the caliphate busy and to a certain extent left the
members of the Household of the Prophet alone. From the other side, the
tragedy of Karbala and the oppression suffered by the Household of the
Prophet, of which the fourth Imam was the most noteworthy embodiment,
had attracted many Muslims to the Imams.

These factors combined to make it possible for people and especially
the Shi'ites to go in great numbers to Medina and to come into the
presence of the fifth Imam. Possibilities for disseminating truths about
Islam and the sciences of the Household of the Prophet, which had never
existed for the Imams before him, were presented to the fifth Imam. The
proof of this fact is the innumerable traditions recounted from the
fifth Imam and the large number of illustrious men of science and
Shi'ite scholars who were trained by him in different Islamic sciences.
These names are listed in books of biographies of famous men in Islam.


