Chapter 10: The Residence of the Twelfth Imam
=============================================

Dr. Fahimi: Where does the Imam of the Age live during the occultation?

Mr. Hoshyar: His residence is not established. Probably he does not have
a fixed residence, and lives invisibly among the people, interacting
with them. It is also possible that he may have selected a far away
place for his domicile. In some hadith-reports it is stated that the
twelfth Imam comes to Mecca during the pilgrimage season and
participates in the hajj rituals. He sees and knows the people, whereas
people do not see him[^1].

Dr. Fahimi: I have heard that the Shi'is believe that the Imam
disappeared in the city of Samarra, in that cellar which is ascribed to
him and is a place of visitation (ziyarat). It is here, they say, that
the Hidden Imam lives, and he will reappear also from this spot. If he
is there in that cellar why cannot he be seen? Who brings food and drink
for him? Why does he not go out from there? One of the Arab poets has
composed a poem about this subject. He says:

Has not the time come for the cellar to bring out what you, out of your
conjecture, believe to be a human being?  
 Shame on you, for creating a third fictitious being, other than a
legendary bird and a ghost.

Mr. Hoshyar: This ascription is nothing more than a falsehood which has
been circulated out of obstinacy. The Shi'is do not maintain such a
belief. There is absolutely no report that says that the twelfth Imam
lives in the cellar and will rise from there. No Shi'i scholar has
mentioned such a thing. On the contrary, many hadith-reports narrate
that he lives among the people and associates with them. Sadir Sayrafi
has related a tradition from Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) which says:

That which makes the condition of the Master of the Command (i.e., the
twelfth Imam) resemble Joseph is that in spite of being mature and wise,
and in spite of having associated with him before, Joseph's brothers
could not recognize him when they came to him [in Egypt] until he
introduced himself to them. Moreover, in spite of the fact that the
distance that existed between Joseph and Jacob was no more than eighteen
days, Jacob had no information about him. Then why are these people
denying that God can do a similar thing for His Proof, the Master of the
Command? He too can interact with people, walk around their market
place, sit on their carpets and still they would not recognize him! He
would continue to do that until God permits him to introduce
himself[^2].

The Story about the Countries that Belong to the Sons of the Imam
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: I have heard that the Imam of the Age has numerous sons, who
live in large well developed countries whose capital cities are known by
names such as Zahira, Rathiqa, Safiya, Zalum, and 'Anatis. Five of his
well respected sons by the name of Tahir, Qasim, Ibrahim, 'Abd
al-Rahman, and Hashim rule these countries. Some of the description of
these countries includes their likeness to paradise where the climate is
perfect and the blessings are countless. In these places there is such a
total peace that a wolf and a sheep live together. Wild animals do not
bother humans.  
 The inhabitants of these countries are the righteous followers of the
Imam who have received their instruction from the Imam's school.
Falsehood and deception have not found their way in these places. From
time to time the Imam visits these ideal places. Such are the agreeable
things reported about these countries that belong to the Imam's sons.

Mr. Hoshyar: The story of these unknown countries is undoubtedly a
legend. The only source for it is the anecdotal account related in
Hadiqat al-shi'a, Anwar nu'maniyya and Jannat al-ma'wa. In order to
elucidate this we should look at the source of the anecdote. The story
has been related in the following form:

It is related by 'Ali Fath Allah Kashani that Muhammad b. 'Ali b. Husyan
'Alawi has narrated in his book from Sa'id b. Ahmad who said: Hamza b.
Musayyib narrated for me a story on the eighth day of Sha'ban, 544 AH
(1149 CE), that 'Uthman b. 'Abd al-Baqi related on the seventh day of
Jamadi al-Thani, 543 AH (1148 CE), who in turn related from Ahmad b.
Muhammad b. Yahya Anbari on the tenth day of Ramadan, 543 AH (1148 CE)
to me, saying: "I was with some people in the gathering of the vizier
'Awn al-Din Yahya b. Hubayra. In that gathering there was also a
respectable person whose identity was not known. The person was engaged
in relating the story in which he described one of his sea journeys.
That year the ship lost its way and took them to the mysterious island
about which no one knew anything. 'We had to disembark and we landed in
that island.'"

At this point Ahmad b. Muhammad relates the fantastic story about those
countries from this unknown narrator in great detail, and at the end of
the story he appends the following:

After hearing the story the vizier entered his special chamber and asked
all of us to come in. He then said: "No one has the right to transmit
the story for anyone, as long as I am alive." We too, as long as the
vizier was alive, never related the event for anyone[^3].

We have taken care to mention the source of the story so that the
readers should realize the weakness of the transmission and its
unreliability. For the detail of the story you may refer to the book
itself. It is obvious for the scholars that the existence of such
countries cannot be proven on the basis of this narrative. First, the
reporter of the important story is an unknown person whose identity is
unclear. Hence, his report has no credibility. Second, it is not
possible that such places exist when no one has any information about
it.

This is particularly so in this age when all corners of the world have
been mapped out and studied by the scholars. However, some people have
defended the existence of these places as vehemently as if they were
defending some fundamental Islamic principle. These people say that
perhaps such places are present even now, but God has concealed them
from strangers and non-believers! I do not believe that such opinions
require any response. Actually, I do not understand what has prompted
these people to offer such a whimsical and conjectural explanation of a
story whose reliability and credibility is itself questionable!

It has been asserted that even if it is assumed hypothetically that such
countries are non-existent now, one can still maintain that they did
exist in the past and are now in ruins and their inhabitants extinct.
Such an assertion is also baseless, because if such prosperous and large
countries with Shi'i population had existed, there would have been many
who would have known about them and would have related, however
speculatively, the amazing things about them in history books.

Ordinarily, it is improbable that such major countries could have
existed and no one ever recorded anything about them. It is equally
implausible that such a thing would have been known to only one
unidentified person whose report about these places forms the basis of
this fantastic narrative. Moreover, it is unthinkable that the evidence
about their existence would be so thoroughly wiped out that there would
remain no archeological or historical trace of those places and their
inhabitants!

The great scholar 'Allama Agha Buzurg Tihrani has critically evaluated
the story and has doubted its reliability. In his comprehensive
bibliographical study of books that were written by Muslim scholars
about various Islamic subjects, he writes the following about the source
that reports the incredible story about these prosperous countries that
belong to the sons of the twelfth Imam:

This story appears at the end of one of the manuscripts of the book
Ta'azi, written by Muhammad b. 'Ali 'Alawi. Hence, 'Ali b. Fath Allah
Kashani assumed that the story is part of that book. He has certainly
made an error since it is not possible that the story could be part of
the book.

The reason is that Yahya b. Hubayra, the vizier in whose house the story
took place, died in the year 560 AH (1164 CE), whereas the author of
Ta'azi lived two centuries before that. In addition, there are
inconsistencies in the text of the story because the narrator of the
story, namely, Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Yahya Anbari, says: "The vizier
exacted a promise from us that we would not relate the story to anyone.
We too have fulfilled our promise and as long as he lived we did not
disclose it."  
 In that case the narration of the story must be placed after 560 AH
(1164 CE), that is, subsequent to the vizier's death. On the other hand,
'Uthman b. 'Abd al-Baqi in the story says: "Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Yahya
Anbari related the story to me in 543 AH (1148 CE)[^4]."

In another place, says Agha Buzurg, the story relates: ". . . 'Uthman b.
'Abd al-Baqi related to me on the seventh of Jamadi al-Thani, 543 AH
(1148 CE) that Ahmad b. Muhammad [Anbari] related to me on the tenth of
Ramadan, 543 AH . . .!" Since the month of Ramadan falls two months
after the month of Jamadi al-Thani how can it be possible for anyone to
report in Jamadi Thani something that occurred in Ramadan?

In short, we are not religiously or rationally required to speculate and
produce weak arguments to speak about the place of the twelfth Imam's
residence and try to prove that Jaza'ir Khadra' (Evergreen Islands) or
the city of Jabulqa or Jabursa are the places of his residence. Or
declare that the Imam has chosen the Eighth Clime as his residence!

Dr. Fahimi: Then what is this story about the Jaza'ir Khadra'?

Mr. Hoshyar: Since it is getting late, shall we discuss the rest of the
subject next week? If you all agree, we can meet in my house.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Jazira Khadra' (The Evergreen Island)
-------------------------------------

The session began on time at Mr. Hoshyar's residence.

Dr. Jalali: If I remember correctly Dr. Fahimi had a question regarding
Jazira Khadra' in the previous meeting.

Dr. Fahimi: I have been told that the twelfth Imam (peace be upon him)
and his sons live in Jazira Khadra'. What is your opinion about this
belief?

Mr. Hoshyar: This story about Jazira Khadra' is no more than a legend.
'Allama Majlisi has narrated the entire story in his Bihar al-anwar, the
summary of which is as follows. Majlisi says:

I found a manuscript in the Amir al-Mu'minin library of Najaf which was
a treatise on the story of Jazira Khadra'. The author of this manuscript
is Fadl b. Yahya Tayyibi. He has written that he heard the story of
Jazira Khadra' from Shaykh Shams al-Din and Shaykh Jalal al-Din in the
shrine of Imam Husayn [in Karbala] on the 15th night of Sha'ban, 699 AH
(1299 CE). They related the story on the authority of Zayn al-Din 'Ali
b. Fadil Mazandarani. Thus I decided to hear the story from him myself.

Fortunately, in the beginning of the month of Shawwal of the same year,
it so happened that Shaykh Zayn al-Din travelled to the city of Hilla. I
met with him in the house of Sayyid Fakhr al-Din. I asked him to tell me
the story he had related for Shaykh Shams al-Din and Shaykh Jalal
al-Din. He said:

I was engaged in studying with Shaykh 'Abd al-Rahim Hanafi and Shaykh
Zayn al-Din 'Ali Andalusi in Damascus. Shaykh Zayn al-Din was a pious
man, and held good opinion about the Shi'a and their scholars, and used
to respect them. I stayed with him for a while and benefitted from his
lectures. It so happened that he had to travel to Egypt. Since we liked
each other, he decided to take me with him. We travelled together to
Egypt and he chose to live in Cairo. We lived in the most favorable
condition there for nine months. On one of the days he received a letter
from his father, requesting him to return because he was seriously ill
and wished to see him before his death.

The shaykh wept upon reading the letter and decided to travel to
Andalusia. I also accompanied him in this journey. When we arrived in
the first town of the peninsula, I became seriously ill and could not
move at all. The shaykh became troubled over my condition. He entrusted
me to the preacher of the town, asking him to take care of me and he
continued on his journey to his city. My illness lasted for three days
and gradually I started getting better. I came out of the house and
strolled in the streets. There I saw some caravans that had come from
the mountainous region with goods to sell.  
 I engaged in conversation with them and they told me that they had come
from the Berber region which is close to the islands of the Rafidis
(Shi'is).

When I heard about the islands of the Rafidis I became eager to visit
them. They told me that the distance between this town and the islands
was twenty-five days of journey, of which for some two days there is no
water or person to be found. To cross those two days I hired a donkey,
and the rest of the journey I travelled on foot. I went on until I
reached the islands of the Rafidis which were fortified with a strong
wall and tall, sturdy watch towers. I entered the mosque of the city and
it was a spacious mosque. I heard the muezzin calling the faithful to
prayer in the way the Shi'is do, and following the call he prayed for
the deliverance of the community through the immediate return of the
Imam. I was crying with happiness.

The people started coming to the mosque and following the Shi'i practice
they performed their ablutions and entered. A handsome man entered the
mosque and went towards the mihrab (the niche). The congregational
prayer began and after it was over they offered their supplications.
Then they saw me and inquired about me. I told them my story and
informed them that I was originally from Iraq. When they found out that
I was a member of the Shi'a, they respected me and fixed me a place in
one of the rooms in the mosque. The leader of the prayer showed his
respect to me and never left me alone at any time.

On one of the days I asked him as to where the food and other needs of
the people come from. He replied that their provision comes from Jazira
Khadra', which is located in the middle of the White Sea. Twice every
year their food comes by ship from the Jazira. I asked him about the
time when the ship was due to return and he said that it would be in
four months. I was sad to learn that it would take that long. However,
after forty days seven ships anchored off shore. From the largest vessel
a handsome looking person emerged. He came to the mosque and performed
his ablutions in accordance with Shi'i teachings and offered his noon
and afternoon prayers. After the prayers were over he came towards me,
greeted me -- mentioning my and my father's name.  
 I was surprised and said: "Did you learn my name during the journey
from Damascus to Cairo or from Cairo to Andalusia?" He replied, "No.
Rather, your name, and your father's name, as well as your features and
characteristics have reached me. I will take you to Jazira Khadra' with
myself." He sojourned there at the island for a week and after
completing his work we set off. After some sixteen days had passed on
the sea, my attention was drawn by the clear waters in the middle of the
sea. That man whose name was Muhammad, asked me as to what had drawn my
attention. I said that the waters of this region had a different color.
At that he told me that this was the White Sea and that the Jazira
Khadra' was there. "These waters are a life fortification surrounding us
and protecting us in such a way that, by God's help, if the ships
belonging to our enemies try to get closer to this point, through the
blessing of the Imam of the Age, they are drowned."

I drank some of the water in that region. It was as sweet as the water
of the Euphrates. After having crossed the white waters we arrived at
the Jazira Khadra'. We disembarked from the ship and went to the city.
The city was prosperous and full of fruit trees. It had a number of
market places filled with goods and the inhabitants of the city lived
most happily. My heart was filled with joy.

My friend Muhammad took me to his house. After we had rested for a while
we went to the congregational mosque. Large crowds had gathered in the
mosque. In the midst of all these people was a prominent and
awe-inspiring person whose imposing features I cannot describe. His name
was Sayyid Shams al-Din Muhammad. People were gathered around him
studying the Arabic language, the Qur'an and other religious sciences.
When I came into his presence he welcomed me and made me sit close to
him. He enquired about my health and told me that it was he who had sent
Shaykh Muhammad to fetch me. Then he ordered one of the rooms in the
mosque to be prepared for my stay. I remained there and ate my meals
with Sayyid Shams al-Din and his companions. Eighteen days passed in
this way.

The first Friday that I was there I went to offer the special service of
the jum'a. I saw Sayyid Shams al-Din reciting the two units of the
Friday service as an obligatory act[^5]. I was surprised to observe this
and when everything was over I asked Sayyid Shams al-Din in private: "Is
it now the period of the presence of the Imam that you offered the jum'a
as an obligatory act?" He said: "No, the Imam is not present, but I am
his special deputy." I went on to ask: "Have you ever seen the Imam of
the Age?" He said: "No, I have not seen him, but my father used to say
that he used to hear his voice but could not see him. But my grandfather
would hear his voice and see him too." So I asked him: "O my master,
what is the reason that some people can see him and some others do not."
He said: "This a special favor that God grants to some of His
creatures."

Then the Sayyid took me by the hand and we went out of the city. I saw
lush trees, and fruit and flower gardens, the like of which I had not
seen in Syria and Iraq. While we were strolling we met a handsome
looking man who greeted us. I asked the Sayyid if he knew the man. He
said: "Do you see this tall mountain?" I answered, "Yes." "In the middle
of this mountain there is a beautiful home, with a sweet water spring
under the trees, and," he continued, "there is a dome made of bricks
there. This man and his other companions are the servants of this dome
and the court. Every Friday morning I go there and meet with the Imam of
the Age. After saying two units of prayer I find the paper on which all
the problems that I need a response for are written. It is appropriate
that you too should go there and meet the Imam in that dome."

Hence, I began to walk towards the mountain. I found the dome as he had
said, and saw the two servants I had seen before. I requested to see the
Imam (peace be upon him). They said it was not possible and that they
had no permission to admit anyone. So I said to them: "Pray for me."
They agreed, and prayed for me. I descended the mountain and went to the
house of Sayyid Shams al-Din. He was not at home.

I went to the house of Shaykh Muhammad with whom I had been on the boat,
and related to him my experience on the mountain and told him that the
two servants did not permit me to see the Imam. Shaykh Muhammad told me
that no one except Sayyid Shams al-Din had permission to go to that
place because he was one of the sons of the twelfth Imam. Between him
and the Imam of the Age there was a distance of five generations of the
Imam and that he was his special deputy.

After that I sought permission from Sayyid Shams al-Din to ask him about
his rulings on some religious problems which I could then cite on his
authority. I also asked him if I could read the Qur'an with him so that
he could teach me the correct pronunciation. He agreed and told me that
we should start with the Qur'an first. During my recitation I would
mention the differences in the reading among the Qur'an reciters. The
Sayyid told me that we do not recognize those variations, and added:
"Our recitation is in conformity with the Qur'an of 'Ali b. Abi Talib
(peace be upon him)."

At that point he told me the story of how the Qur'an was compiled by
'Ali b. Abi Talib. I asked him why some verses of the Qur'an had no
connection with what was being said before and after. He agreed that the
situation was as I described then related the story of how the Qur'an
was compiled by Abu Bakr and how the caliphs rejected the compilation
that was made by 'Ali b. Abi Talib. "It is for this reason that you see
some verses not being related to those before or after," he said.

I asked the Sayyid's permission and reported from him some ninety
rulings, which I cannot permit anyone to see except some very special
individuals among the followers of the Imam . . .

At this juncture the narrator introduces another story which he had
witnessed:

I asked the Sayyid about a tradition from the Imam of the Age that has
been related to us that anyone who claims to have seen the Imam during
the occultation is telling a falsehood. "How is this hadith compatible
with what some of you are able to see?" He replied: "This is true. The
Imam has said thus. However, it was said for that time when he had many
enemies among the 'Abbasids and others. But at this time when the
enemies have become disappointed and since our cities are distant from
them where no body can get close to us, meeting the Imam does not pose
any danger to him."

I then asked him if he knew about another tradition which is reported by
the Shi'i scholars from the twelfth Imam regarding the khums -- that the
Imam has made it lawful for the Shi'is. He replied: "The Imam has given
the permission in regard to the khums to his Shi'a."

Then the narrator quotes some more rulings given by the Sayyid, who
tells him: "Until now you too have seen the Imam twice without
recognizing him." The story ends with his declaration: "The Sayyid
imposed upon me the duty of not extending my stay in the Maghreb and of
returning immediately to Iraq. And I obeyed his command[^6]."

Mr. Hoshyar: The story of Jazira Khadra' is as I have narrated for you
in brief. Let me hasten to add that this story has no credibility and
that it resembles a legend and a fiction for the following reasons:

First, its chain of transmission (sanad) is unreliable. The story has
been taken from an unidentified manuscript. 'Allama Majlisi himself says
thus: "Since I have not found this story in any authentic book, I
created a special section to report it [so that it does not get mixed up
with the other reliable contents of Bihar al-anwar]."

Second, there are a number of inconsistencies in the narrative. I am
sure you noticed that in one place Sayyid Shams al-Din tells the
narrator that he was the deputy of the Imam, but he had not seen him.
Moreover, he says: ". . . but my father used to say that he would hear
his voice but could not see him. But my grandfather used to hear his
voice and see him too." The same Sayyid later on says that he sees the
Imam every Friday morning and encourages the narrator to do the same.
The Shaykh who brought the narrator to that island also tells him that
the Sayyid and those like him are the only ones who can meet with the
Imam. As you have noticed this is a contradictory statement. The
interesting part of the story is that if the Sayyid knew that he was the
only one who could meet with the Imam, why did he propose to the
narrator that he should go to the mountain and see the Imam?

Third, the story makes reference to alterations in the Qur'an, and such
a view is impossible to maintain. Muslims scholars have unanimously
rejected such a contention about the Holy Book of God.

Fourth, the lawfulness of the khums has been touched upon in the story,
which, according to the jurists, is unacceptable.

At any rate, the story has been created like a fiction, and seems
strange and far from the truth. A person by the name of Zayn al-Din
leaves his home in Iraq for education in Syria. From there he
accompanies his teacher to Egypt, and from Egypt to Andalusia in Spain.
He travels all this distance, becomes ill, his teacher leaves him and
after getting well he hears the name of the Jazira of the Rafidis. He
becomes so desirous of visiting this place that he forgets his teacher
and takes off until he reaches the island.

The island appears to be without any vegetation because he asks about
the people's food and where it comes from. In response he hears that it
comes from Jazira Khadra'. Although he is told that the next ship with
food would arrive after four months, it arrives in forty days! After a
week's sojourn he is taken to sea. In the middle of the White Sea he
observes clear, white waters . . . and finally arrives at Jazira
Khadra'. Well, you know the rest of the story!

It is remarkable that a person from Iraq would travel all that distance
through the different countries and would speak the languages of the
people everywhere. Did the people in Spain also speak Arabic?

Another fantastic point is that part which deals with the White Sea. As
you all know the White Sea is located in the northern part of Russia.
The story as related takes place in a different region. Of course, the
Mediterranean Sea, where the story takes place, is also known as the
White Sea. However, the entire sea is called the White Sea, and not only
a spot in it, as the narrator indicates.

Any person examining the story closely would realize that it is
fabricated. In the final analysis, let me point out that we have
previously noted that the hadith-reports mention that the Imam of the
Age (peace be upon him) lives among the people and associates with them.
He also participates in some important occasions, including the annual
pilgrimage to Mecca, and helps people in trouble.

In the light of these traditions, to introduce a distant place,
difficult to access and in the middle of the sea, as the Imam's
domicile -- the Imam who is the hope of the downtrodden and the
redresser of the wrongs committed against them, is, to say the least,
unfair and unreasonable. Finally, let me apologize to you for taking
your valuable time to analyze and discuss such an unreliable story.

Dr. Jalali: Does the Imam of the Age have any offspring or not?

Mr. Hoshyar: We do not have convincing proof supporting or rejecting the
subject of the Imam's marriage and the existence of offspring for him.
It is quite likely that he has been married and does have offspring
without anyone knowing about it. He can do whatever is in his interest,
which, in the view of some, might suggest that he already has offspring
or that they will be born for him later[^7].

When Will He Appear?
--------------------

Dr. Jalali: When is the promised Mahdi expected to appear?

Mr. Hoshyar: No time has been fixed for his appearance (zuhur). As a
matter of fact, the Imams have regarded those who fix the time of the
Mahdi's appearance as liars. Thus, for instance, Fudayl, a companion of
Imam Baqir, asked the latter whether there was any specific time when
the Mahdi would appear. The Imam in his response said three times: "Any
one who fixes the time of the appearance is telling a falsehood[^8]."

Another companion by the name of 'Abd al-Rahman b. Kathir was with Imam
Sadiq when Mahzam Asadi came to visit the Imam and asked him: "When will
the Qa'im from the family of the Prophet rise and establish the just
government that you are expecting, for it has been delayed? When shall
this be realized? " The Imam replied: "Those who fix the time of the
appearance are certainly telling a lie. Those who become hasty in this
matter will definitely destroy themselves. Those who are patient will be
delivered and will return to us."[9]

A prominent and well trusted companion of Imam Sadiq by the name of
Muhammad b. Muslim was told by the Imam: "Any one who fixes the time of
the appearance for you -- do not hesitate to falsify him, because we do
not fix the time for the appearance." There are ten other traditions on
the same theme[^9].

These and many other traditions on this subject provide evidence that
neither the Prophet nor any of the Imams ever fixed the time of the
Mahdi's advent. Hence, if a tradition on this subject fixes the time and
the tradition is attributed to the Imams and if the text is open to some
exegetical explanation, then it should be explained. Otherwise, it
should either be ignored or else falsified. An example of such an
explanation of a weak and unreliable tradition is provided by the
example of Abu Walid Makhzumi, who had attributed to the Imam a
statement that said: "Our Qa'im will rise in ALR[^10]."

The Signs of His Appearance
---------------------------

Engineer Madani: How reliable are the signs of the appearance of the
Mahdi?

Mr. Hoshyar: There are numerous signs of the appearance of the Master of
the Command (may God hasten deliverance through him!) mentioned in the
books on hadith. We cannot undertake to discuss each one of them because
we do not have that much time. It will require several sessions to cover
even the most important of these. Nevertheless, some observations are in
order, however brief.

(a) The hadith-reports coming from the ahl al-bayt have divided the
signs of the appearance into two parts: first, those reports that
mention the signs that will occur without any question and which are
unconditional. These signs must occur prior to the appearance of the
Mahdi. Second, those signs that are introduced without their being
absolute occurrences. These are the events that are not in any way
definitely the signs of the Imam's appearance; rather, they are
conditional. If the conditions are fulfilled, so too will be the signs;
and if the conditions are not fulfilled, so it is with the signs. It was
because of some exigencies that they have been mentioned as part of the
signs of the appearance.

(b) The signs of the appearance are those things without which the
twelfth Imam will not appear. The fulfillment of each of these signs
indicates that the days of restoration and deliverance are to some
extent close by. However, this does not mean that after the signs are
fulfilled, without any delay, the Imam will appear. In the case of some
of these signs it is mentioned that proximate with their fulfillment,
the Imam will appear.

(c) Some of the signs of the appearance will occur as a kind of miracle,
so that the claim to Mahdiism is confirmed and the extraordinary
situation of the world is conveyed to the people. The status of these
signs is the same as with other miracles, which, even when they do go
beyond the world of natural and normal phenomena, should not be regarded
as unacceptable.

(d) There is a kind of sign that is mentioned in some books and which
seems customarily improbable, such as the saying that when the Mahdi
appears the sun will rise from the west, and that the solar eclipse will
occur in the middle of the month of Ramadan, whereas the moon eclipse
will occur towards the end of the same month. All rational people know
that the occurrence of these signs means that the natural order will
have fallen apart and that the solar system will have changed. It must
be pointed out that the traditions that report such events at the End of
Time are no more than 'single' (ahad) transmission.  
 In other words, they do not generate certainty as to the substance that
is being reported. If anyone probes into their chain of transmission
(sanad), he may quickly discover that these were fabricated and
circulated during the Umayyad and the 'Abbasid periods under their
patronage. That period in history saw many individuals who claimed to be
the awaited Mahdi and challenging the de facto governments by rallying
the support of the people against the unjust rulers. Since the Umayyads
and the 'Abbasids understood that it was not possible to falsify the
traditions about the Mahdi that were reported uninterruptedly for
several generations, they used a trick on the people to discourage them
from revolting under 'Alawid leadership.

Consequently, they fabricated and put into circulation traditions that
carried impossible signs for the appearance of the Mahdi. In this way
they sought to dissuade people from following the 'Alawids in their
rebellion against the injustices of the ruling house. However, if these
traditions are true, then there is nothing problematic in visualizing
catastrophic events preceding the advent of the Mahdi to inform the
people about the importance of the event, and to arouse in them a sense
of urgency to work for the government of God on earth.

The Story of Sufyani
--------------------

Engineer Madani: What is the sign about the appearance of Sufyani
towards the End of Time when the Mahdi is to emerge?

Mr. Hoshyar: On the basis of numerous traditions it appears that before
the rise of the Master of the Command, the twelfth Imam (peace be upon
him), a man from the descendants of Abu Sufyan will rise. He has been
described as an outwardly pious person who will take care to remember
God at all times. But in reality he will be the most wicked person on
earth.

He will deceive a large number of people and will rally them around
himself. He will gain control over five regions: Damascus, Hims,
Palestine, Jordan and Qinnasrin, and the 'Abbasid's power will be
permanently destroyed by his hand. He will kill a large number of
Shi'is. Then he will learn of the emergence of the Imam and he will
dispatch an army to fight him. But the army will be unable to get close
to him and will sink into the earth in the area between Mecca and
Medina.

Dr. Jalali: As you know the 'Abbasid empire saw its downfall a long time
ago. There is no trace of it left that Sufyani could destroy!

Mr. Hoshyar: In a hadith reported from Imam Musa Kazim (peace be upon
him) he says: "The 'Abbasid dynasty is founded upon fraud and deception.
It will also vanish in such a way that no trace of it will remain.
However, it will revive itself again in such a way that it would seem as
if it never saw that decline[^11]."

The apparent sense of this hadith suggests that 'Abbasid power will
recur and that the final blow to it will be dealt by Sufyani. It is
possible to maintain that although the rise of Sufyani could be regarded
as one of the definite signs of the Imam's appearance, the manner and
time of his emergence does not seem to be absolute. For example, it is
possible that the destruction of 'Abbasid power at the hands of Sufyani
may not be among the absolute signs of the appearance and it may take
place at the hands of someone else.

Dr. Fahimi: I have heard that since Khalid b. Yazid b. Mu'awiya b. Abi
Sufyan had the wish of gaining the caliphate which he saw in the hands
of the Marwanids, he coined the tradition about the Sufyani to console
himself and to boost the morale of the Umayyads. The author of the book
Aghani says the following about Khalid: "He was learned and a poet. It
is said that he fabricated the tradition about Sufyani[^12]."

According to Tabari, the historian, 'Ali b. 'Abd Allah b. Khalid b.
Yazid b. Mu'awiya arose in the year 159 AH/775 CE in Damascus saying
that he was that awaited Sufyani. In this manner he used to call people
to join his movement.[14] From this historical evidence it is clear that
the tradition about Sufyani is among the fabricated hadith.

Mr. Hoshyar: The traditions about Sufyani have been reported by both the
Sunni and the Shi'i scholars. It is likely that the tradition is among
the uninterruptedly (mutawatir) transmitted ones. Hence, by the mere
fact of the appearance of a false pretender one cannot rule the
tradition to be fabricated and, hence, spurious. Rather, one should say
that since the tradition about Sufyani was well known among the people,
they were awaiting him. Some took advantage of this and revolted against
the rulers claiming to be the awaited Sufyani, thereby deceiving their
followers.

The Story of Dajjal
-------------------

Dr. Jalali: The rise of Dajjal is regarded as one of the signs of the
appearance of the Mahdi. He has been described in the traditions as a
disbeliever who does not have more than one eye which is located on his
forehead and shines like a star. On his forehead is written the
following: "He is a disbeliever," which every person, literate or
illiterate will be able to read. There will be an abundance of food and
a river of water with him at all the times. He will ride a white donkey
whose each step will span a mile. At his command the sky will rain and
the earth will grow vegetation. The earth will be at his discretion. He
will bring the dead back to life. He will cry out in a loud voice that
will be heard all over the world saying: "I am your almighty god who
created you and who sustains you. Run towards me!"

It is said that there was a person during the Prophet's time who was
called 'Abd Allah or Sa'd b. Sayda. The Prophet and his companions went
to visit him in his house. He claimed to be a god. 'Umar wanted to kill
him but the Prophet restrained him. He is still living and at the End of
Time will emerge from Isfahan in the village of Yahudiyya[^13].

It is reported from Tamim al-Dari, a Christian convert to Islam in the 9
AH/630 CE, who said: "I saw Dajjal in chains and fetters on one of the
islands in the west[^14]."

Mr. Hoshyar: In English, Dajjal is known as the 'Antichrist', that is
the one 'against' or the 'enemy' of Christ. The name Dajjal is not a
proper noun of an individual, In Arabic any impostor or a deceiver is
called 'Dajjal'. In the Bible also the word 'dajjal' can be seen in the
same sense. In the First Letter of John 2:22 it is written:

Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the
antichrist, who denies the Father and the Son.  
 In another place in the same letter, 2:18, it is written:

Children, it is the last hour; and as you have heard that antichrist is
coming, so now many antichrists have come, therefore we know that it is
the last hour.

And in 4:3, it says:

And every spirit which does not confess Jesus is not of God. This is the
spirit of antichrist, of which you heard that it was coming, and now it
is in the world already.

In the Second Letter of John, verse 7, it is written:

For many deceivers have gone out into the world, men who will not
acknowledge the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh; such a one is the
deceiver and the antichrist.

From these references in the Bible it is evident that the word dajjal
('antichrist') is used in the meaning of a 'deceiver' and a 'liar.'
Moreover, the story of the rise of the antichrist was well known among
the Christians who awaited his rise.

It appears that Jesus (peace be upon him) had mentioned the emergence of
the antichrist and had warned people about his sedition. Accordingly,
Christians awaited him. In all probability, the antichrist mentioned by
Jesus was the false messiah, a certain man named Dajjal, who appeared
some five centuries following Jesus Christ and falsely claimed to be a
prophet. It was he who was crucified and not Jesus, the Prophet. In
Islam also there are a number of traditions about the existence of
Dajjal. The Prophet used to warn people against the sedition of Dajjal,
saying: "All the Prophets who came after Noah used to warn their
community about the sedition of Dajjal[^15]."

The Prophet is reported to have said: "The Day of Judgement will not
take place until thirty Dajjals emerge claiming to be a prophet[^16]."

'Ali b. Abi Talib said: "Be afraid of the two Dajjals who will be born
of the descendants of Fatima. A Dajjal ('imposter') will arise from
Dijla at Basra who is not from me. He will be the forerunner of a number
of Dajjals ('deceivers')[^17]."

In another tradition the Prophet said: "The Day of Judgement will not
commence until thirty liars and Dajjal-like persons appear and ascribe
falsehood to God and His Prophet[^18]."

In still another tradition the Prophet is reported to have said: "Before
the rise of Dajjal, more than seventy Dajjals ('impostors') will
precede[^19]."

From all these traditions it appears that 'Dajjal' is not the name of a
specific person. Like the word 'antichrist' it is generally applied to
any deceiver, imposter, and fraudulent person. In short, the roots of
the story of Dajjal must be searched in the Bible and among the
Christians. Thereafter, most of the hadith-reports on the subject, with
all of their details, are to be found in the Sunni books and were
transmitted by their narrators. It is quite possible that the actual
events concerning Dajjal, as foretold in some traditions, might be true.
However, all the details about his features and character do not have
the stamp of authenticity on them, since the majority of these
descriptions, published in Bihar al-anwar and other books, are reported
by unidentified narrators[^20].  
 Consequently, even if it is hypothetically admitted that the actual
instance of the appearance of Dajjal is authentic, the details that are
provided have certainly been colored by fictitious stories. We can
maintain this much without difficulty: that in the Last Days and close
to the emergence of the twelfth Imam, a man will be found who will be
singularly a deceiver and an imposter, surpassing in wickedness all the
previous Dajjals. He will mislead a group by his nihilistic claims. He
will present himself to the people as if he is in control of their bread
and water. People will become so delinquent in moral discernment that
they will begin to believe that the entire universe is within his
control. In his deceitful communication he will introduce good works as
bad and bad as good. He will show hellfire as paradise, and paradise as
hellfire. But his disbelief will be evident to all literate and
illiterate persons.

However, there is no evidence to regard Sa'id b. Sayd as the promised
Dajjal or to believe that he continues to live since the time of the
Prophet. For, apart from the weakness in the chain of transmission, the
Prophet is reported to have said this about Dajjal: "He will not enter
the two cities of Mecca and Medina." On the contrary Sa'id b. Sayd had
entered these cities. He died in Medina and some people were witness to
his death[^21].

If it is hypothetically accepted that the Prophet did name Sa'id as
Dajjal, he must have used the word in its common meaning as a 'deceiver'
and a 'liar' rather than as the Dajjal who is part of the signs of the
appearance of the Mahdi. In other words, when the Prophet met Sa'id he
introduced him as a personification of an antichrist to his companions.
Following that, when he informed the people about the emergence of
Dajjal in the Final Days, those who heard him thought the reference was
being made to Sa'id b. Sayd whom he had called a Dajjal, and it is this
Dajjal who would appear as one of the signs of the Last Days, akhir
al-zaman. The tradition about Dajjal being alive and possessing a long
age comes from this incident.

[^1]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 152

[^2]: Ibid., p. 154

[^3]: al-Anwar al-nu'maniyya (Tabriz edition), Vol. 2, p. 57

[^4]: Tihrani, al-Dhari'ah ila tasanif al-shi'a, Vol. 5, p. 108

[^5]: As a rule, during the absence of the twelfth Imam, since there is
no directly appointed deputy of the Imam, the Friday service is offered
as a recommended act, which is immediately followed by the noon prayer
as the obligatory act. In this case Sayyid Shams al-Din, as the deputy
of the twelfth Imam, in the context of this narrative offers the Friday
service as an obligatory act. Tr

[^6]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 159-174

[^7]: This is the point of the prayer mentioned in the Mafatih al-jinan
in which a believer prays to God: "O God, give him (i.e., the twelfth
Imam), his family, his children, his descendants, his community and his
subjects in their entirety, that which is pleasing in his eye." Also, in
another supplication, received from the twelfth Imam himself, he says:
"O God, grant him in himself, in his descendants, his followers, his
subjects, his associates, his general supporters, his enemies, and all
the inhabitants of the world that which will be pleasing in his eye."
However, it is important to keep in mind that such prayers can not serve
as hard core evidence to prove that the twelfth Imam (peace be upon him)
has offspring. At the same time, one cannot rule out altogether that he
does not have any offspring. Imam Sadiq has related a tradition in which
he says: "As if I am seeing the Qa'im descending in the mosque of Kufa
with his relatives and his family." See Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 317

[^8]: Ibid., Vol. 52, p. 103

[^9]: Ibid., Vol. 52, pp. 104 and 117

[^10]: Ibid., Vol. 52, p. 106.

[^11]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 250

[^12]: Abu al-Faraj Isfahani, al-Aghani, Vol. 16, p. 171

[^13]: Ta'rikh Tabari, Vol. 7, p. 25

[^14]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 193-197; Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 18, p.
46 to 87; Abu Dawud, Sunan, Vol. 2, p. 212.

[^15]: Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 18, p. 79; Abu Dawud, Sunan, Vol 3, p. 214

[^16]: Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 18, p. 79; Abu Dawud, Sunan, Vol 3, p. 214.

[^17]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 197.

[^18]: Abu Dawud, Sunan, Vol 2, p

[^19]: Majma' al-zawa'id, Vol 7, p. 333

[^20]: For the detailed chain of transmission and the problem of unknown
reporters in that chain see: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52 where the
traditions are reported with full documentation made up of some
unidentified narrators

[^21]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 199


