Chapter 13: Further Investigation in the Hadith-Reports
=======================================================

Dr. Jalali: I would request Mr. Hoshyar to continue our previous
discussion on the traditions about the merits of awaiting deliverance
(faraj) through the advent of the Mahdi.

Mr. Hoshyar: Let us get into our main topic of investigation in the
traditions dealing with opposition to political and social activism
during the occultation.

As we have pointed out a major part of Islamic teachings which deal with
ordinances which relate the Muslim public order to the religiously
required deeds. These include participation in the defense of one's
family, home, property, and so on; warfare with those who oppress the
people; commanding the good and forbidding evil; and all other duties
that constitute a necessary prerequisite for a Muslim as a member of
society, of a public order. However, it is possible that some people
might escape from the burden of these societal obligations and cite a
hadith or two to justify their complacency and satisfaction with merely
performing some rituals that please them. It is for this reason that I
think the traditions that they employ to justify such behavior must be
carefully examined to determine their source and validity[^1].

First Group of Traditions
-------------------------

There are traditions that advise the Shi'is not to accept the invitation
to join a person who rises in armed revolt without first carefully
examining his credentials and goals. These traditions, furthermore,
require the Shi'is to reject the claims of leadership and the lofty
goals of such individuals, even if they happen to be among the
descendants of 'Ali b. Abi Talib.

First hadith: It is narrated from Muhammad b. Ya'qub, from 'Ali b.
Ibrahim, from his father, from Safwan b. Yahya, from 'Isa b. al-Qasim,
who said: I heard Imam Sadiq say:

Do not leave taqwa (fear of) God, the One and without any partners, and
watch over yourselves constantly. I solemnly declare that if someone has
chosen a shepherd to care for his sheep, but afterward finds someone
else who is more wise than the first one for the task, he will leave the
first one and employ the services of the wiser one. By God, if you had
two life-times, and you experimented with the first one, and were left
with the second lifetime, then there would be no difficulty in utilizing
the experience of the first lifetime. But the reality is other than
this. Every person has no more than one self, for which, if it falls
into peril, there is no possibility for repentance or return. Therefore,
it is necessary for you to carefully evaluate and select the best way
for your selves.

Hence, if one among us came to you and called upon you to revolt, think
carefully and find out for what purpose he has revolted. Do not simply
say [to justify his revolt by saying something like:] "Well, Zayd b.
'Ali also had arisen before!" The reason is that Zayd was a learned and
truthful person and had not called upon you to acknowledge his own
leadership; rather, he was calling towards a person who would be
acceptable and endorsed by the ahl al-bayt. Had he succeeded, he would
have acted upon his promise and would have handed over the power to its
owner.  
 Zayd revolted against the government so that he could overthrow it. But
what is the one who has emerged today calling you? Is he calling you
towards a person who is acceptable and endorsed by the ahl al-bayt? No,
absolutely not. I am calling you to bear witness that we are not pleased
with this person's revolt. This man has not even reached power and he
has already started opposing us. And when he does seize power and raises
his flag, he would certainly not submit to us in obedience.

Hence, accept the call of the one about whom all the descendants of
Fatima are in agreement. That person is your Imam and your leader. When
the month of Rajab dawns, come to the help of God. There is no problem
if you wish to delay it until the month of Sha'ban. And, it is even
better for you, if you wished to keep the fast of Ramadan with your
family. If you need any signs, it is sufficient to remind yourselves
about the rise of Sufyani[^2].

The hadith is regarded as authentic because the entire chain of
transmission has been accredited by scholars.

Meaning and Implications of the hadith
--------------------------------------

The warning given by Imam Sadiq deals with the problem of individuals
from the ahl al-bayt rising against the tyrannical power of the caliphs
and claiming for themselves the leadership. The Imam provides the
criteria of accepting such claims: if the individual is truly qualified
or if he is honest about his goals and about the leader for whom he is
revolting, then his Shi'a should have no problem in responding
positively to his call.  
 This was the situation during the times of practically all the Imams
before the twelfth Imam went into occultation. The hadith apparently
addresses the revolt of Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah b. Hasan b. 'Ali b. Abi
Talib, which the Imam compares with an earlier revolt of Zayd b. 'Ali b.
Husayn b. 'Ali b. Abi Talib. The Imam warns people not to conflate the
two upheavals, and thereby justify their positive response to the later
revolt. For Zayd's revolt was launched in order to restore the true
Imamate to the rightful Imam; whereas there was no such noble goal in
Muhammad's revolt.  
 Moreover, there was a difference in the leadership of the two
movements. Zayd's personality was far more credible than Muhammad's.
Imam Sadiq's observation that the latter would not obey him clearly
explains his misgivings about the goal of the recent revolt.

Abu Faraj Isfahani, writing about Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah, says that the
ahl al-bayt used to call Muhammad the Mahdi, and believed that he was
the promised Mahdi of the traditions. The belief was so widespread that
a group of people belonging to the Hashimites, descendants of Abi Talib,
and the 'Abbasids paid allegiance to him. To add to this atmosphere of
expectation and revolution, according to Abu Faraj, Muhammad b. 'Abd
Allah used to publicly confirm his own candidacy to Mahdiism[^3].

In any case Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah arose as the Mahdi during Imam
Sadiq's period and called upon people to join him. It was in this
context that the above cited hadith was related as a warning to the
Shi'a not to be taken in by such messianic claims. In other words, the
purpose of the Imam was not to issue a blanket prohibition against any
kind of activist response to social and political turmoil. Rather, his
efforts were directed towards educating his followers to distinguish
between the well-intended revolt of Zayd and the ill-intended rise of
Muhammad, both members of the ahl al-bayt. In fact, on the basis of the
above narrative, it appears that Imam Sadiq gave his approval to the
former, including people's participation in that, while condemning the
latter.

It is important to understand the goals of the revolution of Zayd, which
received positive commendation from Imam Sadiq. Of course, in the
limited space that we have in this study, we can only treat them in
brief:

(1) Zayd was a pious, knowledgeable, and truthful person. He had the
necessary qualifications for becoming a leader of the movement. Imam
Sadiq's own evaluation of his uncle's character provides the main
evidence for his endorsement of his revolution. He says: "My uncle Zayd
was beneficial to us in this and the next world. Indeed, he attained
martyrdom in God's way. He is like those who were killed and attained
martyrdom fighting with the Prophet, 'Ali b. Abi Talib, Hasan and
Husyan.[^4]"

In a tradition reported by Abu Faraj Isfahani, the Prophet told Imam
Husayn: "Among your descendants will be born a son whose name will be
Zayd. He and his supporters will be resurrected with a brilliant and
beautiful face on the Day of Judgement, and will enter Paradise[^5]."

(2) Zayd's goal in his revolt was sound. He was not claiming to be an
Imam. His main aim was to overthrow the unjust government and to restore
the authority to the rightful Imam among the ahl al-bayt. If he had
succeeded he would have kept his promise. Again, Imam Sadiq used to say:
"May God have mercy on my uncle Zayd! Had he succeeded in his mission he
would have fulfilled his promise. He used to call people to acknowledge
a person among the ahl al-bayt who was acceptable to and endorsed by
them[^6]."

In some sources there are statements to the effect that Zayd claimed to
be the Imam. His son Yahya, however, denied that ascription to him and
regarded Imam Sadiq as the Imam. Among his followers and his soldiers
also Imam Sadiq was acknowledged as the most learned of the Hashimites
and the rightful Imam. 'Ammar Sabati relates the occasion when a man
asked Sulayman b. Khalid, one of the soldiers in Zayd's army, who had
revolted: "What is your opinion of Zayd? Who is more excellent, Zayd or
Ja'far b. Muhammad [Sadiq]?" Sulayman replied: "By God, one day of
Ja'far b. Muhammad's life is more valuable than the entire life of
Zayd." When Zayd was told about this he too acknowledged that excellence
by saying: "Ja'far b. Muhammad is our Imam in all the questions that
deal with the lawful and unlawful[^7]."

(3) Zayd's revolution was a calculated measure; it did not occur as an
emotional outburst and without any preparation. The underlying intent
was to command the good and forbid the evil, and to combat the forces of
tyranny and wickedness. Zayd wanted to overthrow the unjust government
by use of force and to replace it with a qualified member of the ahl
al-bayt, who had the support of every one. It was mainly for this reason
that a large number of Muslims had rallied to his cause. In Kufa alone,
15,000 thousand people had pledged their support for him. His army was
made up of peoples from different regions of Iraq and Khurasan[^8].

The importance and legitimacy of Zayd's revolt was underscored by the
fact that a great number of Sunni scholars had also responded to his
call and joined his revolution. Some, like Abu Hanifa, the Imam of the
Sunnis, had endorsed and sent him monetary help for his movement[^9].

Zayd had discussed his intention to rise against the unjust authority
with Imam Sadiq, beforehand, to which the Imam replied: "Uncle, if you
are willing to be killed and your body hanged in the trash of Kufa, then
do what you think is right." Zayd was so determined to go ahead with his
plan that in spite of what the Imam had predicted he was willing to die
for his cause. He fought in God's path until he was killed. Imam Rida
said the following about him:

Zayd was the learned one among the descendants of Muhammad. He was
angered for God's sake and fought against God's enemies until he became
a martyr in God's path[^10].

Let us once again come back to our main inquiry about the tradition. It
is evident that one cannot use the tradition reported by 'Isa b. Qasim
as being against an activist response to the political turmoil in the
Muslim public order. On the contrary, it is among those reports that
support a legitimate movement against injustices. The purport of the
Imam's warnings is to make sure that his followers do not blindly follow
this or that person and movement and put themselves in an unnecessarily
dangerous condition. As long as the necessary criteria, as discussed
above, were fulfilled, there was no prohibition against joining the
leader and his movement. Accordingly, one cannot regard the tradition as
among those opposed to any action on the part of the Shi'a during the
occultation of the twelfth Imam.

Second hadith: It is reported from Ahmad b. Yahya al-Maktab, from
Muhammad b. Yahya al-Suli, from Muhammad b. Zayd al-Nahwi, from Ibn Abi
'Abdun, from his father, from Imam Rida (peace be upon him), who told
Ma'mun, the 'Abbasid caliph:

Do not compare my brother Zayd with Zayd b. 'Ali b. Husayn. Zayd b. 'Ali
was among the learned authorities of Muhammad's descendants, who was
angered for God's sake and fought against God's enemies until he was
killed in God's way and attained martyrdom. My father, Musa b. Ja'far
said that he heard from his father, Ja'far b. Muhammad, who said: "May
God have mercy on my uncle Zayd. He called people towards a person
acceptable to and endorsed by the ahl al-bayt. Had he succeeded he would
have definitely fulfilled his promise." He also used to say: "Zayd
consulted me about his mission and I told him, if you are willing to be
killed and your body hanged in the trash of Kufa, then do what you think
is right."

Imam Rida then said:

Zayd was not claiming something that was not his right. He was so
godfearing that he could never claim something that did not belong to
him. On the contrary, he used to tell the people: "I am calling you to
acknowledge a person who will be acceptable to the family of the
Prophet[^11]."

The hadith is not sound, as far as the chain of transmission (sanad) is
concerned. The narrators have been described by scholars of biographical
dictionaries as "lacking credibility." As for its content, it cannot be
regarded as being opposed to an activist stance during the occultation.
After all, it is describing positively Zayd's movement and personality.
However, another Zayd, that is, Zayd b. Musa, Imam Rida's brother has
been criticized. This Zayd had emerged in Basra and had called people to
acknowledge him as their leader. He destroyed the people's homes and
plundered them. He was finally defeated and arrested by the caliphal
authority. Ma'mun forgave him and sent him to see Imam Rida. Imam Rida
ordered him released but asked his brother not to speak to him ever
again[^12].

Evidently, even this hadith is not evidence against an activist response
to the injustices in the Muslim polity during the absence of the twelfth
Imam (peace be upon him).

Second Group of Traditions
--------------------------

These are the traditions that indicate that any revolution before the
final widespread revolution of the Mahdi will end up in defeat.

First hadith: It is reported from 'Ali b. Ibrahim, from his father, from
Hammad b. 'Isa, from Rab'i, reaching back to 'Ali b. Husayn (peace be
upon him), who said:

By God, none among us will rise before the revolution of the Qa'im,
except the one resembling a chick that leaves its nest before it can
fly. Such will fall in the hands of children who will play with it[^13].

This tradition is regarded as weak in transmission because it is
incomplete. As such it is not regarded as reliable.

Second hadith: It is reported from Jabir, from Imam Baqir, who said:

The mode of our Qa'im's revolution will resemble the Prophet's
emergence. The mode of revolution of any one among us, the ahl al-bayt,
before the emergence of the Qa'im, will resemble a chick that leaves its
nest [before being ready to fly], and becomes a plaything for
children[^14].

Third hadith: It is reported from Abu al-Jarud, who heard Imam Baqir
say:

None among us, the ahl al-bayt, rises in order to stand against
injustices and fight for the truth, except he becomes entangled in
difficulties and faces defeat. Until that time, when those who were
present in the Battle of Badr, and who went swiftly to help those who
were fighting, and did not have any one killed in need of burial nor any
one injured in need of treatment, rise.

The reporter asked: 'Who does the Imam mean by that?' Abu Jarud replied:
'Angels[^15].'

Fourth hadith: It is reported from Abu al-Jarud, from Imam Baqir. He
asked the Imam to recommend to him something for his benefit. In
response the Imam said:

I recommend to you that you be godfearing, and remain in your home. And
live with these common people. Avoid the people among us who rise up,
because they do not have any goals. . . Be aware that there is no group
that rises in order to combat injustice and restore the glory of Islam
except that they are struck on the ground by calamities until that time
when a group that was present in the Battle of Badr arises . . .[^16]

The rest of the hadith resembles the previous tradition. These last
three traditions, again, on account of a weak chain of transmission are
regarded as unreliable. Moreover, one of the narrators is Abu Jarud who
followed the Zaydi faction and was the founder of the Jarudiyya sect. He
has been regarded as a weak transmitter by scholars of biographical
dictionaries.

Investigation into the Meanings and Implications of these hadith-Reports
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The traditions show Imam Baqir encountering those among his followers
who want to know the reason he has not arisen. They relate the external
truth about the situation encountered by individuals belonging to the
ahl al-bayt who emerged and who initiated a movement against the unjust
forces, but met with resistance and destruction. It also recounts the
faith in the future revolution of the Mahdi who will receive divine help
from the angels, just as those who fought that monumental battle of Badr
in the early days of Islam received such miraculous help. In other
words, the traditions are engaged in explaining the reason why the Imams
could not arise against the unjust authority without adequate
preparation and without divine aid.

There is also another aspect to these traditions: as reminders for those
who insisted on radical responses at inopportune times for the success
of such actions. These are grim reminders about those 'Alawids who had
been killed at different times because they had taken off "before they
could fly out of the safety of their nest." In other words, success was
not guaranteed to any uprising before the revolution of the Mahdi.
Nevertheless, the traditions do not convey that the legally and morally
imposed obligation of jihad in God's way, defence of Islam and the
Muslims, commanding the good and forbidding the evil, confronting
injustices and wickedness, were all in abeyance since the Imams had no
discretionary authority to effect these duties.  
 If one is informed of the adverse outcome of a struggle, it does not
mean that he is unable, then, to make a decision to put up the struggle.
Here Imam Husayn serves as a good example. He knew the outcome that
would ensue because of his stance against the injustices of the
Umayyads, and still he decided to fulfill his legal and moral obligation
of defending Islam and the Qur'an. There is absolutely no doubt that
today Islam has survived because of the sacrifices that were made by
Imam Husayn, his family and his companions. Hence, it is accurate to
maintain that none of the above hadith-reports imply that the
obligations to defend and protect the Muslim public order specified by
the Shari'a are in suspension until the twelfth Imam returns.

Third Group of Traditions
-------------------------

These are the traditions that require the Shi'a to refrain from joining
any movement before the final appearance of the twelfth Imam. First
hadith: It is related from several narrators, from Ahmad b. Muhammad b.
'Uthman b. 'Isa, from Bakr b. Muhammad, from Sudyar, who said that Imam
Sadiq said:

Stay in your homes. As long as day and night are motionless, you too
remain calm. When you hear that Sufyani has arisen, then commute towards
us, even if it be on foot[^17].

The transmission of the hadith is problematic, because the persons cited
in the chain include a waqifi, that is, one of those who stopped
believing in the Imamate's continuation after the seventh, Imam Musa
Kazim. 'Uthman b. Sa'id was Imam Kazim's agent while the Imam was alive.
After his death he became a waqifi, and refrained from sending the
Imam's share of khums to Imam Rida. The latter had shown his severe
disapproval of him for that. He repented later on and returned all the
goods belonging to the Imam. Equally problematic is the reliability of
Sudayr b. Hakim Sayrafi.

Second hadith: It is related from Ahmad b. 'Ali b. al-Hakam, from Abi
Ayyub al-Khazzaz, from 'Umar b. Hanzala. He said he heard from Imam
Sadiq, who said:

"There are five signs that will occur before the rise of the Qa'im: (1)
The cry [from the sky]; (2) the [rise of] Sufyani; (3) the sinking [of
the earth in some parts]; (4) the killing of Nafs Zakiyya; and, (5) the
emergence of a Yamani." The narrator asked: "O son of the Prophet, what
if one of the members of the ahl al-bayt rises before these signs occur?
Should we follow him?" The Imam said: "No[^18]."

The chain of transmission in this hadith is also problematic because of
the inclusion of 'Umar b. Hanzala, who has not been accredited.

Third hadith: It is reported from Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. al-Fadl b.
Shadhan, from al-Hasan b. Mahbub, from 'Amr b. Abi al-Miqdam, from
Jabir, from Imam Baqir. He said:

Remain still on earth; do not move your hands and feet, until the signs
of which I inform you occur. [These are:], dispute among the family of
so and so; and the call of a caller from the sky; and the sound that
will come from the direction of Damascus[^19].

This tradition also lacks reliability because of its chain of
transmission, which includes an unknown narrator by the name of 'Umar b.
Abi al-Miqdam. Shaykh Tusi has narrated the tradition from two sources
which both happen to be unreliable.

Fourth hadith: It is related from al-Hasan b. Muhammad al-Tusi, from his
father, from al-Mufid, from Ahmad b. Muhammad al-'Alawi, from Haydar b.
Muhammad b. Nu'aym, from Muhammad b. 'Isa, from al-Hasan b. Khalid, who
said: "I told Abu al-Hasan al-Rida that 'Abd Allah b. Bukayr has related
a tradition which I would like to tell you." He said, "Go ahead and tell
me what is this hadith?" I said: "Ibn Bukayr has related from 'Ubayd b.
Zurara who said: 'When Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah b. Hasan revolted I was
with Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him). One of the companions came and
said: May my life be a sacrifice for you! Muhammad b. Hasan has
revolted. What is your opinion about this matter?' The Imam said:

As long as the earth and the heavens are calm you too remain motionless.
Hence, if this is the situation there will neither be a Qa'im nor a
revolution.

Imam Rida said:

Imam Sadiq is right. But the meaning of what he said is not as Ibn
Bukayr has inferred. Rather, the intention of the Imam was to convey
that as long as the sky is silent from the final cry and the earth from
sinking the army [of God's enemy] you too remain undisturbed[^20].

This hadith is not sound in its transmission, because Ahmad b. Muhammad
has not been identified by scholars of biographical dictionaries.
Likewise, three other persons have not been authenticated in this chain,
namely, Hasan b. Khalid, Abu al-'Ala' and Sayrafi.

Fifth hadith: It is related from Muhammad b. Humam, from Ja'far b. Malik
al-Fazazi, from Muhammad b. Ahmad, from 'Ali b. Asbat, from some of his
companions, from Imam Sadiq. He said:

Hold your tongues, and remain within the confines of your homes, because
you will not get anything that the rest of the people do not get.
Moreover, Zaydis will be your shield [against the atrocities that are
being committed][^21].  
 This tradition too suffers from a weak chain of transmission and,
hence, it is not that reliable. A number of transmitters are omitted and
the tradition is taken from 'Ali b. Asbat without any information about
his sources. Moreover, Ja'far b. Muhammad b. Malik is regarded as a weak
link.

Sixth hadith: It is narrated from 'Ali b. Ahmad, from 'Abd Allah b. Musa
al-'Alawi, from Muhammad b. Sinan, from 'Ammar b. Marwan, from Minkhal
b. Jamil, from Jabir b. Yazid, from Imam Baqir. He said:

As long as the sky is calm, you too remain calm and do not revolt
against anyone. Indeed your situation is not obscure. The exception [to
this calmness] is that there are stings from God, on which people have
no power[^22].

The chain of transmission of this hadith also suffers in reliability
because Minkhal b. Jamil has been identified as weak and harmful in his
narration.

Investigation into the Meanings and Implications of these hadith-Reports
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Before examining the implications of these reports, it is relevant to
point out that the Shi'a and the companions of the Imams lived in
anticipation of the awaited Mahdi's rising. This anticipation was
founded upon the traditions that had been handed down from the time of
the Prophet and the Imams (peace be upon them) in which it was promised
that when the Mahdi appears he will fill the earth with justice and
equity as it is filled with tyranny and wickedness.  
 They had also learnt from the traditions that when that person comes
forth he will be triumphant and will enjoy God's special favor. It was
for this reason that the subject of the rise and the final victory of
the Mahdi and so on was prevalent among the Shi'a. The followers of the
Imams used to ask them the reason for their silence in the face of all
sorts of atrocities and the inhumanity suffered by the generality of
Muslims under the caliphs. At times, they used to ask a very specific
question: "Why does not the Qa'im from the ahl al-bayt rise?"  
 At other times, they wanted to know the signs of the Imam's appearance.
It was such conditions that some descendants of 'Ali b. Abi Talib took
advantage of appearing as the promised Mahdi of the family of Muhammad
(peace be upon him and his progeny) and fight against the evil power of
the caliphs. However, within a short time they were defeated, arrested,
and mercilessly killed.

This was the background of these hadith-reports that we have examined in
this section. Hence, when the Imam advises his followers to adopt
quietism in the face of the existing turmoil, he is actually informing
them that the person who has revolted is not the promised Mahdi. They
have to wait for his appearance which will be attended by some specific
signs as well as a movement of resistance. These hadith, then, are meant
to warn their followers not to fall into any trap before the real event
has taken place. They do not, in any way, relieve them from assuming the
tasks laid down by the law for their own and their religion's survival.
There is no evidence, whatsoever, to ascribe such illegitimate views to
the Imams whose sole purpose in uttering these traditions was to save
them from being meaninglessly destroyed. Hence, these traditions cannot
be regarded as opposing all activist responses which seek to preserve
Islamic public order.

Fourth Group of Traditions
--------------------------

These are the traditions that recommend the Shi'a not to make haste in
rising against an unjust government.

First hadith: It is reported from several companions of the Imam, from
Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Khalid, from Muhammad b. 'Ali, from Hafs b. 'Asim,
from Sayf al-Tammar, from Abi al-Marhaf, from Imam Baqir, who said:

The dirt gets into the eye of the one who stirs it up. Those who make
haste destroy themselves. . . . Surely, they (i.e., the government
forces) intend to see people rising against them [so that they can get
rid of them]. O Abu Marhaf, do you believe that those who persevere will
not receive any release from God? Indeed, by God, they will certainly
receive deliverance[^23].

The chain of transmission of this hadith is weak, because it includes
Muhammad b. 'Ali, the Kufan narrator, who is regarded as weak by
scholars of biographical dictionaries. Moreover, Abu al-Marhaf's
identity is unknown.

The context of the hadith is the period in which a group of people had
revolted against the caliphal authority, and were defeated. It is for
this reason the narrator appears to be anxious that Shi'is might also be
targeted. Hence, the Imam consoles him and assures him that God will
deliver those who remain steadfast. Accordingly, this tradition cannot
be classified as one of those which opposes any active participation in
movements led by legitimate individuals with well-defined goals.

Second hadith: It is related from al-Hasan b. Muhammad al-Tusi, from his
father, from al-Mufid, from Ibn Qawlawayh, from his father, from Ahmad
b. Muhammad, from 'Ali b. Asbat, from his uncle Ya'qub b. Salim, from
Abi al-Hasan al-'Abidi, from Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him). He said:
"Anyone who for God's sake adopts perseverance, God will make him enter
Paradise[^24]."

This hadith is relatively well authenticated, since its reporters are
all regarded as trustworthy.

The context of the hadith is not evident from the text. But it is clear
that the Imam is recommending patience in general and the reward that
accrues to the person who perseveres. It does not deal necessarily with
circumstances of revolt or other social-political turmoil.

Third hadith: Imam 'Ali b. Abi Talib says:

Stay where you are, and when visited by calamities be patient. Do not
move your hands and swords in the way of fulfilling the inclination of
your tongues. Do not be in haste. Surely, any one of you dying on his
bed while acknowledging the right of his Lord, and the right of his
Prophet and his ahl al-bayt, dies a martyr. He deserves to receive the
reward for the intention of his righteous deed. He will also reap the
reward for the intention to fight with his sword [in defence of truth
and justice]. Undoubtedly, there is a time and specific limit for
everything[^25].

The hadith is also part of the Nahj al-balagha, and is regarded as
authentic.

Fourth hadith: It is related from Muhammad b. Yahya, from Muhammad b.
al-Hasan, from 'Abd al-Rahman b. Abu Hashim, from al-Fadl al-Katib. He
said that he was in the presence of Imam Sadiq when he received the
letter from Abu Muslim [Khurasani]. He told the messenger that there was
no reply to carry back and that he should leave his presence
immediately. And then he added:

God does not expedite a matter because His servants are in a hurry. To
be sure, it is easier to dig a mountain from its place than to overthrow
a government whose term has not been decreed to end.

The narrator asked for a sign of such an imminence that would be
recognized by the Imam and his followers. The Imam said:

Do not move from where you are until the Sufyani has arisen. At that
time run towards us.

And, he repeated the sentence thrice: "The rise of Sufyani is bound to
happen[^26]."

The hadith is regarded as reliable on the basis of its chain of
transmission.

Fifth hadith: It is reported from Muhammad b. 'Ali b. al-Hasan, from his
sources, from Hammad b. 'Amr, from Anas b. Muhammad, from his father,
from Imam Sadiq, from his forefathers. This was a recommendation from
the Prophet to 'Ali b. Abi Talib. He said:

It is easier to dig huge mountains than to remove those in power whose
time to vanish has not come yet[^27].

This hadith has a problem when examined for its chain of transmission.
It includes Hammad whose identity is unknown. In addition, Anas b.
Muhammad and his father are regarded as lacking credibility.

Sixth hadith: It is reported from Humayd b. Ziyad, from 'Ubayd Allah b.
Ahmad al-Dihqan, from 'Ali b. al-Hasan al-Tatari, from Muhammad b.
Ziyad, from Aban, from Sabah b. Siyaba, from al-Mu'alla b. Khunays who
said, 'I took letters from 'Abd al-Salam b. Nu'aym, Sudayr, and others
to Imam Sadiq at the time when the black-clothed one had arisen. This
was just before the 'Abbasids revolted. The letter said: "We have
decided that the matter of leadership should be handed over to you. What
is your opinion about it?" The Imam threw the letter on the ground and
said: "Alas, alas, alas! I am not their (i.e., the insurrectionists')
Imam. Do they not know that the awaited Mahdi will kill the
Sufyani[^28]"''

The hadith is not reliable as far the chain of transmission in
concerned. The problem is that Sabah b. Siyaba is unidentified.

Investigation into the Meanings and Implications of these hadith-Reports
------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is important to bear in mind what we have said earlier: the followers
of the Imams unfailingly anticipated emancipation from tyrannical
conditions through the rise of the Qa'im from among the family of the
Prophet, as predicted in the traditions from him and the Imams (peace be
upon them). In addition, we must not forget that the Shi'a were living
under most cruel circumstances in this period. They were under
surveillance, in prisons, executed, burnt alive, and so on.
Consequently, whenever a member of the ahl al-bayt promised to lead the
movement to redress the wrongs committed against them, they did not
hesitate to follow him. They even accepted their claim to be the
promised Mahdi, and rallied around to lend them support for their
revolution.

On the side of the government, the Umayyads, and then the 'Abbasids,
were fully aware of the messianic traditions and the political activism
it generated among the dispossessed people. They also knew that the
Shi'a exerted lot of pressure on their Imams to fight injustices and to
replace unjust rulers by assuming power themselves. It was for this
reason that 'Abbasid spies constantly reported the whereabouts of the
Shi'i Imams and their contacts with their Shi'a, expecting that they
would eventually conspire against the government.

This general observation about the times in which the Imams lived and
guided their followers explains many traditions cited in this chapter.
The main point that the Imams wanted their followers to realize was that
the time for the revolution of the promised Mahdi had not as yet
arrived. There were specific signs that would precede that revolution
under the leadership of the Qa'im of the family of the Prophet. More
importantly, there was a realistic assessment of the power of the unjust
authorities in such statements as "It is easier to dig huge mountains
than to remove those in power whose time to vanish has not come yet."  
 Hence, the Shi'a were admonished to bear with patience their burdens
and to remain alert without causing destruction to themselves at the
hands of the wicked rulers. This does not teach submission and quietism,
as others have interpreted. On the contrary, it requires the Shi'a to
assess each instance of upheaval carefully in order to avoid being drawn
into them without any advantage. In fact, all the traditions point
towards using one's intellect to understand the realities and not to
respond simply emotionally and in reaction.

In the final analysis, the implication of these traditions is an
explicit demand that the followers of the Imam, who happened to be in
the minority and under the constant hostile watch of the rulers,
deliberate and conceive better strategies to work for their
self-preservation as well as for the preservation of an Islamic public
order. To be sure, the purport of Imam 'Ali b. Abi Talib's statement:
"Stay where you are, and when visited by calamities be patient. Do not
move your hands and swords in the way of fulfilling the inclination of
your tongues," is a warning not to submit to emotional outbursts, but to
learn from experience the wisdom of caution when the power is unjust and
wicked.

Fifth Group of Traditions
-------------------------

These are the traditions that regard the person who leads any revolution
prior to the revolution of the Mahdi as an evildoer, taghüt.

First hadith: It is related from Muhammad b. Yahya, from Ahmad b.
Muhammad, from 'Isa b. al-Husayn b. al-Mukhtar, from Abu Basir, from
Imam Sadiq, who said:

The leader of every flag [in an uprising] that is raised before the
rising of the Qa'im is an evildoer who is worshipped (taghüt) [by the
people for his daringness] beside God[^29].

This hadith is authenticated on the basis of its narrators who are all
regarded as reliable.

Second hadith: It is reported from Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Nu'mani, from
'Abd al-Wahid b. 'Abd Allah, from Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Rayyah al-Zuhri,
from Muhammad b. al-'Abbas, from 'Isa al-Husayni, from al-Hasan b. 'Ali
b. Abi Hamza, from his father, from Malik b. A'yan al-Jihani, from Imam
Baqir, who said:

The leader of any flag that is raised before the raising of the Mahdi's
flag, is an evildoer[^30].

Investigation into the Meanings and Implications of these hadith-Reports
------------------------------------------------------------------------

To be sure, "raising of the flag" is a metaphor for beginning a battle
against a system in order to establish a new government, and a new
system. The standard-bearer is the leader of the movement who is in the
process of overthrowing the ruling regime and installing a new
government. For this he calls upon the people to join him. Taghüt, as we
have seen in other traditions, is a tyrant who has attacked God's
creatures and has forced them to accept his rule without opposition. The
credo of the leader is captured in the phrase: "the one who worships
other than God." Accordingly, he is engaged in undermining God's
authority among His people, so that he can pursue his personal
ambitions. It is in this sense that the word taghüt is applied to the
leader of such a movement.

The meaning of the tradition is that any flag that is raised before the
revolution of the Qa'im, and of which the leader calls the people
towards himself, that bearer of the flag is to be regarded as an
evildoer. Hence, the hadith implies that insurrection for purposes other
than the correct religion is to be rejected outright. However, if the
purpose of the revolt is to restore violated justice and to make people
aware of their spiritual and moral responsibilities, then it is to be
regarded as legitimate. The leader of this latter kind of revolt does
not call people to himself; rather, he is inviting people towards God.
As such, his flag is leading the people in the same direction as that of
the Qa'im. It is not engaged in negating the achievements of the other
Imams and the Prophet, who all at different times stood firm against
injustices and atrocities committed against innocent peoples.

Conclusions of the Discussion
-----------------------------

The majority of the traditions that we examined in this section were
classified by the scholars of the science of hadith as weak. As such,
they cannot be used as evidence for the argument that is being put
forward in opposition to an activist response during the occultation of
the twelfth Imam. The traditions, however, provide the guidelines for
the Shi'a to consider in acknowledging valid and invalid religious
movements led by one or another leader. They also serve as a reminder to
them that the time for the appearance of the Mahdi had not arrived yet.
Under the circumstances that existed for the Shi'a community living as a
minority under those most unfavorable circumstances that were prevalent
under the caliphate, it was expedient for them not to join the bandwagon
of anyone who invited them to rise against tyranny. In fact, under those
conditions patience is a virtue.

Furthermore, it was a duty to determine both the leadership's claim and
intent, before making the decision to support or reject an uprising. Not
every flag that is raised in the name of fighting injustice deserves
unquestioning support from the Shi'a. The criteria for judging a just
cause provided in the traditions function as a deterrent rather than as
a total prohibition against taking up arms against tyrants. In other
words, the traditions do not propose complete withdrawal for the
followers of the ahl al-bayt from defending God's laws and the Muslim
public order. It simply requires them to be alert at all times about
their duty to God and to God's purposes for humanity as specified in the
teachings of Islam on interpersonal justice.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*  
 To recapitulate our lengthy discussion, let us summarize our major
propositions and then derive the final overall conclusion.

(1) Islam is not simply concerned with the spiritual aspects of human
religiosity. It has legislated comprehensively on every aspect of human
existence -- as individuals related to God, and as members of the human
community related to fellow humans. Thus, all the chapters of Islamic
law, whether they deal with prayer or with fasting, with warfare or
defence, reveal this bi-dimensional feature of Islam.

(2) There is no doubt that Islam was revealed in order to be implemented
as a vital aspect of meaningful human existence.

(3) The implementation of Islam depends upon the establishment of a
Muslim polity and government that is committed to executing the divine
plan on earth by creating an ideal society.

(4) The Prophet was not merely an envoy of God who had come to deliver
the message. He was also the executor of the divine will on earth. An
integral part of his prophetic obligation was to organize his people and
lead them to establish divine scales of justice on earth.

(5) This obligation of implementing the divine will on earth did not end
with the death of the Prophet. It continues as long as Islam remains the
religion of humankind.

(6) It is the duty of the people to support and assist the Prophet and
his rightful infallible successors who also are invested with the power
to create the ideal Muslim public order. This requirement is extended to
the times when there is no infallible leader in power or when such a
leader is in occultation. As long as there is a Muslim polity that needs
support and maintenance through government, a military apparatus, and
financial structures, Muslims have the obligation to provide that
support. During the occultation, when the twelfth Imam lives an
invisible life, the people should choose a most qualified jurist to
provide the necessary Islamic governance. This is the meaning of Islamic
government. It is a government that is headed by a pious, well-versed
jurist, not merely in matters of religion, but also in matters of
governance and in administration of an Islamic polity.

In the second part of our discussion we examined all the traditions that
are used as documentation for the opinion that opposes an active
response from the people during the occultation. As we have
demonstrated, it is impossible to take these traditions in that meaning
and to regard the fundamental duties of a Muslim as a member of the
community as being in abeyance until the twelfth Imam (peace be upon
him) emerges as the Mahdi. In view of all the verses and the
hadith-reports that require Muslims to take up jihad, to command the
good and forbid evil, to defend the rights of the dispossessed and
downtrodden, and other related public obligations, it is impossible to
maintain, even hypothetically, that since the actual ruler of the
Muslims is in invisible existence, we cannot undertake these duties that
require the presence of an infallible leader like the twelfth Imam as a
precondition.  
 More importantly, if the religion of Islam is faced with a danger, no
Muslim can be excused for sitting around and doing nothing about it. Nor
can they be forgiven if they do not resist any intervention or
interference in Muslim affairs by external or internal enemies. None of
the hadith can possibly be interpreted to dictate such irresponsible
behavior from Muslims simply because the Imam is in occultation. All the
above-cited verses and many more passages of the Qur'an form the most
explicit response to those who want to escape that most critical
obligation of being a Muslim, namely, to work towards the creation of an
ethical public order which reflects God's will.  
 When there is no ambiguity in such unequivocally required duties to
maintain the Muslim public order, there can be no possibility of
deducing a quietist attitude that would avoid facing these religious and
moral obligations of the Shari'a. Regardless of the need for sacrifices,
Muslims at all times must, as a fundamental duty of being a believer in
God and His Prophet, protect Islam and its public order.

The scholars of Islam, especially the jurists, have an even greater
responsibility in this regard. As heirs to the Prophet's function and as
protectors of the true religion, they are the refuge of the people. They
cannot acquiesce in the face of a threat that is posed by the ungodly
powers to the Muslims. Imam 'Ali b. Abi Talib has reminded these leaders
saying:

I swear by God, Who has caused the seed to germinate and the human being
to be created, if that crowd had not come to pay their allegiance to me,
and through that act of theirs, the duty that I had to undertake had not
been made clearer, I would have tossed away the reins of the camel of
the caliphate and let it go anywhere it pleased. Moreover, had it not
been that God has exacted a promise from the learned that they would not
give their consent to the wrongdoer to fill his belly while the wronged
person goes hungry, then [I would have never accepted the
caliphate[^31].

Imam Husayn also made similar remarks when he had to confront the
injustices of the Umayyads, by quoting the Prophet, who said:

Whoever sees a tyrant ruler making lawful what God made unlawful,
breaking God's covenant with those who exercise authority, opposing the
Prophet's tradition, and becoming the enemy of the people by committing
acts of disobedience against God, and does not oppose him by action and
opinion, then God will make him enter the same place [of hell-fire] as
the tyrant[^32].

Imam Husayn goes on to explain the reason for such a severe indictment
of any who fails to oppose wrongdoing:

This is so, because the execution of the laws and administration of
affairs is in the hands of those who are knowledgeable about God,
entrusted with the preservation of God's legal order dealing with the
lawful and unlawful. Hence, it is you who have lost this position. And,
this status has not been snatched from you except that you separated
yourselves from the truth and disputed in the matter of the tradition of
the Prophet after a clear proof was afforded. Had you been patient with
the hardships and borne your livelihood for the sake of God, then those
matters related to God would have reverted to you, would have been
issued by you, and would have been referred to you.  
 But you let the wrongdoers take your place and you handed over God's
affairs to them, being fully aware of their following their ruse and
their giving in to their lower appetites. It was your running away from
death and your being attracted to life that made them dominate you. It
was you who let the downtrodden people fall into their hands, so that
they would make some of them their slaves and others their source of
feed. All this allowed the tyrants to rule the way they wanted, and
brought shame and humiliation to themselves and their subjects. In this
behavior of theirs, they follow evil people, and they have become daring
in their opposition to God.

There is no doubt that the learned in the community have great
responsibilities. If they failed to execute them they would suffer
severe sanctions on the Day of Judgment. The duty of the 'ulama' is not
limited to teaching, discussing, commenting, leading congregational
prayers and so on. Rather, their greater responsibility is to protect
the religion of Islam and the Muslims, to fight against unbelievers and
evildoers, who are engaged in destroying Islam, and to implement Islamic
legal and moral precepts. If they fall short in this then they do not
have any excuse in the presence of God. By referring to those weak and
brief traditions, they will not be able to exonerate themselves from
this extremely critical responsibility.

Can God, the Exalted, and the Prophet of Islam, allow us to remain
indifferent to the heinous and dangerous conspiracies against Islam and
the pitiful behavior of some of the Muslim countries; continue with our
life of teaching, preaching, and leading the prayers as usual? No,
never.

[^1]: These hadith can be studied in several important collections, such
as Wasa'il al-shi'a, Vol. 11, pp. 35-41; Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52

[^2]: Wasa'il, Vol. 11, p. 35; Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 301. The
tenth hadith in this section is also from the same narrator and, as
such, should not be seen as a different tradition

[^3]: Maqatil al-talibiyyin, p. 233-240

[^4]: 'Uyun al-akhbar, p. 252

[^5]: Maqatilal-talibiyyin, p. 140-41

[^6]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 46, p. 199

[^7]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 46, p. 135ff

[^8]: Maqatil al-talibiyyin, p. 146-47

[^9]: Ibid., p. 99

[^10]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 46, p. 174

[^11]: Wasa'il al-shi'a, Vol 11, p. 39

[^12]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 48, p. 315

[^13]: Mustadrak al-wasa'il, Vol. 2, p. 248

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Wasa'il al-shi'a, Vol. 11, p. 36; Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 302

[^16]: Mustadrak al-wasa'il, Vol. 2, p. 248

[^17]: Wasa'il al-shi'a, Vol. 11, p. 36

[^18]: Ibid., p. 37

[^19]: Ibid., p. 41

[^20]: Ibid., p. 39

[^21]: Mustadrak al-wasa'il, Vol. 2, p. 248

[^22]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 247

[^23]: Wasa'il al-shi'a, Vol. 11, p. 36

[^24]: Ibid. p. 39

[^25]: Ibid., p. 40

[^26]: Ibid

[^27]: Ibid., p. 38

[^28]: Ibid., p. 37

[^29]: Ibid., p. 37

[^30]: Mustadrak al-wasa'il, Vol 2, p. 248

[^31]: Nahj al-balagha, Second sermon

[^32]: Ibn Athir, al-Kamil fi al-ta'rikh, Vol. 4, p. 48


