Chapter 14: The Signs of the Appearance (Zuhur) of the Mahdi
============================================================

The session began promptly at 8 p.m. at Dr. Jalali's residence. He also
opened the session by asking the first question.

Dr. Jalali: Mr. Hoshyar, could you please tell us, how will the Master
of the Command appear?

Mr. Hoshyar: On studying the hadith reported by the ahl al-bayt, it
appears that when the world has become psychologically ready to accept
the government of God and when general conditions have become favorable
to the idea of the rulership of the truth, God will permit the Mahdi to
launch his final revolution. He will suddenly appear in Mecca and the
caller of God will announce to the world that he has alighted. A few
selected individuals, whose number has been fixed to 313 in some
traditions, will be the first ones to respond to his call, and will be
drawn to him like iron to a magnet in that first hour of his appearance.

Imam Sadiq relates: "When the Master of the Age appears, the young among
his followers (shi'a), without any prior appointment, will rouse
themselves and reach Mecca that very night[^1]."

At that time the Mahdi will call upon the entire world to join his
movement. Those who have suffered and lost all hope that their situation
could improve will rally around him and will pay allegiance to him. In a
short time a vast army made up of courageous, sacrificing, and
reform-seeking peoples of the world will be prepared to be led by him.
Imams Baqir and Sadiq (peace be upon them), have described the Qa'im's
helpers thus:

They will occupy the east and the west of the world, will bring
everything under his command. Each one of these soldiers will have the
power of forty strong men. Their hearts will be harder than iron pieces
so much so that in their march to the goal should they encounter
mountains made of iron they will overcome them with their inner
strength. They will continue their struggle until God's pleasure is
acquired[^2].

At that time, the imperious, sinful rulers, lacking any conscience yet
sensing the threat, would come out in defense, calling out the
oppositional forces made up of their own followers. But the soldiers of
justice and reform, having been disgusted with the injustice and
persecution of those evil forces, will take the ultimate decision of
attacking them in unison and with total effort. With God's help and
sanction they will wipe them out. Awe and fear will descend upon the
survivors who will finally surrender to the rightful, just government.

On seeing the fulfillment of many of the signs promised in the
traditions, a large number of unbelievers will turn towards Islam. Those
who persist in their disbelief and wickedness shall be killed by the
soldiers of the Mahdi. The only victorious government in the entire
world will be that of Islam and people will devotedly endeavor to
protect it. Islam will be the religion of everyone, and will enter all
the nations of the world.

The Destiny of the Unbelievers
------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: What will happen to the unbelievers (kuffar) and those who
associated partners with God (mushrikin)?

Mr. Hoshyar: From the readings in the Qur'an and the hadith literature
it appears that during the Mahdi's rule the government and the power
will be taken away from non-monotheistic[^3] and materialistic
disbelievers, and will be vested in the hands of the Muslims and other
worthy people of the world. Let us, for example, look at certain verses
from the Qur'an:

***It is He who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the
religion of truth, that he may uplift it above every religion, though
the unbelievers be averse. (Saff [61], 9)***

God has promised those of you who believe and do righteous deeds that He
will surely make you successors in the land, even as He made those who
were before them successors, and that He will surely establish their
religion for them that He has approved for them, and will give them in
exchange after their fear security:

***'They shall serve Me, not associating with Me anything.' (Nur [24],
54)***

***Yet We desired to be gracious to those that were abased in the land,
and to make them leaders, and to make them the inheritors, and to
establish them in the land. (Qasas [28], 4)***

These passages from the Qur'an give the glad tidings of that which will
come when world power and government are in the hands of the qualified
and worthy believers and Muslims, and the religion of Islam ("submission
to the will of God") overshadows all other religions and actually
eclipses them all.

The traditions speak about the period of the Mahdi's rule and assure the
believers that the forces of disbelief and hypocrisy will be annihilated
from the face of the earth. Everywhere there will be a true believer in
God's unity. Thus, for example, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
progeny) said:

Even if there remains one day in the life of the earth, God will bring
forth a man from among my progeny whose name and character will be like
mine, and whose patronymic will be Abu 'Abd Allah. Through him God will
revive His religion and bring it back to its early glory. God will also
endow him with victory and there will remain on earth none other than
the ones who will declare the Unity of God (tawhid).

The Prophet was asked as to which of his children's descendants he would
be. The Prophet struck his hand on Husayn, and said: "From his
[descendants][^4]."

Imam Baqir has related a hadith in which he says: "The Qa'im and his
companions will fight so much that there will no longer be those
unbelievers who associate partners to God[^5]."

The Destiny of Jews and Christians
----------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: Since Jews and Christians are the followers of the heavenly
books that teach monotheism, what will happen to them when the Mahdi
appears?

Mr. Hoshyar: The apparent sense of some of the verses of the Qur'an
seems to suggest that they will be around until the Day of Judgement
occurs. God says in the Sura Ma'ida, 14:

And with those who say 'We are Christians' We took compact; and they
have forgotten a portion of that they were reminded of. So We have
stirred up among them enmity and hatred, till the Day of Resurrection.

In the Sura Al 'Imran, 55, He says:

When God said, 'Jesus, I will take thee to Me, and I will purify thee of
those who believe not. I will set thy followers above the unbelievers
till the Resurrection Day.'

Again, in Sura Ma'ida, 64, He says:

The Jews have said: 'God's hand is fettered.' Fettered are their hands,
and they are cursed for what they have said. Nay, but His hands are
outspread; He expends how He will. And what has been sent down to thee
from Thy Lord will surely increase many of them in insolence and
unbelief; and We have cast between them enmity and hatred, till the Day
of Resurrection.

As you can see, the literal reading of these verses suggests that the
religions of the Jews and the Christians will be around until the Day of
Judgement. Some of the hadith-reports corroborate this observation.
Thus, for instance, Abu Basir asked Imam Sadiq: "What will the Master of
the Command do to the 'protected peoples' (ahl al-dhimma)?" The Imam
said: "Like the Prophet he will negotiate terms with them, and they will
pay the jizya (poll tax), while accepting their inferior position [in
the Muslim society][^6]."

In another tradition Imam Baqir says:

The Master of the Command was named as the Mahdi because he will dig out
the Torah and other heavenly books from the cave in Antioch. He will
judge among the people of the Torah according to the Torah; among the
people of the Gospel according to the Gospel; among the people of the
Psalms in accordance with the Psalms; among the people of the Qur'an in
accordance with the Qur'an[^7].

There are traditions that speak just the opposite of what the Qur'an and
above-cited hadith speak. These traditions relate that during the rule
of the Mahdi there will no other communities except the Muslims. The
Mahdi will offer the religion of Islam to the Jews and the Christians;
if they accept it they will be spared, otherwise they will be killed.
Thus, for example, the following tradition in which Ibn Bukayr asks Imam
Rida the interpretation of the verse: "To Him submits everything that is
in the heavens and the earth, in obedience and in aversion." The Imam
relates:

The particular verse is revealed in reference to the Qa'im. When he
appears he will offer the religion of Islam to the Jews, Christians,
Sabians, and the disbelievers in the east and the west. Any one who
willingly accepts Islam will be asked to pray, give alms, and perform
all the obligatory acts; and any one who refuses to do so will be
killed. This will continue until there remains none but a believer in
and worshipper of One God everywhere on the earth.

Ibn Bukayr said to the Imam that in that case there would be far too
many people who would be killed. The Imam said: "Whenever God desires
something to increase or decrease He can do so[^8]."

In another tradition, Imam Baqir related that God will open the east and
the west for the twelfth Imam. He will put up the fight until there is
no other religion than the religion of Muhammad[^9]. In his commentary
on the verse that says: "He (God) will manifest it (Islam), even if the
disbelievers are averse to it," The Imam said: "He will do it in such a
way that there will be no one left except that he will have accepted the
religion of Muhammad."

Hence, there are two kinds of hadith: one in favor and the other
objecting. However, it must be pointed out that those traditions that
agree with the Qur'an have preponderance over those that do not, and
therefore the latter must be of necessity rejected as unreliable.
Accordingly, the Jews and the Christians will remain under the
government of the twelfth Imam, but they will have abandoned their
belief in the trinity and all forms of disbelief connected with
associating partners to God, and become worshippers of One God.

They will continue to live under the protection of the Islamic
government. At the same time, the corrupt and tyrannical governments
will come to an end, and power will be exercised by the well qualified
Muslims. Islam will be the world's religion, gaining precedence over all
other religions and the call of the Unity of God (tawhid) will be heard
all across the world. In this connection Imam Sadiq has said: "When our
Qa'im rises there is no place on earth where one will not hear the
testimony: I bear witness that there is no deity except God, and
Muhammad is the Messenger of God[^10]."

According to Imam Baqir: "When the Qa'im takes the command all the
godless governments will become permanently extinct." Furthermore, in
explaining the verse "when they will be consolidated they will establish
worship and give alms," the Imam said: "This verse was revealed to
describe the Imams, the Mahdi and his loyal followers. God will make
them the commanders of the east and the west, and through them God will
fortify the religion and eliminate innovation and false [interpretations
in it]. Indeed the ignorant people have ruined the truth. All this will
be accomplished in such a way that there shall remain no trace of
injustice. He will execute the duty of commanding the good and
forbidding the evil[^11]."

In another report Abu Basir says that he asked Imam Sadiq: "Who is the
Qa'im of the ahl al-bayt?" He said:

O Abu Basir, he will be the fifth descendant of my son Musa, the son of
the best among the slave girls. His occultation will be prolonged so
much so that a group will fall into doubt. Afterwards God will cause him
to appear and will make him conquer the entire world. Jesus, the son of
Mary, will descend [from heaven] and will perform his prayer standing
behind him. In that afternoon the earth will brighten up with the Light
of God and all spots on earth where other than God was worshipped will
become a prayer house dedicated to God. Religion will be entirely God's,
even though the disbelievers may be averse to it[^12].

Engineer Madani: I recall another related topic but, since the time is
running short, I will raise it when we meet next time.

The session was concluded for that evening and it was decided that the
group would meet in a week's time at Dr. Jalali's residence.

The meeting started promptly at Dr. Jalali's place. It was indeed
gratifying to know the number of issues related to the subject of the
twelfth Imam (peace be upon him) that were raised, discussed and
critically analyzed in the sessions that had met so far. The next
important issue was the destiny of other peoples under the government of
the Mahdi.

Will the Majority of the Peoples on the Earth Be Killed?
--------------------------------------------------------

Engineer Madani: As you all are aware Muslims today are a minority in
the world. The sizeable majority inhabiting the planet is non-Muslim.
The Shi'a are also a minority in comparison to other schools of thought
among Muslims. Among the Shi'a, it must be pointed out in all honesty,
there are many evildoers and corrupt people.

On the basis of the way things move in a society, in addition to some
analogical deduction, this religious scene of the world is unlikely to
change drastically. It is possible to speculate that at the time when
the Mahdi appears the Shi'a will still be a minority. My question is
this: Is it logical and credible to maintain that the majority of the
world's population will simply submit and will not resist as they are
being eliminated by the soldiers of the Imam of the Age? Moreover, if
the majority of the inhabitants of the world are going to be killed,
then this earth will look like a huge cemetery. Does it mean then that
the Shi'a will rule over this large cemetery? Surely this action cannot
be identified as an act of reform and such a government as the universal
authority!

Mr. Hoshyar: Actually we do not have sufficient information about the
future world. We cannot speculate about the future on the basis of the
past. The Muslim assessment of the situation about the human condition
is that humanity is already in a state of perfection in terms of
capability and mentality. With the Mahdi's revolution they will be even
more prepared to accept the truth.

We often hear that many intellectuals in the east and the west have
become aware that their own traditions and religions do not have the
ability to satisfy their conscience. At the same time, the natural
thirst to worship God and to search for a religion has not been entirely
quenched and does not leave them in peace.

As such, they are in search of a religion that is free from all sorts of
superstitions and corrupt beliefs, and whose spiritual power can provide
them with satisfying nourishment. It is in keeping with this human
search for the path that can satisfy their spiritual quest that one can
speculate about the future human society's movement towards discovering
the truth about Islamic knowledge and the permanence of its ordinances.
At that point, it will become evident to them that the only creed which
can respond positively to the inner needs and guarantee physical and
mental happiness is Islam.

Unfortunately, we are not well equipped, both in terms of courage and
means, to inform the peoples of the world about the Islamic truth and
its pure teachings. Nevertheless, the people's search for truth, on the
one hand, and the well stipulated ordinances of Islam, on the other,
will ultimately allow the problem to resolve by itself. At such an
opportune time, peoples of the world will convert to the Islamic faith
in the thousands, making them a majority.

In addition, on the basis of general prevailing conditions at the time
of the appearance, one can speculate that when the promised Mahdi
emerges and presents Islamic truths to the world, informing humanity
about Islam's revolutionary and reformative aspects, large numbers of
people will accept Islam. Hence, they will save themselves from being
killed.

For, on the one hand, they will have perfected their ability to perceive
religious truth and, on the other, they will have witnessed the miracles
performed by the Imam of the Age. Moreover, they will find the social
conditions extraordinary and inexplicable, and the call of the leader of
the revolution will reach their ears. These circumstances will lead
thousands and thousands of people to convert to Islam at the hands of
the Mahdi, thereby saving themselves from destruction.

As for those who persist in their disbelief after all these signs, the
Peoples of the Book, that is, the Jews and the Christians, will continue
to receive the protection of the Islamic government. Other sinful and
corrupt disbelievers will be killed by the universal upholder of
justice, the Mahdi. The number of the latter group will, consequently,
be insignificant.

The Teachings of Islam Will Be Proclaimed to the World from Qumm

From the hadith-reports related by the ahl al-bayt it appears that in
the near future the Shi'i religious establishment, having grasped better
than ever before the teachings of the ahl al-bayt in matters of faith
and practice, will come out from its state of disorder, regalvanize
itself with modern communications technology, and begin to reach out to
the people all over the world with correct information about the
teachings of the Qur'an and Islam. They will reintroduce those Islamic
teachings that guarantee human happiness and will emphasize the factors
that underscore the eminence and advancement of Islam. In this way they
will prepare the way for the appearance of the twelfth Imam (peace be
upon him). May those days come soon!

In one of the hadith Imam Sadiq says:

Very soon Kufa will be empty of the believers. [Religious] knowledge
will disappear from that region the way a snake disappears from its
abode into a hole in the earth, [without leaving any trace]. Then it
will reappear in the city known as Qumm. That city will become the
treasure of religious knowledge and excellence. From there it will
spread throughout the world, thoroughly eliminating ignorance in matters
of religion among the destitute, including women [who will participate
in this process of learning anew about Islam].

This will happen close to the appearance of our Qa'im. In this way, God
will make Qumm and its inhabitants a substitute for His proof. If it
does not happen so, the earth will sink, engulfing its inhabitants, and
there will remain no proof. Religious knowledge will spread across
nations from Qumm and God's proof will have been provided to all people
in such a way that there will not be a single person on earth who will
not have heard about the religion and its wisdom. It will be following
this event that our Qa'im will appear. God's punishment and tribulation
will be ready for execution, because God exacts His revenge only when
the people have rejected His proof[^13].

In another place the Imam says:

God made the city of Kufa and its inhabitants to serve as a proof over
all other places. He will make Qumm also a proof to serve over other
places, and through its inhabitants He will make an argument against all
those, including humans and jinns, who reject the proof of His
existence. God will not disgrace and humiliate Qumm and its peoples; on
the contrary they will always enjoy God's grace and support.

He then went on to say:

The religion and the religious in Qumm, being deficient, will not draw
the attention of the people. Had it not been that they were going to
serve as God's proof both the city and its inhabitants would have
perished, and there would have remained no divine proof for the rest of
the world. In addition, the heavens would not have remained secure and
no warning would have been given to the people. Qumm and its inhabitants
will remain immune from all the calamities. There will come a time when
Qumm and its residents will become a proof for God's existence for the
entire world.  
 This will happen during the occultation of our Qa'im until he appears.
If this does not happen, then the earth will engulf its inhabitants.
God's angels will remove all afflictions and calamities from the people
of Qumm. Any oppressor who commits aggression against Qumm will be
destroyed by those who fight against these oppressors. Furthermore, they
will be met with distressful calamity or will encounter a powerful enemy
who will keep them occupied. Just as these oppressors would have
forgotten remembrance of God, God will make them forget Qumm and its
inhabitants[^14].

Imam 'Ali b. Abi Talib predicted the following about Qumm:

There will be a man from Qumm who will call people towards truth. Some
will respond to his call and will rally around him like pieces of iron
[that are drawn towards a magnet]. Strong winds will not be able to move
them from their place. They will not be tired of warfare and will be
fearless. They trust in none but God. At the end the victory is for
those who are godfearing[^15].

Dr. Jalali: You have predicted that Muslims will be in the majority in
the future. This speculation is contradicted by some hadith-reports.
Thus, for instance, the Prophet is reported to have said:

There will dawn a time when there will remain nothing but a trace from
the Qur'an. And from Islam there will survive only a name. There will be
people called Muslims, but they will be the farthest of all other people
from Islam. They will have well built mosques; but these will be devoid
of guidance[^16].

Mr. Hoshyar: In such hadith-reports the Prophet has not predicted more
than a particular detail that there will be a time that the true Islam
will disappear and no more than an image of it will remain; and that,
although there will be Muslims, they will be far from the true Islam.
However, this prediction is also in accord with Muslims being in the
majority, because it is possible that in spite of being Muslims they
will be little affected by the truth and spirituality of Islam. Yet the
heavy dust of inconsistency and antiquated traditionalism that will have
descended upon Islam will be eradicated by the very existence of the
twelfth Imam, who will lay the foundation for a renewal of the religious
edifice. In this regard it is worth recalling the Prophet's tradition in
which he said:

I swear by the One in Whose hand is my life that Islam and Muslims will
always be in increase, whereas disbelief and those who associate other
beings with God will be in decrease.  
 He then added:

I solemnly declare that wherever night reaches this religion will
reach[^17].

It is sufficient to point out that, first of all, it is predicted that
before the twelfth Imam appears the Muslim community will attain a
majority status. Second, when he appears many people will convert to
Islam because the level of human perfection will have advanced to such
heights that it will enable people to accept the truth of Islam, as many
traditions have reported. In the following tradition Imam Baqir has
declared:

When our Qa'im rises, God will stroke the heads of His creatures with
mercy, thereby making their mind more flawless, and able to realize
their dreams by means of it[^18].

Imam 'Ali b. Abi Talib said:

In the Last Days and the days of calamity and ignorance of the people,
God will appoint a person and will support him and protect his followers
through angels. He will help him through miraculous signs and will give
him victory over all the people of the world, so that whether they like
it or not they will convert to the true religion. He will fill the earth
with justice and equity, and brilliance and rationality. The distances
between places will shrink for him in such a way that no unbeliever will
remain except that [the appointed one] will bring [to him] faith, and no
sinful person will remain except that he will become pious[^19].

"Your Enemies Will Destroy Each Other"

Another matter that helps to resolve the problem raised by Engineer
Madani is that the general conditions of the world, the advancements in
dangerous scientific discoveries and the arms race between the western
and eastern nations, in addition to a general moral decline in humanity,
allow us to anticipate that great powers, including the Jews and the
Christians, would engage each other in hostile activities, and would
destroy a majority of the world's population by means of destructive
weapons. Another large group will become the victims of precarious
diseases that will surface as a result of human destruction of the
natural immune system provided by God in human bodies and in the
environment.

A companion of Imam Baqir by the name of 'Abd al-Malik A'yan relates
that he once stood up in the Imam's presence and, leaning on his two
arms, wept and said: "I was hopeful that I would witness the period of
the Qa'im while there was still some strength left in me." The Imam,
consoling him, said:

Are you not pleased that your enemies are busy with each other [in
conflict], while you are safe in your homes? When our Qa'im arises each
one of you will gain the energy of forty men. Your heart will become
like pieces of iron, which, if hurled against mountains, will break them
through. You will be the leaders of the world and its keepers[^20].

In another report Imam Sadiq predicted the following:

Before the Qa'im's rise two deaths will occur: one death red and the
other white. These will kill five out of every seven persons. The red
death will occur by means of killing and the white through
epidemics[^21].  
 Zurarah b. A'yan, Imam Sadiq's close associate, on one occasion asked
the Imam: "Is the call from heaven, [as predicted in the traditions
about the Qa'im's rise,] a true thing?" The Imam replied: "I declare
with solemnity that indeed that will occur just as all the peoples
[having heard it] will repeat that [call] on their tongues." He then
added: "The Qa'im will not rise until nine out of every ten persons is
annihilated[^22]."

War Is Inevitable
-----------------

Dr. Fahimi: Is not it possible that the preparations of the Mahdi's
revolution might be done in such a way as to avoid war and bloodshed in
establishing his government?

Mr. Hoshyar: As things normally proceed in such events, it seems
unlikely that this catastrophe can be avoided even when the level of
people's thinking changes to the extent that the number of good people
increases, the oppressors and egotistic persons will still be there in
the midst of human society. This group will indisputably be opposed to
justice and will never give up their stubborn antagonism against any
power.

Such people will do anything against the promised Mahdi to protect their
vested interests. Moreover, they will do anything within their power to
demoralize and combat those who support the Imam. To crush the negative
influence of this group there is no other solution except warfare and
bloodshed. It is for this reason that the hadith-reports from the ahl
al-bayt have regarded warfare and bloodshed inevitable.

In one of the traditions Bashir, another companion of Imam Sadiq, asked
the Imam about what the people were saying about the rise of the Mahdi:
'When he rises not even an amount of blood as small as that which is
usually allowed to flow during the cupping procedure will be shed.' The
Imam retorted that such a thing was impossible:

"Had such a thing been possible then it would have been done for the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny). Actually, in the battle
against the enemy, the Prophet's blood flowed as his teeth and his
forehead were injured. By God, the revolution of the one who will
command the affairs [of the Muslim community] will not be accomplished
until we sweat on the battlefield and blood is shed." He then wiped his
hand on his forehead[^23].

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The Mahdi's Defense
-------------------

Dr. Jalali: I have heard that the Imam of the Age will rise with a
sword. This is something that does not seem to be right. The reason is
that so far humankind has created and discovered various kinds of
weapons to be used on the battlefields. Nuclear proliferation and
weapons of mass destruction are recent additions to the array of
weaponry in human arsenals. With the use of chemical and biological
weapons, including remote detonation devices for binary weapons,
thousands upon thousands of people can be destroyed in one blow. The
question arises that with all these weapons existing now, how can one
imagine that the Mahdi and his soldiers will be triumphant fighting with
swords?

Mr. Hoshyar: Yes, indeed the subject of the Mahdi's rise with the sword
is mentioned in the traditions. Let me cite some examples. Imam Baqir
relates:

The Mahdi resembles his forefather, the Prophet, in that he too will
rise with a sword to wipe out tyrants and those who mislead people, the
enemy of God and the Prophet. He will attain victory by sword and scare,
and none of his troops (lit. flags) will return [with a defeat][^24].

However, the rise with the "sword" is a metaphor for warfare. It
indicates that war and bloodshed are part of the official task of the
Mahdi. He is commanded by God to make Islam a universal faith and to
confront injustice and tyranny, even by force and by means of a sword.
His circumstance is contrary to his forefathers' careers, which did not
require them to face the situation in that forceful manner, as their
charge was limited to admonition and counsel. Consequently, "to rise
with a sword" does not mean that his weapons of defense are limited to a
sword, and that he is to restrain himself from using any other kind of
weapons. To be sure, he too might employ the weapons of the day or even
create new weapons to overpower all the known weaponry of his time.

The truth is that our knowledge about the future events of the world is
limited; nor do we know in any detailed manner about the future destiny
of humankind and the course of its technological enterprise. As such, we
do not have the right to judge the future on the basis of the past
without any evidence. We do not know which country or nation will have a
technological and civilizational advantage and superiority over others.
It is possible that the weak and divided nations of the Islamic world
will wake up and put aside their minor differences to create the
universal brotherhood under the mighty banner of tawhid, the Unity of
God, and adopt and implement the Qur'anic guidance as the constitution
of the universal Muslim nation.

The united Islamic peoples could then utilize their natural resources to
their advantage and come out of a self-cultivated laziness and
self-imposed isolation to take up the challenge of becoming leaders of
human civilization in sciences, industry, and ethics. They can bring
under their control the unleashed and boundless energies of the east and
the west in order to channel them into preparing for the final launching
of the Mahdi's revolution.

At that time the Mahdi can appear and destroy the unjust and tyrannical
powers with the help of the mighty forces at his disposal. Furthermore,
with divine assistance and promises of victory, in addition to the
extraordinary energy that emanates from the position of the wilayat (the
exercise of divinely-ordained sovereignty under the Imamate) he can lay
the foundation of a just and equitable government of God on the earth.

At that moment the scientists and scholars whose research made possible
the discovery of all the tools and technology will feel sadness and
remorse because their discoveries had not been used for the betterment
of human life but were instead employed to colonize and to suppress the
peoples of the world. Hence, in order to give recompense for the abuse
of their scientific contributions, they will see no other way but to
respond to the call of the Mahdi to fight for justice and work for the
good of the peoples of the world.  
 We cannot foretell how people in the future will abandon their
arrogance and stubbornness, come out from their ignorance and work
towards the eradication of weapons of mass destruction and the decisive
implementation of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. But all the
wealth that is now being used to produce such weapons could then be
diverted for the elimination of poverty, the advancement of education
and the well being of humankind.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The World under the Mahdi
-------------------------

Engineer Madani: Could you give some indications about the conditions
that would prevail under the rule of the Mahdi?

Mr. Hoshyar: It is possible to reconstruct the following picture of the
future from the traditions related by the ahl al-bayt:

When the promised Mahdi, the twelfth Imam (peace be upon him), appears,
following his victory over the evil forces of the world, he will
administer the entire world under one Islamic government. He will
appoint well-qualified individuals as the governors of different regions
of the world with clear instructions and programs for the peaceful and
just administration of the region under their governance[^25]. The
entire earth will flourish under their administration. The Mahdi will
distantly oversee the whole earth himself, with its widespread regions
and extensive affairs accessible to him like the palm of his hand. His
disciples and helpers also will observe and talk to him from remote
distances. The entire earth will be filled with justice and equity.

People will have become kind and will treat each other with honesty and
sincerity. There will be security everywhere as no one will wish to
cause harm to another. The economic condition of the people will improve
enormously. There will be plenty of rain to cause the earth to become
lush with greenery and there will be all kinds of grains and fruits in
abundance. Necessary improvements will be introduced in agricultural
methods. People will pay more attention to God's presence than to sins.
Islam will become the official religion of the world, with the call of
the Unity of God arising from all corners of the earth.

In the matter of building the roads, interesting programs will be
introduced. Main roads will be sixty yards wide. In building the roads
there will be so much diligence that the mosques standing in the middle
will be demolished. Footpaths will adorn the streets. Pedestrians will
be asked to cross the roads at the proper pedestrian's crossing; whereas
the drivers will be asked to move into the middle. All the windows of
the homes that open to the street will be closed. There will be
prohibitions against constructing open drains and sewage on the streets.
Imposing structures will be demolished. The highly decorative and
elevated mosques as well as minarets and the grills separating the
leader of the congregational prayers from the worshippers will be
destroyed.

During the age of the Mahdi human reason will have reached perfection.
General information among people will have advanced to such a degree
that women will be able to formulate judicial decisions while at home.
Imam Sadiq says:

Knowledge is divided into twenty-seven parts. No more than two parts has
been acquired by human beings so far. When our Qa'im arises he will
expose the rest of the twenty five parts and distribute it among the
people[^26].

People's faith will have attained excellence and their hearts free of
malevolence and resentment. Finally, let me remind you that all this
elaboration has been extracted from pertinent hadith-reports, and most
of these traditions are rare and reported by a single narrator. Anyone
desiring more details can refer to volumes 51 and 52 of Bihar al-anwar,
volumes 6 and 7 of Ithbat al-hudat, and Nu'mani's Kitab al-ghayba.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The Victory of the Prophets
---------------------------

Dr. Jalali: From all the descriptions and excellences that have been
related about the Mahdi, the twelfth Imam (peace be upon him) in the
traditions, it would seem that he is more excellent than all the
Prophets, including the Prophet of Islam (peace be upon him and his
progeny). After all, none of them succeeded in reforming human society,
establishing a world government founded upon the Unity of God,
implementing the divine ordinances in their entirety, executing the
divine scales of justice perfectly, and eliminating injustice and
tyranny absolutely. The only person able to accomplish all these tasks
is the Mahdi, and none other!

Mr. Hoshyar: In reality, the reform of human society, and the execution
of divine laws has been the aspiration of all the Prophets. Each one of
these divinely appointed reformers endeavored to accomplish their goal
in accord with the possibilities and capacity that were available to
them in their particular age and thereby drew the people closer to God.
If they had not struggled and made the necessary sacrifices, then
government based on God's unity would have never taken off. In this
sense, all these Prophets are participants and have a share in this
final success.

The accomplishment of the Mahdi should be regarded as the success of all
God-worshipping peoples in the line of the Prophets and religious
leaders. The Imam's victory is not his own personal victory; rather,
with the amazing energy of this Imam this will be the victory of truth
over falsehood, of piety over disbelief. It will be the fulfillment of
the past Prophets' promise to their followers, and the realization of
their ideal for human society.

The accomplishment of the promised Mahdi, in truth, is the
accomplishment of Adam, Seth, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Muhammad, and
all other Prophets (peace be upon them). They were the ones who, through
their sacrifices and perseverance, prepared this highway and, to some
extent, the people's intellect to accept this call. The program was
conceived and the struggle begun by the past Prophets. Each one of them
provided an example through their own conduct and pushed the level of
the people's comprehension of God's purposes until the line reached the
Prophet of Islam. He outlined the complete program and provided the
comprehensive blueprint for the transformation of the world. At the time
of his death he handed that over to his rightful successors, the Imams.

The Prophet and the Imams, then, endeavored on this path to execute the
divine plan for humanity and in so doing encountered severe opposition
and made great sacrifices. Many more years should go by, and many more
crises and revolutions must be faced by humanity in order for it to
mature and become worthy of the government based on tawhid. It will only
be then that the last barrier of disbelief and irreligiosity will be
surmounted by the astounding energy of the Mahdi (peace be upon him),
only then will the dream of humanity materialize.

Hence, the promised Mahdi is the executor of the Prophet's plans,
including those of the past Prophets. His victory is the victory of the
revealed religions. God promises victory to David in the Psalms, and in
one of the passages of the Qur'an revealed to underscore the Mahdi's
final accomplishment, God reminds Muslims of that promise, saying:

***"We have written in the Psalms that Our righteous servants shall
inherit the earth." (Anbiya', 105)***

The Mahdi and the New Constitution
----------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: I have heard that the twelfth Imam (peace be upon him) will
bring a new religion, constitution, and laws for the people. The present
laws of Islam will be abrogated by him. How reliable is this account?

Mr. Hoshyar: The source of this information are the traditions on this
subject. Thus, to clarify the issue we must cite some of these hadith.

'Abd Allah b. 'Ata' asked Imam Sadiq about the character and conduct of
the Mahdi. The Imam said:

He will carry out the same mission that the Prophet did. He will
eradicate prevailing innovations, just as the Prophet destroyed the
foundation of the jahiliyya (pre-Islamic Arab morals), and then rebuild
Islam afresh[^27].

In another hadith Abu Khadija relates from Imam Sadiq, who said:

When the Qa'im rises he will come with a new commission, just as the
Prophet in the beginning of Islam called the people to a new
commission[^28].

In still another hadith Imam Sadiq says:

When the Qa'im emerges he will come with a new commission, a new book, a
new conduct and a new judgement, which will be strenuous for the Arabs.
His work is nothing but to fight, and no one [among the disbelievers]
will be spared. He will not be afraid of any blame in the execution of
his duty[^29].

The Conduct of the Mahdi
------------------------

However, these and other traditions point to an important factor in
Mahdi's behavior -- that his conduct will be based on that of his
forefather, the Prophet. He will defend the religion and the Qur'an that
were given to the Prophet. For instance, the Prophet is reported to have
said: "One of my ahl al-bayt will rise and will act upon my tradition
and my custom[^30]." And, he said: "The Qa'im among my children, will
have my name and my patronymic. He will possess my features and will
follow my conduct. He will command the people to my obedience and to my
law; and he will call them to the Book of my Lord[^31]."

In another tradition he said:

My twelfth descendant will disappear in such a way that he will not be
seen at all. There will come a time when there shall remain nothing but
a name from Islam. And, there shall remain nothing but a trace from the
Qur'an. At that time God will permit him to revolt and through him God
will reinforce Islam and revive it[^32].

In still another hadith the Prophet said: "Mahdi is from my family and
will fight for my tradition, just as I fought for the Qur'an[^33]."

As one can observe, these traditions clearly indicate that the twelfth
Imam's agenda and his plan of action are to propagate Islam and to
revive the importance of the Qur'an. In order to execute the teachings
of the Prophet he will strive with force. Hence, if there is any
ambiguity in the earlier traditions cited in this section, the above
traditions help clarify them. Over all, the traditions should be
interpreted as follows:

During the occultation, innovations will appear in the religion, and the
ordinances of the Qur'an and the teachings of Islam will be interpreted
in accordance with people's likes and dislikes. As a result, many
teachings and laws will be forgotten as if they were never even a part
of Islam. When the Mahdi appears he will invalidate these innovations
and will restore the ordinances of God as they were when they were
commanded. He will institute the penal laws of Islam without any
leniency. Evidently, such a program will be perceived by the people
something new.

Imam Sadiq in another hadith has made the aforementioned role of the
Mahdi explicit: "When the Qa'im rises he will emulate the conduct of the
Prophet, except that he will elaborate the traditions of Muhammad (peace
be upon him and his progeny)[^34]."

Fadl b. Yasar heard Imam Baqir saying: "When our Qa'im rises he will
face so much difficulty from the people, that even the Prophet during
the period of jahiliyya did not face." Fadl asked: "Why should that be
so?" The Imam said:

When the Prophet was appointed people worshipped stones and wood.
However, when our Qa'im arises people will interpret the ordinances of
God against his interpretation, and will argue with him and dispute by
means of the Qur'an. By God, the justice of the Qa'im will enter inside
their homes, just as the heat and the cold enter them[^35].

The Freshness of the Explanations Offered by the Mahdi
------------------------------------------------------

People, having abandoned the absolute principles and fundamental
teachings of Islam, merely follow the outward forms of religion and
regard those to be sufficient. These are the people who, besides the
five daily obligatory prayers, the fasting of Ramadan, and avoidance of
external pollution (najasat), know nothing of Islam. Besides, some of
them have limited religion to the mosque and, hence, its reality has
very little impact upon their actions and behavior. In the life outside
the mosque, that is in the market place or at work, there is no trace of
their Islam.

They do not regard ethical behavior and moral precepts to be part of
Islam. They give no importance eschewing to immoral conduct and make an
excuse of not following moral guidelines since there is dispute about
the obligatoriness and the prohibitions of certain requirements. They go
as far as turning the prohibitions of the law, through trickery, into
something permissible. They also shun their responsibility for paying
the dues that are imposed by the law on them. In other words, they are
engaged in interpreting the religion according to their desires.

When it comes to the Qur'an, they think it sufficient to pay attention
to its formal recitation and to respect the conventions in that
connection. Hence, when the twelfth Imam appears it is obvious that he
will ask them as to why they have abandoned the essence of religion and
have interpreted the Qur'an and the hadith to fit their own preferred
meanings. Why have they left the truth of Islam while being satisfied
with mere outward adherence to it? Why have they not sought to conform
their character and their actions with the true spirit of Islam?

Why have they twisted the meanings of the religion to accord with their
own personal avarice? Since they pay so much attention to the proper
recitation of the Qur'an, they should also put its directives into
action. The twelfth Imam has the right to ask: "My grandfather, Imam
Husayn, did not get killed for the sake of mourning. Why have you
forsaken my grandfather's goal and destroyed it?"

The Imam will ask them to learn the Islamic social and moral teachings
and apply them in their everyday lives. They should avoid the forbidden
acts, and take care of their financial obligations, without making
flimsy excuses. They should also keep in mind that remembering the
merits of the ahl al-bayt and weeping for their suffering can never
substitute for the zakat and khums and taking care of one's debts.

Nor can they substitute for such sinful behavior as taking interest and
bribes, cheating others and treating them with dishonesty. They should
recognize that weeping and sighing for Imam Husayn can never substitute
for having ill-treated orphans and widows. More importantly, they should
not limit piety to the mosque; rather, they should seek participation in
the society and carry out the duty of commanding the good and forbidding
the evil and fight the innovations that have crept into Islam.

Certainly, such a religion would seem new and difficult to these people,
and they might not even consider it to be Islam, because they have
imagined Islam to be something else. These people used to think that the
progress and greatness of Islam lay in decorating the mosques and in
constructing tall minarets. If the twelfth Imam says: "The greatness of
Islam is righteous action, honesty, trustworthiness, keeping promises,
avoiding forbidden acts," this would appear to them altogether new!

They used to assume that when the Imam appears he will make amends for
all the actions of the Muslims and will retire with them in the corner
of a mosque. But if they witness that blood is dripping from the Imam's
sword and that he is calling people to jihad and to command the good and
forbid the evil, and that he is killing the unjust worshippers and
returning the goods they have stolen to their rightful owners, such
actions of the Imam they will indeed find new!

Imam Sadiq relates:  
 When our Qa'im arises he will call people anew to Islam, guiding them
to the old thing from which people have turned away. He will be called
Mahdi because he will guide people to the thing from which they have
been separated. He will be called Qa'im because he will be commanded to
establish the truth[^36].

In short, there is a total difference between the assumed Mahdi and his
agenda, and the true Mahdi and his role. It is for this reason that
since his actions will not be approved by the people, they will desert
him in the beginning. However, since they will find no one else who can
deliver them they will submit to him. Imam Sadiq says:

I can witness the Qa'im wearing the particular garment and taking out
the letter of the Prophet sealed with a golden seal, and after breaking
the seal he reads aloud to the people. The people disperse from him as
the sheep do from the shepherd. And no one besides his vizier and eleven
chiefs remain with him. Then people begin to search for a reformer
everywhere. But, since they do not find anyone besides him who can help
them, they rush towards him. By God, I know what the Qa'im is telling
them which they refuse to acknowledge[^37].

The Mahdi and Abrogation of the Ordinances
------------------------------------------

Dr. Fahimi: If I recall, you had said earlier that the Mahdi is not the
lawgiver, and neither is he the abrogator of the law. This statement of
yours does not agree with the substance of the following tradition:

Imam Sadiq said:

Two cases of bloodshed are permissible in Islam. But no one executes the
divine ordinance in those two cases until God sends the Qa'im from the
ahl al-bayt who can execute God's injunction in those cases without
requiring any witnesses: one is the case of a married man committing
adultery who will be stoned by him; and the other is the case of a
person refusing to pay the zakat[^38].

In another tradition the Imam said: "When the Qa'im from the family of
Muhammad appears he will judge among people without requiring witnesses
in the manner of David and Solomon[^39]."

These and other such traditions imply that Islamic ordinances will be
abrogated by the Imam who will substitute for them new ordinances. By
holding such beliefs you are actually proving the prophethood of the
Mahdi, even though you do not call him a prophet!

Mr. Hoshyar: First of all, allow me to point out that the source of such
beliefs consists of rare traditions reported by a single narrator.
Second, I do not see any problem with the proposition that God may
reveal a law to the Prophet and inform him that the law will be
applicable to him and his followers until the time when the Qa'im
appears. When the twelfth among his descendants appears he should follow
a second injunction. The Prophet also informs about this arrangement to
his successor until the information reaches the last Imam. In such a
case the ordinance is not abrogated, and the Imam does not introduce a
new ruling that was revealed to him. Rather, the first injunction was
already limited in time, and the Prophet was already informed about the
second one.

Thus, for instance, social expediency required that the judge should
confine his judgement to an objective proof, seeking witnesses, and an
oath. The Prophet and the Imams were also required to follow the same
procedure in their administration of justice. However, when the Mahdi
appears and establishes the Islamic government, he is required to decide
the case on the basis of his knowledge. Thus, this latter ordinance was
already part of Islamic judisprudence, awaiting execution after the
appearance of the Mahdi.

Is It Not Possible that the Mahdi Has Already Appeared?
-------------------------------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: We recognize with you the fundamental belief about the
Mahdi. Yet, how do we know that he has not appeared already? From the
early days of Islamic history up until now there have been many
individuals from different parts of the world, both belonging to the
Quraysh and non-Quraysh, who have arisen with the claim to Mahdiism.
Interestingly, they found supporters among the people and have even left
their legacy in the sects that were named after them. In fact, some of
them came to power and established dynasties that lasted for some time.
Here we are awaiting the appearance of the Mahdi, and in all likelihood
one of the pretenders to Mahdiism might have been a true Mahdi about
which we have no information!

Mr. Hoshyar: As we have detailed in our previous discussions, we do not
believe in an unidentifiable Mahdi whose characteristics are unknown to
us so that we might make an error in recognizing him. On the contrary,
the Prophet and the Imams (peace be upon them), who informed people
about this fundamental expectation and the existence of the Mahdi,
provided all the detailed characteristics and qualifications of the
Mahdi to remove all doubts and ambiguities about his identity. The
following hadith is the summary of such a description of the future
Mahdi:

The Mahdi's name is Muhammad and his patronymic is Abu al-Qasim. His
mother was a slave-girl by the name of Narjis, Sayqal and Sawsan. He
will be a Hashimite, from the descendants of Imam Husayn, and a direct
offspring of Imam Hasan 'Askari. He was born in the year 256/868 or
255/867 in the city of Samarra in Iraq. He has two forms of occultation:
one short, the other long. The second occultation will be prolonged to
such an extent that many people will doubt his very existence. His age
will be very long.

The mission will begin in Mecca. He will launch his revolution with a
sword and will annihilate all the oppressors and disbelievers. All the
Peoples of the Book and Muslims will submit to his authority. He will
establish a universal Islamic government on earth, will thoroughly
uproot the forces of injustice and tyranny, and will replace these with
justice and equity. Islam will become the universal faith and the Mahdi
will expend his energy to spread it peacefully amongst all. Such are the
traits and functions of the Mahdi for whom the Muslims are awaiting.

Sayyid 'Ali Muhammad Shirazi, "the Bab"

Mr. Hoshyar: Now, Dr. Jalali, let me ask you a question. Among all those
who have claimed to be the Mahdi so far, have you come across anyone in
whom all these characteristics that we have detailed above finds
expression so that his claim could be ascertained as a possibility?

For example, a person who arose in one of the cities of Iran claiming
Mahdiism was neither the son of Imam Hasan 'Askari nor had he gone into
occultation for a long time or fought any battle against the unjust
rulers or established a universal Islamic government to fill the earth
with justice and equity. It is remarkable that he did not raise his hand
even a little to stop people from doing wrong. Moreover, not only did he
not spread Islam all over the world, he actually abrogated all its laws
and established a new creed in its place. He did not possess any
profound knowledge nor did he perform any astounding task. And, towards
the end of his career, in spite of the fact that he repented and
displayed remorse, he was executed[^40]. Can any rational person endowed
with intelligence assume that such an individual could be the promised
Mahdi of the Muslims?

The story of this pseudo-Mahdi from the city of Shiraz is no different
from one related in the Mathnavi of Jalaluddin Rumi about a man from
Qazvin, who claimed to be strong but could not stand the pain that was
caused by someone poking a needle on his arm to tattoo a lion that he
had desired. The choice of a lion, as Rumi indicates, was intended to
show off his toughness. However, at each stage of tattooing this
pseudo-strong man from Qazvin was willing to omit drawing parts of the
lion's image that would require the tattooer to poke his needle more
frequently and deeper. These requests to omit major parts of the lion's
body led the tattooer to poke fun at his client:

Who has seen a lion without a tail, a head, or a stomach?  
 When did God ever create such a lion?  
 If you don't have the strength to bear the poking of the needle  
 Don't desire such a brave lion [as a symbol of your strength].  
 One of the interesting episodes connected with Sayyid 'Ali Muhammad
Shirazi is that before the claim to being the Mahdi and Qa'im had got
into his head he, had written a book entitled: Tafsir-i sura-yi kawthar
(Commentary on the Sura Kawthar). In this book he reported traditions
about the promised Mahdi which were not congruent with his own later
claim of Mahdiism. Later on, this issue became a source of aggravation
and nuisance for him and his followers.

In this book he writes:

Musa b. Ja'far Baghdadi related that he heard from Imam Hasan 'Askari
who said: 'I see you [in the future] disputing with each other in the
matter of my successor. Nonetheless, be aware that whoever acknowledges
all the Imams after the Prophet, and rejects my son, will resemble
someone who will acknowledge all the Prophets but will deny the
prophethood of Muhammad (peace be upon him and his progeny). And anyone
who denies the Prophet of God will resemble someone who has denied all
of the Prophets. The reason is that obedience to the last one among us
is like obedience to the first one among us; and denial of the last one
among us is like the denial of the first. Know that my son will have an
occultation and all the people, except a few who will be protected by
God, will fall into doubt.'[^41]

Then he quotes another tradition as follows:

Imam Rida told Di'bil: "Imam following me is my son Muhammad; after
Muhammad it will be his son 'Ali; after 'Ali it will be his son Hasan,
and, following Hasan it will be his son Hujjat and Qa'im, who should be
awaited during his occultation and obeyed when he appears. If there
remains but a day in the age of the world, God will prolong it until the
Qa'im arises and fills the earth with justice and equity just as it is
filled with injustice and tyranny.

As to when he will appear this would be to inform about the time of his
rise, whereas our forefathers have reported from 'Ali, who related it
from the Prophet, who was asked: 'O Messenger of God, when will the
Qa'im from your descendants arise?' He replied: 'His situation resembles
that of the Day of Resurrection [about whose timing no one but God can
reveal]. However, the matter is of grave importance both in the heaven
and on earth and accordingly will happen all of a sudden.[^42]'"

It is evident that a number of things are resolved in these two
traditions: first, Qa'im and Mahdi are the direct offspring of Imam
Hasan 'Askari; second, he will have a lengthy period of occultation;
third, when he appears he will fill the earth with justice and equity;
and, fourth, no one can fix the time for his rise.

Sayyid 'Ali Muhammad's Acknowledgement of the Hidden Imam's Existence
---------------------------------------------------------------------

In his book on the commentary of Sura Kawthar, Sayyid Muhammad 'Ali
acknowledged the existence of the Hidden Imam and wrote about the signs
and indications of that existence. Thus, for instance, he writes:

There is no doubt about the existence of the Hidden Imam. The reason is
that if he did not exist no one else would have existed. As such, this
matter is as clear as the sun in the sky. The problem is that the
necessary corollary of doubt in his existence is doubt in God's power.
Anyone who doubts the existence of God is a disbeliever. . . . As for
the Muslims and the believers among the followers of the Twelve Imams,
the Imamiyya, the period of his birth is proven (may my spirit and the
spirit of all those in the realm of the spiritual beings -- malakut --
be a sacrifice for his excellency!).  
 Moreover, his short occultation and the miracles that took place in
those days, as well as the signs that were given to his deputies, are
also proven beyond any doubt. . . . He (the twelfth Imam) is a righteous
offspring. His patronymic is Abu al-Qasim. He is the one invested with
God's command (al-qa'im bi-amr allah), the proof of God's existence for
God's creatures, the remaining one (baqiyyat allah) among the servants
of God, the Mahdi who will guide people to the mysterious matters. But I
do not like to mention his name, except the way the Imam ['Askari] has
mentioned it, that is, mim, ha, mim, da. There are texts in this regard,
directly received from the [twelfth] Imam (peace be upon him). The Imam
himself has written the note in which he says: "God's curse be upon the
one who mentions me by my name in public.". . .

The Master of the Age (wali 'asr) will have two [forms of] occultation.
During the lesser occultation, he had trustworthy and intimate deputies
and agents. The period of the lesser occultation lasted for seventy four
years and some days. The deputies of the respected master (may our
spirits be a sacrifice for him!) include: 'Uthman b. Sa'id 'Amri and his
son, Muhammad b. 'Uthman, Husayn b. Ruh, and 'Ali b. Muhammad Samarri.

In another place in the same book he writes about his own experience of
having seen the twelfth Imam in Mecca:

One day I was busy praying in the holy mosque of Mecca, on the side of
the Yamani pillar [of the Ka'ba]. I noticed a well built and good
looking young man who was deeply involved in performing the
circumambulation (tawaf). He had a white turban on his head and a woolen
cloak on his shoulder. He was with the merchants' group from Fars. There
was no more than a few steps of distance between us. All of a sudden a
thought came to my mind that he could be the Master of the Command
(sahib al-amr). But I was embarrassed to go closer to him. When I
finished my prayers I did not find him. Nevertheless, I am not so sure
that he was the Master of the Command.

Sayyid 'Ali Muhammad and the Traditions about Fixing of the Time

The following hadith also appears in the commentary on Sura Kawthar:

Abu Basir reported that he asked Imam Sadiq: "May my life be a sacrifice
for you! When will the Qa'im arise?" He replied: "O Abu Muhammad, we,
the ahl al-bayt cannot fix the time of his appearance. Moreover, the
Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his progeny) said: 'Those who
fix the time for the rising [of the Qa'im] are liars.[^43]'"

This and other traditions of its kind make amply clear that the Imams
themselves never fixed the time of the appearance and they falsified
anyone else who tried to do that. However, the followers of the
afore-mentioned Sayyid from Shiraz have ignored these clear indications
and, contrary to the textual proof to that effect provided by their
leader, have searched and found a weak tradition attributed to Abu Labid
Makhzumi and through a far-fetched and mysterious interpretation,
extracted from it the year of the Sayyid's appearance in 1256 AH/1840
CE.

The books that have been written in refutation of the claims made by
this particular faction based on the tradition reported by Abu Labid,
are far too numerous to be mentioned here. Moreover, any further
discussion about the subject would be a digression from our topic of
discussion at this time. Suffice it to say that according to the hadith
of Abu Basir, also relied upon by Sayyid 'Ali Muhammad in his
commentary, any tradition that fixes the exact time for the appearance
of the Qa'im must be rejected as false. As such, its inclusion as
evidence is not permissible, whether it is the hadith related by Abu
Labid or by someone else. The following hadith also appears in the
commentary on Sura Kawthar:

Imam Sadiq has related in a lengthy tradition, saying: "The occultation
of our Qa'im will be denied by the umma. Some will say, without any
knowledge: The Imam was never born; others will say: he was born, but he
died. Still others will become disbelievers and will say: The eleventh
Imam had no offspring at all. Some will spread factionalism in the
community by what they say, and will go beyond the twelve Imams and will
count thirteen or more Imams. There will be those who will cause God's
anger to engulf them by saying: The spirit of the Qa'im is speaking
through another person[^44]."

What Do the Sayyid's Followers Say?
-----------------------------------

In spite of all these clear affirmations in Sayyid 'Ali Muhammad's
commentary on Sura Kawthar, of which we cited some examples, we do not
know what his followers believe. If they regard him the promised Mahdi
and the Qa'im, this belief not only does not conform with the teachings
of the ahl al-bayt, it also goes against the Sayyid's own affirmations.
The reason is that he himself regards the direct descendant of Imam
Hasan 'Askari, whom he calls mim, ha, mim, da, as the Qa'im and the
Mahdi. He also introduces his patronymic as Abu al-Qasim, regards his
short and long forms of occultation necessary, and provides the names of
his special deputies. Finally, he relates his encounter with the young
man in the sacred mosque of Mecca whom he thought to be the Hidden Imam.

If the followers of the Sayyid believe that the spirit of the twelfth
Imam has transmigrated into the Sayyid's body and that he is the
manifestation of the Qa'im, then even this belief has no validity. First
of all, it must be pointed out that such a tenet leads to the belief in
the incarnation and transmigration of souls. Both these are proven to be
false in Islam. Moreover, this belief is in direct contradiction with
the hadith from Imam Sadiq which the Sayyid himself has cited. The Imam
in this hadith says: "There will be those who will cause God's anger to
engulf them by saying: The spirit of the Qa'im is speaking through
another person."

The Sayyid Repudiated Any Attribution of Prophethood and Babism
---------------------------------------------------------------

However, if his followers believe that he was a prophet or a bab
("gate," meaning mediator between the Hidden Imam and his community),
then even this attribution has been declined by him. In the commentary
on Sura Kawthar he writes:

Those who say that "Remember the name of Thy Lord" means that he himself
(i.e., Sayyid 'Ali Muhammad) has actually claimed to have received
revelation and the Qur'an, have indeed become disbelievers. Moreover
those who say that the verse means that he has claimed to be the bab of
the Remnant of God (the twelfth Imam), have also become disbelievers. O
God, you are my witness that [I declare] any one who claims to be divine
or to possess the wilayat or who has received the Qur'an and the
revelation, or who has omitted or altered anything in Your religion, has
become an unbeliever. I certainly seek to disassociate from such people.
You are my witness that I have not claimed to be the bab[^45].

To be sure, when the Sayyid composed his commentary he had no intention
of putting forward any messianic claims. He simply considered himself a
learned person and sensed pain when he saw himself confined to the house
and found other learned authorities occupied with many tasks in the
public life. In this connection he writes:

God has favored me by enlightening my heart. I would like to publicize
the religion of God the way it was revealed in the Qur'an and
demonstrated in the teachings of the ahl al-bayt.

He was troubled by the false messianic claims ascribed to him and took
pains to decline them. Later on he realized that the absurdity of the
people was beyond imagination. Not only did they accept whatever he
said, they also added to it something more. It was at that point in his
career that his proclivity towards the messianic role of the twelfth
Imam became firm in his mind and he proclaimed himself to be the Qa'im.

The Bayan and Messianic Claim
-----------------------------

In chapter seven, the second unit of his Bayan, the Sayyid writes:

Since the appearance of the Qa'im of the family of Muhammad is precisely
the same as the emergence of the Messenger of God, he will not appear
until and unless he manifests the fruits of Islam as deduced from the
Qur'anic verses that have been implanted in the hearts of the people.
There is no way to deduce the fruits of Islam except by faith in him and
confirmation of his status. Now that it has borne fruits, to the
contrary he has been made manifest in the midst of Islam and everyone
proclaims Islam in relation to him while they situate him groundlessly
in Maku.

We have no intention of investigating this new creed in any detail so as
to refute it and demonstrate its absurdities. Much has been written on
this subject and our readers can refer to these works. Nor do we intend
to examine each and every claim to Mahdiism that has been made
throughout the history of Islam or to investigate their claims and
analyze critically the proofs produced to support them. These
discussions, interesting as they may be, go beyond the specific scope of
these sessions.

Let me reiterate that the promised Mahdi has been sufficiently
introduced and described in the authenticated traditions, and possesses
an intelligible and unique personality, understood in the minds of the
Shi'a. If they come, across such a person who fits into all the
characterizations found in the reliable hadith-reports, then they should
submit to his authority. If, on the contrary, they discover that the
person is a pseudo-Mahdi, then they must absolutely reject him. Those
who have so far claimed this messianic position have fallen far short of
sustaining such a title. In order to prove their messianic claim, it is
obvious that they cannot resort to rare and doubtful traditions
transmitted by single narrators and interpret them to their advantage.
This method of establishing a messianic claim is insufficient simply
because of the critical role of the Qa'im in restoring God's religion to
its pure, unadulterated meaning. No single tradition can compete in
reliability and authenticity with already accredited traditions.

False Claims and the Existence of a Followership
------------------------------------------------

Engineer Madani: If the claims of these pseudo-Mahdis were meaningless
and false, why would they attract such a staunch followership?

Mr. Hoshyar: To become a believer in and an adherent of a person does
not prove that person's truthfulness, because in the world there have
always existed false beliefs and religions and staunch believers in
those religions. The perseverance and sacrifice demonstrated by
ill-informed and simple people cannot be taken as a proof of the
religion's and the leader's truthfulness. Even a cursory glance at the
history of religions will reveal this general observation.

For instance, at this time in history when human beings have made great
strides in rational and scientific development, there are millions of
people in India who worship cows and believe that this animal has an
elevated status in the heavens. They regard killing a cow and consuming
its meat a prohibition, and consider disrespect to it as sinful. The
Hindus in India are willing to defend the cow at a great price. One of
the causes of conflict between Hindus and Muslims in India is the
slaughtering of the cow for food, which is permitted in Islam.

Such examples are plentiful in the history of world religions. Hence, it
should come as little surprise to see human beings following all kinds
of creeds and religions, false or true.

I believe we have covered the majority of the fundamental aspects
related to the belief in the Mahdi in Islam in general and among the
Shi'a in particular. Since there are no more issues to discuss we might
consider bringing our sessions on this subject to a close.

Dr. Jalali: I agree that we do not have any other related questions
about the subject.

Dr. Emami: I must say that these sessions were extremely beneficial for
my understanding of the Shi'i beliefs. I wish we could continue to learn
some more. However, it is appropriate to bring the sessions connected
with our subject on the Mahdi, the Universal Just Ruler of the World, to
an end.

Let me take this opportunity to thank you all. May God hasten
deliverance through the appearance of the Supreme Remnant of God, the
twelfth Imam, and may He make us all the servants of Islam and the
helpers of the Imam.

Wassalamu 'alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh!

And peace be upon you, and God's mercy and His blessing!

[^1]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 370

[^2]: Ibid., p. 327

[^3]: The phrase kuffar-i ghayr-i kitabi refers to the disbelievers who
are neither Christian nor Jewish nor Zoroastrian. These latter are
regarded in the Shari'a as muwahhidun, i.e., monotheists. Tr

[^4]: Ithbat al-hudat, Vol. 7, p. 215, 247

[^5]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 345

[^6]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol 52, p. 376, 381

[^7]: Nu'mani, Kitab al-ghayba, p.237

[^8]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol 52, p. 340

[^9]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 390

[^10]: Ibid., p. 340

[^11]: Ibid., Vol. 51, p. 47

[^12]: Ibid., Vol. 52, p. 378

[^13]: Safinat al-bihar, hadith related under 'Qumm.

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 60, p. 216

[^16]: Ibid., Vol. 52, p. 190

[^17]: Ibn 'Asakir, Ta'rikh (Damascus edition, 1329), Vol. 1, p. 87

[^18]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 328

[^19]: Ithbat al-hudat, Vol. 7, p. 49

[^20]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 335

[^21]: Ithbat al-hudat, Vol. 7, p. 401

[^22]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 244

[^23]: Ibid., p. 358

[^24]: Ibid., Vol. 51, p. 218

[^25]: Tabari, Dala'il al-imama (Najaf edition, 1369), p. 249

[^26]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol 52, p. 336

[^27]: Ibid., p. 352

[^28]: Ithbat al-hudat, Vol. 7, p. 110

[^29]: Ibid., p. 83

[^30]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 51, p. 82

[^31]: Ithbat al-hudat, Vol. 7, p. 52

[^32]: Muntakhab al-athar, p. 98

[^33]: Yanabi' al-muwadda, Vol. 2, p. 179

[^34]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 347

[^35]: Ithbat al-hudat, Vol. 7, p. 86

[^36]: Kashf al-ghumma, Vol. 3, p. 264; Mufid, Irshad, p. 240, 343

[^37]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 326

[^38]: Ibid., p. 325

[^39]: Ibid., p. 320

[^40]: Nabil Zarandi, Talkhis-i ta'rikh, pp.135-138

[^41]: Tafsir as-Suratul Kawthar

[^42]: Ibid

[^43]: Ibid

[^44]: Ibid

[^45]: Ibid


