Chapter 4: The Unseen World and the Imam of the Age
===================================================

The following session was convened at Dr. Jalali's residence. He was the
first person to open the discussion.

Dr. Jalali: A small number of Muslims believe that the Imam of the Age
is the son of Imam Hasan 'Askari who was born in the year 256 AH/843 CE.
However, they say that he has ascended from this world to the unseen
world known as Hurqalya[^1]. When humankind reaches maturity and
abandons the strife-ridden life of this world, preparing itself to meet
and behold the Imam of the Age, it will be able to see him.

One of the leading authorities has written thus in his book:

This [unseen] world had gravitated until it merged with the earth. In
the time of Adam he was told: 'Ascend!' And, until now he is ascending.
He has not set himself free from the worldly attachments and the filth
that sticks with them. He has not reached the clean atmosphere yet.
Thus, here it is all darkness. In darkness a human being is searching
for a religion and is performing deeds. He has a set of beliefs.

When he frees himself from the dust of the traditions and enters the
clean space, he will see the brilliant face of the friend of God [= wali
= the twelfth Imam] and benefit from his presence without any
obstruction, in public. At that time ordinances of religion will become
something else, and religion will attain its original form and
everything will be different.

Hence, we should ascend to that world where this friend of God is
manifest and not wait for him to come to us. If he comes to us and finds
us unfit we cannot benefit from him. Moreover, if he comes to us and we
are still in the same state [of ungodly existence], we will not be able
to see him. This is also against common sense. On the other hand, if our
state changes for better and improves, then we have certainly moved
upward in station.

Hence we must realize that we should ascend so that we can reach that
world. The name of that world in the language of theosophy is Hurqalya.
Thus, as the world ascends to that high level it reaches the station of
Hurqalya. In that place the Imam's domain is realized. Truth is spread
and falsehood is defeated[^2].

Mr. Hoshyar: The author's intent in this writing is not clear. If he
intends to convey that the Imam of the Age (peace be upon him) has
relinquished his earthly existence and physical body to ascend to that
ideal world, as a result of which he is no more a person existing on
this earth needing an earthly form and bound to earthly necessities,
this view, besides being in itself irrational, does not conform with the
rational and textual proofs that prove the necessity of the Imamate.

To be sure, these proofs point to the fact that there should exist among
people that perfect man in whom all the excellent qualities and virtues
should become actualized. Such a person, having attained the straight
path of the religion himself, should undertake to show that path and
lead the people toward it. It is only then that the Imam could serve as
a role model and preserve God's ordinances and serve as a competent
authority and proof for God's existence. The twelfth Imam is such a
person. To put it differently, the need of the guide and leader is felt
where people are moving towards that lofty goal, seeking to be
instructed to attain that perfection.

However, if the intent of the author regarding Hurqalya is to fix a
point in this material world, then we have no disagreement with him in
what he believes. But, this more reasonable latter sense does not seem
to be congruent with the apparent meaning of his writing. Over all it
seems to be an untenable opinion.

Will the Imam Be Born at the End of the Time?
---------------------------------------------

Dr. Fahimi: We can accept this much from what you have said so far,
namely, the existence of the Mahdi is among the indisputable religious
truths of Islam, about which the Prophet himself had given the
information. However, what does it matter if we say that the promised
Mahdi is not born yet? Whenever the conditions of the world become
favorable God will appoint one of the descendants of the Prophet who
will establish the rule of justice and will create conditions for God's
sincere worship by destroying the forces of injustice and undertaking to
fight against the wrongdoers until victory is gained.

Mr. Hoshyar: To respond to your question, let me begin by pointing out
that we have proven by means of all the rational and traditional proofs
that no period of human existence is without an Imam, because the
absence of the Imam would lead to the decline of humankind. Hence, our
age is also not without the Imam.

Moreover, we have established the existence of the Mahdi conclusively by
means of the *hadith*-reports from the Prophet and his family.
Consequently, we should also obtain a description of his person and
character from the same sources. Fortunately, all the characteristics
and signs of his existence are covered in numerous reports, leaving no
ambiguity or imprecision on that score. However, if we were to read all
these reports it would require several sessions, for which I do not
believe that you, with your already busy schedule, would have time.
Accordingly, I will provide you with a list of these reports and you are
free to undertake a further detailed examination to satisfy your
interest.

Descriptions Identifying the Mahdi
----------------------------------

The contemporary Scholar, Safi Golpaygani, has collected all these
traditions in his book: *Muntakhab al-athar*, citing their Sunni and
Shi'i sources. Following is the list of the subject and the number of
traditions on that subject:

91 *hadith* on: “The Imams are twelve in number, among whom the first is
'Ali b. Abi Talib and the last is the Mahdi.”

94 *hadith* on: “The Imams are twelve, and the last one is the Mahdi.”

107 *hadith* on: “The Imams are twelve, nine among whom are the
descendants of Husayn, and the ninth is the Qa'im.”

389 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is from among the progeny of the Prophet.”

214 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is from among the descendants of 'Ali.”

192 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is from among the descendants of Fatima.”

185 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is from among the descendants of Husayn.”

148 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is the nineth descendant of Husayn.”

185 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is among the descendants of 'Ali b. al-Husayn.”

103 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is among the descendants of Imam Muhammad
Baqir.”

103 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is among the descendants of Imam Ja'far Sadiq.”

99 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is the sixth descendant of Imam Sadiq.”

101 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is among the descendants of Imam Musa al-Kazim.”

98 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is the fifth descendant of Imam Kazim.”

95 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is the fourth descendant of Imam 'Ali Rida.”

90 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is the third descendant of Imam Muhammad Taqi.”

90 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is among the descendants of Imam 'Ali al-Hadi.”

145 *hadith* on: “Mahdi is Imam Hasan 'Askari's son.”

148 *hadith* on: “The name of Mahdi's father is Hasan.”

47 hadith on: "The name and patronymic of the Mahdi will be that of the
Prophet's name and patronymic[^3]."

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny) declared:

The Promised Mahdi is among my descendants. His name and patronymic will
be the same as mine. In creation and conduct he will be the closest to
me. He will live a life of occultation during which people will become
confused and lost. At that time, like a brilliant star he will appear
and fill the earth with justice and equity, as it is filled with
injustice and tyranny[^4].

As you can see from these hadith-reports, the Mahdi has been so clearly
identified that there remains no doubt as to his identity. At this
juncture, it seems appropriate to remind ourselves that on the basis of
some of the prophetic traditions and historical reports one can surmise
that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny) had forbidden the
combination of his name and patronymic in one person. Hence, this has
been a rare occurrence in history.

In a hadith reported by Abu Hurayra the Prophet said: "Do not combine my
name and my patronymic (kunya) in one person[^5]." It was because of
this prohibition that when 'Ali b. Abi Talib chose the Prophet's name
and patronymic for his son Muhammad b. Hanafiyya, the Prophet's
companions objected to it. 'Ali b. Abi Talib in response to this
objection said: "I have a special permission from the Prophet in this
matter." A number of the companions confirmed 'Ali's statement.

If the content of this report is connected with the hadith-reports which
relate that the Mahdi will have the Prophet's name and patronymic, then
it becomes apparent that the Prophet wanted this combining of his name
and patronymic to be part of the signs of the future Mahdi from which
others were excluded. It was because of this coming together of the
Prophet's name and patronymic in the case of Muhammad b. Hanafiyya that
the latter referred to this fact as a sign of his own Mahdiism saying:
"Yes, I am the Mahdi. My name is the Prophet's name; and my patronymic
is his patronymic[^6]."

Mahdi Is Among the Descendants of Husayn b. 'Ali
------------------------------------------------

Dr. Fahimi: Our scholars accept that the Mahdi will be from among the
descendants of Husayn. They refer to the following hadith reported in
Sunan of Abi Dawud:

Abu Ishaq relates: "'Ali, while looking at his son Hasan, said, 'This
son of mine is the master (sayyid) as declared by the Prophet. Among his
progeny will appear a man whose name will be that of the Prophet. He
will resemble the Prophet in his demeanor; but he will not resemble him
in appearance[^7].'"

Mr. Hoshyar: First, let me point out that in all likelihood, there might
have occurred an error in the writing or printing of the hadith. And
instead of 'Husayn' it might have recorded 'Hasan'. The reason is that
the same hadith has been related in other collections where instead of
'Hasan' it is 'Husayn' to whom the comment is made by 'Ali b. Abi
Talib[^8].

Second, there are far too many hadith-reports in the Sunni and Shi'i
collections that regard the Mahdi to be from among the descendants of
Husayn. As such, this tradition has no validity. Let us examine some
examples from the Sunni compilations on this subject:

Hudhayfa relates the following hadith from the Prophet:

The Prophet said: "If there remains no more than a day for the world,
God will prolong it until a man from my progeny, whose name will be my
name, will emerge." Salman asked: "From which of your progeny will he
emerge?" The Prophet replied: "From this son of mine." And, he struck
Husayn with his hand[^9].

In another tradition Abu Sa'id Khudari relates that the Prophet (peace
be upon him and his progeny) told Fatima:

"The Mahdi of this community behind whom Jesus will pray is among us."
Then he struck Husayn's shoulder with his hand and declared: "The Mahdi
of my community will be from the descendants of this son of mine[^10]."

Once Salman al-Farisi came to see the Prophet when the latter had Husayn
in his lap. The Prophet was kissing Husayn's face and mouth and was
saying:

You are the master and the son and brother of the master. You are the
Imam, son and brother of the Imam. Your are the proof and son and
brother of the proof of God's existence. You are the father of nine
proofs of God, the nineth among whom will be the Qa'im[^11].

According to these hadith-reports, the Mahdi is among the descendants of
Husayn. Hence, one should abandon those reports that say that the Mahdi
will be among the descendants of Hasan. Moreover, even if one accepts
these latter traditions as being authentic, it can be asserted that both
kinds of traditions point to the fact that Mahdi is certainly the
descendant of both Hasan and Husayn, in the sense that Imam Muhammad
Baqir's mother was the daughter of Imam Hasan. The following hadith
points to the logical connection between the two kinds of traditions
about the Mahdi being from the descendants of Hasan and Husayn:

The Prophet told Fatima: The two grandsons of this community are among
us. These are Hasan and Husayn who are the masters of the youths of
Paradise. By God, their father is more excellent than they. I solemnly
declare in the name of the One who has sent me as a prophet that the
Mahdi of this community will emerge from among these two sons of yours
at the time when chaos will rule[^12].

What If the Mahdi WasWell-known?
--------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: If the promised Mahdi had been a prominent and well-known
personality and if his highly publicized merits and characteristics had
reached the ears of the Muslims and the companions of the rightful Imams
in the early days of Islam, the road to manipulation and fallacies would
have necessarily been closed, and the associates of the Imams and the
scholars would not have fallen into an error. On the contrary, one finds
that even some of the descendants of the Imams did not have proper
information about the subject of the Mahdi.

How, then, did so many individuals claiming to be the Mahdi appear in
the early days, introducing themselves as the promised Mahdi of Islam
and misleading the people with their false claim? If the Muslims knew
the Mahdi by name, and the name of his father and mother, and his
patronymic, and that he was the twelfth Imam, and all other details
about his age and other characteristics, how did then a group fall into
error and regard Muhammad b. Hanafiyya, Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah b. Hasan,
Ja'far Sadiq, Musa Kazim, or other such individuals as the Mahdi?

Mr. Hoshyar: As mentioned earlier, the fundamental belief in the
existence of the Mahdi was a well-established tenet of faith among early
Muslims. In fact, people did not entertain any doubt in his existence.
The Prophet had given detailed information about the existence of the
Mahdi, his characteristics, his universal mission of instituting the
divine government based on justice and equity and of bringing an end to
injustice and tyranny by carrying out necessary reforms. Indeed, the
Prophet had given many such glad tidings to the Muslims. Nevertheless,
he had not provided them with the cues and the actual characteristics
and distinctions of the Mahdi. Rather, one can say that such matters
were part of the confidential information that was revealed to a few
entrusted and loyal followers of Islam. The Prophet had given that
confidential information about the Mahdi to 'Ali b. Abi Talib, Fatima
and other trusted companions, while keeping that secret from the general
public, giving them only hints and general information on the subject.
The Imams who came after the Prophet followed the Prophet's example and
shared only summary information about the Mahdi with the general public.
All the detailed particulars on the subject were handed down from one
Imam to the succeeding Imams, one after the other. On occasion, the
information was divulged to a few trustworthy associates. Over all, the
general public and even some of the family members of the Imams, knew
very little about the subject.

There were two reasons for the Prophet and the Imams not to indulge in
providing detailed information about the future coming of the Mahdi:

First, they wanted to keep the identity of the promised Mahdi secret
from the enemies of God and the unjust rulers so that no harm would
befall him from that direction. The Prophet and the Imams were fully
aware that if the unjust rulers, caliphs and their agents knew the
identity of the Mahdi with all the particulars about his parents, their
names, and so on, they would not hesitate to prevent his birth even if
that meant killing his parents. The Umayyads and the 'Abbasids were
determined to hold on to their power by eliminating even the slightest
threat to it. They did not pause to commit grievous crimes in order to
remain in power. In all likelihood, they would have endeavored to get
rid of him, even if it meant killing anyone remotely connected with a
challenge to their autocratic rule.

It is important to note that even though the Umayyads and the 'Abbasids
were not fully informed about the signs of the Mahdi's appearance, they
killed thousands of the descendants of 'Ali b. Abi Talib and Fatima, in
order to thwart the potential threat of the Mahdi's revolution. In a
hadith related from Imam Sadiq to Mufaddal, Abu Basir and Aban b.
Taghlib, the Imam said: "Since the Umayyads and the 'Abbasids had heard
that tyrannical rule will be overthrown by our Qa'im, they initiated
their hostility against us. They labored to kill the descendants of the
Prophet and to destroy subsequent generations with the hope that they
could get rid of the Qa'im. But since God was determined to fulfill His
will, He did not avail the tyrants all the information about the
matter[^13]."

The case with the Imams was not very different than with the Prophet
himself. They lived in fear for their lives. Hence, they practiced
'prudential concealment' (taqiyya) in revealing the details about the
Mahdi even to their closest associates and other 'Alawites. Abu Khalid,
the close associate of Imams Baqir and Sadiq, once requested Imam Baqir
to confirm the name of al-Qa'im for him so that he would perfectly
recognize him. The Imam said: "O Abu Khalid, you have asked me something
about which if the descendants of Fatima come to know anything, the
authorities would cut him into pieces[^14]!"

Second, by providing merely general information about the Mahdi, the
Prophet and the Imams wanted those weak in their faith not to be
overcome by despair at the weakness of God's religion in the face of the
unjust powers. In other words, those who had witnessed or heard about
the unpolluted and just rule of the Prophet and Imam 'Ali b. Abi Talib
in the early days of Islam, had heard about the ultimate victory of true
religion and the end of injustice and corruption under Islam.
Accordingly, they had accepted the new religion with much hope of seeing
an end to all the corruption. However, since they were newcomers to
Islam their faith was not that strong. On the one hand, the prevalent
turmoil in Muslim society and the unfavorable conditions that ensued had
an impact upon these people.

On the other hand, they saw the wicked behavior of the Umayyad and
'Abbasid rulers and the way that that impacted upon society. These
unfavorable social and political conditions had made them very
perplexed. The concern of the Prophet and the Imams was that people with
weak faith would lose hope, with the truth and religion of Islam being
overpowered by evil forces, and so these people would abandon Islam. The
thing that to a certain extent assured people to remain faithful to
Islam and to keep their hearts hopeful was the belief in the deliverance
and the revolution of the promised Mahdi.

These Muslims anticipated the revolution of the promised Mahdi to take
place any day to redress the injustices in society and to restore
universal good order according to the Islamic ideals of justice and
equity. It is natural that this hope for a better future in the people
would have been effected only when all the true details about the
Qa'im's uprising were not clearly known. Otherwise, if the details about
the timing, the identity and other related signs of the Mahdi's
appearance were public knowledge, such a positive attitude and hope
would not have ensued.  
 Undoubtedly, it was this general, summary information about the future
role of the Mahdi that gave the capacity to the downtrodden people in
the early days of Islam to bear with patience the unfavorable living
conditions under the corrupt and unjust rulers of the Ummayad and
'Abbasid dynasties.

The intended impact of what was foretold about the Mahdi in brief is
captured in the report in which Yaqtin, a supporter of the 'Abbasids,
asked his son 'Ali b. Yaqtin, one of the prominent associates of the
Imam Musa Kazim: "Why is it that things that were predicted about us
have been fulfilled, whereas those about you remain unrealized?" 'Ali b.
Yaqtin replied: "The reports that foretold the events came from the same
[prophetic] source. However, since the time for your political power has
arrived, the prophecies about you are, one by one, being fulfilled.

But, the time for our rule, that is the rule of the Prophet's family,
has not come yet. Hence, they have kept us occupied with the glad
tidings and future aspirations. If we had been told that the government
of the Prophet's family will not be established for the next two or
three centuries, the hearts would have been hard and most of the people
would have abandoned Islam. But, the events have been reported in such a
way that the hearts are pleased and every day we are looking forward to
the establishment of God's government[^15]."

The Traditions from the Ahlul Bayt Are Proofs for All Muslims
-------------------------------------------------------------

Dr. Fahimi: One must acknowledge the fact that your traditions identify
and describe the Mahdi very well. Unfortunately, such traditions have
very little value for a person like me who happens to be a Sunni and who
does not attach any significance to the opinions and actions of your
Imams.

Mr. Hoshyar: I am not in the process of proving the Imamate and the
wilayat (love of the ahl al-bayt) for you. I want to point out something
else for you. It is important to emphasize that the opinions and actions
of the Imams among the ahl al-bayt have evidential value and are
significant for all Muslims across the board, regardless of whether they
accept them as Imams or not.  
 The reason is that there are numerous traditions publicized on the
authority of the Prophet and regarded as reliable by both the Shi'i and
the Sunni in which the Prophet has introduced his ahl al-bayt as the
authoritative source of Islamic knowledge and regarded their opinions
and actions as sound. For example, the famous tradition about the "two
things of high estimation" (al-thaqalayn), the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his progeny) said:

I leave among you two things of high estimation. If you hold on to them
you will never be led astray. One of these two things is weightier than
the other. One of these two is the Book of God which is a link between
the earth and the heaven. The second one is my family, my ahl al-bayt.
These two trusts will not separate from each other till the Day of
Judgement. Hence, exercise care in the way you treat these two[^16].

This hadith has been reported in various forms by both the Shi'i and
Sunni sources. Moreover, it has been regarded as an authentic tradition.
According to Ibn Hajar, as recorded in his book al-Sawa'iq al-muharriqa,
this hadith has been narrated by different sources and through numerous
chains of transmission from the Prophet. In fact, more than twenty close
companions [of the Prophet] have related it. The Prophet used to attach
so much importance to the Qur'an and his ahl al-bayt that on different
occasions he had declared their significance for the well being of the
Muslim community in the future, including the Farewell Pilgrimage and
the Ghadir, and after his return from his journey to Ta'if.

Another tradition which is widely acknowledged in all Sunni and Shi'i
sources is related by Ibn 'Abbas who heard the Prophet declare: "The
likeness of my family is the Ark of Noah. Whoever embarks upon it is
saved; and whoever stays away from it will perish[^17]."

Jabir b. 'Abd Allah Ansari related from the Prophet another widely
quoted hadith in which the latter said:

The two sons of 'Ali [Hasan and Husayn] are the leaders of the youths of
Paradise. They are my sons. 'Ali, his two sons, and the Imams after
them, are the Proof of God's existence among the people. They are my
gates of knowledge in the community. Any one who follows them will be
saved from the Hell Fire; and any one who accepts them as his leader has
found the way to guidance. God does not bless any one with their love
without making them worthy of the Paradise[^18].

In one of his orations 'Ali b. Abi Talib told the people:

I ask you to verify this, in the name of God: Do you recall what the
Prophet said in his last speech: "O people! I leave among you the Book
of God and my family? Hold on to them and you will never lose your way,
because God, the Wise, has informed and assured me that these two will
never part from each other till the Day of Judgement." At that time
'Umar b. al-Khattab got angry and stood up and asked: "Does this
statement include all of your family?"  
 The Prophet replied: "No. This includes my legatees among whom the
first is 'Ali b. Abi Talib, my brother, vizier, heir and caliph. He is
the one who has discretionary power over my community. Following 'Ali my
son Hasan, following him my son Husayn, and then nine descendants of
Husayn are the legatees. They will follow each other until the Day of
Judgement. They are the proofs of God's existence for the people, the
keepers of divine knowledge, and the repositories of wisdom on earth.
Whoever obeys them has obeyed God, and whoever disobeys them has
disobeyed God."

When 'Ali's answer reached this point, all those who were present said:
'We bear witness that the Prophet did say all that[^19].'

On the basis of all such traditions that are recorded in the Sunni and
Shi'i sources the following conclusions can be drawn:

(a) Since the Qur'an will remain with the people until the Day of
Judgement, the family of the Prophet, the ahl al-bayt, will also remain
with them. Hence, such traditions can be considered as evidence for the
existence of the Hidden Imam.

(b) The term 'itrat in the hadith actually refers to the twelve legatees
of the Prophet.

(c) The Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny) has not abandoned
the Muslim community without any guidance. Quite to the contrary, he has
actually made his family, the ahl al-bayt, the source of divine
knowledge and guidance. He has declared their opinions and actions
competent and reliable; and has recommended that one hold on to them
until the Day of Judgement.

(d) The Imam, then, will never be separated from the Qur'an and its
ordinances. Therefore, he has to be perfectly knowledgeable about its
injunctions. Just as the Qur'an does not mislead anyone in the matter of
guidance, and leads those who adhere to it to salvation, so does the
Imam lead the people to their goal without committing any error. If the
people follow the Qur'an and the Imams they would certainly be guided to
their prosperity. In other words, the Imam is free from any error and
deviation.

\`Ali b. Abi Talib, the Paragon of the Prophetic Knowledge
----------------------------------------------------------

In the light of historical and traditional sources it is accurate to
assert that the Prophet knew very well that among his companions not all
were capable of carrying the burden of the knowledge that was given to
him in his position as the Prophet of God. Moreover, the prevalent
circumstances in the community were not favorable to spread such
information. However, he was also aware that one day the community would
need that kind of knowledge. Consequently, he selected 'Ali b. Abi Talib
for the purpose of making him the repository of the prophetic knowledge.
He personally undertook to teach him and educate him day and night.
Hence, what 'Ali reported reflects the Prophet's own teachings about
Islam. To cite some examples, let us consider the following:

'Ali was brought up under the special care of the Prophet and was all
the time in his companionship. In this connection the Prophet informed
'Ali that God had required him to befriend 'Ali and to teach him all he
had received from God as a prophet. "You too should take care in
learning and recording what I have taught you. God will certainly
approve your endeavors," the Prophet guided 'Ali b. Abi Talib[^20].

Hence, 'Ali used to say: "Whatever I learnt from the Prophet I never
forgot[^21]." In another report he said: "The Prophet had assigned me a
special hour in the night and the day when I used to present myself [to
learn from him][^22]."

On one occasion 'Ali was asked: "What is the reason that in comparison
to other companions of the Prophet you have the most traditions?" He
replied: "Whenever I asked the Prophet something he gave me an answer.
And whenever I kept quiet he would begin the conversation[^23]."

The Prophet, according to Imam 'Ali, used to ask him to write down what
he said. 'Ali asked him if the Prophet thought 'Ali might forget. The
Prophet said: "No, because I have prayed to God to make you among those
who remembers things and records them. However, I want you to preserve
it for your companions and the Imams who will come after you. It is
because of the blessed existence of the Imams that the rain falls on
earth for the people, their prayers get accepted, the calamities go by
them and mercy descends on them." Then the Prophet pointed towards Hasan
and said: "This is the second in the line of the Imams," and added, "the
Imams will be from the descendants of Husyan."

The Book of 'Ali b. Abi Talib
-----------------------------

To be sure, 'Ali b. Abi Talib was able to comprehend and master the
prophetic knowledge through a serious commitment and divine help,
attended by divinely endowed talent. This knowledge he put to writing
and converted the book to a comprehensive corpus to which he added his
own recommendations for the future benefit of the community. This matter
has been preserved in the hadith-reports related by the ahl al-bayt. For
example, we read the following hadith in the collection:

Imam Sadiq said: We have something in our possession which makes us free
from any need from the people. However, [because of what we have] people
are in need of us. We possess a book which was dictated by the Prophet
himself and which is in the hand-writing of 'Ali. It is the
comprehensive book that includes all the ordinances about that which is
lawful and that which is unlawful[^24].

In another tradition Imam Baqir told Jabir:

O Jabir, if I had expounded for you our belief and tenets we would have
destroyed ourselves. In any case, we are relating for you traditions
which we collected from the Prophet, just as people collect gold and
silver[^25].

'Abd Allah b. Sinan heard Imam Sadiq, who said:

We have in our possession a leather bag, seventy cubits long. It was
written by 'Ali under the dictation of the Prophet. It contains all the
knowledge that people need to know down to the minutest detail[^26].

The Heirs to the Prophet's Knowledge:
-------------------------------------

Mr. Hoshyar: Dr. Fahimi, you said earlier that you do not accept the
Imamate of the family of the Prophet. However, you must accept the
evidential nature of what they say, just as you accept the traditions
reported from the companions, and the succeeding generation of Muslims.
The reason is that even if you do not accept any one of them as the
Imam, you cannot deprive them of their right to relate the reliable
traditions on the authority of the Prophet. Undoubtedly, the value of
what they relate is many times more than the information transmitted by
any ordinary Muslim. A number of Sunni scholars have acknowledged the
level of their knowledge, piety and strength of character[^27].

The Imams, time and again, used to say that they do not give opinions
based on their own predilections. Rather, their responses were derived
from the Prophet's own teachings. In other words, they were the true
heirs of the Prophetic knowledge, relating everything going back to the
Prophet through the Imams. According to Imam Sadiq:

My hadith is my father's hadith. My father's hadith is my grandfather's
hadith. My grandfather's hadith is Husayn's hadith. Husayn's hadith is
Hasan's hadith. Hasan's hadith is Amir al-Mu'minin's ['Ali b. Abi
Talib's] hadith. 'Ali b. Abi Talib's hadith is the Prophet's hadith.
And, the Prophet's hadith is what God has told him[^28].

Dr. Fahimi, I ask you to be fair minded. Do you think that the hadith
reported on the authority of Hasan and Husayn, the two leaders of the
youth of Paradise are not as good as the ones reported by Abu Hurayra,
Samra b. Jundab or Ka'b al-Ahbar? How about the hadith related by the
pious Imam Zayn al-'Abidin, the righteous Imams Baqir, Sadiq, and so on?

Undoubtedly, the Prophet declared 'Ali and his descendants to be the
treasures of prophetic knowledge. He reminded Muslims time and again and
in different contexts to look upon them as the sources of reliable
knowledge about Islam. More importantly, he encouraged the people to
refer to them. Unfortunately, the direction of Islamic history deviated
from its straight course and the community deprived itself of the
valuable instruction of the ahl al-bayt, which led to backwardness among
Muslims.

Dr. Jalali: I have many more questions in mind. But, since its getting
very late, I will leave them for the next session.

Engineer Madani: If you all agree, I would like to hold the next session
in my home. We will continue our deliberations there.

[^1]: The word refers to the mythological universe known to the mystics
as very difficult world requiring the strength or courage of Hercules to
encounter or accomplish. Tr

[^2]: Muhammad Karim Khan, Irshad al-\`ulum (Kirman, 1380), Volume 3, p.
401

[^3]: See: Lutf Allah al-Safi al-Gulpaygani, Muntakhab al-athar fi
al-imam al-thani 'ashar (Tehran: Maktabat al-Sadr, nd.)

[^4]: Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, Volume 51, p. 72.

[^5]: Ibn Sa'd, al-Tabaqat al-kubra, Vol. 1, p. 107

[^6]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 94

[^7]: Sunan, Kitab al-mahdi

[^8]: Ithbat al-hudat, Vol. 7, p. 208

[^9]: Dhakha'ir al-'uqba, p. 136

[^10]: al-Bayan fi akhbar sahib al-zaman, p. 502

[^11]: Yanabi' al-mawadda, Vol. 1, p. 492

[^12]: Ithbat al-hudat, Vol. 7, p. 183

[^13]: Ibn Babüya, Kamal al-din, Vol. 2, 354

[^14]: Shaykh al-Tusi, Kitab al-ghayba, p. 202

[^15]: Ibid., p. 208

[^16]: Dhakha\`ir al-'uqba (Cairo, 1356), p. 16; al-Sawa'iq
al-muharriqa, p. 147; al-Fusul al-muhimma, p. 22; al-Bidaya wa
al-nihaya, Vol. 5, p. 208; (Hydrabad edition), pp. 153, 167; Sibt b.
Jawzi, Tadhkirat al-khawass, p. 182

[^17]: All the sources mentioned in the previous note, in addition to
Majma' al-zawa'id, Vol. 9, p. 168

[^18]: Yanabi' al-mawadda, Vol. 1, p. 54

[^19]: Jami' ahadith al-shi'a, Vol. 1, Introduction

[^20]: See Manaqib Khwarazmi, p. 199, Kulayni, al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 64

[^21]: A'yan al-shi'a, Vol. 3

[^22]: Yanabi' al-mawadda, Vol. 1, p. 77

[^23]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 36; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, Vol. 2, Part II, p. 101

[^24]: Jami' ahadith al-shi'a, Vol. 1, Introduction

[^25]: Ibid

[^26]: Ibid

[^27]: There are a number of works authored by the Sunnis that regard
the Shi'i Imams as righteous and highly knowledgeable in religious-legal
matters. See, for instance, al-Jawzi, Tadhkirat al-khawass, Ibn Sabbagh
al-Maliki, Fusul al-muhimma; Shablanji, Nur al-absar; Ibn Hajar,
al-Sawa'iq al-muharriqa; and, so on

[^28]: Jami' ahadith shi'a, Vol. 1


