Chapter 7: Why Did Not the Occultation Become Complete from the Beginning?
==========================================================================

The group met at Dr. Jalali's house. The session began on time. Everyone
was anxious to hear Dr. Jalali's questions.

Dr. Jalali: What was the purpose of the Short Occultation? If the
twelfth Imam was going to be in occultation, why did he not do so
immediately following the death of Imam Hasan 'Askari? Why did he not
become completely cut off from his followers?

Mr. Hoshyar: You must realize that the disappearance of the Imam and the
leader of the community for a long time is an uncommon event and would
be hard for the people to believe and get used to. It was for this
reason that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny) and the
Imams decided to make the people aware of such a phenomenon gradually.  
 Hence, from time to time they related the events connected with the
occultation, they spoke about the difficulties people would face in the
absence of the Imam, and described the condition of those who would
reject the idea and the losses they would suffer, and praised the
condition of those who would remain firm and the rewards they would
reap. At times, through their own inaccessibility they demonstrated a
situation which resembled the era when the last Imam would be living an
invisible life.

Mas'udi, the famous historian, in his book Ithbat al-wasiyya describes
this gradual introduction of the notion of the Imam's occultation. He
says that Imam Hadi, the tenth Imam, met very little with the people
and, except for some of his special associates, did not maintain
contacts with others. When Imam Hasan 'Askari assumed the Imamate, most
of the time he spoke with the people from behind a curtain so that his
followers would be get used to the idea and be prepared to accept the
disappearance of the twelfth Imam[^1].

If the complete occultation had begun immediately following the death of
Imam Hasan 'Askari, then, in all likelihood, the fact about the
existence of the twelfth Imam would have been ignored and in time people
would have completely forgotten that there exists an Imam in
occultation. Consequently, it was the Short Occultation with which the
event of the disappearance of the Imam occurred.  
 During this period the Shi'a were able to contact the Imam through his
special deputies and were witness to the signs and miraculous deeds that
appeared in the hands of these prominent followers of the Imam. When the
notion of occultation and the Imam's ability to provide the necessary
guidance through his deputies in that state became firmly accepted, the
Complete Occultation occurred.

Is There Any Time Limit to the Complete Occultation?
----------------------------------------------------

Engineer Madani: Is there any time limit fixed for the Complete
Occultation?

Mr. Hoshyar: No, there is no time limit fixed. However, there are many
hadith-reports that point to the prolongation of the occultation to such
an extent that some people will fall into doubt about the existence of
the Imam. For example, Imam 'Ali has related the following about the
Qa'im:

His occultation will be so long that an ignorant person will say: "God
does not need the ahl al-bayt[^2]."

Similarly, Imam Sajjad has related that among the characteristics of
Noah that would recur in the Qa'im would be his long age[^3].

The Philosophy of Occultation
-----------------------------

Engineer Madani: If the Imam of the Age was living among the people,
they would have been able to reach him and consult with him in times of
need to seek solutions to their problems. That would have been better.
In spite of such a need among his followers why did he go into
occultation?

Mr. Hoshyar: To be sure, if there had been no obstacles to his being
present among the people, it would have been more expedient and
beneficial to have him around. However, since God has chosen a state of
invisible existence for him, and since God's acts are founded upon what
is in the best interest of humanity, one should also believe, as one
does in other instances, that in this case also the reason for
occultation is also based on divine wisdom, about which we have simply
an overall knowledge, the details being unknown to us. The following
hadith corroborates the point we are trying to make, namely, that the
actual reason for occultation was not explained for the people, and
except for the Imams themselves no one knew anything about it.

The hadith is reported by 'Abd Allah b. Fadl Hashimi. He relates:

Imam Sadiq said: "The one entrusted with the command will necessarily
live an invisible life. This will lead those who are already astray into
doubt." So I asked the Imam the reason. He said: "I am not permitted to
reveal the reason." I went on to seek the philosophy behind the
invisible life [of the Imam of the Age].

He said: "It is the same wisdom that existed in the prior situation when
other proofs of God also went into occultation. However, the true
understanding behind this occurrence will not take place until after he
has reappeared, just as the wisdom behind making the boat defective,
killing the boy, and repairing the falling wall [in the story of Moses
and Khidr in the Qur'an] were revealed to Moses only after the two had
decided to part company.

O the son of Fadl! The subject of occultation is among the divine
secrets and a concealed matter whose knowledge is only with God. Since
we regard God to be wise we must also affirm that His acts are based on
that perfect wisdom, even when the detailed understanding is not
accessible to us[^4]."

The hadith certainly points to the fact that the main reason for the
occultation was not explained to the people either because it was not
suitable for the people or because they had no preparation to grasp it.
But there are other traditions in which three benefits are given for the
occultation of the Imam:

(1) The benefit of being tested and purified: There are some who do not
have strong faith. Through the requirement of believing in such a
phenomenon as the invisible existence of the Imam their true inner self
is made manifest. Then there are those who do have strong faith in
hidden things, but because of the prolonged concealment and their
awaiting for the deliverance so long, they have suffered a lot. Such
people should receive proper recognition and should reap rewards for
their steadfastness and patience. Imam Musa Kazim has related this
situation in the following hadith:

When the fifth descendant of the seventh Imam disappears watch out for
your faith. God forbid, if someone may drive you away from your
religion. O my son! Undoubtedly, the Master of the Command will have
such an occultation that a group of believers will turn away from
religion. God will test the believers with the occultation [of their
Imam][^5].

(2) The benefit of being relieved from having to pay allegiance to
unjust rulers. There is a tradition reported by Hasan b. Faddal from
Imam Rida, who said:

"I see my followers in the aftermath of the death of my third descendant
[i.e., Imam Hasan 'Askari) looking for their Imam everywhere and not
finding him." I asked him the reason for that. He said: "Because their
Imam will have entered the state of occultation." I went on to ask the
reason for the occultation. He said: "This will be so that when he
reappears he will have paid no allegiance to anyone[^6]."

(3) The benefit of being immune from murder. Zurara reports the hadith
from Imam Sadiq, who said:

"The Qa'im must live an invisible existence." I asked for the reason. He
said: "He is afraid of being killed," and pointed to his stomach.

These three benefits are reported in various ways in a number of
traditions, especially those reported from the ahl al-bayt.

What Danger Faced the Imam If He Were Visibly Present?
------------------------------------------------------

Engineer Madani: If the Imam of the Age were visibly present among
people, he would have been living in one of the cities of the world,
guiding and directing the religious lives of the Muslims, and continuing
to fulfil his obligations until the conditions of the world became
favorable. At that time he would have been able to launch his revolution
and destroy the power of disbelief and injustice. What is wrong with
this supposition?

Mr. Hoshyar: I do not see any problem with the supposition. However, we
should evaluate its overall impact. Let me try to analyze the situation
under ordinary circumstances.

It is important to keep in mind that the Prophet and the Imams had time
and again informed the people regarding the major function of the
awaited Mahdi, namely, the destruction of the tyrannical powers and the
rectification of injustices committed by them. Because of this, two
kinds of people were bound to pay particular attention to the presence
of the Imam:

First, those who were wronged and persecuted and, unfortunately, whose
number has always been large. This group would have rallied around the
Imam and put enormous pressure on him to redress the wrongs committed
against them and defend their rights. In other words, there would have
been endless turmoil and chaos resulting from the rising and
revolutions.

Second, those who were in power and were the source of corruption and
ill treatment of the people. These tyrants were not afraid to employ any
unjust means to remain in power and protect their interests. In fact,
they were willing to sacrifice their entire population as long as they
retained power. Since they saw the presence of the Imam as a threat and
an obstacle to their own interests, they were bound to remove him at any
cost so that they could continue to rule. In fact, at times the rulers
were united in their elimination of the major threat to their power,
namely, the awaited Mahdi. Hence, they were determined to annihilate the
source of justice and equity among the people.

Why Is the Mahdi Afraid of Being Killed?
----------------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: What would be wrong with the Imam suffering death in the
path of reforming society and disseminating the true religion and
defending the oppressed? Is his blood more dear than that of his
forefathers who also suffered martyrdom in defending the religion of
God? My question is why at all should he be afraid of being killed?

Mr. Hoshyar: The Imam of the Age, like his forefathers, is not afraid of
being killed. Nevertheless, his being killed is not in the interest of
the society or the religion. The reason is that whereas when his
forefathers were killed they had their offspring to succeed them, the
twelfth Imam does not have a son to succeed him should he be killed, and
surely the earth cannot remain without God's Proof on it. It is well
established that it is God's will that truth shall become triumphant
over falsehood and that through the existence of the twelfth Imam the
world will become the abode of godfearing people.

Does Not God Have the Power to Protect the Imam?
------------------------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: Does not God have the power to protect the Imam from the
threat posed by his evil enemies?

Mr. Hoshyar: To be sure, God's power is unlimited. However, generally
God does things in the most normal fashion, using the regular channel of
causation. Moreover, God does not want religion or the messengers and
leaders of religion to be protected in an extraordinary way, to deprive
people of their freedom of choice and of facing the consequences of
their choices. Coercion in these matters would divest human beings of
their dignity. On the other hand, as free agents, human beings would
face the testing and purification that becomes possible by accepting to
follow the guidance of truth provided in the religious teachings of the
Prophet and the Imams (peace be upon them).

Is It Not Likely That the Unjust Rulers Would Have Submitted to Him?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: If the Imam were visibly present then the oppressors would
have access to him and would have heard his teachings and probably would
have given up on the idea of killing him. On the contrary, they would
have probably been guided and would have abandoned their unjust ways.

Mr. Hoshyar: Not everyone submits to the truth. From the beginning of
human history till our own times, there has been a group on earth that
has vehemently opposed truth and been the enemy of justice. Moreover,
they have tried with all their might to destroy both truth and justice.
Did not the Prophets and the Imams teach the truth? Did not the
oppressors and unjust rulers have access to their miracles and
teachings? In spite of all that, they never hesitated to silence these
voices of justice and put out these rays of guidance by the means that
were available to them. If the twelfth Imam had not disappeared because
of the fear of these tyrants, he too may have suffered the same fate as
his forefathers.

He Should Remain Silent So That He Would Be Safe
------------------------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: In my view, if the Imam had entirely withdrawn from politics
and had remained silent in the face of these tyrannical rulers' conduct,
while continuing to provide moral and religious guidance, he would have
been spared from the evil of his enemies.

Mr. Hoshyar: Since the oppressors had heard that the promised Mahdi is
their enemy and that, through him, their palaces of injustice would be
razed to the ground, they would not have been satisfied with his silence
and non-critical approach to their unjust rule. They would have deemed
it necessary to get rid of the potential danger to their power.
Moreover, when the followers of the Imam saw the silence of the Imams
endlessly, year after year, in the face of all the injustices inflicted
upon them and their followers, they would have lost hope in the reform
of the world and the victory of truth, and would have doubted in the
truthfulness of the promises contained in the Prophet's hadith-reports
and the Qur'an. In addition, it is inconceivable that the oppressed and
the downtrodden would have permitted the Imam to remain silent.

He Could Have Negotiated a Treaty of Non-interference with the Rulers
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Engineer Madani: Would it not have been possible for the Imam to
negotiate a treaty of non-interference with the rulers, assuring them
that he would not interfere in the workings of their government? In that
way he would have established his credibility and truthfulness in
observing the terms of his treaty and, in return, the rulers would have
left him alone.

Mr. Hoshyar: You must keep this in mind that the function of the awaited
Mahdi is different from that of the other Imams who preceded him. The
other Imams were under obligation to "command the good and forbid the
evil" to their best ability. But they were not required to undertake
warfare. On the contrary, from the beginning the role of the Mahdi was
to be different. The Mahdi would rise against oppression and injustice.
He would not keep silent in the face of corruption; rather, he would
undertake warfare (jihad) to uproot oppression and ungodliness. He would
actually destroy evil forces. These functions were part and parcel of
the signs of the appearance of the Mahdi.

All other Imams were asked by their followers at different times: "Why
do not you rise against the oppressors?" They used to answer: "That task
is upon our Mahdi." Some Imams were asked: "Are you the Mahdi?" The
answer was: "Mahdi will rise with a sword and will fight injustice. But
I am not like that, nor do I have the power to do so." Some of them were
asked: "Are you the Qa'im?" The reply was: "Yes, I am the one entrusted
with truth (qa'im bi-haqq). However, I am not that promised Qa'im who
will cleanse the earth of disbelief and injustice." Sometimes the hope
was expressed by some in the community: "I hope that you are the
Qa'im!"  
 The answer was: "I am the Qa'im. But the Qa'im who will purify the
earth of disbelief and oppression is other than me." When people used to
complain about the social and political turmoil and the tyranny of the
unjust government and the mistreatment and hardship suffered by the
followers of the Imams, the consolation was offered by saying: "The rise
of Mahdi is certain. At that time the situation in the world will
improve and the revenge against the tyrannical people will be exacted."
At other times people would talk about the large number of their enemies
and their power compared to their own small number and powerlessness.  
 The Imams used to comfort their followers and assure them: "The
government of the Prophet's rightful successor is a certainty. The final
victory belongs to the followers of truth. Be steadfast and pray and
expect deliverance through the descendant of Muhammad (peace be upon him
and his progeny)." The believers and the followers of the Imams were
waiting for this deliverance to come and willingly accepted adverse and
painful situations created by their opponents.

Now let me ask you, in all fairness, with all these expectations of
deliverance through the promised Mahdi that the believers had, do you
think that he would have negotiated a treaty of non-interference with
the unjust rulers of his time? If he had done that, would he not have
shattered all the hopes of his followers and caused them to blame him
for selling out to the enemies? In my opinion, such a compromise on the
part of the Imam is impossible. Actually, the adverse impact of such a
compromise would have led these followers of the Imam to abandon their
faith and even pursue injustices to combat persecution.

Moreover, if the Imam had signed a non-intervention and friendship
treaty with the unjust authorities, he would have been inevitably bound
to the terms of such a document. As a result, at no time would he have
undertaken to fight, because Islam regards a treaty binding on those who
have agreed to its terms[^7]. It is for this reason that many
hadith-reports make it explicitly clear that one of the purposes of the
occultation and the secrecy surrounding the birth of the last Imam is
that he should not become obliged to pay allegiance to the rulers so
that whenever he wishes to rise there should be no such obligation on
him. In the following tradition Imam Sadiq said:

The birth of the Master of the Command will remain a secret so that when
he rises he will have no obligation to abide by any agreement. God will
bring about his task in the matter of one night[^8].

Besides all that we have said so far, the oppressors and unjust rulers
could never have felt secure with such an agreement, mainly because of
the perceived danger to their power. Hence, they regarded murdering him
as the only solution for assuring their continued control over the
affairs of humanity. They would have, as a consequence, rendered the
earth devoid of God's proof.

Why Did He Not Appoint Special Deputies During the Complete Occultation?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: We accept in principle the necessity of occultation for the
Imam. But, the question arises as to why did he not appoint his special
deputies during the Complete Occultation as he had done during the Short
Occultation? Such an appointment would have enabled the Shi'a to
establish contact with him and ask for his assistance in solving their
problems.

Mr. Hoshyar: The enemies did not leave the deputies in peace either.
They were imprisoned and tortured so that they would reveal the
whereabouts of the Hidden Imam (peace be upon him).

Dr. Jalali: Well, in that case perhaps it was possible for him not to
appoint specific individuals as his deputies. However, from time to time
he could appear for some of his followers through whom he could convey
his injunctions for the community.

Mr. Hoshyar: Even this approach was not feasible because in all
likelihood that very person to whom the Imam had appeared would have
revealed his domicile to the enemy, leading to the arrest and murder of
the Imam.

Dr. Jalali: Such a danger would have been possible if he had appeared in
front of any unknown person. But if he had appeared for some trustworthy
persons among his followers, the probability of impending danger would
have been absent.

Mr. Hoshyar: Your supposition can be refuted on several grounds:
----------------------------------------------------------------

First, if the Imam had decided to appear for anyone he would have needed
to perform a miracle to introduce himself. In fact, for a cynical
individual he might have been required to perform several miracles so
that, that person would accept him as his Imam. Among these individuals
there was a possibility that there would be some who would resort to
trickery and fraud through magic to deceive and mislead the ordinary
believers and even claim to be the Imam himself! By the way, it is not
possible for everyone to distinguish between a miracle and an act of
magic. This very difficulty would have led to further corruption among
the people, leading to a disastrous situation.

Second, there were actually some shrewd impostors and fraudulent
individuals who had abused such incidents for their own personal
ambitions. They used to claim to have seen the Imam and spread laws
contrary to the Shari'a on his authority so that they could achieve
their evil designs. Whoever intended to do something against the law and
further his own ends used to claim that he had reached the presence of
the Imam of the Age and that the Imam had come to his house the previous
night and had told him that he should do such and such or that the Imam
approved what he was doing, and so on. The dangerous consequences of
such claims is too self-evident to require any further elaboration.

Third, we do not have any unequivocal proof that the Imam of the Age
does not appear for anyone highly trustworthy among his followers.
Rather, it is quite likely that his pious and godly followers might
reach his presence and might be under oath to keep that secret, without
revealing it to anyone. In such cases, everyone is bound to their own
experience and has no right to judge any one else.

What Is the Benefit of Having the Imam in Occultation?
------------------------------------------------------

Engineer Madani: If the Imam is the leader of the people he should be
present among them. What is the benefit of having an Imam who lives an
invisible life? What is the use of having an Imam who lives in the state
of occultation for centuries without fulfilling any of the functions
that he normally undertakes: such as propagating religion, solving the
problems of society, responding to the attacks of his opponents,
commanding the good and forbidding the evil, helping the poor and
redressing the wrongs committed against the downtrodden, upholding the
ordinances of God by instituting proper penalties and explaining the
lawful and the unlawful to the people, and so on.

Mr. Hoshyar: The people are surely deprived of the benefits that you
have enumerated during the occultation. However, the benefits of the
Imam's presence are not limited to these. In fact, there are other
benefits that are available during the occultation. The following two
are among those many other benefits that you have not enumerated:

First, in accord with all that we have said previously and the proofs
that were derived from the writings of Muslim scholars, including the
hadith-reports that spoke about the necessity of the Imamate, the
existence of the Imam as a perfect and unique embodiment of humanity
serves as a link between the material and the spiritual world. If the
Imam is absent the human species will be extinct. If there is no Imam
then God cannot be known or worshipped perfectly. Without the Imam the
link between the material and the spiritual become severed.  
 The heart of the Imam is like the source of electricity that
distributes light to numerous lamps. The illumination and energization
of the hidden universe first mirrors on the heart of the Imam and then
from there it reflects on the hearts of humankind. The Imam is the heart
of the created universe and the leader and guide of humankind. It is
evident that his presence and absence have an impact upon these
actualities. After all these, can one ask what benefit accrues from the
invisible existence of the Imam?  
 I think that you are raising this objection on behalf of someone else
who does not have a real understanding of the meaning of wilayat and the
Imamate and who does not see the Imam as more than a legal expert and an
administrator of justice, whereas the responsibilities of the wilayat
and the Imamate are much more than these external functions.

In a long tradition reported from Imam Sadiq it is related that Imam
Sajjad said:

We are the leaders of the Muslims, God's proofs for His creatures,
masters of the believers, guides for the godfearing, and those invested
with discretionary authority over the affairs of Muslims. We are the
security for the dwellers of the earth, just as the stars are the
security of the dwellers of the heavens. It is because of us that the
heavens descend on the earth whenever God permits. It is because of us
that the rain descends and blessings of earth come out of it. If we had
not been on earth its dwellers would have been consumed in it.

He then went on to say:

From the day God created Adam until today He has not left the earth
without a competent authority (=proof=hujjat). But this authority is
sometimes manifest and well known; at other times he is in occultation
and in concealment. The earth will not be void of such an authority
until the Day of Judgement. If there is no Imam, God will not be
worshipped.

Sulayman, the narrator, asked Imam Sadiq: "How can people benefit from
the existence of an Imam who is in occultation?" The Imam said: "In the
same way as they benefit from the sun behind the clouds[^9]."

In this and other traditions of this kind the existence of the twelfth
Imam and the benefit derived from him are compared to the benefit
derived from the sun hidden behind the clouds. To elaborate on this
imagery let us remind ourselves of the way natural science explains the
phenomenon. It is established in natural science and in astronomy that
the sun is the center of our solar system. The laws of gravity protect
the earth from falling into an abyss, and permit the earth to revolve
around the sun, generating the distinction between day and night and
different seasons according to its position in relation to the sun. The
thermal energy produced by the sun is the source of life on earth and
its light illuminates the otherwise dark earth. This benefit accrues to
the earth regardless of the fact of whether the sun is shining directly
or from behind the clouds. In other words, all its functions
(illumination, providing energy, growth, etc.) are intact even when it
shines from behind the clouds. In fact, whether it is from behind the
dark clouds or at night when we think the sun is not present, we are
still recipients of the sun's thermal energy and all other benefits that
are critical for our survival on earth.

The existence of the Imam is like the sun behind the clouds that
benefits the dwellers of the earth. He is the heart of humankind and its
existential guide. In order for his benefits to reach humanity it does
not matter whether he is manifest or in concealment. Let us recall our
previous discussions about the necessity of the Prophethood and Imamate
and review all their aspects so that we can appreciate the true meaning
of wilayat. This review will help us to understand the most important
benefit of having an Imam from the progeny of the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his progeny), whether manifest or in concealment. As we ponder
this matter, we are actually enjoying the blessings of this Imam's
invisible existence.

As for other benefits enumerated by you, Engineer Madani, of which
people are deprived, actually, both from the direction of God and from
the existence of the Imam, there is no obstacle to these benefits
reaching the people. The problem is with the people themselves. If these
obstructions could be removed and if the people worked towards creating
the just order and toward preparing to launch God's government by
spreading the right information and strengthening the character of the
people to receive the Imam's leadership, then the Imam would appear to
lead humanity towards the creation of the divine order on earth.

It is possible that someone might say: Under the circumstances when the
overall situation is not favorable to the appearance of the Imam, why
should we put ourselves in the dangerous situation of trying to prepare
for his return? In response to this it must be pointed out that a
Muslim's actions in this connection should not be motivated by the
personal gain of some individuals; rather, it should become the goal of
each and every person to endeavor for the social reforms affecting all
people. Seriousness of purpose in improving the conditions of the people
and in removing causes of injustice and tyranny in society are regarded
as the most meritorious act of worship in Islam.

Again, it is possible that someone might say: The endeavors of one or a
few individuals trying to change the conditions in society may come to
nothing. Hence, one should not even try to do anything. Moreover, in
principle, it might be asked what wrong have I done to be deprived of
meeting my Imam? In response to this one can point out the benefit that
accrues to an individual and to the society in general when we endeavor
to raise the standard of thinking and moral awareness among people,
informing them about the lofty goals of Islam and bringing them closer
to the goals of the Imam (peace be upon him). By doing so we have
actually fulfilled our obligation as a follower of the Imam. In return,
we have attained the highest reward of having furthered the realization
of an ideal society, even if merely by a step. Any rational person can
attest to this benefit of striving to further the divine purposes for
human society. It is for this reason that there are numerous traditions
that speak about the merits of awaiting deliverance through the
appearance of the twelfth Imam, and which regard this awaiting as a form
of serving God[^10].

Second, faith in the Hidden Imam and awaiting deliverance through his
return is a source of hope and peace for the hearts of the believers.
Such a hope is one of the major causes of the success and advancement of
the Islamic ideal. Any group of people that becomes bogged down by
pessimism and despair also suffers from self-imposed negativism that
leads to the defeat of the purpose.

There is no doubt that the social and political turmoil in many parts of
the world, the decline of moral and ethical vision, the deprivation and
poverty suffered by the downtrodden, the spread of tools of various
forms of imperialistic intervention in the affairs of the weaker
societies, the arms race among the powerful countries --all these --
have led sensitive and conscientious thinkers around the globe to become
concerned and even, to a certain extent, pessimistic about the ability
of human society to deliver itself from its self-cultivated gradual
destruction.

The only door that has remained open for humanity is the door of hope in
the darkness of despair. That hope lies in the divine intervention in
human affairs by the sending of a divinely guided leader, the Mahdi, to
establish a godly society founded upon the divinely ordained laws.
Indeed, it is this hope that gives solace to the disturbed hearts of
those who have suffered injustices. It is the hope of seeing that
government based on the acknowledgement of the Unity of God which has
safeguarded the faith of the people, and has made them firm in their
commitments to God. It is faith in the ultimate victory of truth that
has made these people seek an active role in working towards social
reforms and other related matters.  
 Seeking the help of God under these circumstances helps human beings to
avoid becoming hopeless in the face of continued atrocities and wrongs
committed against the innocent. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his
progeny) laid the foundation of this positive attitude by introducing
the universal program of reform under the divinely guided leadership
that will undertake to unite human resources in creating the ethical
order proclaimed in the Qur'an.

Imam Zayn al-'Abidin has conveyed this positive aspect of the hope of
deliverance in the tradition in which he says: "To hope for deliverance
and release in itself functions as the most profound form of
deliverance[^11]."

To conclude our discussion at this point, faith in the promised Mahdi
has made it possible for the Shi'a community to hope and work for the
ideal. It has eliminated the negative spirit of pessimism, engendering
in it the positive spirit of confidence in the human ability to work for
its betterment. The belief has, furthermore, required the followers of
the twelfth Imam to fight against the forces of disbelief, materialism,
corruption, and injustice, and to work for the government of God, the
perfection of the human intellect and the establishment of true peace
through justice on earth, and to further human knowledge and technology.
It is for this reason that the hope for deliverance during the
occultation has been regarded as the best form of divine worship and
martyrdom in the path of truth in the numerous traditions reported from
the ahl al-bayt[^12].

The Twelfth Imam Endeavors to Defend Islam during the Occultation
-----------------------------------------------------------------

One of the orations of the Nahj al-balagha points to the fact that the
Imam of the Age during the occultation also is engaged in furthering the
cause of Islam and solving the problems faced by the Muslims as much as
he can. Imam 'Ali b. Abi Talib said:

They (i.e., Muslims) took to the right and the left piercing through to
the ways of evil and leaving the paths of guidance. Do not make haste
for a matter which is to happen and is awaited, and do not wish for
delay in what the morrow is to bring for you. For, how many people make
haste for a matter, but when they get it they begin to wish they had not
got it. How near is today to the dawning of tomorrow. O people, this is
the time for the occurrence of every promised event and the approach of
things which you do not know.  
 Whoever from us (i.e., ahl al-bayt) will exist during these days will
move through them with a burning lamp and will tread on the footsteps of
the virtuous, in order to unfasten knots, to free slates, to divide the
united and unite the divided. He will be in concealment (sitra) from
people. The stalker will not find his footprints even though he pursues
with his eye. Then a group of people will be sharpened like the
sharpening of swords by the blacksmith. Their sight will be brightened
by the revelation (tanzil, i.e., the Qur'an), the interpretation will be
put in their ears and they will be given drinks of wisdom, morning and
evening[^13].

The apparent sense of this oration suggests that during the time of 'Ali
b. Abi Talib, people were awaiting events about which the Prophet had
informed them. In all probability, it was information related to the
occultation. The presumable sense of the oration suggests the Imam
during the period of concealment would live an extremely veiled life.
But he will endeavor to solve the problems facing the community with
deep insight and will vindicate the sanctity of Islam. He will remove
the difficulties and will come to the aid of the wronged ones. He will
disperse the group that would have come together to destroy the Islamic
foundations. He will eliminate all the organizations that he would
identify as being detrimental to the purposes of God. He will provide
the necessary preliminaries needed for bringing about a beneficial
society. With the blessed presence of the Imam of the Age a group of
people will be trained to defend the religion, and will be inspired by
the Qur'anic sciences in their resolutions about the ideal Muslim
society.

Dr. Fahimi: I wanted you to explain to me the reason as to why in our
traditions, that is the Sunni hadith, the existence of the Mahdi,
especially his other names like Qa'im and Sahib al-'amr (the Master of
the Command = the one entrusted with the command), is not mentioned.
However, since it is getting very late in the night, I should keep this
question for our next session.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*  
 To be sure, it was quite late at night. The meeting was adjourned with
the next date announced. It was decided that we should meet at Dr.
Fahimi's house.

[^1]: Ithbat al-wasiyya, p. 206

[^2]: Ithbat al-hudat, Vol. 2, p. 393

[^3]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 51, p. 217

[^4]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 91

[^5]: Ibid., Vol. 52, p. 113

[^6]: Ibid., Vol. 51, p. 153

[^7]: There are a number of passages in the Qur'an that require Muslims
to abide by the terms of the treaty to which they are signatories. See,
for instance, Sura Ma'ida, 1; Mu'minun, 8; and Isra', 34

[^8]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 96x

[^9]: Yanabi' al-mawadda, Vol. 2, p. 317

[^10]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 52, p. 122-150

[^11]: Ibid., p. 122

[^12]: Ibid., p. 122-150

[^13]: Nahj al-balagha, Vol. 2, Sermon No. 146


