Chapter 8: The Sunni Books on the Characteristics of the Mahdi
==============================================================

The session began on time at Dr. Fahimi's house. Dr. Fahimi welcomed the
group and without wasting much time formulated his question with a brief
introduction outlining the problem as he saw it.

Dr. Fahimi: The personality of the Mahdi in the Shi'i traditions is
prominent and clear. However, in the Sunni traditions it is mentioned
briefly and that also with much ambiguity. For example, the story of his
occultation which is recorded in the majority of your traditions, and
which is regarded as the fundamental aspect of his attributes, is
entirely absent in our traditions. The promised Mahdi in your hadith has
different names such as Qa'im, Master of the Command and so on, which,
in our sources, is lacking and he is mentioned only by one name, that
is, Mahdi. More particularly, the Qa'im is totally missing in our
hadith. Do you regard this as something normal, or do you see a problem
with such an absence?

Mr. Hoshyar: Apparently, the reason could be that during the Umayyad and
'Abbasid periods the subject of Mahdiism had assumed a political
dimension. As such the recording and dissemination of the traditions
about the promised Mahdi, especially the signs of his appearance and all
the details dealing with his occultation and revolution, was suppressed.
The rulers were extremely fearful of the spread of the hadith about the
occultation and subsequent emergence of the Mahdi. They were certainly
sensitive about the terms 'occultation', 'rise', and 'insurrection'.

If you refer to the historical sources and study the social and
political conditions that prevailed under the Umayyad and the 'Abbasid
caliphate, you will agree with my explanation as to why such information
was suppressed by these caliphs and their administrators. In this short
time we cannot go into any detail to investigate the major events of the
period. However, to prove our point we have to direct our attention to
two important issues:

First, since the story of Mahdiism had deep religious roots and since
the Prophet himself had given the information that when disbelief and
materialism become widespread and injustice and tyranny become the order
of the day, the Mahdi will rise and will restore the pure religion and
ethical order. It was for this reason that Muslims always regarded this
prophecy as a source of great consolation and awaited it to be
fulfilled. Under adverse conditions when they had lost all hope for the
restoration of justice, the prophecy was even more in circulation, and
those who sought reform, including those who had the ambition to abuse
the simple faith of the people, took advantage of this prediction.

The first person who took advantage of the people's faith in Mahdiism
and its religious underpinnings was Mukhtar. Following the tragic event
of Karbala in 61 AH/680 CE, Mukhtar wanted to avenge the martyrs of
Karbala and overthrow the Umayyad government. But he realized that the
Hashimites and the Shi'is had lost hope in seizing the caliphate for
themselves.  
 Consequently, he saw the belief in Mahdiism as the only way to awaken
the people and make them hopeful. Since Muhammad b. Hanafiyya's name and
patronymic were the same as that of the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his progeny) (this was one of the recognized signs of the Mahdi) Mukhtar
decided to seize the opportunity and introduced Muhammad b. Hanafiyya as
the promised Mahdi and himself as his vizier and envoy. He told the
people that Muhammad b. Hanafiyya was the promised Mahdi of Islam.  
 At the time when the oppression and tyranny were increasing and Husayn
b. 'Ali, his family, and companions were killed mercilessly at Karbala,
the Mahdi had decided to rise in order to avenge the martyrs of Karbala,
and restore justice on earth as it had been filled with wickedness. He
then introduced himself as the Mahdi's representative. In this manner
Mukhtar launched an insurrection and killed a group of murderers who had
participated in killing Imam Husayn. This was, by the way, the first
time that an insurrection had been launched against the caliphate.

The second person who manipulated the faith in the Mahdi for his own
political ends was Abu Muslim of Khurasan. Abu Muslim organized a
widespread movement against the Umayyads in Khurasan with the pretext of
avenging the blood of Imam Husayn, his family and companions who were
killed in the tragic event of Karbala. In addition, he rose to avenge
the cruel murders of Zayd b. 'Ali during the caliphate of Hisham b. 'Abd
al-Malik and of Yahya b. Zayd during the caliphate of Walid.  
 A group of people regarded Abu Muslim himself to be the awaited Mahdi.
Others saw him as a forerunner of the Mahdi and as one of the signs that
preceded the final revolution under he who would appear with black
banners from the direction of Khurasan. In this insurrection the 'Alids,
'Abbasids and all other Muslims formed a united front against the
Umayyads that finally overthrew their rule over the empire.

Although these movements were heavily based on restoring the usurped
rights of the ahl al-bayt and avenging the unjust murders of the 'Alids,
the 'Abbasids and their supporters manipulated the insurrection to their
own advantage. With treachery and treason they distorted the actual
direction of the movement and seized power from the supporters of the
'Alids, thereby establishing themselves as the ahl al-bayt of the
Prophet and as the new caliphs of Islam.

In this revolution, which was founded upon Shi'i ideals of justice and
equity, the people had succeeded in proving their ability to overthrow
the tyrannical rule of the Umayyads. They were pleased that they had
eliminated the source of Umayyad corruption and had helped to return the
right to rule to its rightful leaders among the ahl al-bayt. After all,
they had at least succeeded in getting rid of Umayyad oppression. The
success had led them to aspire to a better life and a more equitable
society. In fact, they had congratulated each other in those terms.  
 However, within a short period they were awakened to the cruelty of the
new dynasty, the 'Abbasids, and realized that the new rulers were not
very different from those they had replaced. There was no change in
their living conditions, no justice, no equity, and no peace. Their
lives and property were not secure from the worldly rulers and
administrators of the new state. The promised reforms and promulgation
of the divine ordinances were far from being realized. Gradually, as
people became aware of the failure of the revolution they had helped to
launch, they became conscious of their error in judgement regarding the
'Abbasids and their deception in the name of the promised Mahdi.

The 'Alid leaders also found the 'Abbasid behavior towards them and
towards Islam and the Muslims not very different from that of the
Umayyads. In fact, the 'Abbasids proved themselves to be even more
manipulative and brutal towards the descendants of 'Ali b. Abi Talib.
They were left with no alternative than to launch their resistance anew
and fight the 'Abbasids also. The best persons among them to lead such
resistance were undoubtedly the descendants of 'Ali and Fatima (peace be
upon them).  
 The reason was that there were a number of their descendants who were
known for their piety, wisdom, knowledge and courage. In fact, they were
regarded as more qualified candidates for the caliphate. Moreover, they
were the true descendants of the Prophet and their direct lineage to him
generated a sense of loyalty and love for them. In addition, because
their rights had been usurped and they had suffered wrongs at the hands
of the Umayyads, the masses had a natural inclination and sympathy for
the ahl al-bayt.

Consequently, as the 'Abbasids persisted in committing atrocities
against the ahl al-bayt the people were, more than ever before, drawn
towards them and rallied to their cause in opposing the rulers and in
rebelling against them. In addition, they made use of the notion of the
Mahdi that had from the time of the Prophet taken deep roots in the
minds and hearts of Muslims and introduced their revolutionary leader as
the promised Mahdi. This required the 'Abbasids to confront some of the
most popular, highly respected, and very learned rivals to their
power.  
 The 'Abbasid caliphs knew the 'Alawid leaders well, being fully aware
of their personal qualities and honorable family lineage and the
prophecies that were foretold by the Prophet about the future coming of
the Mahdi, the restorer of Islamic purity. They knew that in accordance
with the traditions reported from the Prophet the awaited Mahdi would be
one of the descendants of Fatima (peace be upon her). He would be the
one to rise against tyranny and oppression and establish the rule of
justice on earth. Moreover, they knew that his victory was guaranteed.  
 The promise of justice through the appearance of the Mahdi had an
enormous spiritual impact upon the people and the caliphal authority was
fully informed about its potentially explosive repercussions in the
empire. It is probably correct to say that the most formidable challenge
to 'Abbasid authority was from these 'Alawid leaders, who had caused
them to loosen their grip on the regions under their control and face
the consequences of their corrupt rule.

The strategy that was adopted by the 'Abbasids in the light of this
growing opposition to them was to divide the followers of these 'Alawid
leaders and prevent them from rallying around them. The leaders
themselves were kept under constant surveillance and, the famous ones
among them were either imprisoned or eliminated. According to Ya'qubi,
the historian, the 'Abbasid caliph Musa Hadi tried his utmost to arrest
the prominent descendants of 'Ali b. Abi Talib. He had even terrorized
them and had sent instructions all over his realm demanding that they be
arrested and sent to him[^1]. Similarly, Abu Faraj Isfahani writes:
"When Mansur became the caliph all he was concerned about was the arrest
of Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah b. Hasan [b. 'Ali b. Abi Talib] and finding
out about his plans [regarding his claim to being the Mahdi][^2].”

The Occultation of the 'Alawid Leaders
--------------------------------------

One of the issues that was extremely sensitive and worth investigating
was the claim to invisible existence or occultation of some of the
'Alawid leaders. Any one among them who had the personal ability and
qualities to become the leader immediately attracted the people who then
rallied around him with dedication. This attraction took an extreme and
intense form if that person happened to possess one of the signs of the
expected Mahdi. On the other hand, as soon as a person became the
rallying point for the people, the caliphal authority became fearful of
the opposition and undertook to keep a close watch over its underground
activities and even to curtail its growing popularity among the masses
by using terror as a means of repressing revolutionary fervor. Under
these circumstances, the leader had to live in concealment to protect
himself. A number of these 'Alawid leaders lived a life of concealment
for a number of years. Among them are the following examples cited by
Abu Faraj Isfahani:

(1) During the time of Mansur, the 'Abbasid caliph, Muhammad b. \`Abd
Allah b. Hasan and his brother Ibrahim lived an invisible life. Mansur
had tried several times to arrest them. A number of the Hashimite
leaders were imprisoned and they were grilled to reveal the whereabouts
of their messianic leader Muhammad b. \`Abd Allah. At the end of the day
the prisoners were tortured in various ways and killed[^3].

(2) \`Isa b. Zayd lived in retreat and concealment during Mansur's
caliphate. Mansur made every effort to arrest him, but he failed.
Following him, his son Mahdi also tried, but without any success[^4].

(3) During the caliphate of Mu\`tasim and Wathiq, Muhammad b. Qasim
\`Alawi lived an invisible life in concealment and was regarded as being
in occultation by the establishment. He was, however, arrested during
Mutawakkil's caliphate and died while in prison[^5].

(4) During the caliphate of Harun Rashid, Yahya b. \`Abd Allah b. Hasan
lived in concealment. But he was finally discovered by the caliph's
spies. At first he was given amnesty, but later he was arrested and
incarcerated. He died in Rashid's prison of hunger and other forms of
torture[^6].

(5) During the caliphate of Ma'mun, \`Abd Allah b. Musa lived in
concealment and because of him Ma'mun lived in constant fear and
anxiety[^7].

Musa Hadi appointed one of the descendants of \`Umar b. Khattab by the
name of \`Abd al-\`Aziz as the governor of Madina. \`Abd al-\`Aziz used
to treat the \`Alids very harshly. He kept them under constant
surveillance, watching their movements very closely. He used to force
them to appear in his audience every day so that they would not
disappear. He actually exacted promises from them to that effect and
made each one of them answerable for the other.  
 Thus, for instance, Husayn b. \`Ali and Yahya b. \`Abd Allah were made
responsible for Hasan b. Muhammad b. \`Abd Allah b. Hasan. On one of the
Fridays when the 'Alawids were all gathered in his presence he did not
allow them to return until it was time for Friday prayer service. At
that time he permitted them to perform their ablutions and prepare for
the worship. After the prayer was over he ordered all of them arrested.
During the late afternoon prayer he asked them to attend the court and
later dismissed them. It was then that 'Abd al-'Aziz noticed that Hasan
b. Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah was not present. So he called Husayn b. 'Ali
and Yahya b. 'Abd Allah, who were answerable for him, and informed them
that for the past three days Hasan b. Muhammad had not appeared in his
audience.  
 As such, he had either revolted or disappeared. Since they were
answerable for him they had to find Hasan and bring him to \`Abd
al-\`Aziz, otherwise they would be imprisoned. To this Yahya replied:
"He must have been occupied and, therefore, did not show up. It is not
possible for us also to bring him back. Justice is a good thing. Just as
you keep a check on us making sure who is present and who is not, why do
not you ask the descendants of \`Umar b. Khattab also to appear in the
audience? See how many are present, and if their absentees are not more
than ours then we have no objection to your decision. Do as you please
and take any decision regarding us." \`Abd al-\`Aziz was not satisfied
with their response. He swore that if they did not find Hasan and bring
him to him he would demolish their homes, set their goods on fire and
whip Husayn b. 'Ali[^8].

Episodes like this reveal that the topic of invisible existence or
occultation of the 'Alawid leaders was one of the regular issues during
the 'Abbasid era. As soon as one of them disappeared from public life he
became the center of attention from two directions: on the one hand, the
masses, who knew that occultation was one of the signs of the Mahdi,
were attracted towards him; on the other hand, the caliphal authority
had developed an extreme sense of anxiety because of the explosive
ramifications of such a disappearance for the security of its power.  
 After all, it was one of the signs of the Mahdi, and when the people
were told of the disappearance of these 'Alids they speculated of their
being the promised messianic leader who would overthrow the tyrannical
government of the 'Abbasids. Hence, the authorities were worried about
the ensuing chaos and political turmoil unfolding in front of their eyes
which the caliphal power would have difficulty in repressing.

Now that you have familiarized yourself with the critical social and
political conditions that existed during the 'Abbasid period and during
which the hadith books were compiled and composed, it is important to
bear in mind that the authors of these works and the transmitters of the
hadith did not possess the freedom to record all the hadith-reports
dealing with the promised Mahdi, and more particularly, traditions
dealing with the occultation and the rise of the awaited Mahdi.  
 Is it possible to maintain that the 'Abbasids did not have any
involvement or influence over the events in which Mahdi'ism had taken a
political form? Or, that they would permit the transmitters of the
traditions about the messianic role of the Mahdi and his occultation to
freely record and publicize the traditions that would have actually been
to their own detriment?

It is possible that you may contend that the 'Abbasids knew at least
this much: that it was not in the interest of the society to impose
restrictions over the scholars and to interfere with their scholarly
work. Rather, the scholars and the transmitters of the hadith-reports
should be left alone to present the truth to the people and make them
aware of their responsibilities. Well, we should cite some examples in
which the 'Abbasids and their predecessors, that is the Umayyads and the
early caliphs, restricted free expression and hence suppressed
traditions that were against their political domination.

Violations of Free Expression under the Caliphs
-----------------------------------------------

Ibn \`Asakir has related a tradition in which, according to \`Abd
al-Rahman b. \`Awf, \`Umar b. Khattab sent for some of the prominent
companions of the Prophet, including 'Abd Allah b. Hudhayfa, Abu Darda',
Abu Dharr Ghiffari, and \`Uqba b. \`Amir, and reproached them saying:
"What are these traditions that you are relating and spreading among the
people?" The companions said: "Apparently, you want to stop us from
transmitting the traditions." \`Umar said: "You have no right to step
outside Madina, and as long as I am alive do not distance yourselves
from me. I know better which hadith should be accepted and which should
be rejected." The companions had no choice but to stay in Madina as long
as \`Umar lived[^9].

Ibn Sa\`d and Ibn \`Asakir have related that Mahmud b. \`Ubayd heard
\`Uthman b. \`Affan telling people from the pulpit: "No one has the
right to relate a tradition that was not narrated during Abu Bakr and
\`Umar's time[^10]."

During his reign Mu\`awiya had sent official directions that his
security was removed from anyone who reported a tradition in praise of
\`Ali b. Abi Talib and his descendants. At another time he sent a
written command that whereas the people should narrate the merits of the
companions and the caliphs, they should be forced to relate for all the
other companions merit a similar to that which was attributed to
\`Ali[^11].

In the year 218 AH/833 CE, Ma'mun ordered all the scholars and jurists
of Iraq and other places to attend an audience. He then went on to
question them about their beliefs and asked them specifically regarding
their belief about the Qur'an, whether it was the created or eternal
Word of God. He condemned those who maintained that it was not created
and instructed his governors in all provinces to reject their testimony.
With the exception of a few, the decision forced a majority of the
scholars to concede to the caliph's viewpoint[^12].

Malik b. Anas, the great jurist of Madina, had issued a legal opinion
contrary to the wishes of Ja\`far b. Sulayman, the governor of Madina.
The latter required him to present himself in his court where he was
first humiliated and then whipped severely with seventy lashes. This
caused him to be bed-ridden for some time. Later on, Mansur sent for
Malik. In the beginning he apologized for Malik's having been treated so
harshly by Ja\`far b. Sulayman. Then he asked him to write a book on law
and traditions. "But be careful not to include difficult traditions
narrated by \`Abd Allah b. \`Umar, trivial topics related by \`Abd Allah
b. \`Abbas, and the rare hadith reported by Ibn Mas\`ud. Include only
those things on which the caliphs and the companions had agreed. Write
this book so that I can send it to all cities and require people to
strictly follow only this book, and none other."  
 Malik complained that the scholars from Iraq held variant opinions on
matters related to law and hence would not accept his opinions. Mansur
asked him to write the book anyway and assured him that he would impose
it even on the people of Iraq. "If they do not submit, I will behead
them and will punish them severely. Hence, be quick in writing this
book. Next year my son Mahdi will come to you to get it[^13]."

The \`Abbasid caliph Mu\`tasim required Ahmad b. Hanbal to appear in the
court and tested him about his belief in the Qur'an. When Ahmad refused
to submit to the caliph's belief about the created Qur'an, he ordered
him to be whipped[^14]. Similarly, Mansur enticed Abu Hanifa to come to
Baghdad and eventually he poisoned him[^15]. Harun Rashid ordered
\`Abbad b. 'Awam's house destroyed and prohibited him from transmitting
traditions[^16].

Khalid b. Ahmad, the governor of Bukhara, asked Muhammad b. Isma\`il
Bukhari, one of the major compilers of Sunni traditions, to bring his
written traditions to him and read them. Bukhari refused to do so and
sent him a message that if he did not wish him to collect traditions he
should say so, so that he could have a valid excuse for not doing so on
the Day of Judgement. It was for that reason that he was deported from
his homeland. He took refuge in a small village known as Khartang where
he lived until his death. The narrator relates that he heard Bukhari
pray to God in his midnight prayer: "O God, if the earth has turned
narrow for me, then take my life away." It was the same month in which
he died[^17].

When another traditionist Nasa'i wrote his book Khasa'is, in which he
included traditions in praise of \`Ali b. Abi Talib, he was asked to
appear in Damascus and was ordered to write a similar book in praise of
Mu\`awiya. He declined to write such a book because he could not find
any materials praising him except what the Prophet had said about him:
"May God never fill his stomach!" Because of this statement Nasa'i was
beaten up so badly that he died of it[^18].

The Implications of the Situation
---------------------------------

In view of the political turmoil and social unrest that existed under
the 'Abbasids and the activist message of the traditions that deal with
Mahdi'ism, especially the disappearance of and eventual revolution under
the Mahdi which had taken on a political dimension, the masses were
attracted to the promises of a better future that were made in these
messianic traditions. Moreover in the unfavorable conditions that
existed for the authors and compilers of such traditions, it was almost
unthinkable that they would publish traditions dealing with the signs of
the appearance of the Mahdi, his invisible existence and his ultimate
emergence with the mission of destroying the wicked forces of injustice.
More importantly, it is highly improbable that the ruling dynasties
would have permitted the publication and dissemination of the
information that was available to these scholars. The publication of
such ideas was deemed a danger that directly threatened the stability of
their unjust and illegitimate power.

Consequently, neither Malik b. Anas nor Abu Hanifa could have recorded
any traditions dealing with Mahdi'ism and the occultation in their
books. It is worth recalling that it was during this period that
Muhammad b. \`Abd Allah b. Hasan and his brother Ibrahim were living an
invisible and fearful life. A large number of people believed that
Muhammad was the promised Mahdi who would revolt against the unjust rule
of the 'Abbasids and initiate reforms to institute justice. Due to the
fact that Mansur was afraid of Muhammad's disappearance and eventual
revolt, he had imprisoned a number of innocent 'Alawids to arrest him.
After all, he was the same caliph who had killed Abu Hanifa with poison,
and whose governor had whipped Malik b. Anas.

Again, it is relevant to bear in mind that it was Mansur who had ordered
Malik to write a book in which he should reject any hadith from \`Abd
Allah b. \`Umar, \`Abd Allah b. \`Abbas and Ibn Mas\`ud. When Malik
objected by pointing out that the people of Iraq had their own
traditions and opinions, Mansur promised that he would coerce them into
accepting Malik's version. Who could have objected to the caliph that he
should keep clear of the people's religious matters? Why should the
traditions reported by such prominent early figures like Ibn Mas\`ud and
others be rejected?

There is no reason that can justifiably be cited to explain such an
irrational behavior on the part of those who were in power. To be sure,
these individuals whose traditions were prohibited from being cited were
relating traditions that were viewed by these wicked rulers as a threat
to their power. Hence, they banned their publication and dissemination.
In the case of Malik, it is said that he had heard some hundred thousand
traditions of which he published only five hundred in his book on
traditions: Muwatta'[^19].

In other words, it was impossible for the traditionists like Ahmad b.
Hanbal, Bukhari and Nasa'i to record traditions that were more favorable
to the 'Alawids without suffering torture and deportation at the hands
of the 'Abbasids.

Concluding Remarks
------------------

From all that we have discussed so far, we can draw the following
conclusions:

(a) Since the traditions dealing with Mahdi'ism, more specifically the
occultation and revolution of the Mahdi, had assumed a political
dimension which was deemed by the rulers a threat to their power but
favorable to their rivals, the 'Alawids, the Sunni scholars could not
record these traditions in their books because of the limitations
imposed upon them by the caliphs and their governors. And, if some
succeeded in sidestepping the prohibition and published these
traditions, ways were found to suppress them. It may be because the
fundamental belief in the Mahdi, in its ambiguous and concise form,
posed no threat to the caliphate that it remained immune from
eradication. But the information about all the signs of the promised
Mahdi and other details were preserved in the traditions that were
reported by the Prophet and the Imams (peace be upon them) and were
circulated among the Shi'a.

(b) In spite of all the obstacles created by the caliphal authority, the
Sunni books of hadith contained numerous traditions on the subject of
the Mahdi. One day someone mentioned the following in the presence of
Hudhayfa: "You must be very fortunate if the Mahdi appears while the
companions of the Prophet are still alive. Is that not true? The Mahdi
will not rise until there exists a concealed person dearer to the people
than him [the Prophet][^20]."

Here Hudhayfa has hinted at the occultation of the Mahdi. Hudhayfa was
among those few companions of the Prophet who had information about the
conditions of the time and about some of the hidden matters that were
told by the Prophet. He used to say: "Among all the people I am the most
informed about the future occurrences, because the Prophet had mentioned
those in a gathering [among the members of which] I am the only
survivor[^21]."

How Long Will the Hidden Imam Live?
-----------------------------------

Dr. Jalali: How Long Will the Hidden Imam Live?

Mr. Hoshyar: The term of his life has not been fixed. But the hadith
reported on the authority of the Imams introduce him as the one endowed
with a long life. For instance, Imam Hasan \`Askari related:

After me my son is the Qa'im. He is the one in whom two characteristics
of the ancient prophets, namely, long life and occultation, will be
realized. His occultation will be so much prolonged that the hearts of
the people will become hard and dark [with doubt]. Only those who
receive God's special favor and whose hearts are made unwavering and who
are confirmed by the holy spirit will remain faithful to him[^22].

Dr. Jalali: All that you have explained about the Imam of the Age so far
is both rational and appropriate. However, there is one thing that
really troubles my mind as well as the minds of those who are here in
our gathering, namely, the problem of longevity. Educated and
intelligent people do not find such a claim of longevity plausible,
because the age of the human cell is limited. Bodily organs like the
heart, brain, kidney, and abdomen have a precise potential to perform
their function. It is logically impossible for me to believe that the
heart of a normal person can function for more than a thousand years.
Let me be very honest about the fact that you cannot present such a
phenomenon to the public in this age of science and space technology.

Mr. Hoshyar: Dr. Jalali, I do confess that the extended age of the
Guardian of the Age (peace be upon him) is among the difficult things to
believe. I have no knowledge of medicine or biology. However, I am ready
to accept the truth. Hence, I request you to share your knowledge about
long life with us.

Dr. Jalali: I too should acknowledge that my own scientific knowledge is
not sufficient to allow me to solve the fundamental question we are
faced with. As such, it is better to get some expert opinion on this
subject. I think that Dr. Nafisi, the Dean and Professor of the Medical
School at the University of Isfahan, would be the most appropriate
person to address our concern. Besides his thorough training in the
field of medicine in general, he has lot of interest in the question of
longevity.

Mr. Hoshyar: I have no objection to your proposal. I will make the
necessary inquiries and write a letter to Dr. Nafisi, inviting him to
join the group in one of its session. It might be in our interest to
wait to hear from him and, therefore, I will suggest that we meet again
after getting enough information about longevity so that we can enter
our discussions with a better understanding. When Dr. Nafisi replies to
our invitation I will ask Dr. Jalali to contact you by phone to let you
know about our next meeting.

[^1]: Ta'rikh (Najaf edition, 1384 AH), Vol. 3, p. 142

[^2]: Maqatil al-talibiyyin, p. 233-234

[^3]: Ibid., p. 233-299

[^4]: Ibid., p. 405-427

[^5]: Ibid., p. 577-88

[^6]: Ibid.,p. 463-483

[^7]: Ibid., p. 519

[^8]: Ibid., p. 294-296

[^9]: As cited by Mahmud Abwar, Adwa' \`ala-al-sunna al- Muhammadiyya,
p. 54

[^10]: Ibid

[^11]: Sayyid Muhammad b. \`Aqil, al-Nasa'ih al-kafiya, p. 78, 88

[^12]: Ya\`qubi, Ta'rikh, Vol. 3, p. 202

[^13]: al-Imama wa al-siyasa, Vol. 2, pp. 177-180

[^14]: Ya\`qubi, Ta'rikh, Vol. 3, p. 206

[^15]: Maqatil, p. 368

[^16]: Ibid., p. 241

[^17]: Ta'rikh Baghdad, Vol. 2, p. 33

[^18]: al-Nasa'ih al-Kafiya, p . 109

[^19]: Adwa \`ala al-sunna al-Muhammadiyya, p. 271

[^20]: al-Hawi li al-fatawa, Vol. 2, p. 159

[^21]: Ibn \`Asakir, Ta'rikh, Vol. 4, p. 9

[^22]: Bihar al-anwar, Vol. 51, p. 224. Additionally, there are some 46
other traditions in this section on the same theme


