Commentary : Verse 88
=====================

(88) وَ قالَ مُوسى‏ رَبَّنا إِنَّكَ آتَيْتَ فِرْعَوْنَ وَ مَلَأَهُ
زينَةً وَ أَمْوالاً فِي الْحَياةِ الدُّنْيا رَبَّنا لِيُضِلُّوا عَنْ
سَبيلِكَ رَبَّنَا اطْمِسْ عَلى‏ أَمْوالِهِمْ وَ اشْدُدْ عَلى‏
قُلُوبِهِمْ فَلا يُؤْمِنُوا حَتَّى يَرَوُا الْعَذابَ الْأَليمَ

88. " And Moses said: 'Our Lord! Verily You have given to Pharaoh and
his chiefs adornment and wealth in the life of this world, Our Lord! so
that they mislead(men)from Your Path. Our Lord! Destroy their wealth,
and harden their hearts, so they will not believe until they see the
painful penalty'. "

**Commentary :**

The Qur'an then refers to one of the reasons for the rebellion of the
Pharaoh and his adherents, by mentioning the statement of Moses to his
Lord where he talks about the wealth and luxury that Pharaoh and his
followers had in the world. This wealth and luxury had the effect of
seducing the people away from the true Path. The verse says:

" And Moses said: 'Our Lord! Verily You have given to Pharaoh and his
chiefs adornment and wealth in the life of this world, Our Lord! so that
they mislead(men)from Your Path. ..."

Thus Moses(a.s.)asked Allah to destroy their belongings so that they
could not benefit from them, and to take their power away from them that
they might be able to reflect and meditate upon the reality of
existence. The verse says:

"... Our Lord! Destroy their wealth, and harden their hearts, ..."

By losing these two capitals, they would quickly degenerate and move a
step closer to annihilation, thus making it more possible for the
Children of Israel to inflict the last blow upon them. This prayer was
not because of revenge or retaliation but it was because they did not
have the slightest preparedness for accepting faith. The verse says:

"... so they will not believe until they see the painful penalty'."


**Commentary : Verse 89**

(89) قالَ قَدْ أُجيبَتْ دَعْوَتُكُما فَاسْتَقيما وَ لا تَتَّبِعانِ
سَبيلَ الَّذينَ لا يَعْلَمُونَ

89. " He(Allah)said: 'The prayer of you both has been accepted, so
stand straight and follow not the path of those who know not'. "

**Commentary :**

Allah said to Moses and his brother that now that they were ready to
educate and shape the people of Israel, their prayers regarding their
enemies were accepted. The verse says:

" He(Allah)said: 'The prayer of you both has been accepted, ..."

Then they should finally stand, resist, be decisive and do not be
afraid of the difficulties on the way. Never should they submit to the
suggestions of the unwise and the ignorant and nor follow the way of
those who do not know. The verse continues saying:

"... so stand straight and follow not the path of those who know not'.
"


**Commentary : Verse 90**

(90) وَ جاوَزْنا بِبَني‏ إِسْرائيلَ الْبَحْرَ فَأَتْبَعَهُمْ فِرْعَوْنُ
وَ جُنُودُهُ بَغْياً وَ عَدْواً حَتَّى إِذا أَدْرَكَهُ الْغَرَقُ قالَ
آمَنْتُ أَنَّهُ لا إِلهَ إِلاَّ الَّذي آمَنَتْ بِهِ بَنُوا إِسْرائيلَ وَ
أَنَا مِنَ الْمُسْلِمينَ

90. " And We made the Children of Israel to pass through the sea; then
Pharaoh and his hosts chased them in insolence and hostility, until when
the drowning overtook him, he said: 'I believe that there is no Allah
but He in Whom the Children of Israel believe, and I am of those that
surrender'. "

**Commentary :**

The last phase of the struggle of the Children of Israel with the
followers of Pharaoh and their destiny has been depicted in a concise
yet accurate and transparent manner here.

The verse implies that Allah let the Children of Israel pass through
the sea when confronted with the army of Pharaoh while were being
pressured and chased by them. The verse says:

" And We made the Children of Israel to pass through the sea; ..."

Pharaoh and his army chased them there in order to oppress and
eliminate them though they were soon drowned in the midst of the stormy
waves of the sea. The verse continues saying:

"... then Pharaoh and his hosts chased them in insolence and hostility,
until when the drowning overtook him, ..."

This course went on until the abyss surrounded Pharaoh who started
floating on the waves and it was then that his blindness, arrogance and
unconsciousness came to an end and the innate light of monotheism
started shining. He shouted he believed in Him Whom the Children of
Israel believed in, and he confessed that there is no one to be
worshipped except Him and he resigned himself to Him. The verse says:

"... he said: 'I believe that there is no Allah but He in Whom the
Children of Israel believe, and I am of those that surrender'. "

In fact when the prophecies of Moses proved to be true one after
another, and Pharaoh realized the truthfulness of the words of this
great prophet over and again, on witnessing this final power, he had no
excuse but to believe, maybe hoping that the Lord of the Children of
Israel would save him the same way He had saved the Children of Israel
from the mountainous waves.

Obviously, such a faith which is attained in the face of calamities,
when one is caught in the jaws of death, is in fact a kind of "faith for
emergencies", which every criminal claims when he is captured, and is of
no value.


**Commentary : Verse 91**

(91) آلْآنَ وَ قَدْ عَصَيْتَ قَبْلُ وَ كُنْتَ مِنَ الْمُفْسِدينَ

91. " What! Now!(when facing death)while hitherto you have rebelled and
been of the mischief- makers "

**Commentary :**

It was for this reason that Allah, addressing him, informed him that he
did become a believer, while before that he used to rebel, disobey and
used to commit sin; lining up alongside villains and those who were
corrupt on the earth. The verse says:

" What! Now!(when facing death?)while hitherto you have rebelled and
been of the mischief- makers "

At any rate, repenting while one is dying is of no benefit. One must
repent while there is still a chance of life and of being saved.


**Commentary : Verse 92**

(92) فَالْيَوْمَ نُنَجِّيكَ بِبَدَنِكَ لِتَكُونَ لِمَنْ خَلْفَكَ آيَةً
وَ إِنَّ كَثيراً مِنَ النَّاسِ عَنْ آياتِنا لَغافِلُونَ

92. " So this day We shall save you in your body, that you may be a
Sign to those after you! But verily, many among mankind are heedless of
Our Signs. "

**Commentary :**

Allah through the Qur'an announces that He saves Pharaoh's body from
being lost in the sea today so that we can provide an instructive lesson
for future generations for arrogant rulers, and for all oppressors and
those enticing others into corruption as well as for the oppressed. The
verse says:

" So this day We shall save you in your body, that you may be a Sign to
those after you! ..."

At the end of the verse, the Qur'an indicates that many people still
remain ignorant of our verses and symbols and of all those instructive
lessons which have been recorded over and over again in the history of
man, and despite those clues which prove Our omnipotence The verse
continues saying:

"... But verily, many among mankind are heedless of Our Signs. "

It is narrated from Imam Rid a(a.s.)in the commentary, Nour- uth-
Thaqalayn and As- S afi that Pharaoh was armoured from head to toe which
must have pulled him down deep under the sea drowning him but the waves
drove the heavy body ashore atop a lofty rock. This itself was a divine
miracle.


