Section 4 : the Divine Gifts Commentary : Verse 31
==================================================

A few of the Divine gifts given in the physical body of man are
referred to The idolaters asked to make their own made gods effect a
creation The Qur'an a Book from Allah.

(31) قُلْ مَنْ يَرْزُقُكُمْ مِنَ السَّماءِ وَ الْأَرْضِ أَمَّنْ
يَمْلِكُ السَّمْعَ وَ الْأَبْصارَ وَ مَنْ يُخْرِجُ الْحَيَّ مِنَ
الْمَيِّتِ وَ يُخْرِجُ الْمَيِّتَ مِنَ الْحَيِّ وَ مَنْ يُدَبِّرُ
الْأَمْرَ فَسَيَقُولُونَ اللَّهُ فَقُلْ أَ فَلا تَتَّقُونَ

31. " Say: "Who provides you(sustenance)from the sky and from the earth
Or who possesses hearing and sight And who brings forth the living from
the dead and brings forth the dead from the living And, who
administrates(every)affair They will soon say: 'Allah'. Then, say: 'Will
you not then keep from evil ? "

**Commentary :**

There have been said same examples of Allah's bringing forth the living
from the dead and the dead from the living, among which one might cite
the case of the human sperm leading to human beings and human seed from
human beings, the chicken from the egg and egg from the chicken, plants
from seeds, and seeds from plants; socially- righteous children from
corrupt parents and corrupt children from worthy parents.

In this verse there are hints regarding the existence of the Lord and
His right of being worshipped.

At first, the holy Qur'an addresses the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) implying to
tell those polytheists and idol- worshippers, that who are going astray,
who is it that provides nourishment for you in the sky and on the earth
The verse says:

" Say: "Who provides you(sustenance)from the sky and from the earth?
..."

Definitely, the earth provides nourishment for the roots of plants by
means of its nutritious substances. It is probably for this reason that
the above verse refers to the nourishing substances coming from the sky
and later from the earth.

Later, the verse refers to two of man's most important senses, namely
seeing and hearing, without which man's acquisition of knowledge would
have been impossible. It tells him to ask them who is He Who is the
Creator of their eyes and ears and reinforces these two senses of
theirs. The verse says:

"... Or who possesses hearing and sight? ..."

Then it brings up the two phenomena of death and life which are the
most peculiar ones in the realm of creation. It says:

"... And who brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the
deed from the living ? ..."

This is the very issue confronted by scientists and the learned men of
the natural sciences as well as biologists, amazing them that how living
creatures spring from inanimate objects.

The meaning of the above verse includes material as well as spiritual
death and life, for one can see intelligent, honest and faithful men
sometimes born to parents who are corrupt and faithless, and vice
versa.

Then it adds implying that Who is He who rules and regulates all
worldly affairs The verse says:

"... And, who administrates(every)affair? ..."

In fact, the verse at first talks about the creation of the blessings
and then it speaks about the guardian and administrator of these
blessings.

After putting forth these three questions, the holy Qur'an immediately
declares that they will soon answer in reply that it is Allah. The verse
says:

"... They will soon say: 'Allah'. ..."

One may infer from the above sentence that even the polytheists,
infidels and idol- worshippers during the "Age of Ignorance" considered
Allah as the sole Creator, Sustainer, Giver of Life as well as the
Administrator and Maintainer of the world of existence.

And at the end of the verse the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) has been commanded to
ask them: why they did not take the path of virtue. It says:

"... Then, say: 'Will you not then keep from evil ?' "


**Commentary : Verse 32**

(32)فَذلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمُ الْحَقُّ فَما ذا بَعْدَ الْحَقِّ إِلاَّ
الضَّلالُ فَأَنَّى تُصْرَفُونَ

32. " Such then is Allah, your true Lord; and what is apart from the
Truth but error How then are you turned away "

**Commentary :**

After explaining some of the symbols of the signs of the magnitude and
the prudence of Allah(s. w. t.)in the heavens and the earth, and through
this, appealing to the conscience and intellect of the opponents by
which they confessed to it, He decisively declares in this verse that
this is Allah, your true Creator, not the idols or other beings you have
considered as partners with Allah for the sake of worship in front of
which you bow down. The verse says:

" Such then is Allah, your true Lord; and what is apart from the Truth
but error? ..."

Concluding these remarks, the Qur'an implies: now that you have come to
clearly know the truth, do you not realize that you are certain of being
misled if you take any path other than the truth ?

How can you turn away from worshipping Allah despite your knowledge
that there is no one else worthy to be worshipped ? The verse says:

"... How then are you turned away ?"

This verse in fact, offers us a clear logical way for knowing the wrong
and abandoning it. This way is that: one must first try to know the
truth by way of his own conscience and reasoning. After the cognition of
the truth, one must abandon whatever is contrary to the truth or other
than the truth, because they are those things that mislead.


**Commentary : Verse 33**

(33) كَذلِكَ حَقَّتْ كَلِمَةُ رَبِّكَ عَلَى الَّذينَ فَسَقُوا أَنَّهُمْ
لا يُؤْمِنُونَ

33. " Thus is the Word of your Lord proved true against those who did
wrong, that they will not believe. "

**Commentary :**

Breaking the laws of Allah and committing sins provide the grounds for
infidelity and in this way man makes Allah's wrath upon himself
inevitable. The verse says:

" Thus is the Word of your Lord proved true against those who did
wrong, ..."

This is the direct result of their continuous indecency which may
darken their hearts and pollute their spirits to the extent that they
cannot see the enlightening state of the truth, and thus they go astray.
The verse continues saying:

"... that they will not believe. "


**Commentary : Verse 34**

(34) قُلْ هَلْ مِنْ شُرَكائِكُمْ مَنْ يَبْدَؤُا الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ
يُعيدُهُ قُلِ اللَّهُ يَبْدَؤُا الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعيدُهُ فَأَنَّى
تُؤْفَكُونَ

34. " Say: 'Is there any of your partners(whom you ascribe unto
Allah)one( that)can originate creation, then bring it back again ' Say:
'(Only)Allah originates creation, then brings it back again; then how
are you turned away( from the Truth)'"

**Commentary :**

The Qur'an asks whether those whom you consider as Allah's partners are
able to create and then annihilate that creation and recreate it again
in the same way that Allah is able to do. The polytheists know that
creation is solely in Allah's Power. Then, why is it that they again
weave false stories and lie The verse declares:

" Say: 'Is there any of your partners(whom you ascribe unto
Allah)one(that)can originate creation, then bring it back again ' Say:
'(Only)Allah originates creation, then brings it back again; then how
are you turned away(from the Truth)?"


**Commentary : Verse 35**

(35) قُلْ هَلْ مِنْ شُرَكائِكُمْ مَنْ يَهْدي إِلَى الْحَقِّ قُلِ
اللَّهُ يَهْدي لِلْحَقِّ أَ فَمَنْ يَهْدي إِلَى الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَنْ
يُتَّبَعَ أَمَّنْ لا يَهِدِّي إِلاَّ أَنْ يُهْدى‏ فَما لَكُمْ كَيْفَ
تَحْكُمُونَ

35. " Say: 'Is there any of your partners(whom you ascribe unto
Allah)one that leads towards the Truth Say: '(Only)Allah leads unto the
Truth. Is then He Who leads unto the Truth more worthy to be followed,
or he who does not go aright(himself)unless he is guided What then is
the matter with you How do you judge ' "

**Commentary :**

The Qur'an asks once again implying that who provides the living with
life and leads them while managing their material and spiritual lives,
it self Is He your sole Allah, or are the idols The verse says:

" Say: 'Is there any of your partners(whom you ascribe unto Allah)one
that leads towards The Truth ? ..."

Then, the Qur'an, answers that it is the Creator Who guides us and has
bestowed on us intellect, ears and eyes, providing the living with
instincts which help them manage their affairs in their own interests.
Thus, despite all this: Is it appropriate for us to submit ourselves to
idols which cannot lead us How is it that the worshippers of idols
submit and surrender to such things which are neither able to guide
anyone nor have they the potentiality of being led The verse continues
saying:

"... Say: '(Only)Allah leads unto The Truth. Is then He Who leads unto
the Truth more worthy to be followed, or he who does not go
aright(himself)unless he is guided What then is the matter with you How
do you judge ?"


**Commentary : Verse 36**

(36) وَ ما يَتَّبِعُ أَكْثَرُهُمْ إِلاَّ ظَنًّا إِنَّ الظَّنَّ لا
يُغْني‏ مِنَ الْحَقِّ شَيْئاً إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَليمٌ بِما يَفْعَلُونَ

36. " And most of them follow nothing but conjecture: truly, conjecture
can be of no avail against the Truth. Verily Allah is well aware of what
they do. "

**Commentary :**

Thus the reason for their being misled and misguided is that they
follow their own conjectures and their own corrupt speculations.
Conjectures will never lead us to the Truth and to Reality. Following
conjectures only results in the doing of indecencies.

The verse says:

" And most of them follow nothing but conjecture: truly, conjecture can
be of no avail against The Truth. ..."

What is of real value is "knowledge". Sound conjecture and confidence,
if based on proper solid grounds is valuable, i. e. those conjectures
deducted from the apparent words of the holy verses(and
quotations)derived from the Allah's commandments which are practiced by
Islamic jurisprudents(Fuqaha')in even the minute details of problems.

The verse says:

"... Verily Allah is well aware of what they do. "

However, conjectures in the realm of ideas, if they are rooted in
pursuing the vain way of one's ancestors or fanaticism based on
ignorance are groundless, and hence, are of no avail. \* \* \* \*


**Commentary : Verse 37**

(37) وَ ما كانَ هذَا الْقُرْآنُ أَنْ يُفْتَرى‏ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ وَ
لكِنْ تَصْديقَ الَّذي بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَ تَفْصيلَ الْكِتابِ لا رَيْبَ
فيهِ مِنْ رَبِّ الْعالَمينَ

37. " And this Qur'an is not such as to be produced by other than
Allah; but it is a confirmation of(revelations) that went before it, and
a(clear) explanation of the Book, wherein there is no doubt, from the
Lord of the Worlds. "

**Commentary :**

The comprehensive nature of the Qur'an and its contents are such that
any kind of unsound allegation ascribed to it and relating it to other
than Allah(s. w. t.)is unreasonable. The holy verse says:

" And this Qur'an is not such as to be produced by other than Allah;
but it is a confirmation of(revelations)that went before it, ..."

All heavenly Books confirm each other; their differences lie only in
the conciseness and detail of their contents. The verse continues
saying:

"... and a(clear)explanation of the Book, wherein there is no doubt,
from the Lord of the Worlds. "


**Commentary : Verse 38**

(38) أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَراهُ قُلْ فَأْتُوا بِسُورَةٍ مِثْلِهِ وَ
ادْعُوا مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صادِقينَ

38. " Or they say, 'He has forged it. ' Say: 'Bring then a Sura like
unto it, and call(to your aid)anyone you can, besides Allah, if you are
truthful! '"

**Commentary :**

The Qur'an has reiterated on several occasions that the words of
Allah(the Qur'an)are miracles because of the inability of man and jinn
to present something similar, and it has presented this challenge to
both of them. Among the verses that testify to this fact, one may cite
verse 31 of the Sura Hud. Despite the fact that Islam has had millions
of opponents throughout history and still has such enemies, and they
have striven to weaken the Qur'an and defeat Islam, carrying out
intensive activities in the process, yet this confident challenge of the
Qur'an has been left unanswered and will continue to be so until the Day
of Resurrection.

Since we are dealing with setting the dimensions and the definition of
the Qur'an, we will now point out some aspects of this divine miracle.

1.It distills extensive and profound wisdom into concise words. For
instance, regarding the relationship of man and woman, it comments:
"They(your wives)are a clothing for you and you are a clothing for them.
'(1) To explain the fragility and vulnerability of the non- divine
powers, it likens them to a spider's web or declares that they are
unable to create even a

(1) Sura Al- Baqarah, No. 2, verse 187

‏gnat. It says: " verily those whom you call upon besides Allah cannot
create a gnat. "(1)

2. Its profundity and the sweetness of words do not render it
monotonous even if it may be read over and again for more than thousand
times; on the contrary, each time it is studied it presents new
messages.

3. Its harmony of words is especially outstanding and if a Qur'anic
verse is placed among other Arabic texts or passages it can be easily
distinguished from them.

4. The comprehensive nature of the Qur'an: It includes reasoning and
demonstration to citing examples from worldly affairs to the life in
hereafter, and also the facts concerning family problems, legal,
political, military, ethical, historical teachings etc.

5. Its realism: Its contents are not based upon conjecture; even its
stories are documented and real.

6. The universal and all- embracing nature of the Qur'an: All people
will benefit from it at all levels and in all places regardless of
whenever or wherever they are; it is not a Book particular to a special
time, place, or people.

7. The eternal effect of the Qur'an: The older the age of humanity and
the more the sciences progress the more of its secrets are discovered.

8. Its ever- increasing and its everlasting development: Despite having
an increasing number of enemies and the growing number of attacks
launched against it during its history, it has not only survived but
also it has secured the highest station.

(1) Sura Al- Hajj, No. 22, verse 73

9. It is an ever- existing miracle by itself. A miracle that is
available to all and is composed of the kind of words that put it at
everyone's disposal.

01. It is both a miracle and a Book of commandments and legal codes.

11. It is a token from an illiterate man from a region deprived of
literacy.

21. Nothing has been added to it or deducted from it and it has been
kept intact from distortion. The Qur'an puts forth the simplest
challenge, of calling people to present a Sura like it, to prove its
being miraculous. It declares:

" Or they say, 'He has forged it. ' Say: 'Bring then a Sura like unto
it, ..."

The Qur'an is a miracle not only in its entirety but also every one of
its suras proves the same. This challenge of the Qur'an is not confined
to a specific time and place. It will stand unanswered all over the
globe until the end of the life of mankind and the Day of Resurrection.
The Qur'an's challenge is not only issued to the common people, on the
contrary, it is issued to all of mankind, including: jurisconsults, men
of letters, and geniuses. It continues saying:

"... and call(to your aid)anyone you can, besides Allah, if you are
truthful! '"


**Commentary : Verse 39**

(39) بَلْ كَذَّبُوا بِما لَمْ يُحيطُوا بِعِلْمِهِ وَ لَمَّا يَأْتِهِمْ
تَأْويلُهُ كَذلِكَ كَذَّبَ الَّذينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ فَانْظُرْ كَيْفَ
كانَ عاقِبَةُ الظَّالِمينَ

39. " Nay, they belied that which they comprehended not with the
knowledge of it, which whose interpretation has not yet come to them.
Even thus did belie those before them, see then what was the end of the
unjust ones. "

**Commentary :**

The opponents of the prophets have often had two reasons for their
dissidence throughout history, one of which was due to their ignorance
and the other to their lack of knowledge and intellectual appreciation
of the glorious Qur'an as well as the other heavenly Books. It says:

" Nay, they belied that which they comprehended not with the knowledge
of it, which whose interpretation has not yet come to them. Even thus
did belie those before them, ..."

They rejected the Qur'an before they knew the truth about it and had
not grasped command of its interpretation and meaning; because it was
fundamentally against their ancestral religion. Hence, as to the
eventual fate of the oppressors, the verse continues saying:

"... see then what was the end of the unjust ones. "


**Commentary : Verse 40**

(40) وَ مِنْهُمْ مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ وَ مِنْهُمْ مَنْ لا يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ
وَ رَبُّكَ أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُفْسِدينَ

40."And some of them believe in it and some of them do not believe in
it;and your Lord knows best the mischief makers."

**Commentary :**

A leader must not expect everyone to believe in his way. He must lead
them on to the Right Path and if they do not follow, he can only let
them wait for the divine punishment.

The verse says:

" And some of them believe in it and some of them do not believe in it;
and your Lord knows best the mischief makers. "


