Section 7 : No Fear Or Grief For the Friends of Allah Commentary : Verse 61
===========================================================================

Everything in the earth and the heavens is contained in the Open Book
There shall not be any fear or grief for any friend of Allah.

(61) وَ ما تَكُونُ في‏ شَأْنٍ وَ ما تَتْلُوا مِنْهُ مِنْ قُرْآنٍ وَ لا
تَعْمَلُونَ مِنْ عَمَلٍ إِلاَّ كُنَّا عَلَيْكُمْ شُهُوداً إِذْ تُفيضُونَ
فيهِ وَ ما يَعْزُبُ عَنْ رَبِّكَ مِنْ مِثْقالِ ذَرَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَ
لا فِي السَّماءِ وَ لا أَصْغَرَ مِنْ ذلِكَ وَ لا أَكْبَرَ إِلاَّ في‏
كِتابٍ مُبينٍ

61. " And you are not(engaged)in any affair, nor do you recite any part
from the Qur'an, and nor any deed you(mankind)may be doing, but We are
Witnesses over you when you enter into it. Nor is there hidden from your
Lord(so much as)the weight of an atom on the earth or in the heaven, not
anything lesser than that or greater but are(recorded)in a Clear Book.
"

**Commentary :**

The "Clear Book" is the 'Preserved Tablet' or Allah's Comprehensive
Knowledge which covers the entire cosmos including not only the actions
of human beings but also the smallest details of everything in the
heavens and the earth. With the utmost subtlety and eloquence, this
verse announces that Allah is not only fully aware of the minutest facts
in the heavens and the earth but He is also fully aware of the minutest
details of the actions of his subjects.

Whatever the mood or state of meditation or an important affair you
might be in, whatever part of the Qur'an you might be engaged in
reciting, and whatever action you begin, you can do nothing which cannot
be seen or noticed by Allah when you start it. The verse says:

" And you are not(engaged)in any affair, nor do you recite any part
from the Qur'an, and nor any deed you(mankind)may be doing, but We are
Witnesses over you when you enter into it. ..."

Then more emphatically, it continues by saying that not slightest thing
in the heavens and on earth, even that of an insignificant particle or
greater than it can be hidden from Allah. All of these are recorded and
registered in the Preserved Tablet and in the Open Book of Allah. It
continues saying:

"... Nor is there hidden from your Lord(so much as)the weight of an
atom on the earth or in the heaven, not anything lesser than that or
greater but are(recorded)in a Clear Book. "

All Muslims are taught a great lesson by this verse, which can place
them on the right track, leading them toward the Truth and preventing
them from going astray.

It calls our attention to the fact that not only does the Almighty
comprehend our every thought, word and deed, but His angels are also
carefully watching every step we take, every word we utter, every
thought we entertain in our heads, wherever we cast our eyes, and in
whatever state we are in.

It is not without proper grounds that Imam Sadiq(a. s)said: "The
Prophet of Islam(p. b. u. h)whenever reading this verse, used to weep
greatly". If the Prophet of Islam(p.b.u.h.) , with all his sincerity and
gratitude, with all the services he had rendered human beings, and with
all his unparalleled worship of the Creator could be so concerned about
his imperfections before Allah, how then, can we determine our state ?


**Commentary : Verse 62**

(62) أَلا إِنَّ أَوْلِياءَ اللَّهِ لا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَ لا هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ

(63) الَّذينَ آمَنُوا وَ كانُوا يَتَّقُونَ

(64) لَهُمُ الْبُشْرى‏ فِي الْحَياةِ الدُّنْيا وَ فِي الْآخِرَةِ لا
تَبْديلَ لِكَلِماتِ اللَّهِ ذلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظيمُ

62. " Behold! Verily no fear shall be upon the friends of Allah, nor
shall they grieve; "

63. " Those who believe and constantly keep from evil. "

64. " For them are Glad Tidings in this world's life and in the
Hereafter. There is no change in the Words of Allah. That is the great
success. "

**Commentary :**

In the previous verses, some of the characteristics of the polytheists
and non- believers were explained, from now on, the characteristics of
the true believers and those who struggle and strive, who constantly
guard against evil and who are the exact opposite of the first group
will be described. The verse attracts the attentions implying that there
is no fear among the men of Allah and they will have no sorrows. The
verse says:

" Behold! Verily no fear shall be upon the friends of Allah, nor shall
they grieve; "

Here sorrows and fears are those that relate to worldly matters for
Allah's worshippers are imbued with the owe of Him. This kind of fear is
concerned with one's failure to carry out ones duties and
responsibilities and that kind of sorrow which one feels towards his
lack of achievements during the course of his life. Here fear and sorrow
have spiritual connotations, which help in man's perfection and
development. This is quite contrary to the fear and sorrow that have a
material basis and is the source of degradation and deviations.

The friends of Allah are those whose position requires no boundaries
between them and their Lord and they are not distant from Him. Their
hearts are open and unveiled and they see Him with all their hearts
through the light of knowledge, faith, and good deeds which leaves them
with perfect sincerity. It is because of such an acquaintance with Allah
that, in their views, anything else other than Him is insignificant, of
little value, and ephemeral. The verse says:

" Those who believe and constantly keep from evil. "

They are those who have become believers, continuously strive after
virtue and make continence their habit. For them there is good news both
in this world and in the Hereafter, because there are no changes in the
Divine words and promises, for Allah always fulfils the promises He has
made to His friends. This is a great victory and happiness for the
person concerned. The verse says:

" For them are Glad Tidings in this world's life and in the Hereafter.
There is no change in the Words of Allah. That is the great success. "


**Commentary : Verse 65**

(65) وَ لا يَحْزُنْكَ قَوْلُهُمْ إِنَّ الْعِزَّةَ لِلَّهِ جَميعاً هُوَ
السَّميعُ الْعَليمُ

65. " And let not their speech grieve you. Verily the glory is wholly
Allah's; He is All- Hearing, All- Knowing. "

**Commentary :**

As a good end awaits those who observe continence, the attainment of
this goal requires one to pass through some great difficulties. Among
them is that one can cite the struggle which the faithful experience
within their hearts in the process of overthrowing and revising their
aspirations. This can tend to make them feel hopeless, giving them the
impression that the oppressors can overcome them. But this is not so,
Allah, the Exalted in Majesty informs us that we must not let the
oppressors make us sorrowful. The Majesty is entirely His. It is He Who
is All- Hearing and Omniscient. This good news only applies to those
whose existence embodies the characteristics of the friends of Allah.
The verse says:

" And let not their speech grieve you. Verily the glory is wholly
Allah's; He is All- Hearing, All- Knowing. "

In the Islamic texts one reads that:

Amir- ul- Mu'mineen Ali- ibn- Abi- Talib(a.s.)once was asked about the
meaning of Allah's words when He says: "Behold! Verily no fear shall be
upon the friends of Allah, nor shall they grieve", and who the friends
of Allah were.

Amir- ul- Mu'mineen answered: "The friends of Allah are those who are
sincere in their worship, they are cognizant of the depth of those
matters that are of the world, whereas others attach importance to the
outward appearance of the world. These believe in the idea of the
permanent character of the ‏world while the others do not believe in its
lack of permanence. "(1)

It is also narrated from Imam Baqir(a.s.)who said that it is written in
Imam Sajjad's(a.s.), book concerning the friends of Allah that they are
those who accomplish their religious obligations, and act according to
the practice of Allah's Messenger(p.b.u.h.) . They are those who abstain
from all that is forbidden, and have let the transient world go by,
while they are only interested in what is dear to Allah. They make a
living in accordance with the laws which consider these ways of earning
a livelihood lawful. They abhor arrogance, shun the hoarding of wealth
and pay all the obligatory religious dues. Allah has blessed them all
for what they earn, and He has also fixed a great reward for what they
have saved in advance for their life in Hereafter.

(1) The Commentary of Al- Mizan, the explanation upon the verse


**Commentary : Verse 66**

(66) أَلا إِنَّ لِلَّهِ مَنْ فِي السَّماواتِ وَ مَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَ
ما يَتَّبِعُ الَّذينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ شُرَكاءَ إِنْ
يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلاَّ الظَّنَّ وَ إِنْ هُمْ إِلاَّ يَخْرُصُونَ

66. " Behold! Verily to Allah belongs whoever is in the heavens and
whoever is in the earth, and they do not follow any associates, who call
on others besides Allah, they do not follow(anything)but conjectures,
and they only lie. "

**Commentary :**

Be aware that whosoever is in the heavens and on the earth belongs to
Allah and is under His domination. The use of word/ man/, mentioned in
this holy verse(and we translated it as whoever), signifies wise and
intelligent men.

That is, those who have been provided with intelligence and live in the
heavens and on the earth are all under Allah's power and control. When
the rule is that all intelligent people, as individuals among His
creation, must belong to Him, it follows that other existing beings
should also follow the rule and they also belong to Allah. The fact that
He specializes "the intelligent" as a separate category signifies their
elevation and magnification in that position. The verse says:

" Behold! Verily to Allah belongs whoever is in the heavens and whoever
is in the earth, ..."

Those who follow idols are those who consider them as partners with
Allah. The verse continues saying:

"... and they do not follow any associates, who call on others besides
Allah, ..."

Those who select partners for Allah, follow nothing but their own
conjectures simply following their forefathers in this case or it is
because of mistake they have made thinking that they approach Allah
therewith. If they think they can elevate themselves and approach Allah
in this way, they do nothing but lie. The verse says:

"... they do not follow(anything)but conjectures, and they only lie.
"


**Commentary : Verse 67**

(67) هُوَ الَّذي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ اللَّيْلَ لِتَسْكُنُوا فيهِ وَ النَّهارَ
مُبْصِراً إِنَّ في‏ ذلِكَ لَآياتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَسْمَعُونَ

67. " He it is Who appointed for you the night that you rest in it, and
the day giving light. Verily there are signs in it for people who
hearken. "

**Commentary :**

After rejecting all the partners of the polytheists, in calling the
polytheists' attention to His magnitude and His blessings, the Qur'an
implies that Allah made the night dark and the day illuminated so that
they may find silence and comfort during the night and make their living
and earn their sustenance during the day. The verse says:

" He it is Who appointed for you the night that you rest in it, and the
day giving light. ..."

Truly, these are clear proofs and reasons attesting to the Unity of
Allah, the Glorified, for no one else is able to do all this. The verse
continues saying:

"... Verily there are signs in it for people who hearken. "


**Commentary : Verse 68
**
(68) قالُوا اتَّخَذَ اللَّهُ وَلَداً سُبْحانَهُ هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ لَهُ ما
فِي السَّماواتِ وَ ما فِي الْأَرْضِ إِنْ عِنْدَكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطانٍ بِهذا
أَ تَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ ما لا تَعْلَمُونَ

68. " They say, 'Allah has begotten a son! ' Glory be to Him! He is
Self- Sufficient! His is whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in
the earth! No warrant have you for this! Do you say about Allah what you
do not know '"

**Commentary :**

'To beget a son' signifies 'to be the father of someone, which differs
from giving birth and having children. The polytheists considered the
angels as the daughters of Allah, and the Jews took "Ezra" as an
offspring of Allah, while the Christians called Jesus the Son of
Allah.

Allah is neither afraid of being lonely so as to want to adopt an
offspring, nor does He need any heir to adopt a son. He also does not
need any help so that He chooses an assistant, nor does He need to
ensure the survival of His species, so He does not need a son. The verse
says:

" They say, 'Allah has begotten a son! 'Glory be to Him! He is Self-
Sufficient! ..."

This phrase, means that Allah is absolutely self sufficient and He is
absolutely far from what they say, because whatever is in the heavens
and on the earth are His and fall under His command. The verse says:

"... His is whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth!
..."

Thus He absolutely does not need to have a son, for begetting offspring
is to relieve oneself from one's lack of ability and weakness or to
enrich oneself and get rid of poverty, but Allah is free from all this.
If it is impossible for Him to have a real son, it is also impossible
for Him to adopt a stepson and there are no reasons to support the
authenticity of this claim. It says:

"... No warrant have you for this! Do you say about Allah what you do
not know '"

If one wants to know about Allah, these words are to be regarded as
blame, a censure and a threat from Allah, the Magnificent, to those who
have made these unsanctioned and atrocious claims.


**Commentary : Verse 69**

(69) قُلْ إِنَّ الَّذينَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ لا
يُفْلِحُونَ

(70) مَتاعٌ فِي الدُّنْيا ثُمَّ إِلَيْنا مَرْجِعُهُمْ ثُمَّ نُذيقُهُمُ
الْعَذابَ الشَّديدَ بِما كانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ

69. " Say: 'Verily those who forge a lie against Allah will not
prosper. '"

70. "(They have)a little enjoyment in this world, then to Us will be
their return, then shall We make them taste the severe penalty because
they used to disbelieve. "

**Commentary :**

Here the Holy Qur'an mentions the ultimate disastrous end for all those
who ascribe belies and false concepts to Allah. He addresses His
Prophet(p.b.u.h.)that he should tell those who make false ascriptions to
Him and those who make them only lie that they will not be saved. The
verse says:

" Say: 'Verily those who forge a lie against Allah will not prosper.
'"

They might be able to attain worldly wealth through lies and false
claims for a few days, but it is only a passing phenomenon in this
world.(1) They will eventually return to Allah and He will punish them
vigorously for their disbelief and their associating partners with Him.
The verse says:

"(They have)a little enjoyment in this world, then to Us will be their
return, then shall We make them taste the severe penalty because they
used to disbelieve. "

(1) The Arabic words/ mata'/ and/ mut'ah/ are employed for short- term
use. As man's use of the world and its blessings are short- lived, the
Qur'an then applies the word/ mata'/ cornering worldly affairs.


