Section 9 : Moses Takes Away the Children of Israel Commentary : Verse 83
=========================================================================

Moses enjoins his followers to defend upon Allah Moses ordered by Allah
to take abode with the Children of Israel in Egypt and to establish
regular prayers Moses defies Pharaoh Pharaoh chases Moses and the
Children of Israel and is drowned with his armies.

(83) فَما آمَنَ لِمُوسى‏ إِلاَّ ذُرِّيَّةٌ مِنْ قَوْمِهِ عَلى‏ خَوْفٍ
مِنْ فِرْعَوْنَ وَ مَلاَئِهِمْ أَنْ يَفْتِنَهُمْ وَ إِنَّ فِرْعَوْنَ
لَعالٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَ إِنَّهُ لَمِنَ الْمُسْرِفينَ

83. " But none believed in Moses save some children of his people,
because of the fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs, that they would torment
them; and verily, Pharaoh was mighty on the earth, and verily, he was of
the extravagant. "

**Commentary :**

In the beginning, the Qur'an describes the situation of the first group
of those who believed in Moses, saying that after this(event)no one
believed in Moses except a group of his own offspring. This tiny group,
which becomes apparent by use of the Qur'anic word/ urriyah/(children),
was formed mostly from among the youth and young adolescents. They were
under tremendous pressure from the side of Pharaoh and his associates,
and feared the Pharaohnic system which, by putting pressure upon the
believers tried to dissuade them, and make them quit the religion of
Moses. The verse says:

" But none believed in Moses save some children of his people, because
of the fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs, that they would torment them;
..."

Pharaoh was an arrogant man in that land, indulgent and violent, and he
recognized no boundaries and limits. The verse continues saying:

"... and verily, Pharaoh was mighty on the earth, and verily, he was of
the extravagant. "


**Commentary : Verse 84**

(84) وَ قالَ مُوسى‏ يا قَوْمِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ آمَنْتُمْ بِاللَّهِ
فَعَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلُوا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُسْلِمينَ

84. " And Moses said: "O my people! If you have(really)believed in
Allah, then put trust in Him(alone)if you have surrendered(unto Him).
"

**Commentary :**

To comfort them and alleviate their pain in their souls, Moses,
soothingly and affectionately said to them, that if they believed in
Allah they should staunchly stand by their words, have faith, and submit
to Him by putting all their hopes and trust in Him. They ought not to be
fearful of the waves and the storm of afflictions, for Faith cannot be
separated from trust in Allah(s. w. t.).

The real meaning of "trust", here, is leaving one's tasks in His hands
and selecting Him as one's only true help in the times of adversity.

The significance of trust does not imply abandoning one's struggle,
rather, it means that once man has done his utmost in struggling and has
not been able to solve his difficulty, he must not be upset. He must
rely upon Allah's favor, support, and seek help from His pure Essence.
He must have fortitude and continue on in his everlasting struggle. The
above holy verse says:

" And Moses said: "O my people! If you have(really)believed in Allah,
then put trust in Him(alone)if you have surrendered(unto Him). "


**Commentary : Verse 85**

(85) فَقالُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ تَوَكَّلْنا رَبَّنا لا تَجْعَلْنا فِتْنَةً
لِلْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمينَ

85. " Then they said: 'In Allah(alone)we have put our trust. 'Our Lord!
Make us not(subject)to a trial for the unjust people'. "

**Commentary :**

These truthful believers accepted Moses' call to trust in Allah. They
said that only in Allah they put their hopes and trust. The verse
says:

" Then they said: 'In Allah(alone)we have put our trust. ..."

Then, they supplicated Him to relieve them from the wickedness and
vices of their enemies as well as the pressure they were imposing upon
them. They invocated Him not to set them to become rebellious like the
oppressors nor put them under their control and influence. The above
holy verse continues saying:

"... 'Our Lord! Make us not(subject)to a trial for the unjust people'.
"


**Commentary : Verse 86**

(86) وَ نَجِّنا بِرَحْمَتِكَ مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الْكافِرينَ

86. "And deliver us by your Mercy from the disbelieving people. "

**Commentary :**

They supplicated that Allah(s. w. t.)might relieve them, by His Own
Grace, from the grips of the infidels, i. e. Pharaonic nation who had
been enslaving them, allocating hard work and imposing mean jobs upon
them.

The verse says:

"And deliver us by your Mercy from the disbelieving people. "


**Commentary : Verse 87**

(87) وَ أَوْحَيْنا إِلى‏ مُوسى‏ وَ أَخيهِ أَنْ تَبَوَّءا لِقَوْمِكُما
بِمِصْرَ بُيُوتاً وَ اجْعَلُوا بُيُوتَكُمْ قِبْلَةً وَ أَقيمُوا
الصَّلاةَ وَ بَشِّرِ الْمُؤْمِنينَ

87. " And We revealed to Moses and his brother, saying: 'Provide houses
for your people in Egypt, make your houses into places of worship, and
keep up prayer: and give glad tidings to the believers'. "

**Commentary :**

Another stage of the uprising and revolution of Moses(a.s.),
Haroun(a.s.), and the Children of Israel against the Pharaonids is
portrayed here.

First, Allah says that He revealed to Moses and his brother that his
nation should build houses in the land of Egypt. Particularly, they were
to build these houses next to one another and facing them. The verse
says:

" And We revealed to Moses and his brother, saying: 'Provide houses for
your people in Egypt, make your houses into places of worship, ..."

Then, they were to pay proper attention to spiritual self-
actualization through regular prayers, thus purifying and strengthening
themselves. The verse says:

"... and keep up prayer: ..."

In order to remove the effects of fear and terror from their hearts,
and thus regain their spiritual and revolutionary power, He orders them
to give these tidings to the faithful, as to their eventual victory, and
the bestowal of Allah's favour and grace upon them. The verse continues
saying:

"... and give glad tidings to the believers'. "


