Chapter Xvii: Battle of Siffin-before and After
===============================================

**Moawiya's preliminary activities and defiance of Ali**

It has already been stated that during his sojourn at Medina on the
occasion of his visit to Caliph Osman, Moawiya happened one day to ask
Kab-al-Ahbar how the prevailing disturbances against Osman would end.
Kab predicted that Osman would be murdered and that in the long run the
Grey Mule (meaning Moawiya) would succeed in rising to power. Relying on
this prophecy, Moawiya looked forward to chances of his rise to the
sovereign authority and lost no opportunity of taking measures to
promote the object in view. It was due to this that he was slack in
sending succour 1 demanded by Osman when he was besieged; that, when
Osman was murdered he was busy in stirring up the Syrians to avenge his
blood by exhibiting from the pulpit the gory shirt of the murdered
Caliph; that, to let the spirit of revolt ripen among the Syrians he
long detained the envoy from Ali and evaded a definite answer to the
invitation of the Caliph demanding homage from him; that, he gathered
around him several discontented men of note, such as 2 Obeidallah (the
son of Caliph Omar, the murderer who had escaped for fear of being
summoned to the tribunal before Ali), Abdallah b. Abi Sarh (the
ex-governor of Egypt who was displaced when Ali came to power), Marwan
(the secretary and the evil genius of Caliph Osman ) and almost all the
immediate adherents of that Caliph, and the Umyyads who had fled to him
when Ayesha was defeated at Busra; that, he secured the
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Rawdzat-al-Safa.
2 Rawdzat-al-Safa.

alliance of Amr b. Aas, the conqueror of Egypt and the ex-governor of
that country, now residing in Palestine as a landlord but as a
discontented man; (With the 1 stipulation of this restoration to the
same government as the teward for his successful co-operation in
deposing Ali. he took the oath of allegiance to Moawiya acknowledging
him the lawful Caliph, in the presence of all the army, who also took
the oath of fealty. Thty were follwed by the Syrian public who joined in
the acclamations at this grand ceremony); that, he sought 2 allegiance
of several distinguished Companions of the Prophet, such as Saad b. Ali
Waqqas, Abdallah b. Omar, Osama b Zaid, Mohammed b. Maslama, who were
noted for not having done fealty to Ali on his inauguration as Caliph,
and who chose to remain aloof from either patty and wrote reproachful
answers to Moawiya. At this period Abu Horeira, Abu-al-Darda, Abu Osama
Bahili and Noman b. Bashir Ansari were the only Companions in attendance
at the court of Moawiya; that, being for over twenty years governor of
the rich province of Syria and pursuing a far-sighted policy from the
very beginning he had amassed an immense treasure and had a powerful
army at his command. Now he had in his favour the prejudices of the
Syrians in general and of his armies in particular, who had been
artfully taught to implicate Ali in the murder of Caliph Osman. The
blood-stained shirt of Osman was still hung over the pulpit in the great
mosque of Damascus, and the people, inflamed by its sight, sobbed aloud
and cried for vengeance on the murderers and those who sheltered them.
Such was the formidable adversary with whom Ali had to deal after he had
done with Ayesha, Talha and Zubiet.
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Mas'udi.
2 Habib-al-Siyar.

**Ali's march to Syrian frontier
**

On being apprised of these developments in Syria, Ali once more tried
(Shaban 36 A.H. or Jany. 657 A. D.) to use conciliatory means. He
summoned Jarir, chief of Bani Bajila and Governor of Hamadan, to pay
homage to him. The latter happened to be at Kufa. He was known to be on
friendly terms with Moawiya. His return from Syria was anxiously
awaited. At length 1 he came back after three months with an oral
message from Moawiya that the allegiance sought for could only be
tendered if punishment were meted out to the murderers of Osman.
Malik -al-Ashtar accused him of having wasted time in effeminate
pleasures with Moawiya, who purposely kept him long enough to mature his
plans of hostilities. Pretending to be offended wit: this imputation,
Jarir left Kura and joined Moawiya.

Finding Moawiya hopelessly alienated, Ali resolved to march upon Syria
without any further delay. In the month of Zil-qad 36 A. H. or April
657A. D. sending out a detachment as an advance guard to meet him at
Riqqa, he himself with his army proceeded to Medaen. He despatched a
contingent from Medaen and marched crossing the Mesopotamian desert.

The Miraculous fountain in the Mesopotamian desert

On his way he had to halt at a place where no water was available and
the want of water was keenly felt by the army. A Christian hermit, who
lived in a cave near the camping grounds, was sent for and asked to
point out a well. He assured Ali that there was no well in the vicinity
but there was a cistern near by, which contained not more than three
buckets of rain water. Ali then said, 'I know, however, that some of the
Bani Israel prophets
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Ibn Khaldun.

of ancient times had fixed their abode in this place and had dug a pit
for their stock of water.' The hermit replied that he also had heard of
it, but it had been shut up for ages and all traces of it were lost; and
that there was an old tradition that none but a prophet or one sent by a
prophet would discover and re-open it.

"He then, says the Arabian tradition, 1 produced a parchment scroll
written by Simeon bin Safa (Simon Cephos), one of the greatest apostles
of Jesus Christ, predicting the coming of Muhammad, the last of the
Prophets, and that this well would be discovered and re-opened by his
lawful Heir and Successor. Ali listened with becoming reverence to this
prediction ; then turning to his attendants and pointing to a spot, he
said, 'dig there'. They dug, and after a time came to an immense stone,
which having been removed with difficulty, the miraculous well stood
revealed, affording a seasonable supply to the army, and furnishing an
unquestionable proof of the legitimate claim of Ali as the Successor of
the Prophet. The venerable hermit was struck with conviction; he fell at
the feet of Ali, embraced his knees, and never afterwards would leave
him." W. Irving's Successors of Mohamed p. 180.

Having offered thanks to God, and taking water sufficient for the army,
Ali resumed his march. Crossing the Mesopotamian desert, he reached
Riqqa on the banks of the Euphrates. A bridge of boats was constructed
and the army 'crossing the river advanced westward, where it met the
Syrian outposts at Sur-al-Rum. After some skirmishes between the
vanguards of the two armies, the enemy gave way and Ali's army advancing
forward
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. Rawdzat-al-Safa vol. ii, p. 292; Jame-al-Tawarikh, p. 183 etc. The
Early History of Islam with special reference to the position of Ali,
during the Life of the Holy Prophet Muhammad and after. Chp. XXI Saiyid
Safdar Hosain.

came in sight of the main body of Moawiya's forces, already stationed
at Siffin, (Zhilhajj 36 A. H. or May 657 A. D.). Tabri (Vol VI, page
577), Rawdzat-al-Safe Vol. II, page 425 and Orders to the Army before
the battle of Siffin, Abul Fida (page 425) narrate in detail the orders
issued by Hazrat Ali to his officers and soldiers before the battle. As
these orders give a clear indication of the principles and methods laid
down by Hazrat Ali as to how Jehad (Holy Wars) should be carried out,
they are briefly given here:

Ali's advise to the army before the battle of Siffin
1. Never begin a war yourself, God does not like bloodshed; fight only
in defence.

2. Never be first to attack your enemy, repulse his attacks, but do it
boldly, bravely and courageously.

3. While declaring yourself and your deeds (Rajuz, a custom amongst
hand to hand combatants engaged in a fight) never waste your time, and
instead of speaking about yourself speak about God and the Holy Prophet
(AS).

4. Never follow and kill those who run away from the battle or an
encounter, life is dear to them, let them live.

5. Never kill wounded persons who cannot defend themselves.

6. Never strip naked a dead man for the sake of his coat of arms or
dress.

7. Never cut the nose or the ears of the dead to humiliate them.

8. Never take to loot and arson.

9. Never molest or outrage the modesty of a woman.

10. Never hurt a woman even if she swears at you or hurts you.

11. Never hurt a child.

12. Never hurt an old and enfeebled person.

**Ali's camp at Siffin
**

The following interesting incident is related by Major Price as having
taken place at the commencement of the war :-"As Siffin commanded, to a
considerable distance, the only access to the waters of the Euphrates,
Moawiya had stationed Abul Awr, one of his Generals, with ten thousand
men, to guard the communication from the troops of Ali. He had not long
placed his army in this advantageous position, when Ali, approached and
pitched his Camp in the same neighbourhood soon found that their supply
of water was intercepted.

Under these circumstances, Ali sent a deputation to Moawiya to request
that he should relinquish an advantage which appeared very inconsistent
assuring him that had he possessed the passage it would have been
equally free to both the armies. Moawy14 immediately made known the
message to his courtiers, most of whom contended that as the murderers
of Â°s1134.n had cut off all supplies of water when they besieged his
palace, so on the present occasion it would only be just to retaliate.
Amr. b. Aas, however, dissented from this opinion, declaring that Ali
would not suffer his army to perish of thirst with the warlike legions
of Iraq at his heels and the Euphrates before his eyes. But the first
counsel prevailed, and the messenger was dismissed With the reply that

Moawiya was resolved not to forego what he considered to be the
forerunner of his future victory. The result of this application
occasioned Ali considerable vexation and perplexity, till at length the
privations became unbearable, and Malik-al-Ashtar and Ashas the son of
Qais begged to be allowed to open the communication with their swords.


**The fight for the waterway to the Euphrates
**

Permission being granted, and proclamation being made throughout the
Camp, in less than an hour, ten thousand men had flocked to the Standard
of Malik-al-Ashtar, and an equal number to the tent of Ashas. Directing
these troops in a convenient order, each of the two chieftains conducted
their army towards the channel of the Euphrates, and after vainly
warning Abul Awr to quit the banks of the river, Malik at the head of
the Cavalry and Ashas at the head of the Foot, immediately closed upon
the enemy. During the action that followed, Malik was nearly exhausted
with thirst and exertion, when a soldier by his side begged him to
accept a draught of water, but the generous warrior refused to accept
the indulgence till the sufferings of his followers had been allayed,
and at the same time being assailed by the enemy, he laid seven of their
bravest soldiers to the sword. But the raging thirst of Malik and his
troops became at length unbearable, and he directed all that were
furnished with water bags to follow him through the ranks of their
opponents without quitting his person until they should have filled all
their vessels. Piercing the line of the adverse party, Malik made good
his way to the river whilst his followers supplied themselves with
water. The conflict raged with unabated

fury near the Euphrates, till Abul Awr, finding his troops give way
before the relentless attack of their assailants, and being already
beaten from his post, despatched a messenger to Moawiya who immediately
sent Amr b. Aas with three thousand horsemen to his relief.


**Malik-al-Ashtar wins the day
**

The arrival of that General, however, seems to have rendered the
victory of Malik more signal and decisive. No sooner did the latter
descry the approach of Amr than, covering himself with his shield, he
urged his courser towards him with irresistible impetuosity, and Amr
only eluded the fury of his adversary by retiring within the ranks of
the Syrians. The latter, however, were put to the sword in great
numbers, many were drowned in the Euphrates, whilst the remainder fled
for refuge to the camp of Moawiya and the troops of Ali having thus
successfully dislodged the enemy, established themselves in quiet
possession of the watering place and its approaches. Smarting under the
reproaches of Amr, Moawiya now found himself reduced to the necessity of
applying to his adversary for the indulgence which he had so recently
withheld; but Ali, with the liberality and magnanimity so congenial to
his troops allowed his enemy a free access to the Euphrates, and from
this time the followers of either army passed and re-passed to the river
with equal confidence and freedom of intercourse." S. Ockley's History
of Saracens p. 312.


**Desultory fighting for one month
**

Ali divided his forces, which numbered 90,000, into seven columns, each
commanded by a companion of

the Prophet or a Chieftain of renown. The Commanders were; Ammar Yasir,
Abdallah b. Abbas, Qais b. Saad b. Obada, Adballah b. Jafar,
Malik-al-Ashtar, Ashas b. Qais Kindi and Said b. Qais Hamdani.

Moawiya had similarly divided his men, 1,20,000 which greatly
outnumbered the army of Ali, into seven or eight columns under the
following commanders : Amr b. Aas, Abdallah b. Amr b. Aas, Obeidallah b.
Omar, Abul Awr, Zhul Kala Homeiri, Abd-al-Rahman b. Khalid b. Walid, and
Habib b. Maslama. Every day one of these columns from each army took the
field by turn and engaged in skirmishing or single combat, in which case
only one champion from each side fought till the heat of the sun became
intolerable. In this way the contest was kept up for the whole month of
Zilhajj, as Ali was desirous to avoid serious loss of the Muslims in a
decisive battle.

The next year (37 A.H.) set in and as fighting was forbidden, in
Moharram (the first month), both the armies lay encamped in sight of one
another without any activity. During this month of truce Ali earnestly
wished to conciliate Moawiya in order to avert the impending crisis and
re-opened negotiations. The whole month passed in sending or receiving
deputations but all to no purpose. Ali clearly pointed out that, as
Caliph, he was ready to vindicate the majesty of the Divine Law on the
murderers of Osman, if they were only named by Moawiya. But Moawiya,
entertaining ambitious designs upon the Caliphate under cover of the
pretended revenge of the blood of Osman, which had so far been his
strength and had secured him so big an army, would not accede to any
terms before the muderers of Osman were exterminated.

**Furious battles at Siffin
**

The hostilities were resumed with the beginning of the next month
(Safar, 37 A.H. ). For a week the battles raged with unceasing fury till
sunset separated the contesting parties. Every day the conflict became
severe! and more embittered. In the second week Ali made up his mind for
a decisive engagement. The authorities quoted by Price, enter very
minutely into various individual contests which took place during this
protracted campaign. 1 "In several of these Ali was personally engaged;
but his extraordinary strength and skill was so well known to the
opposite party, that he was obliged to disguise himself before an
assailant would attack him. On one occasion, being mounted on the horse
and arrayed in the armour of one of his Chiefs, he was attacked by a
warrior from Moawiya's army; and we are told that with a single sweep of
his scimitar, the Caliph severed the upper half of his body from the
lower. It is said that such was the keenness and temper of the steel,
and the rapidity and precision of the stroke, that the man thus severed
in twain continued fixed in the saddle ; the spectators concluded that
Ali had missed his blow, until the horse chanced to move, when the two
halves of the body fell to the ground."

**Ammar's fall in the Battle
**

"The carnage, chiefly in the ranks of Moawiya, was very great in these
battles. Among the ranks of Ali the loss of certain distinguished
Companions was regretted by friends and foes alike. Ammar Yasir was
deeply grieved when Hashim b. Obta, the hero of Qadisia
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 S. Ockley's History of the Saracens p. 314.

fell fighting by his side. As he saw Hashim fall, he exclaimed to his
fellows : '0 Paradise How close thou couchest beneath the arrow's point
and the falchion's flash ! 0 Hashim even now I see heaven opened, and
black-eyed maidens, all bridally attired, clasping thee in their fond
embrace.' So singing, and refreshing himself with his favourite draught
of milk and water, the aged warrior, fired again with the ardour of
youth, rushed into the enemy's ranks and met the envied fate. People
remembered very well the words of the Holy Prophet, who had said "O
Ammar, thou shalt one day be slain by a godless and rebellious race", in
other words the saying was interpreted, as 'Ammar would be killed
fighting on the side of right.' Thus his death, as it were, condemned
the cause of the ranks against whom he fought; and so it spread dismay
in Moawiya's forces. When Amr b. Aas heard of it, he answered readily :
'And who is it that bath killed Ammar, but Ali the rebellious, who
brought him hither ?' The clever repartee ran through the Syrian host,
and did much to efface the evil omen.' Muir's Annals p. 382. Other
versions of Ammar's last words run as follows : 'The thirsty man longeth
for water and here, close by, it welleth up. Descend to the spring
(death) and drink. This is the joyful day of meeting with friends, with
Muhammad and his Companions.' Wackidi quoted in Muir's Annals p. 382.
"By Allah ! I do not know a deed more pleasing to God than to war
against these lawless vagabonds. I would fight them even if I was
assared of being run through with a lance ; for the death of a martyr,
and the paradise beyond, are only to be acquired in the ranks of Ali.
However courageously our enemies may fight, still justice is on our side
; they desire not to revenge Osman's death, but ambition drives them to
revolt."

"Follow me, Companions of the Prophet! The gates of Heaven are opened,
and houries are waiting to receive us. Let us triumph here, or meet
Muhammad and his friends in Paradise !" With these words he gave his
charger the lash, and plunged with desperate violence into the hottest
of the fight, till, at length, he was surrounded by the Syrians, and
fell a sacrifice to his own courage. His death stirred up Ali's troops
to revenge, whilst even the Syrians regretted his loss, from the high
esteem in which Ammar had been held by the Prophet. Well, Geschicte der
Chalifen quoted in Ockley's History of the Saracens p. 314. Beholding
Ammar fall, Moawiya cried to Amr b. Aas, who was sitting by him, 'Do you
see, what precious lives are lost in our dissensions ?"see' ! exclaimed
Amr, 'would to God I had not lived to see such a catastrophe.' Ammar
Yasir, the patriarch of Muslim chivalry was ninety-three years of age;
he had served the Prophet in Badr and in several other engagements. He
was now Ali's General of the Horse. He was respected as long as he lived
and died lamented by all. Having fallen wounded by a lance of Jowier
Oskoni, he was brought to his tent where Ali, taking his head into his
lap, shed tears of sorrow and offered prayers for the dead friend.


Ali's furious charge on the Enemy
Ali was very much annoyed and grieved at the loss of his brave General
and friend. Putting himself at the head of twelve thousand of his
Cavalry, he made a furious charge on the enemy, trying to reach Moawiya,
whose pavilion was surrounded by five compact rows of his own body-guard
behind the lines of the fighting ranks. Breaking the ranks, Ali
confronted the body guard. They also

could not withstand the terrible shock of the charge. All the rows were
broken up and coming within ear shot of Moawiya, Ali called him saying :
'Come forth O Moawiya How long shalt the blood of the Muslims flow over
the battle-field in the strife between us two? Let us have a duel and
let God decide our fate, whoever kills his adversary shalt be the
master.' 'Fairly spoken,' said Amr b. Aas to Moawiya and he urged him to
accept the challenge, telling him that his refusal would discredit him
forever. But sneering at Amr, Moawiya replied that the provocation was
prudently made to secure for him the Government of Syria, because he
knew fully well that Ali's antagonist in fight never escaped death.


**Scandalous plight of Amr B. AS
**

1 "Amr b. Aas, however, did not seem to possess a much larger share of
personal valour than Moawiya on this occasion. Price tells us that a
short time afterwards, Ali, having changed his armour and disguised
himself, again appeared in the lists. Unconscious of his identity, Amr
b. Aas advanced a few steps, and Ali, pretending as if a little
frightened, still further encouraged him to proceed. They were both on
horse-back, and as Amr neared his foe, he repeated certain bragging
lines, importing discomfiture and havoc he intended to carry into the
enemy's army, even though a thousand such as Ali were numbered in their
ranks. Ali replied in a strain which rather unexpectedly announced his
identity. Away went Amr b. Aas, without a moment's delay, whipping and
spurting as fast as possible, whilst Ali pursued with the utmost
eagerness, and making a well directed plunge, the point of his lance
passed through the skirts of Amr's
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. S. Ockley's His. of Sar. P. 315.

coat of mail, and brought him, head foremost, to the earth.
Unfortunately as Amr wore no drawers, and his heels were in the air,
that part of his person became exposed which t we shall forbear to
particularise. In this situation Ali scorned to do him any further
injury, and suffered him to escape with the contemptuous remark, that he
was never to forget the circumstance to which he was indebted for life
and safety.

**Fiercely contested battle
**

1 "One day, towards the close of the campaign, Ali prepared for battle
with unusual solemnity. Clad in the Prophet's mail and turban, and
mounted on the Prophet's horse, Riyah, he brought out the old and
venerated Standard of Muhammad. The appearance of the sacred relic, now
worn to shreds, brought sobs and tears from the illustrious Companions
who had so often fought and conquered under its shadow, and the
enthusiastic troops drew out in formidable strength beneath the holy
banner. Moawiya had assembled twelve thousand of the best warriors of
Syria, when Ali, sword in hand, rushed upon them at the head of his
impetuous veterans to the cry of Allah-oAkbar, and threw the enemy into
immediate confusion. The Syrians at length recovered from the disorder.
The tribe of Awk on the side of Moawiya and that of Hamdanites on the
part of Ali, each made a solemn vow never to quit the field whilst one
of their opponents remained to dispute it. A dismal slaughter among the
bravest of both armies was the result. Heads rolled and streams of blood
polluted the field in all directions; but in the issue, the Syrians
suffered a total defeat, and retired in the utmost confusion."Price's
Mohammedan History.
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 S. Ockley's His. of Sar. p. 315.

Decisive battles at Siffin and the valiant fight of Malik-Al-Ashtar
The battles of Siffin at last were fought desperately on the 11th ,
12th and 13th of Safar, 37 A.H. War contined raging in the moonlit night
of 13th rather more furiously than in the day. Like the night of Qadisia
field, this night was called a second Lailat-al-Harir or 'Night of
Clangour.' Malik-al-Ashtar mounted on a piebald horse, wielding a
two-edged broad sword repeatedly shouted Allah-oAkbar. At every stroke
of his terrible scimitar was a warrior cleft down. History has it that
he was heard to utter this exclamation no less than four hundred times
during the night. The hero of the battle, resolved on victory, was
pushing his attacks with sustained vigour and persistence. The morning
dawned more disadvantageous to the Syrians, who were pressed hard to
their encampment by the brave assailants. Moawiya, who was eyeing the
field with great anxiety grew more and more nervous when the ranks of
his body-guard were cut to pieces. He despairingly be-thought himself of
flight and even called for his horse, when Amr b. Aas, who stood by,
said to him : 'Courage, Moawiya, do not be disheartened I have devised
means to avert the crisis. Call the enemy to the Word of God by raising
aloft the Holy Book. If they accept, it will lead to thy victory; if any
refuse to abide thereby, it will sow discord amongst them.'


**Trick to avert the crisis
**

Moawiya eagerly caught at the words, and in a moment' five hundred
copies of the Quran were raised aloft at the point of the lance.
'Behold', cried they, 'the Book of
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Masudi.

God, let it decide our differences.' This stratagem produced a magical
effect on 1 Ashath b. Qais and his followers and some Kufians, as if the
artifice was anxiously awaited by them. They at once leaped forward and
with one voice re-echoed the cry, 'The Book of God, let it decide our
differences,' and they dropped their weapons. Hearing the tumult, Ali
stepped forth and remonstrated with them : 'It is a trick' he said,
'afraid of defeat the evil men have sought their safety by guile.' 'What
!' they cried, 'Do you refuse to submit to the decision of the Quran to
which they call you ? "That it is,' said Ali, 'which I have been
fighting so long to bring them to, but they rebelled. Go on and fight
your enemy. I know Moawiya, Amr b. Aas, Ibn Abi Sarh, Habib and Dzohak
better than you do. 2 They have no regard for the religion or the
Quran.' 'Whatever that might be,' they persisted, 'but we are now called
to the Quran and we must not decline it.' Thus they would not listen to
any argument. At last in a revolting attitude, they threatened the
Caliph. that unless he agreed, they would all desert him, or deliver him
into the hands of his enemies, or serve him as Osman was served. Further
protest with such determined soldiery being of no avail, Ali said :
'Hold your mild and treasonable language, obey me and fight, but if you
are intent upon disobedience, do as you like.' They refused obedience
and pressed Ali to call back Malik-al-Ashtar from the field . These men
turned Sectaries and are known in the history of Islam as Kharijities.
Malik-al-Ashtar. being summoned, at first refused, saying, 'I cannot
leave the field as victory is at hand.' On this answer of Malik the
tumult of the Kharijites increased, insisting on Ali to call him back at
once. He then again sent for Al-Ashtar.
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Rawdzat-al-Safa.
2. Ibn Khaldun.

saying e 'Of what avail is victory when treason is rife in my own camp.
Come back at once before I am murdered or delivered over to the enemy.'
Malik-al-Ashtar reluctantly gave in and hurried to the Caliph. A fierce
altercation ensued between him and the angry soldiery. 'Ye were
fighting', he said, 'but yesterday for the Lord, and the choicest among
you lost their lives. What is it but that ye now acknowledge yourselves
in the wrong, and the martyrs gone to hell ? "Nay,' they answered, 'it
is not so. Yesterday we fought for the Lord, and today, also for the
Lord, we stay the fight. On this Ashtar upbraided them as traitors,
cowards, hypocrites, and villains. In return they reviled him, and
struck his charger with their whips. Ali interposed. The tumult was
stayed." Muir's Annals p. 384.

**Proposals for arbitration
**

1 Ash'ath b. Qais Kindi, stepping forth from amongst the Kharijites,
asked permission of Ali to visit Moawiya to enquire of him what his
precise meaning was in raising the Quran aloft. He went to Moawiya and
on his return said that Moawiya and his party wished that the
differences should be left to the arbitration of two umpires, who might
decide it according to the true sense of the Quran, each party to
nominate an umpire and their verdict to be final. Ali was questioned,
"Ash'ath the son of Qais, one of those who had the greatest credit and
influence among the soldiers of Iraq, and whose fidelity was suspected
2, had been bribed by Moawiya. "How do
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. Ash'ath is the same man who in 17 A. H. had travelled all the way
from Iraq to Kinnisrin in Syria in expectation of bounty from Khalid b.
Walid, who gave him 1000 pieces of gold.
2. According to Rawdzat-al-Safa a gift of one hundred thousand dirhams
was promised by Moawiya to Ash'ath.

you approve of this expedient." Ali answered him coldly, saying, "He
that is not at liberty cannot give his advice. It belongs to you to
manage this affair according as you shall think fit among yourselves."
S. Ockley's History of the Saracens p. 317. The army, however,
determined to follow it, shouted assent; and they named Abu
Musa-al-Ashari, the late Governor of Kufa who was deposed by Ali for his
disloyalty. 'This man,' said Ali, surprised at the designation, 'has
already forsaken us; neither hath he now been fighting with us. The son
of the Prophet's uncle viz. Abdallah b. Abbas can preferably be chosen
instead.' 'More preferably,' they ironically answered, 'name thy own
self, why namest thou thy cousin?' They said they would have none but
one who would deal impartially between him and Moawiya. Ali then
proposed Malik Al-Ashtar, but they obstinately forced him to accept none
other than Abu-Musa as his representative. It was a bitter choice for
Ali, but he had no alternative. Abu Musa had kept aloof from the battle,
but must have been in the neighbourhood. When told of the arbitration,
he exclaimed, 'The Lord be praised who hath stayed the fighting !"But
thou art appointed arbiter on our side.' 'Alas ! Alas !' he cried; and
so in much trepidation, he repaired to Ali's camp. Ahnaf Ibn Qais asked
to be appointed joint umpire with Abu-Musa, who, he said, was not the
man to stand alone, nor had he tact and wit enough for the task :-
'There is not a knot which Abu-Musa can tie, but I will unloose the
same; nor a knot he can unloose, but I will find another still harder to
unravel.' This was too true but the army was in an insolent and perverse
mood, and would have none but Abu-Musa. The Syrian arbiter was Amr b.
Aas for whose deep and crafty ways Abu-Musa was no match." Muir's
Annals. p. 385.

**The Deed of arbitration
**
1 The two referees (Abu-Musa and Amr b. Aas), having presented
themselves in Ali's camp, a truce was put in writing. Dictated by Ali,
it was begun thus : the name of God , the most Gracious and Merciful.
This is what had been agreed upon between the Commander of the Faithful,
Ali. and Moawiya.' Amr b. Aas objected to this and said, 'Ali is your
commander but not ours; write down simple names Ali and Moawiya.' Upon
this Ali, remembering the prophecy uttered by the Prophet at Hodaibiya,
told the people around him that a similar objection was raised by the
Quraish to delete the words, 'Apostle of God' appended to the name of
the Prophet in the Treaty; that the Prophet yielded and erased out the
words with his own hands when he saw me hesitating; that he then
predicted that, 'the day will come when I shall also have to yield to
make a similar concession.' Hearing this, Amr b. Aas cried out, 'Dost
thou represent our similarity to the pagan Arabs in spite of our being
good believers!' 'And when,' said Ali, 'an evil-born son had not been a
friend of the wicked and a foe of the righteous ?' Upon this Amr swore
that he would never again seek the company of Ali, and Ali expressed his
wish that God may keep him free of such a companion. However, Ali
yielded and the truce was written with simple names of Ali and Moawiya,
and signed, by which the contracting parties bound themselves to ratify
and confirm the decision of the referees, which was to be determined
some six or eight months later at some place midway between Kufa and
Damascus. The umpires swore that they would judge righteously in
accordance with the Holy Book and without regard to partiality. This
deed of arbitra
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Rawdzat-al-Sala; Habib-al-Siyar 180

tion was executed on Wedensday, the 13th Safar, 37 A. H. or 31st July,
657 A. D.

**The Carnage at Siffin
**

1 Ninety battles were fought at Siffin. The carnage had been very
great. Most of the historians give the number of the slain on both
sides, from first to the last, as seventy thousand. Of these forty five
thousand were Syrians and twenty-five thousand Iraqians. Ammar Yasir,
Hashim b. Otba, Khazima b. Thabit, Abdallah b. Bodail and Abul Hathim b.
Teihan were the leading chiefs killed on Ali's side, while the men of
distinction killed on Moawiya's side were Zhul-Kala Homeiri, Obeidallah
b. Omar, Hoshab b. Zhi-Tzalim and Habis b. Saad-al-Tai.

**Return of the armies
**

The truce having been arranged, Moawiya escaped a defeat and gained his
point for the present with bright hopes for the future. The armies
having buried their dead, left the ill-starred battle-field. Moawiya
retired to Damascus and Ali repaired to Kufa.


**Decision of the umpires
**

The time for arbitration having come, the umpires proceeded to
Dumat-al-Jondel or Azroh, each with a retinue of four hundred horsemen
according to the agreement. Many a leading Chief from Mecca, Medina,
Iraq and Syria went there to watch the proceedings, which were to decide
the future of Islam. Abdallah b.
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Abul Fida

Abbas, who accompanied Abu-Musa to preside at the daily prayers, while
having a discourse with Abu-Musa upon the topic of arbitration, urged
him to beware of the crafty ways of his astute colleague and to keep
particularly in his mind the fact that Ali had no blemish to render him
incapable of government, nor Moawiya any virtue to qualify him for it.
When Abu-Musa reached Duma, Amr b. Aas received him with great respect.
A private conference was held between the two alone in a pavilion
erected for the purpose. Amr was already well aware of the weaknesses in
Abu-Musa's character. He treated Abu-Musa with utmost respect and
civility till he brought him completely under his influence. Having won
his confidence, he made him admit that Osman was foully murdered. Then
he asked him why the avenger of his blood, a near relation of his and an
able administrator viz. Moawiya should not be taken as his successor. To
this Abu-Musa replied that the succession should not be determined on
such a basis which would give preference to Osman's sons as legitimate
claimants; but that they must above all things take care lest a mutiny
should be kindled or civil wars break again. Upon this Amr b. Aas asked
Abu-Musa to reject both Ali and Moawiya, and let the Faithful elect a
third. This is the simplest and safest solution of the problem. 'I
agree,' said Amr, 'let us go forth to pronounce.' A tribunal was erected
from which each of the umpires was to declare publicly his decision.
Abu-Musa wished Ann to go up first, but Amr, alleging reasons to give
preference to Ali's man, overcame all his scruples and insisted upon
Abu-Musa going up first. Abu-Musa ascended and addressed the people thus
: 'Brethren ! 1 and Amr b. Aas, both of us, have given full
consideration to the matter and have come to the conclusion that no
other course to restore peace and

to remove discord from the people can possibly be better than to depose
both Ali and Moawiya in order that people may have their choice of a
better man in their stead. I therefore depose both Ali and Moawiya from
the Caliphate to which they pretend, in the manner as I draw this ring
from my finger.' Having made this declaration Abu-Musa came down. Amr b.
Aas now took his turn and went up to announce what he had to declare.
'You have heard,' he said, 'how Abu-Musa on his part has deposed his
chief Ali; I, on my part, do depose him too and I invest my chief
Moawiya with the Caliphate and I confirm him to it, as I put this ring
upon my finger. I do this with justice because Moawiya is the avenger of
Osman and his rightful successor.' So saying, he came down. This
arbitration took place in the month of Ramazan , 37 A.H. or February 658
A. D.

**Amazement at the decision
**

The audience were quite amazed at the unexpected issue of the
arbitration. Neither the Kufians dreamt of Amr b. Aas so shamefully
over-reaching Abu-Musa, nor the Syrians ever thought of Moawiya
achieving such a triumph. Abu-Musa, confounded and bewildered, assailed
from every side, said, 'What can I do, I have been duped by Amr, who
first agreed with me then swerved aside.' As much as the Syrians
applauded the decision, the Kufians were emaged by it. In the heat of
his indignation, Shureih, the commander of the Kufa escort, rushed upon
Amr b. Aas and was roughly handling him when the people interposed and
set them apart to have recourse only to mutual revilings. Laughed at by
the Syrians and reproached by the Kufians, Abu-Musa felt deeply ashamed
of having been outwitted by his colleague. Apprehending

mischief, he made good his escape and fled to Mecca, where he
thenceforth lived in obscurity and was not heard of any more, though he
died in 42 A. H. or according to others in 52 A. H.

"Many of the angry speeches at Duma by the chief men, who were
bewildered at the strange denouement have been preserved. These are some
of them: The son of Omar : 'See what a pass Islam hath come to. Its
great concern committed to two men : one who knoweth not right from
wrong, the other a nincompoop.' Abubekr's son : 'Would that Abu-Musa had
died before this affair; it had been better for him.' Abu-Musa himself
is represented as abusing Amr in the language of the Quran : 'His
likeness is as the likeness of a dog, if they drive him away, he putteth
forth his tongue, and if thou leave him alone, still he putteth forth
his tongue.' (Sur. VII-771. 'And thou,' retorted Amr, 'art like the
donkey laden with books, and none the wiser for it.' (Sur. V1-25).
Shureih, Commander of the Kufa escort, flew at Amr, and they belaboured
each other with their whips till they were separated by the people.
Shureih exclaimed that he only wished he had used his sword instead.
Muir's Annals p. 394.

Amr b. Aas returned to Damascus, where Moawiya, amidst the acclamations
of joy, was saluted Caliph by the Syrians. Henceforward Moawiya's
interests began to prosper, and the prediction of Kab-al-Ahbar appeared
to be fulfilled.

Abu 'Moosa retired to Medina where he subsequently received a handsome
yearly pension from the court of Moawiya. (Refer Tabari, Abul Fida,
Ausam-e-Koofi, Rawdzat-al-Safa, Morooj-ul-Zahab, Kamil-ibne-Aseer and
The Short History of the Saracen.)

**Dr. Crichton describes Ali's prowess at the battle of Siffin
**
1 "Ninety actions or skirmishes are recorded to have taken place ; and
in these the humanity of Ali was as conspicuous as his valour. He
strictly enjoined his troops invariably to await the first onset of the
enemy, to spare the fugitives, and respect the virtues of female
captives. Not a day passed in which he displayed not some extraordinary
feat of personal strength and skill. The bravest leaders of the Syrian
host fell in succession by the single prowess of his resistless arm-
"For death itself dwelt on the point of his spear, and perdition in the
hilt of the sword." "The hideous and gigantic Kerreib, who could
obliterate with his thumb the impression of a silver coin, he cleft at
one stroke from the crest to the saddle-bow. Two warriors attacked him
in disguise, but with a sweep of his double scimitar he bisected the
foremost through the middle with such rapidity and precision that the
rider remained fixed on the saddle; the spectators concluding he had
missed his blow, until the motion of the horse threw the body in halves
to the ground."
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Dr Andrew Crichton. History of Arabia and its people p. 307.
Publishers Nelsons & Sons, London Ed. 1852.


