Chapter Xviii: the Kharijites
=============================

**Who were the Kharijites**

The truce having been concluded on 13th Safar, 37 A.H. at San, when Ali
was returning homeward with his army, a body of 12,000 men had separated
themselves from the ranks and marched at some little distance in the

same direction as the main body towards Kufa. They murmured at the
compromise agreed upon, and were even loud in their reproaches to one
another for having abandoned the cause of the Faith to the ungodly
compromise. These were the Kharijites (Kharijite means one who rebels
against the established tenets of a religion, a votary or schismatic or
seceder), who had refused fighting at the battlefield after the trick
played by the enemy, and had pressed the Caliph to accept the
arbitration and the particular arbitrator. Approaching Kufa, these
seceders encamped at a village named Harora in the vicinity of Kufa.
Their religious notions were developed into fanatic zeal that the
Believers were all of equal standard and nobody should exercise
authority over another. They formulated their creed with the phrase 'La
hukm ilia lillah,' i.e. no judgment but Lord's alone; consequently there
should be no Caliph, nor an oath of allegiance sworn to any human being.
They blamed Ali as having sinned in consenting to refer to human
judgment that which belonged to God alone, and demanded of him
repentance for his apostasy. They said that Ali ought not to have given
quarter to the enemy, who could be pursued and put to the sword.
Proceeding to their camp, the Caliph firmly remonstrated with them, that
they had given wrong interpretation to the phrase 'La hukm ilia lillah'
and that in accepting the arbitration he had followed the provisions
contained in the Quran ; and that he had committed no sin to repent of.
He pointed out that the sin lay at their own door, because with their
persistent obstinacy they refused to continue fighting with the enemy
and that with their revolting attitude they forced him to call back
Malik-al-Ashtar, who was beating the enemy back to their camp and was at
the point of gaining a complete victory; and that they pressed him to
accept

the arbitration and the particular arbitrator. He further added that he
however expected arbitrators were to be fully bound by the terms of the
truce to deliver their judgment righteously in accordance with the Quran
; and that. if the judgment turned out to be in disregard of
righteousness, he would at once reject it and would again set out
against the enemy. Concluding, he said that it was wrong of them if they
desired him to break the truce, which they themselves had driven him to
arrange. To all this reasoning they simply answered, 'we do admit of our
sin, but we have repented of our apostasy; and thou must repent of it
likewise.' To this Ali replied that he being a true believer he would
not belie himself by admitting his apostasy.

Their revolt 37 A.H.

The Kharijites were not satisfied and they resolved on rebellion; but
awaiting the issue of the umpire's decision, they for the present
postponed any overt action. Soon after the judgment of the arbitrators,
they determined to raise the standard of revolt and prevailed on
Abdallah b. Wahab, one of their chiefs, to accept (contrary to the
principles of their creed ) the command, as a temporary expedient, to
meet the emergency. Fixing their headquarters at Nahrwan, a few miles
from Baghdad , in the month following the arbitration, they secretly
began to leave and to meet at the rendezvous, either singly or in small
batches for fear of raising an alarm. Some five hundred malcontents from
Busra also joined the insurgents at Nahrwan. In the meantime, Ali,
having received intelligence of the deceitful arbitration at Duma, took
little notice of these fanatic zealots, his thoughts being more occupied
with the affairs of Moawiya and

raising levies for Syria for the renewal of hostilities. Hearing about
the Kharijite insurgents, Ali wrote to them that as he was preparing to
march against Moawiya, it was high time for them to join his standard.
To this they sent an insulting reply that they had cast him off as an
ungodly heretic unless he acknowledged his apostasy and repented
thereof, in which case they would see whether anything could be arranged
between them.

**The battle of Nahrwan.
**
Ali had commenced his march on Syria when he received tidings that the
Kharijites had attempted a raid on Madaen but were beaten back to their
camp; that they were committing horrible outrages in the country all
around their camp, condemning as impious all those who did not fall in
with their sentiments; that they had put to death a traveller who
refused to accept their creed, and ripped up his wife who was with
child. The followers of the Caliph, whose families were left behind
unprotected at Kufa, apprehending danger from these barbarous fanatics
desired that before proceeding to Syria these outlaws should be dealt
with first. A messenger was sent to make enquiries but he too was put to
death by them. Seeing the attitude of the insurgents, Ali thought that
immediate measures to check them were necessary ; he therefore changed
his course eastward, crossed the Tigris and apporaching Nahrwan sent a
messenger to demand of them the surrender of the murderers. They replied
that no paritcular person was responsible; and they all deserved equal
merits for the blood of the apostates slain by them. Still Ali, avoiding
bloodshed, tried to win over these misguided fanatics by gentle means.
He had, therefore, a standard planted outside his camp and a,
proclamation made that the

malcontents rallying round it or those who retired to their homes would
be safe. The rebels began to disperse, deserting their camp, till
Abdallah b. Wahab was left with only 1800 adherents, who resolved to
fight against the Caliph at any cost. Ali said that those men were the
true Kharijites, who would go forth against Islam as quick as an arrow
from the bow. At last, headed by their leader, Abdallah b. Wahab, they
desperately rushed upon Ali's army and met their fate. All of them were
slain except only nine, who escaped to serve as firebrands to rekindle
the future fire. On Ali's side only seven men were killed. The zealots,
who had escaped, promulgated their creed and cause in secret at Busra
and Kufa and appeared in the following year in bands of fanatic
insurgents but were easily put to flight or cut to pieces.


**Syrian expedition frustrated
**

The Kharijites having been disposed of at Nahrwan, Ali retraced his
steps towards the Tigris which he recrossed with his army to march upon
Syria, but the Chiefs of his followers urged him to give the army some
rest preparatory to the long journey and to enable them to refit their
armour for war against the well equipped enemy. Ali consented to the
proposal. They marched back towards Kufa and encamped at Nokheila in the
vicinity of the town. A proclamation was made that any one who had any
business in the town may leave the Camp for one day returning on the
next. In a short time the Camp was almost empty of its soldiers, who all
went one after the other to the town. None returning the next day, Ali
became impatient and at length himself entering the town harangued the
people to go forth with him to the Syrian expedition, but no response
was forthcoming and nobody came

forward. The Caliph was disappointed and at last the project for the
expedition had to be abandoned, never to be resumed.

The period of Ali's Caliphate was one of continued struggles. He was
never left to live in peace. The revolt of Ayesha, Talha and Zubeir; the
rebellion and treacherous outrages of Moawiya and Amr b. Aas; the
risings of the Kharijite fanatics; the lukewarmness and apathy of his
own people; the unfaithfulness of his, cousin Abdallah b. Abbas, and
last of all, the defection of his own brother LWl affected his spirits a
great deal. These troubles crowding rapidly one upon another entirely
disturbed his mind.

From the day of his forced ascension to the Caliphate to the last day
of his life, Hazrat Ali did not get a day's rest and peace. It is a
wonder how against heavy odds he could get time to introduce reforms in
the government, to lay down fundamentals of grammar for the Arabic
language, to deliver sermons on theology, on rhetorics, on philosophy of
religion, on wonders of creation and nature, and on duties of man to God
and man; to advise people in the most persuasive manner to suppress the
tendencies for innovation and schism which had crept in the minds of the
Muslims, or to introduce and to bring into effect principles of a benign
government.

The death of Malik Ashtar and Mohammad Abubakr
After dealing with the revolt of the Kharijites, Hazrat Ali had to face
the problem of consolidating his control over Egypt. He had sent
Qais-Ibne-Saad as Governor of Egypt but had to call him back and to send
Mohammad Ibne-Abubakr in his stead. Unfortunately, Mohammad

though brave and sincere was no match for Moawiya and Omar-Ibne-Aas. He
was forced by Moawiya into battle. He wrote to Hazrat AR who sent
Malik-al-Ashtar for his help. But Malik could not reach Egypt; he was
poisoned on the way by a henchman of Moawiya and he died. (Tabari, Vol.
IV, page 521), Mohammad was informed of his death. That young man faced
Omar. Ibne-Aas alone, was defeated in the encounter, and killed, and by
the orders of Moawiya his dead body was burnt and his ashes were strewn
(Tabari, Vol IV, page 592). Hazrat Ali's words at the news of the death
of Mohammad showed how he loved the young man and how the youth loved
him. After him Hazrat Ali had to send some experienced officer to Egypt.
He was busy with that problem when Moawiya organised bands of guerillas
with orders for loot, murder, arson and rape. These bands were to
attack, like surging waves, the provinces of Hijaz, Busra Raay, Mosul
and Herat. Hazrat Ali organised defences of these provinces, defeated
these bands and freed the country from their harassment.

It was very easy for Hazrat Ali to channelize the minds of the masses
towards foreign invasion. It had always been done by rulers and is even
today considered the best form of diverting the energies of a rising
nation, as well as the easiest way to extend one's territory and to
propagate religion. But Hazrat Ali hated bloodshed, did not believe in
imperialism, and had no faith in propagation of religion with the sword
in one hand and the Quran in the other. He believed Islam to be a
message of Peace and Love and wanted mankind to be ruled on the basis of
equity and justice. Therefore, after strengthening one province after
another and fortifying their defences, he got busy in introducing
reforms to create a benign temporal state and never serioulsy thought of
expanding his domain.

**CHAPTER XIX: HIS VIRTUES AND EXCELLENCE
**

**The Ideal Ruler
**

Hazrat Ali's administration was such that it could serve as a model
even to modern governments, not excepting those of the most advanced
countries.

It was a rare coincidence, with few parallels in History, that a
country, so steeped in superstition and ignorance as Arabia was at the
dawn of the seventh century of the Christian era, should have produced
an ideal and humanitarian ruler like Hazrat Ali whose government, even
to-day , stands as a pattern of wise, simple and incorrupti ble
administration.

When Hazrat Ali was called to the helm of the Muslim Commonwealth, his
first act on assuming responsibility as a Caliph was to dismiss all
corrupt governors and state officers who had fastened upon the provinces
like famished leeches, heaping up wealth by means of pitiless extortion.
Hazrat Ali had been advised by his friends to defer the dismissal of the
corrupt men until he was firmly secured against all enemies. "But the
Bayard of Islam," to use Major Osborn's words, "the hero without fear
and without reproach", refused to be guilty of any duplicity or
compromise with injustice. The fiat went forth removing from their
offices all the men who had so grossly betrayed the public trust. This
made the bloodsuckers of the poor his bitter enemies and they rebelled
against him. But this did not deter Ali from his path of duty. Many a
bold and seasoned reformer would have been afraid to tread on this path
and would have deemed it expedient to seek out ways and means of
convenient compromise. But Hazrat Ali did not believe in

dishonest diplomacy. He thought more of the wretched plight of the
humble subjects of the state suffering under the yoke of the corrupt
governors and he considered it his first duty to eradicate abuse and
corruption from public service.

Both by example and precept Hazrat Ali proved himself to be a
God-fearing administrator. Although appointed to the highest office of
the state, he regarded himself as a trustee of the nation. He lived in
oa humble thatched hut. He treated the treasures of the Commonwealth as
the property of the nation and apportioned to himself from the public
funds a share equal to that of the humblest citizen. He abhorred the
whole paraphernalia of pomp and show. During his tenure of office. he
introduced simplicity in every branch of life and also in every
department of the Government. He insisted upon the Governors and
officers of the state followine his example. Ibn-ul-Atheer, a great
Muslim historian, records that during his Caliphate, Ali was visited by
Harun Ibn Hamza in the palace of Khurnaq. It was a midwinter evening and
Harun found Ali shivering from lack of warm clothes.. Harun could not
bear the sight and exclaimed : "O Commander of the Faithful, a share has
been allotted to you and your children in the public treasury, why are
you undergoing such suffering ?" "By Allah," replied Hazrat Ali, "I hate
to make use of your public treasury. Behold, this is the same garment
which I brought with me from Medina."
It was the day of Id-ul-Fitr and all Muslims clad in their best
garments, assembled in the great mosque of Kufa. They were expecting the
Caliph to appear with ceremonial pomp to lead the Id prayers. But they
were disappointed to see Hazrat Ali appearing in his usual long shirt
full of

patches. This unceremonial dress displeased Ibn Abbas, who thought that
Ali might have donned a more costly garment for the occasion. Ali,
realising Ibn Abbas's perturbation, said, "what have you to do with my
dress? This garment of mine is far from being a means of display of
pride and it is such as can be worn by all Muslims."

It was the cardinal principle of Ali's administration that the ruler
should adopt a standard of life equal to that of the humblest subject in
the realm. He sincerely believed that the real greatness of a ruler did
not consist in wearing rich and costly dresses but in relieving the
distress of the suffering subjects. The public treasury was meant to
meet not the extravagant demands of a ruler's vanity but the needs of
the down-trodden people, to feed the starving population and to clothe
the naked. He always directed his governors to adopt a simple standard
of life and nothing displeased him more than to learn that a governor
had indulged in rich feasting. In a memorable letter of censure
addressed to Osman Ibn Hanif, the Governor of Busra, Hazrat Ali wrote
:-- "O Ibne Hanif, it has come to my knowledge that someone amongst the
youths of Busra invited you to a wedding feast and that you attended it
cheerfully and were entertained to a variety of rich dishes. I had never
expected that you would consent to accept the invitation of people who
keep the poor and the needy far away from their dining-tables and invite
only the rich. Remember that it is essential for the faithful to have an
Imam whose example is always to be followed and from whom all knowledge
and guidance is to be derived. Bear in mind that in the worldly domain
your Imam (i.e. Hazrat Ali) has cut down his necessities, so much so
that in dress he does not require more than two old shirts and in food
not more than two (loaves) of bread. It is understandable that you
cannot bring yourself down to this level of absti

nence, but still, as far as possible, you should assist me by observing
piety, chastity and straightforwardness. I swear to Allah that I have
not amassed gold and silver out of your worldly wealth nor have I
provided myself with any new sheet in order to replace the present one
when it becomes worn out. Had I desired to enjoy delicious honey, pure
wheat and silk clothings, I could have easily done so, but what a pity
it would be if I were to allow the animal in me to get the better of my
inner soul, and my avarice to degrade me to the relishing of tasteful
dishes. despite the knowledge that there are many in Hejaz and Yemen who
have no means of getting a single piece of bread, or of being able to
satisfy their hunger. Should I enjoy a restful sleep when all around me
there are hung% and afflicted people? Is it fair and appropriate that
should satisfy my vanity of being addressed as Commander of the Faithful
and on my part I should not share their miseries and sorrows and be not
willing to be one of them in their distresses and afflictions?"

This was Ali's real conception of the Caliphate, name!) that the Caliph
or Ruler should share the miseries and sorrows, the distresses and
afflictions of his subjects.

When Ali appointed his trusted disciple and friend Malik-al-Ashtar as
the Governor of Egypt, he issued to him a letter of appointment which
contained a full code of adminstrative instructions unequalled by any
other royal charter even in this age of enlightenment and culture. He
impressed upon Malik-al-Ashtar the importance of winning the confidence
of the subjects by love and kindness and abjured him from exercising
dictatorial powers and from vanity and pride. "Do not say I am your
Overlord and Dictator and that you should therefore bow to my command,
as that will corrupt your heart, weaken

your faith in religion and create disorder in the state." In
administering Justice, he impressed upon Malik-alAshtar the absolute
necessity of being impartial and of deciding claims in open courts. He
wrote, "Meet the oppressed and the lowly periodically in an open
conference and, conscious of divine presence there have a heart to heart
talk with them. For I have heard the Prophet of Allah saying that no
nation or society will occupy a high position in which the strong do not
discharge their duty to the weak and the rights of the weak cannot be
taken from the strong."

The scanty records available of the notable trials adjudicated upon by
Hazrat Ali both in the reign of the early Caliphs as well as during his
own regime fully endorse the prognostication of the Holy Prophet that
Ali was the best Judge amongst his disciples. If the law reports of the
Arabian High Court were available, every lawyer today would have
acknowledged Hazrat Ali as the greatest Lord Chief Justice of his age.
"But for his assassination", to quote a French Historian, "the Muslim
world might have witnessed the realisation of the Prophet's teachings,
in the actual amalgamation of Reason with Law, and in the impersonation
of the first principles of true philosophy in positive action."

The non-Muslim subjects, called Zimmis, had a special place of
protection in Hazrat Ali's regime. In order to protect them from
exploitation, he decreed that no Muslim was allowed to acquire the land
of a Zimmi even by purchase. They were equal with Muslims in the eyes of
the law and the blood of the Zimmi, said Hazrat Ali, was as sacred as
that of a Muslim. "Had Ali been allowed to reign in peace," says
Oelsner, "his virtues, his firmness and his ascendancy of character
would have perpetuated the old republic and its simple manners. The
dagger of an as

sassin destroyed the hope of Islam." "With him," says Major Osborn,
"perished the truest-hearted and best Muslim of whom Mohammedan History
has preserved remembrance."

It has been rightly said that a genius comes before his age. Hazrat Ali
was born at a time when a reformer was greatly needed but there were few
persons capable of understanding and appreciating the genius of this
great administrator. Syed Ameer Ali correctly sums up the position when
he says, "Seven centuries before this wonderful man would have been
apotheosised; thirteen centuries later his genius and his talents, his
virtues and valour, would have extorted the admiration of the civilised
world."

His literary achievements
"Ali deserves a distinguished place in literary history," Devenport
remarks, "in as much as he had cultivated his mind with an ease and
assiduity unusual in his age and country. He left many collections of
sentences, proverbs and poetical pieces. Gobblin and Lette published
fragments of these sentences, the former at Leyden in 1629 and the
latter in 1746. Vather published Gobblin's fragments in French in 1660.
Ockley, in the third edition of his 'History of Saracens', has given an
English translation of 169 of Ali's sentences. A treatise also by Ali
upon the magical science is said to be still preserved in the Imperial
Library at Constantinople. Such a man was Ali. May he for ever repose on
the bosom of the Eternal Beatitude."

Arabic literature reached its climax by means of his precious sayings
and sermons a few of which have been collected by Syed Shareef al-Razi
in the form of a book, known as "Nahjul Balagha."

Students of the Arabic language will observe with interest the
assistance that Ali gave to Abut Aswad-adDuwali in the task of
systematizing Arabic, grammar. Abul Aswad was one of the most eminent of
the Tabis, an inhabitant of Busra, and a partisan of Ali under whom he
fought in the battle of Siffin. In intelligence he was one of the most
perfect of men, and in reason he was one of the most sagacious. He was
the originator of Arabic grammar. It is said that Ali laid down for him
the principle : the three parts of speech are, the Noun, the Verb, and
the Particle, telling him to prepare a complete treatise based upon
it.

Hassan al-Basari called him "the Scholar of God in this community."

There is a tradition to the effect that Ali had great skill in writing
the Kufic characters. He was able to make the elongated Kat\*, which is
characteristic of that script, with such uniform exactness that it was
scarcely possible, even with a compass, to distinguish any difference
between the Kafs that he had written.

There are traditions that affirm that Ali had a copy of the Quran of
his own, a special copy which he had annotated according to the
conversations he had with the Holy Prophet. This additional writing on
the margin of his own Quran is apparently in the nature of commentary
from the Prophet that others did not know. it has a bearing on the
existence of a mysterious book that is called the 'Jafr'. Al-Kulaini
remarks that, "when the Apostle taught anything to Ali, Ali evolved from
it a thousand other things. He declares that the Sahifa in Ali's
handwriting was seventy cubits in length, as measured by the arm of the
Apostle, and that it contained everything permitted and forbidden", and
everything necessary for man

kind. And in the Jafr, or secret book, he assures us that there was to
be found, "the knowledge of prophets, and of the scholars of the Bani
Israel". Masudi shows how the later Imams were accustomed to refer at
times to these secret books that Ali left in their keeping. Belief in
the existence of these sacred and secret books with the Imams was
firm.

In one of the popular books that Muhammad Bakir Majlisi wrote in the
seventeenth century, the "HayatulKulub", or Life of Hearts, it is
related that at the time when Muhammad appealed to the Nassara
(Christians) in Najraan in Yemen to accept him as a Prophet whose coming
had been foretold by Jesus, a great book called the "Jama" was referred
to in the course of the debate. 1t was a collection of writings of
1,24,000 Prophets. The first part was the book of Adam, "which related
to the kingdom of the Most High, what He had created and He has decreed
in heaven and earth respecting things temporal and eternal. This .book,
which contains all sciences, was transmitted by the father of mankind to
Prophet Shays. Shays added his contributions to the great work and
handed it to Prophet Idris, and likewise there were the writings of the
Prophets Abraham and Moses and Jesus until at last the time came for the
great and final work of Ahmad (or Muhammad).

A Persian manual on the lives of the Imams, which is a compilation from
the voluminous works of Majlisi, was written in Persian and lithographed
in Teheran in 1912. It is called "Tazkeratul-A'imma," and here it stated
that the 'Jafr wa Jaameaa' is a book that the scholars agree that Ali
had in his possession, and that the part that now exists consists of
twenty-eight portions, and that each portion has twenty-eight pages, and
each page twenty

eight divisions "and no one besides God, the Prophet and the Imams know
the character in which it is written, unless the sinless Imams would
have taught it to one."

The same modern manual mentions also "the Book of Ali" (the Sahifa),
"which the Prophet dictated and Ali wrote. It is seventy metres long and
the width of a sheepskin. It is also called the 'lama', and it shows
what things are permitted and what things are forbidden". Two other
minor works of the same sort are the "Jafr Abyad" (the white Jafer),
which has fourteen portions, and each portion has fourteen divisions,
and the writing of Fatima, with many traditions, to show that God taught
Adam twenty-five of the Divine names, Noah knew eight, Abraham had six,
Moses had four, Jesus had two, and Assif ibn Barkhia had one, whereas
the Apostle of God knew seventy-two of these names, which he taught to
Ali.

Collections have been made of maxims and aphorisms that have originated
from Ali. A hundred of these were collected by the Persian poet Rashid
al-Din and they have been translated into German. There are one hundred
and sixty nine of these moral sayings given in Ockley's History of the
Saracens (p. 339).

It was said to Ali, "What is generosity?" He replied, "that from which
the initiative proceedeth, for what cometh after a request is liberality
and munificence."
On another occasion he remarked, "He who seeketh to do justice unto
men, let him desire for them what he desireth for himself."

According to historian Masudi (Murooj-uz-Zahab Masudi Vol. II, page 33,
Egypt), Hazrat Ali is credited with not less than 480
politics, as collected by Zaid Ibn Wahab in the Imam's . So highly
valued are these contributions own lifetime both for contents and their
intrinsic literary worth that some of his master-pieces have formed
throughout the course of Islamic history, subjects of study in centres
of Muslim learning. Indeed, his reputation seems to have travelled to
Europe at the time of the Renaissance. Edward Powcock, (1604-1691), a
professor at the University of Oxford, published the first English
translation of his 'Rhetoric'.

Khawja Hasan Nizam has quoted a list of the following Muslim Scholars
who have collected the teachings of Hazrat Ali in their respective
books.

1. Seerat-e-Ali by Hafiz Hamadan Ibrahim who died in 181 A.H.

2. Musnad-e-Ali by Ahmed bin Ibrahim who died in 226 A.H.

3. Musnad-e-Ali by Mohammad bin Abdullah who died in 258 A.H.

4. Akbar-wo-Seyar-e-Ali by yaqoob bin Shaiba who died 262 A.H.
5.Musnad-e-Ali by Qazi Ismail who died in 283 A.H.

6. Musnad-e-Ali by Abubakr Ahmad bin Ali who died in 292 A.H.

7. Musnad-c-Ali by Ahmad bin Shoaib Nisayee who died in 303 A.H.

The historian John J. Pool (author of the life of H. M. Queen Victoria)
in his book 'Studies in Mohammedanism' says : "Ali was the first Caliph
to protect and encourage national literature. The Prince was a scholar
himself and many of his wise sayings and proverbs are published in a
book. It is a remarkable work and deserves to be more widely read in the
west."

In Summing up Hazrat Ali's worth, Maswoodi says, "If the glorious name
of being the first Muslim, a comrade of the Holy Prophet in exile, his
faithful companion in the struggle for the Faith, his intimate associate
in life and his kinsman; if a true knowledge of the spirit of his
teachings and of the Book; if self-abnegation and practice of justice;
if honesty, purity and love of truth; if a knowledge of law and science,
constitute a claim to pre-eminence. then all must regard Hazrat Ali as
the foremost Muslim. We Shall search in vain to find, either among his
predecessors (save one) or among his successors, those virtues with
which God had endowed him."

His sermons
Hazrat Ali says that as a Caliph and Ruler, he promises safety and
security of life, property, honour, social status and religious freedom
to non-Muslims and they should not be maltreated and looked down upon.
So long as they do not try to betray and injure the cause of the state
of Islam they should not be molested and should be allowed to practice
their religion and trades freely and openly. Islam teaches us to carry a
message of peace with us and improve the status of society wherever we
go and the best way to. achieve this is to create amity, friendliness
and concord between human beines. Therefore, Muslims should try to
develop friendship of these people and should never resort to wrong use
of power, force or arrogance. Non-Muslims should not be over-taxed,
humiliated, and should not be forced out of their homes, lands and
trades. Their priests should be treated with due respect. Their
monasteries should be protected, they should be allowed to carry on
their lectures, teachings and preachings as usual, and their religious
ceremonies should not be prohibited. If they want to build their places
of worship then

fallow ownerless lands should be allotted to them. One who disobeys the
order is going against the orders of God and the Holy Prophet (A.S.) and
will deserve His wrath.

It may be mentioned here that Ali was so popular even among the
non-Muslims that when he died, all the Christians, Jews and Zorastrians
of Kufa, particularly their women and children who were personally
looked after by Ali, lamented his death and wept as one does for one's
father. Mourning was observed even in Jerusalem and the Lord Bishop also
could not restrain his tears. (Prof. M. G. Reynold's Book on Islam,
Chapter III.)
"Be virtuous when there is still time for you to realise and adopt
vittues, when repentance can do you good, when prayers are heard: when
you are enjoying peace and comfort and when the angels are still writing
your good and bad actions (when you still have power and opportunities
to do good or to be wicked). Do good before old age or disability stops
you from doing anything, before protracted illness renders you exhausted
and unfit for any work and before death takes you away from this sphere
of activities (life). Because death, sooner or later, will put an end to
all your pleasures and all your enjoyments, it will send you far away
from your cherished surroundings."

"Have you fully realised what Islam is? It is a religion founded on
truth. It is such a fountainhead of learning that from it flow out
several streams of wisdom and knowledge. It is such a lamp that from it
several lamps will be lighted. It is a tall beacon lighting the path to
God. It is a set of principles and beliefs which will satisfy every
seeker of truth and reality."

"Know you all that God has made Islam the most sublime path towards His
Supreme Pleasure and the highest

standard of His Worship and Obedience. He has favoured it with noble
precepts, exalted principles, indisputable arguments, unchallengeable
supremacy and undeniable wisdom."

"It is upto you to maintain the eminence and dignity granted to it by
the Lord, to follow it sincerely, to do justice to its articles of faith
and belief, to implicitly obey its tenets and orders, and to give it the
proper place in your lives."

"Weigh your own soul before the time for the weighing of your actions
arrives; take count with yourself before you are called upon to account
for your conduct in this existence; apply yourself to good and pure
actions. adhere to the path of truth and rectitude before the soul is
pressed to leave its earthly abode: verily. if you will not guide and
warn yourself, none other can direct you. i adjure you to worship the
Lord in purity and holiness. He has pointed out to you the path of
salvation and the temptations of this world. Abstain from foulness,
though it may be fair-seeming to your sight; avoid evil, however
pleasant. For ye knoweth how far it takes you away from Him. Listen, and
take warning by the words of the Merciful Guardian. 0 ye servants of my
Lord, fulfil the duties that are imposed on you, for in their neglect is
abasement : your good works alone will render easy the road to death.
Remember, each sin increases the debt, and makes the chain (which binds
you) heavier. The message of mercy has come; the path of truth is clear;
obey the command that has been laid on you; live in purity, and work in
piety, arid ask God to help you in your endeavours, and to forgive your
past transgressions. Cultivate humility and forbearance : comfort
yourself with piety and truth. Take count of your actions with your own
conscience, for.


4he who takes such count reaps a great reward, and he who neglects
incurs great loss. He who acts with piety gives rest to his soul; he who
takes warning understands the truth; he who understands it attains
perfect knowledge."

The following sermon, delivered by him on Friday, the 2nd of Moharram
36 A.H., before the rally of his governors, bears witness to his
administrative ability:
"O, the Faithful Believers! As you have been entrusted with the grave
responsibility of ruling the masses, you should bear God in mind,
protect the unity of God through your actions and keep aloof from
polytheism. Obey the commandments of the Almighty and the orders of the
Holy Prophet. Follow the path of truth and set an example to others by
your noble sayings and actions. Do not be proud of your high position
and transcend rule. Consider this opportunity of yours as a God-sent
bounty to serve mankind. Help the distressed and extend a helping hand
to the weak and the tyrannised. Be vigilant of what happens in the
expanse of your territories, take heed of the dishonest and beware of
the troublemongers. Be courteous to the ambassadors of the foreign
states and kind to the guests. Maintain good relations with the tribes
living on the borders. Pay heed to the happiness of your subordinates
and protect your province from revolt and civil disorders."

"The governors should work for the satisfaction of the people and try
to develop the growth of agricultural products. They should refrain from
collecting more taxes than are due. They should tour their provinces and
supervise the work of their assistants. They should provide schools,'
orphanages, sanctuaries for the poor, rest-houses for travellers and
police quarters for civil

protection. They should accomplish the requirements of the soldiers and
carefully look after the war steeds."

On another occasion, when the tribe of Bani Tameem complained to the
Caliph against Abdullah bin Abbas, one of his governors, he wrote to
Abdullah thus :

"You should not behave like a beast towards your subjects. They are
respectable people who should be treated with courtesy. You are
representing me and the treatment meted out by you to the subjects is
considered as that of mine. Your first consideration should be the
welfare of those over whom you rule and you must treat them with due
respect."

In the following sermon, the Holy Imam has described his sincere work,
his courage and his fortitude in the cause of Islam, comparing other
Muslims, especially during those early days, when the Holy Prophet
started to preach Islam.

"I stood up alone among my contemporaries to welcome the order of God
while they (Muslims) were keeping back timidly. I boldly came forward to
defend the Faith while they were nervously hiding their heads under
their hoods. I unhesitatingly testified to the message of God, while
they were tongue-tied with fear of the non-believers. I walked the path
of truth under the Divine Light while they stood still under clouds of
uncertainty and doubt about religion and God. I never spoke aloud of my
virtues, though I surpassed every one of them in attaining Divine
Favour."
"Possessing these attributes and distinction I rose higher than any of
them and stood alone at that eminence. My stand was firm like that of a
mountain which neither a cyclone can shake nor tornadoes break. Not a
single

person has any justifiable cause to blame me or to find fault with
me."

"Al! those, whom society has wronged or has unjustly humiliated, are
respectable before me and dear to me and I shall secure for them their
just claims and rights, while despotic and arrogant usurpers of human
rights are contemptible in my eyes and I shall make them give back the
rights and privileges thus wrongly usurped. I cheerfully resigned to the
will of God and have willingly bowed my head at His Command."

"Can you believe that I could frame a lie unto our Holy Prophet! I was
the first person to attest him as the Prophet of God, how can I be first
to calumniate him! Therefore, when I deliberated upon the state of
affairs, I came to the conclusion that I must give priority to the
fulfilment of a promise made to the Holy Prophet over the problem of
asking people to take the Oath of allegiance to me."

The doctrine of Renunciation played no part in Ali's counsels. He
advised men not to love this world but he did not advise them to
renounce it. On the contrary he urged them to live their life on earth
in an orderly way so that they might better the lot of everyone in this
world as a preparation for a happy life in the next world. In one of his
sermons he exhorted :

"O men of God! May God keep you happy and shower His favours upon you !
You should prepare yourselves for the long journey that awaits you.
There are many difficulties that beset your path. Death is ever anxious
to devour you. Renounce the riches of the world and catch hold of piety.
Life in this world is short whereas life after death will be
everlasting. Buy those commodities here (in this world) which will stand
you in good stead

in the other. Do not demean yourself before God, who is well acquainted
with your innermost feelings. Do not allow your soul to be lost in this
world before death may overtake you. 0 men! Cast a glance on this world
from a wise man's point of view. She (the world) casts out her guests in
a short space of time. She harasses those with whom she fondles and
prattles. Whatever part of life is wasted in idle pursuits can never be
retrieved. Its (world's) gratifications and enjoyments are soon changed
into sufferings and pain, its embellishments and decorations into
distortions and impoverishment. The days of this life are numbered.
Death is inevitable and is bound to come soon. After having adorned your
person with good deeds you should not pay any heed whether death catches
you or you catch death. Many men buy clothes, which instead of being
worn by them are used in their coffins. Many men build houses which
instead of becoming abodes become their graves. No one has lived forever
in this world and no one has invented such a medicine which may make men
immune from the clutches of death. Solomon the Prophet reigned with
great pomp and majesty but when his time came he had to depart from this
world. The world was left without him and his palaces are nothing but a
heap of ruins. (Take the case) of those men who lived in impregnable
citadels on the top of mountains guarded by a powerful army, but when
their time came, death ejected them from those fortified places and put
them to eternal sleep in graves. One can hear the whisper of the angels
over their graves "Where. are those stiffnecked people who boasted of
their pelf and power and their crowns and thrones? Where are their royal
robes? What became of those beauties whose radiance under veils dimmed
the light of (the sun) in this world? Where have gone those forts which
were decorated with golden curtains, in front of

which stood sentries (for watch and ward)? Do not they show us how
powerless they were? Have not the worms eaten their bodies, who only a
few days ago set a magnificent and sumptuous table with luxurious
plates? The vicissitudes of fortune have ruined their citadels,
destroyed their royal robes and reduced to dust their crown and
thrones?"

**His supplications
**

"Thanks be to my Lord ; He the Adorable, the only one to be adored. My
Lord, the Eternal, the Ever-existing, the Cherisher, the True Sovereign
whose mercy and might overshadow the universe; the Regulator of the
worm, and Light of the creation. Him do we worship; to Him belong all
worship; He existed before all things, and will exist after all that is
living has ceased. Thou art the adored, my Lord; Thou art the Master,
the Loving and Forgiving; Thou bestowest power and might on whom Thou
pleasest; him whom Thou hast exalted none can lower; and him whom Thou
hast lowered none can exalt. Thou, my Lord, art the Eternal, the
Creator, All-wise Mighty Sovereign; Thy knowledge encompasses
everything; Thy beneficence is all-pervading; Thy forgiveness and mercy
are all-embracing. 0 my Lord, Thou art the Helper of the afflicted, the
Reliever of all distress, the Consoler of the broken-hearted ; Thou art
present everywhere to help Thy servants. Thou knowest all secrets, all
thoughts, Thou art present in every assembly, Fulfiler of all our needs,
Bestower of all our blessings. Thou art the Friend of the poor and
bereaved ; my Lord, Thou art my Fortress; a Haven for all who seek Thy
help. Thou art the Refuge of the weak; the Helper of the pure and true.
0 my Lord, Thou art my Supporter, my Helper, the Helper of all who seek
Thy help. 0

my Lord, Thou art the Creator, I am only created; Thou art my
Sovereign, 1. am only Thy servant; Thou art the Helper, I am the
beseecher; Thou, my Lord art my Refuge; Thou art the Forgiver, I am the
sinner; Thou, my Lord, art the Merciful, All-knowing, All-loving; I am
groping in the dark; I seek Thy knowledge and love. Bestow, my Lord, all
Thy knowledge and love and mercy; forgive my sins, 0 my Lord, and let my
approach be only to Thee."

**His sayings
\>
**
There is no treasure like knowledge.

The realm of knowledge has no bounds.

The chief of talents is knowledge.

Knowledge leads to wisdom, accordingly the educated man is the wise
one; riches diminish by expenditure, while knowledge is increased by
dissemination.

A wise man needs each day an hour set apart in which to examine his
conscience, and measure what he has gained or lost.

The heart is the source of wisdom, with the ear as its channel.

Philosophy is a tree growing in the heart, and bearing its fruit on the
tongue.

Belief and wisdom are twin brothers; Allah accepts not the one without
the other.

While you live you die. Each breath of a man is a step nearer death.

Death awaits every living creature and everything must end.

You are the game that death hunts.

If you stand still, it will seize you;

If you flee, it will overtake you.

Books are the gardens of the learned.

The man of learning lives even after his death.

The ignorant man is dead, while still alive.

The scholar knows an ignorant man, because formerly he was ignorant
himself, but the ignorant knows not the scholar, never having been
one.

He is very unfortunate who cannot in his life-time gain a few sincere
friends and sympathisers and more unfortunate is the one who has gained
them and then to have lost them (through his deeds).

There is no greater wealth than wisdom,

No greater poverty than ignorance,

No greater heritage than culture,

And no greater friend and helpmate than consultation.

The strongest man is he who can fight against himself.

The strongest man is he who can make his reason conquer his passions.

Protect your wealth by means of Zakat.

Cure your sick through offering of Alms and destroy difficulties and
dangers through prayers.

One without pity for others will never be pitied.

Whoever has compassion upon orphans, will see his own children treated
kindly.

There is no better means of prolongation of life than Sadaqah (alms)
and there is no better thing than prayers for emancipation from evils.

There is no better method of making human beings look venerable than by
good manners and there is no better remedy than repentance for the
forgiveness of sins. Beware that Sadqah (Alms) is a curtain between
oneself

and the fire of hell and is an easy medium for the Pool-e-Serat and is
a protection from punishment.

Treat people in such a way and live amongst them in such a manner that
if you die they weep over you and if you are alive they crave for your
company.

I recommend five things to you, the attainment of which will be worth
any amount of hardship : Not to expect anything from anyone but from
God; not to fear anything but your sins; not to be ashamed to say, 'I do
not know', when asked about something you are not aware of; not to be
ashamed of learning a thing you do not know. Ever preserve the virtue of
patience, for patience in relation to Eeman' (Faith) is like the head in
relation to the body. And there is no good in a body which has no head,
neither in Eeman' which has no patience.

He who understands Divine Greatness never boasts.
A sincere friend is sincere even in hardships.

Do not envy the glory and magnificence of others, let not pride and
grandeur of this world puff you, nor let sorrow over its wickedness and
poverty depress you; for, all glory and magnificence shall fade, all
worldly bliss pass away and all evil and poverty surely end, as we shall
ourselves pass away.

**Humbleness and prostration bring nearness to God.
**


God the Almighty selected us from His Creation and selected for us our
followers who assist us. They are pleased when we are pleased and are
sorrowful in our sorrows. They give up their lives and property for our
cause. Therefore they are ours and will be with us in Paradise.

If you believe in God, abstain from forbidden things, then you will be
saved from all evils. If you please God, God will also please you.

Simplest way of attaining God's mercy is to be good to all humanity.

The descendants of the Prophet are his Confidants, the Shelter of his
commands, the Trustees of his knowledge, the Stronghold of the Quran and
the Mountains of his Faith.

It was his firm belief that a ruler should rule not to please himself
but to bring happiness to the ruled. And it was on the basis of this
principle that he laid down rules for his people to carry out :

(1) You must develop in yourself, kindness and love for your subjects.
Do not behave with them as if you were a ferocious beast.

(2) Muslims and non-Muslims should be treated alike. Muslims are your
brothers and non-Muslims are human beings just like you.

(3) Do not feel ashamed to forgive. Do not. be hasty with punishment.
Do not quickly lose your temper over mistakes and failures of those over
whom you rule. Anger and desire for vengeance are not going to be of
much use to you in administration.

(4) Do not allow favouritism and nepotism to force you to violate your
duties to God and man, and drive you towards tyranny and oppression.

(5) While selecting officers take care that you do not select such
persons as have served tyrannical and oppressive rulers and have been
responsible for atrocities and savage cruelties.

(6) Select honest and kind persons as your advisers and from amongst
them prefer those who speak out the bitter truth to you unreservedly
without fear or favour.

(7) Appointments in the first place must be on probation.

(8) Keep your officers well paid so that they may not be tempted to
practice corruption or misappropriation.

(9) Appoint confidential officers secretly to watch the activities of
your officers and staff and report to you about their behaviour.

(10) Your secretaries should be the cream of your civil, judicial or
military service. Choose the best among them irrespective of age or
period of service.

(11) All letters or applications should be dealt with by the officers
and replies or orders about them should be drafted by them only. No
subordinate must be allowed to be the eyes and the mind of these
officers.

(12) Take your subjects into your confidence and make them feel that
you are their well-wisher and friend.

(13) Never break a promise or go against the terms of a treaty. It is a
sin against God.

(14) You must take care of your traders but should never allow them to
resort to hoarding, black-marketing and profiteering.

(15) Help handicraft; it reduces poverty and raises the standard of
life.

(16) Agriculturists are assets to the state and should be protected.

(17) Remember that your sacred duty is to look after the poor, disabled
and the orphans. Let not your officers humiliate them, ill-treat them or
oppress them. Help

them, protect them and let them approach you whenever they are in need
of your help.

(18) Avoid bloodshed, do not kill anybody unless he deserves to be
killed according to the Canons of Islam.

Hazrat Ali's administration was too disturbed by civil war to allow him
to remedy the evils of the previous administration ; but he removed most
of the corrupt governors and established a state archive for the safe
custody and preservation of records of the Caliphate. He created the
office of 'Hajib' (chamberlain) and that of the 'Sahibush-Shurta'
(Captain of the Guard). He reorganised the police and regulated their
duties. Under his advice the era of 'Hijra' was established and schools
and mosques were also founded and endowed in every part of the empire.

Recognition of Ali's superiority
Ibn-e-Hajar Makki in Sawaiq-e-Muhariqa reports that Abubakr once said
:

"It would be difficult indeed for any one to pass over the bridge of
'Sire, on the Day of Judgment without getting a permit from Ali, because
this is what I have heard from the Holy Prophet."

Omar related that once the Holy Prophet said, "If the faith of the
inhabitants of the seven worlds be put on one side of the scale, and
that of Ali alone on the other side, verily Ali's side will weigh
heavier."

Imam Shafai's famous verse : "Ali will judge mankind and allot them
either paradise or hell. He was the leader of men and Jinns, the true
Testator of the Holy Prophet. If the followers of Ali are 'Raffizhes'
(the heterogeneous sect of Shias) verily I am one of that sect. Ali

at the time of the breaking of the symbols in the Kaaba put his feet on
that shoulder where God had put His hand on the 'Night of Meraj' and
verily Ali was that man into whose eyes shone the light of God."

Once, Imam Ahmad asked his father, Imam Hanbal, who was superior,
Moawiya or Ali, to which query Imam Hanbal replied, "Ali had numerous
enemies and all of them tried to find fault with him but they searched
in vain and could not find any flaw in him. At long last they joined
hands with Moawiya and declared war on Ali. When they failed to defeat
him by fair means they took to treacherous and deceitful courses to harm
him."

Ibn Athir says, "Ali was the first Caliph whose parents were pure
Hashimites and who was so judicial minded that he could not put up with
the dishonesty even if his friends or relatives were to indulge in it
and was so much engrossed in piety that at the time of his marriage with
Fatima, he did not possess anything save a camel skin, which he
converted into a bed sheet at night. The Prophet in his sayings has not
extolled any of his companions as much as he has Ali. Surely Ali never
spoke a lie in his life-time."

Some one asked the Umayyad Caliph, Omar bin Abdul Aziz (717-20 A.D.)
whom he considered the most pious man in the world, to which query he
replied, "Ali excelled mankind in piety. Not only this, but he tried
zealously to reform his friends, associates, acquaintances and all those
who came in contact with him."

Ibn Masud used to say that throughout Arabia there was no more
impartial judge than Ali.

Abu Saeed Khudiri held that he could easily detect a hypocrite by his
enmity towards Ali.

Abdullah ibn Abbas used to say, "Should schism seep into Islam, it
would be the bounden duty of the believers to attach themselves fast to
Ali (i.e. his teachings) and the Quran for I have heard the Prophet say,
'Ali was the first to believe in me, he will be the first to meet me in
Paradise and will be the greatest discriminator of truth from falsehood,
he is the leader of all the believers, he is the 'Sadiq-i-Akbar' (the
great truthful one) and is that door (of faith) the entry through which
will lead to Paradise."

(Munaqib ibn Murwaiyia)

**Ali's advent foretold in the Scriptures
**

After the creation of the world, God sent his prophets to illumine
mankind, the most auspicious of these being Abraham. In response to a
prayer to God, asking for a blessing, Abraham is said to have received
the answer : "Sarah, thy wife, shall bear thee a son and thou shall call
him Isaac : and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting
covenant for his seed after him. And as for Ishmael I have heard thee :
behold, I have blessed him and will make him fruitful and will multiply
him exceedingly, twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a
great nation." (Genesis 18 : 19-20).

The twelve princes referred to in this prophecy are obviously the
twelve Imams of whom the first is Ali, who drew his lineage from
Ishmael, as foretold by God. The rest of the Imams are in direct lineage
from Ali and Fatima, the daughter of the Holy Prophet.

**The various appellations
**

Thus, specially created by God and displaying divine traits of
character, Ali has been bestowed with many names.

The following appellations are those most generally added to Ali's name
"Moula" (Master), "Murtaza" (he with whom God is well pleased), "Haider"
(the lion), "Wali Allah" (Friend of God), "Haidar-i-Karrar" (the
impetuous lion), "Asad Allah al-Ghaib" (the victorious lion of God),
"Moula Mushkkil-Kusha" (the Master who solves the difficulties of
others), "Shah-i-Wilayat" (the King of the pious), "Abul Sibtayan" (the
father of Hasan and Husain, who are the leaders of the youths of
paradise), "Amin-ulMomineen" (Trustee of the faithful),
"Imam-ul-Mutakeen" (Leader of the Holy), "Sayyid-ul-Mornineen" (Master
of the believers-in-faith), "Khatum-ul-Wassee-een" (the Seal of
Prophet), "Amir-ul-Momineen" (the Commander of the faithful), "Al-Wasi"
(the Successor), "Al-Hadi" (the Guide), "Khair-ul-Bariyya." (the best of
the Creation).

He was born of the Divine Light that shone in God's sanctuary of the
Kaaba and was brought up in infancy by the Holy Prophet himself, brought
up by him as a son and was given his daughter in marriage. The Holy
Prophet imparted divine knowledge to him. And, on attaining manhood, Ali
stood by God's Apostle, risking all dangers for him, fighting all his
battles and displaying such un-. flinching fidelity that his name became
synonymous with loyalty and faithfulness.

**Ali's piety
**

When Ali offered his prayers he was frequently observed to be in a
strange physical condition. When asked to account for the pallor of his
face and the way in which his body trembled he replied, "I present
myself to the Almighty to render an account of the various obligations
that devolve on me and I do not know whether I have

discharged them dutifully by protecting the defenceless and aiding the
oppressed." His humility before God was one of the reasons why he was
regarded as a saint of saints. Another factor which made him
exceptionally pious was the important part which he assigned to prayer
in his daily life.

One day when the Holy Prophet was sleeping with his head in Ali's lap,
the time of "Asr" (afternoon prayers) had passed. Informed by Divine
revelation that he had caused Ali to miss his prayers, the Holy Prophet
said, "Verily, Ali was busy in the set vice of God and His Apostle. 0
Lord! Command Thy sun not to set yet and to come back into the world
again so as to enable Ali to perform his prayers." The Sun re-appeared
forthwith until Ali had finished his prayers.

In one of his many battles Ali is said to have been pierced by the head
of an arrow, which could not be extracted and which caused him great
pain for many months. One day, he was holding communion with God, he
went into a state of reverie and on emerging from this trance he found
that the head of the arrow had come out of its own accord, through the
intercession of Divine Favours.

Because Ali was considered to be the most pious and most holy of all
the believers in faith, the people also began to feel that God must have
rewarded him by granting him the power to perform miracles. Tales abound
of mira culous happenings. A withered tree grew again at Ali's touch;
pebbles turned into pieces of gold at his command, so that a believer in
faith could find money to pay back a Jewish usurer; Ali was gifted with
divine qualities.

