Chapter Iv: Ali As a Protector & Disciple of the Prophet
========================================================

**Hijrat and the conspiracy to murder Muhammad**

The Quraish, beholding with alarm the exodus of the followers of the
Prophet and dreading the consequences of the new alliance of Muhammad
and his followers with the people of Yathrib, formed a strong conspiracy
to prevent his escape to Yathrib, under any circumstances. They kept
close watch over the movements of the Prophet and took measures to
secure his person in order to put him to death. They held council to
discuss how they should do away with Muhammad. One opined that he should
be imprisoned in a cell having but a little hole, through which he
should be given scanty food till he dies. Another suggested that he
should be banished. These proposals were rejected by others as too mild
lest he should find means to escape and seek revenge. At length they
decided to kill him by forcing into his dwelling in the night; they
appointed one man from each of their families to join in the murderous
attack upon Muhammad. This was a ruse to trap the Hashimites into
avenging themselves on at least one family which would give their
enemies enough provocation and justification for a fight.

This conspiracy was hardly at work when the angel Gabriel appeared to
the Prophet, informed him of the scheme against him, and communicated to
him the permission of Allah to his Hijrat or emigration from Mecca to
Yathrib 1 that very night. This is mentioned in the Quran thus:

"And when the Infidels plotted against thee, that they might detain
thee (as prisoner) or put thee to death, or turn thee out; and they
plotted (against thee) but God laid a plot (against them); and God is
the best layer of plots. (i. e. God's watchfulness outwits the wicked in
frustrating their designs against the virtuous)." Sura VIII-30.

**Migration of the Prophet from Mecca**

By the time the murderers began to assemble before the dwelling of the
Prophet, he apprised his favourite cousin, Ali, of the impending danger,
and of his intention to leave the house at once for good. He directed
Ali to lie down on the bed in his place and cover himself with his (the
Prophet's) well known green mantle. Unhesitatingly Ali carried out the
instructions and Muhammad, repeating the ninth verse of Sura Ya Seen of
the Holy Book, sallied forth unobserved by the assailants as if they
were stricken with blindness.

"And We have set a barrier before them, and a barrier behind them; and
We have covered them with darkness; wherefore they shall not see." Sura
XXXVI-9.

His heart swelling with love and gratitude at being selected for such a
dangerous task, Ali asked his Master,

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Yathrib changed its
ancient name, and was henceforth styled Med inat un-Nabi, the City of
the Prophet, or shortly, Medina, the city par excellence.

"If I sleep here in your bed in your stead, will you be safe?" "Yes,"
said the Holy Prophet. He then instructed Ali to remain behind at Mecca
for some time in order to discharge for him certain trusts and charges
and bequests which were incumbent on the Prophet. He instructed Ali to
look after the women and children and send them to Medina quietly.

The task Muhammad entrusted to Ali was a major one, and no small an
undertaking for a youth of hardly twenty three years; but the way in
which he carried it out, showed Ali's astonishing capacity. He was
called upon to deputise for Muhammad at the risk of his own life, for it
was highly probable that the mob would kill Ali taking him to be
Muhammad, or else would get furious at being foiled of their chief
objective, and in that case would also kill him instead of the
Prophet.

When all the assassins had been assembled, they (in the words of W.
Irving) paused at the door and looking through a crevice, beheld, as
they thought, Muhammad wrapped in his green mantle, and lying asleep on
his couch. They waited for a while consulting whether to fall on him
while sleeping or wait until he should go forth. At length they burst
open the door and rushed towards the couch. The sleeper started up, but
instead of Muhammad, Ali, son of Abu Talib stood before them. Amazed and
confounded they demanded, "Where is Muhammad?" "I know not," replied Ali
sternly, and walked forth, nor did any one venture to molest him.

John Davenport describes the incident in the following words : "After
surrounding the house, the assassins then forcibly entered it, but
finding instead of their purposed victim, the youthful Ali, calmly and
resignedly awaiting the death intended for his Chief. So much devo
tedness excited the pity even of those men of blood, and Ali was left
unharmed."

**Ali's Devotion**

Ali's devotion to the Prophet without fear of running the risk of
losing his own life was much appreciated by the All-knowing Judge of
man, the merciful God, who sent down the angels Gabriel and Michael to
guard him from the murderous mob; and informed the Prophet on his way to
Medina of His approval of Ali's resignation to His Will, with the words
contained in Verse 20$ of Sura II of the Quran.

"And of men there is one who selleth his soul for the sake of seeking
the pleasure of God; and God is gracious unto His servants." Men of
understanding and intelligence will ever admire Ali till the end of time
for the tranquillity of mind displayed by him in the midst of this
terrible struggle between life and death.

Also, they will marvel at the Prophet's wise selection of Ali for this
night's dramatic performance.

Something in Ali's bearing, his intensely personal heroism, some
magnetic quality of his demeanour, must have been responsible for his
survival on this occasion. The mob held back and we know that Ali stayed
behind in Mecca for some days to return the properties left in trust by
the Holy Prophet to their rightful owners as directed.

**Ali hastened to Medina**

Having satisfactorily accomplished these responsibilities entrusted to
him and having arranged for the safe departure of the Prophet's family
members to Medina, Ali hastened forward on foot to Medina, travelling
only in the night and hiding himself in the day, lest he should fall
into the hands of the Quraish. He reached Qoba three days after the
arrival of the Prophet, with his feet sorely lacerated and bleeding. The
Prophet, overjoyed at seeing him, received him with open arms, and
finding him tired and exhausted, shed tears manifesting his fondness and
affection for him; he subsequently applied the moisture of his mouth to
the wounds of Ali's feet with his own hands and prayed for him. This
produced instantaneous relief.

The converts at Qoba desired the Prophet to lay the foundation stone of
a mosque for them. The Prophet asked some of his companions to ride on
his camel and to make a circuit round the place. It was his intention to
build a mosque in the place where the camel stopped. Some of his
companions mounted on the back of the camel, but it refused to budge.
Then the Prophet asked Ali, his vicegerent, to make the attempt. As soon
as Ali set foot in the stirrups, the camel stood up and the Prophet
directed Ali to let the animal go by itself without guiding it. Ali let
loose the rein, and the camel went round a small piece of ground and
came back to its starting point and knelt down. The Prophet marked the
site and fixing the position of Qibla, he laid the foundation stone for
the mosque. There is a mention of this mosque in the Quran vide Sura
IX-109 last portion.

This was the last halt of the Prophet before he set out for Medina.
Qoba is situated only two miles to the south of Medina, and is
remarkable for its beauty and fertility.

The Holy Prophet left Qoba on Friday the 16th Rabi I., corresponding
(according to Mr. Caussin de Perceval) with the 2nd of July 622 1.

Boreida b. Al Hasib with his seventy neophytes (new converts) formed a
procession, carrying as standard his lance with a piece from his turban
fastened to its upper end.

It being Friday, the Prophet stopped at Raanawna, a place midway
between Qoba and Medina, and performed his Friday Prayers, followed by a
sermon to the Muslims present. This Friday Service and the Sermon were
the first, to be observed always thereafter.

When the Prophet after the Service, was proceeding to Medina, the whole
spectacle with its ceremonial solemnity looked really grand, like a
triumphal procession headed by a monarch, increasing in its majestic
grandeur as it approached the City, where thousands of spectators had
assembled to have a look at the great Prophet of Islam. History of the
world records no greater example of the triumph of truth.

Each tribe, which he passed through, desired the honour of his presence
and requested him to take up his abode with them. The Prophet, refusing
all these offers, said that the camel, which he rode on, was inspired
and would take him to the proper quarter. The camel proceeded on to the
eastern sector and knelt down in the open courtyard of the Banu Najjar,
near the house of Khalid b. Zaid, known in history as Abu Ayyub Ansari,
the then head of the Banu Najjar family-the family to which Muhammad's
grand father Abd-al-Mottalib's mother Selma belonged. He was delighted
to be fortunate to have the honour of the Prophet's presence.
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 Caussin de Perceaval Vol. iii. pp. 17-20; Ibn-Hisham p. 335. 18

After his arrival in Medina, one of the first acts of the Holy Prophet
was to establish the brotherhood, individually between the people of
Medina (known as AnsarsHelpers) and the emigrants of Mecca known as
Mohajirs, and\_to lay the foundation of the Prophet's mosque known as
Masjid-e-Nabavi.

The Prophet inculcated the fundamental principle that brotherhood
depended not on blood but on faith alone. The rights of family
inheritance within Islam, were expressly valid and sacred. These
mandates resulted in a considerable extension of the Muslim community.

His own brotherhood the Prophet bestowed upon Ali, his cousin, as
previously he had done in Mecca, declaring according to Suyuti, "Thou
art My Brother in this world and in the next".

The Muslims were sympathetic and considerate to one another after the
brotherhood was enjoined. They were so zealous in their faith that
nothing else came before Islam; and anything outside of it was looked
upon as unholy. In fact, they were animated with a strange spirit of
firmness in their adherence to the Prophet and of cohesiveness to hold
together. Gibbon gives the account in the following words : "To
eradicate the seeds of jealousy. Muhammad judiciously coupled his
principal followers with the rights and obligations of brethren; and
when Ali found himself without a peer, the Prophet tenderly declared
that he would be the companion and brother of the noble youth. The
expedient was crowned with success; the Holy fraternity was respected in
peace and war, and the two parties vied with each other in a generous
emulation of courage and fidelity." W. Smith's p. 460. The ordinance of
brotherhood is given thus in the Quran :

"Verily those who believe and have emigrated and have tried with their
substance and their souls for the cause of God, and those who have given
them shelter and been helpful, shall be near of kin (heirs) the one to
the other." Sura VIII-73 1.

The Holy Prophet took up his temporary residence in the house of Abu
Ayub Ansari for seven months, until the Masjid-e-Nabavi, with proper
quarters for himself, was built in the courtyard where the camel had
stopped.

The construction work was distributed among the Mohajirs and the
Ansars-the Prophet, too, had his share of the work. But he was seldom
allowed to work, as Ammar Yasir used to accomplish the Prophet's share
of work in addition to his own. Ammar Yasir was the first and foremost
to begin the foundation of the mosque, and Ali was the first to offer
his services as a labourer working alongside with the other members of
the fraternity, shovelling the earth when the foundations were being
laid and later carrying on his shoulders, baskets of mortar and brick
which he passed on to the masons. While thus labouring, Ali used to
recite the following verse :

Whosoever builds a mosque
And works whether sitting or standing
Puts up with the pain of labour
While others shirk work
For fear of dust and pain
Both of these verily Cannot equal each other.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Taliquat Ibn-e-Saad
Vol. III page 13, Riazunnazarah Vol. II page 1, Usdul Ghalia Vol. I page
269, Muntakheb Kanz-ul Ummal page 145, Kunuz-ul-Haquaiq page 20.

When the mosque and residential houses were ready, the Prophet and Ali,
(his chosen companion) shifted from their temporary residence to the
permanent ones.

**CLOSING OF THE DOORS OPENING INSIDE THE PROPHET'S MOSQUE.**

Later on, some companions of the Prophet also built their houses close
to the Mosque with doors opening into the courtyards. Sometime
afterwards, while they were leisurely sitting in the Mosque, a voice was
heard : "Ye people! Close your doors opening into the Mosque." The
people were struck with wonder to hear the voice, but they sat dumb
without stirring to carry out the Command, till they heard again the
injunction to close the doors on pain of Divine Wrath. Terrified at this
warning, they all approached the Prophet, who was in his apartment. Ali
also came out of his apartment which was adjacent to the Prophet's rooms
since the day of Fatima's marriage with him. He stood by the Prophet
when he ordered that all the doors opening into the Mosque, excepting
that of Ali and his own, should be closed. People began to murmur. The
Prophet was angry at their attitude and addressed them thus : "Verily,
God ordered His apostle Moses to build a holy Mosque, and he allowed
Moses, Aaron and the two sons of Aaron, viz. Shabbar and Shabbir, to
live therein. I was likewise ordered to construct a holy mosque wherein
myself and my brother Ali and his two sons, Hasan and Husain are allowed
to live. Verily, I do only what I am ordered to do. I never undertake to
act on my own wish. Certainly I have not ordered of my own accord to
close your doors or to let Ali's door open. It is God who granted Ali an
abode in the Holy Mosque." Consequently, the companions, whose houses
skirted the quadrangle of the Mosque, closed their doors.

It is recorded on the authority of Sa'd, that the Apostle of God said
to Ali : "It is not lawful for any to be in the Mosque while under the
obligation of performing a thorough ablution except for me and for
thee," Major Jarret's translation of Suyuti's His. p. 175.

Omar b. Al-Khattab said : " Verily, Ali hath been endowed with three
qualities, of which had I but one, it would be more precious to me than
were I given high bred camels." It was asked of him what they were? He
replied : "His marriage with Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet; his
remaining in the Mosque while that is permitted to him which is not
lawful for me; and carrying the Standard on the day of Khaibar." Major
Jarret's translation of Suyuti's His. p. 175. Tirmizi Mishkath 463,
Nasai page 9, Riazunnazarah Vol. II page 192, Ibn-e-Maghazili and
Kanzul-Ummal page 29.

**CHAPTER V: ALI'S MARRIAGE WITH FATIMA THE DAUGHTER OF THE HOLY
PROPHET**

During the second year of Hijrat, Hazrat Ali's marriage with Fatima,
the only daughter of the Holy Prophet, took place. Muhammad had received
many offers for her hand from very rich families in Medina, as also from
the chiefs of mighty clans in Arabia but he declined to consider these
offers. He said he was awaiting the order of God for the person to whom
his daughter should be wedded.

Some one then suggested to Hazrat Ali that he should place a proposal
for himself before the Holy Prophet. Ali approached the Prophet feeling
shy and modest, but when Muhammad heard the proposal he was so pleased
that he smiled and said, "Ahlan wa Merhaban" (It is a welcome and happy
proposal.)

Muhammad took the consent of his daughter for this proposal. The
betrothal of Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet, to his cousin and
faithful disciple, Ali, took place in the month of Ramazan 2 A.H., but
the nuptial ceremonies were performed two months later in Zilhajj. This
alliance - as revealed to the Prophet-was ordained by God, Who, he said
to Fatima, had informed him of his choice from the noblest on the earth
of two blessed men, one being her father (himself) and the other her
husband (Ali); and that he had decreed his (the Prophet's) lineal
descendants to spring forth from the couple (Ali and Fatima) and not
direct from himself.

According to Dailami in Firdous-ul-Akhbar, Khuiar Zamin Manaqib and
Yousuf Kanji in Kifayat-ut-Talile, the Holy Prophet announced that
Gabriel had brought the good news that God had performed the marriage of
Fatima and Ali in Heaven and the Prophet should perform the same on
earth.

All the Muhajireen and Ansar of Medina assembled in the mosque, while
Hazrat Ali was seated before the Holy Prophet with all the modesty of a
bridegroom. The Holy Prophet first recited an eloquent sermon and then
announced, "I have been commanded by God to get Fatima wedded to Ali,
and I do hereby solemnize the matrimony between Ali and Fatima on a
dower of 400 Misquall." Then he asked Hazrat Ali, "Do you consent to it
0 Ali?" "Yes, I do, 0 Holy Prophet of God." Then the Holy Prophet raised
his hands in supplication and prayed thus : "O my God ! Bless both of
them, sanctify their progeny and grant them the keys of Thy beneficence,
Thy treasures of wisdom and Thy genius; and let both of them be a source
of blessing and peace to my people." Then Ali prostrated himself before
God. After a service of thanksgiving in which the Holy Prophet asked God
for His blessings on the couple, praying, "O Almighty Lord! Bless them
both and better their endeavours and give them noble children". The
marriage was then performed. Addressing Ali, the Holy Prophet then said,
"O Ali, lucky art thou indeed! Of all the virtuous women of the world,
your wife is queen." Then turning towards Fatima the Holy Prophet said,
"Of all the virtuous men of the world your husband is the king. May God
keep you pious and chaste and bless your children. Verily I am a friend
to him who befriends you both and an enemy to him who is your enemy."

From this marriage, Ali and Fatima had two sons, Imam Hasan and Imam
Husain, and two daughters, Janab-e-Zainab and Janab-e-Umme Kulsoom.

The wedding ceremony of the only daughter of Muhammad well demonstrates
the ideal simplicity with which it was conducted. The wedding feast was
of dates and olives; the nuptial couch was a sheepskin; the ornaments,
the general outfit and the articles of necessity for the bride
consisting of only a pair of silver armlets, two shirts, one head tiara,
one leather pillow containing palm leaves, one grinding mill, one
drinking cup, two large jars and one pitcher. This was all, compatible
with the circumstances of the Prophet Muhammad and his son-in-law Ali,
who had to sell his coat of mail to raise the dowry required.

It may be recalled that Fatima's mother was that generous lady Khadija
whose fabulous wealth was spent by the Prophet on the widows and orphans
of Muslims, and who was content even when nothing was left for her
daughter.

The true grandeur of the marriage lay not in the ostentations, but in
the blessings of Heaven for which the marriage is the most memorable in
the annals of Islam. The couple tied in matrimonial alliance by God-were
destined to be the parents of an illustrious progeny termed the sons of
the Prophet, who are distinguished from, the rest of the Muslim world as
divinely commissioned Imams or the Commanders of the Faithful, and the
rightful successors of the Apostle of God. They are universally
acknowledged by Muslims as the fountain-head of piety and wisdom. Hasan
and Husain, the sons of Ali and Fatima, played in the lap of the
Prophet, who showed them proudly from his pulpit and called them the
Chiefs of the youths of Paradise. The parents themselves were as exalted
as their children. The Prophet used to say, "I am the city of knowledge
and Ali is its gate." Ali, the gallant hero as he proved himself on all
occasions of undaunted valour, had won for himself the title of 'Lion of
God' from the Prophet. Fatima, who possessed the love and confidence of
the Prophet and God, was ranked as one of the four ladies 'Perfect in
Faith' with whom God had deigned to bless this earth, viz. 1 Asia, the
wife of Pharaoh, Mary, the mother of Jesus, Khadija, the wife of
Muhammad, and Fatima, the wife of Ali.

1 It is related that Asia, the daughter of Mozahem, because she
believed in Moses, her husband cruelly tortured her, fastening her hands
and feet to four stakes, and laying a large millstone on her breast; her
face, at the same time was exposed to the scorching heat of the sun; her
anguish, however was alleviated by the angels shading her with their
wings and the view of the mansion prepared for her in paradise, which
was revealed to her on her

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 'Sale' from
Jalaluddin-al-Zamakhshari.

pronouncing the prayer in the text: at length God received her soul;
or, as some say, she was taken up alive into paradise, where she eats
and drinks.

The Holy Prophet called Fatima the Chief of the women of Paradise and
superior to all of them, and according to Bokhari, Muslim, Tirmizi,
Dailami, Tibrani, Hakim, Abu Nayeem and a host of commentators, the Holy
Prophet enjoined that Fatima is a part and parcel of himself and whoever
caused the slightest grief to her, caused grief to the Prophet and to
God Himself and that God is pleased with those with whom Fatima is
pleased and God is angry on those who have incurred the wrath of
Fatima.


