Chapter Vi: Ali the Heroic Deffender of Islam
=============================================

**The first battle of Islam at BADR**

(200 Miles from Mecca and 80 Miles from Medina) The emigration of the
Holy Prophet to Medina had turned the enemies from Mecca more hostile,
and they constantly kept on thinking how they could overthrow him, and
put an end to Islam. The Meccans and their allies started to bring their
raids to the very outskirts of Medina, destroying the fruit trees of the
Muslims and carrying away their flocks.

The winter of 624 A. D. saw the invasion of Medina by a strong force of
Meccans led by Abu Jahl (an uncle of the Prophet) consisting of an army
of 1000 strong with 700 camels and 100 horses.

Receiving information about this force, the Prophet decided to meet the
enemy outside Medina. He set out with three hundred and thirteen of his
followers. This small force was marshalled out of Medina with the
youthful Ali holding the Banner of the Prophet. 1

Warfare in those days followed a different pattern. Before the general
battle began, a number of duels were fought between the leading warriors
on each side. When the Muslims reached the fertile vale of Badr, a
favourite watering place and camping ground on the caravan route, three
stations northwards from Mecca, the Prophet ordered a halt, taking up a
suitable position near a stream of fresh water, to await the arrival of
the infidel army. It was on the next day, Friday, 17th Ramazan 2 A.H. or
January 13th 624 A.D., that the enemy, blowing their trumpets,
approached the Muslims, and both forces were arrayed in battle.

Three of the infidel warriors, Utba, the father-in-law of Abu Sufyan,
his brother Shaiba, and Al-Walid came out of the ranks and arrogantly
challenged the Muslims. Three Ansars of Medina stepped forward to meet
this challenge. This greatly enraged the Meccans who refused to combat
with the Ansars saying, "We have not come all this way to cross arms
with the Medinites, against whom we bear no grudge. We challenge the
people of Mecca who have the courage to defy us." Upon this Ali and
Ubayd ah, cousins of the Prophet, and Hamza his uncle, responded to the
challenge. In the words of Col. Bodley, "At the taunt of the Quriashite,
Ali dashed out of the Muslim ranks glitering in breast-plate and helmet.
He was soon followed by Ubaydah bin al-Harith, a paternal cousin of
Muhammad and Hamza who wore an ostrich feather in his cuirass. The three
companions were thus closely related to Muhammad and fulfilled the
Quraish for Hashimite blood!"

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Tabari; Kamil; Ibn
Athir; Ahmad Hanbal; Durr Manthur.

"The three duels were as rapid as they were murderous. Hamza killed
Shaiba, while Ali killed Al-Walid. Ubaydah was mortally wounded, but
before he fell, Ali and Hamza were able to come to his rescue. Hamza
hurled himself at Utba, and with a sweep of his sword cut off his head.
In a few minutes three of Mecca's most important warriors had been sent
to find out the truth about the hell which Muhammad had promised
them!"

"With a cry of rage three more Meccans darted from under Abu Jahl's
banner and assailed the Muslim champions (Ali and Hamza). They too went
down before the sword of Islam. A further three were dealt with the same
fate. There was a moment of hesitancy among the Quraishites. Muhammad
did not miss his advantage. With a sharp order he sent his soldiers
charging into a general attack."

The line of the Quraish wavered and a number of their bravest and
noblest fell; they took to flight ignominously, and in their haste to
escape they threw away their armour and abandoned their transport
animals with all their camp and equipage. Seventy of the bravest Quraish
were slain and forty-five taken prisoners, and their commander, Abu
Jahl, was amongst the slain.

Though it was the first engagement of the youthful Ali, he showed
surprising results and was praised by one and all. He killed no less
than sixteen-though some historians give him credit for thirty-six--of
the bravest and the most prominent of the Quraish army.

**Battle of OHAD.**

1 The Prophet reached Ohad in the morning of Saturday, the 7th of
Shawwal, 3 A.H. (January or February 625 A.D.)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Ibn Athir, Ibn
Hisham; Tabari

and found the Meccan forces face to face, ready to advance for the
battle. The Quraish advanced in the form of a crescent and the right
wing of their cavalry was led by Khalid b. Walid, a notorious warrior.
Abu Amir, a Meccan champion, stepping forward with his fifty archers,
showered the arrows first towards the Muslims, who retaliated promptly.
Thus the fight began. The Meccan archers turned back and their standard
bearer, Talha b. Abi Talha, coming forth, challenged the Muslims. Ali
stepped forward and struck off one of his legs. He fell down and another
champion hoisted the standard. He was killed by Hamza. A third now took
the standard and he was slain by Ali. Thus nine or ten standard bearers
fell one after the other only by Ali's sword. 1 It is a noteworthy
incident that Talha the first standard bearer of the Meccans lost one of
his legs by a stroke of Ali's sword, fell down and his lower garment
being loosened, he became naked. Ali, instead of finishing him, turned
his face from him and hit him no more. The Prophet marked the event and
exclaimed, "Allah O Akbar" (Great is the Lord), and when he asked Ali
why he had spared the man, he said the man was nude and entreated for
the sake of Allah to spare his life. Ali and Hamza, the champions of
Badr, unsparingly dealing out death, worked havoc among the enemy.
Hamza, however, while duelling with Saba b. Abd-al-Uzza, a Meccan
champion, was treacherously speared from behind by Wahshi, an Ethiopian
slave, who lurked behind a rock with that intent, having been promised
by Hinda, the wife of Abu Sofyan, his freedom, if he could avenge the
death of her father and brother slain by Ali and Hamza in the battle of
Badr. Now Ali, taking Abu Dajana' Mos'ab b.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Tabari; Ibn Athir.

Omeir and Sahel b. Honeif, Muslim champions with him, charged the
enemy. The force of the charge broke the ranks of the enemy, the whole
host wavered and Ali with his Muslim champions, gained the enemy's camp.
They made the Meccan army turn and flee, leaving their camp to the
Muslims, who at once proceeded to approppriate it.

1 But their eagerness for spoil turned the tide of victory, which was
already gained by Ali and his Muslim champions. The archers posted at
the defile deserted their posts to join in the plunder, leaving the
subaltern, Abdallah b. Jobeir, in spite of his protests, with only about
ten men. Khalid, the Meccan commander of the cavalry, who behind the
defile was awaiting a suitable chance to effect his charge, succeeded in
dexterously emerging through and cutting down the small guard of the ten
men, and charged furiously the rear of the Muslims. Mos'ab b. Omeir, a
champion of Muhammad, who bore a great resemblance to him, fell dead.
Ibn Soraqa proclaimed aloud that Muhammad was slain. The flying Meccans
turned hack. Their banner, which was lying low on the ground, was picked
up by a Meccan named Omra bint Alqama and then lifted high up by a slave
named Sowab and the Meccans clustered around it. Most of the Muslims,
including many of the Companions of the Prophet took to flight. 2 This
sudden change of fortune checked the Muslims, who found themselves
surrounded by the Meccans. It

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Ibn Athir ;
Tarikh-al-Khamis. Tabari; Tarikh-al- Khamis; Tafsir Kabir;
Minhaj-al-Nabowat.
2 Tarikh al Khamis, Tabari, Tafsir Kabir, Tafsir Dur-re-Mansoor,
Suyuti. Tafsir Gharaib-ul-Bajan Neshapuri, Mustadrik and ad at- i
f-un-Nabowat

was all confusion so that it was not easy to distinguish friend from
foe. Discipline could not be restored.

Some were saying that Muhammad would not have been killed 1 had he been
a true Prophet, 2 others were talking of seeking pardon of Abu Sufyan
and taking refuge with him. (Sur. III-138 refers to these people thus:
"And Muhammad is no more than an Apostle; already there have passed
before him Apostles: what then if he dies or is killed, will ye turn
back on your heels? But he who turneth back on his heels will not harm
God at all; surely God will reward the grateful." Sur.. 111-142 refers
to them thus : "O ye who believe, if ye follow those who disbelieve,
they will turn ye back upon your heels, and ye shall be turned back
losers.")

3 Some of the Prophet's adherents, however, resolved not to survive him
and they fought and perished in the struggle. Anas b. Nadzar, uncle to
Anas b. Malik, having seen Omar b. Khattab and Talha b. Obeidallah
sitting leisurely along with some others, asked them what they were
doing. They said they had nothing to do since Muhammad was slain.
Hearing these words Anas addressed them aloud thus: "My friends ! Though
Muhammad be slain, certainly Muhammad's Lord liveth and dieth not :
therefore value not your lives since the Prophet is dead, but fight for
the cause for which he fought." Then he cried out, "O God! I am excused
before Thee, and acquitted in Thy sight of what they say," and drawing
his sword fought valiantly till he was killed. Sale p. 52, from
Al-Beidzawi. The Angel Gabriel appeared to the Prophet with the verse
which meant to inform him that

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Tabari; Ibn
Hisham.
2 Tarikh-al-Khamis.
3 Tabari-vol-iii, Ibn, Athir; Tarikh-a1-Khamis.

among his followers there were persons who looked only to this life and
also those who cared for the next life. (Sur-iii-l46 "Of you are those
who chose this present world and of you are those who adopted the world
to come hereafter.")

Ali, who was still defending bravely, ran to the Prophet who was all
alone, and stood by his side. 1 The Prophet inquired why he did not flee
with the others, to which he replied that he belonged to him and had no
business with the others and that he being a believer would not like to
turn a disbeliever or an infidel. Presently, one after the other two
parties of the Quraish were sent to attack the Prophet. He asked Ali to
defend him, and the gallant hero repulsed them with such intrepidity
that he was praised 2 by Angels, whose voioe was heard saying :
"Zulfiqar is the only effective sword and Ali the unique champion."

**Ali helped by Gabriel.**

3 Ali received sixteen wounds, four of which were so serious that he
was falling down from his horse, but on each of these occasions a
beautiful youth took hold of him, lifted him up to his saddle and
soothed him with these encouraging words : "Go on fighting, 0 hero! God
and His Prophet appreciate thy services." This was none other than
Gabriel the Evangel, who praised Ali to the Prophet for his zeal and
ardent devotion to him at the time when all others had deserted him. The
Prophet told Gabriel : "No wonder! Ali comes of me and I

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Tabari ; Ibn Athir ;
Madarij-al-Nabowat, Habib-ql-Siyar ; Rawdzat-al-Ahbab.
2 Habib-al-Siyar; Rawdzat-al-Ahbab.
3 Madarij-al-Nabowat; Ma'arij-al-Nabowat.

myself come of him," i.e. booth of us are part and parcel of one and
the sane Celestial Light;" whereupon Gabriel remarked that he also come
s of both of them, i.e. he also was created from tie same Light as
Muhammad and Ali.

**The Prophet Wounded.**

In the melee above referred to, Obba b. Khalf, a Meccan champion,
rushed towards the Prophet aiming at him with his spear; but he was
himiself killed with his own spear; the Prophet snatching it out of his
hands and dealing him a blow, striking him dead. Another tradition 1
says that he had received a wound from the Prophet's own hand but died
of the same wound on his return to Mecca. Soon after this, the Prophet
was wounded by a stone from a sling aimed at him by Otba, brother of
Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas, which strucck the Prophet on the mouth, cutting his
lips and shatterring two of his front teeth. 2 He was wounded en the
face also by an arrow, the iron head of which could not be extracted by
himself, and he lay bleeding for some time on the ground. 3 Blessed the
timely aid and friendly hand of Ali, who, repulsing the enemy, came back
and finding the Prophet in this condition conveyed him to a place of
safety, extracted the arrowhead, staunched his blood and tended him,
aided by his wife Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet. No doubt Ali
proved himself now, as before and as hereafter, the defender or
right-hand of thee Prophet on all occasions of danger, in confirrnity
with Good's Decree which the Prophet had seen inscribed in Heave n on
the night of his Me'raj.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Al Bedzawi
2 Ibn Athir; Tarik-a1Khamis.
3 Tarikh Islam by Zakir Hosaini (vol. ii. page 1000).

The reader may also recall the way Ali risked his own life in defending
the Prophet, on the occasion of his escape from Mecca, by laying himself
upon the couch in place of the Prophet, covering himself with the
Prophet's well-known green mantle, and thus misleading the Meccans for
some hours in their search and pursuit of the Prophet, who succeeded
during the interval to hide himself in a cave on mount Thaur a hill to
the South of Mecca.

**The end of the Battle.**

On finding out that the Prophet was only wounded and not killed, the
Muslims began to rally round him. The Meccans, having no courage to rout
them, contented themselves with the honour of snatching back the victory
from Muhammad; and left the field after mangling and mutilating the dead
bodies of the Muslims. Halting at Rowha, 8 miles homeward from Ohad, Abu
Sufyan felt uneasy at the utter fruitlessness of his campaign and began
to contemplate a raid upon Medina. The Prophet, on the other hand,
suspecting some treachery at the enemy's hasty retreat, resolved on
immediate action and so pursued them next morning as far as
Hamra-al-Asad, where he was informed that the Meccans receiving
intelligence of his advance had already taken their road home.

The Meccans lost one hundred and three men in the battle; of these,
twenty-one had fallen under the sword of Ali. Among the Muslims there
were seventy martyrs. The bravest of the Muslims who fell dead in the
battle, were Hamza b. Abd-al-Mottalib, Mos'ab b. Omeir, Sa'd b. Al-Rabi,
Ammara b. Ziyad and Hantzala a son of Abu Amir, the Meccan champion, who
was the first to come forward from the ranks of the Meccans with fifty
archers to charge the Muslims. Among the slain, the body of the
Prophet's uncle Hamza b. Abd-al-Mottalib was found mutilated. The fiend.
Hinda, wife of Abu Sufyan, had his liver taken out, sucked it and
quenched her thirst for avenging the death of her father who was killed
by Hamza in Badr. The Prophet collected all the dead bodies of the
Muslims and buried them, offering prayers for each. He observed that the
martyrs were his companions, for whose perfection in faith he would bear
witness on the Day of Judgment.

Death of Ali's Mother.

Ali's mother, Fatima-binte-Asad, also loved Muhammad like a son from
the time when, at the age of six, he entered her home. After the death
of Abd-al-Mottalib, she had affectionately looked after him. At the time
of her death in the year 4 A.H., the Holy Prophet had her covered with
his own shirt, after her bath preparatory to her burial. He took part in
the digging of her grave, and when it was ready, he first lay down in
the grave and sanctified it, then he prayed for her. When the people
asked him the reason for showing such favours to the deceased, the Holy
Prophet replied, "After Abu Talib if ever I was grateful to any one, it
was this pious soul who mothered me, nurtured me, brought me up and took
me as her very own son."

The Battle of Khandaq.

The Jews were not idle after being expelled and formed a coalition with
the other tribes who were banished from time to time. They left no stone
unturned to annihilate their common enemy, the Prophet. They stirred up
the Jews of Khaibar to join them against him. They sent deputations to
the Bedouin tribes and to the Quraish in Mecca. They succeeded in
concluding a treaty with the Meccans, binding them conjointly to oppose
Muhammad to the last. They also succeeded in bringing about an alliance
with the great Bedouin tribes of Ghatafan, Solaim, Bani Qais and Bani
Asad to suppress Islam. It was contemplated to attack Medina in a body
in order to destroy the Prophet and his religion at its very roots.

The Meccans, four thousand strong, having three hundred horses and
fifteen hundred camels, were joined by six thousand of the allies from
the Jews and the Bedouin tribes; and the three armies set out, ten
thousand strong, under the command of Abu Sufyan in the month of
Shawwal, 5 A.H. (Feb. 627 A.D.)

**The Entrenchment Defence.**

1 The Prophet received intelligence of the invasion before the approach
of the enemy, but had little time to prepare for a confrontation. He
resolved this time to defend himself at Medina, so he began preparations
for a siege. The stone houses of the town were built so close to one
another as to make a high strong and continuous wall for a long
distance, excepting the north-west corner, where a wide open gap could
afford the enemy an easy ingress. At this place, at the happy suggestion
of Salman Farsi, who was familiar with the mode of defending cities in
other countries, a trench, fifteen feet in width and fifteen feet in
depth, was dug. The work was portioned out amongst the Muslims, the
Prophet himself sharing it by carrying the excavated earth. In six days
the trench was finished, deep and wide along almost the whole length
of

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Tabari, Ibn Athir,
Rawdzat-al-Ahbab.

the defence. The houses outside the own were evacuated, and the women
and child en were accommodated for safety on the tops of the
double-storied houses within the entrenchment. These arrangements were
hardly completed when the approach of the enemy was reported. The Muslim
army was immediately marshalled and entrenched behind the ditch; and the
Prophet encamped in the centre of the entrenchment in a tent of red
leather, on a space appearing like a crescent. The camp had the rising
ground of 'Sila' on its rear and the trench in front.

The enemy on beholding the trench was struck dumb with astonishment.
This mode of defence was not known to the Arabs, and they were at a loss
to understand how to overcome this obstacle; they therefore laid siege.
Unable to come to close quarters for some time, they perseveringly
directed their attacks with archery. Meanwhile, Abu Sufyan attempted to
instigate the Jewish tribe of Qoraitza to break their pact of allegiance
with Muhammad.

The Qoraitza Jews breaking their Pact of Neutrality.

The Nadzirite Hoyay b. Akhtab, the most zealous promoter of opposition
against Muhammad was sent to negotiate with Ka'b b. Asad, the prince of
the Qoraitza Jews, and he succeeded in winning him over to the side of
Abu Sufyan, disregarding the pact of neutrality with the Prophet. It was
agreed that the Qoraitza would assist the Quraish after ten days'
preparation, and would attack the rear of the Muslim army from the
northwestern quarter of the town, which lay on the south-east of their
fortress and was easily accessible to them.

Rumours of this reached the Prophet, who deputed two chief men of the
Aws and the Khazraj, Sa'd b. Moazh and Sa'd b. Obada respectively, to
ascertain the truth.

They proceeded towards the Jews, and, after making searching enquiries,
came back and reported to the Prophet that the temper of the Jews was
even worse than feared.

This news alarmed him. These apprehensions having been confirmed, it
was necessary to guard against surprise or treachery. The north-western
quarter of the town, which lay on the side of the Jewish stronghold, was
the least capable of defence. To protect the families of his followers
throughout the city, the Prophet could do nothing but to detach a
considerable number of men from his force of three thousand, which was
barely adequate for the long line of the entrenchment. To meet this
emergency, he had to deploy two parties, one of three hundred men under
Zaid bin Haritha, his freed man, and another of two hundred men under a
chief of Medina, to patrol the streets and lanes of the town day and
night.

Thus the strength of the force at the Defence was reduced to 2,500 men,
as against the 10,000 of the enemy. The prolongation of the siege was
still more troublesome to the Muslims, as the already inadequate number
of men guarding 'the outposts of the entrenchment line got no relief;
they were wearied with keeping a vigilant watch unceasingly day and
night. Besides hunger, on account of having fallen short of provisions,
they had to suffer very much from the heat of the sunny days and the
chill of the cold nights in the open air.

The Enemy clearing The Ditch.

More than a fortnight had thus elapsed, when at length a select party
of the besiegers' horsemen found the narrowest and weakly guarded part
of the Ditch. Amr b. Abd Wudd, Nawfal b. Abdallah and Dzarar b.
Al-Khattab led by Ikrima b. Abu Jahl, spurring their horses leaped
forward towards the Muslims, and challenged them to single combat. ' Abu
Sufyan with Khalid b. Walid waited on the other side of the trench to
witness the issue of the fight.

In the battle of the 'Khandaq' (or the Ditch) when Muhammad had to meet
the maximum strength of the forces of the heathens from Mecca and when
everyone in the Muslim camp had refused to go against Amr, the
challenging hero of the enemy, it was only Ali who, although a youth,
readily offered to fight the giant warrior. When Ali stepped forward
against the giant warrior the Apostle of God exclaimed: 'Goeth forth the
whole of Faith against the whole of infidelity.'

**Ali wins the day.**

1 The Muslims at the sight of Amr were awe-struck and paralysed. None
of them ventured to come forward as his antagonist, as he was famous for
his prowess and was reckoned among the Arabs as one equal to one
thousand antagonists. None but Ali stood up, but the Prophet bade him
wait. Again Amr roared for his opponent and again Ali was forthcoming,
but the Prophet stopped him. At his third call, he tauntingly asked the
Muslims whether none of them wished to enter Paradise as a martyr. Still
no one was found to respond to the challenge except Ali, who impatiently
stepped forward. The Prophet, now permitted Ali, and putting his own
turban upon his head, his own coat of mail over his body, armed him with
his own sword the Zulfigar and sent him to his adversary.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Rawdzat-al-Ahbab;
Tarikh-al-Khamis; Rawdzat-al-Safa; Habibal-Siyar.

"It is a struggle between Faith and infidelity.; the embodiment of the
former is bound to crush the entirety of the latter," 1 exclaimed the
Prophet, when Ali, the illustrious hero of Islam was proceeding onward
to Amr b. Abd Wudd, the famous giant of the infidels. Then lifting up
his hands Muhammad prayed : "O God ! Obeida my cousin, was taken away
from me in the battle of Badr, Hamza my uncle in Ohad. Be merciful not
to leave me alone and undefended. Spare Ali to defend me. Thou art the
best of Defenders."

2 When the two (Amr and Ali) stood face to face, Amr said to Ali :
"Nephew, (as he was a friend of Abu Talib, the father of Ali) by God, I
do not like to put thee to death." Ali replied : "But by God, I am here
to kill thee." Amr, enraged at this reply, immediately alighted and
advanced towards Ali. Ali sprang forward and so started a duel which
will always be remembered, for it decided the fate of the Meccans, as
their morale was being destroyed by the death of Amr. It did not take
Ali long to realize that Amr, in spite of his age was as agile as his
reputation had made him out to be. The duel went on for some time,
finally like a flash of lightning Ali darted forward and in one sweep of
his scimitar struck off Amr's leg. Amr tottering on one leg, denounced
the Holy Prophet and Ali and their family. Picking up the severed limb,
he flung it at Ali with all his might. It was his last effort, and Ali
was nearly stunned, but in a moment he had recovered and plunged his
sword into Amr. At last the voice of Ali, sounding 'Allaho Akbar' (Great
is the Lord) was heard, which in "icated victory. The Divine Decree
which the Prophet saw inscribed in letters of Celestial

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1
Sirat-al-Mohammediya; Hayat- 1-Haiwan.
2 Ibn Athir; Abul Fida.

Light in the Heavens on the night of Meraj was found by him fulfilled
on every such occasion.

1 Beholding the fate of their renowned champion, Amr's comrades in the
enterprise rushed back to escape, spurred their horses and all gained
the opposite side of the ditch except Nawfal, whose horse failed in the
leap and fell into the ditch. Being overwhelmed with a shower, of stones
by the Muslims, he cried out, "I would rather die by the sword than
thus." Hearing this appeal Ali leaped into the ditch and dispatched
him.

**The Sister of Amr B. Abd Wudd.**

Contrary to the custom, Ali did not strip Amr of his armour or clothes.
2 When Amr's sister came to the corpse she was struck with admiration at
the noble behaviour of her slain brother's adversary; and finding out
who he was, she felt proud of her brother having met his fate at the
hands of the person who was known as the Unique Champion of spotless
character. She expressed herself thus : "Had his conqueror been other
than the one who killed him, I would have wept over Amr all my life. But
(I feel proud that) his antagonist was the Unique Spotless Champion."

Ali's valour praised by The Prophet.

3 The ever-victorious Ali, the 'Lion of God' was thus signalized in
this Defence, as on previous occasions in the battles of Badr and Ohad.
The Prophet declared that
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 Rawdzat-al-Ahbab; Izalatal Khifa, Tarikh-al-Khamis.
2 Tarikh-al-Khamis.
3 Madarijal Nabowat ; Hakim in his Mustadrak ; Firdows-alAkhbar;
Rawdzat-al-Ahbab.

Ali's one stroke on the day of the Ditch is superior to the devotional
worships performed by both the worlds (Men and Angels) till the day of
Judgment. (Vide Hakim's Mustadrik Vol. I, Page 32 and Dailami's
Firdous-ul-Akhbar).

**The Enemy's last attempt.**

Nothing further was attempted by the enemy that day; but great
preparations were made during the night, Khalid with a strong party of
horsemen vainly attempting to clear the ditch. Next morning the Muslims
found the whole force of the enemy marshalled against them along the
line of entrenchment. They sought to gain the Muslim side of the Trench,
but were repelled at every point. The Trench, fully served its purpose;
it could not be crossed, and during the whole operation only five
Muslims were killed. The enemy, notwithstanding their large numbers,
were paralysed by the vigilance of the Muslim outposts. In their utter
frustration they regarded the Trench as an unworthy subterfuge, being a
foreign artifice with which no Arab was acquainted.

Infidelity of the Quraitza Jews.

Meanwhile Abu Sufyan demanded of the Quraitza Jews the fulfilment of
their engagement to join in a general attack on the following day; but
the Jews doubted the Quraish and their allies and feared that if the
struggle proved a failure, the besiegers might conveniently withdraw and
leave them to their fate. They accordingly demanded hostages in security
against such an event, and pleaded their Sabbath as a pretext for not
fighting the following day. This attitude aroused, in turn, the
suspicions of the Quraish that the Jews, for making their peace with
Muhammad, were demanding hostages of them for the purpose of handing
them over to Muhammad. Abu Sufyan and his confederate chiefs were
greatly disheartened. Their hope so long centred on the Quraitza Jews
falling upon the city in the rear of the Prophet's defences, was now
changed into a fear of hostilities from the treacherous Quraitza
themselves.

**Troubles in the enemy's Camp.**

Dispirited at the loss of their bravest General, Amr b. Abd Wudd, and
wearied, as they were, after the two vigorous but unsuccessful attempts,
the Quraish and their allies had no courage to attempt another general
assault. Discord was also rife among them. The Bedouins had no forage
for their camels and horses, which were dying daily in considerable
numbers. Provisions were running short. Above all, the weather was
intolerably troublesome to them. Night set in upon them cold and
tempestuous. A storm of wind and rain blew dust in their faces,
overturned their tents, extinguished their fires, overthrew their
cooking vessels, and sent their horses astray. They exclaimed that it
was all due to witchcraft and enchantment of Muhammad, who would be seen
shortly falling upon them with his whole force, and they were greatly
struck with terror.

The Prophet who was in earnest prayer for the last three days appealed
to the Almighty for his help in these words: "O Lord ! Revealer of the
Sacred Book, Who art swift in taking account : turn the confederate host
! Turn them to flight, 0 Lord, and make them quake." 'The

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Tafsir Durr Manthur;
Sirat Mohammediya; Sirat-al-Halabia Tarikh-al-Khamis;
Rawdzat-al-Ahbab,

fourth night, when he had finished his prayers, he asked if any one was
willing to go to the camp of the enemy to spy on their activities. He
promised Paradise to the person who might venture out for that purpose.
Huzhaifa readily responded to the call and proceeded in the darkness of
the night to the camp of the enemy where he saw devastations wrought by
the tempest, and found Abu Sufyan in a gloomy mood. He came back to his
camp, and reported in detail to the Holy Prophet what he had seen of the
enemy. He was delighted to find his appeal to God being answered. "O
true believers! Remember the favour of God towards you, when hosts (of
infidels) came upon you and We sent against them a wind, and hosts ( of
Angels which) ye saw not, and God beheld what ye did." (Sura
xxxiii-9).

**Siege raised by the Enemy**

Either upset by the severity of the weather or struck with terror at
this manifestation of Heavenly Wrath, after the loss of their best
warrior at the hands of AR, Abu Sufyan precipitately decided to raise
the siege and to march back at once. Summoning the allied Chiefs, he
made known to them his resolve. Issuing orders to break up the camp and
immediately mounting his camel, he hastily made his way to Mecca
followed by his armies; Khalid, with two hundred horses, guarded the
rear against pursuit. The Ghatafans and the Bedouin allies retired to
the desert from where they had come and not a single soul was to be seen
in the field.

In the morning the Muslims discovered to their great joy the sudden
disappearance of the enemy and found themselves unexpectedly relieved.

They broke up their camp, in which they had been suffering the
hardships of the siege for the last twenty-four days in the month of
Shawwal-ZILQAD, 5 A.H. (or February-March 627 A.D.), and as soon as they
received permission from the Prophet to leave the ground beside the hill
of 'Sila' they dispersed with the greatest alacrity to their homes.

Operations against The Banu Quraitza Jews in 5 A. H.

The Jewish tribe of Banu Quraitza had settled towards the eastern
sector of Medina in a fortified stronghold. They had gone against the
Medina Charter, which they had signed. They had entered into a secret
treaty with Abu Sufyan and helped him against the Muslims in the battle
of 'Khandaq'.

Soon after his return from the entrenchment, while laying aside his
armour, the Prophet was washing his hands and face in the house of his
beloved daughter Fatima, whom he used to visit before proceeding to his
house on return from an expedition or excursion, the Angel Gabriel
brought him a command to proceed immediately against the Quraitza
Jews.

The Prophet instantly sent Ali with his Standard, and he himself with
his army followed him and laid siege to the fortress of the Jews. The
siege lasted twenty-five days, and Ali who was in command, reduced them
1..1 such a state that starvation stared them in the face. He then led
the assault on their stronghold, capturing it so quickly that he was
able to offer his afternoon prayers in the compound of the citadel.

Operations against The Banu Mustaleq- : 6 A. H.

The Jewish tribe of Banu Mustaleq had settled down in a neighbouring
province of Medina. The Prophet having received intelligence of their
activities, sent Boreida b. Al Hasib to ascertain the truth about their
meditated raid on Medea.

Boreida confirmed the news upon his return, and the Prophet marched on
them on the 2nd Shaban, 6 A. H. with Ali as his standard bearer. The
Muslim army was able to advance far into their territory without any
opposition, for Ali's reputation as a warrior had preceded him, striking
terror into the hearts of the tribesmen who fled from the approaching
army. All the warriors of the Banu Khuzza fled, leaving the Banu
Mustaleq to face the army of the Holy Prophet on their own.

In the single combats that were fought, Ali crossed swords with Quttada
the Jewish leader of the tribe and killed him. Another Jewish warrior,
Malik, confronted Ali, and he too was quickly disposed ofl. After Malik,
his son came out to avenge the death of his father, but met the same
fate. This completely disheartened the Jews, and they laid down their
arms and agreed to pay tribute

The Holy Prophet's Pilgrimage to Mecca in 6 A. H.

(628 A. D.) and The Treaty of Hudaibiya.

The Holy Prophet desired to make a pilgrimage to the Kaaba. Ever since
he migrated to Medina six years ago ire had always been a longing on his
part to do so.

Hasty preparations were made, and the Prophet informed the people of
Medina that this trip was meant only as a pilgrimage. Arrangements for
the journey having been completed, the Prophet led fourteen hundred men
to Zul Hulefa on the road to Mecca. All swords were to be sheathed and
the wearing of armour of any kind was forbidden.

Before approaching Mecca, the Prophet was informed that the Meccans
hearing about his journey had despatched a cavalry of two hundred to
prevent him from proceeding further. To advance was out of the question
as the Prophet had not come to give them battle; so he diverted to the
right towards Al Hudaibiya. Reaching Al Hudaibiya, on the verge of the
sacred territory surrounding Mecca, his camel Al Qaswa stopped and knelt
down as if refusing to go further. The Prophet took this sign as a
Divine Omen that he should not proceed further; he ordered a halt and
encamped there-. While the Prophet and his followers waited here, the
Quraish continued to hold counsel around the Kaaba. Some were for
driving Muhammad away by force, a few were for allowing him to perform
the pilgrimage, but the majority wanted to prevent him from entering the
Kaaba while still avoiding warfare. This led to a stalemate.
Negotiations continued between the Prophet's representatives for some
days without the deadlock being broken. The Quraish remained adamant,
not agreeing to allow the Prophet to enter Mecca.

Finally a treaty was signed between the Meccan representative Suhail
bin Amr and the Holy Prophet. The Prophet instructed Ali, his
Vicegerent, to write down the treaty at his dictation, and it began thus
: "In the name of God, the most Gracious and Merciful', Suheil objected
to this, and said that it should begin as the Meccans used to do. Thus:
"In Thy name, 0 God!" The Prophet agreed and asked Ali to write "Bismeka
Allah Hoomma'. Next he dictated:

"This is the Treaty made between Muhammad the Apostle of God. and
Suheil son of Amr." Suheil again raised an objection and said that had
the Meccans acknowledged him as an Apostle of God they would never have
taken up arms against him 1. Instead of "the Apostle of God", Suheil
asked the Prophet to have his father's name written. The Prophet again
yielded, but Ali had already written the words, "Muhammad the Apostle of
God". 2 The Prophet bade Ali to erase the words under objection, but as
Ali hesitated, the Prophet himself taking the writing materials
obliterated the words and had the words, "son of Abdullah" substituted
in place of "Apostle of God". 3 He prophesied at the same time,
addressing Ali, that he would similarly have to yield on a similar
occasion in his own time. This prophecy was fulfilled when a treaty was
concluded between Ali and Muawiya some thirty years later.

By the terms of the treaty it was agreed that the Muslims should return
immediately to Medina but that they could perform the pilgrimage the
following year. During the period the Meccans would evacuate the city
for three days and camp outside its walls. The Muslims should come as
pilgrims, unarmed, save for a sword each, which they could carry for
self-defence. It was further agreed that there would be a ten-year truce
between the Meccans and the Muslims, and that the Meccan caravans should
be allowed to pass without hindrance through their territory. It was
also agreed that any Meccan who escaped to Medina to accept Islam would
be handed back to the Meccans.

For the time being warfare was avoided and peace returned. The Muslim
pilgrims returned to Medina only to

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Abul Fida
2 Habib al-Siyar; Tazkirat-al-Kiram
3 Rawdzat-al-Ahbab; Habib-Siyar; Ibn Athir

find themselves once more threatened, this time by their implacable
enemies-the Jews.


