The Conquest of Khaibar. 6a.h. (628 A. D.)
==========================================

Khaibar is situated about a hundred miles to the north east of Medina,
and means literally a fortified place. The Jews of Khaibar constituted a
serious threat to the Muslims : The Jews who had lost their fights
against the Holy Prophet, had slowly and imperceptibly collected in the
vicinity of this fort, and had begun to incite their brethren to wage
war against the Muslims. The valley surrounding Khaibar was considered
as one of the most fertile of the desert oasis, and its great gardens of
date palms were most jealously guarded by the various Jewish tribes
whose territory it was. The Jews of Khaibar were considered the bravest
warriors, and they posed a most powerful challenge to the supremacy of
Islam.

**Sorties of The Jews.
**
The valley of Khaibar was studded with fortresses strongly situated on
rocky hillocks, which numbered about ten, and some of which such as
Al-Qumas, Al-Qatieba, Al-Watih and Sulalim were deemed impregnable.
Outside help was now impossible. The Jews, counting upon their numbers -
far greater than those of the comparatively small horde of the enemy -
upon their valour as well as upon their strongholds, resolved to resist.
But when besieged in any of their citadels, they could not resist very
long and eventually evacuated it after one or two sorties. Thus all the
inferior fortresses, with which the Muslims had begun their attacks,
fell one after the other into their hands.

**The Citadel of Khaibar**

At last the Jews rallied round their chief, the king of their nation,
named Kinana, son of Al Rab and grandson of Abul Haqiq. He lived in a
strongly fortified citadel of Khaibar named Al-Qamus, built on a steep
rock which was considered impregnable, having high and frowning walls;
it was well defended by bulwarks closely guarded by brave soldiers as it
also contained his treasures. As soon as the Prophet happened to glance
at the fortification, he first of all offered prayers to the
all-powerful Lord, praying for successful delivery of the citadel into
the hands of the Muslims; and as long as he remained encamped before it,
he daily offered prayers on a great stony rock named Mansela, and every
day he made seven circuits around it. In later times a mosque was
erected at this spot in memory of the Prophet's worshipping place, and
it became an object of veneration to the pious Muslims.

**The Siege of The Citadel**

The siege of A I -Qamus was an extremely difficult task for the
Muslims, who had never before forced their way into such a stronghold.
It lasted for some time and tried the skill and patience of the Muslims,
who had fallen short of provisions, and the country all around was laid
waste by the Jews during the period - about a month - when they were
engaged in storming the minor fortresses. The Jews had destroyed even
the date palms round their citadel to starve the enemy; and, having
resolved to fight desperately, they had posted themselves in front of
the citadel. The besiegers attempted to force their approach, but every
attack was repulsed. The Prophet, who was during these days suffering
badly from a headache, handed over his Standard to Abubekr b.Abu
0ohafa.\_ directing him to lead the assault, but the latter was strongly
repulsed by the Jews and forced to retreat. Next the Prophet sent his
men headed by Omar b. Al-Khattab, carrying his Standard, but the result
was no better than a forced retreat. The Prophet, having thus been
disappointed by the failure of his prominent Companions, exclaimed,
"Tomorrow I shall hand over my Flag to one who loves God and His
Prophet, and who is the beloved of the Lord and His Prophet, and who is
a fearless charger who' never turns his back upon a foe; at his hands
the Lord will give victory". Every one of the Prophet's Companions was
anxious to be signalized on the morrow as the "beloved of God and His
Prophet." They passed the night in great anxiety as to which one would
prove to be the blessed one. No one thought of Ali, the cousin and the
Vicegerent of the Prophet, the hero of all previous wars, because he was
suffering badly from sore eyes and could not see anything. The longed
for morning dawned, but the Prophet appeared not to take notice of any
particular individual. When he broke the silence he asked for Ali, and
all of them with one voice answered, that he was at a considerable
distance at the time and was also badly suffering from sore eyes, and
that he was utterly unable to look around. The Prophet commanded them to
bring Ali to him. Selma b. Aku fetched Ali. The Prophet taking Ali's
head into his lap, applied the saliva of his mouth to his eyes.
Instantaneously his eyes became so clear as if he had never suffered
from the disease. It is said that throughout his life, he never had any
trouble with his eyes again.

The Prophet confided his Sacred Banner into the hands of Ali, armed him
with his sword the Zulfiqar, and thus designated him the man whom God
and His Prophet loved. He directed him to lead the assault and to fight
till the Jews acknowledged submission. Ali, clad in a scarlet vest over
which was buckled a cuirass of steel, issued forth with his followers
and scrambling up the great stony rock in front of the fortress planted
the Standard over its top, and resolved never to recede until the
citadel was taken.

The Jews sallied forth to drive down the assailants. Jewish monk asked
Ali his name, which he gave out as Ali b. Abi Talib or Haidar. The monk,
hearing the name, warned his men that the assailant would not withdraw
without capturing the citadel. However, Harith, a Jewish champion, who
had vigorously repulsed the previous attacks, stepped forward and slew
several of his Muslim antagonists. Perceiving this, Ali himself advanced
and slew Harith, in a hand to hand fight. The brother of Harith was a
man of gigantic stature and huge form. He was unequalled in valour among
the Jews. To revenge the death of his brother, he came out, covered from
his neck to the waist with a double coat of mail, having on his head a
helmet for protection from the stroke of a scimitar. He had a huge gird
on both his sides and brandished a big spear with tripleforked sharp
pointed heads. Stepping forward from the Jewish lines, he challenged his
adversaries to a single combat. "I am Marhab", he cried, "as all Khaibar
knoweth, the greatest warrior in the world. None among the Muslims could
dare come forward to confront him. Ali himself advanced from the Muslim
line in response to his vainglorious challenge saying, "I am he whom his
mother named Haidar, a lion of the wilderness; I weigh my foes in a
gigantic balance(i.e. I make short work of my enemies.)" Ali's words
were not meaningless. Ali knew, through inspiration that Marhab had
lately dreamt of a rugged lion tearing him to pieces; so he reminded
Marhab of the dream. The words had their effect; as when the two
combatants accosted each other, Ali measured him with the eye and found
him wavering. As they closed, Marhab made a thrust at Ali with his
three-pronged lance, which Ali dexterously warded off, and before he
could recover himself, Ali dealt him a blow with his irresistible
scimitar, the Zulfiqar, which divided his buckler, passed through his
head in two, through the helmet, right down to his chest or down to his
saddle, as some traditions say, severing him in twain. He fell lifeless
to the ground and the winner announced his victory by his usual shout,
"Allah-o-Akbar," i.e. Great is the All Powerful Lord. And everyone knew
that Ali was victorious.

**Ali's superhuman feats of prowess**

The Muslims now rushed forward in a body and there was a melee. Seven
of the Jews' most distinguished warriors viz. Marhab, Antar, Rabi,
Dzajij, Daud, Morra and Yasir, having fallen by Ali's sword, the Jews
retreated into the citadel with the Muslims hotly in pursuit. In the
heat of the battle, a Jew dealt a blow on Ali's arm knocking his shield
which fell to the ground and another Jew ran away with it. Ali being
enraged, performed superhuman feats of prowess, he jumped over a trench,
approached the iron gate of the fortress, wrenched it off its hinges and
used it as a buckler for the remainder of the battle.

Abu Rafe, one of those who stormed the fort with Ali, testified that,
after the war, he examined the gate and tried with seven other persons
to turn it over but the attempt failed. The citadel was captured and the
victory was decisive. The Jews lost ninety-three men, while: on the
Muslim side, only. nineteen were killed throughout the campaign.

According to Suyuti in Tarikhul-Khulafa, Ali held the gate in one hand,
making his companions stand on the flat gate, went on placing them
across the ditch by a movement of his hand. Suyuti adds that later the
gate could not be moved by eighty persons.

**Ali's services appreciated.**

After capturing the citadel Ali came back victorious to his Camp, the
Prophet, seeing him coming, came out of his tent with open arms to
receive him. Warmly embracing Ali, the Prophet kissed his brow and
declared that his services to the Divine cause were appreciated by the
Almighty Judge as well as by himself and added.

1 "Ali, had I not been afraid that the Muslims would start regarding
you as Christians regard Christ, I would have said things about you
which would have made the Muslims venerate you and to consider the dust
of your feet as something worth venerating; but it will suffice to say
that you are from me and I am from you; you will inherit me and I will
inherit you; you are to me what Aaron was unto Moses; you will fight for
my causes, you will be nearest to me on the day of judgment; you will be
next to me on the fountain of Kauser; enmity against you is enmity
against me; a war against you is a war against me; your friendship is my
friendship; to be at peace with you is to be at peace with me; your
flesh is my flesh; your blood is my blood; who will obey you will obey
me; truth is on your tongue, in your

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Yanabi-al-Mowaddat
(Bombay Edition, page 107).

heart and in your mind. You have as much faith ht God as I have. You
are a door to me. As per the order of God, I give you these tidings that
your friends will be rewarded in Heaven and your enemies are doomed for
Hell".

Ali shed tears of joy at this intelligence. The Apostle revived their
faith by the example of Ali on whom he bestowed the surname of the "Lion
of God". Gibbon, D. & F. of Roman Empire Vol. V. p. 365.

**Surrender of the Jews.**

After the defeat, the fortress surrendered on condition that the
inhabitants were free to leave the country after giving up their whole
property to the conqueror, each one taking a camel load of food stuffs
with him. Concealment of the valuables was to be deemed an infraction of
the conditions, and the violator was liable to capital punishment.
People preferring to live in the country might occupy and reside in the
houses possessed by them and might also cultivate the land they
occupied; but no immoveable property was to be owned by them, they being
treated as tenants bound to cede half of their products to the
conqueror, who could put them to exile at his will and pleasure.

The Massacre of The Bani Khuzaa.

By virtue of the Hudaibiya Treaty, the Bani Khuzaa had declared
themselves in alliance with the Prophet. With all the tribes in and
around o Medina knowing the strength of the Muslims, the Holy Prophet
might have hoped for a peaceful year to come, but it was not to be,
because the Meccans had no intention of keeping to the terms of the
treaty. As the first year of the treaty drew to a close, the Meccan
Quraish violated it in a most ruthless manner. At their direct
instigation the tribe of Bani Bakr invaded the Bani Khuzaa, pillaged
their territory and massacred them. Those who escaped the massacre fled
to Medina and sought the Prophet's help and a redress of their
grievances. The Holy Prophet came to the conclusion that the time to put
an end to this rule of iniquity and oppression that prevailed at Mecca
was long overdue. To the people of Bani Khuzaa the Prophet made a
promise that he would take up their cause as his very own.

He ordered an army of ten thousand to get ready to take the field
against the Meccans. It was at this stage that Abu Sufyan, the Governor
of Mecca realising the gravity of the danger, came to Medina to seek the
Prophet's forgiveness. The Holy Prophet knew Abu Sufyan too well to
waver in his determination, having lost all faith in the Meccans.

**March on Mecca.**

On the 10th Ramazan, 8 A. H. or the 1st January 630 A. D. Muhammad took
the road to Mecca with a fully equipped army of ten thousand strong, and
marched in all haste towards the Holy City of Mecca. The Muslim army
continued its unopposed march to Marr-uz-Zuhraan, within sight of Mecca.
Here they were ordered to camp and to await developments, and they were
permitted to light camp fires. Soon the heights were ablaze with a
thousand fires, and the Meccans who had not received any tidings of the
impending danger, were struck with terror at this sight.

Realising that Islam could no longer be prevented from spreading, Abu
Sufyan sought to save his skin by a profession of the faith. The Holy
Prophet did not trust him any more than at the time of Ohad. Hence he
did not expose his army to any surprise move on the part of the Meccans.
He ordered his forces to surround the city and to enter from four
different points. To Ali, who commanded a large body of cavalry, was
confided the Sacred Banner, which he was to plant on Mount Hajun, and
which he was to maintain there until the Prophet joined him.

Express orders were given to all Generals to practise forbearance, and
under no circumstances make the first attack. The main body of the army
advanced without molestation. Muhammad brought up the rearguard, clad in
a scarlet vest, and riding on his favourite camel A 1-Qaswa. He
proceeded slowly, his movements being impeded by the immense multitude
which thronged around him. Arriving at Mount Hajun, where Ali had
planted the Standard of the Faith, he had a tent pitched for himself.
Here he alighted, put off his Scarlet garment, and assumed the black
turban and the pilgrim's garb.

Not long after this, accompanied by Ali, he proceeded direct to the
sanctuary of Kaaba, kissed the sacred stone, performed the seven
circuits round the sanctuary, and offered his devout prayers.

The city was at his mercy, but history does not afford a similar
example of the magnanimous generosity and forbearance which was
displayed by Muhammad. "What can you expect at my hands?" He asked them.
"Mercy", they replied. Tears came into the eyes of the Prophet when he
heard them beg for mercy. "I will speak to you", he continued, "as
Joseph spoke to his brethren. I will not reproach you today. God will
forgive you, for He is merciful and loving. Go; ye are free!" can
anything be more sublime than this? (Eternal Peace be upon him and his
Holy Progeny).

There were three hundred and sixty symbols around the Kaaba
representing the pagan Arab Gods. The Prophet pointed to each with his
staff whilst reciting the verse, "Truth has come and falsehood being
perishable has vanished" and the symbols fell on their faces. Pictures
of Abrahaml and Ishmael and of the angels in female form, which covered
e walls of the Kaaba were obliterated. Hobal the Symbol treated as the
greatest deity of Mecca, was fixed on a high position beyond reach. To
destroy it, the Prophet desired Ali to mount on his shoulders. Ali
hesitated for a moment. "Do as you are told" reiterated the voice of the
Master. Ali then got up on the Holy Prophet's shoulders and completed
the destruction. He threw down all the symbols, replica of the "Age of
Ignorance", and then jumped down from the shoulders of his Master. Then
the Prophet asked Ali, "how did you feel when you were mounting my
shoulders?" To this Ali replied, "While there I found that my hand
reached to a height as high as Heaven, and that I could remove whatever
I wanted with ease." The Holy Prophet replied, "O Ali! I congratulate
you on performing a Divine duty, and lucky am I indeed that I held the
Divine burden on my shoulders." The Holy Prophet's order to Ali to mount
on his shoulders was nothing but a Divine Revelation which signified
that Ali was a partner in this Divinely ordained Command of the Lord.

**The Bani Jazhima.**

The Bani Jazhima, who lived at a day's march from Mecca, had already
embraced Islam, but none of them had turned up to pay respects to the
Prophet at Mecca. The Prophet deputed Khalid with a small detachment to
enquire, with difinite instructions not to provoke a struggle. Khalid
secretly rejoiced to get this commission which afforded him a chance to
take revenge for the murder of his uncle some years ago at the hands of
the Jazhimites. Revenge he did take by ordering the execution of some of
them.

The Prophet, grieved at receiving the sad news of the outrage, raised
up his hands to Heaven and called God to witness that he was innocent of
what Khalid had done. On his return, when Khalid was upbraided, he
shifted the blame to Abd-al-Rahman, but the Prophet indignantly rejected
the imputation.

Accordingly, the Holy Prophet sent Ali with a sum of money for
distribution among the people to compensate for the bloodshed, and to
restore to them what Khalid had wrested from them. The generous Ali
executed the commission faithfully. Inquiring into the losses and
sufferings of each individual, Ali paid as much compensation as they
demanded. When all blood was atoned for and all the sufferers were
satisfied, he distributed the remaining money among them, gladdening
every heart by his bounty. The Prophet applauded this generosity,
praised and thanked Ali. Khalid was rebuked and reproved.

**The Battle of Hunain. 8 A. H.**

The formidable Bedouin tribes, the Hawaazin, the Thakif and various
others pastured their flocks on the territories bordering Mecca. Some of
them possessed strongly fortified towns like Tayef, and were unwilling
to render obedience to the Muslims without resistance. They formed a
league with the intention of overwhelming Muhammad before he could make
preparations to repulse their attack.

The threatening information compelled the Prophet to cut short his stay
in Mecca. He left Mecca with his ten thousand followers, who had come
with him from Medina, and two thousand from Mecca who had volunteered to
fight by his side. Ali as usual, held the Sacred Standard of the
Prophet. In the dead of night the army reached the Hunain valley, which
lies about midway between Mecca and Tayef. In order to reach the fertile
valley of Tayef, they had to pass through a narrow defile called Hunain.
This was the key point of the enemy's defence. It was a narrow and
dismal place leaving little room for an army to pass through, except in
single file, nor could camels and horses be manoeuvred within its narrow
walls. Concealing themselves under the precipitous side of the rocky
valley, the tribesmen, from the heights, showered avalanches of rocks
and arrows on the Muslims, and prevented all attempts by the Muslim
cavalry to organise a charge. Panic began to spread amongst the Muslim
troops and defeat seemed very probable. All except the Holy Prophet,
Ali, Abbas and a few others started to run and panic seized the whole
army. According to Habib-us-Siyar and Rouzath-ul-Ahbab, Khalid Bin Walid
was the first to leave the field. As they ran helter skelter, the Holy
Prophet called out to them, "Where are you going ? The Apostle of the
Lord is here! Return! Return! Where are you going? The Apostle of the
Lord is here ! Return! Return!"

At this critical moment Ali rallied the disorganised forces around him
inspiring them to fight with fresh valour. At the same time the Holy
Prophet asked his uncle Abbas, who held his mule, to call aloud at the
top of his voice:

"O citizens of Medina! O men of the Treaty of Fealty (alluding to those
who took the oath under the tree at Hudaibiya)! 0 Ye of the Sura Baqar
(reminding them of their paying homage at the time of embracing Islam)!
The stentorian voice of Abbas, as he repeatedly called aloud, was heard
by the fleeing columns and it was answered with Labbaik (we are coming)
from all sides and the men began to return. About a hundred men, all
Ansars\* (Abul Fida ; Ibn Hisham), gaining the narrow Pass, checked the
advance of the enemy. The standard bearer of the enemy, a man of
extraordinarily tall stature and stout built, came forward and
challenged the Muslims to single combat. As usual, Ali stepped forward
and engaged him and within a short time put an end to him. Now both the
parties closed with each other and a hand to hand fight ensued. The
conflict was terrible. The Prophet, who was watching the struggle from
an eminence, taking a handful of gravel, cast it towards the enemy
saying, "Ruin seize them". The enemy became panicky within a short time
and finally took to flight, chased by the Muslims, and many of them were
killed. The battle was won. The enemy, lost seventy of their bravest, of
whom forty fell under the sword of Ali.

As a result of this victory, enormous booty fell into the hands of the
Muslims. The battle of Hunain, is one of the most famous events in the
history of Islam. It was notable for the strategy of Ali regrouping the
Muslim army, turning defeat into victory. It also showed the clemency
with which the prisoners were treated. Six hundred of the enemy were
freed without having to pay ransom.

Mention of this battle has been made in the Holy Quran vide Sura IX-25
and 26.

25 "Already hath God helped you in many engagements, and on the day of
Hunain when you prided yourself on your numbers, it availed you nothing.
The earth became too strait for you although it was widely large, then
did ye turn your backs in flight."

26 ("Then God sent down His tranquillity upon His Apostle and upon the
faithful and sent down hosts (troops of angels) invisible to you ; and
chastised those who disbelieved, and that is the reward of the
ungodly."

Operations against the People of Al-Tavef. S A. H.

After the battle of Hunain, Malik ibn Auf, fled to Tayef where he was
given asylum. The people of Tayef were formidable warriors who
worshipped an idol called Allat, and attributed all their success to
him. It was the Prophet's desire to destroy this idol, and prove to the
people of Tayef that only God was to be worshipped. Hence a force was
sent to lay siege to Tayef.

The warriors of Tayef proved their mettle, and resolved to fight to a
finish against the Muslim assaults, and they replied with counter
assaults, until the casualties among the Muslims started piling up. When
the Muslims laid waste their vineyards and date palms, they offered
formidable resistance and refused to surrender.

Finally the Holy Prophet decided to send Ali to Tayef with an
invitation oto the people to accept Islam. On his arrival in the
territories bordering on Tayef, Ali began to destroy the pagan symbols
whenever he came across one. This greatly incensed the local tribesmen,
men of the Banu Khusham, who were feudatories of the Tafefites. In a
skirmish with them Ali killed their formidable leader, Shahab. This
caused panic amongst the forces of the Banu Khusham, who surrendered.
Other feudatories of Tayef, the men of Hawazan and the Banu Thakeef were
also quickly defeated by Ali, who marched on to Tayef, where he found
its people now anxious to surrender. A deputation of the people of Tayef
then went to the Holy Prophet to pray for forgiveness and to ask
permission to enter the Islamic fold.

The deputation asked the Holy Prophet to give them short respite for
the continued worship of their symbols, begging first for one year's
grace then for six months, and finally for just a month. The Holy
Prophet rejected their request emphatically. "Then" said they, "Exempt
us from the five daily prayers". The Holy Prophet replied, "Faith
without prayers is no faith at all". As a last appeal they said, "Give
us exemption from Zakat (the obligatory tax)". The Holy Prophet said to
them, "You have to observe prayers and fasting and to pay the obligatory
tax if you accept Islam. These are all articles of Faith, and can never
be dispensed with. And should you deviate a hair's breadth from the
Commands of God, I will send you a man, like me in all respects and he
will put you to the sword, and ignominious will be your lot". Then the
Holy Prophet caught hold of Ali's hand and said, "Verily he is the man
who will do this job".

Ali inspired with Divine Secrets.

During the period when the army was sitting round the besieged town of
Tayef, the Prophet sent out a detachment under the command of Ali to
invite the tribes inhabiting the vicinity of Tayef, to embrace Islam.
Ali had some encounters, especially the Khotham clan offered opposition
but after their chief named Shabab was slain by Ali, they submitted.
When Ali returned after faithfully and successfully executing his
mission, the Prophet on seeing him exclaimed 'Allaho Akbar' and took him
alone to his sacred apartment to have a long and confidential talk with
him. His companions1 began to murmur, wondering why the Prophet so long
engaged Ali in a secret conference, not allowing others to be present.
Hearing this, the Prophet said that God Himself had inspired Ali with
Divine Secrets, and it was for this reason that he was engaged in
confidential discourse so long.

**Wadi-al-Ramal or Zhat-al-Salasal Expedition.**

In the year 9 A.H., the Prophet received intelligence that the tribes
inhabiting the Wadi-al-Ramat valley contemplated a raid upon Medina, and
that they were collecting arms and men for the purpose. The valley was
surrounded on all sides by hills and thorny bushes and trees which
served as ambuscade. Two expeditions failed due to the difficult terrain
which was an asset to tote enemy to ambush the Muslims.

At last, the Prophet despatched Ali at the head of an army. Ali, at the
start, took another direction and after some stages turned suddenly
towards his destination through a rugged tract, marching by night and
halting for rest in the day. His companions protested against the
dangers of the route, but Ali paid no heed to them and proceeded on. At
length one morning he surprised the enemy and ravaged the valley,
avenging the loss they had inflicted upon the preceding expeditions.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Habib-al- Siyar;
Maar ij-al-Nabawat; Kanz-al-Ummal.

1 The Prophet received a revelation as contained in Sura C of the Quran
and he announced the glad tidings of Ali's victory to his Companions.
When Ali was coming back victorious, the Prophet went out with his
followers to receive him. Seeing the Prophet, Ali got down from his
horse, but the Prophet bade him remount, and told him his services were
approved by God and His Prophet. On hearing this Ali wept with joy.

This expedition is known as Zhat-al-Salasal expedition. which is
related by some historians as having taken place in the year 8 A.H.

**Operations against the Banu Zubuda.**

Banu Zubuda was a clan living to the west of Medina. and had accepted
Islam. Their leader was a warrior known as Omar bin Kurb. Omar had a
feud with another warrior of the same clan named Ushus Khusee, who had
killed his father. Anxious to avenge his father's death, Omar took Ushus
prisoner and desired to slay him. The matter went up to the Prophet for
arbitration. The Holy Prophet decreed that after the acceptance of
Islam, the seeking of revenge for the blood of relatives, which had
become a system during the time before Islam, did not now arise. This
decision upset Omar so much that he renounced Islam. Omar then killed
Harrith Ibn Kaab, the chief of a tribe which had become a feudatory to
Islam. This killing of an ally of the Muslims could not be tolerated by
the Holy Prophet.

He deputed Ali to lead a force against the Banu Zubuda. Before the
general battle began, Omar came out and challenged Ali to a single
combat. At this Ali, The Lion

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Kashfal Ghamma.

of God', came thundering out of the ranks, and chanting verses in which
he glorified the valour of the Muslim heroes, struck such awe in the
heart of the adversary that he fled from the battlefield. This left the
tribe of Banu Zubuda without a leader, and they promptly took to flight.
Ali pursued them, took several of them prisoners and returned to Medina
in triumph.

The Tabuk expedition, and the appointment of Ali as Governor of
Medina.

In the middle of 9 ASH. 631 A.D. news reached the Prophet that the
Roman Emperor Heracles was mobilising a huge army to surprise the
Muslims at Medina. Receiving this intelligence, the Prophet resolved to
meet the enemy on their way, and issued explicit orders to his men to
make preparations for the expedition. The Holy Prophet appointed Ali,
his Vicegerent, as Governor of Medina. Besides commanding the Medina
garrison, Ali was to officiate at prayers and to perform all those
duties that had hitherto devolved on the Holy Prophet. In addition to
maintaining law and order, he was also required to look after the
Prophet's household, a duty which more than all others epitomised the
love and trust in which he was held by his beloved Master. He accepted
the trust with great reluctance, having been accustomed always to
accompany the Prophet and share all his perils.

After the departure of the Holy Prophet, rumours began to circulate to
the effect that Ali had been deliberately left behind because the
Prophet had been apprehensive about the dangers of the Tabuk expedition.
These rumours were started by one of the leaders of the hypocrites,
Abdullah ibn Ubay, an old enemy of Islam since the days of Badr.

( 67 ) To a man of Ali's nature, accusations of cowardice were more
than could be borne. Stung by this suggestion, Ali hastened after the
Prophet, overtaking him on the road to Tabuk and informed him of the
various rumours prevailing in Medina. The Holy Prophet managed to pacify
Ali and spoke thus : "These men are liars. They are the party of the
Hypocrites and Doubters, who would breed sedition in Medina. I left thee
behind to keep watch over them, and to be a guardian to both our
families. 1 I would have thee to be what Aaron was to Moses; excepting
that thou canst not be like him, a Prophet; I being the last of the
Prophets." The Holy Prophet also explained to Ali that although Abu
Sufyan had embraced Islam, the danger of an intrigue at Medina was still
so great, that only Ali would be able to curb the mischievous designs of
the enemies within the city.

Ali left post-haste for Medina where he sought out the house of
Abdullah Ibn Ubay and dragging him outside proceeded to give him a bit
of his mind. Though the Holy Prophet had been lenient in his dealings
with the Hyprocrites, Ali made it very clear to them that he would not
tolerate their double-dealings. He believed in harsher measures and he
made it abundantly clear, that, as long as he was in charge of Medina,
he would neither brook any insult nor endure any form of intimidation.

**Announcement of Sura Baraat**

2 The pilgrims at the annual pilgrimage 'to Mecca were for the most
part heathens, who mingled idolatrous practices

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Suyuti.
2 Abut Fida; Tarikh-al-Khamis.

with the holy rites, and the Prophet had hitherto abstained from being
present at these ceremonies, and contented himself with the Lesser
Pilgrimage or Umra as in previous years. The sacred season of the year 9
A.H. was now drawing near. By this time the Prophet had received a
revelation forbidding the unrighteous to perform the pilgrimage after
this year, as mentioned in the opening verses of Sura IX of the Quran.
The Prophet therefore deputed Abubakr to proceed on pilgrimage to Mecca,
in order to promulgate the revelation to the Pilgrims. Three hundred
Muslims accompanied Abubakr and twenty camels were given to him to be
sacrificed on behalf of the Prophet.

Shortly after the departure of Abubakr, the Prophet received Command
from God, and in obedience to the Command, he despatched Ali 1 on his
swiftest camel, the Al-Ghadzba, with orders to overtake the caravan and
to take back the book (Verses of Sura IX) from Abubakr. and to proceed
himself with it to announce it to the pilgrims at Mecca.

Ali overtook the caravan at Araj, and taking the book from Abubakr
proceeded to Mecca. Abubakr returned dejected to Medina and asked the
Prophet whether he being replaced by Ali for conveying the revelation to
the people of Mecca was based on any Command of God!

The Prophet answered that he had a revelation from God to the effect,
that, "I should not depute anyone for this proclamation except myself or
someone from me. Ali is from me and I am from him. He is my Brother,

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Tirmizhi; Ahmad
Hanbal; tabari; Alamin-al-wara; Task Mo'alim-al-Tanzil; Abul Fida.

my Vicegerent, the Executor of my will, and he is my Successor and
performs all those duties that devolve on me."

According to Hishami the Prophet answered that he had a revelation to
the effect that none should deliver the revelation to the people but he
himself or a man of his family, or (according to Tirmizhi and Nasai)
that none should deliver it to the people but he himself or Ali.

Reaching Mecca, Ali read aloud, towards the close of the Pilgrimage, on
the great Day of Sacrifice, to the vast concourse of the pilgrims, the
recitation of the passage of the Quran. Having finished it, he
continued: "I have been ordered to explain to you, (1) that no one shall
hence forward make the circuits of the Holy House in a state of
nakedness, (2) that any treaty, made by anyone with the Prophet, shall
remain in force till its termination, that four months 9f liberty are
allowed to all, after which the obligation devolving on the Prophet will
cease, (3) that no unbeliever will enter Paradise, (4) that the
unrighteous must not come on Pilgrimage after this year.

Operations against the Banu Tay-Spring 630 A.D.

The tribe of Banu Tay was instigated by its priests to defy the
authority of the Holy Prophet. One of the chiefs of this famous tribe
was the illustrious Hatim, whose prodigious achievements had passed into
the classics of oriental literature. Poets and minstrels had sung the
tales of Hatim's generosity and munificence, and his romantic tales fill
the pages of many oriental books to which people revert for pastime and
pleasure. Hatim had died some time before this insurrection, and when
the leadership fell on his son Abi, the Banu Tay had a chief who
equalled his father in the performance of charitable deeds.

As a warrior Abi was lacking in valour, for when the Holy Prophet sent
a force under Ali to quell the rebellion, Abi fled to Syria, leaving
behind his sister Sufana and his clansmen to their fate. Ali took them
prisoner and sent them to Medina where the Prophet set Sufana at
liberty. She refused however to accept her freedom, saying, "O Apostle
of God! My father is dead, and when your army approached our territory,
my brother and other relations took to flight to save their skins. My
father was an illustrious chief known as Hatim Tay, and was famous for
his munificence. He used to ransom prisoners, feed the poor and needy,
protect the honour of women, and console the sick and the afflicted. I
am daughter of that chief who would never have accepted liberty unless
the men of his tribe were also released." "O young lady" said the Holy
Prophet, "I accede to your request, and set all your tribesmen free.
There is no doubt that your father had all the virtues of a Muslim." The
Holy Prophet bestowed precious gifts on Hatim's daughter and sent her
away with all honour and respect.

When Sufana went to Syria, she appraised her brother Abi, the wonderful
bounty granted out to her by the Prophet of Islam. Upon hearing the
wonderful details of Sufana's stay in Medina, a strange longing overcame
Abi to meet the Holy Prophet. He hastened to Medina and threw himself at
the feet of the Holy Prophet and accepted Islam. This was the signal for
the rest of his clan to embrace Islam. In the subsequent wars, the
people of Banu Tay remained steadfast in the faith and rendered valiant
services to the cause of Islam.


