Chapter X: the Death of the Holy Prophet
========================================

A few months after his Last Declaration at Ghadir-eKhum, the Holy
Prophet took ill. His malady was developing, his fever returned and his
illness took a serious turn and at times he was unconscious.

**The Prophet hindered to record his will**

On the Thursday preceding his death, when several of his chief
Companions were present in the room, the Prophet, while lying on his
bed, asked for writing materials saying, "Bring me paper and ink so that
I may record for you a document which will prevent your ever backsliding
into error." Omar, at once interposed thus : "The man wandereth in
delirium, 'God's book is suflicient for us.' A large body of the Muslims
take this phrase of Omar's as a move of separation from the orthodoxy
established by the Prophet, who directed all to follow the Quran and his
Progeny, declaring : 'I leave unto you two grand Precepts, each of which
surpasses the other in grandeur, God's Book and my Progeny; the twain
will not be separated till they meet me in Paradise.'

Some of those present said that the writing material should be
furnished; others sided with Omar; a discussion ensued and the voices
rose high to the annoyance of the Prophet. The ladies from behind the
screens wished to provide the writing materials, but Omar chided them:
'Quiet', and said, 'Ye resemble the females in the story of Joseph, when
your master falleth sick ye burst into tears, and the moment he
recovereth a little ye begin teasing.' The Prophet hearing this said :
'Chide them not, verily they are still much better than ye are.'

Now some persons proceeded to ask the Prophet what his wishes were to
be recorded. But he angrily recited verse 1 2 of Sura XLIX (O Believers!
Raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet; neither speak
aloud unto one another, lest your works become vain, while ye perceive

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Ibn Khaldun, Tabari,
Abul Fida.

aloud not) and said 'Begone, let me alone, for my present condition is
better than that which ye call me to.'

Ibn Abbas lamented the irreparable loss sustained by the Muslims on
this Thursday by the Prophet being hindered to record what he wished for
the guidance of his followers. Remembering the incident he wept till his
tears made his cheeks and beard wet.

**The Prophet's last prayer and sermon in his mosque**

The sickness of the Prophet assumed a serious turn from Saturday night
and till Sunday night the fever continued unabated.

Early in the morning on Monday, the day of his death, the Prophet with
his head bandaged, came out of his apartment supported by two men. After
prayers, he delivered a short sermon with a voice that reached beyond
the outer doors of the Mosque, which was unusually crowded with anxious
people who had been seeking for the news of his health after the crisis
of the preceding night. In the sermon the Prophet also said that evils
were drawing near and the darkest part of asdark and tempestuous night
was approaching.

The Prophet re-entered his apartment and lay down exhausted. His
strength was rapidly failing.

He called Fatima, his beloved daughter and made her sit by his side and
whispered something into her ear. She burst into tears. He then again
whispered something to her and dried her tears with his own hands. She
then appeared comforted and 1 smiled. He then called Hasan
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\_ 1 Rawdzat-al-Ahbab; Madarij-al-Nabowat.

and Husain, his dear children whom he had fondled in his lap for years,
to embrace them for the last time. Hasan put his face upon the face of
the Prophet, and Husain threw himself upon his breast. Both of them wept
and cried so bitterly that everyone else in the room started to cry. The
Prophet embraced them very affectionately, kissed them both and directed
everyone present to treat them and their mother with utmost love and
respect, as they were treated by himself. (It was usual with the Prophet
that when he saw Fatima approaching, he always stood up, and, advancing
a pace or two, received her with acclamations of joy, then kissing her
hand, he used to sit in his own place.)

'Just before he breathed his last a little alter midday on 28th Safar
11 A.H. he sent for Ali 1.

He admonished Ali to bear with patience and self control all the
troubles which he would be subjected to after his death. He desired Ali
to pursue with patience the right path leading to the next world even
though he may find others engrossed in this world. The Prophet took
Ali's head inside his own mantle, so that it covered both of them, till
Ali took out his head and announced the death of the Prophet. (Life of
Ali by Dar Quti wal Razi, page 739; printed at Khadimal Talim Press,
Lahore;

Madarij-al Nabowat.) 2 Ibn Sa'd and Hakim have recorded that the
Prophet breathed his last with his head on the lap of Ali.
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 Rawdzat-al-Ahbab; Madarij-al-Nabowat;
2 Saiyid Safdar Husain-The Early History of Islam.
Madarij-al-Nabowat.

The last words spoken by the Prophet, said Alt, were "The blessed
companionship on high. Prayers," ,prayers after which he stretched
himself gently and teen all was over.

**A Strange Scene**

Meanwhile a strange scene was being enacted at the Mosque. Shortly
after the Prophet's death, Omar entered the apartment and raising the
sheet which covered the body, gazed earnestly on the Prophet's features,
which looked as of one peacefully sleeping. Softly replacing the
covering he started up and exclaimed : "The Prophet is not dead. he hath
gone to his Lord as aforetime Moses d id and remained forty days absent.
He will yet return among us again." Brandishing his sword he exclaimed,
"I will cut off the head of him who dares to say that the froPhet is
dead." He was haranguing the people in a similar strain when Abubakr
appeared. He listened to the wards of Omar for a moment and passed 'on
to see the prophet. He entered, and, lifting the sheet which covered th4
body, stooped down and kissed the forehead. Then taking the head upon
his hands, he slightly lifted it and minutely scanned the features.
Replacing the head gently on its pillow, he exclaimed ; "Yes! Sweet thou
wert in life and sweet thou dead indeed." art in death. Alas, my Master!
thou art Covering the body, he issued forth and proceeded at once to the
spot where Omar was bran dishing his sword and haranguing the people.
"Be quiet Omar! sit thee down," cried Abubakr. But Omar would not listen
to him. Turning therefore to the assemblage, he addressed them thus: "Do
ye forget already the verse which was revealed to the Prophet after the
battle of Ohad?"

'Muhammad is but a man with a Mission, verily other Apostles died
before him; what then! If he were to die or to be killed, would ye turn
upon your heels?' Again, know ye not the verse revealed to the Prophet,
'Verily 0 Muhammad! Thou shall die, and verily they shall die; Verse
XXXIX-31; continuing he said : 'Whosoever worshippeth Muhammad, let him
know that Muhammad is indeed dead; but whosoever worshippeth God, let
him know that God is immortal, He liveth and dieth not. The truth now
being known, the assemblage sobbed aloud. Omar on hearing these verses,
trembled and dropped down, and then he knew of a certainty that the Holy
Prophet was indeed dead.

In the afternoon there appeared a friend who came running hastily to
Abubakr and Omar, and informed them that many a chief of Medina had
assembled at Saqifa Bani Sa'da and that they were proceeding to choose
Sa'd b. Obada as their leader. "If ye have a desire to secure the
Supreme Authority," said he, "ye should not lose a minute to reach
thither before the matter is settled and opposition becomes dangerous."
Receiving the intelligence. Abubakr and Omar hurried to Saqifa, in
company with Abu Obeida and several others.

Meanwhile Ali, regardless of the movement outside was busy inside the
apartment with preparation for the bathing of the Prophet's body, in
company with Abbas, his two sons Fazl and Qutham, Osama and Saleh.
Having closed the door of the apartment they took the body in for
bathing. 1 Ali was the only man named by the Prophet to bathe his body,
(as predicted by him while he was giving the first bath to Ali at the
time of

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Saiyid Safdar
Husain-The Early History of Islam.

his birth) as he had said that any one, other than Ali, that looked
upon his nakedness, would forthwith turn-blind. So Ali bathed the body
and others helped him with their eyes bandaged.

After bathing the body, they laid it out, putting on it the garments in
which he died. Two sheets of fine white cloth were wound over the
garment, and then it was wrapped in a sheet of striped Yemen. Then came
the parties for praying over the dead body. First the relations and next
to them the followers and companions of the Prophet entered the
apartment in batches of ten at a time and prayed over him. Thus the body
remained till the time of burial.

Opinions differed as to where the burial should take place! The matter
was settled by Ali, who said that he had heard the Prophet saying, that
at whatsoever spot a Prophet dies, he should be buried there.
Accordingly the grave was dug, and the burial took place on the night of
Tuesaay or early in the morning on Wednesday. The body was lowered into
its last resting place by the same near relations who had bathed and
laid it out. Ali was the last person to leave the interior of the grave,
weeping bitterly. He was never seen to cry like that before or after
that occasion. When -he came out of the grave, he lifted his hands in
supplication and said, "Lord! He was Thy first creation, his apparent
death is not a sign of his mortality, he lifted the gloom prevailing
before creation started, he was the proof of Thy Glory, and was our
guide towards that Realm. His soul was thb Emblem of Thy Supreme Might,
his body was a master-piece of Thy Creation and his mind was Thy
Treasure House."

**CHAPTER XI: THE HEREDITARY ENMITY BETWEEN THE HASHIMITES AND THE
UMAYYADS**

The acknowledged superiority of Hashimites over all Arab tribes in
respect of their lineage, gallantry, hospitality and ethical attributes
did always evoke the jealousy of Umayyads against them. And, thus, the
Umayyads were constantly bent on ruining the honour and vilifying the
integrity of Hashimites by all means.

Abu Hatim Sajistani writes in his book, 'Kitab-ulMuammarin' :

"One day Muawiya expressed his wish to some of his associates to meet
some aged man who could describe the antiquity and past events. The
people brought before him Abad Bin Amad, a man of three hundred and
sixty years old, hailing from Hazramoot.' Muawiya enquired of him if he
had ever seen Hashim. The old man answered, "Yes! Hashim was a man of
high stature and elegant personality". He further asked him if he had
also seen Umayyah. The man said, "Yes! I have seen him too. He was blind
and a man of short stature and meanness was obvious on his countenance."
Hearing this, Muawiya turned pale and was taken aback. Ibne Aseer,
commenting upon the cause of malice between Hashimites and Umayyads,
writes, "When Hashim became the heir of his father Abd-e-Manaf and
inherited his fortune, the jealousy of Umayyah, the son of
Abd-ush-Shams, kindled the spark of malice against Hashim forever." The
gulf between Hashimites and Umayyads was widened till, in the third
generation of Hashim, Hazrat Mohammad was born. Abu Sufian, the son of
Harb, was the leader of Umayyads at that time who, right from the
declaration of Hazrat Muhammad's prophethood till the fall of Mecca,

remained the perpetual instigator behind all the wars against the
Muslims and steered the vehicle of the campaign of hostility towards the
Holy Prophet and his religion.

The fall of Mecca compelled Abu Sufian to embrace Islam, which he did
reluctantly. After the Holy Prophet's death, he induced Hazrat Ali to
rise against the Caliph in power and thus to weaken the solidarity of
Islam but could not succeed in his treacherous designs. The appointment
of his son Muawiya, by Hazrat Omar, as a governor of Syria in 20 A.H.,
lifted up the morale of the Umayyads and provided them with an
opportunity to be on the rise. In the year 22 A.H. the 'Shure' Counsel
elected Hazrat Osman as a Caliph. "By this time," writes Ibne Abdul Bar
in 'Isteeab,' "Abu Sufian found a golden opportunity for the realisation
of his dreams. He approached Hazrat Osman and addressed him in the
following words:

"Osman! After Bani Taim ( Hazrat Abubakr ) and Bani Adi (Hazrat Omar),
the Caliphate has at last come to you. So roll it like a ball wherever
you wish and strengthen its foundation with your own Umayyads as this is
an empire, and I do hardly have any faith in the so-called Paradise and
Hell." The Historians unanimously agree with the fact that, in the reign
of Hazrat Osman, all the key posts were entrusted to Umayyads throughout
the whole Islamic Empire and Muawiya had secured complete domination
over Syria. The exchequers (Bait-ul-Mal) of Medina and Damascus were at
the disposal of Muawiya to meet his selfish ends of nepotism and
diplomacy. Syria became the centre of attraction for all materialists.
The mammonists were bent upon extracting their share of wealth and
honour by showering upon the ruling power their utmost flattery. Muawiya
harnessed these very elements to achieve his ambitious designs of
vilifying and degrading the prestige of the Holy Prophet and his
Progeny, and, thus, satisfied his cherished grudge and enmity between
his ancestor Umayyah and Hashim.

**2. Difference of Faith and Religion :**

The second factor of animosity between Hashimites and Umayyads was the
difference of their Faith and Religion.

Hashim and all his descendants, except Abu Lahab and his followers,
were Unitarians and adhered to the faith of Abraham. On the contrary,
Umayyah and his offsprings were heathens.

Ibne Jurair, Tabari and Hakim have quoted from authentic sources,
"Those who changed the religion of God with infidelity were Bani Umayyah
and Bani Mughairah, the two famous tribes of Quraish."

Abu Sufian as well as the other members of Umayyads were, therefore,
the deadliest enemies of the Holy Prophet and continued their greatest
endeavours to uproot Islam as long as it was possible. They remained
subdued as long as the Holy Prophet lived. But the spark of their
animosity against Hashimites which was buried in the ashes of their
diplomacy, was rekindled after the demise of the Holy Prophet, and the
descendants of Abu Sufian availed a golden opportunity to realise their
long-cherished dream.

"The persecutors of Muhammad," says Gibbon, "usurped the inheritance of
his children and the champions of idolatory became the supreme heads of
his religion and Empire. The opposition of Abu Sufian had been fierce
and obstinate, his conversion was tardy and reluctant; his new faith was
fortified by necessity and interest."

In malice, jealousy and animosity against the Ahl-ulBait, Moawiya like
his son Yazid was no less than his father Abu Sufian. He first extracted
the allegiance of the Syrians by presenting himself as a great religious
leader and then addressed himself to the task of vilifying and degrading
the Holy Prophet and his Progeny.

3. The virtuous attributes of the Holy Prophet Muhammad and his family
:

The third important reason of the malice and grudge, existing between
Bani Hashim and Bani Umayyah, was the virtuous attributes with which
Prophet Muhammad and his Holy Progeny were gifted. The existence of
Prophet Muhammad as a Hashimite was enough to awaken an inferiority
complex among their rival tribe, the Umayyads, but what added fuel to
the fire was the Holy Prophet's frequent elaboration upon the virtues of
his family members to such an extent that the recognition of their
integrity survived all the endeavours of the enemies to malign the world
opinion against them.

To quote Ibne Abi Hadid al-Mutazali,

"The traditions, regarding Hazrat Ali's attributes, were quoted from
the Holy Prophet to such an extent that the Umayyads, inspite of their
kingdom and power, failed to erase them from the memory of the world;
and were it not for the will of God, the records of the excellence of
the Ahl-ul-Bait would not have survived the long reign of the Umayyads
due to their intense malice and severe hatred against the Hashimites."

**4. Services rendered to 'Islam'**

All the members of the Hashimite family, irrespective of their age,
excluding Abu-Lahab and his followers, devoted their all to the cause of
Islam. Hazrat Jafar Tayyar's propagation, the holy war of Hazrat Hamza
and the heroism of Hazrat Ali were the weapons to counteract the efforts
of the enemies of Islam. As a matter of fact, Abu Sufian and his
followers were the deadliest enemies of Islam till the conquest of
Mecca, but whenever they opposed the Holy Prophet, the Hashimites came
to his rescue. After embracing Islam, Abu Sufian could naturally not
assassinate the Holy Prophet but his mission was later accomplished by
his son Muawiya, who poisoned Imam Hasan through Juda Binte Ashas, and
by his grandson Yazid who massacred Imam Husain and the progeny of the
Holy Prophet in the field of Kerbala.

Islamic History can never forget the occasion when the revered family
of the Holy Prophet were brought as captives to the court of Damascus
and the slain head of Imam Husain was placed in a golden tray before
Yezid; while he, touching the sacred teeth of the Apostolical Imam with
his stick, was reciting the following verses :

"If my ancestors, who had been slain in the battle of Badr, would
witness the way I have avenged their blood from Muhammad's progeny, they
would admire my deed immensely and would say, Bravo, Yazid! May not thy
hands get benumbed, and it was nothing but an imperialistic design of
the Hashimites, as neither a Divine Message ever came to Muhammad nor
was there any Revelation (Wahl)."

**(Waseelat-un-Najat)** These were the causes of the enmity between the
Hashimites and Umayyads, instigated by Umayyah himself and remained till
the decline of the Umayyad's Empire.

In short, the royal treasury of Damascus met the lavish expenses of
Muawiya's project which attracted not only the aristocrats of Hejaz,
Iraq, Egypt and other Islamic countries but also exposed the
materialists behind the garb of spiritualist and religious scholars from
Mecca and Medina who thronged the court of Damascus. The coining of
false traditions came into operation, which, in no time, brought forth
lacs of traditions eulogising Umayyads and censuring and degrading
Prophet Muhammad and his Holy Progeny. Thus, the false contents and the
raw materials formed the very nucleus of the so-called 'History of
Islam.'


