Chapter Xv: Ali's Silence Over the Caliphate
============================================

Ali's silence in the matter of the Caliphate was not due to the absence
of friends and supporters, but, out of respect for the wishes of the
Holy Prophet; he did not press further his right to the Caliphate.

On hearing the news of the Holy Prophet's death, Abu Sufian came to
Medina and, accompanied by Abbas Bin Muttalib, called on Hazrat Ali. He
expressed his views Abdul on the Caliphate of Hazrat Abubakr thus: "AM
Banff Taira (The tribe of Hazrat Abubakr), cannot rule over US. You are
the only one suited to be our Caliph. Make use of this opportunity and
wage a war against Abubakr. I swear to submit my allegiance to you and
to all assistance that may be required."
Being fully aware of Abu Sufian's evil intentions towards the Holy
Prophet and Islam in the past, and finding him opportunist with hatred,
greed and racialism in a cheap his breed, Hazrat Ali refused to accept
his proposal. Moreover, he knew that to wage a war would be detrimental
and not beneficial to the cause of Islam. It was to avoid endangering
Islam that he refused to fight against Hazrat Abubakr. So he
preferred -to observe complete silence in the matter. (Tareekh Kamil).

Even if Abu Sufian had not offered his assistance to him for
over-throwing the Caliphate of Hazrat Abubakr, and had his aim had not
been for the welfare and prosperity of Hazrat Ali could well have taken
care of the situation, having the support of the staunch followers of
the Ahl-ul-Bait, such as Abu Zar Ghifari, Ammar Yasir, Salman, Miqdad
and the other prominent members of the Hashimite family
Before his death on 22nd Iamadi-ul-Akhar 13 A.H., Abubakr nominated
Hazrat Omar as his suo- Hazrat cessor, contrary to the principal laws of
democracy stressed

by the Muslims who had assembled at Saqifa Bani Sa'da.

Thus Hazrat Ali's right was usurped for the second time in succession.
In spite of this, he helped the ruling Caliph in religious as well as
other matters referred to him and which could not be otherwise solved.
So sound were his judgments and his advice based on the Holy Quran that
Hazrat Omar ordered, the interpreters of the Verses of the Quran and the
traditions of the Holy Prophet to refrain from giving their opinion
while Hazrat Ali was amidst them. Hazrat Omar died on 29th Zilhajj, 23
A.H. and Hazrat Osman was elected as the third Caliph by a Council of
Electors consisting of six members appointed by the dying Caliph. John
Bagot Glubb says in his boo k The Great Arab Conquests, "Osman had been
a failure as Caliph. He had proved too weak to control the turbulent and
factious spirit of the Arabs, especially at a time when an almost
unbroken succession of victories had rendered them more than usually
intractable. His was a limited mental outlook, unable to grasp the big
issues and dominated by his greedy relatives. He himself lived
comfortably and accepted presents, though doubtless ( his primitive
luxuries were negligible in comparison with) those of the former rulers
of Byzantine and Madain."
Hazrat Ali continued assisting the ruling Caliph with the same
perseverance as in the past, until Hazrat Osman was murdered. At this
critical moment, when the angry groups of Muslims had besieged the house
of Hazrat Osman, no one dared to protect the helpless Caliph.

"But" in the words of Amir Ali in The History of the Saracens, "Osman
was bravely defended by Ali and his sons and dependants, and the
insurgents had great difficulty in making any impression on the
defenders. At last two

of the besiegers scaled the wall, and there killed the aged Caliph."

Writings of some Historians on the death of Osman.

"For a few days after the murder of Osman", writes John Bagot Glubb,
"Medina was an anarchy with the mutineers in complete control .... Ali
was pressed to accept the Caliphate both by the companions of the
Prophet-the now venerable elders of Medina-and by the insubordinate
troops who virtually controlled the city. Six days after the murder of
Osman, Ali was proclaimed Caliph in Medina. The majority of the
citizens, including Talha and Zubeir took the oath of allegiance to
him."
Eric Schroeder in 'Mohammad's People', published in England (1955)
says, "Five days after the murder of Caliph Osman, the people gathered
together and decided; 'We know no one better to be Imam and Caliph than
Ali but he will not take the burden, answered some, 'press him home till
he consents'. They all gathered at Ali's house with such eagerness that
they were pushing and crushing each other; they called Ali out, and
said, 'If we go to our homes again without an Imam and a Caliph such a
strife will stir as will never again be stilled; you will have to
consent to be our Imam and Caliph of God.' Ali replied, 'small longings
have I for this authority, yet the believers must have a chief; and
right gladly will I accept the temporal authority of another, even
Talha.' 'Nay, thou hast more right than I, said Talha. One who stood
near by forced open Ali's palm and Talha swore the oath of allegiance to
Ali. Zubeir did likewise, and from his house they brought Ali to the
mosque and everybody once again thronged round him to swear the oath of
allegiance to him as their Imam and Caliph."


(Professor Sedillot in 'Histories des Arabes' says, "It might have been
thought that all would submit themselves before his glory; so fine and
so grand; but it was not to be."

Contemplations for the election of a Caliph in place of Osman
After the murder of Osman terror reigned in the city and the regicides
had the entire mastery of the situation, there being no settled
government in Medina. The principal citizens, feeling the tumultuous
state of the populace and apprehending civil war, clamoured for
immediate election of a Caliph. The threatening attitude of those who
had come from various parts of the empire, viz. Egypt, Syria,
Mesopotamia and Persia on the occasion was a source of great alarm,
because they were resolved not to disperse until they knew whom they
were to have as their Caliph.

There were two candidates, Talha and Zubeir (both brothers-in-law of
Ayesha) who aspired to secure the Caliphate with the powerful support of
Ayesha. (Ayesha was the daughter of the first Caliph Abubakr, and a wife
of the Holy Prophet. Her youngest sister was a wife of Talha, who was
also a cousin of her father. Her eldest sister was a wife of Zubeir,
whose son Abdullah was adopted by Ayesha. Thus doubly related to both,
Talha and Zubeir put her in the unique position of lending her powerful
support to both the claimants to the Caliphate) To their great
disadvantage, she was not present in Medinc at this juncture, having
gone on pilgrimage to Mecca. Talha, who had taken an active part in
inistigating those who had besieged Osman's dwelling and his associate

Zubeir had some people of Basra and Kufa to support their pretensions,
but the majority of the general public of Medina, who enjoyed the
exclusive right of electing a Caliph, considered quite a different
person to be best fitted for the office. He was a man admired by his
friends and foes alike for his courage, eloquence, magnanimity, piety,
nobility, and his near kinship to the Prophet. This was Ali, the cousin
of the Prophet and the father of the Prophet's posterity from his
beloved daughter Fatima. He was considered as the rightful successor to
the Caliphate; and the people, now wishing to be governed by the
Prophet's heir, desired to see Ali elevated to his Legitimate Dignity.
Talha and Zubeir, cautioned by the mood of the moment, held their peace
and thought it prudent to dissemble their feelings so far as to take the
oath of allegiance to Ali with a steadfast resolve, however, of breaking
it as soon as a favourable opportunity should occur.


**Election of Ali
**

In this dilemma several of the principal men of Medina approached Ali
and desired him to accede to their request. In reply he assured them
that he had no wish for temporal power and would willingly accept the
authority of any other person elected by them. They, however, insisted
that there was no one so well qualified as he. Notwithstanding their
persistence, Ali was resolute in his refusal and said that he would
rather like to serve as an adviser than take the reins of government in
his hands. The insurgents, who had themselves been responsible for the
prevailing disturbed condition at Medina, were anxious to put the city
back to its normal state and were much annoyed at the difficulty in the
choice of a Caliph.


and insisted that before they quitted Medina, the citizens, in exercise
of their right, must elect a Caliph within one day, as they were the
proper persons to determine the controversy. If the choice was not made
within the time allowed by them, they would put to the sword the leading
men of Medina. Upon this the populance again came to Ali in the evening
and explaining to him the situation, earnestly entreated him to
reconsider their position and the danger to the religion. Overcome at
length by their pathetic expostulations, Ali consented with reluctance
saying: "If you excuse me and elect another, whomsoever you may think
fit to choose, I shall most submissively yield obedience to him. If I am
compelled to comply to accept the offer, I must say frankly at the
outset that I shall conduct the administration quite independently, and
I shall deal with all of you according to the Holy Book of the Lord and
to the best of my knowledge and judgment." They unhesitatingly assented
and proferred to give him their hand in token of doing fealty to him;
but he refused to do anything unless it was done in public, so that no
one might have cause to grumble. "Ali was apprehensive of the intrigues
of Ayesha, Talha and Zubeir and the whole house of Umayyah (of which
Moawiya, Osman's lieutenant in Syria, was chief), who, he knew, would
avail themselves of every opportunity to oppose and disturb his
government." Ockley's History of the Saracens p. 289.


**Inauguration of Ali as Caliph.
**
Next morning (on the fourth day after Osman's murder), the people
assembled in large numbers in the peat mosque. Here Ali made his
appearance clad in a simple cotton gown and a coarse turban wound round
his head and carrying a bow in his right hand and in the left hand his
slippers which

he had taken off in reverence for the place. Talha and Zubeir not being
present, he caused them to be sent for. When they came, they offered him
their hands in approbation of his election as Caliph. tut Ali paused and
said to them that if they were sincere in their hearts they might do him
fealty in good earnest assuring them at the same time that if either of
them would accept the Caliphate, he was quite willing to swear fealty
with perfect sincerity and would be glad rather to serve as an adviser
than to take the government upon himself. This, however, both of them
declined, and expressing their perfect satisfaction, stretched forth
their hands to pay homage to Ali. Talha's right arm was maimed as a
result of a wound he had received in the battle of Ohad, and therefore
could stretch it forth with difficulty. As he was the first to begin
with the ceremony, the audience took it as an evil omen and a by-stander
remarked: 'It is likely to be a lame business that is begun with a lame
hand.' The presage proved only too true as subsequent events showed. The
assemblage then swore allegiance to Ali and their example was followed
by the general public. None of the Umayyads and the immediate adherents
of Osman came in, nor did Ali press any one to come and do fealty to
him. There were also some prominent men in Medina who kept themselves
aloof, being disinclined to pay homage to Ali. These were according to
Mas'udi, Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas, Maslama b. Khalid. Moghira b. Shoba, Qidama
b. Matzun, Wahban b. Saifi, Abdallah b. Salam, Hassan b. Thabit, Kab. b.
Malik, Abu Sa'id Khudri, Mohammed b. Maslama, and Abdallalh 1 b. Omar,
Fidzala b. Abeed, Kab b. Ajza;
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Mas'udi assails the character of Abdalla'h b. Omar by his keeping
himself from paying homage to Caliph Ali and later on swearing
allegiance to Yazid b. Moawiya as Caliph, and again to Abd al Malik b.
Marwa'n.

Habib-al-Siyar adds: Zaid b. Thabit, Osama b. Zaid, Abu Musa Ashari,
Zaid b. Rafe, Salma b. Salama, Sohaib b. Sinan, Noman b. Bashir; Tabari
adds: Rafe b. Khadij. These people were named Motazilities.

Having done homage to Ali, the insurgents returned to their homes.

