Chapter Xvi: Intrigues and Conspiravy Against Ali
=================================================

**The cry for the revenge of Osman's murder**

After the inauguration of Ali, Talha and Zubeir with several others
came to him and requested that the murder of Osman should by all means
be avenged, proferring their services for the purpose. Ali knew full
well that the crime was perpetrated hardly against their own will and
even before their eyes, that now their cry for vengeance was nothing but
a design to foment dissension by calling up a host of enemies. tte,
therefore, explained to them that the tragedy had its roots in old
enmity; that there were several parties having different opinions; that
it was not the moment to stir up a civil war; that the discontent was
instigated by the devil, who, when once he holds the ground, never quits
it easily; and that the very measure they suggested to undertake was the
devil's own proposal to foment unrest and tumult. However, he told them
that he had already sent for Marwan, formerly a secretary of Osman, and
Naela, the wife of Osman, who were all the time in the same house with
Osman, to enquire as to who the real culprits were who perpetrated the
murder. Marwan was not forthcoming, while Naela said that two persons
were culprits but that she could not name or identify them. Hazrat Ali
further added that several persons were said to be implicated in the
crime but no evidence was available against them. Under the
circumstances, he declared that unless all parties united, it would be
difficult to take effective steps. He asked them what method they would
propose as best suited to gain the end. They replied that they knew of
none. Then he said : 'If you will point out the real assassins of Osman,
I shall not fail to vindicate the majesty of the Divine Law in putting
them to their dues'. They were silent. Their insidious proposition being
thus turned down, they departed.

In the meantime, warned by the sudden departure of the Umayyad
families, Ali began to secure the good will of the Quraish and the
Ansars by showing his high appreciation of their worth, for he was
desirous of having as many friends as possible against the apprehended
trouble with the Umayyads.

****Reforms Contemplated by Ali.**

** The next matter for immediate attention of the new Caliph was the
removal of the ungodly men, who governed various provinces with such
tyranny that it drove the people to desperation, which cost Osman his
life. Many abuses had crept in during the reign of Osman, which called
for immediate action, and most of the provincial governments were in the
hands of persons of dubious antecedents and suspected faith. Having set
his heart upon a thorough reform, he resolved to depose Moawiya and the
other governors, who owed their appointments to his predecessor.
Abdallah b. Abbas, who had returned by now from his pilgrimage to Mecca,
strongly opposed this measure, especially of the proposal to depose
Moawiya and advised him to postpone the execution of the contemplated
measure for a short while till at least he should find himself more

firmly established in authority. He argued : 'If thou deposest Moawiya,
the Syrians, whom he hast firmly attached to himself by his munificence,
will rise up against thee in a, body, will not recognise thee Caliph and
worst of all, they will accuse thee of the murder of Osman. It will be
advisable, therefore, to let him continue in his place till he submits
to thy authority, and when once he hast done that, it will be easy for
thee to pull him out of his house by the ears whensoever thou dost
desire it.' 'Besides,' he reminded Ali, 'Talha and Zubeir are not the
persons to be relied upon; I have good reasons to suspect them of taking
up arms against thee very soon, and perhaps they may join Moawiya' 'But
the Divine Law,' said Ali, 'dost not allow of crafty deceptions. I must
strictly follow the true principles of religion and therefore should not
willingly allow any ungodly man to retain his office. The reason why Ali
did not listen to those who advised him not to dismiss Moawiya is given
by Osborne (History of Islam) in the following words: "The Bayard of
Islam, the hero without fear and without reproach refused to be guilty
of any duplicity of compromise with injustice." 'Moawiya will have
nothing but the sword from me. I cannot retain him for a single day.'
'See,' continued he, 'I appoint thee, O Ibn Abbas ! Thou shalt go forth
thyself to Syria to turn him out.' 'That', cried Ibn Abbas, 'is quite
impracticable, Moawiya would not leave me alive because of my being akin
to thee.'

When these arrangements were in progress, Talha and Zubeir came to Ali
and applied for their appointment to the governments of Kufa and Basra,
respectively. But Ali politely refused, observing that in the present
emergency, he needed such able counsellors near at hand.

Having chosen his men for the government of the various provinces, Ali
sent them out to their respective destinations in the month of Moharram
36 A.H. to replace the existing Governors. Thus he sent (1) Obeidallah
b. Abbas to Yemen; (2) Qais b. Saad b. Obada to Egypt; (3) Qutham b.
Abbas to Mecca; (4) Samaha b. Abbas to Tihama; (5) Awn b. Abbas to
Yamama; (6) Osman b. Honeif to Busra (7) Ammara b. Shahab to Kufa; (8)
Said b. Abbas to Bahrein; and (9) Sahel b. Honeif to Syria.

Obeidallah reached Yemen and found that Yala, his predecessor, had
carried off to Mecca all the treasure amounting to sixty thousand
Dinars, which he made over to Ayesha along with six hundred camels, one
of which was a rarity, a big-sized, well bred animal, valued at 200 gold
pieces. It was named Al-Askar and was specially presented for the use of
Ayesha. Obeidallah, however, took possession of the government of
Yemen.

Qais b. Saad, when approaching Egypt, was opposed by a party with
leanings towards the late Caliph Osman whilst passing a frontier
garrison; but by feigning an attachment to the cause of Osman, he
succeeded in reaching the seat of his government, which he was to
occupy. His predecessor, Abdallah b. Abi Sarh, being certain of his
removal, had already made his way to Syria to take refuge with Moawiya,
as most of the Umayyads had done on the accession of Ali.

Osman b. Honeif, who went to Busra, entered unopposed; but Ibn Mir, his
predecessor, had also already made away with all the treasure and joined
Talha and Zubeir. Osman occupied his post but found that disaffection
was rife against Ali among a considerable number of the people.

Ammara on his way to Kufa was met by Tulaiha and Qaqa at the stage
named Zabala, and they advised him to go back to Medina as the Kufians,
they said, were resolved not to part with Abu Musa Ashari, who was set
over them by their own choice by the late Caliph. They warned him that
if he attempted to enter Kufa, he would have to face strong hostilities.
Ammara retraced his steps, to Medina and reported the state of affairs
to the Caliph, Ali.

When Sahel, the Governor designate of Syria, reached Tabuk, he met a
party of horsemen who told him that the people of Syria were clamouring
for the vengeance of Osman's blood and would not receive a man of Ali's
appointment whom they did not recognise as Caliph. Being unprepared to
force his advance, Sahel returned to Medina and reported the matter to
Mi.

Scheme of the Umayyads to stir up the people against Ali's
government.

In the meantime the Umayyads, sparing nothing which could possibly
serve to disturb Ali and his government, carried, at the instance of 1
Umme Habiba, a widow of the Prophet and sister of Moawiya, the
blood-stained shirt which Osman was wearing at the time of his murder,
together with the mangled fingers of Naela, his wife, to Moawiya in
Syria, where he used them as instruments to stir up the spirit of
vengeance among his people. Amr b. Aas, the true counsellor of Moawiya,
said to him: 'Show the dam her foal, it will stir her bowels'; and he
accordingly suspended the shirt with the mangled fingers attached
thereto on the pulpit of the mosque at Damascus. These
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Mas'udi; Habib-al-Siyar.

emblems were also carried about for the army to witness. These objects,
daily exposed to view, touched the Syrians, who wept till their beards
were wet with tears, and swore vengeance upon the murderers of Osman.

Moawiya's defiance of Ali's authority.

When Sahel returned, Ali asked Talha and Zubeir to mark the extent to
which the parties were divided and which he had cautioned them against.
They replied that, if they were allowed to go out of Medina, they would
be answerable if the disturbance did not cease. Upon this Ali said that
sedition was like fire, the more it burnt the stronger it grew and the
brighter it shone; he would, however, bear it so long as it was
possible, and when it became unbearable he would try to extinguish it.
He resolved in the first instance, to write a letter to Moawiya and also
to Abu Musa demanding their allegiance. Abu Musa replied that he himself
and the Kufians, with some exceptions, were entirely at his service; but
from Moawiya no reply was forthcoming though weeks elapsed. In fact
Moawiya had detained the messenger to witness the strength of his armies
clamouring impatiently to revenge the blood of Osman, but, being,
faithfully submissive to him, only waited for a word of command from him
to march againt all concerned. After several weeks Moawiya permitted the
messenger to go back to Medina, accompanied by a messenger of his own,
who carried a despatch which was superscribed on the cover with the
words 'from Moawiya to Ali.' According to the instructions given to him
by Moawiya, when Moawiya's messenger reached Medina, he carried the
despatch aloft upon a staff on purpose to be seen by the people in the
streets. Being well aware of

Moawiya's disaffection for Ali, the people thronged, anxious to know
what the contents of the message might be. It was just three months
after the murder of Osman that the despatch was presented to Ali, who
read the address and breaking open the seal found all blank within,
which he rightly took as a token of utmost defiance. Astonished at the
effrontery of Moawiya, he asked the messenger to explain the enigma. 1
Upon this the messenger having begged and received assurance for the
safety of his life answered: "Know then, I have left behind me in Syria
sixty thousand warriors bewailing the murder of Osman under his
blood-stained shirt by the oulpit of the great Mosque at Damascus, all
bent on revenging the death of the Caliph on thee."

"O me!" cried Ali in astonishment. "I call God to witness that I am not
guilty of it. 0 God! I seek Thy protection against so false a charge."
Ali then declared that only the sword could be the arbitrator between
Moawiya and himself; and turning to Ziyad b. Hantala who sat by
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 The messenger's reply to Ali is given by Major Price thus : "Fifty
thousand men are assembled about the robes of Osman' whose cheeks and
beards have never been dry from tears, and whose eyes have never ceased
from weeping blood, since the hour of that prince's atrocious murder.
They have drawn their swords with a solemn pledge never to return them
to the scabbard, nor cease from mourning, until they have extirpated all
concerned in that detested transaction. This sentiment they have left as
a solemn bequest to their descendants; and the earliest principle that
mothers instil into the minds of their infant offspring is, to revenge
the blood of Osman to the last extremity.' This insolent speech excited
the anger of the attendants of the Caliph to such a degree, that, had
not Ali interposed, serious consequences might have ensued. Strange to
say, this magnanimity on the part of Ali operated like magic on the
messenger of Moawiya, who then declared himself convinced of his error,
and solemnly swore that for the future he would never voluntarily
separate from the person of Ali or acknowledge the authority of any
other sovereign to his prejudice." S. Ockley's History of Saracens P.
295.

him, said that an expedition against Syria might be proclaimed, which
Ziyad soon communicated to the people.

**Departure of Talha & Zubeir.
**
Talha and Zubeir, whose desire to quit Medina was twice thwarted, now,
seeing how the affairs were drifting, were anxious to acquire freedom of
action, which they could not enjoy so long as they remained in Medina.
Once more, therefore, they came to Ali and asked of him leave to proceed
to Mecca on pretext of performing the Lesser Pilgrimage. Ali, who
understood their motive, reminded them of the oath of allegiance which
they had taken of their free will on the day of his inauguration and
gave them leave to depart, saying that he expected strange things from
them and therefore he had insisted on their sincerity in taking the
oath.

Ali began prenarations for the expedition to Syria, calling for
assistance from all the provinces and intensifying recruitment in
Medina; entering into armed conflict with Moawiya, he had to face
another serious rebellion, which is described in detail below.

Ayesha's plans for rebellion.

Ayesha, on her way back from the pilgrimage at Mecca, met Ibn Omm Kalab
at Safif. He informed her of Osman's murder and All's accession to the
Caliphate. When Ayesha heard of Ali's election as Caliph she said, "I
wish Heavens had fallen and I had not seen this day." Ref. Historians
History of the World. Vol. VIII page 170. She further added 'carry me
back to Mecca' and, repeating it, she

said, 'By God! Osman was innocent, I will avenge his blood.' She went
instantly back to Mecca along with her confederate Hafsa 1 and began to
propagate sedition there. Sit. W. Muir in his Annals of the early
Caliphate on page 351 and 352 gives the following account of Ayesha
relating to this incident: "In the early period of Osman's troubles,
Ayesha is said to have contributed her share towards fomenting public
discontent. We are told that she even abetted the conspirators, among
whom her brother Muhammad, son of Abubakr, was a chief leader. When on
receiving the tidings of the murder, on her way back from Mecca, she
declared that she would avenge Osman's death. 'What cried her informant,
startled by her zeal, 'is this thy speech now, whilst but yesterday thou
wast foremost to press the attack upon him as an apostate?' 'Yea', she
replied, 'but even now he repented of that which they laid to his
charge, and yet after that they slew him.' In reply her informant
recited the verses purporting to say: 'Thou wast the first to foment the
discontent. Thou commanded us to slay the prince for his apostasy.'
Anyhow it must be admitted that Ayesha was a jealous, violent,
intriguing woman, a character that may well account for much that would
otherwise appear strange." In fact Ayesha expected either of the two,
Talha or Zubeir, to succeed Osman, but contrary to her expectations, Ali
was elected. She detested Ali and was extremely disturbed in mind and
thought of resorting to open hostilities. Declaring herself avenger of
Osman's blood, she induced the great and powerful clan of Umayyah to
which Osman belonged to join her cause. The Umayyads who still resided
at Mecca and those who had fled from Medina on the accession of Ali,
readily gathered under her flag. The deposed Governors of several
provinces also came in, one after the other, and,
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Tabari.

persuading easily a large number of malcontents, made common cause with
her. Yala, the ex-governor of Yemen, furnished her with ample means to
carry on the war by presenting her the State treasure, which he had
carried off from Yemen.


Talha and Zubeir join Ayesba in her rebellion
About four months after the murder of Osman, Talha and Zubeir, the
brother-in-law of Ayesha reached Mecca and found things well in
progress. Notwithstanding their oath of allegiance to Ali, which they
now said they took under compulsion and were not therefore bound to
abide by it, they longed to take up her cause, which, in case of
success, was sure to prove to their own benefit. Accordingly they joined
Ayesha and began to take measures against Ali, proclaming among the
faction at Mecca that Al's affairs were quite in an unsettled condition.
"Ayesha, Talha and Zubeir who had always been enemies of Osman, and
were, in fact, the contrivers of his death and destruction, when they
saw Ali elected, whom they hated equally, if not more, made use of
Osman's real and sincere friends as instruments of their malice against
the new Caliph. So that from very different motives they all unanimously
joined in demanding satisfaction for the murder of Osman.

The joint move of Ayesha, Talha and Zubeir has been mentioned in
'Historians History of the World, Vol. VIII page 170, as follows :
"Though she (Ayesha) had obviously shared the conspiracy against Osman,
she now proclaimed herself as avenger and she denounced Ali as the
author of his death. Joined with her were Talha and Zubeir who well knew
the falsehood of Ayesha's allegation"

Simon Ockley's History of the Saracens p. 294. The standard of
rebellion was raised and the tale of these distinguished persons was
eagerly listened to by the factious and the revengeful Arabs at large,
whose fathers and brothers had been killed by Ali in defending the
Prophet's cause on the occasion of various wars in his time. Many a
discontented Arab flocked under the Standard. The treasure, which Ibn
Amir the deposed Governor of Busra had brought away with him, was now
utilized by Talha and Zubeir in equipping the force.

War council
The preparations for war having been completed, the leaders of the
rebellion held a council to discuss the place where the operations could
be carried on with success. Ayesha proposed to march upon Medina to
attack Ali in his capital. This idea was abandoned because she was
informed that the people of Medina were unanimously in favour of Ali,
and too powerful to be assailed with success. Some suggested that they
proceed to Syria and make a joint attack with the insurgents there; but
Walid b. Oqba strongly opposed this suggestion, saying that Moawiya
would not approve of their presence in his capital, much less the
control of his armies by them in such critical times, rather he would
take it ill, as an interference in his designs to gain independence,
which, as a matter of fact, kept him from sending the succour demanded
of him as a feudatory chief by Osman, whose days he thought were
numbered. The objection being weighty, the suggestion was dropped. At
last, Talha having assured them that he had a strong party in his favour
at Busra and that he was confident of its surrender, it was finally
resolved to march toward that city. A proclamation was accordingly made
by beat of drum through the streets of Mecca that Ayesha, the Mother of
the Faithful, accompanied by the

distinguished chiefs, Talha and Zubeir, was going in person to Busra;
that all those who were desirous of avenging the atrocious murder of the
prince of the faithful viz. Osman, and of doing service to the cause of
the Faith, should join her, even if they had no equipments, which would
be furnished to them as soon as they came in.

Ayesha instigates Umme Selma
Ayesha desired Umme Selma, another wife of the Prophet who had been at
Mecca on pilgrimage, to accompany her in the adventure, but she
indignantly declined the invitation, and reasoned with Ayesha whether
she was justified to venture against the prophecy of the Prophet in
opposing Ali, who, she pointed out, was also Caliph duly elected
unanimously by the people of Medina and acknowledged by the people of
several provinces. Reciting the Prophet's saying: "Ali is my vicegerent
in my life as also on my death, whosoever disobeys him disobeys me," she
asked Ayesha if she had heard the Prophet say so. The latter assented.
Then Umme Selma reminded her of the Prophet's prediction, to which he
had given utterance reproachfully to his wives: "A short while after,
the dogs of Hawab shall bark at one of my wives who will be amongst a
rebellious mob. Oh! that I knew who she was! Beware O Homeira! lest thou
should be the one." Ayesha, was alarmed at these reminders and Umme
Selma continuing her warnings said: "Do not let thyself be beguiled by
Talha and Zubeir. They will entangle thee into wrong but would not be
able to extricate thee from the wrath or disgrace that may befall thee."
Ayesha returned to her lodging half inclined to desist from her scheme,
but the entreaties of her adopted son, Abdallah b. Zubeir, persuaded her
vindictive nature to avenge herself upon

the man who had once joined the Prophet in suspecting her when a false
charge was laid against her. "Ayesha, spurning the restraints of her
sex, prepared to join the campaign and to stir up the people of Busra,
as she had stirred up those of Mecca. Hafsa, daughter of Omar, another
wife of the Prophet, was with difficulty restrained by her brother who
had just fled from Medina, and held aloof from either side from
accompanying her sister-widow." Muir's Annals, p. 353.

Ayesha's march on Busra
At length Ayesha, mounted in a litter carried by the camel al-Askar,
marched forth from Mecca at the head of one thousand volunteers, Six
hundred of them were riding on camels and four hundred on horses. She
was attended on her right by Talha and by Zubeir on her left. On her
way, many a people joined her, soon swelling the number of the rebel
army to three thousand.

Moghira b. Sho'ba, who was Governor of Busra and of Kufa, in the time
of Caliph Omar, and Sa'id, one of the veteran elders of Mecca and a
Mohajir of the first emigration who also accompanied the cavalcade,
suspecting the motives of Talha and Zubeir, enquired of them as to who
would be the Caliph in the event of victory. "Either of us two, as
chosen by the people", was the ready response. "And why not a son of
Osman?" asked Sa'id. To this the reply was, "Because the elders, being
distinguished chiefs and Mohajirs, should not be overlooked." "But I
think", rejoined Sa'id, "if you are going forth to revenge the murder of
Osman, his successor should, of a right, be one of his own sons, two of
whom Ahab and Walid e already in your camp. Your succession would mean
that, under pretence of Osman's blood, you sought to fight for

your own profit." "It will, however", they answered, "depend upon the
men of Medina to choose whomsoever they like." Moghira and Sa'id,
distrusting the leaders of the rebellion, resolved to retire, and
accordingly they retraced their steps to Mecca along with their
followers, who formed part of a body of the rebel army. Turning to the
troops, as they were passing by them shouting: "Slay the murderers of
Osman, destroy them, one and all", Moghira cried out to Marwan and
others: "Whither are ye going to hunt the murderers? They are before
your eyes on the humps of their camels (pointing out towards Talha,
Zubeir and Ayesha), slay them and go back to your homes. They are the
proper objects of your vengeance, they had as much hand in the detested
affair as anybody else." The army, however, continued its march shouting
wildly all the way. It was urged that the question of succession was
premature, and Ayesha declared that the choice of a successor was the
exclusive right of the men of Medina and must rest with them as before
and, to avoid further misgivings, she directed that Abdallah, the son of
Zubeir, should lead the daily prayers.


Ayesha in the valley of Hawab
On their way to Busra, the rebel army received intelligence that Ali,
the Caliph, had come out of Medina in their pursuit. In order to reach
Busra uninterrupted and unhampered Ayesha ordered that the route should
be changed. Leaving aside the highway, her armies marched by an
unfrequented pathway to Busra. The guide, to dispel the irksomeness of
the long autumn nights, whiled away his time singing and occasionally
shouting the name of each valley, desert or village they were passing
by. Reaching one night a place, he cried: "The valley of

Hawab." Struck at this name, a chill ran through Ayesha's whole frame,
instantly the dogs of the village surrounding her camel began to bark at
her most clamorously. "What place is this?" she screamed aloud, and the
guide repeated in his usual tone, "The valley of Hawab." The Prophet's
prediction recently brought to her memory by Umme Selma, as already
observed, was now uppermost in her mind, and she shivered and exclaimed,
"Alas I am indeed the wretched woman of Hawab. The Prophet had already
warned me against this." Talha and Zubeir swore falsely that the guide
had mistaken the name and that the place was not Hawab. They also
suborned fifty witnesses to swear to it. In spite of this she refused to
proceed further. This is said to be the first occasion of false evidence
given publicly since the dawn of Islam.

Thus for the night and the whole of the following day they halted at
Hawab. Talha and Zubeir were quite perplexed and did not know what to
do. At last, hitting upon a clever stratagem, the next night they made
the army raise a cry, "Quick! Ali's army is fast approaching to overtake
us." Ayesha struck with terror, instantly took to her heels, found her
camel, and nimbly got into her litter. The march was instantly
resumed.

Ayesha's encampment at Khoreiba
The army pushed forward in haste towards Busra and reaching the
outskirts of the town encamped at Khoreiba. Ayesha sent for Ahnaf b.
Qais, a leading citizen of Busra, and asked him to join her army. After
some discussion on the subject, he refused to take up arms against the
Caliph. Resolving, however, to remain neutral, he left Busra with six
thousand of his followers and encamped

in the suburbs of Busra at Wadi-al-Saba. Ayesha sent a message to Osman
b. Honeif, the Governor of Busra, inviting him to come to her.
Immediately Ibn Honeif, putting on his armour and followed by a large
number of the citizens, went forth to meet Ayesha. But to his surprise,
he found the army of the insurgents arrayed on the parade-ground
followed by a large number of the factious element of the citizens, who
had in the meantime joined Ayesha to stand by her side. A parley ensued:
"Talha and Zubeir alternately addressed the multitude, and were followed
by Ayesha, who harangued them from her camel. Her voice, which she
raised that it might be heard by all, became shrill and sharp, instead
of intelligible, and provoked the merriment of some of the crowd. A
dispute arose as to the justice of her appeal; mutual revilings took
place between the parties; they gave each other the lie, and threw dust
in each other's faces. One of the men of Busra then turned and
reproached Ayesha: "Shame on thee, '0 Mother of the Faithful!' said he,
"Murder of the Caliph was a grievous crime, but was a lesser abomination
than thy forgetfulness of the modesty of thy sex. Wherefore dost thou
abandon thy quiet home and thy protecting veil and ride forth like a man
barefaced on that accursed camel to foment quarrels and dissensions
among the Faithful?" Another of the crowd scoffed at Talha and Zubeir:
"You have brought your mother with you", cried he, "why did you not also
bring your wives?" Insults were soon followed by blows, swords were
drawn, a skirmish ensued, and they fought until the hour of prayer
separated them." W. Irving's Successors of Muhammad. p. 172.

The gates of the city were now closely barred against the entry of the
insurgents. Some days passed in skirmishes with serious loss to the
Governor's party and the rebels had

the advantage of gaining some footing in the town. At length a truce
was agreed upon and one of the terms being that a messenger should be
sent to Medina to enquire whether Talha and Zubeir paid homage to Ali on
the day of his inauguration voluntarily or under compulsion. In the
former case they would be treated as rebels and in the latter their
partisans in Busra would be justified in upholding their cause. The
insurgents, who were desirous to get a chance to overpower the Governor
and to take possession of the city, acquiesced in this arrangement to
gain time for the longed for opportunity. A messenger was sent to
Medina. When he delivered his errand, the people were all silent. At
last Osama stood up and said that they were compelled. But this
assertion of Osama would have cost him his life had not a friend of his,
viz., Sohaib, a man of influence and authority, taken him under his
protection and led him home.


Seizure of Busra by Ayesha.

In the meantime the insurgent leaders endeavoured to draw Ibn Honeif,
the Governor of Busra to their camp by friendly messages, but he
suspecting treachery, confined himself to his own house and substituted
Ammar in office. Talha and Zubeir, taking a chosen band one stormy dark
night, mixed with the congregation in the mosque in the guise of
worshippers, surprised the Governor after killing forty of his guard and
took him prisoner. On the following day Hakim b. Jabala tried to release
the prisoner, but in his efforts lost his life together with seventy of
his followers. A serious conflict raged throughout the city, resulting
in the total discomfiture and heavy loss of Ali's party. Ayesha entered
the city in state and the government of Busra, together With the
treasury, passed into the hands of the insurgents.

Soon after the capture of Osman b. Honeif. Ayesha was asked in what way
it was her pleasure to punish him. She passed a sentence of death on
him, but on the entreaties of a woman of her retinue, she was moved to
spare his life. He was doomed, however, to suffer great tortures before
he could escape from the hands of his captors. His beard, moustache and
eyebrows were plucked out hair by hair and he was then contemptuously
turned out.

Tidings to Ali of Ayesha's revolt

The reader might naturally be anxious to know what Ali, the Caliph, was
doing all this time. Let us therefore leave the insurgents in possession
of Busra and follow Ali : Rumours of the disturbance at Mecca reached
Medina, but Ali said that unless an overt action of the malcontents
threatened the very unity of Islam, he would not take drastic measures
against them. After some time, Umme Selma, 1 who had spurned the
proposals of Ayesha at Mecca, as already observed, repaired to Medina
soon after the departure of the rebels to Busra and informed Ali of the
revolt of Ayesha, Talha and Zubeir. Again, an urgent message was also
received from Omm-al-Fadzl, the widow of Abbas at Mecca, with news of
the rebels' designs against the Caliph and of their march upon Busra.

On receipt of this intelligence, Ali assembled the people in the great
Mosque and called them to take up arms and to follow him against the
rebels. The Caliph's eloquent address and warm appeal was received with
coldness and apathy 2 which pervaded the assembly. No one appeared ready
to respond to the call. Some of them had
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Rawdzat-al-Ahbab.
2 Ibn Athir.

in their minds the fact that the person against whom they were urged to
take up alms was none other than the Mother of the Faithful, i.e.
Ayesha; others dreaded a civil war, some doubted if Ali might not in
some degree have been implicated in the death of Osman, a charge which
had been so artfully brought against him. For three consecutive days Ali
tried his best to move the people to bestir themselves. At last on the
third day Ziyad b. Hantzela rose and approching Ali said : "Let
whomsoever will, hold back, I shall go forward." Following his example,
two Ansars, Abul Hathim and Khazima b. Thabit, came forth saying : "The
Prince of the Faithful is innocent of the murder of Osman, we must join
him." Instantly Abu Qatada, another Ansar, a man of distinction stood up
and drawing his sword exclaimed : "The Apostle of God, upon whom be
peace, girded me with this sword. I have kept it sheathed a long while;
but now it is high time to draw it against these wicked men who are
always deceiving the people." (Simon Ockley's History of the Saracens p.
300).

Even Umme Selma 1 in the enthusiasm of her zeal for Ali said to him :
"O Commander of the Faithful! If it were permitted by Law, I myself
would have accompanied thee in thy expedition, but I know thou wouldst
not allow it, so I offer the services of my son, Omar b. Abi Selma, who
is dearer to me than my own life. Let him go with thee and partake of
thy fortunes." Ali accepted the offer and Omar b. Abi Selma accompanied
him in the expedition. He was a man of valour, possessed of piety and
many other good qualities, he was subsequently appointed Governor of
Bahrein.
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Tabari ; ibn Khaldun.

Ali's march against Ayesha

In short, a levy of nine hundred men could be raised with difficulty.
The cold attitude of the people of Medina at this critical juncture made
Ali so dejected that he resolved not to come back among them but to
transfer his seat of government elsewhere. However at the head of this
small force of nine hundred 1 men he marched out of Medina wishing to
overtake the rebels on their way to Busra. Arriving at Rabazha (on the
outskirts of Nejd), he found out that the insurgents had already passed
and were beyond reach. Though joined on his march by the Bani Tay and
some other loyal tribes, still, not being sufficiently equipped for
further advance, he ordered a halt at Zhi Qar waiting for reinforcements
from Kufa, where he had sent Mohammed b. Abubakr and Abdallah b. Ja'far
to Abu-Musa-al-Ashari, the Governor, requesting him to urge the people
to come over to their Caliph in order to subdue the rebels and to try
for the re-union of a divided people.


Abu Musa-al-Ashari's conduct towards the Caliph

Abu-Musa cherished no good will towards the Caliph because the latter
having sent Ammara b. Shahab to replace him, as has been mentioned
earlier, as he was a weak and spineless man of low spirit. Ayesha had
already sent him letters to dissuade his people from their allegiance to
Ali and to persuade them to rise up to avenge the murder of Osman.
Apprehensive of the success of Ayesha at Busra, he had already begun to
waver in his allegiance to Ali and to advocate her cause to the people.
When the Caliph's messengers arrived at Kufa and gave out
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Rawdzat-al-Safa.

his command, there was perfect silence among the people in the mosque.
At length the people. asked Abu-Musa how he advised them in the matter
of joining the Caliph's forces. He gravely replied that going to fight
for Islam and sitting quietly at home were two different things. The
former was the way of the world, while the latter was the heavenly way.
They should take their choice. Enraged at heating him speak thus, the
Caliph's envoys reproached him, to which he answered with an oath that
the homage done to Osman still hung round his neck and round the neck of
his master meaning Ali as well as his people; so 1 they were resolved to
see the murderers of Osman liquidated withersoever they were; and so
long as any of the murderers remained alive they would not go out to
join any expedition. He desired Mohammed b. Abubakr and Abdallah b.
Ja'far to go back as fast as they could to Ali and tell him so.

2 In the meantime Osman b. Honeif, the ex-Governor of Busra, presented
himself at Zhi-Qar. His appearance was strange indeed. The Caliph
recognised him and observed with a smile that he had left him an old man
but he returned to him a beardless youth. In fact Osman had a remarkably
beautiful beard, the loss of which, together with the hair plucked out
of his moustache and eyebrows, gave him an uncanny appearance, which
made all smile. He recounted the misfortunes he had experienced at the
hands of the insurgent leaders, and the Caliph sympathised with him for
his sufferings and comforted him by assuring him that his sufferings
would be counted as merits. He then said that the men who were the first
to accept him as a Caliph were the first to break their oath of fealty
and the
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Tabari.
2 Abul Fida.

first to rise up in rebellion against him. He could not understand
their voluntary submission to Abubakr, Omar and Osman and their
opposition to him.

As soon as Mohammed b. Abubakr and Abdallah b. Ja'far came back and
reported what Abu-Musa had said. the Caliph despatched Ibn Abbas' and
Malik-al-Ashtar to Kufa to use their influence over the Kufians.
Arriving at Kufa, they delivered the message and invoked the assistance
of the Kufians. Abu-Musa, however, addressed them thus : "Brethren! The
Companions of the Prophet know better of God and His Prophet than those
who are not Companions. The disturbance is amongst the Companions, they
know best who is to be trusted. You should not meddle with their
affairs. For such an occasion the Prophet has said: "There would be a
disturbance in which he that sleepeth is better than he that is awake,
and he that is awake is better than he that sitteth, and he that sitteth
is better than he that standeth; and he that standeth is better than he
that walketh, and he that walketh is better than he that rideth."
Wherefote sheath your swords, cut your bow strings and put off lances.
Sit quietly in your houses and receive the injuted to your hospitality
till the disturbance is ceased. Let the Companions of the Prophet be all
agreed. You need not make war against any. Let those who have come to
you from Medina return back."

Abu Musa's deposition from the government of Kufa
Ibn Abbas and Malik-al-Ashtar went back and reported to the Caliph, who
then sent his son Hasan accompanied by Ammar Yasir, who had been for
some time Governor of Kufa during the reign of Caliph Omar and who for
his outspoken remarks had been severely maltteated by Caliph
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Ibn Athir.

Osman. Malik al-Ashtar, a man possessed of initiative and
determination, exercising great influence over the Kufians, who was
irritated by the prevarications of Abu-Musa in his previous mission,
followed Hasan along with Qartza b. Ka'b Ansar, who was nominated by the
Caliph to replace Abu-Musa in office. Abu-Musa received Hasan quite
respectfully, but when in the mosque the assistance required by the
Caliph was sought for, he opposed the proposal as vigorously as before,
repeating the saying of the Prophet as mentioned in the foregoing
paragraph viz. "There should be a disturbance in which he that sleepeth
is better than he that walketh etc." Ammar Yasir, the venerable old
favourite of the Prophet aged about 90, a stern soldier and veteran, now
General of the Horse in Ali's forces, hearing the cunning speech of
Abu-Musa, promptly replied to him that he had misapplied the words of
the Prophet which were meant to rebuke such men as Abu-Musa himself, who
were far better sleeping than awake, better sitting than standing etc.
Still Abu-Musa persisted in hindering the people from complying with the
envoys' proposals. A tumult ensued when 1 Zaid b. Sohan stood up and
read out a letter from Ayesha commanding him either to remain at home
neutral or to join her. Having read this letter he produced another,
meant for the Kufian general public to the same effect. Having read both
these letters he remarked : "She is required by the Quran and by the
Prophet to sit quietly at home in her house, and we to fight till there
should be no sedition. She commands us to play her part while she has
taken ours upon herself." Some people among the audience reproached Zaid
for this remark against the Mother of the Faithful. Abu-Musa again began
his address opposing the Caliph, upon which some of the audience chided
him for
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Tabari.

his unfaithfulness and disloyalty and forced him to leave the pulpit,
which was then occupied by Hasan b. Ali.

1 Abu-Musa had to leave not only the pulpit but also the mosque at
once, as some of the men of the garrison stationed at the Governor's
castle came crying to him, bearing evidence of having been severely
beaten with batons and sticks. It may be explained that, while the
dissension was going on in the mosque, Malik-al-Ashtar taking a party of
his men seized the castle of the Governor by surprise, caused the
garrison to be soundly beaten and sent them to the mosque, to cut short
the discussion. This prompt measure of Al-Ashtar produced the desired
effect ; and it placed the cold-spirited conduct of Abu-Musa in such a
ridiculous light that the feelings of the populace were instantly turned
against him. He proceeded to the castle in haste only to receive orders
from Malik to vacate it at once. The mob at the gate were ready to
plunder his house, but Malik interposed and granted Abu Musa twenty four
hours to take away his belongings.

Hasan b. Ali raising a levy of 9000 Kufians
From the pulpit Hasan addressed the congregation very fluently. "He
maintained the innocence of his father in regard to the assassination of
Osman. His father, he said, had either done wrong, or had suffered
wrong. If he had done wrong, God would punish him. If he had suffered
wrong, God would help him, The case was in the hands of the Most High.
Talha and Zubeir who were the first to inaugurate him, were the first to
turn against him. What had he done, as Caliph, to merit such opposition
? What injustice had he committed ? What covetous
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Ibn Athir ; Ibn Khaldun.

or selfish propensity had he manifested ?" W. Irving's Successors of
Muhammad p. 177.

He reminded the people the saying of the Prophet who had said that Ali
would always be on the side of truth. The eloquence of Hasan was
extremely effective; the heads of the tribes were telling each other
that they had given their hands in allegiance to Ali. He had done them
the honour by wishing to make them arbittators in such an important
affair. They were sorry for not giving heed to the messengers, which
necessitated the Caliph to depute his own son to come to them asking for
their assistance. They fin2lly concluded that they ought to obey their
Caliph and must comply with such a reasonable demand.

Hasan told them that he was going back to his father and that those who
thought fit to accompany him might do so, while others might follow by
land or by water. Accordingly 1 nine thousand Kufians came over to Ali,
some by land and some by water. Welcoming them, Ali- said : "I have
called you hither to be witnesses between us and our brethren of Busra.
If they submit peaceably, it is what we desire; if they persist we will
heal them with gentle usage, unless they fall upon us injuriously. We,
on our part, will omit nothing that may, by any means, contribute to an
accommodation, which we must prefer to the desolation of war." S.
Ockley's History of the Saracens p. 306.

The army of the Caliph, having been reinforced from other quarters as
well, now numbered twenty thousand strong, and with this army he
advanced towards Busra 2. While staying at Zhi-Qar, Ali wrote letters to
Ayesha,
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Tabari.
2 Rawdzat-al-Ahbab.

Talha and Zubeir warning them against the unwise steps they had taken
and telling them that none of them could stand as legitimate avengers of
the blood of Osman, who was an Umayyad while none of them belonged to
the Bani Umayya. Ayesha sent a reply that the situation had already
reached a stage at which warnings were useless, as for Talha and Zubeir
they gave no written answer but sent word to inform Ali that they were
not prepared to obey his dictates and that he was at liberty to do
whatever he wished.


Ali's arrival at Busra
Ayesha's army numbered thirty thousand, but it consisted mostly of raw
recruits, while that of Ali's was composed principally of veterans and
men who had seen service and were the Companions of the Prophet. When
Ali appeared with his forces marshalled in an imposing battle array
before Busra, Ayesha and her confederates were struck with terror. 1
Approaching Busra, Ali sent Qa'qa b. Amr, a Companion of the Prophet, to
the rebel leaders to negotiate peace if possible. Ayesha replied that
Ali should personally negotiate with them. 2 When Ali arrived, messages
passed between the hostile forces with a view to compromising the
matter. Ali, Talha and Zubeir were seen holding long conversations,
walking together backward and forward in the sight of both the armies,
the negotiations went so far that every one expected that a peace would
be effected; for Ali, with his impressive eloquence, touched the hearts
of Talha and Zubeir, warning them against the Judgment of Heaven and
challenging them to the ordeal of invoking heavenly wrath on those who
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Murtudza ; Abbasi.
2 Tabari; Rawdzat-al-Ahbab; Imamat-wal-Siyasat.

promoted and prompted the murder of Osman instigating the malefactors.
In one of their conferences Ali asked Zubeir "Hast thou forgotten how
the Apostle of God once asked thee if thou did not love his dear Ali,
and thou answered 'Yes', dost thou not remember the Prophet's prophecy
that 'nevertheless, there will come a day when thou wilt rise up against
him and bring many miseries upon him and upon all the Muslims'. Zubeir
answered that he remembered it perfectly well and he felt sorry, that
had he remembered it before, he would never have taken up arms against
him. Zubeir appeared most inclined not to fight against Ali.

He returned to his camp and acquainted Ayesha with what had passed
between himself and Ali. "It is said that upon this hint he declined
fighting with Ali, but that having acquainted Ayesha with the
circumstances, she was so furious against Ali, that she would not listen
to an accommodation on any terms. Others say that his (Zubeir's) son
Abdallah (adopted by Ayesha) made him change his mind by asking him
whether or not he was afraid of Ali. Upon Zubeir answering, 'No, but
that he was sworn to Ali', Abdallah bade him expiate his oath, which he
did by giving a slave his liberty, and forthwith prepared without
further hesitation, to fight against Ali." S. Ockley's History of the
Saracens p. 307.

The two armies were camping opposite one another on the same field.
During the night one p2rty fell upon the other, each blaming the other
for provoking a drawn battle. The reader may question which of the two
parties was to blame for this nocturnal attack. Which party attempted at
pacification to avoid bloodshed, and which thwarted the attempts. The
circumstances related above are only too clear to indicate the truth.

The battle of the camel 'Jamal'

Early next morning, Friday the 16th of Jamadi 11, 36 A.H. (November 656
A.D.) Ayesha took the field, mounted in a litter on her great camel
Al-Askar and riding up and down among her troops, animating them by her
presence and by her voice. In history the battle is named 'the battle of
the camel' after the strange animal on which Ayesha was mounted, though
it was fought on the field of Khoreiba close to Busra . Ali's army faced
the enemy in battle array, but the Caliph ordered them not to take the
offensive unless the enemy began the onset. He further gave stringent
orders that no wounded should be slain, no fugitive pursued, no plunder
seized nor the privacy of any house violated. No sooner had he given
these orders when showers of arrows started to pour from the enemy but,
still Ali forbade his soldiers to retaliate and bade them wait.

"To the very last moment Ali evinced a decided repugnance to shed the
blood of a Muslim; and just before the battle, he endeavoured to turn
the adversary to allegiance by a solenm appeal to the Quran. A person
named Muslim immediately offered himself for the service; and uplifting
a copy of the sacred volume with his right hand, this individual
proceeded to admonish the enemy to recede from their unwarranted
designs. 1 But the hand which bore the Holy Manuscript was severed from
his arm by one of the infuriated multitude. Seizing the Quran with his
left, that limb was also severed by another scimitar. Still, however,
'messing it to his bosom with his mutilated arms he continued his
exhortations until finally he was kiled by the swords of the enemy. His
body was subsequently recovered by his friends and prayers
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. According to Tabari (Persian) by Talha.

pronounced over it by Ali in person ; after which, taking up a handful
of dust, and scattering it towards the insurgents, that prince
imprecated upon them the retribution of an avenging Deity. In the
meantime. the impetuosity of Ali's followers could no longer be
restrained. Drawing their swords and pointing their spears, they rushed
impetuously to the combat, which was supported on all sides with
extraordinary fierceness and animosity. "Price's Mohomedan History"
quoted by S. Ockley p. 308.

Talha's fate
1 During the heat of the battle when victory began to incline towards
Ali, Marwan b. al-Hakam (Secy. of the late Caliph Osman) one of the
officers in Ayesha's army, noticed Talha urging his troops to fight
valiantly. 'Behold the traitor,' said he to his slave attendant, 'but
recently he was one of the murderers of the aged Caliph, now he stands
as the pretended avenger of his blood. What a mockery ! All to gain
worldly grandeur.' So saying he in a fit of hatred and fury, shot Talha
with an arrow which pierced his leg right through and struck his horse,
who reared and threw the rider to the ground. In the anguish of the
moment, Talha cried, "O God, take vengeance upon me for Osman according
to Thy will !" And then called for help. Seeing his footwear full of
blood, he asked one of his men to pick him up and put him on his horse
and carry him to Busra. Finding his death approaching, he called one of
Ali's men, who happened to be present, 'Give me thine hand,' said the
dying penitent, "that I may put mine in it and by this act renew my oath
of fealty to Ali." With these words Talha breathed his
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Rawdzat-al-Ahbab.

last. It touched the generous heart of Ali when he heard it, and he
said, "Allah would not call him to heaven until He had blotted out his
first breach of his word by this last vow of fidelity." Talha's son
Mohammed was also killed in this battle.

Zubeir's fate
Remorse and compunction had been aroused in the heart of Zubeir at
Ali's reminding him of the Prophet's prophecy. He had no doubt entered
into the battle at the instance of Ayesha and his own son, but his heart
was heavy. 1 Now he saw that Ammar Yasir, the venerable old companion of
the prophet, noted for his probity and uprightness, was e General in the
Caliph's army, he recollected having heard from the Prophet's lips that
Ammar was a person who would always be found on the side of justice and
right and that he would fall under the sword of the rebels. It all
looked ominous to Zubeir and with a boding spirit he withdrew from the
field of battle and all alone took the road to Mecca. When he came to
the valley crossed by the brook Saba where Ahnaf b. Quis was encamped
with a horde of Arabs (a s already mentioned), awaiting the issue of the
battle, he was identified by Ahnaf at a distance. 'Cannot any one bring
me tidings of Zubeir, said he to his men. One of his men, Amar b.
Jarmuz, understood the hint and immediately set off. Seeing him
approach, Zubeir suspected some evil intent and bade him keep his
distance. But after some argument they made friends and both dismounted
to offer prayers as it was the time for prayers. When Zubeir prostrated
himself in the prayers, Amr seized his oppor
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Ibn Athir.

tunity and struck off Zubeir's head with a single stroke of his
scimitar. He carried the head to Ali, who shed tears at the sight of it.
It was the head of one who was once his friend. Turning to the man he
said, 'Go' villain ! Carry thy news to lbn Safiah in hell." This
unexpected malediction so enraged the wretch, who expected a reward,
that he uttered a rhapsody of abuse upon Ali and in a fit of desperation
he drew his sword and plunged it through his own heart.

Defeat of Ayesha
Such was the end of the two great leaders of the rebels. As to Ayesha,
the implacable soul of the revolt, the vindictive lady was still
screaming unceasingly with her shrill voice, "Slay the murderers of
Osman," and urging her men to fight. But the troops, bereft of their
leaders, had already lost heart and were falling back upon the city.
Seeing, however, that she was in peril, they stayed their flight and
turned to her rescue. Rallying round her camel, one after another rushed
to seize the bridle and the standard, and one after another they were
cut down. Thus seventy men perished by the bridle of the ill-fated
animal. Her litter, steel-plated and constructed like a cage, bristled
all over with darts and arrows, and the hump of the huge beast looked
like a startled and angry hedgehog. "Convinced that the battle must
remain in suspense as long as the camel continued to exhibit a rallying
point to the defenders of Ayesha, Ali signified his desire to those
around him that their efforts should be directed to bring down the
animal. After repeated and desperate assaults, Malik-al-Ashtar succeeded
at lengh in forcing a passage and immediately struck off one of the
camel's legs. Malik smote another leg, and the camel immediately sank

to the earth. The litter of Ayesha being thus brought to the ground,
Mohammed, the son of Abubakr, was directed by Ali to take charge of his
sister and protect her from being injured by the missiles which still
flew from all quartets. He drew near accordingly, but when on
introducing his hand into the litter and happening to touch that of
Ayesha, she loaded him with abuse and execration, demanding what
reprobate had presumed to stretch his hand where none but the Prophet's
had been permitted. Mohammed replied that though it was the hand of her
nearest in blood, it was also that of her bitterest enemy. Recognizing,
however, the well known accents of her brother, the apprehensions of
Ayesha were speedily dispelled." Price's Mohamedan History as quoted by
S. Ockley p. 310.

Ali's magnanimity towards the enemy.

"Ayesha might have looked for cruel treatment at the hands of Ali,
having been his vindictive and persevering enemy, but he was too
magnanimous to triumph over a fallen foe." W. Irving's Succ. of Mohd. p.
197. When all the confusion of the battle was over, Ali came to her and
asked her how she fared. Finding that she was all right and had escaped
without injury, he reproachfully said to her, 'Had the Prophet directed
thee to behave in this way ?' She replied, 'You are victorious, be good
to your fallen foe.' Ali reproached her no more and gave instructions to
her brother Mohammed, to take her to the house of Adballah b. Khalaf a
Khozaite, who was a leading citizen of Busra and was killed fighting for
Ayesha. She asked her brother to trace Abdallah, the son of Zubeir, who
was subsequently found lying wounded on

the battlefield among the dead and wounded. As desired by Ayesha, he
was brought before Ali for pardon and forgiveness. The generous-hearted
conqueror magnanimously announced general amnesty to all the rebels and
their confederates along with Adballah b. Zubeir. In spite of all this,
Marwan and the Umayyads fled to Moawiya in Syria and to Mecca.


Carnage in the battle
The losses in the battle were very great. Some historians say that
16,796 men of Ayesha's forces and 1,070 of Ali's army were killed in the
battle. The field was covered all over with dead bodies . A trench was
dug and the dead bodies of friends and foes together were buried by the
order of the Caliph.


Retirement of Ayesha
When all was quiet, Ali sent Abdallah b. Abbas to ask Ayesha to go to
Medina, but she declined, saying that she would not go to a place where
the Bani Hashim dwelt. Some reproachful arguments passed between the
two, after which 1bn Abbas came back to Ali and reported her refusal.
Malik-al-Ashtar was then sent to her, but he too failed in his attempts
to persuade her. Then Ali himself went to her and told her that she was
required to sit quietly at her home where she should now go to take her
abode in the place where the Prophet left her, forgetting the past. 'The
Lord pardon thee,' he said, 'for what hath passed and have mercy upon
thee.' But she paid no heed to his words. At last, he sent his son Hasan
with the message that if she persisted in her refusal

to go to her house in Medina, she would be treated in the way with
which she was well acquainted. When Hasan visited her, she was dressing
her hair, but hearing the message she was so perplexed that leaving her
head half dressed she got up and ordered preparations for the journey.
Hasan retired, but. the ladies of the house enquired of her what it was
the boy said that made her so uneasy after her rejecting Ibn Abbas,
Malik-al-Ashtar and even Ali's suggestion. Then she narrated the
incident when the 1 Prophet had authorized Ali to divorce any of the
Prophet's wives during his life or after. Hasan, said she, was the
bearer of a warning from Ali to enforce that authority, which made her
so uneasy. Ali made proper arrangements for Ayesha's journey and
directed his two sons, Hasan and Husain, to escort her to a day's march,
himself accompanying her for some distance.

"By the direction of Ali, Ayesha was escorted by a retinue of women (40
or 70), apparelled as men, and their familiar approach afforded a
constant subject of complaint. On her arrival at Medina, however, she
discovered the delicacy of the imposture, and became as liberal in her
acknowledgments as she had before been in her reproaches." Price's
Mohomedan History as quoted by S. Ockley p. 310.

It may not be out of place here to refer to the well-known tradition
from Sahih Bokhari (translation by Wahiduzzaman part XII, Book of Jehad
and Siyar page 68, Ahmedi Press, Lahore) wherein it is narrated The Holy
Prophet pointing to the house of Ayesha, proclaimed thr ee times that
mischief will start from this house and
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Rawdzat-al-Ahbab; Habib-al-Siyar; A's= Kufl; Manqib-Murtazavi

the head of Satan will make its appearance from this very house."
Needless to say that Ayesha's rebellious and irreligious action was in
clear contravention of the mandate of God in Sutah Ahzab verse 33 as
also of the various exhortations of the Holy Prophet about this
incident.

The spoils of war.
It has been mentioned earlier that Ali had forbidden his army to seize
any plunder. "So carefully were Ali's orders against plundering
observed, that whatever was found on the field, or in the insurgent
camp, was gathered together in the great mosque, and every man was
allowed to claim his own. To the malcontents, who complained that they
were not allowed to take the booty. Ali replied that the rights of war,
in this case, lasted only so long as the ranks were arrayed against each
other, and that immediately on submission, the insurgents resumed their
rights and privileges as brother Muslims. Having entered the city, he
divided the contents of the Treasury amongst the troops which had fought
on his side, promising them a still larger reward should the Lord
deliver Syria into his hands." Muirs Annals, p. 366.


Sir William on the battle of the Camel.
"The carnage in the ill-starred Battle of the Camel (for so it came to
be called) was very great. The field was covered with over 10,000 bodies
and this, notwithstanding that the victory was not followed up, for Ali
had given orders that no fugitive should be pursued, nor any wounded
soldier slain, nor plunder siezed, or the privacy of any house invaded

A great Trench was dug, and into it the dead were lowered, friends and
foes alike. Ali encamped for three days outside the city, and himself
performed the funeral service. It was a new experience to bury the dead
slain in battle not aginst the infidel, but Believer fighting against
Believer. Instead of cursing the memory of his enemies (too soon the
fashion in these civil wars), Ali spoke hopefully of the future state of
such as had entered the field, on whatever side, with an honest
heart."

Sir William Muir- The Caliphate, its Rise, Decline and Fall page 250.


Transfer of the seat of government.
Ali's stay in Busra was not long. Having appointed Abdallah b. Abas as
Governor, the Caliph repaired to Kufa in the month of Rajab, 36 A.H.
Apprehensive of Moawiya's designs against him, Ali considrerd Kufa
suitably situated to check any encroachment in Iraq or Mesopotamia, and
also in recognition of the assistance he had received from the Kufians,
he transferred the seat of his government to Kufa from Medina and made
it the centre of Islam and the capital of the Empire, as topographically
it was in the centre of his dominions.

**Ali's dominion.
**

The conspiracy of Ayesha , Talha and Zubeir having been crushed at the
Khoreiba battlefield, this victory had given Ali complete sway over the
territories from Khorasan in the east to Egypt in the west with the
exception of the provinces in the north-west of Arabia, which were under
the Governor of Syria viz. Moawiya.

