Introduction
============

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

*The Promised Mahdi* is the English translation of the thirteenth volume
of Allamah Majlisi’s*Biharul Anwar* , which was originally published in
twenty-five volumes in Arabic. Later on it was published in a 110
volumes edition, of which this book comprises the 51, 52 and 53 volumes.

As the title,*Biharul Anwar* (*Oceans of Lights* ) suggests, it is in
fact an encyclopedia of Islamic traditional reports and it covers all
the major sources of Islamic traditions extant at the time of its
compilation.

The present volume deals with Imam Mahdi (a.s.), the last Imam of Ahle
Bayt (a.s.). From which so far only an incomplete translation of the
51st volume has been published in English from the Islamic Republic of
Iran.

*The Promised Mahdi* is the complete English translation of original
thirteenth volume of*Biharul Anwar* , corresponding to volumes 51, 52
and 53 of the 110 volume set, which is in print today.

Special Features of this Translation
------------------------------------

In this complete edition, we have included the chapters that were
omitted by the previous translators; i.e. the chapter on Prophecies of
Soothsayers engraved on rocks (Chapter 16) and the chapter on People
with long lifespans in the History of Humanity (Chapter 19).

Secondly, we have included the chains of narrators, which is considered
as a part of the*hadith* (tradition), although we have shown it in
reduced font size to distinguish it from the text of the tradition.

Thirdly, we have given the Arabic text of the verses of Quran as well.
Moreover we have also presented the Arabic text of the first tradition
of every chapter for the convenience of advanced readers and
researchers.

We have also numbered the chapter numbers in proper sequence after
removing all discrepancies that were present in the Arabic, Persian and
Urdu versions and also numbered the traditions according to the original
Arabic version. Although there are a few discrepancies in numbering of
traditions in the Arabic version, we have followed the same sequence so
that anyone comparing the English version with the Arabic will not have
any problem.

While translating these volumes, we have adopted some features of the
Persian translation by the most respected Ayatullah Ali Dawani.

First of all the title we have chosen for this book, is the translation
of the above version:*Mahdi Maood* - The Promised Mahdi.

Secondly, we have emulated him in giving sub-headings to different
traditions in some sections, which describe the subject matter of the
tradition.

The biography of the honorable author, Allamah Muhammad Baqir Majlisi is
also from the book of Ayatullah Ali Dawani’s*Mahdi Maood* as also the
write up on the works of Allamah Majlisi and their translations in
various languages.

We invite suggestions from readers and scholars, which would help us in
improving future editions of this book.


