8
=

Chapter Eight: Narrations of Imams Hasan and Husain (a.s.) about the Promised Mahdi
===================================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
الْمُظَفَّرُ الْعَلَوِيُّ عَنِ ابْنِ الْعَيَّاشِيِّ عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنْ
جَبْرَئِيلَ بْنِ أَحْمَدَ عَنْ مُوسَى بْنِ جَعْفَرٍ الْبَغْدَادِيِّ عَنِ
الْحَسَنِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ الصَّيْرَفِيِّ عَنْ حَنَانِ بْنِ سَدِيرٍ عَنْ
أَبِيهِ سَدِيرِ بْنِ حُكَيْمٍ عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنْ أَبِي سَعِيدٍ عقيصاء
[عَقِيصَى‏] قَالَ لَمَّا صَالَحَ الْحَسَنُ بْنُ عَلِيٍّ ع مُعَاوِيَةَ
بْنَ أَبِي سُفْيَانَ دَخَلَ عَلَيْهِ النَّاسُ فَلَامَهُ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَى
بَيْعَتِهِ فَقَالَ ع وَيْحَكُمْ مَا تَدْرُونَ مَا عَمِلْتُ وَ اللَّهِ
الَّذِي عَمِلْتُ خَيْرٌ لِشِيعَتِي مِمَّا طَلَعَتْ عَلَيْهِ الشَّمْسُ
أَوْ غَرَبَتْ أَ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّنِي إِمَامُكُمْ مُفْتَرَضُ
الطَّاعَةِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَ أَحَدُ سَيِّدَيْ شَبَابِ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ
بِنَصٍّ مِنْ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ ص قَالُوا بَلَى قَالَ أَ مَا عَلِمْتُمْ
أَنَّ الْخَضِرَ لَمَّا خَرَقَ السَّفِينَةَ وَ قَتَلَ الْغُلَامَ وَ
أَقَامَ الْجِدَارَ كَانَ ذَلِكَ سَخَطاً لِمُوسَى بْنِ عِمْرَانَ ع إِذْ
خَفِيَ عَلَيْهِ وَجْهُ الْحِكْمَةِ فِيهِ وَ كَانَ ذَلِكَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ
حِكْمَةً وَ صَوَاباً أَ مَا عَلِمْتُمْ أَنَّهُ مَا مِنَّا أَحَدٌ إِلَّا
وَ يَقَعُ فِي عُنُقِهِ بَيْعَةٌ لِطَاغِيَةِ زَمَانِهِ إِلَّا الْقَائِمُ
الَّذِي يُصَلِّي رُوحُ اللَّهِ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ خَلْفَهُ فَإِنَّ
اللَّهَ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ يُخْفِي وِلَادَتَهُ وَ يُغَيِّبُ شَخْصَهُ
لِئَلَّا يَكُونَ لِأَحَدٍ فِي عُنُقِهِ بَيْعَةٌ إِذَا خَرَجَ ذَاكَ
التَّاسِعُ مِنْ وُلْدِ أَخِي الْحُسَيْنِ ابْنِ سَيِّدَةِ الْإِمَاءِ
يُطِيلُ اللَّهُ عُمُرَهُ فِي غَيْبَتِهِ ثُمَّ يُظْهِرُهُ بِقُدْرَتِهِ
فِي صُورَةِ شَابٍّ ابْنِ دُونِ أَرْبَعِينَ سَنَةً ذَلِكَ لِيُعْلَمَ
أَنَّ اللَّهَ عَلى‏ كُلِّ شَيْ‏ءٍ قَدِيرٌ
</p>

**1-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muzaffar Alawi from Ibne
Ayyash from his father from Jibraeel bin Ahmad from Musa bin Ja’far
Baghdadi from Hasan bin Muhammad Sairafi from Hannan bin Sudair from his
father, Sudair bin Hakeem from his father from Abu Saeed Uqeesa that he
said:

When Hasan Ibne Ali (a.s.) signed the peace treaty with Muawiyah Ibne
Abi Sufyan, people went to him and some of them criticized him for it.
The Imam said: “Woe unto you! You do not know what I did. By Allah, what
I have done is better for my Shia than all the riches upon which the sun
has risen and set. Don’t you know that I am your Imam, whose obedience
is obligatory upon you, and one of the two chiefs of the people of the
Garden on the virtue of explicit saying of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.)?”

They said: “Indeed so.” He said: “Don’t you know that when Khizr tore
the boat and killed the boy and erected the wall, that was very harsh
for Musa Ibne Imran (a.s.), since its wisdom was hidden to him, which
was wisdom and propriety before Allah?

Don’t you know there is no one of us except a pledge of allegiance to
the tyrant of his time falls on his neck except the Qaim behind whom
Ruhullah Isa Ibne Maryam will pray? For Allah, the Exalted, will hide
his birth and conceal his person, so there will not be any commitment of
allegiance on his neck for anyone when he rises. He is the ninth from
the children of my

brother Husain, the son of Fatima, the Mistress of bondmaids. Allah will
prolong his life in his occultation. Then he will bring him forth
through His power in the figure of a youth of less than forty years, so
it may be known*that Allah* is*All-Powerful over everything.* “

**2-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad
bin Abdus from Abu Amr Laithi from Muhammad bin Masud from Ali bin
Muhammad bin Shajja from Muhammad bin Isa from Ibne Abu Umair from Abdur
Rahman bin Hajjaj from Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) from his father
Muhammad bin Ali (a.s.) from his father Ali bin Husain that Imam Husain
(a.s.) said:

“Blessings of Allah be unto them; in the ninth son of mine there is a
tradition from Yusuf and a tradition from Musa, the son of Imran. He is
the Qaim of us Ahle Bayt. Allah, the High, will restitute his affair in
a single night.”

**3-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Maghazi has narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Ahmad bin Musa bin Furat from Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad from Sufyan from
Abdullah bin Zubair from Abdullah Ibne Sharik on the authority of a man
from Hamadan, saying:

I heard Husain Ibne Ali, Allah’s blessings be unto them both, say, “The
Qaim of this Ummah is the ninth from my progeny. He is the man of the
occultation. And he is the one whose inheritance is distributed while he
is alive.”

**4-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Hamadani from Ali from his
father from Abdus Salam Harawi from Waki bin Jarrah from Rabi bin Saad
from Abdur Rahman bin Salit that Imam Husain (a.s.) said:

“There are Twelve Guides from us; their first is Amirul Momineen Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and their last is the ninth from my sons and he is
the Imam, the Establisher of the Truth. Allah will revive the earth
after its death. He will uplift the right religion through him*over all
religions, dislike may the polytheists.* He will have an occultation in
which nations will apostatize and many more will stay firm on the
religion. They will be maltreated and asked:*When is this promise, if
you are truthful?*

Behold, the one who remains steadfast during his occultation despite
maltreatments and falsifications, is in the position of a warrior with
the sword in the way of Allah in the presence of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.).”

**5-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Muhammad bin Hasan
Qazwini from Muhammad bin Abdullah Hadhrami from Ahmad bin Yahya Hawl
from Khallad Muqri from Qays bin Abu Hasin from Yahya bin Wathab from
Abdullah Ibne Umar that he said: I heard Husain Ibne Ali (a.s.) say:

“Even if there should not remain but a single day from the world, Allah,
the Exalted, will prolong that day so much that a man from my progeny
will

rise. He will fill the earth with justice and equity as it will be
replete with injustice and oppression. So I heard the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) say.”

**6-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father from
Muhammad bin Yahya Attar from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik from Hamadan
bin Mansur from Saad bin Muhammad from Isa Khashshab that he said:

I said to Husain Ibne Ali (a.s.), “Are you the Awaited Patron of this
Enterprise?” He said: “No, rather, the Patron of this Enterprise is the
runaway fugitive, the son of a non-avenged father, called by the
patronymic of his uncle. He will put his sword on his shoulder for eight
months.”

**7-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** A group has narrated from Talakbari from
Ahmad bin Ali from Ahmad bin Idris from Ibne Qutaibah from Fadhl from
Amr bin Uthman from Muhammad bin Ghazafar from Uqbah bin Yunus from
Abdullah bin Sharik who says in a lengthy narration that Husain (a.s.)
passed by a group of Umayyads sitting in the Masjid of the Messenger
(a.s.). He said:

“Behold, by Allah, the world will not end until Allah sends a man from
my seed, who will kill from you one thousand and with the thousand
another thousand and with the thousand another thousand.”

I asked, “May I be your ransom. They are the sons of so-and-so and they
do not reach this number.” The Imam said: “Look at you! At that time, a
man will have from his seed so-and-­so many men. And the chief of our
people will be from themselves.”


