9
=

Chapter Nine: Narrations from Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.)
========================================================

<p dir="rtl">
ابْنُ عِصَامٍ عَنِ الْكُلَيْنِيِّ عَنِ الْقَاسِمِ بْنِ الْعَلَاءِ عَنْ
إِسْمَاعِيلَ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ إِسْمَاعِيلَ عَنِ احْمَدْ
ابْنِ حُمَيْدٍ عَنِ ابْنِ قَيْسٍ عَنِ الثُّمَالِيِّ عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ
الْحُسَيْنِ ع أَنَّهُ قَالَ فِينَا نَزَلَتْ هَذِهِ الْآيَةُ وَ أُولُوا
الْأَرْحامِ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلى‏ بِبَعْضٍ فِي كِتابِ اللَّهِ وَ فِينَا
نَزَلَتْ هَذِهِ الْآيَةُ وَ جَعَلَها كَلِمَةً باقِيَةً فِي عَقِبِهِ وَ
الْإِمَامَةُ فِي عَقِبِ الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبٍ ع
إِلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَ إِنَّ لِلْقَائِمِ مِنَّا غَيْبَتَيْنِ
إِحْدَاهُمَا أَطْوَلُ مِنَ الْأُخْرَى أَمَّا الْأُولَى فَسِتَّةُ
أَيَّامٍ وَ سِتَّةُ أَشْهُرٍ وَ سِتُّ سِنِينَ وَ أَمَّا الْأُخْرَى
فَيَطُولُ أَمَدُهَا حَتَّى يَرْجِعَ عَنْ هَذَا الْأَمْرِ أَكْثَرُ مَنْ
يَقُولُ بِهِ فَلَا يَثْبُتُ عَلَيْهِ إِلَّا مَنْ قَوِيَ يَقِينُهُ وَ
صَحَّتْ مَعْرِفَتُهُ وَ لَمْ يَجِدْ فِي نَفْسِهِ حَرَجاً مِمَّا
قَضَيْنَا وَ سَلَّمَ لَنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
</p>

**1-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has quoted from Ibne Isaam from
Kulaini from Qasim bin Alaa from Ismail bin Ali from Ali bin Ismail from
Ahmad bin Humaid from Ibne Qays from Thumali from Imam Zainul Abideen
(a.s.) that he said:

“This verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأُوْلُواْ الأَرْحَامِ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلَى بِبَعْضٍ فِي كِتَابِ اللّهِ
</p>

***“…and the possessors of relationships are nearer to each other in the
ordinance of Allah…” (Surah Anfal 8:75)***

And the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَجَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً بَاقِيَةً فِي عَقِبِهِ
</p>

***“And he made it a word to continue in his posterity…” (Surah Zukhruf
43:28)***

…have been revealed about us. Imamate is in the progeny of Husain (a.s.)
until Judgment Day. And he said: Our Qaim will have two occultations,
one longer than the other.

The first one will be six days and six months and six years. The second
one, its period will last very long so much so that many of the
believers of this creed will turn away from it. No one will stay firm on
it but the one whose certainty is strong, whose cognition is correct and
he does not find impediment in his heart from our judgment and submits
to us Ahle Bayt.”

The author says: “Six days” perhaps alludes to the different phases of
his life in his occultation. For six days, no one but the extremely
confidential individuals were aware of his birth. After six months,
others were informed. After six years, as his father passed away, he
became well known to many people.

**]2-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from Daqqaq and
Shaibani together from Asadi from Nakhai from Naufili from Hamza bin
Humran

from his father from Saeed bin Jubair from Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.)
that he said:

“The birth of our Qaim will be hidden from the people, so they will say
that he is not born yet. He will rise at the time of his rise without
any pledge of allegiance to anyone on his shoulders.”

**3-** ***Majalis:*** Shaykh Mufeed has narrated from Ibne Quluwayh from
his father from Saad from Ibne Isa from Ibne Abi Umair from Ibne Muskan
from Bishr Kunnasi from Abu Khalid Kabuli says that Imam Ali Ibne Husain
(a.s.) said to me:

“O Abu Khalid, mischief shall come like strips of nightly shadow. No one
will be saved but the one from whom Allah has taken His covenant. They
are the light of guidance and the sources of knowledge.

Allah will save them from every dark mischief. As if I see your Awaited
Patron has risen over your Najaf on the outskirts of the Kufa with three
hundred and ten and some odd men. Jibraeel is on his right and Mikaeel
is on his left. Israfeel is in his front. The standard of the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) is with him, which he has unfolded. He throws no
nation down with it, but Allah, the Exalted, destroys them.”


