12
==

Chapter Twelve: Narrations of Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.)
====================================================

<p dir="rtl">
أَبِي عَنْ سَعْدٍ عَنِ الْحَسَنِ بْنِ عِيسَى بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عَلِيِّ
بْنِ جَعْفَرٍ عَنْ جَدِّهِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ جَعْفَرٍ عَنْ
أَخِيهِ مُوسَى بْنِ جَعْفَرٍ ع قَالَ إِذَا فُقِدَ الْخَامِسُ مِنْ وُلْدِ
السَّابِعِ فَاللَّهَ اللَّهَ فِي أَدْيَانِكُمْ لَا يُزِيلُكُمْ أَحَدٌ
عَنْهَا يَا بُنَيَّ إِنَّهُ لَا بُدَّ لِصَاحِبِ هَذَا الْأَمْرِ مِنْ
غَيْبَةٍ حَتَّى يَرْجِعَ عَنْ هَذَا الْأَمْرِ مَنْ كَانَ يَقُولُ بِهِ
إِنَّمَا هِيَ مِحْنَةٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ امْتَحَنَ بِهَا
خَلْقَهُ وَ لَوْ عَلِمَ آبَاؤُكُمْ وَ أَجْدَادُكُمْ دِيناً أَصَحَّ مِنْ
هَذَا لَاتَّبَعُوهُ فَقُلْتُ يَا سَيِّدِي مَنِ الْخَامِسُ مِنْ وُلْدِ
السَّابِعِ قَالَ يَا بُنَيَّ عُقُولُكُمْ تَصْغُرُ عَنْ هَذَا وَ
أَحْلَامُكُمْ تَضِيقُ عَنْ حَمْلِهِ وَ لَكِنْ إِنْ تَعِيشُوا فَسَوْفَ
تُدْرِكُونَهُ
</p>

**1-** ***Ilalush Sharai:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father
from Saad from Hasan bin Isa bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Ja’far from his
grandfather Muhammad from Ali bin Ja’far from his brother, Imam Musa
Ibne Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“When the fifth from the sons of the seventh disappears, then by Allah,
by Allah, watch your religiosity. Do not allow anyone to remove it from
you. O my dear son, it is necessary for the Patron of this Enterprise to
disappear until many who believe in this matter turn away from it. It
will be a trial from Allah, by which He will try His creation. If your
fathers and grandfathers knew a creed better than this, they would have
followed it.”

I said: “My master, who is the fifth from the sons of the seventh?” He
said: “O my son, your intelligence is beneath understanding him and your
dreams are narrower than to carry it. However, if you live, you will see
him.”

In*Ikmaaluddin* ,*Ghaibat Tusi, Ghaibat Nomani* and*Kifayatul Athar*
this report is narrated through other chains of narrators as well.

**2-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from Hamadani from
Ali from his father from Muhammad bin Ziyad Azdi that:

I asked my master Musa Ibne Ja’far (a.s.) about the holy Divine
verse:*And He has lavished His favors on you, explicit and hidden.* He
said: “The explicit favor is the manifest Imam and the hidden one is the
hidden Imam.” I asked him, “Is there someone in the Imams who will
disappear?” He said: “Yes. His person will disappear from the eyes of
the people and his remembrance will not disappear from the hearts of the
believers. He is the Twelfth of us. Allah will facilitate every
difficult task for him and will abase every hardship for him. He will
reveal the treasures of the earth for him, proximate every far for him,
destroy every tyrant through him and kill the rebellious Satan on his
hands.

That is the son of the mistress of the slave girls, whose birth will be
hidden from the people, and mentioning him by his name will not be

permissible for them until Allah manifests him and fills the earth
through him with equity and justice, as it will be replete with
injustice and oppression.” Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) says, “I have not heard
this narration from anyone except Ahmad Ibne Ziyad Hamadani on my return
from Hajj. He was a trustworthy, religious and a knowledgeable man.*­*

This report is also mentioned in*Kifayatul Athar* through another chain
of narrators.

**3-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has quoted from his father
from Saad from Khashab from Abbas bin Amir that:

I heard Imam Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.) say, “People will say, the Master of
this Affair has not been born yet.”

**4-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Hamadani from Ali bin
Ibrahim from Muhammad bin Khalid from Ali bin Hisan from Dawood bin
Kathir that he said:

I asked Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) about the Master of this Affair. He said:
“He is the castaway, the loner, away from his home, hidden from his
family, the son of an un-avenged father.”

**5-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from the father of Shaykh Saduq
from Saad from Ibne Isa from Bajali from Muawiyah bin Wahab and Abi
Qatadah Ali bin Muhammad from Ali bin Ja’far from his brother, Imam Musa
Kazim (a.s.) that:

I asked him, “What is the interpretation of the word of Allah, the
Exalted:

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَصْبَحَ مَاؤُكُمْ غَوْرًا
</p>

***“Say, ‘Have you thought? If in the morning your water should have
disappeared into the earth, then who would bring you running water?”
(Surah Mulk 67:30)***

He said: “When you lose your Imam and do not see him, what are you going
to do?”

**6-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Hamadani from Ali from his
father from Salih bin Sindi from Yunus Ibne Abdur Rahman that: I came to
Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) and asked:

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, are you the*Qaim bil ­Haqq* (The
Establisher of the Truth)?” He said: “I am the Qaim bil Haqq, however,
the Qaim who will clean the earth from the enemies of Allah and will
fill it with equity, as it will be full of injustice, is the fifth*from*
my sons.

He will have an occultation the length of which will be much due to his
fear*for* his life. Many nations will apostatize in that period and the
rest will remain steadfast.” Then he said: “Bliss be*for* Shia, the
adherers to*our* love during the occultation of our Qaim, who will
remain steadfast on our adoration and detestation of our enemies. They
are ours and we are theirs. They are pleased with us as Imams and we are
pleased with them as Shia. Bliss be*for* them! They are, by Allah, with
us in*our* rank on Judgment Day.”


