13
==

Chapter Thirteen: Narrations of Imam Ali bin Musa Reza (a.s.)
=============================================================

<p dir="rtl">
الطَّالَقَانِيُّ عَنِ ابْنِ عُقْدَةَ عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ الْحَسَنِ بْنِ
فَضَّالٍ عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنِ الرِّضَا ع أَنَّهُ قَالَ كَأَنِّي
بِالشِّيعَةِ عِنْدَ فَقْدِهِمُ الثَّالِثَ مِنْ وُلْدِي يَطْلُبُونَ
الْمَرْعَى فَلَا يَجِدُونَهُ قُلْتُ لَهُ وَ لِمَ ذَلِكَ يَا ابْنَ
رَسُولِ اللَّهِ قَالَ لِأَنَّ إِمَامَهُمْ يَغِيبُ عَنْهُمْ فَقُلْتُ وَ
لِمَ قَالَ لِئَلَّا يَكُونَ فِي عُنُقِهِ لِأَحَدٍ بَيْعَةٌ إِذَا قَامَ
بِالسَّيْفِ
</p>

**1-** ***Ilalush Sharai*** **and** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** Shaykh Saduq
(r.a.) has narrated from Taliqani from Ibne Uqdah from Ali bin Hasan bin
Fadhdhal from his father from Imam Reza (a.s.) that he said:

“As if I can see the Shia when they lose the third from my sons, they
will be searching for the green pasture, but will not be finding it.” I
said to him, “Why so, O son of Allah’s Messenger?” He said: “Because
their Imam will disappear from them.” I asked: “Why?” He said: “So there
will not be any pledge of allegiance for anyone over his shoulders when
he rises with the sword.”

**2-** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from his father
from Himyari from Ahmad bin Hilal from Ibne Mahbub that Imam Reza (a.s.)
said:

“Definitely, there will occur the dumb, catastrophic mischief, in which
every secret and close relation will be dropped. That will happen when
the Shia will miss the third from my sons. The dwellers of the heavens
and the earth, and every worthy and merited man, and every contrite and
sorrowful person will cry for him.” Then he said: “My parents be the
ransom of the namesake of my grandfather and my look-alike and the
look-alike of Musa the son of Imran (a.s.). He is appareled in the
garments of light, shining with rays of illumination of sanctity. How
abundant worthy men of faith and how abundant sorrowful men of belief
will be perplexed and grievous at the loss of that crystal spring.

As if I see them when in their utmost despair, they are being called by
a call that is heard from faraway as it is heard from the near, a call
that is a blessing for the faithful and a curse for the unbelievers.”

**3-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** A similar narration is mentioned in
Ikmaaluddin from Saad from Ja’far Fazari from Ali bin Hasan bin Fadhdhal
from Rayyan bin Sult except that in it he says:

*“Inhabitants of the earth and the heavens mourn his death.”*

*The author says: The statement: ‘* He is appareled in the garments of
light’ implies that he will shine with divine effulgence.

**4-** ***Ikmaaluddin*** **and** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** It is narrated
from Hamadani from Ali from his father from Harawi from Dibil Ibne Ali
Khuzai that:

I recited my long poem to my master Imam Ali Ibne Musa Reza (a.s.), the
beginning of which is,

**Schools of verses empty of recitations**

**And the House of Revelation horrendously empty**

**When I reached to my verse:**

**The rise of an Imam who will definitely rise**

**And stand by the name of Allah and His blessings**

**He will make distinction between all rights and wrongs**

**And will proffer requital for charities and malevolence**

Imam Reza (a.s.) cried very profusely and then raised his head and said
to me, “O Khuzai, the Blessed Spirit has spoken on your tongues in these
two verses. Do you know who this Imam is and when he will rise?” I said:
“No, my master, except I have heard that an Imam of yours will rise and
clean the earth from mischief and will fill the earth with equity as it
will be full of oppression.” He said: “O Dibil, the Imam after me is my
son Muhammad; after Muhammad his son Ali; after Ali his son Hasan; and
after Hasan his son, Hujjah Qaim, the Awaited one during his
occultation, and the one obeyed in his time of appearance.

Even if not more than one day should remain from the world, Allah will
prolong that day so much that he will rise and fill the world with
equity just as it will be full of injustice.

As for when it will happen, that is to describe its time, and my father
has narrated to me through his forefathers through Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) was asked, ‘O Messenger of
Allah, when is the Qaim from your progeny going to rise?’ He said: ‘His
example is like the example of the Hour:

<p dir="rtl">
لاَ يُجَلِّيهَا لِوَقْتِهَا إِلاَّ هُوَ ثَقُلَتْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالأَرْضِ لاَ تَأْتِيكُمْ إِلاَّ بَغْتَةً
</p>

***“…none but He shall manifest it at its time; it will be momentous in
the heavens and the earth; it will not come on you but of a sudden.”
(Surah Araaf 7:187)***

In*Kifayatul Athar,* a similar traditional report is mentioned on the
authority of Abu Salat Harwi.

**5-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Walid from Saffar
from Ibne Yazid from Ayyub Ibne Nuh that:

I said to Imam Reza (a.s.), “We hope that you will be the Patron of this
Affair and that may Allah, the Exalted, confer this to you without use
of violence. You have been pledged allegiance to and coins have been
minted on your name.”

He said: “There is no one of us that letters come and go to him, is
asked questions, pointed with fingers, and religious dues taken to, but
he will be assassinated or he will die on his bed, until Allah, the
Exalted, sends for this Order a man whose birth and place of growth will
be hidden and he will not be hidden in his lineage.”

**6-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Attar from his father from
Ashari from Muhammad bin Hamadan from his uncle, Ahmad bin Zakariya
that:

Imam Reza (a.s.) asked me, “Where is your house in Baghdad?” I said: “At
Karkh.” He said: “That is the safest of places. There has to happen the
deaf catastrophic mischief in which every secret and close relation will
be dropped. That will happen after the Shia will miss the third from my
sons.”

**7-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam from
Abdullah bin Ja’far from Yaqtini from Muhammad bin Abi Yaqub Balkhi
that:

I heard Imam Reza (a.s.) say, “They will be tested through something
that is severer and greater. They will be tested with a fetus in the
abdomen of his mother and the suckling baby, until it is said that he
has disappeared and that he is dead. They will say, ‘There is no Imam.’
However, even the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) disappeared, and many
others and many others disappeared. And here I am, awaiting a death in
the bed.”

The author says: The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) disappeared a number of
times like when he stayed in the cave of Hira and three years in Sheb
Abu Talib and three days in the Thawr Cave. And he was also concealed
from the Meccans on his way from the cave to Medina. And it is possible
that His Eminence has used the plural because prophets of Allah had gone
into hiding many times but the narrator has quoted the singular as
‘disappearance of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)’.

**8-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from Ali bin
Muhammad from some of his associates from Ayyub bin Nuh from Imam Reza
(a.s.) that he said:

“When your standard is raised from your behind, then expect the
salvation from beneath your feet.”


