14
==

Chapter Fourteen: Narrations of Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.)
=========================================================

<p dir="rtl">
الدَّقَّاقُ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ هَارُونَ الرُّويَانِيِّ عَنْ عَبْدِ
الْعَظِيمِ الْحَسَنِيِّ قَالَ دَخَلْتُ عَلَى سَيِّدِي مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
عَلِيٍّ ع وَ أَنَا أُرِيدُ أَنْ أَسْأَلَهُ عَنِ الْقَائِمِ أَ هُوَ
الْمَهْدِيُّ أَوْ غَيْرُهُ فَابْتَدَأَنِي فَقَالَ يَا أَبَا الْقَاسِمِ
إِنَّ الْقَائِمَ مِنَّا هُوَ الْمَهْدِيُّ الَّذِي يَجِبُ أَنْ يُنْتَظَرَ
فِي غَيْبَتِهِ وَ يُطَاعَ فِي ظُهُورِهِ وَ هُوَ الثَّالِثُ مِنْ وُلْدِي
وَ الَّذِي بَعَثَ مُحَمَّداً بِالنُّبُوَّةِ وَ خَصَّنَا بِالْإِمَامَةِ
إِنَّهُ لَوْ لَمْ يَبْقَ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا إِلَّا يَوْمٌ وَاحِدٌ لَطَوَّلَ
اللَّهُ ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمَ حَتَّى يَخْرُجَ فَيَمْلَأَ الْأَرْضَ قِسْطاً وَ
عَدْلًا كَمَا مُلِئَتْ جَوْراً وَ ظُلْماً وَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ تَبَارَكَ وَ
تَعَالَى يُصْلِحُ أَمْرَهُ فِي لَيْلَةٍ كَمَا أَصْلَحَ أَمْرَ كَلِيمِهِ
مُوسَى ع لِيَقْتَبِسَ لِأَهْلِهِ نَاراً فَرَجَعَ وَ هُوَ رَسُولُ نَبِيٍّ
ثُمَّ قَالَ ع أَفْضَلُ أَعْمَالِ شِيعَتِنَا انْتِظَارُ الْفَرَجِ
</p>

**1-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Daqqaq from Muhammad bin
Harun Rauyani from Abdul Azeem Hasani that:

I came to my master, Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) intending to ask him
about the Qaim whether he is the Mahdi or someone else. However, he
initiated the topic before I brought it up, saying, “O Abul Qasim, the
Qaim is from us and he is the Mahdi. It is obligatory to wait for him in
his occultation and to obey him in his appearance. He is the third from
my sons. By the One Who sent Muhammad with Prophethood and distinguished
us through Imamate, even if it does not remain from the world but a
single day, Allah will prolong that day until he rises. He will fill the
earth with equity and justice, as it will be replete with injustice and
oppression. Allah, the Exalted, will rectify his order in one night, as
He rectified the order of His Converser Musa (a.s.) who went to fetch
some fire for his family and returned a prophet, an apostle.” Then he
said: “The best action of our Shia is to wait for the reappearance.”

**2-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam from
Ahmad bin Mabandad from Ahmad bin Hilal from Umayyah bin Ali Qaisi that
he said:

I said to Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.), “Who is the Imam after you?” He
said: “My son Ali, my son Ali.” Then he lowered his head briefly in
contemplation and then raised it and said: “There will be a considerable
perplexity.”

I said: “When it happens, to whom we should turn to?” He remained
silent. Then he said: “Nowhere,” and repeated it three times. I asked
again. He said: “To the cities.” I asked, “Which city?” He said: “This
city of ours; and is there a Medina other than this?”

**3-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam from
Abi Abdullah Muhammad bin Hisham from Abu Saad Sahal bin Ziyad from

Abdul Azeem that he heard Abu Ja’far Muhammad Ibne Ali Imam Reza (a.s.)
say:

“When my son Ali dies, the light after him will come into view and then
disappear. Woe is for the doubter and bliss is for the believer, who
will run with his religion for refuge. Then after that there will be
events in which forelocks would go grey and times will be very severe.”

**4-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** It is narrated from Abu Abdullah Khuzai
from Asadi from Sahal from Abdul Azeem Hasani that: I said to Imam
Muhammad Taqi (a.s.):

“I hope that you would be the Qaim from Ahle Bayt (a.s.), who will fill
the earth with equity and justice as it will be replete with injustice
and oppression.” He said: “O Abul Qasim, there is no one of us but he is
a Qaim with the order of Allah and guide to the religion of Allah.

However, I am not the Qaim through whom Allah will cleanse the earth
from men of infidelity and rejection, and will fill it with equity and
justice. He is the one whose birth will be hidden from the people and
whose person will disappear from them and it will be unlawful to mention
him by his name. He is the namesake of the Messenger of Allah and will
bear his patronymic. He is the one for whom the earth will roll and
every difficult task will be facilitated. His companions, equal to the
three hundred and thirteen fighters of Badr, will gather around him from
distant locations of the earth. To this the word of Allah refers:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلَى
كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
</p>

***“…wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together, surely Allah
has power over all things.” (Surah Baqarah 2:148)***

When this number of people of the earth will unite for him, his command
will appear. When the covenant, which is ten thousand people, fulfills
for him, he will rise with the permission of Allah. He will continue to
kill the enemies of Allah until Allah, the High, will be happy from
him.”

I asked, “My master, how would he know that Allah is pleased with him?”
He said: “Allah will cast compassion in his heart. “

**5-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ali from
Ibne Abdus from Qutaibah from Hamadan bin Sulaiman from Saqar Ibne Abi
Dalf that:

I heard Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) say, “The Imam after me is my son,
Ali. His command is my command, his word my word, obedience to him is
obedience to me. The Imam after him is his son Hasan. His command is his
father’s command, his word is his father’s word, and obedience to him is
obedience to his father.” Then he became silent. I asked: “O son of
Allah’s Messenger, who is the Imam after Hasan?” He cried very profusely
and then said: “After Hasan is his son Qaim bil Haqq, the Awaited.” I
said to him, “O son of Allah’s Messenger, why is he called Qaim?” He
said: “Because he will rise after the death of his remembrance and
apostasy of the majority of the believers in his Imamate.” I said: “Why
is he called the Awaited?” He said: “He will have an occultation the
days of which will be many and the duration of which will be long. The
sincere will wait his uprise and the

doubters will reject him and rejecters will mock at him. A person who
will assign a time will lie, a person who will hurry will perish, and
the one who will submit will be saved.”

**6-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Muhammad Sindi
from Muhammad bin Hasan from Himyari from Ahmad bin Hilal from Umayyah
bin Ali Qaisi that he said:

I said to Imam Taqi (a.s.): “Who is the heir after you?” He replied: “My
son, Ali.” Then he said: “Behold there will be a perplexity.” I said:
“To where shall we turn then?” He remained quiet and then said: “To
Medina.” I asked: “Which Medina?” He said: “This Medina of ours, and is
there a Medina other than this?”

7- Ahmad bin Hilal says: Muhammad bin Ismail bin Bazi’ narrated to me
that Umayyah bin Ali came and asked Imam Taqi (a.s.) the same question,
to which he gave the same answer.

8- From the same chains it is narrated from Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.)
that he said: “When three names, Muhammad, Ali and Hasan, come
consecutively, their fourth one will be their Qaim.”


