The Author
==========

The great Allamah, the late Mulla Muhammad Baqir Majlisi (r.a.), is the
author of*Biharul Anwar;* the thirteenth volume of which is devoted to
the traditional reports about the twelfth Shiite Imam, Imam Muhammad
Mahdi (a.s.). Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) was one of the most prolific
writers of Shia Islamic books of traditions. It was the singular effort
of this great scholar that Shia Islam was able to preserve its heritage
and to popularize it among the masses, even though anti-Shia people
tried their best to destroy the heritage of Shiaism and consign its
books to the flames, as is known to all.

Here we shall present the biography of Allamah Majlisi in brief and for
details, one may refer to books like Mirza Husain Noori’s*Faizul Qudsi
Fee Ahwal Majlisi* etc. This book includes details of the ancestors,
siblings, teachers and students of Allamah Majlisi (r.a.). It also deals
with the writings of this great scholar in Arabic as well as in Persian.
The same was also mentioned in the old edition of the first volume
of*Biharul Anwar* .

Father - Allamah Majlisi, the First
-----------------------------------

Mulla Taqi Majlisi, son of Maqsood Ali Isfahani, famous by the title of
Majlisi the first, was the father of Mulla Muhammad Baqir Majlisi, the
author of*Biharul Anwar* . He was one of the most prominent Shia scholar
of the Safavid Era. His contribution to the preservation and revival of
Shia heritage was such that every Shia person is indebted to him. The
great jurist and famous scholar, Shaykh Hurre Amili says: “Mulla
Muhammad Taqi Majlisi was an accomplished scholar, a great researcher, a
pious worshipper, a trustworthy scholastic theologian and a jurist of
his time.”

Mulla Taqi Majlisi was a student of Mulla Abdullah Shustari and Shaykh
Bahauddin Amili (r.a.). He resembled his teacher in piety and worship.
All his life, he was busy in practicing the best of the morals and in
propagating the traditions of the house of the Prophet. He was a
prolific poet, who used the*nom de plume* of Majlisi and hence this
title became popular among his descendants.

He passed away in the year 1070 Hijri at the age of sixty-seven years.

Among his writings is a gloss on*Man Laa Yahzarul Faqih* in Arabic as
well as Persian, a commentary on*At-Tahdhib* , commentary on*Ziyarat
Jamia* . A gloss on*Usul Kafi* ; as well a commentary on*Sahifa Kamilah*
of Imam Sajjad (a.s.).

Sons of Majlisi I
-----------------

According to all books, Majlisi, the first, had three sons: Mulla
Azizullah, Mulla Abdullah and Mulla Muhammad Baqir (Majlisi II). He also
had four daughters who were also accomplished and educated like his
sons.

Allamah Majlisi
---------------

The great Allamah, Mulla Muhammad Baqir Isfahani, famous as Allamah
Majlisi and Majlisi II, was the third and the youngest son of Mulla
Muhammad Taqi or Majlisi I. According to Mir Abdul Husain Khatoonabadi,
Majlisi II was born in 1037 in Isfahan, which was a center of Shia Islam
at that time. However in some other sources the year of his birth is
mentioned as 1038.

Allamah Majlisi had a natural inclination to learning and he set upon
the pursuit of knowledge since his childhood. He received his early
education from his father and then from various scholars of that time,
whom we shall mention below.

Allamah Majlisi and the post of Shaykhul Islam
----------------------------------------------

He was elevated to the post of Shaykhul Islam by Shah Sulaiman Safavi,
which was the highest religious post in Iran. At that time, his age was
sixty-one years and he retained that post till the end of his life. Shah
Sulaiman Safavi also formed endowments for the scholarly pursuits of the
Allamah and for the spread of Islamic education.

Valuable writings of Allamah Majlisi
------------------------------------

Since Persian was language of the common people at that time, Allamah
Majlisi wrote a large number of books in this language to popularize
Shia Islam among the masses. His Persian books are as follows:

1-*Hayatul Qulub* (3 volumes)

2- Hilyautul Muttaqeen

3- Ainul Hayat

4- Mushkilatul Anwaar, Mukhtasar Ainul Hayat

5- Zaadul Maad

6- Tohfatuz Zair

7-*Haqqul Yaqeen* (his last book)

8- Jilaul Uyun

9- Rabiul Asabi

10- Maqabisul Masabih

… and around forty other books.

Arabic books of Allamah Majlisi:

1- His magnum opus, the encyclopedic*Biharul Anwar* was originally
published in twenty-five volumes as follows:

Vol. 1. Book of knowledge and ignorance; excellence of knowledge and
scholars and their classes.

Vol. 2. Book of monotheism, qualities of the Almighty Allah, His
beautiful names.

Vol. 3. Book of Divine Justice

Vol. 4. Book of debates and discussions

Vol. 5. Life histories of the prophets

Vol. 6. Life history of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and an account of
his ancestors

Vol. 7. Common account of the Holy Imams (a.s.) and Imamate

Vol. 8. Mischiefs that occurred after the passing away of the Prophet

Vol. 9. Account of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)

Vol. 10. Account of Lady Fatima, Imam Hasan and Imam Husain (a.s.).

Vol. 11. Account of four Imams after Imam Husain (a.s.): Imam Zainul
Abideen, Imam Muhammad Baqir, Imam Ja’far Sadiq and Imam Musa Kazim
(a.s.)

Vol. 12. Account of four Imams before Imam Mahdi (a.s.): that is Imam
Ali Reza, Imam Muhammad Taqi, Imam Ali Naqi, and Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s.).

Vol. 13. Account of Imam Mahdi (a.s.).

Vol. 14. The earth and the heavens and their parts. Jinns, men, animals,
eatables and drinks.*Tibbe Reza* and*Tibbe Nabi* etc.

Vol. 15. Book of Faith and disbelief.

Vol. 16. Ethics, practice and manners

Vol. 17. Advices and wise sayings

Vol. 18. Part I- Purification, Part II - Prayers

Vol. 19. Excellence of the Holy Quran and rewards of its recitation etc.

Vol. 20. Zakat, Sadaqah, Khums, prayer, Etekaf and other rituals of the
year.

Vol. 21. Hajj, Umrah, description of Medina etc.

Vol. 22. Ziyarats that have been narrated from the Holy Imams (a.s.).

Vol. 23. Vows and oaths.

Vol. 24. Practical laws till the Book of Diyats.

Vol. 25. Permissions and all the lists of Shaykh Muntakhabuddin Razi.
Permission of various scholars like Allamah Hilli etc.

2- Miratul Uqool fee Sharh Akhbar Aali Rasool: Commentary of Usul Kafi
of Kulaini.

3- Commentary on*Arbaeen*

4- Commentary on*At-Tahdhib* by Shaykh Tusi

5- Commentary on*Sahifa Sajjadiya*

6-*Al-Masail Hindiya* - Replies to questions sent to him by his brother,
Mulla Abdullah from India.

… and eight other books.

Translations of the various books of Allamah Majlisi
----------------------------------------------------

Most of his Arabic writings have been translated into Persian and most
of his Persian books have been translated into Arabic. Some of his
Persian books have also been translated into Urdu and other languages.

The present translator has translated all the three volumes of*Hayatul
Qulub* into English.

The respected Mr. Sayyid Tahir Bilgrami has translated*Ainul Hayat* into
English for Ansariyan Publications.

Teachers of Allamah Majlisi
---------------------------

Allamah Majlisi obtained instruction from various teachers, the most
prominent being the following:

1- His honorable father, Mulla Muhammad Taqi Majlisi (r.a.).

2- Mulla Muhammad Salih Mazandarani (d. 1081)

3- Maulavi Husain Ali, son of Mulla Abdul Shustari

4- Mir Rafiuddin Muhammad bin Haider Husaini Naini (d. 1099)

5- Mir Muhammad Qasim Tabatabai

6- Muhammad bin Sharif bin Shamsuddin Isfahani

7- Shaykh Hurre Amili

8- Mulla Mohsin Faiz Kashani (d. 1091)

9- Sayyid Ali Khan Shirazi (d. 1120)

10- Muhammad Mohsin bin Muhammad Momin Astarabadi etc.

Students of Allamah Majlisi
---------------------------

Among the most illustrious students of Allamah Majlisi were the
following:

1- Sayyid Nimatullah Jazaeri

2- Mir Muhammad Salih bin Abdul Wasay

3- Mir Muhammad Husain Khatoonabadi…etc.

His Death
---------

According to his grandson, Mir Muhammad Husain Khatoonabadi, Allamah
Majlisi passed away on 27th of Ramadhan 1110 Hijri at the age of 73
years. He was buried next to his respectable father in the Jame Masjid
of Isfahan, which is since then a place of visitation for Shia people.


