18
==

Chapter Eighteen: Occultations of the Prophets and Imam Zamana (a.s.)
=====================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
ابْنُ الْوَلِيدِ عَنِ الصَّفَّارِ عَنْ سَعْدٍ وَ الْحِمْيَرِيِّ مَعاً
عَنِ ابْنِ أَبِي الْخَطَّابِ عَنِ ابْنِ أَسْبَاطٍ عَنِ ابْنِ عَمِيرَةَ
عَنْ زَيْدٍ الشَّحَّامِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ ع قَالَ إِنَّ صَالِحاً
ع غَابَ عَنْ قَوْمِهِ زَمَاناً وَ كَانَ يَوْمَ غَابَ عَنْهُمْ كَهْلًا
مبدح [مُدَبِّحَ‏] الْبَطْنِ حَسَنَ الْجِسْمِ وَافِرَ اللِّحْيَةِ خَمِيصَ
الْبَطْنِ خَفِيفَ الْعَارِضَيْنِ مُجْتَمِعاً رَبْعَةً مِنَ الرِّجَالِ
فَلَمَّا رَجَعَ إِلَى قَوْمِهِ لَمْ يَعْرِفُوهُ بِصُورَتِهِ فَرَجَعَ
إِلَيْهِمْ وَ هُمْ عَلَى‏ ثَلَاثِ طَبَقَاتٍ طَبَقَةٌ جَاحِدَةٌ لَا
تَرْجِعُ أَبَداً وَ أُخْرَى شَاكَّةٌ فِيهِ وَ أُخْرَى عَلَى يَقِينٍ
فَبَدَأَ ع حَيْثُ رَجَعَ بِطَبَقَةِ الشُّكَّاكِ فَقَالَ لَهُمْ أَنَا
صَالِحٌ فَكَذَّبُوهُ وَ شَتَمُوهُ وَ زَجَرُوهُ وَ قَالُوا بَرِئَ اللَّهُ
مِنْكَ إِنَّ صَالِحاً كَانَ فِي غَيْرِ صَورَتِكَ قَالَ فَأَتَى
الْجُحَّادَ فَلَمْ يَسْمَعُوا مِنْهُ الْقَوْلَ وَ نَفَرُوا مِنْهُ
أَشَدَّ النَّفُورِ ثُمَّ انْطَلَقَ إِلَى الطَّبَقَةِ الثَّالِثَةِ وَ
هُمْ أَهْلُ الْيَقِينِ فَقَالَ لَهُمْ أَنَا صَالِحٌ فَقَالُوا
أَخْبِرْنَا خَبَراً لَا نَشُكُّ فِيكَ مَعَهُ أَنَّكَ صَالِحٌ فَإِنَّا
لَا نَمْتَرِي أَنَّ اللَّهَ تَبَارَكَ وَ تَعَالَى الْخَالِقُ يَنْقُلُ وَ
يُحَوِّلُ فِي أَيِّ الصُّوَرِ شَاءَ وَ قَدْ أُخْبِرْنَا وَ تَدَارَسْنَا
فِيمَا بَيْنَنَا بِعَلَامَاتِ الْقَائِمِ إِذَا جَاءَ وَ إِنَّمَا صَحَّ
عِنْدَنَا إِذَا أَتَى الْخَبَرُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ فَقَالَ لَهُمْ صَالِحٌ
أَنَا صَالِحٌ الَّذِي أَتَيْتُكُمْ بِالنَّاقَةِ فَقَالُوا صَدَقْتَ وَ
هِيَ الَّتِي نَتَدَارَسُ فَمَا عَلَامَاتُهَا فَقَالَ لَها شِرْبٌ وَ
لَكُمْ شِرْبُ يَوْمٍ مَعْلُومٍ قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَ بِمَا
جِئْتَنَا بِهِ فَعِنْدَ ذَلِكَ قَالَ اللَّهُ تَبَارَكَ وَ تَعَالَى أَنَّ
صالِحاً مُرْسَلٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِ قَالَ أَهْلُ الْيَقِينِ إِنَّا بِما
أُرْسِلَ بِهِ مُؤْمِنُونَ وَ قالَ الَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا وَ هُمُ
الشُّكَّاكُ وَ الْجُحَّادُ إِنَّا بِالَّذِي آمَنْتُمْ بِهِ كافِرُونَ
قُلْتُ هَلْ كَانَ فِيهِمْ ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمَ عَالِمٌ قَالَ اللَّهُ
تَعَالَى أَعْدَلُ مِنْ أَنْ يَتْرُكَ الْأَرْضَ بِغَيْرِ عَالِمٍ يَدُلُّ
عَلَى اللَّهِ تَبَارَكَ وَ تَعَالَى وَ لَقَدْ مَكَثَ الْقَوْمُ بَعْدَ
خُرُوجِ صَالِحٍ سَبْعَةَ أَيَّامٍ عَلَى فَتْرَةٍ لَا يَعْرِفُونَ
إِمَاماً غَيْرَ أَنَّهُمْ عَلَى مَا فِي أَيْدِيهِمْ مِنْ دِينِ اللَّهِ
عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ كَلِمَتُهُمْ وَاحِدَةٌ فَلَمَّا ظَهَرَ صَالِحٌ ع
اجْتَمَعُوا عَلَيْهِ وَ إِنَّمَا مَثَلُ عَلِيٍّ وَ الْقَائِمِ مَثَلُ
صَالِحٍ ع
</p>

**1-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from Ibne Walid from
Saffar from Saad and Himyari together from Ibne Abil Khattab from Ibne
Asbat from Ibne Amira from Zaid Shahham that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said:

“Salih disappeared from his nation from a long time and the day he
disappeared from them, he was an aged man of open stomach, beautiful
body, dense beard, delicate abdomen, small cheeks, and when he returned
to his people, they did not recognize him with the appearance he had.

When he came back, they were of three categories: One category rejected
him saying, ‘Do not ever come back.’ One category doubted in him. And
the last group of people was on certainty. When he came back, he began
with the doubting congregation and said to them, ‘I am Salih’; they
belied,

cursed, and turned him down and said to him, ‘Allah has turned away from
you. Salih was in a figure other than yours.’” The Imam said:

“He then came to the rejecters, but they did not listen to his word and
dispersed from him in a very cruel manner. Then he walked to the third
category, which were people of certainty about him, and said to them, ‘I
am Salih.’ They said: ‘Give us a word with which we will not doubt you
are Salih, for we do not doubt that Allah, the Exalted, is the Creator
and He transfers and transforms His servants into any figure He desires.
Salih had informed us and taught us when he was amongst us the sign of
the Qaim when he comes. A word is true before us when it comes from the
heavens.’ Salih said: ‘I am the Salih who brought you the calf.’

“They said: ‘You spoke the truth. This is what we have been studying.
What are its signs?’ “He said: ‘There is a drink for the calf, and a
drink for you on a known day.’ “They said: ‘We believe in Allah and in
what you have brought to us,’ At that time, did Allah, the Exalted, say,
Salih is a messenger from his Lord. The people of certainty said: We
believe what he has been sent with; and said the people who were
haughty, who were the doubters and the rejecters, We disbelieve in that
which you believe in.”

Zaid Shahham says, I asked, “Was there at that day a scholar amongst
them?” The Imam said: “Allah, the Exalted, is more just than to leave
the earth without a scholar who would guide to Allah, the Exalted.

The nation waited seven days after the exit of Salih, a period in which
they did not know any Imam, except the Divine religion they had at their
hands and their word was one. When Salih (a.s.) came back, they united
around him. Verily, the example of Ali and the Qaim is like Salih.”

**2-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from his
father from Saad from Mualla bin Muhammad from Muhammad bin Jamhur etc.
from Ibne Abi Umair from Abdullah bin Sinan from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“In the Qaim there is a tradition from Musa Ibne Imran (a.s.).” I asked,
“What is the tradition of Musa Ibne Imran?”

He said: “The secrecy of his birth and his disappearance from his
people.” I asked, “How long did Musa disappear from his family and
people?” He said: “Twenty-eight years.”

**3-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from his
father and Ibne Walid together from Himyari from Muhammad bin Isa from
Sulaiman bin Dawood from Abu Basir that he said:

I heard Abu Ja’far (a.s.) say, “There are four traditions in the Master
of this Affair from four apostles: a tradition from Musa, a tradition
from Isa, a tradition from Yusuf and a tradition from Muhammad, bliss be
for them all. The tradition from Musa is that he is fearful and
vigilant; the tradition from Yusuf is the prison; the tradition from Isa
is that it is said that he is dead, while he has not died; and the
tradition from Muhammad (a.s.) is the sword.”

**4-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Musa bin Ahmad
Alawi from Muhammad bin Hamam from Ahmad bin Muhammad Naufili from Ahmad
bin Hilal from Uthman bin Isa from Khalid bin Najih from Hamza bin
Humran from his father from Saeed Ibne Jubair that he said:

I heard the ornament of worshipers, Ali Ibne Husain (a.s.) say, “In the
Qaim of ours there are traditions from the traditions of the apostles,
peace be with them. A tradition from Adam, a tradition from Nuh, a
tradition from Ibrahim, a tradition from Musa, a tradition from Isa, a
tradition from Ayyub and a tradition from Muhammad (a.s.). The tradition
from Adam and Nuh is the length of his life; the tradition from Ibrahim
is the secrecy of his birth and the desertion of the people; the
tradition from Musa is the fear and the disappearance; the tradition
from Isa is the dispute of the people about him; the tradition from
Ayyub is relief after the trials; and the tradition from Muhammad (a.s.)
is his rise with the sword.” ­

**5-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Bishar from Muzaffar
bin Ahmad from Asadi from Nakhai from Naufili from Hamza bin Humran from
his father from Saeed Ibne Jubair that he said:

I heard the chief of worshipers, Ali Ibne Husain (a.s.) say, “There is a
tradition from Nuh in the Qaim and that is the length of his life.”

**6-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Hamadani from Ali bin
Ibrahim from Muhammad bin Isa from Sulaiman bin Dawood from Abu Basir
and he has narrated from Ibne Isaam from Kulaini from Asim bin Alaa from
Ismail bin Ali from Ali bin Ismail from Asim bin Hamid from Muhammad
Ibne Muslim that he said:

I came to Abu Ja’far (a.s.) intending to ask him about the Qaim of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.). He began the conversation first, “O Muhammad Ibne
Muslim, there are similarities in the Qaim from Aale Muhammad (a.s.) to
five apostles, Yunus the son of Mata, Yusuf the son of Yaqub, Musa, Isa
and Muhammad, bliss be for them all. As for his similarity to Yunus, it
is his return from his occultation while he is young after an old age.

As for his similarity to Yusuf the son of Yaqub, it is his disappearance
from everyone he had in the world and his vanishing from his brothers
and the confusion of his situation to his father Yaqub (a.s.) despite
the proximity of the distance between him and his father, his family and
his followers.

As for his similarity to Musa, it is the continuity of his fear, the
length of his occultation, the secrecy of his birth, the weariness of
his followers from the pains and disregard they saw after him until
Allah, the Exalted, allowed him to rise and helped him and consented him
over his enemies.

As for his similarity with Isa, it is the disagreement of the disputers
about him, so much so that one congregation said: He was not born;
another said: He is dead; another said: He was killed and crucified.

As for his similarity to his grandfather Mustafa (a.s.), it is his rise
with the sword, his massacre of the enemies of Allah and the enemies of
His Messenger (a.s.) and his massacre of the tyrants and the oppressors;
and that he will be succored through the sword and fright; and that no
standard of his will come back in defeat. From the signs of his rise is
the rise of the Sufyani

from Syria; the rise of the Yemeni; a call from the sky in the month of
Ramadan and a caller who will call his and his father’s names.”

**7-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Musa from Asadi
from Nakhai from Naufili from Hasan Ibne Ali bin Abi Hamza from Abu
Basir that he said:

I heard Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say: “In the Master of the Affair
there is a tradition from Musa, a tradition from Isa, a tradition from
Yusuf and a tradition from Muhammad (a.s.). As for the tradition from
Musa, he is fearful, vigilant; as for the tradition from Isa, it is that
the same that was said about Isa will be said about him; as for the
tradition from Yusuf, it is the prison and the Taqayyah; as for the
tradition from Muhammad (a.s.), it is his rise in his grandfather’s
style and illustration of his sayings. Then he will put his sword over
his shoulder for eight months, continuously massacring the enemies of
Allah, until Allah is pleased.” I asked, “How would he know that Allah,
the Exalted, has been pleased?” He said: “He will cast compassion into
his heart.”

**8-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad
from Abu Umair Laithi from Muhammad bin Masud from Muhammad bin Ali
Qummi from Muhammad bin Yahya from Ibrahim bin Hashim from Abu Ahmad
Azdi from Dharis Kannasi that he said:

I heard Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say, “In the Patron of this Age there
is a tradition from Yusuf. The boy of a black slave girl. Allah will
restitute his affair in one night.”

*The author says:* “The boy of a black slave girl” is contrary to the
many other traditions that have come about his mother. However, this can
be interpreted as someone who is like the mother or a maid.

**9-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ali bin Hatim
from Ahmad bin Isa Washa Baghdadi from Ahmad bin Tahir from Muhammad bin
Yahya bin Sahal from Ali bin Harith from Saad bin Mansur Jawashini from
Ahmad bin Ali Budaili from his father from Sudair Sairafi that he said:

I along with Mufaddal Ibne Umar, Abu Basir, Aban Ibne Taghlib entered
upon our master Abu Abdullah Ja’far Ibne Muhammad (a.s.). We saw him
sitting on bare earth. He had a Khaibari woolen cloak that was ringed at
the neck, did not have any pockets and had short sleeves. He was crying
like a deeply afflicted and bereaved mother of a child from the depths
of a heart that was full of mourning. Grief had appeared in the sides of
his face and the change had spread on to both of his cheeks and tears
were rolling on the sides of his visage, as he was saying:

“My master, your occultation has taken away my night’s sleep, it has
narrowed my bed for me and has snatched away the solace from my heart.

My master, your occultation has turned my tragedies into the atrocities
of eternity! The loss of one after the other perishes a crowd and a
multitude. No more I feel the tear that drops from my eye and the moan
that faintly leaves my chest from the places of tragedies and past
calamities except that it exemplifies before my eye the greatest and
cruelest of catastrophes, the

most dismal and disdainful mishaps, mixed with your wrath and calamities
coupled with your anger.”

Sudair says, Our hearts and minds were overwhelmed by that terrifying
scene and mortifying view. We thought that it is the sign of a dreadful
shattering or times have brought him a calamity. So we said: “May Allah,
O son of the best of the creation, never bring tears into your eyes. For
what incidents are your eyes pouring and your tears raining and what
situation has led you to this mourning?”

Sudair says: Imam Sadiq (a.s.) took a deep sigh that his chest expanded
and his fright enhanced and he said: “O you, I looked at the Book of
Jafr this morning, and that is the book that encompasses the knowledge
of deaths, trials and tribulations and the knowledge of all that has
been and all that will be until Judgment Day, which Allah, glory to His
name, has exclusively imparted to Muhammad and the Imams after him,
peace be unto him and them. I viewed therein the birth of our Qaim and
his disappearance and its protraction and the length of his lifespan and
the trials of the believers through him after him in that period and the
generation of doubts in their hearts from the length of his
disappearance and the apostasy of most of them from their religion and
their removing the cord of Islam from their necks, about which Allah,
glory to His name, has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَكُلَّ إِنسَانٍ أَلْزَمْنَاهُ طَآئِرَهُ فِي عُنُقِهِ
</p>

***“And We have made every man’s actions to cling to his neck…” (Surah
Isra 17:13)***

…which is the Wilayah. So emotions overpowered me and griefs overwhelmed
me.”

We said: “O son of Allah’s Messenger, dignify us and bestow honor upon
us by sharing some of what you know from the knowledge.”

He said: “Allah, the Exalted, has consigned three qualities in the Qaim
of ours, which He had consigned to three of the apostles. He
foreordained his birth like the birth of Musa (a.s.); his disappearance
like the disappearance of Isa (a.s.); and his longevity like the
longevity of Nuh (a.s.). Moreover, He made the lifespan of His virtuous
servant Khizr a proof of his lifespan.”

I said: “Remove the curtains for us, O son of Allah’s Messenger, from
the faces of these concepts.”

Birth of His Eminence, Musa (a.s.)
----------------------------------

He said: “As for the birth of Musa: When the Firon discerned that the
demise of his kingdom is on his hands, he ordered the soothsayers be
called, who foretold him about his lineage and that he will be from the
Children of Israel. Firon did not cease to have his men rip open the
abdomens of the pregnant women of the Children of Israel, until he
killed in the pursuit of Musa twenty and some odd thousand babies. He
was unable to murder Musa, for Allah, the Exalted, protected him.

Likewise, when the Umayyads and the Abbasids discovered that the demise
of their kingdom and that of their kings and tyrants will be at the
hands of the Qaim from us, they showed enmity towards us and took their
swords out for the murder of the House of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) and to cut off his progeny in order to make certain they have
killed the Qaim

(a.s.). However, Allah dislikes not revealing His Command for one of the
oppressors until His light is full, even if the pagans may dislike this.

Disappearance of Isa (a.s.)
---------------------------

As for the disappearance of Isa: The Jews and the Christians formed
unanimity that he has been killed; whereas Allah belied them in His
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا قَتَلُوهُ وَمَا صَلَبُوهُ وَلَـكِن شُبِّهَ لَهُمْ
</p>

***“and they did not kill him nor did they crucify him, but it appeared
to them so (like Isa)…” (Surah Nisa 4:157)***

Likewise is the disappearance of the Qaim (a.s.) since one congregation
denies it for its length-ranging from one misguided person who says, ‘He
was never born’; to another who says, ‘He was born and he died’; to
another who rejects faith by saying that our Eleventh was issue-less; to
another who deviates by saying, ‘This will increase to thirteen and
upwards’, and another who sins against God, the Exalted, by saying, ‘The
spirit of the Qaim speaks through the body of someone else’.

Longevity of Nuh (a.s.)
-----------------------

“As for the longevity of Nuh: When he prayed for the descent of
punishment against his people from the heavens, Allah, the Exalted, sent
Jibraeel, the Trusted Spirit, with seven kernels, and said: ‘O Apostle
of Allah, Allah, the Exalted, says to you, ‘They are My creation and My
servants. I will not perish them with a lightening from My thunderbolts
until the call has been stressed upon and the proof has become binding.
Retain your hard labor in making the call to your people, for I will
reward you for that. Plant these kernels, because your relief and
liberation will be at its plantation, outgrowth, and fruition when it
reaches fruition. Give this glad tiding to your believing followers.’
When the trees grew and thrived and their trunks and branches developed
and spread out and their fruits grew big, he asked Allah, the Exalted,
for the fulfillment of the promise. Allah, the Exalted, ordered him to
plant the seeds of those trees and retain patience and hard work and
make the call to his people. He informed the nations that believed in
him; three hundred men of them turned away from him and said: ‘If what
Nuh is claiming were true, the promise of his Lord would not have been
violated.’

Then Allah, the Exalted, continued to order him every time to plant the
seeds until they had been planted seven times. Nations of believers
continued to lose congregations until they were left only seventy and
some odd men. At that time, did Allah, the Exalted, sent a message to
him and said: ‘O Nuh, now the dawn on your eyes has broken the night as
the truth has manifested with clarity and the order of belief has become
pure from impurity by the apostasy of everyone who had a wicked
disposition.

If I had destroyed the disbelievers and kept those who have apostatized
from amongst the believers in you, I had not fulfilled My early promise
to the believers from your people who were sincere in their belief in Me
and had adhered to the rope of your Prophethood that I would make them
heirs in earth and empower for them their religion and replace their
fear with

security, so that worship be pure for Me by the departure of doubts from
their hearts.

How could I provide heirship and empowerment and replacement of fear
with security while I know the weakness of certainty of the people who
apostatized and their wicked dispositions and their evil insides, which
were the outcomes of hypocrisy and the initiation of misguidance. If
they had procured from Me the kingdom that will be given to the
believers at the time of heirship when I will have killed their enemies,
they would have sniffed the smells of its attractions, and it would have
strengthened the inner secrets of their hypocrisy, and eternalized the
strings of misguidance in their hearts, and they would have faced their
brothers with enmity and would have battled them in pursuit of chiefdom
and the distinction of commanding and forbidding. And how can the
religion’s empowerment and the command’s spread amongst the believers
coexist with rise of mischief and occurrence of wars? Never. Build the
ark under Our eyes and as We reveal.’”

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Likewise is the Qaim (a.s.). The days of his
occultation will be lengthy so truth may become clear and belief may
become pure from impurity by the apostasy of everyone from the Shia with
a wicked disposition, who are feared they are hypocrites when they
expect heirship and empowerment and a vast security in the reign of the
Qaim (a.s.).”

Mufaddal says, I asked, “O son of the Messenger of Allah, the Nawasib
believe this verse has been revealed about Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and
Ali.” He said: “May Allah not guide the hearts of the Nawasib. When was
the religion which Allah and His Messenger pleased with empowered
through spread of security in the Ummah and departure of fear from their
hearts and doubts from breasts during the reign of anyone of them? And
in the reign of Ali (a.s.) specially with the apostasy of Muslims and
mischief, which were occurring in their days and the wars that were
breaking out between the disbelievers and between themselves.”

Then Imam Sadiq (a.s.) recited this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
حَتَّى إِذَا اسْتَيْأَسَ الرُّسُلُ وَظَنُّواْ أَنَّهُمْ قَدْ كُذِبُواْ
جَاءهُمْ نَصْرُنَا
</p>

***“Until when the apostles despaired and the people became sure that
they were indeed told a lie, Our help came to them…” (Surah Yusuf
12:110)***

“As for the virtuous servant of Allah, Khizr: Allah, the Exalted, did
not lengthen his lifespan for the sake of an apostleship ordained to
him, nor for a book sent to him, nor for a code of law replacing the
previous codes from other messengers before him, nor for an Imamate
obliging His servants to follow him, nor any obedience mandated with
respect to him. Instead, since Allah, the Exalted, knew how lengthy He
would make the life of the Qaim (a.s.) in the days of his disappearance
and He knew the rejection of His servants with respect to the length of
that life, He lengthened the lifespan of the Virtuous Servant for no
other reason but to argue on its basis for the lifespan of the Qaim
(a.s.) and so that the argument of the adversaries may cease and people
may not have any proofs against Allah.”

In*Ghaibat Tusi* a similar report is quoted from Ali bin Harth.

**10-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muzaffar Alawi from Ibne
Ayyashi from his father from Ali bin Muhammad bin Shaja from Muhammad
bin Isa from Yunus from Ali bin Abi Hamza from Abu Basir that he said:
Said Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

“There are many prophetic customs in the Master of this Affair: a custom
from Musa Ibne Imran, a custom from Isa, a custom from Yusuf and a
custom from Muhammad (a.s.). As for his custom from Musa, he is fearful,
vigilant.

As for his custom from Isa, it is said about him what was said about
Isa,

As for his custom from Yusuf, it is the veil. Allah will put a curtain
between him and the people; they see him but they do not recognize him.
As for his custom from Muhammad (a.s.), he strides with guidance on the
Prophet’s guidance and behaves according to his conduct.”

**11-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ali bin
Bishar from Muzaffar bin Ahmad from Asadi from Barmaki from Hasan bin
Muhammad bin Salih Bazzaz that he said:

I heard Hasan Ibne Ali Askari (a.s.) say, “My son is the Qaim after me
and he is the one in whom the traditions of lengthy lives and
disappearance of the apostles, peace be with them, will run, until
hearts will turn like stones for the length of the promised time and no
one will stay in the belief in him except the one that Allah, the
Exalted, has inscribed faith in his heart and has succored him with a
Spirit from Him.”

**12-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Abu Basir that Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“There is a similarity with Yusuf in the Qaim.” I asked, “And what is
that?” He said: “Perplexity and disappearance.”

**13-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** Shaykh Tusi writes:

There are traditions which include the news that the Master of the Age
dies and then lives or is killed and then lives. View the following
traditions for instance: Abu Saeed Khurasani says: I said to Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.), “Why has he been named the Qaim?” He said: “Because he
will rise after he dies. He will rise with the Order of Allah.”

Like this report Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Abdullah Ja’far Himyari
through his chains has narrated from Abu Basir that: I heard Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say, “The similitude of our Order in the Divine
Book is the similitude of the owner of the donkey, Allah made him die
for a hundred a years and then raised him up again.”

A similar report is narrated by Himyari from Ali bin Khattab on the
authority of the Muezzin of the red mosque: I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.), “Is there in the Book of Allah a similitude for the Qaim?” He
said: “Yes, the verse of the owner of the donkey, Allah made him die for
a hundred years, and then He raised him up again.”

Similarly Fadhal bin Shazan has narrated from Himad Ibne Abdul Karim
that: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “When the Qaim rises, people will
say, ‘How this can be? His bones have decayed since a long time ago.”

These traditions and the like have to be interpreted on the grounds that
“his name will die” and many people and not all will believe that “his
bones have decayed,” and then Allah will raise him as He raised the
owner of the donkey after his real death. This is the sound
interpretation of these narrations.

Moreover, singularly narrated traditions, which do not convey certitude,
are not trusted with respect to something that is rationally known and
reasoning has led it to and is supported by inordinate number of
traditions. It is necessary not to rule anything on such an occasion and
adherence to what is already known.

We interpreted these traditions, while setting aside the disputability
of their authenticity, as is done in similar situations.


