3
=

Chapter Three: Prohibition of pronouncing the name of Imam Zamana (a.s.)
========================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
عَبْدُ الْوَاحِدِ بْنُ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ جَعْفَرٍ عَنِ
ابْنِ أَبِي الْخَطَّابِ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ سِنَانٍ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
يَحْيَى الْخَثْعَمِيِّ عَنِ الضُّرَيْسِ عَنْ أَبِي خَالِدٍ الْكَابُلِيِّ
قَالَ لَمَّا مَضَى عَلِيُّ بْنُ الْحُسَيْنِ دَخَلْتُ عَلَى مُحَمَّدِ
بْنِ عَلِيٍّ الْبَاقِرِ ع فَقُلْتُ جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ قَدْ عَرَفْتَ
انْقِطَاعِي إِلَى أَبِيكَ وَ أُنْسِي بِهِ وَ وَحْشَتِي مِنَ النَّاسِ
قَالَ صَدَقْتَ يَا بَا خَالِدٍ تُرِيدُ مَا ذَا قُلْتُ جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ
قَدْ وَصَفَ لِي أَبُوكَ صَاحِبَ هَذَا الْأَمْرِ بِصِفَةٍ لَوْ رَأَيْتُهُ
فِي بَعْضِ الطُّرُقِ لَأَخَذْتُ بِيَدِهِ قَالَ فَتُرِيدُ مَا ذَا يَا بَا
خَالِدٍ قَالَ أُرِيدُ أَنْ تُسَمِّيَهُ لِي حَتَّى أَعْرِفَهُ بِاسْمِهِ
فَقَالَ سَأَلْتَنِي وَ اللَّهِ يَا بَا خَالِدٍ عَنْ سُؤَالٍ مُجْهِدٍ وَ
لَقَدْ سَأَلْتَنِي عَنْ أَمْرٍ مَا لَوْ كُنْتُ مُحَدِّثاً بِهِ أَحَداً
لَحَدَّثْتُكَ وَ لَقَدْ سَأَلْتَنِي عَنْ أَمْرٍ لَوْ أَنَّ بَنِي
فَاطِمَةَ عَرَفُوهُ حَرَصُوا عَلَى أَنْ يَقْطَعُوهُ بَضْعَةً بَضْعَةً
</p>

**1-** ***Ghaibat*** ***Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin
Abdullah from Muhammad bin Ja’far from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad
bin Sinan from Muhammad bin Yahya Khathami from Zaris from Abu Khalid
Kabuli that he said:

When Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) passed away, I came to Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.). “May I be your ransom,” said I, “you have known my
dedication to your father and my affinity towards him, and my reclusion
from the people.” “You spoke the truth, Abu Khalid,” he said. “What do
you want?”

“May I be your ransom,” I said, “Your father has described the ‘Master
of this Affair’ to me with specific qualities that should I see him on a
trail, I would hold his hand.” He said: “Abu Khalid, what do you want
then?” “I want you to tell me his name, so I may recognize him by his
name.” “You have inquired from me, by Allah, Abu Khalid, about a
question of great caution.” He said: “You have asked me of a subject
that if I were to talk to anyone about it, I would speak to you. You
have asked me of a subject that should the children of Fatima recognize
him, they will crave to cut him piece by piece.”

**2-** ***Ghaibat*** ***Nomani:*** It is narrated from Saad from
Muhammad bin Ahmad Alawi from Abu Hashim Ja’fari that he said:

I heard Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) say, “My successor after me is my son,
Hasan. What will your condition be regarding his successor?”

I asked, “Why so, may I be your ransom?” He said: “Because you will not
see his person, nor is it permissible for you to mention him by his
name.” “So how are we to mention him?” I asked. “Say the Hujjah from
Ahle Bayt (a.s.), blessings of Allah and His greetings be unto him.”

Shaykh Saduq narrates an identical narrative on the authority of Ibne
Walid from Saad.

*Ghaibat Tusi* narrates the same from Saad.*Kifayatul Athar* narrates
the same through another chain from Saad.

The author says: In some traditions mentioned before, his holy name has
been explicitly mentioned. Shaykh Saduq says: This tradition has come
like this, mentioning the name of the Qaim (a.s.); however, my belief is
that forbiddance of mentioning his holy name is binding.

**3-** ***Tauhid:*** Daqqaq and Warraq have narrated from Muhammad bin
Harun Sufi from Rauyani from Abdul Azeem Hasani from Imam Naqi (a.s.)
that he said about Qaim (a.s.):

“It is not permissible to mention him by his name until he rises and
fills the earth with equity and justice as it will be full of oppression
and corruption.”

**4-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Ibne Idris has narrated from his father from
Ayyub bin Nuh from Muhammad bin Sinan from Safwan bin Mahran that Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The Mahdi is from my sons, the fifth from the sons of the seventh. His
person will disappear from you and it is not permissible for you to
mention him by his name.”

Another tradition is mentioned in*Ikmaaluddin* on the authority of Ibne
Abi Yafur from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.).

**5-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Hamadani from Ali from his
father from Muhammad bin Ziyad Azdi from Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.) that he
said when the Qaim (a.s.) was mentioned:

“His birth will be hidden from the people and it will not be permissible
for them to mention him by name until Allah, the Exalted, manifests him,
and He fills the earth through him with equity and justice as it will be
full of inequity and oppression.”

*The author says:* These instructions explicitly refute the assertion
that such forbiddance is specific for the time of the Minor Occultation,
an argument based on hunches and illusions.

**6-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Sinani from Asadi from
Sahl from Abdul Azeem Hasani from Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) that he
said:

“Qaim is the one whose birth will be hidden from the people, his person
will disappear from them, and it will be forbidden for them to mention
him by his name. He has the same name and patronymic as the Messenger of
Allah.”

**7-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father, Ali
bin Babawayh and his teacher, Ibne Walid Qummi both narrate from
Himyari, saying:

“I was with Ahmad Ibne Ishaq in the presence of Amari. I said to Amari,
“I ask you about a subject, as Allah, the Exalted, has said in the story
of Ibrahim,*Do you believe not? He said: Yes, but in order to satisfy my
heart.* Have you seen my Patron?” He said: “Yes, and he has a neck like
this,”

pointing with both of his hands to his own neck. “And the name?” I
asked. “I warn you not to seek that, because the Ahle Sunnat believes
that this progeny has been cut off,” he said.

**8-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Muhammad from Abu
Abdullah Salihi that:

Our scholars urged me after the demise of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) that
I should ask about the name and the place. The answer came to me, “If
you should guide them to the name, they will divulge it, and if they
should know the place, they would guide others to it.”

**9-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muzaffar Alawi from Ibne
Ayyashi from Adam bin Muhammad Balkhi from Ali bin Husain Daqqaq and
Ibrahim bin Muhammad together from Ali Ibne Asim Kufi that he says:

The following has come in the epistles of the Imam of the Time (a.s.):
“Accursed, accursed, is the person who mentions me by my name among
people.”

**10-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq says: I heard
Abi Ali Muhammad bin Hamam say: I heard Muhammad bin Uthman Amari, may
Allah sanctify his soul, say:

“An epistle came in a handwriting, which I recognize: Whoever mentions
me by name in a group of people, on him is the curse of Allah. “

**11-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father
from Saad from Ibne Yazid from Ibne Mahbub from Ibne Raab from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The Master of this Affair is a man that no one will mention him by his
name, except an infidel.”

**12-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father and
Ibne Walid from Saad from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik from Ibne Fuddal
from Rayyan bin Sult that he said:

I asked Imam Reza (a.s.) about the Qaim (a.s.). The Imam said: “His body
is not seen and he is not mentioned by his name.”

**13-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father and
Ibne Walid from Saad from Yaqtini from Ismail bin Aban from Amr bin
Shimr from Jabir that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“Umar asked Amirul Momineen (a.s.) about the Mahdi (a.s.), saying, ‘O
Ibne Abi Talib, tell me about the Mahdi. What is his name?’ Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) said: ‘As for his name, my beloved (the Prophet) has
bound me not to speak to anyone of his name until Allah, the Exalted,
raises him. It is of the things that Allah, the Exalted, has entrusted
its knowledge to his Messenger.’”

In*Ghaibat* of Shaykh Tusi it is mentioned that Saad narrates the same
report.


