Surah Infitar, Chapter 82
=========================

**(The Cleaving Asunder)**

**Number of Verses:** **19**

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

The theme of this Surah, similar to that of other Surahs of the last
part of the Qur'an is about the Hereafter and points to five different
subjects.

1. The preliminary events, which happen at the end of this physical
world and just a little before that, the new Spiritual World is
established.

2. A hint to the blessings of Allah that encompass man's entity, and the
breaking of his pride, in order for him to he prepared for the
Resurrection.

3. A reference to the angels who are appointed to record the deeds of
man.

4. The end of 'the Righteous' and 'The wicked' on the Day of Judgment.

5. A part of the hardship on that Great Day.

A narration from Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*"He who recites those two Surahs: Infitar and Inshiqaq and considers
them present before his eyes in his obligatory and optional prayers,
nothing will separate him from Allah and there will he no hindrance
between him and Allah. He will be in the continuous presence of Allah
and Allah will be looking over him until all of the accounts he has with
others are settled."*

Surah Infitar, Verses 1-5
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا السَّمَاءُ انْفَطَرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْكَوَاكِبُ انْتَثَرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ فُجِّرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْقُبُورُ بُعْثِرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلِمَتْ نَفْسٌ مَا قَدَّمَتْ وَأَخَّرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. "When The Sky is cleft asunder."***  
***2. "And when the planets are scattered."***  
***3. "And when the seas burst forth,”***  
***4. "And when the graves are over turned (emptied),”***  
***5. "Every soul shall know what it has sent forward and (what it has)
held back."***

### The Disturbance in Order and Symmetry

Again, at the beginning of this Surah, we are informed about a part of
the horrible events that occur, throughout the world immediately before
the Day of Judgment.

It says:

***"When the Sky is cleft asunder".***

***"And when the planets are scattered."***

The present phenomenal order will not last for ever. Then,
constellations will lose their regularity and the order of this world
will be disturbed. All stars and planets in the sky, revolving around
special points, will leave their routine and, hitting each other, burst
violently. All will be destroyed before the new Spiritual World is
established.

The term /infatarat/ is based on /infitar/ which means 'being cloven
asunder'.

It resembles the term used in some verses of the Qur'an, such as, Surah
Inshiqaq, No. 84, Verse 1 which says:

***"When The Sky is rent asunder".***

And, it also resembles Surah Muzammil, No. 73, verse 18 which says:

***"Whereon the sky will be cleft asunder?...”.***

The term /intatharat/ is basically derived from /nathr/ which means 'to
disperse' and the term /intithar/ means 'to scatter', and, hence,
scattered stars cause each one of them to be thrust in different
directions, then many commentators have interpreted the term
/intatharat/ as the 'falling of the stars' which is appropriate with the
sense of 'scatter'.

The term /kawakib/ is the plural form of /kaukab/ which carries many
meanings in the Arabic language, including: 'star', in the general
sense, and 'Venus' in a proper sense: i.e. a white point in the eye,
tall plants, blossoms, the shine of steel, a handsome lad, a sword,
water, the chief of a group, etc.

However, it seems that the main meaning is 'a bright star' and other
meanings are used metaphorically in relation to that meaning.

What factor or factors cause the stars to be scattered? Is it because of
the disturbance of their polarization?

Does a mysterious power have an effect on them? Or is it the consequence
of the world's gradual contraction, which is now approved of by the
scientific community. No one knows the exact answer, but it is, at
least, understood from them that when these great phenomena cannot
resist and will be totally shattered then the position of man, a weak
creature, is obvious.

This is an admonishment to man, in relation to the destruction of this
phenomenal world, in order for him not to consider it immortal or not to
be attached to it and avoid committing numerous sins for its sake.

After speaking about the sky the Surah says:

***"And when the seas burst forth".***

Although the seas and oceans (other than the lakes), on the Earth, are
now connected to each other, it seems that prior to the Hereafter the
mountains will turn to rubble, because of earthquakes, and will fill
them up, entirely, so that water will cover all the lands, and the seas
will join to each other as a single ocean which will overwhelm the whole
planet (Earth); as Surah Takwir No. 81 verse 6 says:

***"When the seas boil over swelling".***

There is another probability, in commenting on these two verses, which
interprets the term /fujjirat/ and /sujjirat/ in the sense of 'explosion
in the seas which turns the seas into fire', because, as was said
before, water is formed with a combination of two elements; both of
which are combustible. If something chemically separates the water of
the seas into oxygen and hydrogen, a small spark can ignite it into an
overwhelming, blazing inferno.

Then, speaking about the Resurrection, where the dead are thrown out for
reckoning, which is the stage for the rebirth of the dead and the world,
it says:

***"And when the graves are over turned (emptied),”***

The term /bu'thirat/ means 'to turn upside-down' or 'to be scattered'.
Raqib cites in his book 'Mufradat' that the word may be combined from
two parts: /ba'th/ and /athirat/ where both meanings are gathered in it,
(like /bismillah/ which is formed from /bismi/ and /allah/).

In any event, what is said in the above verse is similar to what Surah
Zilzal No. 99 verse 2 denotes:

***"And the Earth throws up her burdens (from within)".***

Or, it resembles Surah Naziat No.79 Verse 13-14 which say:

***"But it shall be only a single blast",***

***"When behold, they shall be in the awakened state”.***

All these statements show that the rebirth, and the dead coming out from
their graves, will occur suddenly and rapidly.

And, after pointing to some events that happen before and after the
Resurrection; as a conclusion it says:

***"Every soul shall know what it has sent forward and (what it has)
held back."***

Verily, on that Day, everything will be obvious to all and the curtains
of arrogance and pride will be removed, then, the full Reality will be
manifested.

Man will see his deeds altogether, irrespective of good or evil, and
understands what sort of deeds he had sent forth and what kind of deeds,
together with their effects, remained in the world, whose result reached
him later after his death; such as, acts of charity done, any remaining
voluntary alms and/or pious foundations and endowments, or the books and
works he had left behind; whether with good intention or evil ones, of
which other persons used after him, and, also, the good or bad habits
that remain among societies for generations.

These are some of man's deeds that their result reaches him after his
death and they are the examples of the term /axxarat/ 'what it has held
back', which is mentioned in the verse.

It is true that in this world everyone is, more or less, familiar with
what he has done, but forgetfulness, selfishness, and self-love often
prevent man from keeping all of his actions in mind and understanding
the depth of their final result. However, on the Day when everything
changes and there will be a revolution in all things in the world,
including man's spirit; he will have a complete knowledge and a precise
comprehension of what he has done in his life.

Or, more than that, he will see all of them in front of himself as Surah
al-i-Imran, No. 3, verse 30 says:

***"On the Day when every soul will be confronted with all the good it
has done, and all the evil it has done…”.***

Some of the commentators have rendered the verse with some other
interpretations, one of which is that it means the deeds that man has
committed at the beginning of his life and the deeds that he has
postponed to do at the end of his life. But, the first commentary is
more appropriate in every respect.

By the way, the term

***/nafs/ 'soul',***

here, means every individual human spirit, and it includes all mankind,
in general.

### Explanations

Besides what is said in the above verses about the remaining result of
man's deeds, there are some narration's which say that there may be some
actions, fulfilled by man, whose effect; good or bad, lasts for many
years or even forever, and he receives its fruit.

A narration from Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*"There will be no reward for a man after his death except in three
ways: the pious foundations that he has established in his life and that
will continue after his death, a tradition of guidance for the benefit
of people according to which they behave after his death, and a
believing good child who asks forgiveness from Allah for him”.*[^1]

The things that are beneficial for the believers after their death are
six according to another narration: a pious child, the Qur'an that he
studies, a well he has dug (for its water), a tree he has planted,
providing water, and, finally, a good tradition that persists after him
and is beloved by all.[^2]

Some narrations focus on the science that a person leaves behind amongst
people.[^3]

There are numerous narrations that warn people to be especially careful
about their behavior, because their behavior may cause their societies
to have some good or bad traditions later.

The late Tabarsi cites a tradition corresponding with the above
mentioned verses that states: once a person, who was attending with the
Prophet (S), rose and asked people to help him with some financial
matter. No one responded to him. At this moment, one of the Prophet's
(S) companions gave the beggar something.

Then others followed suit and everyone gave him something to help him
and the Prophet (S) said:

*"He who leaves a good tradition behind himself one that others follow,
will have his own reward and, in addition to this he will have a reward
similar to his followers' rewards; without decreasing anything from that
which they gained. And he who leaves an evil tradition behind himself
and others follow it, will have his own sin plus a sin similar to his
followers' sins, both, without decreasing from any of them".*

At that moment Khathifah, one of the Prophet's companions (S), recited
the verse:

***"Every soul shall know what it has sent forward and (what it has)
held back".***[^4]

Amir-al-Mo'mineen Ali (as) says:

*"What will your position be, then, when your affairs reach their end
and graves are turned upside down (to throw out the dead)? There, every
soul shall realize what it has sent before, and they shall be brought
back to Allah their true Lord, and what they did fabricate (the false
deities) will vanish from them”.* [^5]

These verses and narrations illustrate man's responsibility for his
deeds, from the Islamic point of view, so that they may result in some
good rewards or painful punishments for him even after the passing of
thousands of years.

Surah Infitar, Verses 6-12
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنْسَانُ مَا غَرَّكَ بِرَبِّكَ الْكَرِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي خَلَقَكَ فَسَوَّاكَ فَعَدَلَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي أَيِّ صُورَةٍ مَا شَاءَ رَكَّبَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا بَلْ تُكَذِّبُونَ بِالدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ عَلَيْكُمْ لَحَافِظِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كِرَامًا كَاتِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْلَمُونَ مَا تَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. "O man! What has seduced you (away) from your Lord, the
Gracious?"***  
***7. "Who created you and fashioned you, and proportioned you in
perfection?"***  
***8. "In whatever form He pleased, He constituted you.”***  
***9. "Nay! but you disbelieve in the (day of) reckoning”***  
***10. "And surely there are Watchers over you,”***  
***11. "Honorable scribes:"***  
***12. "They know (and understand) whatever you do.”***

### O man! What Has Seduced You?

Concerning the previous verses about the Resurrection, the following
verses; to awaken man and to direct his attention to the responsibility
of that which Allah expects of him, the Qur'an kindly questions in an
intensive scornful tone and says:

***“O man ! What has seduced you from your Lord, the Gracious?”***

Here,

***'man'***

is mentioned for the sake of his humanity, which is a privilege of his
over all other creatures in the world. Then he is in the presence of
Allah, Who is both Lord and Gracious.

Because of His Lordship He supports man and undertakes his training and
improvement; and because of His Graciousness, He bestows innumerable
material and spiritual blessings on him without expecting repayment or
reward. He even overlooks his mistakes and forgives him.

Is it appropriate for this noble creature to be bold and disgraceful to
such a great Lord?

Or, is it right for man to be neglectful of Him and not to obey His
instructions that guarantee his own happiness?

That is why a narration from the Prophet (S) for this commentary of the
verses says:

*"His ignorance has caused him to be proud and neglectful."*

This statement makes it clear that the main purpose is that by relying
on His Lordship and Graciousness, the pride and negligence of man is
removed.

The term /qarraka/ is based on the term /qurur/ which originally means
‘negligence in wakefulness'; or, in other words, negligence where man
should not be neglectful. Since negligence sometimes becomes the source
of ‘boldness’ or the feeling of 'self-importance', the term /qurur/ has
been interpreted in these senses. Satan is called /qarur/ because he
seduces man with temptations and causes him to be neglectful and bold.

In commenting on the term /karim/, various interpretations have been
cited:

Some have said that /karim/ is used for 'gracious one'; that all his
actions are beneficent and he seeks for neither gaining benefit nor
parrying loss.

Some others have said that /karim/ means 'one who donates what is for
him to donate and what is not'.

Still others have said that /karim/ is 'one who pays a lot for a
little'.

However, in fact, all of these commentaries are gathered together in the
essence of the term when it refers to the utmost graciousness of one,
such as Allah; the most Gracious, Who not only forgives the sinners, but
also changes their sins into good deeds (for those who deserve
forgiveness).

There are some wonderful statements from Amir-al-Mo'mineen Ali (as) in
commenting on the verse.

In the following one, he says:

***“The addressee (in this verse) is devoid of argument and his excuse
is most deceptive. He is holding himself ignorance.”***

*“O man! What has emboldened you to (commit) sins; what has deceived you
about your God and what has made you satisfied with the destruction of
yourself'? Is there no cure for your ailment or no awakening from your
sleep?*

*Do you not have pity on yourself as you have on others? Generally when
you see anyone exposed to the heat of the sun you cover him with shade,
or if you see any one afflicted with grief that pains his body you weep
from pity for him. What, then, has made you patient over your own
disease?*

*What has made you firm in your own affliction, and what has consoled
you from weeping for yourself although your life is the most precious of
all lives to you? And why does not the fear of an ailment, that may
befall you in the night, keep you wakeful although you travel on the
road to Allah's wrath due to your sins?*

*You should cure the disease of languor in your heart by determination,
and the sleep of neglectfulness in your eyes by wakefulness. Be obedient
to Allah, and love Him in remembrance, and picture yourself, running
away when He is approaching you. He is calling you to His forgiveness
and conceding your faults with His kindness, all the while you are
fleeing away from Him toward others.*

*Certainly, Allah is Great; the Powerful, Who is so generous, but how
humble and weak are you and yet so bold to commit disobedience to Him
although you live in His protection and undergo changes of life in the
expanse of His kindness...”.*[^6]

Then to awaken the neglectful man, in four steps it points to a part of
Allah's, favor and says:

***"Who created you and fashioned you, and proportioned you in
perfection”.***

***“In whatever form He pleased, He constituted you.”***

Thus, the Qur'an mentions four great stages in the Creation of man, viz:
the creation itself, the fashioning of him, his proportion afterward,
and, finally, the constitution of man.

The first stage in the creation of man is from the lowly life-germ in
the darkness of the mother's womb.

The second stage is his fashioning in a just form and with appropriate
limbs in an astonishing regular formation. Eyes, ears, heart, blood
vessels, and other organs of the body are created so surprisingly that
if man thinks about their structures and regularities and understands
Allah's Beneficence to him, each of them will be illustrated as a world
of knowledge and power that Allah granted man, because of His Favor and
Graciousness.

These are the Divine gifts that natural scientists have been thinking
over, working on, and writing about for thousands of years, but they are
still at the threshold.

The third stage is proportioning man and adjusting his faculties as well
as his organs, and then, their internal coordination's and relations
with each other.

The parts of man's body are created mainly symmetrically: hands, feet,
eyes, ears, some bones, vessels and muscles are in pairs on both sides
of the body.

Besides, different organs and limbs cooperate with each other to
accomplish their functions, for instance, the respiratory system
complements the circulatory system and vice versa. In swallowing a
little piece of food, teeth, tongue, salivary glands, and muscles,
around the mouth and throat, work together until the morsel enters the
digestive system.

Henceforth, too, many other coordinations occur until the food is
digested and absorbed, and subsequently, the required nutrition and
vitality is supplied.

These processes totally are reflected in the phrase

***/fa'adalaka/ 'and proportioned you in perfection'.***

Some have interpreted this phrase in the sense of man's 'standing
erect', his virtue and rank in comparison with other kinds of animals,
which corresponds more with the latter stage, but the former meaning is
more comprehensive.

Finally, the formation and constitution of man in comparison with other
living creatures comes forth. Comparing him with them, he has
well-balanced features, good character and an awakened nature, which is
alert and capable of accepting any training and knowledge.

Besides, the contenances of men are different as it is mentioned in
Surah Rum No. 30 verse 22 which says:

***"And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth,
and the variation in your languages and your colors..."***

In addition to the external differences, there are many internal ones,
as well, such as talents and tastes which are organized and arranged in
some forms that requires only His knowledge, to establish a safe and
sound society, complete for all of them; to supply the required
necessities, and the internal and external powers of men to be
complements of each other.

On the whole, Allah has created man in the best of molds, as Surah Tin,
No. 95 verse 4 says:

***"We have indeed created man in the best of molds."***

In short, through the above verses, as well as in many other verses of
the Qur'an, Allah wants the forgetful arrogant man to try to know
himself.

He should research his existence from the very beginning, which means
his creation in his mother's womb to the time when he is born, and from
then until he matures and develops, in order to understand that in every
stage and at every moment he has been receiving abundant new blessings
from his Great Lord, and not to be neglectfully arrogant; by accepting
His Lordship, worships Him.

Then, the Qur'an refers to the origin of their neglectful arrogance and
says:

***"Nay! but you disbelieve in the (Day of) reckoning".***

Neither Allah's generosity nor His kindness is the origin of your
carelessness, but the lack of belief in the Day of Judgment is the main
cause for your arrogance.

Verily, when we seek deep into the souls of most neglectful arrogant
ones we find doubt and denial of the Hereafter within them, while all
their other words and deeds are mere excuses. That is why the more the
basis of faith and belief in the Resurrection, in those hearts, are
strengthened, the less this negligence and carelessness will remain
there.

The term /din/, in this verse, means ‘punishment' and the 'Day of
Reckoning' and that some have suggested 'Islam' as a probable meaning of
it seems inappropriate, because the main theme of the verses, here, is
Resurrection.

Then, in order to remove the factors effective in arrogance and
carelessness and to strengthen the belief in the Resurrection, it says:

***“And surely there are Watchers over you,”***

***"Honorable scribes.”***

***“They know (and understand) whatever you do."***

The term /hafiżin/, used in the above verse, means 'some special angels
who are scribes for the good and evil deeds of men, and with protection
preserve them'; the ones who are called

***/raqib/ 'watcher, guardian',***

and

***/'atid/ 'ready'***

in Surah Qaf, No. 50, verse 18 which says:

***"Not a word does he utter, but that there is a sentinel over him,
ready (to note it)”.***

And, also, in the same Surah verse 17 says:

***"When the two receivers (guardian angels) receive (his doings and
note them) one sitting on the right and one on the left…”***

Some other verses of the Qur'an point to the existence of these guardian
angels, too.

Undoubtedly, Allah, sooner and better than anyone else, is a watcher and
a witness to Men's deeds, but, for emphasis and to make men feel their
responsibility more acutely, He has appointed, over them, a number of
angels that witness, some of which are the very ones that we have spoken
about.

In addition to them, there are other protectors who have surrounded man
from every side, all of whom, by the name of 'witnesses of the
Hereafter, ' are categorized in seven divisions:

The first witness is Allah Who says:

***“...and whatever deed ye (mankind) may be doing, We are Witnesses
thereof...”***[^7]***.***

The second are the prophets and the vicegerents of the prophets:

***"How then if We brought from each Prophet a witness, and We brought
thee O a witness against these (people)”***[^8]***.***

Then, the tongue, hands and feet or man's limbs, in general, are
witnesses:

***"On the day when their tongues, their hands, and their feet will bear
witness against them to their actions”***[^9]***.***

Another witness is man's skin:

***"They will say to their skin: 'Why bear you witness against
us?”***[^10]***.***

Angels are witnesses as stated in[^11], and as the verse above denotes.

The land on which man lives and commits good or evil deeds is a witness:

***"On that Day will she (the Earth) recount (all) her
news”***[^12]***.***

And the final classification of witnesses is the time when the actions
are done. It bears witness, against Men, that they have committed
certain deeds in their life.

Tabarsi cites in his book ‘Ihtijaj’ that once someone asked Imam Sadiq
(as) what the reason was that there are some appointed angels for
scribing man's good and evil deeds when it is known that Allah is aware
of all things irrespective of their being obvious or hidden.

He answered:

*"Allah invited those angels to His worship and appointed them as
witnesses over His servants in order that they be the most careful of
their obedience to Allah and least committers of sin because of the
angel's presence.*

*There is many a servant who decides to commit a sin, but when he
remembers their presence he stops and says:*

*'My Lord sees me and the angels are appointed to witness the deeds.'*

*Moreover, Allah, with His Grace, kindly appointed them, by His leave,
to protect the servants from stubborn Satans by banishing them and also
to keep the servants safe from numerous harmful animals and pests of the
land, which are not seen until the time when Allah orders it and the end
of their lives has come."*[^13]

It is clearly understood from this narration that angels, in addition to
being scribes for man's deeds, protect him against unpleasant events,
pests, and Satans' temptations.

It is noteworthy that in the above verses these angels are characterized
as 'Honorable Scribes' in order to make man aware of being more careful
about his own deeds, because the higher position the watchers of man's
deeds have, the more careful man is before them and is more ashamed of
Committing sins.

The term

***'scribes',***

used in this verse, is for emphasis, in that they are not satisfied with
only memorizing the actions, but they also record them all precisely and
then nothing will be left unrecorded or omitted; from the smallest item
to the largest.

And the sentence:

***'They know (and understand) whatever you do”***

is also another emphasis on this fact that they are perfectly vigilant
of everything you do and their record is completed according to the same
knowledge.

By the way, all these details denote to man's free-will, because if man
were not free there would be no reason or aim for appointing these
guardian angels or for their records which contain so much information
and warnings for him.

On the other hand, all of the details make this fact clear that the
divine punishments and rewards are very severe and serious, since Allah
has counted them extremely important for mankind.

Regard for this fact and believing in it are enough to train man and
make him familiar with his responsibilities and, consequently, keep him
far away from evils and corruptions.

### Explanation: The Angels; the Scribes

Not only in the above verses, but, also in many other verses of the
Qur'an and in Islamic narrations, this idea has come to light that Allah
has appointed some angels to protect man and to scribe his deeds, both
good and evil, preparing his record for the Day of Judgment.

In the Islamic narrations there are some meaningful qualities mentioned
about these angels as a warning to man, among which are the following:

1. Someone asked Imam Musa-ibn-Ja'far (as),

*“Are the two angels, appointed for recording man's deeds, aware of his
retention and inner decision when he wants to do a good or an evil
action?”*

*“Is the odor of sewage and perfume the same?”*

Imam (as) asked him and he answered:

*"No".*

Imam (as) then told him:

*“When a person decides to do a good action, his breath becomes sweet.
The angel on his right (the scribe of the good deeds) tells the angel on
his left to stand up, because he has intended to do good; and when the
person fulfills it his tongue, as a pen, and his saliva, as the ink, are
used by the angel to record it.*

*But, when he decides to do an evil action his breath becomes fetid, and
the angel on his left tells the angel on the right to stand up, because
he has intended to do evil. And when he concludes the act his tongue, as
a pen, and his saliva, as the ink, are again used by the angel to scribe
it.”*[^14]

This tradition clearly indicates that man's intention affects his whole
entity and angels will be informed of his inner secrets by his outer
signs. Certainly, they could not scribe the deeds correctly if they were
not aware of man's intentions, because the value of an action relates
fully to the kind of intention man has. The Prophet (S), too, in his
famous tradition likewise concurred.

Another thing that is understood from the above tradition is that some
means, which are used for man, are taken from himself.

2. The guardian angels are to note down a good deed on the record when
the person intends to do good, and when he fulfills it they scribe it
ten-fold, but when he intends to commit sin they will not note it down
until he fulfills the act, then they scribe only one strike against
him.[^15]

This shows the Grace and Mercy of Allah for man. He forgives him his
intention of doing sin and the punishment of the sin is equal according
to Justice, but He gives him a good-deed for each intention of
obedience, and rewards him according to His Graciousness not to His
Justice. This encourages man to do good.

3. Another tradition from the Prophet (S) says that he, after pointing
to the two Guardian angels who scribe each good action of a servant
ten-fold, said:

*"When a person does an evil, the angel on the right tells the angel on
the left not to hasten in scribing the sin, he may do a good action
which covers the sin, since Allah says:*

***'…these things that are good remove those that are
evil...'***[^16]***,***

*or he may repent... Then the angel appointed to scribe evils waits
about seven hours to see whether he does a good action or repents, if
not the angel on the right tells him to note the evil action down in his
record”.*[^17]

4. Another narration from Imam Sadiq says:

*"When the believers are sitting in a private meeting and speaking
together, the Guardian Angels tell each other that we should leave them
alone. Perhaps the believers are discussing something secret that Allah
has concealed”.*[^18]

5. Hazrat Ali (as) advises people toward piety (taqwa) and says:

*"Know, O' creatures of Allah! that your ownself is a guard over you;
your limbs are watchmen and truthful vigil-keepers who preserve (the
record of) your actions and the numbers of breaths you take. The gloom
of the dark night cannot conceal you from them, nor can closed doors
hide you from them. Surely tomorrow is close at hand...”.*[^19]

Surah Infitar, Verses 13-19
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْأَبْرَارَ لَفِي نَعِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ الْفُجَّارَ لَفِي جَحِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَصْلَوْنَهَا يَوْمَ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هُمْ عَنْهَا بِغَائِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ مَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ لَا تَمْلِكُ نَفْسٌ لِنَفْسٍ شَيْئًا ۖ وَالْأَمْرُ يَوْمَئِذٍ
لِلَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. "Surely the Righteous shall be in Bliss,”***  
***14. "And surely the Wicked shall be in blazing Fire,”***  
***15. "Which they shall enter on the Day of Reckoning,”***  
***16. "And never shall they be absent therefrom”,***  
***17. "And what makes you know what the Day of Reckoning is?"***  
***18. "Again, what makes you know what the Day of Reckoning is?”***  
***19. "The Day on which no soul shall have aught for (another) soul,
and the command that Day shall be (wholly) Allah's."***

### On That Day, No One Does Anything for Anyone

Concluding the previous discussion about recording the deeds of men by
the angels, the following verses speak about the account of man on the
Day of Judgement and the end of the Righteous and the Wicked.

It says:

***“Surely the Righteous shall be in Bliss”,***

***"And surely the Wicked shall be in blazing Fire”.***

The term /abrar/ is the plural form of /bar/ and /barr/ in the sense of
'a pious person' and the term /berr/, which means any piety, here means
both 'pious beliefs', 'good intentions' and 'good deeds'.

The term /na’im/ is singular and means 'a good thing, a blessing’, and,
here, it means 'Heaven, Bliss, Eternal Gardens'. The term is mentioned
in an indefinite form, in Arabic texts, to show its greatness and
vastness of which no one knows, but Allah. The Arabic special
grammatical form of the term, which is used here, is for emphasis and
denotes to the resistance and perpetuity of this great Blessing.

The term /fujjar/ is the plural form of /fajir/ which is originally
based on the term /fajr/ meaning 'to open wide' and the phrase
/tulu'-i-fajr/ is used for 'day-break' as if the curtain of the gloom of
the dark night is torn wide open by the dawn; and the term /fujur/
‘wickedness' is used for the actions of those who tear away the curtain
of piety and follow the path of sin and corruption.

The term /jahim/ is derived from the term /jahm/ which means 'to light a
fire', and then /jahim/ is 'a burning-fire ' which, in the Qur’an,
generally means 'Hell'.

And by the Surah saying

***'that the Righteous are in Bliss and the Wicked are in blazing
Fire'***

it may mean that even now they are in Bliss and blazing fire, and in
this world, too, Heavenly blessings and Hellish punishments encompass
them, as Surah 'Ankabut, No.29, verse 54 says:

***"...But, of a surety, Hell will encompass the rejecters of Faith”.***

Some scholars have said that these ideas are for an avoidable future and
in Arabic literature things which are sure to happen in the future are
said in present tense and sometimes the past tense of the verb is used.
(The first interpretation is more appropriate with the appearance of the
verse, but the second one seems better.)

The next verse further describes more about the destiny of the Wicked.

It says:

***“Which they shall enter on the Day of Reckoning".***

If the previous verse means that they are now in the blazing fire, this
verse may mean that they will have more blazing fire stronger than this,
on the Day of Reckoning. They will feel the perfect practicality of its
heat, then.

The term /yaslaun/ is based on /saly/ which is cited with the meaning of
'entering the fire and suffering its roasting burning pain', and since
in Arabic texts the verb is in the form of future tense, it denotes to
continuity and being in the constant company of it.

And, again, for more emphasis, it says:

***“And never shall they be absent therefrom”.***

Many of the commentators have considered this verse as an evidence for
the continuity and eternity of the Wicked's punishment. Then they have
concluded that 'the Wicked', mentioned in these verses, are 'the
Unbelievers', because eternity and continuity of the fire is only for
the Unbelievers.

Therefore, the Wicked are those who do not care for piety, because of
lack of faith in the Hereafter and rejecting the Day of Judgement, not
because of the force of base desires all the while having Faith.

This verse is stated in the present tense, which is an emphasis on what
was said before: that these kinds of people are not far from the blazing
fire; their life, itself, is a Hell and their graves, according to some
Islamic traditions, is a ditch of fire. Thus, the Hell of this world,
the Hell of the partition and the Hell of the next world all are now
prepared for them.

By the way, this verse depicts that the blazing fire of Hell never
fades, and they will never escape it even for a moment.

Then to illustrate the importance of that Day, it says:

***"And what males you know what the Day of Reckoning is?”***

***“Again, what makes you know what the Day of Reckoning is?”***

When the Prophet (S), with his vast and profound knowledge about the
Hereafter and the extraordinary insight he had about the Creator and the
Resurrection, about the great and terrible events of that Day and its
considerable horror governing there, was not well acquainted with the
Hereafter, the situation of others is obvious.

This statement denotes to the fact that the horrible events of the
Hereafter are so great and vast that it cannot be described with our
present vocabulary. As we, the dwellers on earth, do not know well about
Heaven and its abundant blessings, we cannot grasp the full concept of
the punishment in Hell, and in general, of the Final Judgement, as well.
The question is repeated twice to emphasize this difficulty.

In the next verse, a simple but, complete and meaningful answer to the
above question is suggested which points to one of the qualities of that
Day.

The answer is suggested by a negative proportion:

***''The Day on which no soul shall have aught for (another) soul; and
the command That Day shall be (wholly) Allah's."***

Surely, everything in this world, too, is with Allah, but, we all depend
on one another in proximity, human law and institutions may hold large
masses of mankind in their grip. Here, there are, apparently, worldly
rulers, owners, and powerful members with whom some superficial persons,
sometimes, consider the source of independent power. But, this period
will be all over.

Then the ownership is totally His Own and is so perfected that their
wills will be in complete consonant with Allah’s Universal Will, the
Absolute Command, on everything and more evident than ever,
thenceforward will be wholly with Allah.

This is the same fact that is mentioned in many other verses, of the
Qur'an, such as Surah Mo'min, No. 40, verse 16, which says:

***"...Whose will be the Dominion that Day? That of Allah, the One, the
Irresistible!”***

As a matter of fact, everyone, on that Day, is so occupied with himself
that if he had any power, he would not pay attention to anyone else; as
Surah 'Abasa, No. 80, verse 37 confronts it:

***"Each one of them, That Day, will have concern enough to occupy
him”.***

A tradition from Imam Baqir (as) says:

*“The command that Day and today is wholly Allah's, ...but on the Day of
Judgement all the rulers and owners will be removed and there will be no
sovereignty except Allah’s.”*[^20]

A question may arise such as: ‘Does that state contrast with the
intercession of prophets, saints, and angels? '

The answer simply is this: many verses of the Qur'an verify that
intercession is also done by His leave for those who are allowed,

***“And they offer no intercession except for those who are
acceptable...”***[^21]***.***

### Supplication

*O Lord! On that horrible Day, everyone hopes for your generosity and,
today, we rely on You.*

*O Lord! We seek Your Grace in this world and the Next World: please do
not deprive us.*

*O Lord! The absolute command is Yours: save us from polytheism and
relying on others.*

[^1]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 71, p 257.

[^2]: ibid.

[^3]: maniyyal-ul-Mured, p. 11

[^4]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 449

[^5]: Nahj-ul-Balaqa, Sermon No. 226 (Arabic Version).

[^6]: Nahj-ul-Balaqa, Sermon No 223 (Arabic Version), No 227 (English
Version)

[^7]: Surah Yunus., No. 10, verse 61

[^8]: Surah Nisaa, No. 4. verse. 41

[^9]: Surah Nur. No. 24, verse 24

[^10]: Surah Ha-Mim, No. 41. verse. 21

[^11]: Surah Qaf. No. 50, verse 21

[^12]: Surah Zilzal. No. 99, verse 4

[^13]: Nur-uth Thaqalayn", vol. 5, p. 522.

[^14]: Usul-i-Kafi, vol. 2, Chapter Good or Evil Action, Tradition 3.

[^15]: Ibid., Traditions 1 and 2.

[^16]: Surah Hud 110. No. 11. verse 114

[^17]: Usm-i-KliDl, vol. 2, Chapter: (food or Evil Action, Tradition 4.

[^18]: Ibid., based on Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 110.

[^19]: Nahj-ul-Balaqa, Sermon Iqo. 157 (Arabic Version), No. 160
(English Version).

[^20]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 450.

[^21]: Surah Anbiya, No. 21, verse 28


