Surah Mutaffifin, Chapter 83
============================

**(Defrauders)**

**Number of Verses:** **36**

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

Opinions are divided about this Surah on whether it is a Meccan Surah or
a Medinan one.

One of the occasions of revelation of the Surah denotes that the
beginning verses of the Surah, which are about shortchanging, can be
about those tradesmen who dealt in fraud in Medina.

Other verses of the Surah mostly resemble, from the point of tone, the
Meccan Surahs, whose short and meaningful verses warn of the
Resurrection and the horrible events of the Hereafter. Particularly, the
last verses of the Surah, which speak about the mockings of the
disbelievers at the believers, match the earlier environment of Mecca
where Muslims were in a minority and unbelievers were in a majority.

Perhaps, it is for this reason that some commentators consider a part of
the Surah Meccan and another part of it belonging to the Medina period.
But, on the whole, this Surah seems chronologically close to the Meccan
period.

In any case, the theme of the Surah is divided into five categories:

1. It seriously warns and threatens the defrauders.

2. It points to the lack of strong belief in the Resurrection as being
the origin of corruption and great sins.

3. There are some hints in this Surah showing the end of the Wicked on
That Great Day.

4. It points to some of the great gifts and delightful blessings of the
Righteous in the Garden of Bliss.

5. The unbelievers, foolishly mocking at the believers, in this life,
and the reverse situation, in the Hereafter is briefly referred to in
the Surah.

### The Virtue in Studying the Surah

There is a tradition from the holy Prophet (S) that says:

*“The person who studies Surah Mutaffifin (Defrauders), Allah will make
him drink of the pure, sealed drink on That Day 8.”*[^1]

And there is also a narration from Imam Sadiq (as) which says:

*“The person who recites Surah Mutaffffin (Defrauders) in his obligatory
prayers, Allah will keep him safe from fire on the Day of Judgement.
Then, neither the fire will meet him nor will he meet the fire.”*[^2]

These great rewards are for the one who studies it and acts accordingly,
of course.

Surah Mutaffifin, Verses 1-6
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيْلٌ لِلْمُطَفِّفِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ إِذَا اكْتَالُوا عَلَى النَّاسِ يَسْتَوْفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا كَالُوهُمْ أَوْ وَزَنُوهُمْ يُخْسِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَا يَظُنُّ أُولَٰئِكَ أَنَّهُمْ مَبْعُوثُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَقُومُ النَّاسُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “Woe to the defrauders,”***  
***2. “Who, when they take a measure from people, take it in full,”***  
***3. “But when they give by measure or weight to men, they cause loss
(give less than what is due)."***  
***4. “Do they not think that they shall be raised (to life
again)?"***  
***5. "For a Great Day”***  
***6. “The Day when (all) mankind shall stand before the Lord of the
Worlds?"***

### The Occasion of Revelation

Ibn-Abbas says that when the Prophet (S) arrived in Medina large group
of tradesmen used to deal fraudulently, then Allah sent down these
verses and, thereafter, they did not commit further fraud.

Another tradition says that: a large number of the inhabitants of Medina
were tradesmen at that time. They used to deal fraudulently and many of
their dealings were religiously unlawful. Then, these verses were
revealed and the Prophet (S) recited them to the citizens of Medina.

He also added:

*''There are five for five.”*

They asked him which 'five' were for which ‘five'. And he answered:

*“No nation broke their promise but that Allah set their enemies over
them.”*

*“No society passed Judgement without suffering excessive poverty when
they were heedless of the laws of Allah."*

*''No nation fornicated without being faced with abundant fatality"*

*“No sect committed fraud save those whose crops became rotted and
famine plagued them.”*

*''No community refused paying Alms tax except that they were parched by
draught.”*[^3]

The late Tabarsi has cited about the occasion of revelation of these
verses that there was a man in Medina by the name of Abu -Jahinah who
had two scales for measuring: one of them was big, which he used when he
wanted to buy things, and the other was small, which was used when he
used to sell things. (Then, this Surah was revealed and warned him and
the likes of him).[^4]

### Woe to Those Who Deal in Fraud

In these verses, before everything, it addresses the shortchangers and
says:

***“Woe to the defrauders”***

This is a threat, indeed, from Allah to these arrogant, unmanly
oppressors who tread on the rights of the people.

The term /muţaffifin/ is based on /taţfif/ derived from /ţaf/ which
means 'the edge of something'; and everything which is slight or
insufficient has been called /ţafif/ as well as a measure which is not
completely full viz., the content is up to the edge, but it is not
sufficiently full. Then, the different forms of this term have been used
for 'shortchanging'.

The word /wayl/, here, means; 'woe, or a great misfortune, or sorrow, or
death, or punishment, or a very hot site in Hell'. It is usually used
when it is meant 'an evil and lowly sense or damnation'. The word is
very short, but it implies many ideas.

It is noteworthy that a narration from Imam Sadiq (as) says that Allah
has not used the term

***/wayl/ ‘woe',***

in the Qur'an, for anyone unless He has called the one a pagan, as He
says:

***"...and woe to the Unbelievers because of the (coming) Judgement of a
momentous Day”***[^5]***.***[^6]

Thus, by this narration we understand that 'dealing in fraud' is akin to
'paganism'.

***"Who, when they take a measure from people, take it in full.”***

***“But when they give by measure or weight to men; they cause loss
(give less than what is due)”.***

Some of the commentators have understood from the above verse that
/mutaffif/ 'a defrauder' is a person who takes more than his right when
he buys something and gives less than what is due when he sells it, and
Allah has used the word

***'woe'***

against him, in both cases.

However, this idea is wrong because the term /yastaufun/ means that they
take their right fully, but, there is nothing in verse 2 which indicates
that they take something more than what is their right.

In comparison with these two circumstances of when they buy something
they take it in full, but, when they must give in full what is due from
them, they do not and cause a loss, Allah curses them.

This is noteworthy, too, that in dealing with others, when they take
their own right, it is speaking of 'measure' and they take measure in
full, but when they are going to give people's rights to them, it is
speaking of both ‘measure and weight' and they give them less than what
is their due. This difference in the usage, of the words, may be due to
one of the following reasons:

The first is that, in old times when wholesale trades used to occur the
buyers mostly used big measures because, scales were not big enough for
weighing very heavy loads, but smaller measures were more suitable and
easily available. However in selling things they had both wholesale (by
measures) and retail (by weights).

The second is that for taking a share, it is more suitable to use
'measure' because, shortchanging is more easy when weighing things and
provides a greater possibility to commit fraud.

This point is also notable that though the verses speak about
shortchangers, undoubtedly 'fraud' must be taken, here, in a more
general sense: It consists of giving short measure and short weight, but
it covers much more than that. It includes any shortchanging in
numericals, (the countable items which are sold one by one). Or, it may
include lazy workers or employees who do their duty insufficiently: so
the verses condemn even them.

Some commentators consider a broader scope for the meaning of the
verses. They say that any changes in 'limits set by Allah' and any
deterioration in social relations and morals may be involved. Although
there is no clear implication about them in the verses, the idea is not
inappropriate.

Hence, it is narrated from 'Abdullah-ibn–Mas’ud, a companion of the
Prophet's (S), who said:

*"Prayer is measurable. If one fills its measure completely (and says a
prayer perfectly) Allah will give him a complete reward, but if not,
Allah's word about Mutafffin (defrauders) will be against him,
too.”*[^7]

Then, to threaten them (the defrauders) reproachfully, it questions:

***"Do they not think that they shall be raised (to life again)?"***

***“For a Great Day”.***

On the day whose account, punishment, and primary events and horrors are
all great.

***“The Day when (all) mankind shall stand before the Lord of the
Worlds?"***

That is, if they believed in the Hereafter and they knew an account will
be given there, and all their deeds are recorded for the Judgement,
before the Lord, and whoever has done an atom's weight of good or evil
shall behold it on That Great Day, they would not commit oppression and
would never tread on the rights of anyone.

Many of the commentators took the term /yazunnu/, based on the term
/zann/, to mean 'conviction'. It resembles Surah Baqarah, No. 2, verse
249 which says:

***“...But those who were convinced that they must meet Allah said: 'How
oft, by Allah's will, hath a small force vanquished a big one?'..."***

A tradition from Hazrat Ali (as) for the commentary of the verse attests
to the idea.

He said about the meaning of the verse:

***“Do they not think that they shall be raised (to life again)”,***

That it renders:

*"Are they not sure that they will be raised (to life again)?”*[^8]

It has also been narrated that he said:

*"There are two kinds of /zann/ 'imagination': one is 'of doubt' and the
other is 'of conviction'. What are given in the Qur'an about
Resurrection are those of the ' imagination of conviction' and what are
given about the World are those of the imagination ‘of doubt’.”*[^9]

It is notable that, as Raqib has said in his book Mufradat, the term
/zann/ basically is a word used for that case which happens in a
person's mind where there are some implications in a person's thoughts
about something. If they are convincing, the knowledge and confidence
rise, but if they are feeble, there will be a mere 'delusion'.

Thus, the term /zann/ 'imagination', inspite of its present day usage,
has a broad meaning in the Qur’an that consists of the sense of both
'knowledge' and 'apprehension'. It has been used sometimes with the
former meaning and sometimes with the latter one.

### Explanation: 'Dealing in Fraud' is One of the Factors of Mischief in the Land

The Holy Qur’an frequently condemns fraud, for example, in the story of
Shu’ayb in Surah Shu'ara No.26, verse 181 to 183 it says:

***“Give just measure, and cause no loss (to others by fraud).”***

***“And weigh with scales true and upright”.***

***“And withhold not things justly due to men, nor do evil in the land,
working mischief”.***

Hence, dealing in fraud unjustly, with measure or weight, is counted as
working mischief in the land. This is an evidence for the idea that
shortchanging is one of the aspects of social evils.

And, also, in Surah Rahman, No.55, verse 7-8, justice in weights, which
should be applied by people, is counted of the Balance of the firmament
which Allah raised high, where it says:

***“And the firmament has He raised high, and He has set up the Balance
(of Justice),”***

***“In order that you may not transgress (due) balance.”***

This means that justice and balance of the scale should be observed
seriously, because it is an important factor not only in social affairs,
but it is, in fact, a part of the balance the regulation in all the
world that Allah has created.

For the same reason, the great leaders of Islam have paid much attention
to it.

For example, Asbaq-iln-Nabatah has quoted from Hazrat Ali (as) that when
he was on the pulpit, he said:

*“O tradesmen! 'practical theology’ is first then trade.”*

And he repeated it thrice, then finally added:

*"A tradesman is a wicked man and a wicked man will be in Hell except
for those who take their right in justice and give people's right (in
full)”.*[^10]

Another narration from Imam Baqir (as) says that when Amir-al-Moimineen
Ali (as) was in Kufa, every morning he used to enter the markets and
walk through them carrying a whip with him over his shoulder (for the
punishment of the offenders).

He would stand in the middle of the market and call:

*"O traders, fear Allah!”.*

When people heard his voice they dropped what they were doing and
listened to his words carefully.

Then he said:

*“Ask Allah for goodness, and be easy in your dealing with people, to be
blessed. And approach the customers (in dealing), and make patience a
model of decorum for yourself. And restrain from swearing; and avoid
telling fies. Stand against cruelty, and treat the oppressed justly.*

*Do not approach usury. Give just measure and weight, nor withhold from
the people the things that are their due: commit not evi1in the land
with intent to do mischief.”*

And, also, as it was mentioned for the occasion of revelation of the
verses, the Prophet (S) said:

*“No sect committed fraud save those whose crops rotted and famine
plagued them.”*

As a consequence from the above words, we find out that the use of short
weights has been one of the great factors of destruction and punishment
for some of the past generations, which caused disturbances in their
economical order, and the descent of Divine Punishment.

It has been emphasized even in Islamic traditions about business
behaviours that believers should give others a bit more when measuring
or weighing something, and take from others a bit less than that which
is due.

This is opposite to what is mentioned in these verses about the
treatment of the defrauders,

***''Who when they take a measure from people, take it in full,”***

***“But when they give by measure or weight to men, they cause loss
(give less than what is due).”***

On the other hand, as it was mentioned before, ‘fraud' has such a broad
meaning that envelops any shortchanging in any business or problem or
responsibility whether they are personal or social or Divine.

Surah Mutaffifin, Verses 7-10
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْفُجَّارِ لَفِي سِجِّينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا سِجِّينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كِتَابٌ مَرْقُومٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. “Nay.' Most surely the Record of the Wicked is (preserved) in
Sijjin."***  
***8. “And what informs you of what 'Sijjin' is?”***  
***9. “(It is) a Register (fully) inscribed."***  
***10. “Woe, That Day, to the deniers,”***

### What Informs You What 'Sijjin' Is?

To follow the theme of the former verses about shortchangers, and the
relation between sin and the lack of strong belief in the Day of
Judgment, a part of the destiny of the Wicked on That Day is mentioned
in the next verses.

At first, it says that they, in vain, think that there is no Record of
account given in the Hereafter, but,

***“Nay! Most surely the Record of the Wicked is (preserved) in
'Sijjin’,”***

***“It is a Register (fully) inscribed."***

There are mainly two commentaries for these verses:

1. The meaning of /kitab/, here, is the record of man in which all the
deeds, irrespective of great or small, are exactly inscribed.

The term /sijjin/ means a 'register' wherein the deeds of all mankind
are recorded. In other words, it is like a ledger where the account of
the creditors and the debtors are registered on separate pages, one by
one. The thing that is understood, from this verse and the next verses,
is that all the deeds of the Wicked are registered in a book by the name
of ‘Sijjin’ and all the deeds of the Righteous are registered in another
book by the name of ‘Illiyin’.

The term /sijjin/ is based on /sijn/ which has different meanings, such
as: 'prison, hard, anything hard, a terrible place in the bottom of
Hell'; the place where the records of the Wicked are held, and it is a
proper name for the fire of Hell.

Tarihi says in Majma'-al-Bahrain for the root word of /sijn/:

*"It is mentioned in the commentary that it is 'a complete work '
comprising the deeds of the Wicked, of Jinn and of mankind.”*

(Tarih' has not made it clear as to whose commentary this is).

The symmetries that attest to the above idea are as follows:

1. The term

***/kitab/ ‘book',***

in cases like this in the Holy Qur’an, means 'Record'.

2. The last verse, which has come as a description for the term
'sijjin', says:

***“(It is) a Register (fully) inscribed”.***

Some commentators have not taken the verse as a description for
'sijjin', but, this idea certainly does not apply to the apparent
meaning of the words.

3. Some have said that the term /sijjin/ and /sijjil/ have the same
meaning. And we know that /sijjil/ means: 'a grand book'.

4. It is understood, from the verses of Qur'an, that the deeds of all
mankind are inscribed, in several books, so that no one will have any
excuse for their deeds.

The first 'book' is the personal record of the individuals, which will
be given to the hand of its owner: for the Righteous to their right
hand, and for the evildoers to their left hand; and there are many
verses, in the Qur'an, that verify this idea.

The second is the one that can be called 'The Record of the Sects', as
mentioned in Surah Jathiya, No.45, verse 28 which says:

***"...Every sect will be called to its Record...”.***

The third one is the Record of all humankind: The Wicked and the
Righteous. The 'book' that, in these verses and the following ones, has
been called 'Sijjin' for the former and 'Illiyin' for the latter.

In short, according to this commentary, 'Sijjin' is the ledger, the
complete work, in which all the deeds of the Wicked are recorded. It is
called 'Sijjin’, perhaps for the reason that its contents cause the
Wicked to be imprisoned in Hell. Or, the book, itself, is in the bottom
of Hell, in contrast with the book of the Righteous, which is in
'Illiyin’ of Heaven.

2. The second commentary says that 'Sijjin' means 'Hell', which is a
very big prison for the Wicked, or it is a terrible site in Hell, and
the meaning of

***'The Record of the Wicked'***

is 'the destiny of the Wicked' which is inscribed for them. Therefore,
the verse means: surely the destiny of the Wicked is in Hell. There are
many examples of the application of the meaning of the term 'book', in
the Holy Qur'an, with this sense.

For instance, in Surah Nisa, No. 4 verse 24, after saying that:

***"And (prohibited are) all married women except those whom your right
hands possess”,***

it says:

***“.../kitaballah 'alaykum/, (this is) Allah's ordiance to you...”.***

And, Surah Anfal, No.8, verse 75 says:

***“...kindred by blood have prior rights over each other in the
ordinance of Allah...”.***

The matter that attests to this commentary is that 'Sijjin' has been
commented on as being Hell, the same meaning as the narrations and
Islamic works have.

In the commentary of 'Ali-ibn-Ibrahim for the meaning of the verse:

***“Nay! Most surely the Record of the Wicked is (preserved) in
Sijjin”,***

it is said that: their appointed chastisement is in

***'Sijjin', (Hell).***

A narration from Imam Baqir (as) also says:

***“'Sijjin'***

*is the seventh earth and*

***'Illiyin'***

*is the seventh heaven (indicating the lowest and the highest places)”.*
[^11]

There are many narrations which say that the deeds which are not fit to
be accepted by Allah will descend and fall in Sijjin.

A tradition from the Prophet (S) says that:

*“Sometimes it happens that the appointed angel, for gathering up the
deeds of a servant, ascends joyfully with a good deed of the servant.
Then Allah says: 'Put it in Sijjin, because the servant did not seek My
Countenance in it'."*[^12]

On the whole, it is understood from the narrations that 'Sijjin' is a
very low place in Hell, where the wrong actions or the record of the
evil deeds of the Wicked are sent to, or their destiny is for them to be
imprisoned therein.

According to this commentary, the verse

***"(It is) in Record (fully) inscribed”***

is an emphasis on the verse

***"...Most surely the Record of the Wicked is (preserved) in
Sijjin,”***

(not as a commentary for Sijjin). Then the verse means that this is a
punishment inscribed for them, surely.

The term /marqum/ is based on /raqm/ 'large, bold writing' and since
these writings are clear and unambiguous, the term may refer to the
decisiveness and clearness of it.

These two commentaries can be considered together, because in the first
commentary 'Sijjin' means 'the ledger of the deeds of the Wicked', and
in the second one it means Hell or the bottom of the earth. And it is
clear that these are 'causes and effects' for each other. That is, when
the record of a person is registered in 'the ledger of the deeds of the
Wicked', it results in their being sent to the lowest point of Hell.

In the last verse of this portion, in a startling short sentence, the
end to come of those who deny the Resurrection is pointed out.

It says:

***"Woe That Day, to the deniers."***

It is the denial from which the various sins, including dealing in fraud
and transgression, originate. In the first verse it says:

***"Woe to the defrauders”,***

and now it says:

***"Woe, That Day, to the deniers",***

which briefly, but meaningfully, points to the kinds of painful and
horrible chastisements awaiting them.

It is noteworthy that in the first verse

***'the defrauders'***

and then in verse seven,

***'the Wicked'***

and in verse ten

***'the deniers'***

are mentioned. This shows that there is a close connection between
denying the Resurrection and those deeds. The relationship between these
will be dealt with more clearly in the following verses.

Surah Mutaffifin, Verses 11-17
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُكَذِّبُونَ بِيَوْمِ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يُكَذِّبُ بِهِ إِلَّا كُلُّ مُعْتَدٍ أَثِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِ آيَاتُنَا قَالَ أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا ۖ بَلْ ۜ رَانَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّهُمْ عَنْ رَبِّهِمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ لَمَحْجُوبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ إِنَّهُمْ لَصَالُو الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ يُقَالُ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. "Those who deny the Day of Judgement”***  
***12. "And none denies it but every Transgressor, the Sinner!”***  
***13. "When Our Signs are recited to him, he says: 'Myths of the
ancients’.”***  
***14. "Nay, Rather what they used to do has put rust upon their
hearts."***  
***15. “Nay, most surely on That Day they shall be debarred from their
Lord,”***  
***16. "Then, they will enter the fire of Hell."***  
***17. "Then it will be said (to them): ‘This is that which you used to
deny.”***

### Sin Works as Rust Upon the Heart

The previous verses made clear the dreadful end of the unbelievers. The
following verses begin with an introduction to unbelievers also.

It says:

***"Those who deny the Day of Judgement."***

***"And none denies it but every Transgressor, the Sinner”***

It means that the denial of the Day of Judgement is not based on
reasoning and logical thinking, but those who want to be oppressors,
whenever they wish, and to be the sinners of any corruption, take joy in
denying the Hereafter.

They want to continue their evil deeds, freely and without thinking
about their responsibilities. They do not pay attention to their
conscience. They know no laws. The case is similar as can be found in
Surah Qiyamat, No. 75, verse 5.

It says:

***"But man wishes to do wrong (even) in the time in front of him,”***

(then he denies the Hereafter).

Hence, as belief has an affect on deeds, the same evil deeds affect on
the formation of beliefs. This very idea will be divulged, clearly, in
the commentary of the next verses.

Now, the third characteristic of the deniers of the Hereafter is
mentioned.

It says:

***"When Our Signs are recited to him, he says: 'Myths of the ancients'
“.***

They are not only Transgressors and Sinners, but mock the Signs of Allah
and say that they are old myths like a series of ancient stories
belonging to the very early periods of man, which have no real value. In
this way, and under the pretext of calling them myths, they want to
withdraw themselves from the duties that the verses of the Qur'an define
for them.

The sinners raise the subject as an excuse to flee from the truth and do
not accept Allah’s invitation.

This idea is mentioned not only in this verse, but there are also nine
other verses that denote just the same matter, about the sinners, and
their excuse of calling these myths including Surah Furqan, No. 25,
verse 5, which says:

***"And they say': 'Tales of the ancients, which he has caused to be
written: and they are dictated before him morning and evening'."***

In Surah Ahqaf, No.46, verse 17 when an ungodly son is being advised by
his godly parents that the promise of Allah is true and all will be
called to life again, after death, he mocks their words and says:

***"...this is nothing but tales of the ancients."***

However, wrong doers always seek some vain excuses to make their
conscience content, on the one hand, and to get rid of the just people's
protests, on the other hand. It is a wonder how these kind of persons
have often had some similar behaviour, as if they had been whispering
the same things into each others ears throughout history, matters such
as: sorcery, divination, madness, myths and the like.

The Holy Qur'an points to the main origin of their wickedness in the
next verse where it says:

***"Nay! Rather what they used to do has put rust upon their hearts."***

What an alarming sense it is! What they do works as rust on their hearts
and vanishes the first light and the early brightness that is really
from the divine nature which Allah created in them. That is why the
characteristic of truth, the shine of Revelation; with its full beaming
brightness, does not reflect on their hearts.

The Qur'anic term /ran/ is based on /rayn/ (rust). As Raqib says in
Mufradat, it means: 'the coating or film formed on the precious things'.
And some other philologists meant it as 'the radish-brown or redish
yellow coating formed on iron or steel, and the like, by oxidation'; as
occurs during exposure to air and moisture and it is usually a sign of
the decay of the metal. Then, as a consequence, naturally its radiance
disappears.

There will be a description, under the title of 'Explanation' that you
will study later about the destructive effects of sin which dulls the
light and radiance of the heart, even to the point of wiping it out.

***"Nay! most surely on that Day they shall be debarred from their
Lord.”***

And this is the most painful punishment of the evildoers in contrast
with the spiritual meeting and the presence of the Righteous before
their Lord, which is the best of blessings and the highest reward for
them.

The term

***/kalla/ 'Nay'***

is usually used to negate a previous statement. For this case,
commentators have delivered many probabilities; some of which are as
follows:

It is an emphasis on the term

***'Nay',***

in the former verse, and it is not true what they say about the
Hereafter being myths of the ancients.

Or, it is not so that the rust, which sin causes upon their hearts, will
be wiped off. They shall be debarred from seeing Allah both in this
world and the Next.

Or, as it is said in some other verses of the Qur'an, that they think
that even if they are brought back to their Lord, they shall surely be
given some kind of blessings there.

It is not as they think, though, and they will have the worst
punishments and the most severe tortures in the Hereafter.

Truly, there will be a return, to us, of our worldly actions in the
Hereafter. Those who neglect the truth, in this life, and their deeds
have affected their hearts like rust, will be deprived from the Mercy of
Allah and will never be able to see His appearance in the spiritual
world, and they will never meet Him; the Sublime.

***“Then, they will enter the fire of Hell."***

This entrance into the fire, is the result of deprivation from Allah,
and nothing else. Verily, the heat of this deprivation is hotter then
the heat of the fire of Hell, itself.

### Explanations

#### Why Does Sin Work As Rust Upon The Heart?

Not only in this verse, but also in many other verses of the Holy Qur'an
it talks frankly about the effect of sin in darkening the heart.

Once, in Surah Mo'min, No.40, verse 35 it says:

***"Thus does Allah seal up every heart of arrogant obstinate
Transgressors.”***

Then another time, in Surah Baqarah, No. 2, verse 7 describing a group
of stubborn sinners, it says:

***“Allah hath set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing, and on
their eyes is a veil; great is the penalty they (incur).”***

And Surah Hajj, No. 22, verse 46 says:

***"Truly it is not their eyes that are blind, but their hearts which
are in their breasts.”***

Verily, the worst result of continual sinning is a heart sealed up,
which is the extinguisher of the light of knowledge. The substance of
sin flows from the limbs to the heart and changes it into something like
a stagnant swamp. It is in this condition that man cannot distinguish
between good and evil, and commits such horrific wrongs that everyone
becomes astonished.

This self-destructive sinner undermines himself and ruins his own
happiness by his own hands.

There is a tradition from the holy Prophet (S) which says:

*"Abundant sins cause the heart to decay.”*[^13]

And another tradition from him (S) says:

*"When a servant commits a sin, a black stain appears on his heart. If
he repents and leaves off committing the sin and asks for forgiveness
from Allah, his heart will be polished. And if he digresses again, the
stain will spread until it covers his heart completely.*

*This is the very rust that Allah has mentioned in the Holy Qurtan in
the verse that says:*

***'Nay! Rather what they used to do has put rust upon their
hearts'."***[^14]

The same idea has been narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) with a slight
difference in Usul-i-Kafi.

And in the same book, there is another tradition from the Prophet (S)
that says:

*"Speak with each other, and visit each other, and tell of the
traditions (of ours). Surely the traditions refine the hearts. Verily,
hearts become rusted as a sword does, and the traditions are the
polish.”*[^15]

It has also been proved psychologically that man's behaviour effects on
his soul and gradually varies it to that qualification. It is effective
in his thought and Judgment, even.

It is also notable that the more man continues sinning, the thicker the
darkness covers his soul until the point where he considers his evil
deeds as his good deeds and he is even sometimes proud of them. At this
time the back doors are shut and the bridges are broken for him to
return. This is the most dangerous position that a person can be in.

#### A Curtain Over The Spirit

Although many of the commentators have tried to insert something into
the verse:

***'Nay, most surely on That Day they shall be debarred from their
Lord',***

and say: the sinners shall be debarred from ‘the mercy' or 'the honour'
or 'the reward' of Allah, the verse apparently does not need anything
added, but, they are really debarred from Him; While the Righteous will
meet with Allah in Heaven and enjoy the greatest possible pleasure
there, where the Sinners, the Hellish Disbelievers, are deprived of that
(Him); the unmatched blessing.

Some good-doers of the believing people may have the emanation even in
this world, but the wrong doers never will.

In one respect, the former are always in front of Allah, but the latter
are so far from Him.

The Righteous are so delighted in supplicating to Him that it is
indescribable, but the sinners are so entangled with their sins that
they cannot be saved.

Amir-al-Mo'mineen Ali (as) says in his supplication called ‘Kumayl’:

*“Supposing that I am able to endure Thy chastisement, how can I endure
separation from Thee?”*

Surah Mutaffifin, Verses 18-28
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْأَبْرَارِ لَفِي عِلِّيِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا عِلِّيُّونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كِتَابٌ مَرْقُومٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَشْهَدُهُ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْأَبْرَارَ لَفِي نَعِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ يَنْظُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعْرِفُ فِي وُجُوهِهِمْ نَضْرَةَ النَّعِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسْقَوْنَ مِنْ رَحِيقٍ مَخْتُومٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خِتَامُهُ مِسْكٌ ۚ وَفِي ذَٰلِكَ فَلْيَتَنَافَسِ الْمُتَنَافِسُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِزَاجُهُ مِنْ تَسْنِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَيْنًا يَشْرَبُ بِهَا الْمُقَرَّبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

>  {28}

***18. “Nay, verily the Record of the Righteous is (preserved) In
‘Illiyin’,”***  
***19. "And what explains to thee what ‘Illiyin’ is?"***  
***20 “(It is) a written record,”***  
***21. “(Which is) witnessed by the ones Nearest (to Allah).”***  
***22. “Surely the Righteous will be in Bliss:”***  
***23. “(Sitting) on thrones (of Dignity), they will command a sight (of
all things):”***  
***24. "You will recognize in their faces the radiance of Bliss”***  
***25. “Their thirst will be slaked with pure drink sealed”***  
***26. “Whose seal is musk, and for that let (all) those strive who
strive (fo Bliss)”***  
***27. “And whose mixture is of 'Tasnim’ “***  
***28. “A spring from which drink the ones Nearest (to Allah).”***

### ‘Illiyin is Anticipating the Righteous

In contrast to the destiny of the Record of the Wicked, which was
described in the previous verses, the following verses talk about the
Righteous, whose honour and merits, compared with those of the Wicked,
will make the situations of them, both, more clear.

At first, to negate their false thoughts about the resurrection, it
says:

***“Nay, verily the Record of the Righteous is (preserved) in
‘Illiyin’.”***

The term /'illiyin/ is the plural form of /‘ulayy /which basically means
'properly, High places or the persons who sit in high places, or the
dwellers of high parts of the mountains'. Some commentators have
rendered it, here, to mean 'a name of the upper part of the skies or
upper part of Heaven'.

Some have also said that the term is mentioned in the plural form for
emphasis where it means 'highness over highness'.

Furthermore, similar to the two commentaries we had about 'Sijjin', in
the former verses, we have the same about ''Illiyin', as well.

The first commentary says that /kitab-al-abrar/ means 'the Record of the
Righteous'. They intend to say that the record of their deeds is
registered in a ledger, (a complete work), which shows the whole deeds
of all believers, and is in a very high and honourable position.

Or, it means that their record is preserved in the highest and the most
honourable abode in Heaven over their places, all of which illustrate
that their own rank is extremely high. A tradition from the Prophet (S)
says that ' 'Illiyin' is the seventh sky and is below the throne of
Allah'. And this is just contrary to the record of the Wicked, which is
in the lowest part of Hell.

The second commentary says that /kitab/, here, means 'destiny' and 'the
definite end' that Allah has defined for the Righteous in the highest
levels of Heaven.

Of course, these two commentaries can also both come together, i.e.
their Record is registered in a ledger and the ledger resides totally in
heaven. Meanwhile, the Divine command governs high over them concerning
the position of the Righteous, themselves, and considers them to be in
the highest levels of Heaven.

Then, to make the greatness and the highness of ' 'Illiyin’ clear, it
goes on to say:

***“And what explains to thee what ' 'Illiyin’ is?”***

This means that it is a position beyond the imagination and
comprehension, so high that no one, not even the Prophet (S), can know
the peak of its highness.

Then, the Qur'an, itself, explains it further and says:

***“(lt is) a written record”.***

This idea is according to the commentary that means: ''Illiyin’ is a
ledger for the righteous deeds, while according to the second commentary
the verse means that this is a decisive destiny that Allah has written
for the Righteous that their position is in the highest stages of
Heaven.

(Note: Therefore, 'a written record' is an interpretation for 'the
Record of the Righteous' not for ''Illiyin’).

***"(Which is) witnessed by the ones Nearest (to Allah)”.***

Some of the commentators have interpreted the meaning of 'the ones
Nearest (to Allah) ' mentioned in this verse, as being 'the angels that
are close to the throne of Allah’, the guardians for the record or the
destiny of the Righteous.

The next verses express clearly, that a special group of the elected
believers are 'the ones Nearest (to Allah)' who possess a very high rank
and are witnesses to the records of the others from the Righteous.

As Surah Waqi'ah, No. 56, verses 10-11, with the names of the following
two groups:

***'The Companions of the Right Hand'***

and

***'The Companions of the Left Hand',***

say:

***"And those foremost (in faith) will be foremost (in the
Hereafter)”,***

***“These will be those Nearest (to Allah)”.***

And Surah Nahll, No. 16, verse 89, which says:

***"One day We shall raise from all peoples a witness against them, from
amongst themselves: and We shall bring thee as a witness against
them...”.***

Then, concerning a part of the rewards of the Righteous, it says:

***"Surely the Righteous will be in Bliss."***

The basic meaning of the term /na'im/, as Raqib says, is 'immense
blessing'. Besides that, it is mentioned in an 'indefinite form' which,
here, denotes to its greatness and importance. That is, they possess the
blessings and comforts that are indescribable. And this is a complete
and hidden definition referring to the whole material and spiritual
blessings of Heaven.

Then, to describe some of them, it says:

***“(Sitting) on thrones (of Dignity), they will command a sight (of all
things)”.***

The term /ara'ik/ is the plural form of /arikah/ 'throne'. Basically, it
is used with the meaning of 'a beautiful royal throne', or 'a couch for
the bride in the nuptial chamber', but, here, it means 'highly decorated
seats in Heaven where the Righteous sit'.

The term

***/yanzurun/ ‘they look'***

is mentioned, here, without any object or objects and is to be meant in
a broad sense: i.e. they look at Allah's Mercy, His unique essence, the
variety of Divine blessings and the surprising beauties in Heaven.

***'They look',***

because one of man's pleasures is 'the pleasure of sight'.

Thereafter it says:

***"You will recognize in their faces the radiance of Bliss."***

It means that a special refreshment and delight is seen on their faces,
so that you need not question them. On the contrary, when you look at
the Wicked, you can see grief and sorrow together with pain and misery
on their faces.

The term /nadrah/, as it was mentioned before, means a special
refreshment and happiness resulting from the abundance of blessing and
comfort seen on the faces of well-off people.

After discussing about the blessings of 'throne', 'look', and 'ease with
happiness', it refers to another blessing: The pure drink of the
Righteous.

It says:

***"Their thirst will be slaked with pure drink sealed”.***

The pure drink of the Next World is not like the devilish drink of this
world. It does not bring alcoholism and madness, for committing sin in
them, hut, it increases their wisdom and intelligence safely and with
complete joy.

Most of the commentators have interpreted the term /rahiq/ in the sense
of 'pure drink', a drink that is not obscene and is not of a polluted
mixture; it is flawless.

And the term

***/maxyum /'sealed'***

is used as an emphasis for its pureness, soundness, and a state of being
intact.

Moreover, the use of such complete containers is a high honor and
respect to the guests; a sealed container whose lid will be opened only
by the guests.

***"Whose seal is musk...”***

The pure drink of Heaven is not the same as the sealed wine bottles of
this world which are closed tightly sometimes with a wafer of molten wax
(or clay) into which is pressed the distinctive seal of the sender or
the company, that may make the hands dirty when opening them, but it is
sealed with musk and, when it is being opened, it smells like the
perfume of musk.

At the end of the same verse it says:

***"...and for that let (all) those strive who strive (for Bliss).”***

Tabarsi, the great commentator, says in Majma'-al-Bayan that the term,
/tanafas/, means that two persons long for a worthy thing, each of which
tries to obtain the same precious thing that the other one has.

In Majma'-al-Bahrain the term, /tanafas/, is defined in the sense of
'proceeding the other, or friendly competition'. Each of them wishes and
tries to own the precious thing that the other has.

Raqib in Mufradat says: /munafasah/ means 'a man's attempt to be
associated with the outstanding people and joining them without causing
harm to others'.

In fact, the meaning of this verse is similar to that of Surah Hadid,
No. 57, verse 21, which says:

***“Be you foremost (in seeking) forgiveness from your Lord, and a
Garden (of Bliss), the width whereof is as the width of heaven and
earth...”.***

Or, it is similar to the meaning of Surah ali-’Imran-, No. 3, Verse 133,
which says:

***"Be quick in the race for forgiveness from your Lord, and for a
Garden whose width is that of the heavens and the earth...”***

However, the meaning of the verse is the nicest one that can be
considered for the encouragement of men, to send them forth for
receiving these unmatched blessings by the way of true faith and good
deeds. It is a very wonderful evidence to show the eloquence of the Holy
Qur'an.

***"And whose mixture is of 'Tasnim'"***

***“A spring from which drink the ones Nearest (to Allah)".***

It is understood from these verses that /tasnim/ is the highest drink,
among the heavenly pure drinks, which the ones Nearest to Allah drink,
only, but the Righteous drink some of /tasnim/, which is mixed with

***/rahiq/, 'the pure drink sealed',***

which is another kind of pure drink in Heaven.

Some commentators believe that this pure drink is called /tasnim
/because this spring flows down from Heaven, while some others say that
it is a special drink which falls from the sky of Heaven.

The heavenly drinks are different, indeed. Some of them flow in rivers,
as many verses of the Qur'an point out, such as is found in Surah
Muhammad, No. 47, Verse 15:

***“...rivers of milk... rivers of wine... rivers of honey...”***

And some of them are in sealed containers, like the one mentioned in the
former verses. The most important one is the drink which falls from
Heaven whose name is 'Tasnim', the one that none of the other drinks, in
Heaven, can be compared with. Then, the effect that it has on the soul
of the Righteous is, consequently, the deepest and the most attractive,
whose spiritual pleasure is indescribable.

It is necessary to make note of this truth, again, that these are only
some hints to those heavenly facts, indeed, because our human vocabulary
cannot describe the unique blessings of Heavens completely.

And even more than that, no one can imagine them, as Surah Sajdah, No.
32, verse 17 says:

***"Now no person knows what delights of the eye are kept hidden (in
reserve) for them...”***

### Explanation: Who are 'the Righteous' and 'the Ones Nearest to Allah'?

The names of

***/abrar/ 'the righteous'***

and

***/muqarrabun/ 'the ones Nearest to Allah'***

are frequently highly mentioned in the Holy Qur'an along with their rank
and their rewards.

They are so high that as Surah ali-’Imran, No. 3, verse 193 says that

***'The men of Understanding'***

ask Allah that their souls be taken to Himself in the company of the
Righteous.

And there are many great rewards mentioned, for them, in the Qur'an
including Surah al-Insan, No. 7s6, verses 5-22 and, also, Surah Infitar,
No. 82, verse 13 and some other verses in Surah Mutaffifin talk about
Allah’s Grace, to them, as well.

The term

***/abrar/ 'the Righteous'***

is the plural form of /birr/ and they are the believers who have a great
soul and a firm belief and do good deeds.

***‘The ones Nearest to Allah', /muqarrabun/,***

are those who have a close position to Allah.

Then, it seems that all

***'the ones Nearest to Allah'***

are among the

***Righteous, /abrar/,***

but all of the latter,

***Righteous /abrar/,***

are not among

***'The ones Nearest to Allah'.***

There is a narration, from Imam Hassan Mujtaba (the second Imam) which
says:

*"By Allah, everywhere in the Qur'an where Allah says*

***/inn-al-abrar/ (surely the Righteous),***

*He means no one save Ali-ibn-Abu Talib, Fatimah, me, and Hosain" (as).*
[^16]

Undoubtedly, the five holy ones, i.e. Muhammad, Ali, Fatimah, Hassan and
Hosain (as) are the most clear examples of the Righteous and

***'the ones Nearest to Allah';***

and, as it was mentioned in the commentary of Surah al-Insan, No. 76,
the very Surah is mainly about Amir-al-Mo'mineen Ali, Fatimah, Hassan
and Hosain. Eighteen verses of Surah al-Insan are especially about their
achievements, though the revelation of the verses about them does not
hinder the broadness and generality of the meaning of those verses.

#### Heavenly Drinks

It is clearly understood, from many of the verses of the Holy Qur'an,
that there are numerous kinds of pure drink with many names and various
qualities, in Heaven, that are entirely different from the worldly
impure beverages; which are the origins of enmity, murder, and
corruption.

They are offensive, distasteful, and impure. But, the drinks of Heaven
are sweet-smelling, perfumed, and purified, so that they increase
wisdom, pleasure, and love. Those who drink of them will languor in a
kind of spiritual joy and delight that cannot be described.

Two varieties of the drinks of Heaven are named in these verses:

/tasnim/ and /rahiq-i-maxtum/, while some other varieties are mentioned
in Surah al-Insan, No. 76, and even other Surahs of the Qur'an, each of
which are appropriately explained.

It is interesting to note that the Divine drinks are also the reward for
those who avoid drinking the worldly alcoholic drinks, as well as those
who quench the needs of the deprived and extinguish the fire of sadness
in the hearts of the believers.

Once the holy Prophet (S) told Hazrat Ali (as):

*"O Ali! the person who leaves drinking wine, Allah will make him a
drink from 'the pure drink sealed,”.*[^17]

And, it is even more interesting to find that another tradition from him
(S) says that if a person leaves off drinking wine even for the sake of
anything besides Allah, He will make him drink from the pure drink.

Hazrat Ali (as) says:

*“I questioned him 'the sake of anything save Allah? ",*

and he answered:

*"Yes, the person who avoids drinking wine for the sake of protecting
his life, Allah will make him a drink from the pure drink
sealed'".*[^18]

Verily, those who avoid drinking wine for the sake of their health are
in fact from

***'the men of Understanding'.***

And, as it is understood in Surah ali-'Imran, No. 3, verse 193 that

***'the men of Understanding'***

are also among the Righteous, who drink from the pure drinks of Heaven.

A narration from Ali-ibn-Hosain (as) says:

*"The person who quenches the thirst of a believer, Allah will make him
a drink from 'the pure drink sealed”.*[^19]

And, another narration says:

*“The person who fasts on a hot day in summer for the sake of Allah, He
will make him a drink from 'the pure drink sealed'."*[^20]

Surah Mutaffifin, Verses 29-36
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ أَجْرَمُوا كَانُوا مِنَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا يَضْحَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا مَرُّوا بِهِمْ يَتَغَامَزُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا انْقَلَبُوا إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِمُ انْقَلَبُوا فَكِهِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا رَأَوْهُمْ قَالُوا إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ لَضَالُّونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أُرْسِلُوا عَلَيْهِمْ حَافِظِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْيَوْمَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنَ الْكُفَّارِ يَضْحَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ يَنْظُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ ثُوِّبَ الْكُفَّارُ مَا كَانُوا يَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. "Surely those who committed sin used to laugh at those who
believed,”***  
***30. "And when they passed by them, they were winking at one another
(in mockery;)"***  
***31. "And when they returned to their people they returned
jesting,”***  
***32. "And when they saw them, they said: 'Surely these have gone
astray’”.***  
***33. "While they had not been sent as guardians over them!”***  
***34. "So, on this Day (of Judgement) the Believers win laugh at the
Unbelievers:"***  
***35."(Sitting) on thrones (of Dignity) they will command (a sight) (of
all things)".***  
***36. "Have not the Unbelievers been paid back for what they used to
do?"***

### The Occasion of Revelation

The commentators have quoted two occasions of revelation for these
verses:

The first is that: Once Hazrat Ali (as) and some of the believers, were
passing by a number of pagans from Mecca when the pagans laughed at them
and mocked them, then the above verses were revealed and made their
destiny clear on the Day of Judgment.

Hakim Abu-Qasim Haskani has narrated from Ibn-i-Abbas in
Shavahid-al-Tanzil that: The phrase 'those who were guilty' targeted the
hypocrites of Quraish and 'those who believed' meant 'Ali-ibn-i-Abutalib
and his devotees.

The second occasion of revelation is that the above verse has been
revealed about some people such as: 'Ammar, Suhayb, Khabbab, Bilal, and
some others of the poor believers who were mocked by some pagans of
Quraish like Abujahl, Walid-ibn-Muqayrah, and 'as-ibn-Wa'il.

These two occasions of revelation can both be considered together, too.

### Once They Used to Mock the Believers But, Today…

The previous verses talked about the great rewards and the blessings of
the Righteous, while these verses point to a part of the troubles and
the difficulties that the believers may be faced with, in this life, for
their Faith and Righteousness, to show that those great rewards are not
undue.

These verses speak about the position of the pagans and their revolting
treatment against the believers. Four varieties of their revolting
behavior are mentioned here.

First, it says:

***"Surely those who committed sin used to laugh at those who
believed.”***

They arrogantly laughed at them to insult them. And the wicked have
always been, in this world, smug against the believers.

By the way, the application of the term

***/ajramu /'those who committed sin'***

instead of the term /kafaru/ 'those who disbelieved' makes it clear that
the disbelievers can be known by their sinful deeds since disbelief is
always the origin of mischief.

In the next verse, the second wrong action of the unbelievers is
mentioned, where it says:

***"And when they passed by them, they were winking at one another (in
mockery)”.***

In this way and by these innuendoes and sarcasm's the unbelievers,
having evil motives, want to say that: 'Look! these poor people say that
they are the nearest to Allah: and claim that the divine verses are
revealed for them. Look! these foolish people say that the dry and
rotten bones will be called to life again!’. Unbelievers usually say
some unbecoming and nonsensical words like this.

It seems that the unbelievers" laughs were obviously done when the
believers passed by them and their mocking sarcasm's were meted out when
they passed by the believers. And since they could not laugh at the
believers and mock them easily, they winked and made gestures to convey
their thoughts to each other. But, when they were in their own
gatherings and the believers passed by them they could commit their
evils more freely and boldly.

The term /yataqamazun/ is derived from /qamz/ which means: 'to point or
wink at anyone or anything which is the object of criticism’. And
sometimes this word is used for any fault-finding, even when it is done
orally.

This refers to their behavior when they met the believers. But when they
went home and they had private meetings with their family members and
their relatives they continued mocking in the absence of the believers.
They explained happily how they had mocked them.

So the next verse says:

***"And when they returned to their people they returned Jesting".***

They talked to each other so proudly and boastingly as if they had won a
great victory.

The term /fakihin/ is the plural form of /fakih/ which is based on
/fakahah/ which means 'to be joyful' and 'to laugh'. It is originally
derived from /fakihah /with the meaning of ‘fruit'. It seems that these
frivolities and amusements are like sweet juicy fruit of which they find
pleasure in. Also, friendly sweet speaking is called /fukahah/.

Though the term /ahl/ usually means ‘family' and 'relatives', it may
have a broader meaning, here, and includes 'close friends', too.

Their fourth evil action against the believers was that:

***"And when they saw them, they said 'Surely these have gone
astray'.”***

Since the believers had left the belief and the worship of the gods that
the unbelievers used to follow, so, the wrongdoers thought of the
believers Faith; believing in Allah, as a wrong way and said that they
had gone astray.

The type of behavior that the unbelievers had may refer to the early
period of Islam, when they did not think of the Divine Religion as a
serious and everlasting one. Therefore, they laughed and mocked it.

But, gradually, when groups of people came to Islam and the unbelievers
felt threatened, they stood firmly and step by step they intensified
their enmity. The verse above depicts the first stage of their enmity
against the Muslims; the one that gradually changed into several bloody
battles in later stages.

Since the believers were mostly from among the poor people who had not
possessed high ranks in their society or a great deal of money, the
unbelievers regarded them as lowly and counted their faith unworthy,
and, consequently, mocked them and their belief.

***"While they had not been sent as guardians over them!”***

With what right and according to what rationale do they find fault with
the believers?

The rich and the arrogant, from the sect of Noah, told him:

***"...We see (in) you nothing but a man like ourselves; nor do we see
that any follow you but the lowliest”***[^21]***.***

And he answered:

***"...Nor yet do I say, of those whom your eyes despise that Allah will
not grant them (all) that is good: Allah knoweth best: what is in their
soul...”***[^22]

This is, in fact, an answer to those arrogant braggarts saying that it
is none of their business what type of people the believers are. They
should notice the message of Allah in the invitation of the Prophet (S)
to Islam.

But, in the Hereafter the tables will be turned as in the next verse:

***“So, on this Day (of Judgement) the Believers will laugh at the
Unbelievers."***

It is because the Day of Judgment is a day that, according to Divine
Justice, everyone will receive the results, of his own deeds, which he
incurred in this world. All these tricks and falsehoods will be shown or
what they really are, and that is why the Believers will laugh at the
Unbelievers; which is, itself, a kind of painful punishment for the
arrogant ones.

Some narration's, from the Prophet (S), denote that on that Day a door
in Heaven will be opened to the disbelievers and they, thinking that
they are free from the fire of Hell, go toward it. But, when they reach
the door, it will be closed quickly. This will occur several times and
the Believers, watching them from Heaven, will laugh.

***“(Sitting) on thrones (of dignity) they will command a sight (of all
things)".***

What will they be looking at? They will be looking at the immense
Blessings of Eternity; at the Great Gifts therein; at His endless Grace;
at the Dignity and Respect together with the calmness they have n
Heaven, and at the painful chastisement that the obstinate arrogant
Unbelievers are faced with in Hell.

Finally, in an interrogative sentence, the last verse questions:

***"Have not the Unbelievers been recompensed for what they used to do
''***

This statement, whether coming from the side of Allah, or of the angels,
or from the Believers, is a type of sarcasm leveled at the imaginations
and the claims of the arrogant Unbelievers, who expected to receive
rewards and prizes from Allah for their vices.

To confront the vanity of these wrong imaginations, it says:

***"Have not the Unbelievers been recompensed for what they used to
do?”***

Some of the commentators have counted this sentence as a separate and
independent sentence while some others have considered it as dependent
on the previous verse; i.e. the Righteous are sitting on their decorated
thrones and looking to see whether the wicked have received the merit of
their wrong actions. Verily, they should get their reward from Satan.
Can the cursed Satan give them any reward?

The term /thuwibb/ is based on /thaub/ which basically means 'to return
to the original state', or 'to return to a place to which one has come
before', and /thawab/ is said for a recompense or the reward which is
given to a person for his deeds, since it is the result of his deeds
which returns to him.

This term is used for the compensation of a good action and an evil one
both, but more specially and more frequently for good ones. Therefore,
the above mentioned verse denotes a sort of sarcasm to the Unbelievers,
and it must be so, because they used to mock both the Believers and the
Messages of Allah, so, on That Day, they should be paid back for their
mockeries which they committed in this world.

Supplication
------------

*O Lord! Save all of us from pride, ignorance, and vanity.*

*O Lord! Grant us the spirit of justice, truthfulness, and humility.*

*O Lord! Set our Record in ''Illiyin' and take it out from 'Sijjin'.*

[^1]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 451.

[^2]: Thawab-ul-a’mal, based on Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 527.

[^3]: Tafsir Fakhr-i-Razi, vol. 31, p. 88.

[^4]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 452.

[^5]: Surah Maryam, No. 19. verse 37

[^6]: Usul-i-Kafi, based on Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 527

[^7]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 452.

[^8]: Borhan, Commmentary, vol. 4, p. 38.

[^9]: Nur-al-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 528.

[^10]: Al-Kafi, vol. 5, Chapter: 'Trade'.

[^11]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 530, Tradition 15

[^12]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol, 5, p. 530, Tradition 19

[^13]: Durr-al-manthur, vol. 6, p. 326.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 325.

[^15]: Nur-uth-Theqalayn, vol. 5, p. 531, Traditions 22 and 23.

[^16]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 533 (Tradition 33).

[^17]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 534 (Tradition 35).

[^18]: Ibid.

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 456.

[^21]: Surah Hud No. 11, verse 27

[^22]: Surah Hud No. 11, verse 31


