Surah Inshiqaq, Chapter 84
==========================

**(The Rending Asunder)**

**Number of Verses: 25**

(After reading certain verses of Qur'an it is an obligation to do
prostration after their recitation, so we have chosen this mark \* to
help you find these verses within the text.)

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

This Surah, like many other Surahs of the last part of the holy Qur'an,
talks about the Resurrection. First, there are some references to the
awful events of the time when this world ends and the New World begins.

Then, it speaks about the resurrection and The Reckoning of the
good-doers and evildoers and their ultimate end. Further, it refers to
the deeds and beliefs of the disbelievers which bring about Allah’s
punishment on them. And then, after some oaths, it touches on the
different stages man goes through during and after his life. Finally, it
returns to speaking about the good and evil actions of man and his
rewards or punishments on That Day.

The Virtue In Studying This Surah
---------------------------------

There is a tradition from the Prophet (S) which says:

*"He who studies Surah Inshiqaq Allah will make him safe from being
given his Record from behind his back (on the reckoning Day)”.*

There is a narration from Imam Sadiq, written in the book
‘Thawab-al-A'mal', which says:

*"He who recites those two Surahs: Infitar and Inshiqaq, and considers
them present before his eyes in his obligatory and optional prayers,
nothing will separate him from Allah. He will be in he continuous
presence of Allah and Allah will be looking over him until all of the
accounts he has with others are settled."*

Surah Inshiqaq, Verses 1-9
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا السَّمَاءُ انْشَقَّتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَذِنَتْ لِرَبِّهَا وَحُقَّتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْأَرْضُ مُدَّتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَلْقَتْ مَا فِيهَا وَتَخَلَّتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَذِنَتْ لِرَبِّهَا وَحُقَّتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنْسَانُ إِنَّكَ كَادِحٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ كَدْحًا
فَمُلَاقِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِيَمِينِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَوْفَ يُحَاسَبُ حِسَابًا يَسِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَنْقَلِبُ إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. "When the Sky is rent asunder,”***  
***2. "And obeys its Lord, and it must;"***  
***3. "And when the Earth is flattened out,”***  
***4. "And casts forth what is within it and becomes empty,”***  
***5. "And obeys its Lord, and it must;”***  
***6. "O man! Surely you are ever toiling on towards your Lord;
painfully toiling, until you meet Him."***  
***7. "Then he who is given his Record in his right hand,”***  
***8. "Soon he will be reckoned with by an easy reckoning,”***  
***9. "And he will return unto his people in joy."***

### A Hard Struggle Towards Absolute Perfection:

As it was said in the description of the content of the Surah, at the
beginning of the Surah it talks about the awful and amazing events which
will happen at the end of this world.

It says:

***"When the Sky is rent asunder,”***

(and the celestial bodies burst asunder and lose their order and
regularity).

An idea similar to that is mentioned at the beginning of Surah Infitar,
No. 82, verses 1-2 where it says:

***"When the Sky is cleft asunder,”***

***"When the planets are scattered",***

and this is an announcement for the destruction and the end to this
material world.

***"And obeys its Lord, and it must;"***

No one might suppose that the Sky, which is great and seemingly vast and
limitless, would have the least resistance against this divine order.
It, like an obedient person, resigns to the Order, perfectly.

The term /athinat/ is derived from /uthun/ 'ear' meaning 'to listen to';
and here, metaphorically means 'to obey the Command'.

The term /huqqat/ is based on /haqq/ and means 'fit, need, or deserve'.

How can the earth and the sky not obey when they are created things and
they must necessarily obey their Creator since their very nature as a
created being requires that they must hearken to the call of their
Creator, and they not only did so from the beginning as Surah Fussilat,
No. 41 verse 11 says:

***"...they said 'we do come (together), in willing obedience’",***

but they also obey Allah’s' command for their dissolution.

Some have also said that the purpose of the term /huqqat/ is that the
fear of the Hereafter is so terrible that the Sky deserves to be cleft
asunder. However, the first commentary seems more fitting.

Then it points to the state of the earth and says:

***"And when the Earth is flattened out''.***

Many verses in the Qur'an say that mountains will be uprooted, totally,
and left as plains; smooth and level, and the earth will be flattened
and large enough for all human beings to gather on.

This is said in Surah ‘Ta-ha No. 20, verses 105-107:

***"They ask thee concerning the Mountains: say, 'My Lord will uproot
them and scatter them as dust;'”***

***"He will leave them as plains smooth and level;"***

***''Nothing crooked or curved will thou see in their place".***

And the Great Judgment, where all human beings, from the beginning to
the end, are gathered, needs such a large and level place.

Some commentators have said that on That Day Allah spreads the present
earth, much larger than it is now, in order to make room enough for all
of His creatures.

***"And casts forth what is within it and becomes empty."***

The consensus of scholars say that the meaning of the verse is that the
Earth will suddenly cast forth what it has within its soil, of dead
bodies, who will then have a re-birth for the eternal life.

This is the same idea set forth in Surah Zilzal, No. 99, verse 2:

***"And the Earth throws up her burdens (from within)."***

And, it is also similar to what is said in Surah Nazi’at, No. 79, verses
13-14:

***"But it shall be only a single blast,”***

***"When, behold, they shall be in the awakened state."***

Some commentators have said that besides human beings, mines and
treasures, hidden within the soil, will erupt.

It is also probable that the verse refers to the idea that molten lava,
within the earth, will be carried out by violent and terrible
earthquakes which then covers the surface of the earth and makes it
level. Thereafter, the interior of the earth will be empty and quiet.

All of the above three commentaries, combined, are also possible.

***"And obeys its Lord, and it must."***

These events, which correlate with the submission of all creatures,
indicate the destruction of the universe: the earth, the sky, treasures
which, all-in-all, come to an end and give way to a new stage of life;
the Eternal life.

Moreover, as signs, they make it clear that Allah domain is over
everything, especially the Resurrection.

Verily, man will be faced with the result of his actions; good or evil,
when these events occur.

Then, addressing mankind, it tells them of the fate on their path:

***“O man! Surely you are ever toiling on towards your Lord; painfully
toiling, until you meet Him.”***

The term /kadh/ means ' toil ' and 'labour', or 'striving hard’.

In the commentaries of 'Kashshaf ' and 'Fakhr-i-Razi' and also
'Ruh-al-Amin' the term has been meant as 'a scratch on the skin of the
body'. That is why it is used for the struggles which affect man's
spirit.

This verse points to a great principle throughout everyone's life. It
says that this life is perpetually saturated with pain and labour, when
it is for obtaining the articles of this world, and even more so for the
eternal happiness and for gaining Allah’s favour. This is the nature of
this world. Even those who live a very good life are not at all free
from pain and labour.

The term

***'meet'***

used in this verse refers to either the meeting at the Gathering Place,
in the Hereafter, before the throne of Allah’s Absolute Judgment for
all, or meeting His Reward or Punishment, or meeting Him through one's
intuition, and shows that the pain and the labour will continue until
That Day. When it finishes, one meets his Lord after death, with one's
pure and good deeds, of course.

man, in the sense of all human beings, and stressing on the humanity of
the human, is addressed by the verse, and this tells us the fact that
Allah has created the required faculties in man to pave the way from the
beginning to the end.

The emphasis on the term

***'Lord'***

points to another fact. That is, that this troublesome effort of life is
a part of the Divine program towards man's development.

Verily, we are travellers, from nothing, who have entered the realm of
existence and are going to the Abode of Love with the hope that we shall
meet Him.

This idea is mentioned in some other verses, of the Qur'an.

For example, in Surah Najm, No. 53, verse 42 it says:

***"That to thy Lord is the final Goal”.***

And also in Surah Fatir, No. 35, verse 18 it says:

***“...and the destination (of all) is to Allah."***

And there are also other verses, in the Qur'an, all of which denote that
the permanent process of development for all creatures is unto Almighty
Allah.

But, here, men are divided into two groups, as it says:

***"Then he who is given his Record in his right hand,”***

***“Soon he will be reckoned with by an easy reckoning,”***

***“And he will return unto his people in joy."***

This group of people are those who act and use their gifts in the same
way that Allah has guided man to do. All their efforts and endeavours
are for the sake of Allah and their entire movements are always unto
Allah.

There, they are given their Records in their right hand and that shows
the purity of their deeds, the correctness of their faith, and their
deliverance in the Hereafter that will bring them joy and happiness; an
honour to all human beings gathered there.

When they stand in front of the Scale (for reckoning), that which is
very just, Allah reckons with them easily: He forgives them of their
faults and, because of their strong faith and good acts, changes their
sins into good deeds.

Some commentators have said that the meaning of 'an easy reckoning ' is
an account which is taken easily and not with accuracy and severity; in
which sins are forgiven and good deeds are given reward.

There is a tradition from the Prophet (S) which says:

*"Allah takes the account easy of he who has three characteristics and
lets him go into Heaven with His Mercy.”*

*“What are they?"*

They asked, and he answered,

*"To be generous to the person who deprived you; to join to the one who
ceased from you; and to forgive those who hurt you”.*

This matter is also understood from some narrations that accuracy and
severity with reckoning, in the Hereafter, depends on one's wisdom and
knowledge, as a narration from Imam Baqir (as) says:

*"In the Hereafter and on the Day of Judgment, Allah, the Almighty, will
exact a detailed account from his servants, in exact proportion to the
reason with which He has endowed them in the worldly life".*[^1]

The opinions for the commentary about /ahl /are divided. Some
commentators have said that the objective meaning is 'one's believing
wife and children' that only believers will obtain in Heaven. The very
thing, that a person meets his beloved members, in Heaven, and is with
them there, is a great blessing in itself.

Some other commentators have said that it means 'the angels belonging to
the believing servants in Heaven'. Still others have meant /ahl/ as the
believing persons whom were loved by one in this life and they were on
the same level with him.

All of them combined are also probable.

### Explanations

#### A Surprising Narration!

It is narrated from Amir-al-Mo’mineen Ali (as) who commented about the
verse:

***“When the Sky is rent asunder"***

and said:

*''The skies will separate from the galaxy”.*

This narration is meaningful and noteworthy. It is considered among the
miracles of science. It opens a secret which none of the scientists of
that time knew.

But, nowadays astronomers, with the help of their observations through
their great and powerful telescopes, have proven that the universe is a
collection of galaxies, each of which is in the form of many systems and
stars, and that is why they are called 'star cities'. The Milky Way, a
known galaxy, is visible at night and is a great collection of these
very systems and stars.

One side of it is so far from us that its stars seem to be only a
massive white cloud, but actually it is a group of lights close
together, indeed.

The other side of it, which is nearer to us, is formed by visible stars;
the same stars which we see in the sky at night. Then, our solar system
is a part of this galaxy; the Milky Way.

According to the above narration, Hazrat Ali (as) says that at the
threshold of the Hereafter the stars that we primarily see in the sky
will separate from the galaxy and lose their order completely.

In those days, no one knew that the stars we see in the sky were really
parts of the Milky Way, but only he whose heart was connected to the
unseen world and whose knowledge was derived from the divine source
could know.

### This Life is Full of Pain and Labour

The term /kadih/, used in the verse, denotes that every effort and
endeavour is with pain and trouble. The verse addresses all individuals
and states the fact that the nature of life, in this world at any stage,
is full of toil and misery, bodily, mentally or both, combined, and no
one is an exception.

There is a very meaningful tradition narrated from Imam
Ali-ibn-al-Hosain (as) which says:

*"There is no ease and comfort in the world for the people of this
world. It is found only in Heaven and for the people of Heaven. Toil and
labour are in this world and for the people of this world.*

*Each one of them who gets a share of it, has doubled the greed. And
those who have more property and things of this world are more needful,
because they need other people and some tools to keep and protect the
things that they have accumulated. Then, there is no comfort in the
wealth of this world.”*

So Imam (as) adds at the end that:

*"Nay, the friends of Allah never bear pain in this world for this
world, but they bear it in this world for the Next World."*[^2]

Surah Inshiqaq, Verses 10-15
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ وَرَاءَ ظَهْرِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَوْفَ يَدْعُو ثُبُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَصْلَىٰ سَعِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ كَانَ فِي أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ ظَنَّ أَنْ لَنْ يَحُورَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلَىٰ إِنَّ رَبَّهُ كَانَ بِهِ بَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. "But he who is given his Record behind his back,”***  
***11. "Soon he will cry for Perdition,”***  
***12. “And enter a Blazing Fire."***  
***13. “Truly, he was (erstwhile) joyful among his people!”***  
***14. "Truly he thought that he would never return (to his Lord)”***  
***15. "Yes indeed! Surely his Lord was (ever) watchful of him”***

### Those Who Hold Their Record Behind Their Back!

In contrast to the aforementioned verses, which were about those who are
given their Record in their right hand, these verses are about the
unbelievers and how they are given their Records.

At first, it says:

***“But he who is given his Record behind his back,”***

***“Soon he will cry for Perdition,”***

***“And enter a Blazing Fire.”***

The commentators have delivered different ideas about this verse which
says

***'They are given their Records behind their back’,***

and those verses which say

***'Their Records are given to their left hand'.***

Some commentators have said that their right hand is tied to their neck
with chains so, that is why their Records are given to their left hand
from their back and it is a sign of degradation and shame.

Some others have said that their hands are not free; they are tied
behind their back like those of captives and, thus, they can only
receive their Records in their left hand behind their back.

Then, still others have said that by noting Surah Nisa. No.4, verse 47
which says:

***“...before We alter faces then turn them on their back...”,***

it can be understood that the faces of this group of wicked ones have
been turned to their back and they have to read their Records
themselves; the Records are given to their left hand behind their back.

It is more agreeable to say that the doers of good take their Record
happily in their right hand and call, with pride and boasting to others
in the Hereafter:

***“Ah here! Read ye my Record!"***[^3]***.***

But, when the wicked are given their Record in their left hand, they
will keep it behind their back shamefully in order for it not to be seen
by others, but unfortunately it is of no use, because nothing is hidden
there.

They cry for perdition, but it will be in vain and they will receive the
command:

***"And enter n Blazing Fire";***

that is, they will arrive at the blazing fire of Hell.

Then, the cause of this awful case is described and it says:

***"Truly, he was (erstwhile) joyful among his people.”***

It was a joy of pride, and the pride originated from neglect and being
forgetful of Allah. His self-complacence and self-conceit, in his lower
life, will now give way to weeping and misery.

It is clear that joy or happiness is not naturally blamed or forbidden,
but a believer should be hopeful and happy of Allah’s Grace, and be
always rejoicing and good tempered with others when interacting with
them. That joy is blameworthy which makes people forgetful of Allah, and
entangles them only in their lusts.

***"Truly he thought that he would never return (to his Lord)!”.***

In fact, the true source of his misery and corrupted idea was his denial
of the Resurrection, that which made him proud and exaltant and, thus,
he became drunk with lusts and far from the Reality; Allah, in so far as
he mocked the Mission of the prophets, and when he went to his people he
was happy with this mockery.

This very idea is mentioned in Surah Mutaffifin, No. 83, verse 31:

***"And when they returned to their people they returned jesting ,”***

and also in the story of the wealthy Qarun who was doubtful of Allah,
some of his people told him

***“...Exult not, for Allah loveth not those who exult (in
riches)"***[^4]***.***

The term

***/lanyahur/ 'he would never return'***

is based on /haur/ which originally means 'go to and fro' whether in
deed or in thought.

The term /mihwar/ 'axis’, /muhawarah/ 'answers for answers, dehate',
/hiwar/ 'a loud voice in dialogue', /tahayyur/ 'astonishment', and

***/hawariyun/ 'companions of Jesus'***

are from the same root.

But, on the whole, this word which has been used in this verse means
'return' and 'resurrection’.

Meanwhile, this verse shows that the lack of belief in the Resurrection
is the origin of carelessness, pride, and corruption.

In the last verse of this portion of the verses, for the negation of
their false belief, it says:

***“Yes indeed! Surely his Lord was (ever) watchful of him",***

and recorded all of man's acts, totally, and kept the Record for the
coming Reckoning Day.

The idea, in this verse, is an evidence for the Resurrection, as verse 6
was:

***"O man! Surely you are ever toiling on towards your Lord; painfully
toiling, until you meet Him”.***

Both of them emphasize on the term

***'Lord',***

because the process of man's development towards his Lord can never end
with his death. The final goal is beyond the only life in this world.

Allah’s watchfulness over man's actions and the record of the deeds are
not done in vain. They are certainly primary to the final Judgment and,
consequently, to the Reward and the punishment.

Surah Inshiqaq, Verses 16-25
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالشَّفَقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّيْلِ وَمَا وَسَقَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْقَمَرِ إِذَا اتَّسَقَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَتَرْكَبُنَّ طَبَقًا عَنْ طَبَقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا لَهُمْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قُرِئَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقُرْآنُ لَا يَسْجُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا يُكَذِّبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يُوعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبَشِّرْهُمْ بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَهُمْ أَجْرٌ غَيْرُ
مَمْنُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. "But nay! I swear by the glow of the sunset,”***  
***17. "And by the night and that which it gathers together (in one
herd)”.***  
***18. "And the moon when it grows full,”***  
***19. "That you shall most certainly enter one stage after
another."***  
***20. "What then is the matter with them that they do not
believe?”***  
***21. "And when the Qur'an is recited to them they do not fail
prostrate” \****  
***22. "Nay, those who disbelieve reject (it)."***  
***23. "And Allah knows best what they keep secret (in their
breasts)."***  
***24. "So announce to them a painful punishment,”***  
***25. "Except those who believe and work righteous deeds: for them is a
reward unending.”***

### You Are Continuously Changing.

After the description of man's development, stage by stage, unto his
Lord that we had discussed in the former verses, we will see a
conformation of the same fact, with more details, in the following
verses.

It says:

***"But Nay! I swear by the glow of the sunset,”***

***“And by the night, and that which it gathers together (in one
herd)”.***

***"And the moon when it grows full,”***

***“That you shall most certainly enter one stage after another."***

The word /la/ in the term /fa-la-uqsimu/ is expletive and is used for
emphasis, here.

The term /ŝafaq/, here, as Raqib cites in Mufradat, means 'redness' of
the sky after sunset which mixes with the darkness of nightfall.

Fakhr-i-Razi believes that the term /ŝafaq/ originally means 'thinness',
and therefore, a very thin dress is called /ŝafaq/ and /ŝafaqat/ is used
in the case of one having a 'thin' heart. (But, Raqib's statement seems
to be more appropriate).

In any case, Allah swears by it to make everyone think about this
beautiful natural phenomenon, because 'sunset' announces a deep
revelation in the world, that is, the day ends and the night begins, and
also, it is the time of the sunset prayer; 'Maghrib'.

To swear by the night is for the reason that night is a hiding place for
secrets and mysteries.

The term /wasaq/, conveying the meaning of 'to gather together (in one
herd)', points to one of the great secrets of the night. At nightfall
all the wandering flocks and herds come home. The men that had scattered
abroad, for their livelihood, return home to rest and sleep.

The night collects them in their homes.

This idea is also carried in Surah Mo'min, No. 40, verse 61 when it
says:

***“It is Allah who has made the Night for you, that you may rest
therein...”***

The moon and its glorious silver light, especially when it is full at
night, is one of Allah’s signs and that is why He swears by it.

It is interesting to note that these four parts point to the cases and
varieties that continually occur in the created world: the sun sets, its
redness appears in the sky, living creatures rush to their home, and the
moon rises in full.

It should be noted that on the night before the fourteenth day of the
month, the moon rises from the beginning of the night, by which these
oaths are said, and that is a basis for the verse:

***“That you shall most certainly enter one stage after another",***

which illustrates the different states in the life of man.

There are various commentaries for this sentence. Some of them are as
follows:

1. Man travels and ascends, stage by stage, towards the Absolute
perfection. He strives hard; first in this world, then in the partition
and then in Resurrection, with the different states that they have.

2. Man has different stages of development, from the time he is the
sperm form, until death. They are considered about thirty seven stages
by some people.

3. Man bears various opposites in his life: health and sickness, chess
and happiness, hardship and ease, war and peace.

4. Man will face many different hard situations in the Hereafter until
he receives the consequence of his reckoning; Heaven or Hell.

5. In ancient times people had many varieties of pleasant and unpleasant
adventures; or that the unbelieving people among the Muslim community
displayed various denials and rejections of Islam. This idea is said to
be narrated from Imam Sadiq (as).

All the above commentaries are possible, of course, and the verse may
refer to all of them together.

In any event, the occurrence of these states to man and the lack of
constancy in his position, on the one hand, is an evidence to the fact
at he is 'a created thing' and necessarily has a Creator, because every
changeable thing is a creature and all creatures have a Creator; and on
the other hand, it is an evidence to the lack of immortality for this
world; also it is a sign for man's constant movement and development
toward his Lord, to the Resurrection; as was mentioned in verse 6:

***"O man! Surely you are ever toiling on towards your Lord; painfully
toiling, until you meet Him."***

Then, as a general consequence it inquires:

***“What then is the matter with them that they do not believe?”***

How can they ignore the immense gifts and benefits they have from Allah?
They have clear evidences and signs for theism, theology and
Resurrection, both in outer nature like day and night, sun and moon,
light and darkness, sunrise and sunset with its redness; and inner
nature from the mother's womb in the form of sperm; to other stages one
after another until death, but they do not believe. Why do they not
accept of Allah’s grace instead of disputing about it?

Then it turns from the creation to the revelation and says:

***“And when the Qur'an is recited to them they do not fall
prostrate.” \****

The Holy Qur’an is so bright and clear that it is a good evidence for
itself and that its content is from the Divine source.

***'Prostrate',***

here, means 'humble gratitude to Allah', and

***'to fall prostrate'***

which is the act of putting the forehead on the ground for the prayer,
is one of the examples of this general sense. Perhaps for the same
reason, as it is narrated, when the Prophet (S) recited these verses he
fell prostrate.

***“Nay, those who disbelieve reject (it).”***

The verb form used in the Arabic text, which is usually applied in a
continuous case, shows their constant rejection. That constancy was not
because of the revelation being inadequate, but it was based on their
blind imitation of their father's behaviour and following their own
interests and their lusts.

***“And Allah knows best what they keep secret (in their breasts)”.***

Allah is aware of their thoughts and aims, and, also, of the motives
causing those constant rejections. Then, whatever more they keep secret,
finally He will punish them.

The term /yu'un/ is derived from /wi’a'/ 'container'. The very word is
used in a statement narrated from Hazrat Ali (as) in Nahj-ul-Balagha
which says:

***“Verily these hearts are containers. The best of them is that which
has a better ability to preserve its*** ***contents and a bigger
capacity to hold more”.***

***“So give them tiding of a painful punishment”.***

The term /baŝŝir/ is usually used for 'announcing good news' but,
sometimes, it is used ironically. The believers are informed of the
immense blessings of Heaven while blame is put on the unbelievers and
causes them to be regretful and begrudging.

In the last verse of this Surah, the fate of those good-doers from among
the believers is again mentioned as an exception where it says:

***“Except those who believe and work righteous deeds: for them is a
reward unending.”***

The term /mamnun/ is derived from /mann/ which means both 'cease' and
'decline' and also 'indebtedness'.

The word

***/manun/ 'death'***

is, also, based on it. All these senses may be understood from the term,
in this verse, because, inspite of the blessings in this human world,
which are diminishable and ever changing and often mixed with undesired
consequences or indebtedness given by this person or that person, the
blessings of that spiritual world are followed by no indebtedness,
declension or undesired consequences.

This exception is apparently joined to the earlier descriptions, about
the unbelievers in the former verses, in order to give a way to the
disbelievers and to say that certainly that painful punishment will be
removed from those who repent and believe and do good and they will
given a Reward that will never fail.

### Explanation

The late 'Tabarsi' in 'MaJma'-al-Bayan' has rendered the last verses of
this Surah to mean 'free-will', since it is not praiseworthy for Allah,
the Wisest, to blame those who do not fall prostrate and believe, when
they are forced to.

And, when it says:

***“What then is the matter with them that they do not believe?”,***

***“And when the Qur'an is recited to them they do not fall
prostrate”, \****

is a clear evidence for 'free-will'. Again, blame for leaving the
prostration is a reason for the fact that the disbelievers should not
only follow the primary Principles of religion, but, also should perform
the secondary precepts of religion, as well.

### Supplication

*O Lord! Take our reckoning easy on the Day when all attend at Your
Judgment.*

*O Lord! Help us to go the Right Path when all human beings are ever
toiling on towards You until they meet You.*

*O Lord! We have obeyed Your Message, the Holy Qur'an, bestow on us the
grace to act accordingly.*

[^1]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 537.

[^2]: Khisal-i-Saduq, vol. 1, Chapter: 'This World and the Next World'

[^3]: Surah Haqqa, No. 69, verse 19

[^4]: Surah Qasas. No. 28, verse 76


