Surah Buruj, Chapter 85
=======================

**(The Constellations)**

**Number of Verses:** **22**

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

The early Muslim believers of Mecca lived in turmoil especially at the
beginning period of Islam. They were always faced with torture; bodily
and spiritually, by the pagan Arabs who forced them to leave their
Faith. Some of them, the weak ones, succumbed, but, the stronger ones
resisted.

This is a Meccan Surah whose main objective seems to be the spiritual
strengthening of the believers against that process, and encouraging
them to persevere.

Concerning this point, it tells the story of 'the makers of the pit of
fire', those who dug some ditches in which they burnt people for their
Faith. They threatened them and burnt them, but the true believers did
not loose their Faith.

In another section of the Surah, the pagans are threatened with the
blazing fire of Hell for the persecution of Allah’s votaries, while the
believers are given good news about the gardens of Bliss.

Then, to attract their attention to past generations, it illustrates the
story of Pharaoh, the people of Thamud and some other arrogant sects.
They lived in such great authority, in the past, that the pagans of
Mecca were naught in comparison with them, but they could not stand for
Allah’s command and perished. Besides, these examples are for soothing
the heart of the Prophet (S) and of the believers.

Finally, the Surah ends wilh an explanation about the greatness and the
extraordinary importance of the Holy Qur'an.

On the whole, this is a Surah of resistant perseverance, and patience
from the side of the believers against the persecutions of the enemies,
amongst which the promise Allah’s victory is found.

The name of the Surah is taken from the oath which occurred in the
beginning verse of the Surah.

The Virtue in Studying This Surah
---------------------------------

There is a tradition from the Prophet (S) for the virtue of this Surah
which says:

*"Allah will give reward for the good-deeds ten times the number of all
peopie gathered in 'Friday Prayer' and all people gathered on the day of
'Arafah (the ninth day of Zilhajj), to the person who studies this
Surah. Its recitation saves man from fears.”*

These rewards fit in with the content of the Surah and it is obvious
when we consider that: one of the commentaries for the verse:

***“By the Witness and the Witnessed”***

is 'Friday' and ‘Arafah Day', and that the Surah denotes to the severe
perseverance of the early believers against the enemies' persecutions.
By the way, it also confirms that these rewards belong to those who
study the Surah, then contemplate on it and act accordingly.

Surah Buruj, Verses 1-9
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الْبُرُوجِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْيَوْمِ الْمَوْعُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشَاهِدٍ وَمَشْهُودٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُتِلَ أَصْحَابُ الْأُخْدُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّارِ ذَاتِ الْوَقُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ هُمْ عَلَيْهَا قُعُودٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُمْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَفْعَلُونَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ شُهُودٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا نَقَمُوا مِنْهُمْ إِلَّا أَنْ يُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ
الْحَمِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. "By the Sky full of constellations,”***  
***2. "By the promised Day (of Judgment),”***  
***3. "By the Witness and the Witnessed."***  
***4. "Cursed were the makers of the pit (of fire),”***  
***5. "Of the fuel-fed fire (kept burning),”***  
***6. "When they sat by it,”***  
***7. "And they were witnesses of what they did to the believers."***  
***8. "They were vengeful towards them for no other reason than that
they believed in Allah, the Almighty, the Praiseworthy,”***  
***9. "Him, to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth.
And Allah is Witness over everything."***

### The Believers and the Pyres

We know that the believers of Mecca were in terrible trouble, at the
beginning, and their enemies did whatever they could to torture them. As
it was mentioned earlier, the objective of the revelation of the Surah
is to warn these persecutors so that they may consider the destiny of
the past tyrannical generations and, on the other hand, it is a soothing
message for the early believers of Mecca and a strengthening for their
spirits. Furthermore, it is a lesson to Muslims throughout history.

***“By the Sky full of constellations”.***

The term /buruj/ is the plural form of /burj/ which originally means 'a
castle' or 'a tower'. Some have rendered it to anything that is
apparent, manifest or conspicuous, high or elevated; hence /burj/ is
applied to a certain kind of structure. Also, /burj/ is used to define
an angle of a fortress, or of a surrounding wall of a city, which is
more conspicuous; and sometimes a fortress, itself, is called /burj/.

The celestial bodies are either the bright stars of the sky, or the
'constellations', that is, 'a number of fixed stars arbitrarily
considered as a group' usually named after some mythological beings that
they supposedly resemble an outline, or the broad belt of the
constellations marking the twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

Each makes the solar path through the heavens, as we see it, month after
month. (Indeed, the sun is rather fixed and the earth rotates round the
sun, but, to us it seems to be the contrary.)

Whichever of them the oath is made to, it denotes to its greatness
which, perhaps, was not completely known to Arabs at that time, but it
is clear to us, today, though it seems that the meaning is 'the bright
stars of the sly'.

The holy Prophet (S) is narrated to have said, on the commentary of the
verse, that:

*"It means the stars.”*[^1]

***"By the promised Day (of Judgement)"***

The appointed Day that all the prophets spoke about and hundreds of
verses of the Holy Qur’an warned of.

The Day that

***"Those of old and those of later times."***

***“All will certainly be gathered together for the meeting appointed
for the Day”***[^2]***,***

and the account of all will be made clear.

And, in the third and fourth oaths, it says:

***“By the Witness and the Witnessed.”***

There are many commentaries given on the meaning of the terms /ŝahid/
'witness' and maŝhud/ 'witnessed'.

There are more than thirty, of which the following are the most
outstanding:

1. The

***'Witness'***

is the Prophet (S) as Surah Ahzab, No. 33 verse 45 says:

***"O prophet! Truly We have sent you as a Witness, a Bearer of Glad
Tidings and a Warner”.***

And the

***'Witnessed'***

is the Day of Judgment, as Surah Hud, No.11, verse 103 says:

***"...that is a Day for which mankind will be gathered together: that
will be a Day of Testimony”.***

2. The

***'Witness', /ŝahid/,***

is the witnesses to man's deeds like his limbs, as mentioned in Surah
Nur, No. 24, verse 24:

***"On the Day when their tongues, their hands, and their feet will bear
witness against them as to their*** ***actions”.***

And the

***'Witnessed', /maŝhud/,***

is people and their deeds.

3. The

***'Witness'***

is Friday which is witness to the community of Muslims in the great
ceremony of 'Friday Prayers'.

And the

***'Witnessed'***

is ‘Arafah Day' when the pilgrims, of Kaaba, are the visitors on that
Day (the ninth day of Zilhajj). This very commentary has been narrated
from the Prophet, Imam Baqir, and Imam Sadiq (as).[^3]

4. The

***'Witness'***

is 'the Feast of Sacrifice', and the

***'Witnessed'***

is ‘Arafah Day’.

A narration says that once a man came into the Mosque of the Prophet
(S), /masjid-an-nabi/, and saw a person who was reciting traditions of
the Prophet (S). He asked him for the commentary of this verse and the
person there answered in the affirmative that

***/ŝahid/ the 'Witness'***

is Friday and

***/maŝhud/ the 'Witnessed'***

is 'the Feast of Sacrifice Day'. He passed him and saw another person
who was also reciting.

Then he asked him about the commentary of the verse and he answered:

***/ŝahid/ the 'Witness'***

is Friday and

***/maŝhud/ the 'Witnessed'***

is 'the Feast of Sacrifice Day'. He continued walking, and met a young
man who was very handsome and he, too, was narrating traditions from the
Prophet (S).

He asked him to tell him about the commentary of the verse and the young
man answered:

***/ŝahid/ 'the Witness'***

is Muhammad (S) and

***/maŝhud/ the 'Witnessed'***

is the Day of Judgment.

He added:

*"Have you not heard that Allah says:*

***'O Prophet! Truly We have sent you as a Witness, a Bearer of Glad
Tidings and a Warner',***

*and have you not also heard that He says:*

***'That is a Day for which mankind will be gathered together: that will
be a Day of Testimony'?”***

The writer of this incident says:

*"I asked about the first person and I was answered that it was
Ibn-Abbas, the answer for the second person was 'Abdiullah-ibn-'Umar,
and the third one was Hassan-ibn-'Ali (as).”*[^4]

5. The

***'Witness'***

is 'nights and days', and the

***'Witnessed'***

is 'mankind' whose deeds they witnessed, as it is said from Imam
Zayn-al-'abidin (as) in 'the morning and evening supplications':

*“This is a new day which is witness to our deeds. When we do good, it
leaves us praiseworthy, and when we do evil, it leaves us scorned."*[^5]

6. The

***'Witness'***

is 'angels' and the

***'Witnessed'***

is 'the Qur’an'.

7. The

***'Witness'***

is 'the Black Stone' and the

***'Witnessed'***

is 'the persons who have performed pilgrimage to Mecca’ who pass by 'the
Black Stone' and touch it.

8. The

***'Witness'***

is people and the

***'Witnessed'***

is Allah.

9. The

***'Witness'***

is the 'Muslim Community', and the

***'Witnessed'***

is other nations, as Surah Baqarah, No. 2, verse 143 says:

***“...that you might be witnesses over the nations”.***

10. The

***'Witness'***

is the Prophet of Islam (S) and the

***'Witnessed'***

is other prophets, as Surah Nisa No. 4, verse 41 attests:

***''and We brought you as a witness against these."***

11. Or the

***'Witness'***

is the holy Prophet (S), and the

***'Witnessed'***

is Amir-al-Momineen Ali (as).

Of course, the quality of this verse, in comparison with the previous
verses, demands that

***/ŝahid/ the 'Witness'***

be the Day of Judgment, whether it be the Prophet of Islam or other
prophets over their nations, the angels, man's limbs, and the like; and

***/maŝhud/ the 'Witnessed'***

to be mankind or their deeds.

Thus, most of the above mentioned commentaries join and come under one
category with a broad sense.

However, the commentaries such as ‘Friday', 'Arafah Day’, and 'the Feast
of Sacrifice Day' are separate from this meaning; though they are also
among the witnesses of the Day of Judgment and the witnesses of man's
deeds. Each of them, consisting of a large number of people even in this
life, metaphorically resembles the Resurrection.

Taking note of the above explanation, it will be obvious that there is
no contrast in the mentioned commentaries. All of them may gather in the
meaning of the 'witness' and the 'witnessed' in a vast scope. This is
one of the signs of the importance of the Holy Qur'an whose meanings are
so broad that many different commentaries can be applied to them.

It is because

***/ŝahid/ the 'Witness'***

concludes any witness and

***/maŝhud/ the 'Witnessed'***

covers anything that can be witnessed. They are mentioned in 'indefinite
form', which shows their importance which was explained, definitely, in
the above commentaries.

It is noteworthy that there is a delicate relation between these four
parts, on the one hand, and the subjects that the oaths are for, on the
other hand. The sky and its bright stars and ordered constellations are
signs of regularity and account.

***'The promised Day (of Judgment)'***

is a definite scene of

***'reckoning'***

upon

***'the book'.***

The

***'Witness'***

and the

***'Witnessed'***

are also some means by which reckoning is precisely done. The oaths are
for the persecutors to be warned that surely their evil deeds against
the believers are recorded and kept for 'the promised Day of Judgment'.
And the witnesses around us, from angels, limbs of the body, the days
and nights, and the like, are watchful of these deeds and they will bear
witness to them on that Day.

Then, after these oaths, it says:

***"Cursed were the makers of the pit (of fire),”***

***“Of the fuel-fed fire (kept burning),”***

***“When they sat by it,”***

***“And they were witnesses of what they did to the believers."***

The term /uxdud/, as Raqib says in his book 'Mufradat', means 'a wide
and deep ditch spread on the land', or in other words, the vast pits or
trenches are called 'Okhdud' whose plural form is /axadid/ and is
basically derived from /xadd/ which means 'a deep trench in the ground,
or a pit, a ditch' or the like, dug, or excavated; and originally it is
derived from the /xadd/ of man with the sense of 'the part bordering
upon the nose, on either side (on the right and on the left where the
tears flow when one weeps)'.

It is used metaphorically for the ditches that appear on the surface of
the earth; (and later, as an active meaning in practice).

To answer the question of who the makers of the pit of fire were, in
which they burnt people for their Faith, and while they were alive; the
commentators and historians have delivered some different ideas which
will be dealt with under the title of 'Explanation' later. But, it is
certain that they had excavated and prepared some deep pits of fire to
make the true believers leave their Faith. When the believers persisted,
the persecutors threw them into the fire and burnt them alive.

The term /waqud/ basically means a substance by which fire is made (like
wood). Any fire needs something, such as wood, and the like to be burnt,
but /that-al-waqud/ points to the abundance of fire that they used; then
naturally, the resulting fire had been an immense one; and that is why
the term has been interpreted to 'burning fire'.

Some authorities think that /waqud/ carries two meanings: one is 'wood'
and the other is 'flame'. But, this idea is not acceptable.

The objective point in the verse:

***"When they sat by it,”***

and the verse after that, is that some pagans were sitting and watching
them burning not only indifferent, but, also enjoying it. That was a
sign of their utmost hard-heartedness.

Some have also said that these persons were the appointed interrogators
and the persecutors of the believers to cause them to leave the true
religion.

Still others believe that they were two groups of people: one group was
the persecutors and the other was the spectators; and since the
spectators were pleased with what the persecutors did, then, this action
was attributed to all of them. And, it is natural that in situations
like this a group of men are always performers and some others are
spectators. Besides, chiefs usually instruct while subordinates obey.

It is also said that there were some people sitting and watching the
persecutions to see that the persecutors did not offend their duties and
bore witness, before the king, that they had done their duties well.

The combination of these different groups, for the fulfillment of the
action, does not seem improbable. Therefore, all of the above mentioned
commentaries can be considered together.

At any rate, the form of the verb in the Arabic text denotes that the
action was continued for a length of time.

"***They were vengeful towards them for no other reason than that they
believed in Allah, the Almighty, the Praiseworthy,”***

Verily, the believers had no fault, but that of their Faith in the True
God, Allah. They believed in Allah, the Absolute Perfection, Who is
Mighty, and is Worthy of all Praise. Was the belief in such a God a sin,
or was the belief in powerless irrational gods?

The term /naqamu/ is derived from /naqam/ which means: 'to devour, to
dislike, to reject' by tongue, or by practice through punishment and
vengeance.

Surely an action like that is done in great sin, not for the Belief in
Allah, Who is exalted in Power and Worthy of all Praise. This makes it
clear that how ignorant they were and how low their culture had been
that they considered their greatest sin as their greatest pride.

This resembles the idea in Surah A'raf. No.5, verse 126 that sorcerers,
after believing in Moses and being threatened with persecution and death
by Pharach, told him:

***“But thou dost wreak thy vengeance on us simply because we believed
in the Signs of our Lord...”***

The terms

***/'aziz/ 'the Almighty'***

and

***/ĥamid/ 'the praiseworthy'***

are, indeed, a reply to their iniquities and a proof against them.
Meanwhile, they are also a threat and warning to all the doers of
persecution, throughout history, that Allah, the ‘Almighty', and the
'Praiseworthy', keeps watch over them.

Then, talking about two other divine qualities, it says:

***"Him to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. And
Allah is Witness over everything.”***

Indeed, these four divine qualities: 'Almighty, (Omnipotent),
Praiseworthy, ownership of the kingdom of heavens and the earth, and
Omniscient' are of those that establish the propriety of servitude.

Also, it is a glad tiding to the believers that Allah is attentive and
watchful over their perseverance and patience in defending Faith, and He
sees their sacrifices and devotions. These are the facts that give them
power and satisfaction.

On the other hand, they are threats and warnings for their enemies to
know that Allah is Mighty but, He leaves them alone in order to examine
them; and, at last, they will receive the painful chastisement for their
evil deeds.

### Expbnations

#### Who Were 'The Makers of The Pit of fire’?

It was said before that /uxdud/ means 'a wide and deep ditch' and here,
it means 'some great pits full of fuel-fed fire prepared by the
persecutors for the purpose of burning the believers'.

There is no agreement among the authorities, both commentators and
historians, as to the time and place of the incident whether it has been
a single event or the happening refers to numerous events similar to
that in different parts of the world.

The most famous one is that of Zu-Nuwas, the last Himyrite king of
Yemen.

Zu-Nuwas, who was by religion a Jew, named himself Yusef. The members of
Himyrite followed him as Jews. Then, after a length of time, he was
informed that a group of people in Najran, a zone in the north of Yemen,
were still Christian. His companions compelled him to force the group to
be Jewish. He moved to Najran and gathered the inhabitants of the area.

Offering them the Jewish religion, he insisted that they accept it, but
they did not. They refused the religion and accepted to suffer death,
instead.

Zu-Nuwas ordered his men to dig a large ditch and fill it with wood,
then he lit a great fire. Some of them were thrown into it and burnt
alive. Some others were killed by the sword and were torn into pieces.
Altogether, the number of deaths was about twenty thousand.[^6]

It is cited that one of the Christians of Najran fled from the event and
went to the Roman Caesar in Rome and asked him for help against
Zu-Nuwas.

Caesar replied that Najran was far from his country, but, he would write
a letter to the king of Abyssinia, who was a Christian and whose country
was neighbouring to the man's, and would ask him to help.

He wrote that letter and demanded that the Abyssinian king to take
revenge on that terrible murderer. The man from Najran went to the King,
Najashi, who became very saddened when he heard the story of Najran. He
felt pity for the extinguishment of the light of Christianity, there,
and decided to take revenge.

The Abyssinian army hastened to Yemen and defeated Zu-Nuwas' troops,
killing a great many of them. Then, before long, they took Yemen and
Najashi rulled it as a state of Abyssinia.[^7]

Some commentators have cited that the length of the ditch was 40 cubits
and its width was 12 cubits. (A cubit was equal to half a meter.
Sometimes, in other places, it was used instead of /gez/ which was a
measure for one meter.) Some other commentators have cited that there
were seven ditches each of which had been as large as the above
mentioned one.

This event has been narrated, differently, in numerous books of
commentary and history including Majma'-al-Bayan by Tabarsi, Abul-Futuh
Razi's Commentary, Tafsir-i-Kabir by Fakhr-i-Razi, Ruh-al-Ma'ali by
Aloosi, Qartabi’s Commentary, Sirah by Ibn- Hosham, and many others.

As it was mentioned before, the cruel persecutors were finally punished
in this world and were revenged for the murders they had committed. The
punishment of blazing fire in the Hereafter is waiting for them, too.

These 'crematoriums', which were made by those Jews, are said to be
probably the first ones in history. But, it is surprising that this very
cruel innovation was used against the Jews, themselves, and, as it is
known, many Jews were burnt in crematoriums, on Hitler's orders, in
Germany; and the example of the 'Punishment of the Burning Fire'
happened to them even in this world.

In addition to this, Zu-Nuwas, the main establisher of this horrible
innovation, himself, was not safe from his evil deeds.

The above lines about 'the makers of the pit of fire' are according to
popular attitudes, but there are also other narrations which say that
'the makers of the pit of fire' were not only those in Yemen at the time
of Zu-Nuwas, but in other locations and at different times. Commentators
have cited up to ten narrations about them.

A narration that has been cited from Amir-al-Motmineen Ali (as) says:

*“And the Magi had a 'Book' and they acted according to their Holy Book.
One of their kings married with his sister and the woman wanted him to
announce that marriage with ones' sister' is lawful, but his people did
not accept this. So, the king had some of the believing people, who
opposed his instruction, thrown into a pit of fire.”*[^8]

This is about 'the makers of the pit of fire' in Fars (Old Persia, i.e.
Iran). There is a citation about 'the makers of the pit of fire' in
Sham, as well, where there lived some believing people who were burnt in
a pit of dire by Antiyakhus.[^9]

Some have also referred this event to the companions of Daniel, he
famous prophet of the Israelites who are mentioned in the book of Daniel
from the Torah, and Tha'labi has applied 'the makers of the pit of
fire', in Fars, to them.[^10]

It is not improbable that 'the makers of the pit of fire' includes all
of hem, although the most famous example of it is the story of Zu-Nuwas
in Yemen.

#### Resistance in Keeping Faith

There are numerous examples, in history, of people who suffered fatal
persecutions for their beliefs. They agreed, eagerly, to be killed but,
did not leave their Faith. History has so many stories of this kind:
some of the Faithful were hanged, some were murdered by the sword, and
some were burnt to death.

The story of 'asiya, Pharaoh's wife, is well known. She was persecuted
terribly for her Faith to Moses, the son of 'Imran, so much ao that she
died because of the torture.

A narration from Amir-al-Momineen Ali (as) says:

*"Allah appointed a man to prophethood from among the people of
Abyssinia for them, but they refused him. They fought against him and
his followers in which, finally, some of the prophet's votaries were
killed and some others were captured and kept along with the prophet
himself as captives.*

*Then they prepared a ditch full of blazing fire, and called people to
come beside it. They commanded that any of them who followed the same
religion as theirs could go aside and those who believed in the
prophet's religion and that of is votaries should throw themselves into
the fire. The prophet's followers, who could do nothing, bravely threw
themselves into the fire. They outran each other (as if in a
competition).*

*Then, at that moment there came a woman carrying a one-month-old baby.
She went to throw herself into the fire but suddenly her motherly
affection stopped her. Then the little baby called her and said:*

*'Do not fear, Mother, throw yourself and me both. By Allah, surely this
is a little thing on the path of Allah...'*

*And this baby was one of those who spoke in the cradle.”* [^11]

This story tells us that there had been another example of

***'the makers of the pit of fire'***

in Abyssinia.

The story of 'Ammar-Yasir's parents and some others, like them, in
addition to the story of Imam Hosain and his companions who proceeded to
be killed as martyrs, are famous in Islamic history.

In our time, we ourselves, have seen or have heard many examples of
young and old people who willingly wished to be martyred for the sake of
their Faith and religion. Then, as a conclusion, it should be said that
the existence of the Divine religions, in the past and present, depended
on these devotions and martyrdoms.

Surah Buruj, Verses 10-16
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ فَتَنُوا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ ثُمَّ لَمْ
يَتُوبُوا فَلَهُمْ عَذَابُ جَهَنَّمَ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابُ الْحَرِيقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَهُمْ جَنَّاتٌ
تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْكَبِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ بَطْشَ رَبِّكَ لَشَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ هُوَ يُبْدِئُ وَيُعِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الْغَفُورُ الْوَدُودُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذُو الْعَرْشِ الْمَجِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعَّالٌ لِمَا يُرِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. "Surely (as for) those who persecute (or draw into temptation)
believing men and believing women, yet repent not, for them is the
punishment of Hell and for them is the punishment of the Burning
Fire.”***  
***11. “Surely (as for) those who believe and do good deeds, for them
are Gardens underneath which rivers flow, that is the great salvation,
(the fulfillment of all desires),”***  
***12. "Surely the Grip of thy Lord is severe."***  
***13. “It is He Who creates (everything) from the very beginning and
causes to return,”***  
***14. "And He is All-forgiving, All-loving,”***  
***15. “Lord of the 'Arsh (Throne), the Glorious,”***  
***16. The Doer of whatever He wills.”***

### Allah's Punishment for the Persecutors

After describing, in the former verses, the terrible persecutions
carried out by some past generations who burnt the resisting believers,
in the following verses it points to the grievous punishment of Allah,
for them, in contrast with the great rewards for the believers.

The warning is quite clear:

***"Surely (as for) these who persecute (or draw into temptation)
believing men and believing women, yet repent not, for them is the
punishment of Hell and for them is the punishment of the Burning
Fire."***

The term /fatanu/ is derived from /fatn/ which originally means 'to try
or prove' (as gold in the fire to ascertain its purity), then the term
is used in the sense of examination and persecution (by burning) or
both. It is also used with the meaning of either punishment or leading
into temptation.

In this verse, it is used with the meaning of 'punishment and penalty',
similar to Surah Zariyat, No. 51, verses 13-14 which say:

***"(It will be) a Day when they will be tried (and tested) over the
Fire!”***

***“Taste ye your trial! this is what ye used to ask to be
hastened!”.***

The words

***'yet repent not',***

in the verse, shows that it is possible for the persecutors to repent,
and this signifies the highest Mercy of Allah to the sinners. In the
meantime, it warns the pagans of Mecca to leave off with the persecuting
of the believers and return to the way of Allah before it is too late.

In principal, the Qur’an does not close the door of repentance on
anyone. Then, it can be understood that the settlement of the painful
punishments are for the improvement of the sinners and returning them to
the way of Allah as a consequence.

It is noteworthy that there are two kinds of distinguishing
chastisements, mentioned in the verse for the persecutors: the first is

***‘the punishment of Hell',***

and the second is

***'the punishment of the Blazing Fire'.***

The case is, perhaps, for the reason that there are many kinds of
punishment in Hell, one of which is ‘the Blazing Fire' and it is
especially mentioned for those persecutors who burnt the believers of
Mecca with fire and should be punished with Fire on That Day. But, how
different these two kinds of fire are!

Some commentators have cited that

***'the punishment of Hell'***

is for their

***'disbelieving'***

and

***'the punishment of the Blazing Fire'***

is for their deeds of persecuting others.

Then, paying attention to the rewards of the Righteous, it says:

***“Surely (as for) those who believe and do good deeds, for them are
Gardens underneath which*** ***rivers flow, that is the great salvation,
(the fulfillment of all desires)”.***

What a great Salvation! What can be better or higher than being the
Nearest to Allah, honourably, in the midst of the Gardens of Bliss, the
Etemal blessings? But, it should be noted that the essential means of
obtaining this 'great Salvation' is 'Belief and doing good deeds'.

The phrase

***/'amal-us-salihat/ 'do good-deeds'***

denotes that a mere good action, or a few of them done temporarily, are
not enough, but good deeds must be done continuously by the believers.

The term

***/thalika/ 'that',***

in Arabic, is generally used for pointing to something or someone that
is in the distance. But, here it is used to show importance and
highness, then it means that their 'great Salvation' is so important and
high that imagination cannot touch it.

Then, threatening the pagans once more, it says:

***"Surely the Grip of the Lord is severe.”***

So, it emphasizes that one should not think that there is no Hereafter
and that one does not return to life again.

Nay, it says:

***“It is He Who creates (everything) from the very beginning, and
causes it to return”.***

The term /bataŝa/ means 'to take or seize by force' and since this
action is the cause of punishment, then it is used in the sense of
'chastisement'.

The term

***/rabbika/ 'your Lord'***

is for soothing the Prophet (S) and is an emphasis on Allah’s support
for him.

It is noteworthy to mention that there are five emphases concentrated on
here:

1. The term /bataŝa/, meaning 'to take by force', contains the
connotation of severity.

2. A noun-phrase is usually used for emphasis.

3. The term

***/ŝadid/ 'severe',***

itself.

4. The word

***/inna/ 'surely'.***

5. The Arabic letter 'lam' (**ل**), used in cases like this, is also
used for emphasis, here.

Therefore, the Holy Qur'an threatens them precisely about the
punishment. And the sentence:

***“It is He Who creates (everything) from the very beginning, and
causes it to return”***

is an evidence for the Resurrection which can be counted as another
emphasis, added to the above ones.

Then, five qualities of the divine attributes are mentioned. It says:

***"And He is All-forgiving, All-loving,”***

***“Lord of the Throne, the Glorious,”***

***“The Doer of whatever He wills.”***

The terms

***/qafur/ (All-forgiving),***

and

***/wadud/ (All-loving)***

both are 'of the utmost amplification' which refer to the extreme
forgiveness and love of Allah: He is 'forgiving' of the sins of those
sinners who repent, and is 'Loving' to the servants who are good-doers.

In fact, these divine attributes are mentioned to be added to the
threats given in the former verses to illustrate the fact that the
sinners can repent and be forgiven because, while Allah is strict in
punishment, He is

***'All-forgiving'***

and

***'All-loving'.***

The term /wadud/ has the sense of being in the subjective case, which
fits the other attribute, i.e. 'All-forgiving'.

The third attribute is

***/zul-'arŝ/ 'Lord of the Throne ('Arsh)'.***

And 'Arsh, which means 'Royal throne', in such cases, refers
metaphorically to power and Sovereignty. This touches on the fact that
the rulership of all creatures is His, and Allah’s Will is, itself, the
Word and the Deed. There is no interval between them. No circumstance
whatever can come between His Will and the execution thereof. Therefore,
it is quite easy for Him to call the dead to life, again, and punish the
persecutors and the oppressors.

The term /majid/ is derived from /majd/ which means 'to excel in glory'
which is used only for Allahas a quality.

The association of these five Divine attributes are clear, because Allah
is All-forgiving and All-loving under the absolute Power (Omnipotence),
Graciousness and with His Will so that nothing can stop Him, no one is
able to confront Him, nor does His Will fade.

Surah Buruj, Verses 17-22
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ الْجُنُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِرْعَوْنَ وَثَمُودَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي تَكْذِيبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ مِنْ وَرَائِهِمْ مُحِيطٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ هُوَ قُرْآنٌ مَجِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي لَوْحٍ مَحْفُوظٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. "Has the story reached thee, of the Forces"***  
***18. "Of Pharaoh and (the tribe of) Thamud?"***  
***19. "And yet the unbelievers (persist) in rejecting (the
Truth)!”***  
***20. “But Allah encompasses them from every point!”***  
***21. “Nay! it is a glorious Qur'an,”***  
***22. "(1nscribed) in a Tablet Preserved!"***

### Did You See What Happened to the Forces of Pharaoh and the Tribe of Thamud?

The previous verses were about the Absolute Power of Allahand His
Sovereignty with some threats for the unbelieving persecutors.

Then, to make it clear that these threats are not a mere statement and
they are practicable, in the next verses it addresses the Prophet (S)
and says:

***"Has the story reached thee, of the Forces”***

These forces are some large and great troops which fought against
Allah’s prophets in the past, but all of them perished.

Then two examples of the forces are mentioned: one of them is very
ancient, and the other waa not so ancient then.

It says:

***“Of Pharaoh and (the tribe of) Thamud?”***

These peoples were those who governed throughout of the world at their
time from east to west. Some of them exploited the stable stone of the
mountains and built splendid houses and castles with them, so that there
were no other people who could match them, in those times.

But Allah destroyed them all. Pharaoh was a proud monarch of a powerful
kingdom, with resources and organization, material, moral, and
intellectual, as good as any in the world. When he pitted himself
against Allah’s Prophet, he and his forces were destroyed through water
in the Nile.

The 'Thamud', a very old generation, were great builders, and had a high
standard of material civilization. But, they defied the law of Allah and
perished in a dreadful earthquake and cold terrible storms, which threw
them prone on the ground and buried them with their fine buildings.
These two factors, water and wind, were of the main necessities of life,
but they worked as the means of their inevitable destruction.

Pharaoh and Thamud are two examples who were both very powerful; chosen
from all past arrogant generations. They are selected because the Arab
pagans knew their names and were partly familiar with their history.

Then, in the next verse, it says:

***“And yet the unbelievers (persist) in rejecting (the Truth).”***

Truth is obvious to all, but the arrogant ones do not follow the 'Way'
and do not obey the 'Right'.

The term

***/bal/ ‘and yet'***

is used, here, for varying the matter and saying that these pagans are
as if they are worse than Pharaoh and the tribe of Thamud from the point
of arrogance and rejecting the verses of Qur'an. They used all possible
means to gain their goal.

So, they should know that:

***"But Allah encompasses them from every point!”***

and they are all always within His grasp.

If Allah leaves them alone for a while, it is not due to inability, and
if He does not punish them immediately, it is not because they are out
of His reach.

The term

***/wara-’i-him/ ‘from behind'***

points to the sense that they are encompassed by the Divine forces, not
only in conditions that they foresee but from a variety of unexpected
directions; and cannot escape from Justice and Penalty.

It is also probable that it points to the Knowledge of Allah in regard
to their deeds, so much so that none of their words, behaviour, and
thoughts are hidden from Him.

Then, pointing to the vanity of their persistence in rejecting the
Qur’an and their claim that it was magic, or poetry it says:

***"Nay! it is a glorious Qur'an. (Inscribed) in a Table! Preserved!”***

It will remain safe and unchanged from the hands of the Wicked, the
Satans, and the Soothsayers. Therefore, O Prophet (S)! pay no attention
if they call you a poet, or sorcerer, or soothsayer, or even mad. Do not
be worried.

Your support is Mighty and your Way is clear. As it was mentioned
before, the term /majid/ is derived from /majd/ which means 'to excel in
glory' and is completely appropriate for the Qur’an, because its
contents are broad and glorious and its meaning is vast and exalted both
about Divine theology, and ethical morals, as well as religious laws.

The term /lauh/ means 'a broad tablet to write on', while /louh/ means
'thirst', and also: 'atmosphere’.

The verb, derived from the former, means ' appear and glitter’. But the
word is used here in the sense of 'the Tablet on which the Holy Qur'an
is inscribed and is preserved'. It, of course, does not mean the
ordinary tablets that we use.

It is cited in a commentary from Ibn-Abbas that the length of 'the
Preserved Tablet' is as long as the distance between the sky and the
earth, and its width is as long as the distance between East and West.

Hence, it seems that 'the Preserved Tablet' is the very Knowledge of
Allah, which encompasses all the world and is safe from any distortion
and alteration.

Surely, the Qur'an originates from the endless knowledge of Allah, and
is neither from man's thought, nor a production from the Satans. Its
content, itself, proves this fact.

This is probably the same thing that the Holy Qur'an has called

***/kitab-un-mubin /'a Record Clear'***

and sometimes

***'Umm-ul-Kitab' 'the Mother of the Book',***

as Surah Ra’d, No.13, verse 39 says:

***"Allah doth blot out or confirm what He pleaseth: with Him is the
Mother of the Book”.***

And in Surah An'am, No. 6, verse 99 it says:

***"...nor anything fresh or dry (green or withered), but is (inscribed)
in a Record Clear (to those who can read)”.***

It should also be noted that this is the only situation in 'the Holy
Qur'an' in which the term 'the Preserved Tablet' has occurred.

[^1]: Durr-ul-manthur, vol. 6, p. 331

[^2]: Surah Waqi'ah, No. 56, verses 49-50

[^3]: Majma.-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 466.

[^4]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 543.

[^5]: Sahifah-Sajjadiyah, Sixth Supplication.

[^6]: Tafsir-i- 'Ali-'bn-lbrahim-Qummi, vol. 2, p. 414.

[^7]: Qisas-i-Qur’an, Balaqi, p. 288.

[^8]: A'lam-i-Qur'an, p. 137-138.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Tafsir-i- Ayashi; narrated in Al-Mizan, vol. 20, p. 377.


