Surah Tariq, Chapter 86
=======================

**(The Night)**

**Number of Verses:** **17**

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

The subjects in this Surah are mainly divided into two groups:

1. Resurrection and

2. The Holy Qur'an and its value.

At the beginning, after some reflective oaths, it points to the
existence of some divine protectors of man.

To make manifest the possibility of Resurrection, it refers to the first
stage of man's life and his creation from a sperm drop and then it draws
a conclusion that the Creator, who is able to create him from such a
lowly life-germ, can give life again, to him.

In the following part, it describes the Resurrection and the uniqueness
it has. Then, it offers some meaningful oaths to verify the importance
of the Holy Qur'an; and finally, it finishes the Surah by mentioning
Allah’s punishments for the unbelievers in order to give a warning to
them.

The Virtue in Studying this Surah
---------------------------------

There is a tradition from the Prophet (S) for the virtue of this Surah
which says:

*“For the person who studies this Surah, Allah will reward this action
ten times the number of stars in the sky.”*[^1]

There is a narration from Imam Sadiq which says:

*"Anyone who recites Surah Tariq in his obligatory prayers will have a
high rank with Allah in the Hereafter, and will be the prophets ' close
friend and companion in Heaven.”*[^2]

Obviously, it is the content of the Surah and acting accordingly which
deserves such great rewards; not its mere recitation without following
by action.

Surah Tariq, Verses 1-10
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّمَاءِ وَالطَّارِقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الطَّارِقُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّجْمُ الثَّاقِبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ لَمَّا عَلَيْهَا حَافِظٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَنْظُرِ الْإِنْسَانُ مِمَّ خُلِقَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُلِقَ مِنْ مَاءٍ دَافِقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَخْرُجُ مِنْ بَيْنِ الصُّلْبِ وَالتَّرَائِبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَجْعِهِ لَقَادِرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تُبْلَى السَّرَائِرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ قُوَّةٍ وَلَا نَاصِرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. "By the Sky and the Night-visitant (therein)"***  
***2. "And what will explain to thee what the Night-visitant is?"***  
***3. "(It is) the Star of piercing brightness,”***  
***4. "There is not a soul but has a protector over it."***  
***5. "So let man contemplate on from what he is created!"***  
***6. "He is creased from a drop emitted."***  
***7. "Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs:"***  
***8. "Surely He is able to bring him back (to life)!”***  
***9. "On the Day when hidden things will he made manifest,”***  
***10. "man will have no strength, and no helper."***

### O man! Consider of What You Are Created!

This Surah, like many other Surahs of the last part of the Holy Qur'an,
begins with some beautiful oaths to reflect upon which express a great
fact.

***"By the Sky and the Night-visitant (therein)"***

***"And what will explain to thee what the Night-visitant is?"***

***"(It is) the Star of piercing brightness,”***

The term /tariq/ is derived from /tarq/ 'to pound'. And /tariq/ means
'way’ because the path is pounded by the feet of pedestrians. The term
/matraqah/ 'a sledge hammer' is used for pounding iron and materials
like this.

And since the doors are closed at night when people arrive they have to
pound on them to gain permission to enter, then, that which comes at
night is called /tariq/ ‘the night-visitant'.

Amir-al-Motmineen Ali (as) said about Ash'ath-ibn-i-Qays, the hypocrite,
who came to the door of his house at night and thought that he could
bribe Hazrat Ali by giving him some honey paste so that he would not
judge against him, then Hazrat Ali said:

*"A stranger incident than this is that a man came to us in the night
with a closed flask full of honey paste.”*[^3]

The Qur’an has defined 'tariq', itself, where it says:

***"(It is) the Star of piercing brightness."'***

This Night-visitant is the brilliant star that appears very high in the
sky as if it almost pierces its depth; and it is so bright that it
splits the thick darkness and penetrates to the eyes.

There are many different ideas said about the kind of 'star' mentioned
in this verse. Some of them, from the point of its distance and
highness, say that it may be 'Pleiades'. Some others, from the point of
its brightness, say that it is ‘Saturn', or 'Venus', or 'a meteor'. Some
ideas say that it can be any star which glitters in the sky.

But, taking note that the modifier 'piercing' mentioned in the verse for
the star, shows that the star is not any star, but it is a forceful
bright star whose light passes through the darkness of night and
penetrates to men's eyes.

Some narrations denote that the 'star' is 'Saturn' which is one of the
planets of the solar system and is very bright.

This very idea is also understood from a narration of Imam Sadiq (as)
when he was asked by an astronomer regarding what Allah meant by
/thaqib/ in that verse and he answered:

*“It is 'Saturn' which appears in the seventh sky. But its light passes
the skies and reaches the first sty. That is why Allah has called it
‘the star of piercing brightness’.”*[^4]

It is noteworthy that Saturn is the last and the farthest star to us in
the solar system which is visible simply by the naked eye. And from
among the planets of the solar system, it is the sixth in distance from
the sun, but if we count the moon's circle, it will be the seventh, so
Imam Sadiq (as) has considered its circle as the seventh sky in the
mentioned narration.

Having some outstanding characteristics, Saturn deserves to be sworn to.
It is the farthest visible star in the solar system and everything which
is very high is exemplified in Arabic literature.

Saturn is notable for several concentric bright rings, which revolve
around it in the plane of its equator, and are the most amazing
celestial phenomena about which meteorologists have delivered various
ideas. But, there are still more secrets about it that must be
discovered in the future.

Some experts believe that there are ten moons around Saturn eight of
which can be seen through ordinary telescopes, but, two of them can only
be seen by very great and powerful telescopes.

It is clear that when the Holy Qur'an was revealed no one knew all of
these facts and it is after many centuries that we know them now.

Moreover, the commentary of 'the star of piercing brightness' may cover
any bright star, and Saturn, being one of its examples, does not
contradict the above idea.

'Piercing star' is one of the wonders of the celestial creations and may
be one of the examples of the above mentioned commentary.

As in Surah Saffat, No. 37, verse 10 which says:

***“Except such as snatch away something by stealth, and they are
pursued by a flaming fire, of piercing brightness.”***

The occasion of revelation recorded in some commentaries for the above
mentioned verse, attests to this idea.

Now let us see what these oaths are for.

In the next verse it says:

***“There is not a soul but has a protector over it.”***

This protector is for recording one's acts and retaining them for the
Reckoning Day.

It is similar to what Surah Infitar, No. 82, verses 10-12 carry over.

They say:

***"And surely there are Watchers over you,”***

***“Honourable scribes:”***

***“They know (and understand) whatever you do."***

Thus, you are not alone. Whoever you are, and wherever you are the
angels of Allah watch you. This is a subject that can be very useful in
training and improving man, if he will only consider it.

It is noteworthy that the

***'protectors'***

are not defined in the verse as to who they are, and what kind of things
they protect, but some other verses of the Qur’an clearly certify that
they are angels and the things that they protect are 'man's deeds';
irrespective of good or evil.

Some probabilities denote that this protection is the protection of
humans from accidents and fatal events. Verily, if Allah did not protect
them, there would be few people who would die of natural causes, because
the number of terrible accidents is so large that no one can escape from
them, particularly young children.

Or, the protection may be the protection of humans against the whispers
of Satans, of Jinns and of men. They are so many that if Allah did not
protect them, no one would remain safe.

But the first commentary seems the most suitable, because the latter
verses talk about Resurrection and Reckconing, though all three
commentaries, together, do not seem improbable.

It is praiseworthy that the aforementioned oaths have a close
relationship with the protection of angels from the deeds of man; that
which the oaths are for.

Since, the stars, rotating in a regular order high in the sky, are as an
evidence for the existence of a definite regularity in the universe,
then how can man's deeds be left alone without a reckoning and
protection from the divine protectors?

Then, to prove the possibility of the Resurrection for those who
consider it impossible, it says:

***“So let man contemplate on from what he is created.”***

And, thus, the Qur'an asks and advises all mankind to think about that
which they were created from in the beginning.

But, immediately after that the Qur'an answers the question, itself, and
says:

***"He is creased from a drop emitted."***

A gushing fluid in which his life-germ was floating.

And in another description for 'that water pouring forth' it says:

***“Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs."***

There are many different ideas for the commentary of the terms

***/sulb/ 'backbone'***

and

***/tara'ib/ 'ribs',***

as mentioned in this verse, where the fluid comes forth from between
them. In these ideas the commentators mostly try to comment on these two
terms referring to man and woman from which the egg and sperm form the
foetus.

But, primarily it should be noted that the verse is speaking only about
a man's fluid, because

***'a drop emitted'***

belongs to a man not to a woman since that of a woman does not emit and
it says that the gushing fluid is so that:

***"Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs.”***

Then, it is not appropriate to bring woman into this discussion. It is
better to say that the Qur’an points to one of the two main parts of the
life-germ, viz: a man's seed, which is understandable to all[^5].

And

***'backbone'***

and

***'ribs'***

are a man's back and front; the area between which his fluid comes from.

This is a clear commentary and the meanings of the terms simply conform
to what is found in a dictionary. Meanwhile, there may be greater facts
hidden in the verse that modern science has not found yet, however,
scientists may uncover them in the future.

Then, as a consequence it says that the Creator who created man from a
sperm drop:

***“Surely He is able to bring him back (to life).”***

At first it was dust. Then, after some changes, it varied to a sperm
drop, and eventually it turned into man, after passing some amazing and
complicated stages, of course. So, it will not be difficult for Allah to
bring him back to life again.

This fact is similarly mentioned in some other verses of the Qur'an such
as in Surah Hajj, No. 22, verse 5 which says:

***"O mankind! if you have a doubt about the Resurrection (consider)
that We created you out of dust, then out of sperm...”***

And also in Surah Maryam, No.19, verse 67 which says:

***"Does not man call to mind that We created him before, when he was
nothing?”***

In the next verse it describes the Great Day when it says:

***“On the Day when hidden things will he made manifest."***

The term /tubla/ is based on /balava/ 'to prove by trial or examination'
and since the facts will be made manifest upon examination then the term
is used, here, in the sense of 'appearing’.

The term /sara'ir/ is the plural form of /sarirah/ ‘a secret; or inner
thought, case, mood’.

Yes, on that Day, the day of appearing and the day of sorting out, the
secrets will be uncovered and everything from good or evil, truth or
falsehood, pure or impure will become quite evident. The believing
people will be proud, then, and will be honoured by additional rewards,
but the unbelieving ones will be ashamed and blamed because of this
clear manifestation.

What a painful time he will have who lived a life respectfully, but with
hidden evils; then, everything will become obvious to all! Surely he
will be completely sorry and regretful on that Day. This may be more
painful for him than the flames of fire in Hell.

Surah Rahman, No. 55, verse 41 also says:

***"For the sinners will be known by their Marks...”.***

In some other verses of the Qur’an we read that in the Hereafter there
are some people whose faces are white and bright, but there are others
that have dark and dusty faces[^6].

Verily, similar to the Night-visitant and other stars that appear at
night and everyone can see them in the sky, the protectors of man, who
record and keep his deeds, will unveil everything there, also.

It is narrated from Ma’ath-ibn-Jabal who asked the Prophet (S) about the
interpretation of the term

***/sara'ir/ 'secrets',***

in this verse regarding what secrets there are by which Allah will
examine the people in the Hereafter and he answered:

*“Your secrets are your deeds such as prayers, fasting, religious tax,
ablution, wet dream ceremonial bath, and any other obligatory acts. All
of them are hidden, because if a person wills he says he has said his
prayers but in fact he has not, he says he has made his ablution, but he
has not, and this is the commentary of which Allah says:*

***'On the Day when hidden things will be made manifest’”.***[^7]

But, the great difficulty is that, on that Day:

***“man will have no strength and no helper."***

He will have no power to hide his evils, and no one to help him to ward
off Allah's punishment. Many verses of the Qur’an denote that, on the
Day of Judgment, man will have no helper, no use of ransom, no way of
returning and no chance of fleeing. The only useful means to make one
safe from torments will be pure belief and good deeds.

Surah Tariq, Verses 11-17
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الرَّجْعِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْأَرْضِ ذَاتِ الصَّدْعِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلٌ فَصْلٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هُوَ بِالْهَزْلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ يَكِيدُونَ كَيْدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَكِيدُ كَيْدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَهِّلِ الْكَافِرِينَ أَمْهِلْهُمْ رُوَيْدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. “By the rain giving heaven, (the returning rain),”***  
***12. “And by the earth splitting (with plants):"***  
***13. "Most surely it (the Qur'an) is a decisive word,”***  
***14. "And it is not a thing for amusement.”***  
***15. "Surely they are plotting a scheme (against the truth),”***  
***16. “And I am (also) planning a scheme (against them),”***  
***17. "Therefore grant a delay to the unbelievers: give respite to them
gently (for a while)."***

### We Destroy the Enemies' Plans

Their plots will be of no avail, and Allah’s purpose will prevail.

To follow the previous verses which were about the Resurrection and
realizing it by taking note of the creation of man from sperm, the
following verses continue the same theme, however, for further emphasis
and with more evidences.

It says:

***“By the rain giving heaven, (the returning rain),”***

***"And by the earth splitting (with plants)"***

***“Most surely it (the Qur'an) is a decisive word,”***

that you will return to life.

***“And it is not a thing for amusement.”***

The term /raj'/ is based on /ruju'/ 'return'. In the Arabic language
'rain' is called /raj'/, because water evaporates from the earth and the
seas, rises to form clouds and then once again comes back down as rain;
raining intermittently.

The term /sad'/ means 'to split' and together with what was said about
/raj’/ 'rain' it means splitting of dry, hard earth after rainfall and,
also, the growth of plants.

In fact, these two verses point to dead lands which survive by
life-giving rain. This is what the Qur’an has repeatedly mentioned as an
evidence for the Resurrection.

For example, in Surah Qaf, No. 50, verse 11 it says:

***“…And We give (new) life therewith to land that is dead: thus will be
the Resurrection.”***

So there is an obvious relation between these oaths and what the oaths
are taken for. This is one of the wonders of the Qur'an’s eloquence,
that there is an interesting relationship between the oaths and what the
oaths are for.

Surah Hajj, No.22, verse 5, confirming the Resurrection, refers to both
evidences of man's creation from sperm and its various stages in the
form of foetus, and giving life, again, to dead lands by sending down
rain, and in this very Surah, Tariq, it emphasizes on both of them as
well.

The phrase

***/qaul-un-fasl/ 'a decisive word',***

is a statement that definitely separates Good from Evil. A group of
commentators, considering the aforementioned verses, have related the
statement to Resurrection while some others believe it means 'the Holy
Qur’an' as some narrations of Ahlul-Bayt (as) confirm, too.

Of course, the terms /yaum-ul-fasl/ with the meaning of 'Hereafter' is
used and mentioned in several verses of the Qur'an.

It is, also, probable that the terms /qaul-un-fasl/ mean 'the verses of
Qur'an' some of which announce the Resurrection. Then, both of the above
commentaries can be combined.

A quotation from the Holy Prophet (S) has been said to have been
narrated by Hazrat Ali (as), thus:

*“'There will be a sedition among you soon, '*

the Prophet said.

I asked him what the remedy for it was, and he answered:

*'Qur'an is the remedy which tells you about the past and the future and
your Judgement. It is a statement that separates right from wrong. It is
a serious word. It is not in vain. Allah will defeat any oppressor who
leaves Qur’an. And the person who seeks divine guidance anywhere save
Qur'an will be led astray by Allah’.”*[^8]

Then, to console the Prophet (S) and the believers both, on the one
hand, and for threatening the enemies of Islam, on the other hand, it
says:

***“Surely they are plotting a scheme (against the truth),”***

***“And I am (also) planning a scheme (against them),”***

***“Therefore grant a delay to the unbelievers: give respite to them
gently (for a while).”***

Verily, they always plan wicked schemes to oppose you. Sometimes they
mock you. Sometimes they lay siege on you, economically. Sometimes they
torture the believers. Sometimes they tell others not to listen to the
Qur’anic recitation and make noise in order to be victorious. Sometimes
they call you a soothsayer, mad, etc.

Sometimes they believe Islam in the morning, but they disbelieve in the
evening on the same day to attract some believers to follow them.
Sometimes they tell you that only the poor and miserable people believe
you and follow you, then leave them until they (the unbelievers) come to
you. Sometimes they ask you to accept some of their gods, at least,
until they follow you. And, sometimes they plan a scheme to banish you
or kill you.

In short, every moment the unbelievers can try a new plot to disperse
your followers and oppress the believers, or abolish you in order to
extinguish Allah’s' light.

But they should know that Allah will not allow them to do so, and He has
taken a decision to spread the light of Islam over the world and then
the light of Allah cannot be extinguished with a blow from their mouths.

This bright ever-shining light will not be put out by the plots of these
unregenerate men who plan; but Allah, too, plans.

The term

***/kayd/ 'to plot against'***

is applied both to plotting with an evil purpose (which is used more
than the other usage), and planning with a good purpose, such as Surah
Yusef, No.12, verse 76 which says:

***“...Thus did We plan for Yusef (Joseph).”***

The meaning of

***"the enemies' plot",***

in this verse, is clear with the above explanation about some of the
evils of the unbelievers.

There are many evil plots and wicked plans of this kind, with an evil
purpose, mentioned in the Qur'an, but what is the meaning of Allah’s
plan, in this verse, of having a good purpose? Some commentators believe
that 'granting a delay to the unbelievers 'which ends with their painful
punishment, is its meaning. Some others think that ' the punishment
itself ' carries the meaning.

It is more suitable to say that it means the same beneficence that the
Prophet (S) and the believers got from Allah. They, after respiting the
enemies, caused them to be neglectful and rendered their efforts
ineffective, then, their plans remained fruitless.

In these verses the Prophet (S) is deliberately ordered to act toward
them moderately and give respite to them and not hurry to destroy them;
to let them have the final notes, to wait for a few of them who have a
little readiness to come to Islam.

It is noteworthy that, at first, it says:

***“Therefore grant a delay to the unbelievers”,***

and then it emphasizes:

***“...give respite to them gently (for a while)”.***

It says the same matter twice for emphasis, but in a different way and
with various words so as not to be taken unpleasantly.

The term /ruwayda/ is based on /rud/ 'to try to do something gently',
but, here it means: give respite to them for a while.

Thus, in this short verse three times Allah orders His Prophet to act
with them moderately, and this is a good example for all Muslims to be
patient and careful in their affairs especially when they are faced with
their powerful and dangerous enemies. They should avoid haste and doing
things undesigned or at an inappropriate time.

Moreover, it is better for the Prophet (S) to be patient in delivering
the Message of Allah in order to respite all those who may believe, and
to complete the argument and reason for all of them.

The reason why this respite has been counted short, may be because Islam
overcame its enemies in a short time and their plans did not profit
them. The first failure was at the battle of Badr. Then, later their
plans failed, again, in the battles of Ahzab, Kheybar, Seffin and so on.
At the end of the Prophet's life, they were completely weak when the
light of Islam spread throughout the Arabian Peninsula; and before the
end of one century, it covered most parts of the world at that time.

Or, it may be that the punishment of the Hereafter is near and basically
everything which is definite and sure is counted close.

However, this Surah begins with oaths to the sky and stars, and ends
with threats to the unbelievers who plot and scheme against the
beneficent purpose of Allah. There are also some nice evidences to the
Resurrection in some elegant sentences about the angels, who are the
protectors of man, and for soothing the believers. These verses are not
only short and meaningful, but also beautiful and decisive.

### Supplication

*O Lord! The plots and schemes of the enemies are many in our time. Turn
them to themselves and make their evil plans invalid.*

*O Lord! On the Day when all the secrets will be made manifest, please
put us not to shame.*

*O Lord! We have no power or helper save You. Leave us to no one else,
but to Yourself.*

[^1]: Majma'-al-BayaAn, vol. 10, p. 469:

[^2]: Thawab-ul-A'mal, according to Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 549.

[^3]: Nahj-ul-Balaqa, Sermon 224 (Arabic Version), Sermon 228 (English
Version),

[^4]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 550, Tradition 4

[^5]: see also Surah Najm, No.53, verse 46 and Surah Qiyamat, No. 75,
verse 37

[^6]: Surah ‘Abasa. No. 80, verses 38-41

[^7]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 472; and a similar meaning is found
in Durr-al-manthur, vol. 6, p. 336.

[^8]: 'Sahih-i-Tarmathi’ and 'Sunan-i-Darami’ based on the quotation of
'Ruh-al-Ma'ani, The Commentary, vol. 3, p. 100 and 'Tafsir-i-Maraqi,
vol. 30, p. 118.


