Surah Nabaa, Chapter 78
=======================

**(The Great News)**

**Number of Verses: 40**

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

Most of the verses of the last part of the Qur’an were revealed in
Mecca. The nature of these Surahs is that they put emphasis on the
Creation and the Resurrection, furnished with glad tidings and warnings;
usually in a shocking and awakening tone.

All the verses of the Surahs, except a few, are short and full of
implications. For the same reason, they affect, deeply, on any conscious
person and they awaken some of the unaware, too. They give spirit to
dead‑like people and make the indifferent ones feel responsibility. On
the whole, they have a specific case and an enthusiastic world of their
own, full of enlightenment and attraction.

Surah Nabaa is not an exception to this general principle. It begins
with an awakening question, and ends with a wonderful sentence full of
warning.

The contents of the Surah can be divided into several parts:

The question that is stated in the first verse about the

***“Great News” /naba’-in-\`ażim/***

or the Hereafter.

Examples of the types of Divine Power in the Heavens and on Earth, and
also of men’s lives and their gifts as evidences to the possibility of
the Resurrection and the Hereafter.

Preliminary signs of the Resurrection.

Reference to the painful chastisement of the transgressors.

The encouraging gifts and blessings of Heaven.

Finally, the Surah ends with some intensive warnings about the dreadful
punishment, and then, the sad destiny of the Unbelievers.

The name of the Surah, Nabaa, is taken from its second verse, but
sometimes it is called /’amma/ which is the first word in the first
verse.

The Virtue In Studying Surah Nabaa
----------------------------------

There is a tradition from the Prophet (S) which says:

*“He who studies Surah Nabaa will be satiated, by Allah, with a cold
drink in Heaven”.*[^1]

Another tradition from Imam Sadiq says:

*“He who continues studying Surah Nabaa, everyday, will meet the Holy
Shrine at Mecca (Kaaba) before the year ends”.*[^2]

Again, another tradition from the Prophet (S) says:

*“He who studies it (Surah Nabaa) and learns it by heart, on the Day of
Judgment, his reckoning will be concluded (so quickly) equal to the same
length of time it takes to say a single prayer”.*

Surah Nabaa, Verses 1-5
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَمَّ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ النَّبَإِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي هُمْ فِيهِ مُخْتَلِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا سَيَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ كَلَّا سَيَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “O what do they ask (one another)?”***  
***2. “Of the Great News,”***  
***3. “That in which they differ”.***  
***4. “Nay! they shall soon (come to) know,”***  
***5. “Nay indeed! they shall soon (come to) know”.***

### The Great News!

In the first verse, it astonishingly questions:

***“O what do they ask (one another)?”***

Then, without expecting them to reply, the Qur’an answers:

***“Of the Great News”.***

***“That in which they differ”.***

For the meaning of /naba’-in-\`ażim/, the commentators have put forth
different ideas. Some of them say it means: ‘the Day of Resurrection’
while some others have meant it as ‘the revelation of the Holy Qur’an’
and still others have said it means: ‘The whole Islamic Principles’. In
some narrations it has been commented on to mean ‘vicegerency and
guardianship’; which will be dealt with later.

Paying careful attention to all verses of the Surah, especially to some
points in the following verses and specifically to the sentence:

***“Verily The Day of Sorting out is (a day) appointed”,***

which has come after mentioning some Signs of Allah’s Power in the
heavens and on the Earth, and also paying attention to the fact that the
most intensive opposition of the Unbelievers was about the existence of
‘Resurrection’; all in all most commentators approve of the first idea,
that is, in the sense of ‘Resurrection’ for the phrase
/naba’-in-\`ażim/.

As Raqib says in his book, Mufradat, the term /naba’/ means: ‘a great
news which is useful and man is acquainted with it or has a strong
conviction to it; and these three things are the conditions of /naba’/’.

Therefore, the term

***/’ażim/ ‘great’***

is more emphatic and, on the whole, indicates that this news, about
which some were doubtful, has been a known fact, great and full of
importance, and therefore, its most appropriate meaning is
‘Resurrection’.

The phrase

***‘they ask (one another)’***

may refer only to the Unbelievers who used to ask each other about the
Resurrection; of course, not for their research and comprehension, but,
due to their doubts.

It is also probable that the question is from the believers or from the
Prophet (S), himself.

Here, a question may arise that: if /naba’-in-\`ażim/ refers to the
Resurrection, which apparently all the unbelievers denied, why does it
say

***“That in which they differ”?***

To answer this question, we say that: the denial of the Resurrection, in
an absolute form, does not decisively exist even among the unbelievers,
because many of them assume that there is the existence of the spirit
after death, or in other words, ‘the spiritual Resurrection’.

Some of them were doubtful about the bodily Resurrection as in Surah
Naml No. 27, verse 66:

***“Still less can their knowledge comprehend the Hereafter: nay, they
are in doubt and uncertainty regarding it, nay, they are blind
thereunto!”.***

And some of them completely denied the Resurrection and even said that
the Prophet (S) was mad, because of his claim about Resurrection; as in
Surah Saba, No. 34, verse 7‑8:

***“The Unbelievers say (in ridicule): Shall we point out to you a man
that will tell you, when you are all scattered to pieces in
disintegration, that you shall (then be raised) in a New Creation?”.***

***“Has he invented a falsehood against Allah, or has a spirit (seized)
him? Nay, it is those who believe not in the Hereafter, that are in
(real) Penalty, and in farthest Error”.***

Thus, their rejection of the Resurrection is certain.

It further states:

***“Nay! they shall soon (come to) know”.***

***“Nay indeed! they shall soon (come to) know”.***

When they will be informed, they will cry and will be sorry for
themselves; each of them saying:

***“Lest the soul should (then) say: Ah! Woe is me! in that I neglected
(my Duty) towards Allah...”***[^3]

On the Day that they are surrounded by massive punishment, and they wish
to return to their former life, they ask:

***“Is there any way (to effect) a return?”***[^4]***.***

Even when they, being at the point of death, are sure about the
partition and Resurrection; because all the curtains will be removed,
then, and the facts of the next world will became obvious, they cry
saying:

***“...O my Lord! send me back (to life)”,***

***“In order that I may work righteousness in the things I
neglected...”***[^5]***.***

The Arabic term

***/saya’ lamun/ ‘they shall soon come to know’***

begins with ‘

**  
**

س

  
’ (s) which is usually used as a sign for near future, and denotes that
the Hereafter is near; that this whole life is just a fleeting moment in
comparison to it.

Commentators have suggested different ideas about the twice repeated
verse, mentioned above, which says the same facts for emphasis: To
inform them that the Hereafter is in the near future, or to tell them
two separate matters:

(1) That they will see the punishment of this world in the near future,
and

(2) that they will see the next world’s punishment after that (of which,
the first idea seems more appropriate).

It is also probable that this refers to the improvement and progress of
man’s knowledge, when there will be so many reasons and evidences for
the possibility of the Resurrection that even the unbelievers cannot
afford to deny, but can only confess, the Reality.

However, the fault in this commentary is that this kind of knowledge is
for the later generations of mankind, which this verse refers to, and
not for those who used to live at the Prophet’s time (S) and differed on
the existence of the Hereafter.

### Explanation: The Proposition of ‘Vicegerency’ and ‘/naba’‑in‑‘ażim/ (The Great News)

As was mentioned earlier, it has been said that the phrase
/naba’‑in‑‘ażim/ has several meanings: ‘the Hereafter, the Holy Qur’an,
the entire Islamic Principles’, etc. But, the whole concept, taken from
the verses altogether, leads us to ‘Resurrection’ as having the closest
meaning.

There are a lot of narrations, some of which have been cited by the
Household of the Prophet ‘Ahlul Bayt’ (as), and some others by Sunni
commentators, that say the phrase /naba’‑in‑‘ażim/ refers to Hazrat
Ali’s (as) vicegerency and Imamat (the leadership of the Islamic
community), which is a matter of dispute among a group of Muslims, even
today. Or it is interpreted as vicegerency, in general.

Three of the narrations are as follows:

1. Hafiz‑Muhammad‑ibn‑Mo’min‑Shirazi, one of the scholars of the Sunni
Community, has narrated a tradition from the Prophet (S) on the
commentary of the first verse of this Surah, and he (S) said:

*“It means the vicegerency of Ali; about which everyone will be asked in
the grave, and no one in the East or West, in the seas or over the land
passes away without the angels asking him about the vicegerency of
Amir‑al‑Mo’minin, and he will also be asked what his religion is, who
his Prophet is, and who his Imam is”.*[^6]

2. Another narration says that on the day of the Battle of Seffin, a man
from the troops of Sham (Damascus), having his armor on and carrying a
Qur’an with him, entered the battlefield while he was reciting Surah
Nabaa.

Then Ali (as), himself, faced him and questioned him:

*“Do you know what*

***/naba’‑in‑‘ażim/ (the Great News),***

*in which they differ, is?”*

The man replied:

*“No, I do not know”.*

Imam Ali (as) said:

*“I am, by Allah, the very*

***/naba’‑in‑‘ażim/ (the Great News)***

*that you differ in and you quarrel against my vicegerency. You turned
away from my vicegerency after you had pledged allegiance to it, and
only on Dooms Day will you really comprehend, once more, what you had
understood about it before”.*[^7]

3. A narration from Imam Sadiq says:

***“‘The Great News’***

*is the same as Vicegerency”.*[^8]

To gather the contents of these narrations and the commentary of the
verse, in the same sense as ‘Resurrection’, which was previously
mentioned, is possible in two ways:

(1) The phrase /naba’‑in‑‘ażim/ has a broad meaning which includes all
of the meanings previously given, though when these verses were revealed
the Qur’an insisted on ‘Resurrection’ more than anything else. Still,
this does not hinder us from finding more interpretations, of the verse,
other than the above and

(2) as we know and as it has been mentioned repeatedly, the Qur’an has
various meanings; that is, a verse may have several meanings, in
different dimensions, among which only one is obvious by the apparent
words and the other meanings are hidden, but they can be found with the
help of other explanations and are not clear to anyone except ‘the
distinguished ones’.

This is not the only verse that has obvious and hidden meanings. There
are many other verses, in the Holy Qur’an, of which the Islamic
narrations contain different commentaries.

But, we emphatically state that it is not possible to understand the
hidden meanings of the Qur’an without the clear explanations or
commentaries from the Prophet or sinless Imams (as), and the existence
of hidden meanings, in the Qur’an, should not be a possible way of
misusing it by the mischief‑makers who comment on the verses in whatever
way they wish.

### Why is the Resurrection Emphasized On So Much?

It was mentioned, before, that the most important thing which is
emphasized on and spoken about, in the thirtieth part of the Holy
Qur’an; whose Surahs are mostly Meccan, is the Resurrection and man’s
state in the Hereafter.

This is so because, for the improvement of man, the first step is to
know that there is a Reckoning Day. And there is a flawless Court in
which nothing is hidden from its Judges; a Court where you can find no
transgression, no oppressor, and no mistake.

Neither recommendations nor bribes are useful therein. No one can tell a
lie or deny the Truth. In short, there is no way to flee from the grip
of punishment, there; the only way is staying away from sin, here; in
this world.

The belief in there being such a Court shakes man, awakens the sleeping
souls, makes the spirit of piety and responsibility come alive, and
invites human beings to be careful of their duties.

Generally, the main factor in the appearance of corruption, in any
environment, is one of two following points:

(1) the weakness of the watchmen, or

(2) the weakness of judicial organization.

If the watchful guards look over the deeds of man, and careful courts
verify the offenders’ crimes and let no mischief leave without penalty,
then, in such a safe and sound environment, surely inequity, corruption,
transgression, and rebellion will decrease to the minimum.

When the worldly life, under the control of its watchmen and courts is
so, then man’s divine spiritual life is obvious.

Belief in an Omnipresent Unity that:

***“...From whom is not hidden he least little atom...”***[^9]***,***

and belief in the existence of Resurrection, which according to Surah
Zilzal No. 99, verses 7‑8:

***“So, whoever has done an atom’s weight of good shall behold it!”.***

***“And whoever has done an atom’s weight of evil shall behold it”,***

nothing will be forgotten and everything will be in front of man. This
kind of belief supplies such a piety in man that can guide him to the
path of charity and goodness throughout his life.

Surah Nabaa, Verses 6-16
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ نَجْعَلِ الْأَرْضَ مِهَادًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْجِبَالَ أَوْتَادًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخَلَقْنَاكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا نَوْمَكُمْ سُبَاتًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ لِبَاسًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا النَّهَارَ مَعَاشًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَنَيْنَا فَوْقَكُمْ سَبْعًا شِدَادًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا سِرَاجًا وَهَّاجًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْزَلْنَا مِنَ الْمُعْصِرَاتِ مَاءً ثَجَّاجًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِنُخْرِجَ بِهِ حَبًّا وَنَبَاتًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَنَّاتٍ أَلْفَافًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. “Have We not made the earth as a (wide) expanse?”***  
***7. “And the mountains as pegs?”***  
***8. “And We created you in pairs,”***  
***9. “And We made your sleep for repose,”***  
***10. “And We made the night as a covering”***  
***11. “And We made the day for (seeking) livelihood,”***  
***12. “And We built above you seven firmaments”***  
***13. “And We made (therein) a blazing lamp,”***  
***14. “And We sent town from the clouds water in abundance”***  
***15. “That We may bring forth thereby grain and plants,”***  
***16. “And gardens of luxurious growth?”***

These verses are, in fact, an answer to the questions of the rejecters
of the Resurrection, and those who differ on /naba’-in-\`ażim/ ‘the
Great News’ since, these verses mention a portion of the wise order of
this world of being and its reasonable gifts, which have a very
effective function in man’s life.

They are, on the one hand, a few of the clear Signs of Allah’s power
over all things; including the rebirth of the dead, and on the other
hand, they point to the fact that this Wise order cannot exist in vain
since, if with the end of this material world all other things end, too,
this life will certainly be in vain.

Thus, these verses can be considered as some reasons for the
Resurrection from two points of view:

(1) Through the ‘reasoning of power’, and

(2) through the ‘reasoning of knowledge’.

In these eleven verses, twelve important blessings are pointed out,
mixed with grace and affection and accompanied with reasoning and
stimulation of the sentiments. As bare rational reasoning is not quite
sufficient, sentiments and affections are needed.

At first, it begins with the earth and says:

***“Have We not made the earth a (wide) expanse?”***

The term /mihad/, as Raqib cites in his book, Mufradat, means ‘a level
and tidy place’. It is derived from the term /mahd/ ‘a bed, cradle’.
Some commentators and philologists have rendered it to mean ‘bed’, which
is both soft and comfortable.

The use of this term, for the earth, is full of meaning because, on the
one hand, most parts of the land are so smooth and level that man can
build houses thereon and prepares gardens and farms thereabout.

On the other hand, all his necessities are found over the Earth or
hidden on its insides in the form of raw materials and valuable mines.

And, then again, the earth swallows up man’s refuse, and the corpse of
the dead are buried in it; (because of their dissolution and the
absorption of their various microbes in the soil), to be vanished by the
wonderful properties of dust.

Furthermore, the Earth, itself, rotates and then rotates around the Sun
by which the days and nights and the four seasons of the year appear and
these, too, play an important role in man’s life.

In addition, the earth stores up, under its surface, much of the water
that falls down from heaven and then, gradually, distributes it through
springs and subterranean canals.

In short, everything useful for the comfort of the creatures living on
the land, is supplied on this smooth bed; the Earth. The importance of
this great blessing will be made clear only when some slight changes
happen to it.

Then, in order that the importance of the mountains may not be
forgotten, in contrast to the smoothness of the surface of the Earth, it
says:

***“And the mountains as pegs?”.***

Mountains have deep and expanding formations joined together under the
ground. They, armour‑like, protect the Earth’s surface against the inner
pressure caused by the central molten lava, and the outer pressure
resulting from the moon.

Also, mountains stand as lofty walls in the way of terrible storms, and
as safe abodes for men to rest, therein. If they were not so, man’s life
would be quite uncomfortable under the constant strikes of violent
storms.

In addition, mountains are the source of sweet water as well as
different precious mines.

Adding, still, to all of the above, the mountains’ peaks; like gears of
a wheel, restrain, by friction, the thick air mass around the globe, as
if dragging it along with themselves.

Some scientists say that if the surface of the Earth were a flat plain,
then, when the globe turns, the air would slide over it and great storms
would develop. This constant turmoil would make the surface too hot and
uninhabitable.

After mentioning these two phenomenal blessings of Allah, it refers to
the spiritual signs of Allah and says:

***“And we created you in pairs”.***

The term /azwaj/ is the plural form of the term /zauj/ which means
‘mate, companion, a couple, and gender (husband or wife)’ from which not
only is a man created and through which his generation survives, but
also his spouse is counted as the reason for his spiritual tranquility,
as Surah Rum No. 30 verse 21 says:

***“And among His Signs is this, that He created for you mates from
among yourselves, that you may dwell in tranquillity with them, and He
has put love and mercy between your (hearts)...”.***

In other words, the genders (masculine and feminine) are the complement
of each other then, they become complete and this makes them a whole.

Since the term /azwaj/ also means: ‘kinds, species, and classes’, some
commentators have rendered it to mean: ‘the variations in man from the
point of color, race, language, different spiritual levels and talents’;
which are signs of Allah’s greatness and the cause of perfection in
societies.

Then, it refers to ‘sleep’, a grand divine gift to man, and says:

***“And We made your sleep for repose,”.***

The term /subat/ is derived from /sabt/ which originally means
‘discontinue, rest’ and then it was used for the ‘suspension of work’
for the purpose of resting, and that the term ‘Saturday’ in the Arabic
vocabulary is called /yaum‑us‑sabt/, because it had been affected by the
custom of the Jews who stopped working on Saturday.

Thus, the term /subat/ narrowly refers to the stopping of most of man’s
physical and mental activities when he sleeps. The very temporary
stopping of activity causes refreshment and improvement for the tired
organs, strengthening the soul and the body, renewing one’s pleasure,
removing any fatigue and uneasiness, and consequently, making man ready
to start working again.

Though one‑third of the human beings’ lifetime is occupied by sleep and
they have always been entangled with the question of ‘dreams’, still
they wonder about the mysteries of sleep. Even yet, it is not exactly
known why that at a special moment the mind fails to work well, the
eyelids droop and all the limbs come to a peaceful state.

But, one thing is definitely known and that is: sleep is of great
importance to one’s health, and that is why psychiatrists try to make
their patients’ sleep normally and regularly, because it is impossible
to cure them without it.

Those who do not sleep enough are pale, withered, nervous, and dull. On
the contrary, those who sleep normally, when they rise they feel, in
themselves, much pleasure and vitality.

After a tranquil sleep, study progresses very quickly and mental
activity and physical endeavors are often more successful. These facts
show the important functional role of sleep in man’s life.

There are few tortures, for a person, that are as painful as compulsory
sleeplessness. Experiments have shown that man’s tolerance for lack of
sleep is very little and soon he loses his health and becomes sick.

The aforementioned statements about the importance of sleep mean, of
course, a balanced sleep, because, over sleeping, like gluttony, is one
of the graceless behaviors which causes various sicknesses.

It is interesting that there is not a certain time limit for the natural
length of sleep in all persons, but everyone should find the amount of
sleep that one needs regarding his physical and mental activities and
according to one’s own experience.

And stranger still is when human beings are placed in a difficult
situation where they must stay awake for a long time. Their perseverance
for sleeplessness increases, temporarily, so that sometimes they
decrease their sleep to one or two hours, but it has often happened that
when the circumstances have changed, man, both spiritually and bodily,
has demanded the recompense of that sleeplessness and has taken it back.

There are, of course, a few rare individuals who are able to go without
continuous sleep, for months at a time. In contrast, there are some
people who fall asleep even when they are walking on the street or when
they are speaking with another person.

Surely, this state is very dangerous for them, especially if there would
be no one to look after them. Obviously, these kinds of people are sick
and sooner or later they will be faced with physical and spiritual
difficulties.

In short, this wonderful characteristic, which appears in man and is
called ‘sleep’, contains many mysteries and is perceived as a ‘miracle’.

Although the above mentioned verse is about ‘sleep’, as a divine
blessing, it seems that death, and wakefulness could, also, symbolize
Resurrection, so the verse could be a hint to both of them.

Then, again, concerning sleep, it speaks about the blessing of ‘night’
and says:

***“And We made the night as a covering”.***

Following immediately after that, it says:

***“And We made the day for(seeking) livelihood”.***

Contrary to the duelists (because of being uninformed about the secrets
of Creation, where they thought that the light of day is good and the
darkness of night is evil and they believed in a separate god, for both
of them, while thinking that the former originated from ‘God’ and the
latter from Satan) we should give a bit more thought to it, then we will
recognize that both of them are great blessings and are the origin of
other blessings, as well.

According to the above verses, the gloom of night is a cloth and
covering over the body of the Earth and over all living creatures
residing on it. Night, compulsorily, stops the exhausting activities of
the life and makes the gloom of darkness, which is actually peace,
calmness, and tranquility, dominate over everything in order to give the
tired limbs a chance to recover and the gloomy spirit a chance to
revive, since a good and quiet sleep is more likely to be obtained in
the dark.

Besides this, when night comes, the sunshine disappears. If the sun were
to shine continuously, all plants and animals would die from its heat,
and the Earth could not be a dwelling place for them.

For the same reason, the Holy Qur’an has frequently emphasized on this
matter.

Once, it says:

***“Say, see you? If Allah were to make the Day perpetual over you to
the Day of Judgment, what god is there other than Allah who can give you
a Night in which you can rest?...”***[^10]***.***

And after that it adds:

***“It is out of His Mercy that He has made for you Night and Day, that
you may rest therein, and that you may seek of His
Grace...”***[^11]***.***

It is noteworthy that, in the Holy Qur’an, many great things have been
made oath to, once, but ‘night’ has been made oath to seven times, which
illustrates the importance of the darkness of night, since we know that
an oath is made for important affairs.

Those who make the night bright with artificial light and sit up all
night long and sleep during the daytime, instead, become rather
afflicted and sickly.

People, in villages, who sleep soon, at night, and get up early in the
morning, lead healthier lives.

Night has other useful advantages, too.

For instance, the period after midnight and before dawn is the best time
to pray and supplicate to Allah and a very good occasion for
self‑perfection and devotional acts as Surah Zariyat, No. 51, verse 18,
about the qualities of the Righteous, says:

***“And in the hours (wee hours of the morning) of early dawn, they
(were found) praying for forgiveness”.***

The light of the day, too, is a unique blessing. It produces movement,
such as, preparing man for effort and endeavor, and causing the plants
and animals to grow under its rays.

Then, the above sentence which says:

***“And We made the day for (seeking) livelihood”,***

is truly so complete and meaningful that it does not need any further
explanation.

In conclusion, the duration of the day and night and the precise
regularity of their gradual changes, is one of the Signs of Allah in
Creation. Moreover, it is counted as a natural calendar for the
arrangement of man’s life timetable.

Then, from the Earth our attention is turned to the heavens and it says:

***“And We built above you seven firmaments”.***

The number ‘seven’, here, may be a multiplication figure which refers to
the numerous celestial spheres, groups of systems, galaxies and the
different firmaments, in the existing universe, which have a firm nature
and are created massive and strong.

Or, it may be a figure of quantity in the sense that what we see from
the galaxies belongs to the first sky, as Surah Saffat, No. 37, verse 6
states:

***“We have indeed decked the lower heaven with beauty (in) the
stars”,***

and beyond that there are six more skies that are far from man’s reach.

It is also probable that the phrase

***/sab\`an shidada/ ‘seven firmaments’***

refers to the several layers of the atmosphere surrounding the Earth
which, in spite of being apparently transparent, is so dense that it
protects Earth from the continually falling meteorites.

As soon as one of them enters Earth’s atmosphere it becomes hot enough
to burn, because of its violent contact with the protecting layers and
then it turns to ash and comes down slowly over the land. If this layer
of atmosphere did not exist, our cities and farms would be exposed to
the invasion of these meteorites day and night.

Some scientists have calculated the tenseness of the atmosphere,
surrounding the Earth, as being more than one hundred kilometers thick,
and equal to a steel ceiling ten meters thick!

And this is only one of the commentaries for the phrase

***/sab\`an shidada/ ‘seven firmaments’.***

After a short description about the creation of the heavens, attention
is paid to the Sun, the great world‑illuminating gift, and says:

***“And We made (therein) a blazing lamp”.***

The term /wahhaj/ is based on the term /wahaj/ which means ‘light and
heat’ issuing from fire. Therefore, the term with this sense ‘brightly
burning’ used for the Sun, points to a couple of great blessings that
arc the origin of all material gifts of this world, that is ‘light’ and
‘heat’.

The light of the Sun not only lights man’s surrounding environment and
the whole solar system, but also is very effective in the growth of
living creatures.

Its heat, in addition to the effect that it directly has on the lives of
human beings, animals and plants, is the main cause of the existence of
clouds, winds, and rainfall necessary for the irrigation of dry lands

Because of its ultraviolet rays, the Sun is very useful in destroying
microbes. If it were not, generations of living creatures would perish
in a short time.

The Sun constantly illuminates the whole world, free of charge, with its
warm, bright light and from an appropriate distance. It is neither so
hot and burning, nor so cold and dim; and it offers itself to all of us.

If we compare the value of energy produced by the Sun, with the price of
other sources of energy, it adds up to a very large sum. Let us assume
that we grew an apple tree with artificial light and energy. Each apple
would cost an extraordinary amount. But now, indeed, we receive this
worldly productive light, freely, from /siraj‑an‑wahhaj/ ‘a blazing
lamp’.

The Sun is the star nearest the Earth, whose mean distance from it is
nearly 93,000,000 miles (about 150,000,000 kilometers); its diameter is
about 865,000 miles; its mass is about 322,000 times, and its volume
more than 1, 300,000 times, that of the Earth, and its density is about
one‑fourth that of the Earth.

Its outer heat is about 6,000º C (10,000 F). (The Kelvin temperature
scale uses a degree of which the unit of measurement equals the
centigrade degree, but it is numbered from absolute zero, which is
‑273.16º C). All of these are arranged, in such a way, so that if they
were a little more or a little less than what they are, it would be
impossible for life to exist on the Earth.

Following the description of the gifts of ‘light’ and ‘heat’, it speaks
of another important matter, about life, which closely relates to the
subject of sunshine and says:

***“And We sent down from the clouds water in abundance”.***

The term /mu\`şarat/ is the plural form of the word /mu\`şar/ which is
based on the term /\`aşr/ in the sense of ‘pressure’ and the term is
used with the meaning of ‘clouds emitting or pressing out rain’, as if
to press itself to pour water.

Some others have said that it means ‘the clouds that are ready to rain’,
because the form of the word used in Arabic texts denotes to ‘readiness
for something’.

Some commentators have said that /mu\`şarat/ is not an adjective for the
word ‘clouds’, it is an adjective for the word, ‘winds’ which press on
the clouds from every side in order for it to rain.

The term /thajjaj/ is based on /thajj/ which means ‘to pour abundant
water, continuously’ and also it is used, here, in the Arabic intensive
form. So, on the whole, the meaning of the verse is that: ‘We sent down,
continuously, abundant water from the clouds emitting rain’.

Rain, by itself, has some benefits and merits when it falls: it makes
the air fresh, it washes the dirt away, it decreases the heat of the
weather; it even moderates the cold weather, it decreases the cause of
diseases and it brings man spirit and joy.

But the following verses point to three other great benefits of rain; it
says:

***“That we may bring forth thereby grain ant plants”.***

***“And gardens of luxurious growth”.***

Raqib cites in his book, Mufradat, that the term /alfaf/ denotes that
the trees of this garden are so thick and entangled that they are joined
to each other.

In fact, in those two previous verses, all of the foodstuff that grows
on the land and which men and animals use have been pointed out because
a great part of it is compiled of grains /habba/, the vegetables and
roots /nabata/ and, thirdly, fruits /jannat/.

It is true that in these two verses only three outstanding benefits of
rain are mentioned, but its benefits, undoubtedly, are not limited only
these.

Seventy percent of man’s body weight is made up of water; the main
origin of all living creatures, as the Qur’an says:

***“...We made from water every living thing...”***[^12]

Therefore, water acts as the essential property in the life of living
creatures, especially man.

Not only man’s body, but also many factories are paralyzed without
water, and a lot of manufactures would fold, too, without the
availability of water.

The beauty and the livelihood of nature is due to water, and the best
commercial and economical trade routes, of the world, are waterways.

### Explanation: The Relation Between These Verses and the Resurrection

Through the above eleven verses, the greatest divine gifts and the most
basic necessities of man’s life are pointed out, i.e. light, darkness,
heat, water, land, and plants.

The statement about this precise regularity, on the one hand, is a clear
proof of Allah’s power over everything.

Therefore, there would be no doubt for anyone as to how Allah can bring
the dead to life again; as the Qur’an says, very clearly, for an answer
to the rejecters of the Hereafter:

***“Is not He Who created the heavens ant the earth able to create the
like thereof? Yes indeed! for He is the Creator Supreme, of skill and
knowledge (infinite)!”***[^13]

On the other hand, this great and lofty establishment certainly has a
definite goal, which undoubtedly cannot be construed as the mere ‘life
of this world’ or being satisfied by simply eating, drinking, and
sleeping, but Allah’s knowledge requires an aim higher than this goal
and, in another sense, the first life is an admonishment for the Next
Life, an’ a stopover on man’s long journey, as Surah Mo’minun, No. 23,
verse 115 verifies:

***“Did you then think that We had created you in jest that you would
not be brought back to Us (for account)?”***

And, too, sleeping and wakefulness can be seen as a kind of death and
rebirth, and the dry and dead lands that are revived by falling rains
again and again, every year, are before our very eyes the incidents that
refer to the Resurrection.

They illustrate the Hereafter and the life after death. Surah Fatir, No.
35 verse 9 attests to this idea.

It, after pointing to the revival of the dead lands by rain, says:

***“...even so (will be) the Resurrection!”***

Surah Nabaa, Verses 17-20
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ يَوْمَ الْفَصْلِ كَانَ مِيقَاتًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يُنْفَخُ فِي الصُّورِ فَتَأْتُونَ أَفْوَاجًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفُتِحَتِ السَّمَاءُ فَكَانَتْ أَبْوَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسُيِّرَتِ الْجِبَالُ فَكَانَتْ سَرَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. “Verily the Day of Sorting out is (a day) appointed”.***  
***18. “The Day when the Trumpet shall be blown and you shall come forth
in groups”.***  
***19. “And the heaven shall be opened and become (wide as) gates,”***  
***20. “And the mountains shall be set in motion as if they were a
mirage”.***

### Finally, the Promised Day Will Come

There were some various evidences for Resurrection referred to in the
previous verses.

Here, as a consequence, the first verse says:

***“Verily the Day of Sorting out is (a day) appointed,”***

The phrase

***/yaum‑al‑fasl/ ‘the Day of Sorting out’***

is a very meaningful one which speaks of isolations on that Great Day:
The separation of Good from Evil, the separation of the believing
good‑doers from disbelieving sinners, the isolation of parents from
child, and brothers from each other.

The term /miqat/ is based on the term /waqt/ ‘time’ which means ‘an
appointed time’. The certain places, where the pilgrims to Kaaba put on

their pilgrimage dress, are called /miqat/, because they gather there at
an appointed time.

Then, some of the specialties and the events of that Great Day are
detailed:

***“The Day when the Trumpet shall be blown and you shall come forth in
groups”.***

It is well understood, from the verses of the Holy Qur’an, that two
great events will happen

***“...when the Trumpet shall be blown”***

In the first incident, the order of the universe becomes disturbed and
all the people, over the earth, and those who are in the heavens will
die. In the second case the world will be renewed, the dead will return
to life and the Resurrection will occur.

The term /nafx/ means ‘blow’ and the term /şur/ means ‘trumpet’ which is
usually sounded for stopping or starting the caravans or troops, and the
people, in them, understand this from its two different sounds whether
they should stop or start.

This is a delicate point referring to those two great events. And what
is said in the above verse, is a hint to the ‘second blast’, when ‘the
dead are revived and the Resurrection occurs’.

This verse says that on that Day,

***“...you shall come forth in groups”,***

while Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 95 says:

***“And every one of them will come to Him singly on the Day of
Judgment”***

and, also, Surah Asra, No. 17, verse 71 says:

***“One day We shall call together all human beings with their
(respective) Imams...”.***

To collect these senses together, we see that ‘people being in groups’
is not in contrast with

***‘every group enters the Resurrection with its respective Imam’.***

And ‘every one of them will coming singly’ is stated for the reason that
there are several stopovers in the Hereafter.

People may come in groups with their respective leaders; leading or
misleading, at the first halting places, but when they stand before the
throne of Justice, they stand individually, or as Surah Qaf, No. 50,
verse 21 says:

***“And there will come forth every soul: with each will be an (angel)
to drive and an (angel) to bear witness”.***

It is also probable that they come one by one, because they are
separated from their friends, partners and supporters Since, in the
Hereafter, everyone is alone with one’s own deeds.

***“And the heaven shall be opened and becomes (wide as) gates”.***

### What are the meanings of ‘be opened’ and ‘gates’?

Some commentators have said that it means that the doors of the ‘unseen
world’ will be opened to the ‘intuition world’ where the curtains will
be removed, thus making the world of angels open to the world of
man.[^14]

Some others think that this verse points to what is said in other verses
of the Holy Qur’an, such as in Surah Inshiqaq, No. 84 verse 1 which
says:

***“When the Sky is rent asunder”,***

and on another occasion in relation to the same sense, but using another
word it says:

***“When The Sky is cleft asunder”***[^15]***.***

In fact, there will appear so many clefts in the celestial spheres that
it will seem as if they have changed into open gates.

There is another probability that man, in the present conditions of this
world, cannot venture through the heavens, and if it were possible for
him to, it would be strictly limited, as if, the present circumstances
had shut the gates of the skies to him. But, in the Hereafter, man will
become free from the earthly world and the gate‑ways to the heavens will
be opened to him, and then the necessary conditions will become
available.

In other words, on that Day, the skies will be ‘cleft asunder’ and after
that new skies and earth will be substituted, as Surah Ibrahim, No. 14,
verse 48 says:

***“One day the Earth will be changed (into) a different Earth and so
will be the heavens...”***

On this occasion the gates of the skies are opened for the earthly men
to go through and follow their ways: the righteous go into Heaven whose
doors will be opened to them:

***“...until behold, they arrive there; its gates will be opened; and
its keepers will say: Peace be upon you...”***[^16]

It is in the same place that angels come to them from every door and
congratulate them:

***“…and angels shall enter unto them from every gate (with the
salutation)”***[^17]***.***

And the doors of Hell will he opened to the Unbelievers:

***“The Unbelievers will be led to Hell in crowds: until when they
arrive there, its gates will he opened...”***[^18]

And. thus, man arrives in a place where the width is as wide as the
phenomenal earth and heavens:

***“...and for a garden whose width is that (of the whole) of the
heavens and of the earth...”***[^19]***.***

And finally, the next verse, explaining the events of the Hereafter,
illustrates the status of the mountains and says:

***“And the mountains shall vanish as if they were a mirage”.***

As it is understood from all the different verses of the Qur’an about

***‘the end of the mountains in the Hereafter’,***

that mountains will go through stages: at first they will move:

***“And the mountains are in motion”***[^20]***.***

Then they will be taken off and crushed:

***“...and the earth and mountains are lifted up and crushed with a
single blow”***[^21]***.***

And after that they will be as a poured heap of sand:

***“...and the mountains become a slipping heap of sand”***[^22]***.***

Then, they will change like fibers of teased or carded wool which can be
moved about by the winds:

***“And the mountains will be like carded wool”***[^23]***.***

They will turn to dust, then, and scatter about:

***“And the mountains shall be crumbled to atoms”,***

***“Becoming dust scattered abroad”***[^24]***.***

And finally, as the current verse denotes, there will remain only a
trace of them as a mirage.

Thus, mountains will disappear throughout the earth at last, and the
land will be level:

***“They ask you concerning the Mountains: say, My Lord will uproot them
and scatter them as dust”;***

***“He will leave them as plains smooth and level”***[^25]***.***

The term /sarab/ is based on the term /sarab/ and means: ‘a mirage’, a
deceitful appearance as of water in the desert. Then anything that has
an appearance, but is nothing, indeed, is called ‘mirage’.

In fact, the mountains will turn into dust and will be scattered in the
air in a state like a mirage. When high solid mountains will have a
destiny like this, the state of other changes in the world and, also,
the state of people of great authority, in this life, will be obvious
there; a mere mirage.

The following question may arise: Do these events happen with the ‘first
blast’, which is the end of this world, or with the ‘second blast’,
which is the beginning of the Resurrection?

Since the verse

***“The Day when the trumpet shall be blown and you shall come forth in
groups”***

certainly relates to the ‘first blast’, when people survive and arrive
at the Hereafter in groups, this verse must be concerned with the same
blast, too, but its beginning (the movement of the mountains) may occur
with the ‘first blast’ and its end (changing as a mirage) with the
‘second blast’

There is another probability that all the stages of the mountains relate
to the first blast, however, since the range of these two blasts are
almost close to each other, they are mentioned together, as in some
other verses of the Qur’an. The events of the first blast are mentioned
with the events of the second blast (as in Surahs Takwir and Infitar).

It is noteworthy that in the former verses mountains were referred to as
‘pegs’ and the earth as a ‘cradle’; but in these verses it is said that
on the Day when the order of the destruction of this world will be
issued, that cradle will be disturbed and those great pegs will be
leveled and, hence, their tangible matter will become decomposed and
shattered.

Surah Nabaa, Verses 21-30
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ كَانَتْ مِرْصَادًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلطَّاغِينَ مَآبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَابِثِينَ فِيهَا أَحْقَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَذُوقُونَ فِيهَا بَرْدًا وَلَا شَرَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا حَمِيمًا وَغَسَّاقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَزَاءً وِفَاقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا لَا يَرْجُونَ حِسَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا كِذَّابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ أَحْصَيْنَاهُ كِتَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَذُوقُوا فَلَنْ نَزِيدَكُمْ إِلَّا عَذَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “Surely Hell lies in ambush”.***  
***22. “For the transgressors a destination”.***  
***23. “To abide therein for ages”.***  
***24. “Nothing cool shall they taste therein, nor any drink”.***  
***25. “Except a boiling fluid and pus”.***  
***26. “A fitting recompense (for their evil)”.***  
***27. “Surely they used not to look forward to the reckoning (for their
deeds)”.***  
***28. “And they rejected Our Signs with strong denial”.***  
***29. “And everything have We recorded in a book”.***  
***30. “So taste you (the fruit of your deeds); for no increase shall We
grant you, but in punishment”.***

### Hell is a Great Ambush!

After presenting some of the evidences of Resurrection and a part of its
incidents, attention is paid to the destiny of the Unbelievers and says:

***“Surely Hell lies in ambush”,***

***“For the transgressors a destination”.***

***“To abide therein for ages”.***

The term /mirşad/ is a place‑noun which means ‘a place of observation,
or of ambush’. Raqib cites in his book Mufradat: ‘/marşad/ and /mirşad/
both mean the same thing with a slight difference; that /mirşad/ is
called a place that is made especially for an ambush’.

Some commentators have said that the term is in the Arabic intensive
form, with the same sense as that of a person who lies in ambush,
continuously. Of course, the first meaning is both more common and more
appropriate.

The question of

***‘Who is lying in wait, in Hell, for the transgressors?’,***

has been answered with

***‘the angels of chastisement’,***

because according to Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 71 the whole of
mankind, good or evil, will pass by the fire of Hell or over it, thus:

***“Not one of you but will pass over it: this is with thy Lord, a
Decree which must be accomplished”.***

In this companion passage, the angels of chastisement are lying in wait
to catch the transgressors.

If we comment on the term with the meaning of its Arabic intensive form,
Hell is lying in wait and each of the transgressors, who passes by, will
be absorbed inside, and in this passage it can be seen that none of them
will he safe from fire since, either the angels of chastisement or the
intensive absorption of Hell, will capture them.

The term /ma’ab/ means: ‘a place of return’, and sometimes means:
‘residence’. It is used, here, with the latter meaning.

The term /aĥqab/ is the plural form of /huqb/ with the sense of ‘a long
space of time’. The ‘space’ has been commented on, differently, as to
being ‘forty’, ‘seventy’ or ‘eighty’ years. In any case, this sense
denotes that the transgressors will remain in Hell for a long time, but
it will end at last. This contrasts with the verses that denote the
eternity of chastisement for them.

The commentators have followed different tracks in commenting on this,
for example:

Among the consensus of the commentators, a well‑known commentary says
that the term /aĥqab/, in this text, means that ‘some long spaces of
time will pass one after another without having an end; with each one
that passes, another substitutes’.

In some traditions, it is said that this verse is about those evildoers
who will finally be free from the fire, not about those who will be in
Hell forever.[^26]

Then, to point to a small part of the great punishments in Hell, it
says:

***“Nothing cool shall they taste therein, nor any drink”.***

***“Except a boiling fluid, and pus”.***

And also, of course, the thick hot smoke mentioned in Surah Waqiah No.
56, verse 43 thus:

***“And in the shades of Black Smoke”.***

The term /ĥamim/ means ‘a boiling water’ and the term /qassaq/ means
‘pus’ flowing from a wound or sore, and some have commented on it to
mean ‘bad‑smelling fluids’.

The Righteous, in contrast with them, drink the wholesome pure drinks
from the heavenly springs gifted by Allah:

***“...and their Lord will give them to drink a Drink, Pure and
Holy”***[^27]***.***

And there are some drinks for them, in nice heavenly containers, which
are sealed with musk:

***“Whose seal is musk...”***[^28]***.***

What a contrast between the righteous and evildoers!

Since these grave and dreadful punishments may seem surprising to some,
in addition to this, it says:

***“A fitting recompense (for their evil)”.***

And why not? Those who were cruel to the oppressed, in the world, and
had no mercy on anyone; tyrannical branding all the hearts and spirits
so that it seemed that they burnt their victims, violently, deserve to
suffer painful punishments like that and their drinks should, also, be
so.

Basically, as we have mentioned repeatedly, it is understood from the
verses, of the Qur’an, that at least many of the chastisements in the
Hereafter are the incarnation of men’s deeds in this world.

For instance, Surah Tahrim No. 66, verse 7 says:

***“O you Unbelievers! Make no excuses this Day! You are being but
requited for all that you did!”***

(And now you see them in front of you).

To explain the cause of these punishments, it says:

***“Surely they used not to look forward to the Reckoning (for their
deeds)”.***

And the same carelessness paid to the Reckoning and the Day of Judgment
was the cause of their rebellion, tyranny, and cruelty, which resulted
in this dreadful destiny for them.

In fact, the lack of Faith, about the Reckoning, is a certain cause of
rebellion; that which is the cause of those grave chastisements.

The term /layarjun/ is derived from /raja‘/ which means both ‘hope’ and
lack of fear and terror’. In principle, when one hopes and expects a
penalty, naturally he fears, and if he does not expect it, he does not
dread it, and these two correlate with each other. Then, those who do
not have hope in the Reckoning do not fear, either.

The term /inna/ shows emphasis; the term /kanu/ is a sign for the past
continuous tense; the term /hisaba/ which has been used in an indefinite
form, here, after the negative sign of /la/, means ‘reckoning’ and in
general, all point to the fact that they, the transgressors, never
expected any Reckoning or the Record, at all.

Or, in other words, they had forgotten about the Day of Judgment and
they left no room for it in their lives. It is natural that such persons
who become the doers of any great evil and sin will finally be involved
in these painful punishments.

***“And they rejected Our Signs with strong denial”.***

Their low desires had become so strong in them that they denied all the
Signs of Allah in order to continue going astray and accomplish their
unlawful wishes.

It is obvious that these verses carry some broad meanings, so that they
include the verses consisting of the unity of Allah, prophecy, divine
legislation, creation, the prophets miracles, precepts, and traditions
And, regarding the denial of the extensive Divine Signs and evidences,
that have covered the world of creation and divine legislation, we
should accept the punishment for these people as ‘a fitting recompense’
and just penalty.

Then, as a warning to these rebels and, also, for the emphasis on the
balance of ‘sin’ and ‘penalty’, and the authority of a fitting
recompense (for their evil), it says:

***“And everything have We recorded in a book”.***

We accept this warning so that we, therefore, would not imagine that
something of our deeds will be left unrecorded and that we will not be
punished for it, and also, that we would never consider the painful
punishments as unjust.

Many of the verses, of the Qur’an, certify the fact that all of man’s
deeds, irrespective of small or great, apparent or hidden, and even
intentions and beliefs, are recorded.

Once it says:

***“All that they do is noted in (their) Books (of Deeds): ‘Every
matter, small and great, is on record’”***[^29]***.***

Another time it says:

***“...Verily, Our messengers record all the plots that you
make!”***[^30]

In addition, it says:

***“...and We record that which they send before and that which they
leave behind...”***[^31]

And then, when the records of the evildoers will be handed to them, they
will cry saying:

***“Ah! Woe to us! What a book is this! It leaves out nothing small or
great, hut takes account thereof!”***[^32]***.***

Undoubtedly, the person who believes in this fact with all his heart,
will be very careful in his deeds and the very belief creates a lofty
wall between him and sin and is counted as one of the important factors,
effective in good training.

In the last verse, of this portion under discussion, the style of
speaking is changed from the third person to the second person,
addressing them directly and in a threatening tone:

***“So taste you (the fruit of your deeds); for no increase shall We
grant you, but in punishment”.***

Whatever you cry, whenever you say

***‘Ah woe to us’,***

or ask to return to the world to do good instead of evil; all are in
vain and you gain nothing, but your punishment.

This is the penalty of those who, when they were faced with the
Prophets’ kind invitation to faith and piety, used to say:

***“It is the same to us whether you admonish us or be not among (our)
admonishers!”***[^33]***.***

And again, this is the penalty of those who, when the messages of Allah,
are recited get nothing from it:

***“...but it only increases their flight (from the
Truth)!”***[^34]***.***

And finally, this is the penalty of those who avoided no sin and were
fond of no act of charity.

It is narrated that the Prophet (S) said:

*“This verse is the most intensive one in the Qur’an about those who
deserve Hell”.*[^35]

Why shouldn’t it be so!? When the Merciful and Beneficent Allah
addresses them with wrath and says:

***“...for no increase shall We grant you, but in punishment”,***

to make them completely hopeless.

Surah Nabaa, Verses 31-37
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ مَفَازًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَدَائِقَ وَأَعْنَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَوَاعِبَ أَتْرَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَأْسًا دِهَاقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْوًا وَلَا كِذَّابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَزَاءً مِنْ رَبِّكَ عَطَاءً حِسَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا الرَّحْمَٰنِ ۖ لَا
يَمْلِكُونَ مِنْهُ خِطَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. “Surely for the Righteous there is a victory,”***  
***32. “Gardens enclosed and vineyards”***  
***33. “And comely maidens, with the freshness of youth, equals in
age”.***  
***34. “And a cup overflowing”.***  
***35. “No Vanity shall they hear therein, nor Untruth,”***  
***36. “A reward from your Lord, an award sufficing,”***  
***37. “Lord of the heavens ant the earth and all between the two, the
All‑merciful, with Whom none shall have power to argue.***

### Some Great Rewards for the Righteous

The former verses were about the destiny of the rebels and about some of
their painful punishments and the causes of their rebellion. The
following verses are about the opposite group; the true believers, the
Righteous, and some of their rewards in the Hereafter: compare them with
each other so that the facts can be understood more clearly. This is the
style, in the Qur’an, which sets the opponents facing each other and
makes their state clear by showing the contrasts in their positions.

At first, it says:

***“Surely for the Righteous there is a victory”.***

The term /mafaz/ is a place‑noun which is derived from /fauz/ in the
sense of ‘gaining goodness safely’ and also means: ‘salvation and
victory’ which is necessary for paining the goodness safely’. Regarding
the term /mafaz/, which is used in an indefinite form in this text, it
means ‘gaining a very great victory and salvation’.

Then, describing this felicity and salvation, it says:

***“Gardens enclosed and vineyards”.***

The term /ĥada’iq/ is the plural form of /ĥadiqah/ which is a garden
planted with trees surrounded by a wall. Raqib cites in his book,
Mufradat, that /ĥadiqah/ originally means‑: ‘a piece of land containing
water for irrigation’, like /ĥadaqah/, ‘the eye‑socket’, where water
exists, continuously, for lubricating the eye.

It is interesting to note that, among all the fruits, grapes are
emphasized on, here, because of their extra advantages in comparison
with the other fruits.

Since, according to statements of the scientists of nutrition, grapes
are not only a complete food, from the point of their nutritive value,
but are, also, counted as an article of foodstuff closely similar in
comparison to mothers’ milk. They produce calories, in the body, twice
as much as meat does. Grapes have so many useful properties that they
could be called ‘a natural pharmacy’.

Further to this, they possess the characteristic of being antitoxins;
useful in blood purification. They work as a remedy for rheumatism and
gout, and are a factor in controlling the level of nitrogen in the
blood.

In addition to these, grapes strengthen the nerves, bring happiness, and
because of containing different kinds of vitamins, make man able‑bodied
and powerful.

These are only a few of the qualities of grapes.

And hence, it has been related that the Prophet (S) has said:

*“Grapes are your best fruit”...*

Then, referring to another gift, in Heaven, for the Righteous, it says:

***“And comely maidens, with the freshness of youth, equals in age”.***

The term /kawa’ib/ is the plural form of /ka’ib/ which means ‘a damsel
entering puberty’ which illustrates their prime youth. And the term
/atrab/ is the plural form of /tirb/ which means ‘persons of the same
age’ which is used mostly for the feminine gender. Some others have said
that the term is originally based on /tara’ib/ meaning: ‘ribs of the
chest’ which are very similar to each other.

It is probable that the maidens of Heaven, themselves, are ‘equals in
age’ or they are ‘equals in age’ with the wives of the Righteous, for
only by this standard can complete sympathy and understanding be
figured. However, the first commentary seems more appropriate.

Then, the fourth gift, allocated to the Righteous, is mentioned:

***“And a cup overflowing”.***

It is not a drink like the worldly wine; which is filthy and makes man
drunk unconscious and descends him lower than the lowly animals, but it
is a drink that increases the wisdom and refreshes the spirit and soul.

The term /ka’s/ means ‘a cup full of drink’, and it sometimes means the
container, itself.

The term /dihaq/ is rendered as ‘overflowing’ by many commentators and
philologists, but in ‘Lisan‑ul‑Arab’ by Ibn‑i‑manzur, two more meanings
are cited for it: ‘successive(ly), repeated(ly)’ and ‘limpid, clear’.

Therefore, if we consider all these senses, the verse means: ‘in Heaven,
overflowing cups of pure, limpid drink are brought, repeatedly, for the
Righteous’.

In speaking about ‘cup’ and ‘drink’ reference is made to the disgusting
association of the two in this world, while the heavenly drink is just
the opposite to that devilish worldly wine.

Subsequently, the next verse says:

***“No Vanity shall they hear there, nor Untruth”.***

Two probabilities are suggested regarding the pronoun in /fiha/ and as
to which noun it refers to. The first says it refers to ‘Heaven’ and the
second, that it refers to ‘cup’.

According to the first commentary the verse means that: ‘they hear no
foolishness or falsehood in Heaven’, as was said in Surah Qashiya, No.
88, verse 10‑11:

***“In a Garden on high”,***

***“Where they shall hear no (word) of vanity”.***

And, according to the second commentary the verse means: there will not
appear any deceit or worthlessness as a result of having that cup of
drink as was said in Surah Tur, No. 52, verse 23:

***“They shall there exchange, one with another, a (loving) cup free of
frivolity, free of all taint of ill”.***

In any case, one of the great spiritual bounties for the Righteous, in
Heaven, is that they hear no vanity, no falsehood, no slander, no
rejection of the truth, no justification of the unjust, and no worthless
talk such as are usually associated with this earthly world which is
indulged in by some corrupted people and causes pain to the hearts of
the Righteous.

Verily, how nice and comfortable the environment where this kind of
unbecoming speech is not found therein, and according to Surah Maryam,
No. 19, verse 62:

***“They win not there hear any vain discourse, but only salutations of
Peace:...”.***

In counting the bounties in Heaven, for the Righteous, a spiritual gift
is mentioned, at the end, which excels the others and says:

***“A reward from your Lord, an award sufficing”.***

What blessing and reward can be better and has a higher standard than
that of a powerless servant, favored with the grace and love of his
Great, Gracious Lord. Allah rewards him, honors him, and gives him a
liberal and bountiful gift. This is the true Salvation, which is so
delightful for the Righteous that no other blessing can match it.

The term /rabb/ ‘Lord’ followed by /ka/, the second person singular
pronoun (addressee), together with the term /’ata’/ ‘an award’ are all
signs of His superior favor which are involved in these rewards.

The term /hisaba/, according to many commentators, means ‘sufficient’,
like /hasbi/ ‘enough’.

A tradition from Hazrat Ali (as) says that in the Hereafter Allah takes
careful count of each good deed, of the Believers, and wards them, for
every good deed, ten to seven hundred times more, as he has cited from
the Qur’an:

***“A reward from your Lord, an awardsufficing.”***[^36]

It is understood from this narration that though Allah’s rewards are
paid out generously or bountifully as awards, they are based on the
account of good deeds, i.e. His awards are in proportion with men’s good
deeds. Hence, the term /hisaba/, in the above verse, can be commented on
by its common meaning: ‘account’. This meaning and the previous meaning,
then, can be used interchangeably.

Then, in the last verse of this part, it says:

***“Lord of the heavens and the earth and all between the two, the
All‑merciful...”***

Truly, the One Who is the owner of the great universe, and is its
Creator, too, Whose Grace is seen everywhere and covers everyone, does,
indeed, award the Righteous, abundantly, in the Hereafter.

This verse, without doubt, points to the fact that if Allah promises the
Righteous such rewards, then a small part of it; in the form of His
general Grace, has been shown to those in the heavens as well as to
those on the earth in this world.

And at the end of the verse, it says:

***“...with Whom none shall have power to argue”.***

The pronoun of the term

***/layamlikun/, ‘none shall have’,***

may refer to all creatures in the heavens and on the earth, or to all
the Righteous and the rebels gathered in the Hereafter for the Reckoning
and recompense. Whichever it may be, it points to this fact, that on
that Day no one has the right to protest against the Record, because it
is 50 precise and the recompense so just that no one can say anything.

Besides, no one has the right to offer intercession, but by Allah’s
leave:

***“...Who is there con intercede in His presence except as He
permitteth?...”***[^37]

### Explanation: The Rewards of the Righteous and the Recompense of the Rebels

There is an interesting comparison between the rewards of the Righteous,
in these verses, and the chastisement of the disbelieving rebels in the
former verses.

The contrast is between

***/mafaz/ ‘a place of salvation’***

for the Righteous and

***/mersad/ ‘a place of ambush’.***

The Upright will have and enjoy

***‘gardens enclosed, and vineyards’,***

but the transgressors will have fire

***‘to abide therein for ages’.***

The Righteous are awarded

***‘pure drinks’***

in

***‘cups overflowing’,***

but the evildoers are recompensed

***‘a boiling fluid and pus’.***

The Righteous, are

***‘awarded sufficingly’***

by Allah; the All‑merciful, but the rejecters receive

***‘a fitting recompense’***

from Him; the Just.

The rewards are increased for the Righteous, but there is an increase of
punishment for the rebels.

In short, these two groups are in contrast with each other in every
respect, because they are different from the point of belief and action.

### The Pure Drinks in Heaven

In different verses of the Holy Qur’an, the heavenly drinks are
well‑defined and specified. Studying these verses shows that those who
drink these drinks attain such an ecstasy that no human language can
describe it.

In Surah al-Insan, No. 76, verse 21 the drink is characterized as ‘pure
drink’:

***“And their Lord will give to them to drink of a Drink, Pure and
Holy”.***

On some other occasions it is emphasized that this clear white drink is
a drink that brings no headiness nor intoxication:

***“Round will be passed to them a Cup from a clear‑flowing
fountain”,***

***“Crystal‑white, of a taste delicious to those who drink
(thereof)”,***

***“Free from headiness; nor will they suffer intoxication
therefrom”***[^38]***.***

And in another Surah it says:

***“Verily, the Righteous drink of a cup; the mixture of which is (like)
camphor”***[^39]***.***

Also, it says:

***“And they will be given to drink there of a cup (of pure drink) mixed
with Zanjabeel (ginger)”***[^40]***.***

In the current verse, it says:

***“And a cup overflowing”.***

But most important is that it is Allah Who offers and serves them the
drinks with His Favor and Grace:

***“...and their Lord will give to them to drink...”***[^41]***.***

### Supplication

*O Lord! We pray that You will give us the pure drink, also.*

Surah Nabaa, Verses 38-40
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَقُومُ الرُّوحُ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ صَفًّا ۖ لَا يَتَكَلَّمُونَ
إِلَّا مَنْ أَذِنَ لَهُ الرَّحْمَٰنُ وَقَالَ صَوَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكَ الْيَوْمُ الْحَقُّ ۖ فَمَنْ شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِ
مَآبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنْذَرْنَاكُمْ عَذَابًا قَرِيبًا يَوْمَ يَنْظُرُ الْمَرْءُ مَا
قَدَّمَتْ يَدَاهُ وَيَقُولُ الْكَافِرُ يَا لَيْتَنِي كُنْتُ تُرَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. “The Day on which the Spirit and the angels shall stand arrayed,
they shall speak not except whom the All‑merciful gives leave, and (who)
speak what is right”.***  
***39. “That Day is certain; whoever then desires may take refuge with
his Lord”.***  
***40. “Surely We have warned you of a Punishment near, the Day when man
shall see what his two hands have sent forth and the Unbeliever shall
say: O! would that I were dust”.***

The Unbeliever shall say:

***“O! would that I were dust”.***

A noticeable part of the chastisement for the transgressors and the
reward for the Righteous, on Dooms Day, were mentioned in the previous
verses.

Verses 38 to 40 introduce ‘That Great Day’, and expound on some of its
events, by saying:

***“The Day on which the Spirit and the angels shall stand arrayed, they
shall speak not except whom the All‑merciful gives leave, and (who)
speaks what is right”.***

Undoubtedly, the act of the Spirit and the angels on that Day; ‘to stand
arrayed and speak not except those whom the All‑merciful gives Leave’,
is only because of their obedience to Him. In this world, too, they
fulfill His Will and serve His commands. Of course, their fulfillment,
in that world, will be more apparent, more clear and more extensive.

What does

***‘the Spirit’***

mean, here? Commentators have yielded several interpretations for it,
some of which extend to eight probabilities. The following meanings are
the most important ones:[^42]

1.

***‘The Spirit’***

is a creature other than the angels and greater than all of them.

2.

***‘The Spirit’***

is the angel Gabriel who is the greatest angel because he is charged,
especially, with bringing Messages from Allah to the human Apostles.

3.

***‘The Spirit’***

may be the souls of men, collectively, that rise with the angels.

4.

***‘The Spirit’***

is an angel of the highest standard, higher than all angels, and greater
than Gabriel. It is the very angel who was with all prophets and the
sinless Imams (as) and remains so.

It is noteworthy that, in the Qur’an, ‘the Spirit’ is sometimes simply
mentioned alone and without any definition.

In this case, it is often equivalent to the angels, as in this verse:

***“The angels and the Spirit ascend unto Him…”***[^43]

Or;

***“The angels and the Spirit descend therein by their Lard’s leave for
every affair.”***[^44]

In these two verses,

***‘the Spirit’***

is mentioned after

***‘the angels’,***

and in the current verse it is mentioned before “the angels’, therefore,
it may indicate the greatness of a distinguished one.

But in many verses of the Qur’an ‘the Spirit’ is mentioned with
something else or with a specification.

For example,

***/ruh‑ul‑qudus/ ‘Holy Spirit’***

in Surah Nahl, No. 16, verse 102 says:

***“Say, The Holy Spirit has brought the revelation from thy Lord in
Truth...”***

or

***/uuh‑ul‑amin/ ‘the Spirit of Faith and Truth’***

in Surah Shuaraa, No. 26, verse 193 says:

***“With it came down the Spirit of Faith and Truth”.***

In some verses Allah designates the word

***‘Spirit’***

for Himself as in the following:

***“...and breathed into him of My spirit...”***[^45]

And in another verse it says:

***“...Then We sent to her Our spirit...”***[^46]***.***

It seems that the term

***‘Spirit’***

which is stated differently in these verses, may have different meanings
whose explanations are stated, appropriate, under each of them in the
commentary.

But, among these various commentaries, what seems the most fitting, to
the current verse, is that the Spirit here, refers to one of the great
angels of Allah that, according to some narration’s, is even higher than
Gabriel, as a tradition from Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*“He is an angel greater than Gabriel and Michael”.*[^47]

And, it is cited in Ali‑ibn‑Ibrahim’s commentary that:

***“‘The Spirit’***

*is an angel, greater than Gabriel and Michael, and he was with the
Prophet (S) as wells as with the Imams”.*[^48]

Although in some narration’s quoting Ahlul Bayt, it is cited that the
Prophet (S) has said: ·

The Spirit is an army from Allah’s armies, who are not angels and have a
head, hands and feet

*“and, then, he (S) recited:*

***‘The Day on which the Spirit and the angels shall stand arrayed’,***

*and said:*

*‘These are an army and those are of another army.’”*[^49]

In any case, as it was pointed out earlier, the great creature of
Allah’s, whether it be among the angels or is another kind of creature,
will be with the angels in the Hereafter; all of them ready to obey
Allah’s command.

In the Hereafter, everyone is so terrified that no one is able to say a
word or offer intercession except by Allah’s leave. They praise Him, or
intercede, as He permits, only for those who are deserving.

It is cited, in a narration, that once Imam Sadiq (as) was asked about
this verse and he said:

*“By Allah, on the Day of Judgment, we will be given leave for them and
we will speak”.*

The narrator asked him (as) what he would say on that Day, and he
answered:

*“We praise our Lord, and send blessings on our Prophet, and intercede
for our followers and our Lord does not refuse us”.*[^50]

It is understood from this narration that on the Day of Judgment the
Prophets and the sinless Imams will be in the row of angels and

***‘the Spirit’***

who will be given leave to speak will praise Allah and intercede.

The term

***/sawab/ ‘what is right’***

an evidence that angels, the Spirit, prophets, and Saints will intercede
for those who are deserving and their intercession will not be undue.

Then, it points to that Great Day which is the Day of resurrection for
both men and angels, as well as The Day of Judgment for the
transgressors, where they will be given their recompense, and the
Righteous will be rewarded, and it says:

***“That Day is certain”.***

The term /ĥaqq/ means: ‘a thing that surely happens’ and ‘that which is
right and proper, just and true’. This meaning is completely right for
the Dooms Day, where the rights of everyone will be given to him; the
oppressed’s rights will be taken from the oppressors, the ‘rights’ and
‘the hidden secrets’ will be manifested, and hence, it will be ‘right’
in all respects.

Since recognition of this fact can he the most effective motive for men
to move towards the path of Allah and obeying him, then immediately
after the previous sentence, in this verse, it says:

***“...whoever then desires may take refuge with his Lord”.***

That is, all the means of this divine motion are prepared: right and
wrong have been introduced; prophets have said enough about the Truth
and Divine Reality; wisdom, which is an inner apostle, has clearly
defined the end of the transgressors and the Righteous, and the court,
the Judge, and the Judgment have been known. The only remaining thing is
man’s firm decision that should be made with free‑will; which Allah has
bestowed on him, to go forth on the right path.

The term /ma’ ab/ means ‘a place of return’ and it is also cited with
the sense of ‘road’ and ‘way’.

Then, as an emphasis on the sinners’ punishment, and as a warning to
those who think that the Great Day is very far from them or it is on
credit, stating that it is very near it says:

***“Surely We have warned you of a punishment near...”***

The life of this world, however long it may be, is as a mere moment in
comparison with the life of the Next World. According to an Arab
proverb: ‘Everything that is certain to come, is near’.

Then, for the same reason, Allah, in Surah Maarij, No. 70, verses 5‑7
tells His prophet:

***“Therefore do thou hold patience, a patience of beautiful
contentment)”.***

***“They see the (Day) indeed as afar‑off (event): ‘But We see it
(quite) near’”.***

Amir‑al‑Momineen Ali (as), also in this regard, says:

*“Whatever is certain to come, is near”.*[^51]

It is near because the main source of men’s divine chastisement is their
own deeds, which are always with them as we see from Surah Ankabut, No.
29, verse 54:

***“...and most surely hell encompasses the unbelievers”.***

Since on that Day a great number of people, being full of grief and
sorrow, will be regretful of their actions, which, then, of course,
will, be quite useless.

Following that warning, it says:

***“...the Day when man hall see what his two hands have sent forth, and
the Unbeliever shall say: O! would that I were dust”.***

Some commentators have considered the term /yanżur/, in the same sense
of /yantażir/, that is: ‘on that Day, men will wait for the recompense
of their deeds’.

And some others have considered it to mean: ‘looking at the Record and
observing the goad and evil actions’.

And it has also been construed as meaning: ‘to see the reward and the
penalty of the deeds’

These commentaries originate from the idea that they have paid little
attention to the existence of the embodiment of man’s deed, on that Day,
otherwise, the meaning of the verse is clear and no interpretation would
be needed.

From the different verses of the Qur’an and Islamic narration’s, it ,
understood that on that Day the deeds of man will be personified in some
appropriate forms and will appear in front of him.

In fact. he will truly see his own deeds, himself, and when he observes
his evil actions he will be both sorry and regretful, and when he
observes his good actions he will be happy and delighted. As a matter of
fact, one of the best rewards for the Righteous, and one of the worst
punishments for the evildoers is the very personification and
incarnation of their deeds, which will follow them everywhere.

Surah Kahf, No. 18, verse 49 says:

***“...they will find all that they did, placed before them...”.***

And Surah Zilzal, No. 99, verses 7‑8 say:

***“So, whoever has done an atom’s weight of good shall behold it”.***

***“And whoever has done an atom’s weight of evil shall behold it”.***

So, these are some of the wonders of the Hereafter that the deeds of man
will be personified and the powers will be changed into a tangible
substance and become a living thing.

The sentence

***/maqaddamat yadahu/ ‘what his two hands have sent forth’,***

is so stated because, man usually does most of his actions with his
hands, but, surely they are not limited only to those actions which are
performed by the hands. The actions which are done by the tongue, eyes,
and ears are included, too.

Verse 40, of this Surah, has warned us about the matter before we reach
that Day and it says:

***“...And let every soul look at what (provision) he has sent forth for
the morrow.”.***

When the unbelievers see the deeds of their lifetime in front of them,
they will be so sorry that they will say:

***‘O! would that I were dust’,***

and from it would never have been created as a human being.

Of course, they know that dust is better than themselves, because dust
is not only harmless but also useful for all: it takes a single grain
and makes a return of sometimes more than one hundred plants, instead.
But humans have been the source of corruption in different forms.

In some verses of the Qur’an it is said that when the Unbelievers and
the sinners see the Hereafter and the throne of Divine Judgment,
therein, and the recompense of their deeds, they will react differently,
all of which relates to the intensive grief they have.

Sometimes, they say:

***“Ah! woe is me! in that I neglected (my duty) towards Allah...***

And sometimes they say:

***“Now then send us back (to the world): we will work righteousness:
for we do indeed (now) believe”.***

And further still they say:

***“Would that I were dust.”,***

which was discussed in the current Surah.

### The Clear Solution For Fatalism and Free‑will

This controversy is one of the oldest cases which has been discussed
among the scholars, some of whom believed in man’s free‑will and some in
another philosophy; each have stated some reasons to prove their ideas.

It is interesting to note that the fatalists and those adherents to the
idea of free‑will’ have both approved the principle of free‑will, in
practice, and have accepted it. In other words, their scientific
conflicts arc bound only to the circle of their discussions and not in
practice. This clearly shows that the principle of free‑will exists in
the nature of all men, and by refusing the various temptations, everyone
agrees with the principle of free‑will.

One of the most clear evidences to free‑will is the common conscience or
the general nature of men that appears in man’s life in different forms.
Since, if man thought that deeds were obligations and did not believe in
free‑will, then why:

1. Do they sometimes repent of their behavior, for what they have done,
or the actions they have not done, and decide to take benefit from their
former experiences in their future conduct?

2. Condemn the evildoers. If they are obliged why are they scorned?

3. Are the good doers praised?

4 Do people try to train their children, so that they can gain felicity
and be happy. If all are obliged, what is the use of training?

5. Do all the scientists, without exception, try to increase the
standard of morals in societies? Why?

6. Does man repent of his errors? If the principle of fatalism is
accepted, what does ‘penitence’ mean?

7. Does man become sorry about his negligence in carrying out his
duties? Why?

8. Are criminals and evildoers, all over the world, strictly
interrogated and tried in courts? The action beyond the limit of man’s
Will does not need interrogation and trial.

9. Throughout the world and among all sects, whether they are polytheist
or materialist, do they believe in punishment for criminals? Then, is it
a penalty for the deed that they were obliged to do?

10. Do even the fatalists, when their interests and honor is violated by
someone, protest and call him as an offender in the court?

In short, truly, if man is not free in Will, then why should he have
feelings of regret?

What is blame and scorn? Can a person whose hand is trembling.
unwillingly, be blamed?

Why arc the good doers praised? Do they have a free will of their own to
continue doing good?

In fact, when the effect of training and education is accepted, fatalism
will be meaningless.

Besides, morals, without assuming free‑will, have no sense at all. If we
are obliged to do things, what is the meaning of repentance? What is
regretting for? Then, the trial of an obliged person is the most cruel
thing, and punishing him is worse than that.

All these point to the fact that the principle of ‘free‑will’ is in
human nature and it fits in with the general conscience of mankind. Not
only the common people, but also all special classes and all
philosophers are like that in their deeds, and then, even fatalists are
actually free in Will.

It is an interesting fact that the Qur’an has frequently emphasized on
this situation.

It says:

***“...whoever then desires may take refuge with his Lord”.***

Not only in these verses, but also in many other verses of the Qur’an,
stress has been put on man’s Will, however, to discuss this, here, will
deviate us from our topic of discussion, so, suffice it to mention only
three of them, thus:

***“Surely We guided him to the way: whether he be grateful or
ungrateful (is up to him)”***[^52]***.***

***“Let him who will, believe, and let him who will, reject
(it)”***[^53]***.***

***“Surely this is an admonishment, that whosoever will, (taking this
straight way) may choose a path unto his Lord”***[^54]***.***

Discussing fatalism and free‑will is very time consuming and many books
and articles have been written about these subjects. What we have
mentioned, here, was only a small sample on the subject, from the point
of view of the Qur’an and the conscience, which we will end on this
important point:

The adherence to fatalism, from the view of some men, is not only for
the philosophical discussions and the reasoning out of problems, but it
is for some other important psychological and social matters, as well,
which are undoubtedly factors in its appearance and continued
popularity.

Many persons have assumed that the belief in fatalism’ or fatal destiny’
or ‘fate’ in the sense of fatalism, have a common source: to escape from
personal responsibility, or to use it as a cover‑up for the defeats and
failures resulting from their negligence and carelessness, and/or due to
their low desires.

Sometimes, colonizers, to break the perseverance of people and to
extinguish the nation’s fire of wrath, imposed this idea on them saying
that their fate has been the same from the beginning, so, they can do
nothing, but accept it.

Assuming that this belief is correct, the whole behavior of all
criminals is permissible and the vice of all sinners becomes excused,
then, there will be no difference between an obedient person and a
criminal.

### Supplication

*O Lord! Protect us from these misled ideas and their consequences.*

*O Lord! On the Day that Hell lies in ambush for the transgressors and
Heaven is a victory for the Righteous, we all have hope in your Grace.*

*O Lord! On the Day when all see their deeds in front of them, do not
put us to shame.*

[^1]: Majma-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 420.

[^2]: Tafsir-i-Borhan, vol. 4, p. 419.

[^3]: Surah Zumar, No. 39 verse 56

[^4]: Surah Shura No. 42 verse 44

[^5]: Surah Mo’minun, No. 23 verse 99‑100

[^6]: Risa’lat‑ul‑I’tiqad, Abu Bakr‑Muhammad‑ibn‑i‑Shirazi (Based on
Ihqaq‑ul‑Haqq, vol. 4, p. 484).

[^7]: Tafsir‑i‑Borhan, vol. 4. p. 420, Tradition 9.

[^8]: Tafsir‑i‑Borhan, vol. 4, p. 419, Tradition 3.

[^9]: Surah Saba No. 34 verse 3

[^10]: Surah Qaşaş No. 28, verse 72

[^11]: Surah Qasas, No. 28, verse 73

[^12]: Surah Anbiya, No. 21, verse 30

[^13]: Surah Yasin. No. 36 verse 81

[^14]: Al‑Mizan, vol. 20, p. 265 (Farsi Translation)

[^15]: Surah Infitar, No. 82 verse 1

[^16]: Surah Zumar, No. 39 verse 73

[^17]: Surah Rad, No. 13, verse 23

[^18]: Surah Zumar, No. 39, verse 71

[^19]: Surah Al‑i‑Imran, No. 3, verse 133

[^20]: Surah Tur. No. 52, verse 10

[^21]: Surah Haqqah, No. 69, verse 14

[^22]: Surah Muzzammil, No. 73, verse 14

[^23]: Surah Al‑Qariah, No. 101, verse 5

[^24]: Surah Waqiah, No. 56, verses 5‑6

[^25]: Surah Ta‑Ha, No. 20. verses 105‑106

[^26]: Tafsir‑i‑Nur‑uth‑Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p 494, Tradition 23 and p.
495, Tradition 26

[^27]: Surah al-Insan, No. 76, verse 21

[^28]: Surah Mutaffifin, No. 83, verse 26

[^29]: Surah Qamar, No. 54, verses 52‑53

[^30]: Surah Yunus, No. 10, verse 21

[^31]: Surah Yasin, No. 36, verse 12

[^32]: Surah Kahf, No. 18, verse 49

[^33]: Surah Shuara, No. 26, verse 136

[^34]: Surah Bani Israil, No. 17, verse 41

[^35]: Tafsir‑i‑Kashshaf, vol. 4, p.690 and Ruh al‑Bayan, vol. 10, p.
307

[^36]: Nur‑uth‑Thaqalayn’ vol. 5, p. 495, Tradition 29.

[^37]: Surah Baqarah, No. 2, verse 255

[^38]: Surah Saffat, No. 37, verses 45‑47

[^39]: Surah al-Insan, No. 76, verse 5

[^40]: Surah al-Insan, No. 76, verse 17

[^41]: Surah al-Insan, No. 76. verse 21

[^42]: Qartabi, The Commentary, vol. 10, p. 6977.

[^43]: Surah Maarij, No. 70, verse 4

[^44]: Surah Qadr, No. 97, verse 4

[^45]: Surah Al‑Hijr, No. 15, verse 29

[^46]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 17

[^47]: Majma’‑al‑Bayan, vol. 10, p. 427.

[^48]: Tafsir‑i‑Ali‑ibn‑lbrahim, vol. 2, p. 402.

[^49]: Durr‑al‑manthur, vol. 6, p. 309.

[^50]: Majma’‑al‑Bayan, vol. 10, p. 427.

[^51]: Nahj‑ul‑Balaqa, Sermon No. 103 (Arabic Version). Sermon No 106
(English Version).

[^52]: Surah al-Insan, No. 76, verse 3

[^53]: Surah Kahf, No. 18, verse 29

[^54]: Surah al-Insan, No. 76. verse 29


