The Rules in Matrimony and Marriage
===================================

**Issue 794:** Matrimony is one of the recommended acts. When one fears
that he will fall into committing the unlawful due to his abstinence
from marriage, marriage is obligatory for him.

**Issue 795:** The man and woman become lawful for one another by means
of the matrimonial contract. (The matrimonial contract) is of two types:
Permanent marriage and temporary marriage. The woman married with the
permanent matrimonial contract is called Daa’imah.

Temporary marriage is that a woman is married for a specific period, be
it short or long. It is called Mut'ah marriage by virtue of the
terminology of the Qur’an. Temporary Marriage has the same rules as
permanent marriage with respect to the 'Iddah after divorce and other
rules.

**Issue 796:** A verbal Seeghah is conditional in the matrimonial
contract, whether it be permanent or temporary and mere agreement of the
two sides (of the contract) is not sufficient. It is permissible for the
two sides or their representatives to perform the Seeghah of matrimony.

**Issue 797:** The representation of a man by a woman and the
representation of a woman by a man is proper for the purpose of
executing the Seeghah of matrimony.

**Issue 798:** When a woman or a man authorizes a person to perform the
Seeghah of matrimony as a representative of them, they will not become
lawful for one another as long as they are not certain that the
representative (Wakeel) has performed the Seeghah of matrimony. However,
when the representative is a case of reliability and he says: I
performed the Seeghah, it is sufficient.

The Method of Performing the Seeghah of Permanent and Temporary Marriage
------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Issue 799:** It suffices for the Seeghah of permanent marriage if the
woman says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَوَّجْتُ نَفْسِى عَلى الصَّداقِ المَعلومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I marry myself to you for the agreed upon dowry*

And the man says afterward:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبلتُ التَّزْوِيجَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I accept the marriage*

If they authorize a representative for the matrimony, then, it would be
sufficient that the representative of the woman says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَوَّجْتُ مُوَكِّلَكَ اَحْمَدَ، مُوَكِّلَتِي عَلَى الصِّـداقِ
المَعْلُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I marry the woman I represent to the man you represent for the agreed
upon dowry*

And the representative of the man says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبلتُ لِمُوكَّلي التَّزْوِيجَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I accept the marriage on behalf of the man I represent for the agreed
upon dowry.*

It suffices in temporary marriage if the woman says, after specifying
the duration (of the marriage agreement) and the dowry:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَوَّجْتُكَ نَفْسِي فِي المُدَّةِ المَعْلُومَةِ عَلَى المَهْرِ
المَعْلُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I marry myself to you for the agreed upon time period for the agreed
upon dowry.*

And the man says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبلتُ التَّزْوِيجَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I accept the marriage*

Or the representative of a woman says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَوَّجْتُ مُوَكِّلَتِي مُوَكِّلَكَ فِي المُدَّةِ المَعْلُومَةِ عَلَى
المَهْرِ المَعْلُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I marry the woman I represent to the man you represent for the agreed
upon time for the agreed upon dowry*

And the representative of the man says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبلتُ لِمُوكَّلي التَّزْوِيجَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I accept the marriage for the man I represent*

Conditions of The Matrimonial Contract
--------------------------------------

**Issue 800:** Some matters are conditional in the matrimonial contract
('Aqd An-Nikaah):

1) The precaution is to perform the Seeghah of marriage in proper
'Arabic. When the two sides are not able to perform the Seeghah in
'Arabic, they can perform it in their language. It is not obligatory to
appoint anyone to perform the Seeghah in the 'Arabic language (although,
it is better). However, it is obligatory to perform the Seeghah with
words which convey the same meaning understood from the 'Arabic Seeghah.

2) It is obligatory upon whomever performs the Seeghah o f marriage that
they intend Inshaa’, meaning that they intend to establish a marital
bond between the man and woman by reciting these words (of the Seeghah),
then, the woman makes herself a wife for the man with these words and
the man accepts this meaning. Likewise, it is obligatory for the
representative to have in the intention of Inshaa’ as well.

3) Sanity and maturity (Buloogh) is conditional for whoever performs the
Seeghah, according to precaution.

4) It is obligatory upon the guardian (Waliy) or representative (Wakeel)
that they specify the man and woman at the time of performing the
Seeghah of the contract. According to this, when a man has a number of
daughters it is not proper that he says: *I am marrying one of my
daughters to you*.

5) It is a condition that the man and the woman are agreed to the
marriage voluntarily. However, when one of the two was apparently not
agreed but we know of their agreement in their heart, their marriage is
proper, in the reverse situation, their marriage is not proper.

6) It is obligatory that the performance of the Seeghah of the marriage
contract be done in a proper manner. When it is performed in an
incorrect manner such that it changes its meaning, the contract is
invalid. There is no objection when its meaning has not been altered. It
is permissible to appoint one representative for both spouses.

**Issue 801:** He who does not know the rules of the 'Arabic language
but he knows how to articulate the words of the contract in a proper
manner and is aware of its meaning also, the contract is proper.

**Issue 802:** When a woman is married to a man without her permission,
then, she agrees to that afterward and gives permission for the
marriage, the contract and the marriage is proper.

**Issue 803:** The precaution is permission for the marriage of a
mature, sensible young woman marrying herself with the permission of her
father and paternal grandfather, if she is a virgin. However, when she
finds an appropriate mate for herself and her father disapproves, his
permission is not conditional. It is likewise when a young girl cannot
access her father or paternal grandfather and she needs to get married.
If she is not a virgin, the permission of her father or grandfather is
not conditional in the new marriage.

Defects For Which it is Permissible to invalidate The Contract
--------------------------------------------------------------

**Issue 804:** When a man comes to know, after the contract (is
executed), that the woman is afflicted with one of the following
defects, it is permissible for him to invalidate the marriage contract:

• Insanity (Junoon-With the condition that it occurred before the
contract).

• Leprosy (Juzaam)

• Psoriasis (Baras)

• Blindness ('Ama)

• Lameness ('Araj-If it is apparent)

• Rupture (meaning the passageway of menstruation and urine or the
passageway of menstruation and stool are one in a general breach which
makes it unsuitable for sexual satisfaction).

• The existence of flesh or a bone or gland in the vagina such that it
prevents sexual intercourse.

**Issue 805:** It is permissible for the woman to invalidate the
marriage contract due to the following matters:

• Insanity of the husband (Junoon)

• Absence of the instrument of virility (i.e. the sexual organ)

• Impotency

• That the man is castrated (Mukhasiy-the details of this issue and the
previous issue are reserved for detailed jurisprudence books)

**Issue 806:** When a man or woman invalidates a contract due to one of
the above mentioned defects, there is no need of divorce, rather, the
invalidation (Faskh) is sufficient.

**Issue 807:** When a woman invalidates the contract due to inability of
the man to engage in sexual intercourse with her, it is obligatory for
the man to pay half of the dowry (Mahr) to her. If the woman or man
invalidates the contract due to one of the other aforementioned defects,
when no intercourse has occurred between them, nothing is obligatory
upon the man. As for when sexual intercourse had occurred, then, the
obligatory precaution is that he gives the dowry, all of it.

Women With Whom it is Forbidden to Marry
----------------------------------------

**Issue 808:** The marriage of a man with his close relative (Mahram) is
forbidden. The close relatives (Mahram) are: the mother, the daughter,
the sister, the paternal aunt, the maternal aunt, the niece (daughter of
the brother and daughter of the sister), the wife of the father (meaning
stepmother), the daughter of the wife and the mother of the wife. (The
explanation of these matters is forthcoming in the next issues)

**Issue 809:** When a man marries a woman, although he has not had
sexual intercourse with her, her mother and the mother of her mother and
the mother of her father (and so forth) becomes a close relative
(Mahram) of that man, although they are ascending (in the family tree).
However, the daughters of the wife are not forbidden nor the grand
daughters of this woman, from her sons or her daughters except when he
had intercourse with the wife.

**Issue 810:** The paternal aunt of the father and his maternal aunt,
the maternal aunt of the grandfather and his maternal aunt; the paternal
aunt of the mother and the maternal aunt and the paternal aunt of the
grandmother and her maternal aunt, although they ascend (the family
tree) are close relatives (Mahram).

**Issue 811:** The father of the husband and his father, although they
ascend (the family tree); the son (of the husband) and the son of the
daughter of the husband, although the descend (the family tree) are
close relatives in relation to the woman whether born before the
marriage contract or after the contract.

**Issue 812:** When a man marries a woman, it is not permitted that he
marry her sister as long as the wife (her sister) is in his net of
marriage whether it be permanent or temporary marriage. It is not
allowed to marry the sister of his wife even after the divorce of the
wife as long as she is in seclusion ('Iddah), in the revocable divorce
(At-Tallaaq Ar-Raj'i, its explanation is forthcoming in the book of
divorce).

The recommended precaution is not to marry the sister of the wife even
during the seclusion ('Iddah) of the irrevocable divorce whose
explanation is coming afterward. Likewise (is the situation) in the
seclusion ('Iddah) of a temporary marriage (Mut'ah), be it after the
completion of the time period (of the contract) or after forgiving of
the remainder of the time period.

**Issue 813:** It is not permissible for a man to marry the daughters of
the sister of the wife (i.e. his wife's nieces) or the daughters of her
brother without the permission of the wife. However, if he marries (one
of these women) without the permission of the wife, then, the wife
approves, the contract and the marriage is proper.

**Issue 814:** It is not allowed for a Muslim woman to marry a
non-Muslim man. Also, it is not permitted for a Muslim man to marry a
non-Muslim woman according to precaution. However, marriage in temporary
marriage is permitted with the women from the People of the Scriptures
(Ahlul-Kitaab), like the Christians and Jews.

**Issue 815:** When a man fornicates with a married woman (God forbid),
she becomes forbidden for him permanently, meaning if her husband
divorces her, it is not permitted that the fornicator marry her after
her seclusion ('Iddah) of divorce.

**Issue 816:** When a man fornicates with a woman and she is in the
seclusion ('Iddah) of another (man's divorce), she will become forbidden
for him whether the divorce is revocable (Raji') or irrevocable (Baa’in)
according to obligatory precaution and, likewise, is the seclusion
('Iddah) of temporary marriage.

**Issue 817:** When a man fornicates with an unmarried woman nor (a
woman) in her seclusion ('Iddah), it is permissible for him to marry her
afterward. However, the recommended precaution is that he waits until
she menstruates and then he marries her.

**Issue 818:** If a man marries a woman and she is in the seclusion
('Iddah) of another (man's divorce), if both sides or one side knows
that the woman is in seclusion and also knows that the marriage in the
seclusion is prohibited, this woman becomes forbidden permanently for
the man whether he had intercourse with her or not.

However, when neither one of the two know that the woman is in her
seclusion or they do not know that to marry a woman in her seclusion is
forbidden, the woman will become forbidden for him only if he had
intercourse with her and she will not become forbidden if he did not
have intercourse with her.

**Issue 819:** The mother of a sodomized male and his sister and his
daughters are forbidden for the one committing the sodomy (i.e. the
homosexual act) whether the sodomized person is mature (Baaligh) or
immature. However, when the person committing the sodomy is immature,
they do not become forbidden for him. Likewise is the situation when
there was doubt as to whether there was penetration (during the
homosexual act) or not.

**Issue 820:** When someone is married to the mother of someone or his
sister or his daughter, then, after the marriage he commits sodomy with
that person, she (meaning the wife) does not become forbidden for him
although he has committed a major sin.

**Issue 821:** When a woman is divorced three times she becomes
forbidden for her husband. However, when she marries another man
fulfilling the conditions in the Book of Divorce, then, her second
husband divorces her, it is permissible to marry the first husband a
second time.

Rules of Permanent Marriage
---------------------------

**Issue** **822**: It is not permissible for a woman married in
permanent marriage to leave the house or select an occupation or
employment outside of the house without her husband's permission whether
his agreement is verbal or his agreement is known in context. Just as it
is not permitted that she prevent him for sexual intercourse without a
legal excuse.

It is obligatory upon the husband also that he provide food, clothing,
residence and the necessities of life for his wife according to the
common (standard). Even the expenses of the doctor, medicine and things
similar to that. When he does not provide that, then, the precaution is
that he becomes indebted to her for that whether he be able or unable
(to provide it).

**Issue 823:** It is not obligatory upon the woman that she perform
household services, prepare food and clean and things similar to that in
the house except by her desire. If the husband forces her to do that, it
is permissible that she can take compensation from him in exchange for
that (work).

**Issue 824:** It is not obligatory to specify the dowry (Mahr) in
permanent marriage and the contract is proper without it. However, after
the husband has intercourse with her, it is obligatory that he give her
a dowry in accordance with women of her stature (Mahr Mithl).

**Issue 825:** When a time period was not specified for paying the
dowry, it is the right of the woman to seek her dowry immediately.
Rather, it is permitted that she prevent her husband from intercourse
with her before taking possession of her dowry, whether her husband is
able to pay the dowry or not, except that his lack of ability (to give
the dowry was evident) from the beginning an indication that the dowry
was initially in his liability and not a cash situation.

Temporary Marriage (Mut’ah)
---------------------------

**Issue 826:** In temporary marriage it is obligatory to specify the
period (of the marriage) and the amount of the dowry, without that the
marriage is invalid.

**Issue 827:** Temporary marriage is permissible although it not be for
enjoyment and pleasure. Rather, with the intention that it will make a
person lawful for one of the relatives of the daughter with the
condition that the daughter who is married with the temporary marriage
is in the age acceptable for enjoyment and pleasure. For example, when
she is a minor, it is obligatory to make the period long so that it
includes the interval of her preparation for that (although the period
be granted after the marriage)

**Issue 828:** It is permissible for a woman to stipulate in the
temporary marriage that her husband will not have intercourse with her,
rather, that he be content with other (types of) pleasure besides
intercourse. However, there is no objection if she agrees (to
intercourse) after that.

**Issue 829:** There is no right of maintenance for the temporary wife
even though she becomes pregnant from (her temporary husband). There is
no inheritance from the husband and the husband does not inherit from
her. Likewise, there is no obligatory conjugal rights for her.

**Issue 830:** It is permissible for the temporary wife to leave the
house without the permission of her husband or to select for herself
employment outside of the house, except that when her leaving the house
forsakes the right of her husband.

**Issue 831:** It is permissible for the father and grandfather, in
order to become a close relative (Mahram) to a woman that they marry her
to their immature son (with the condition that the period of the
marriage is so long that it includes the interval in which the child
will become capable of sexual enjoyment.

Likewise, it is permissible that (a man) marry his immature daughter to
a person in order that he become a close relative (Mahram) to his family
(with the same condition which has passed in the instance of the son).
It is obligatory in both situations, according to obligatory precaution,
that the contract has benefit and advantage for both sides and that it
be devoid of corruption.

**Issue 832:** It is permissible for a man that he grants the period of
the temporary marriage (to his wife) and terminate it. In this
situation, if he had intercourse with her, it is obligatory that he pay
the entire dowry and if he had not had intercourse with her, he give her
one half of the dowry.

**Issue 833:** It is permissible for a man to marry himself permanently
to the wife whom he married temporarily, however, it is obligatory to
first grant to her the remainder of the period (of the temporary
marriage), then, he can marry her in a permanent marriage anew.

**Issue 834:** There is a period of seclusion ('Iddah) for the temporary
wife after the termination of the period (of the marriage) with the
explanation which will come in the Book of Divorce. The children born
from this marriage have all the rights established for children who are
born from permanent marriage. They inherit from their mothers and their
fathers and their relatives although the two spouses (in the temporary
marriage) do not inherit from one another.

The Rules of Viewing (Nazar)
----------------------------

**Issue 835:** For a man viewing the body of the unrelated (Ajnabi)
woman is forbidden whether it be with the intention of lust or without
this intention. Likewise, it is forbidden for a woman to look at the
body of an unrelated man. However, there is no objection in looking at
the face of an unrelated woman and her hands up to the wrist when there
is no intention of lust nor going to corruption and sin.

Likewise, there is not objection in a woman looking to the extent which
is customary without covering of the body of the unrelated man, like the
head, face, knees and something of his hands or feet.

**Issue 836:** It is permitted (for a man) to look at the immature girl
when there is no intention of lust and he does not fear falling into
anything unlawful by looking at her. However, it is obligatory,
according to obligatory precaution, not to look at her thighs and
stomach which she customarily covers.

**Issue 837:** It is obligatory that a woman cover her body and her hair
from (the view of) unrelated men. The recommended precaution is that she
cover before the immature boy who can distinguish between good and bad
and right and wrong, who is at the stage that his viewing can be
lustful. However, it is not obligatory to cover the face and the hands
up to the wrist.

**Issue 838:** It is forbidden to look at the private parts of another,
although it be in the mirror or in clear water and things similar to
that, whether it be a close relative (Mahram) or a unrelated person,
whether the one viewed is male or female. The obligatory precaution is
not to look at the private parts of an immature discerning child.
However, it is permitted for two mates (i.e. husband and wife) to look
at the entire body of the other.

**Issue 839:** It is allowed for the close relatives (Mahram) of a man
and woman, like brothers and sisters to look at each other to the
customary extent in their seeing the body of the other. The precaution
is not to look at what is besides that.

Issue 840 It is not permitted for a man to look at the body of another
man with lust and it is also forbidden for a woman to look at the body
of another woman with the intention of lust.

**Issue 841:** It is not forbidden for the unrelated man to photograph
the unrelated woman, except when it is necessary to look at her body
besides the face and hands.

**Issue 842:** When a woman wears a legal covering (Hijaab), it is
objectionable to look at her face without the covering, except that he
does not recognize her and there is no other fear of corruption in
looking.

**Issue 843:** When the male nurse or male doctor is compelled to touch
the body of the female patient or the female nurse or female doctor is
compelled to touch the body of the male patient, it is obligatory upon
them to wear gloves and whatever is similar to gloves. However, there is
no objection in the state of compulsion.

**Issue 844:** It is permissible for the doctor to look at the unrelated
woman for treatment in the situation of necessity.

**Issue 845:** It suffices in covering (Hijaab) that the woman covers
her body besides the face and hands up to the wrist by any means
possible. A specific and particular clothing is not conditional.
However, it is objectionable to cover with tight clothing and clothing
clinging to the body. Likewise, are the clothing used for decoration.

**Issue 846:** It is permissible for an unrelated man to look at the
woman that he intends to marry in order to inspect her beauty or
defects. Rather, even when he did not obtain the intended aim with one
look, it is permissible for him to repeat the viewing in a number of
sittings.

**Issue 847:** It is permissible to listen to the voice of an unrelated
woman when there is no intention of lust and it does not lead to falling
into sin. However, it is obligatory that the woman not make her voice so
that it brings about infatuation and incites desire.

**Issue 848:** It is permissible to look at an unrelated woman in order
to identify her at the time of indicating (someone) when a witness in
(legal) decisions and important matters which are similar to that.

Miscellaneous issues of Marriage
--------------------------------

**Issue 849:** When it was conditional in the contract that the woman
whom is to be married is a virgin, then, it becomes clear that she is
not a virgin, it is permissible for (the man) to invalidate the
marriage.

**Issue 850:** The obligatory precaution is that the unrelated man and
woman not find themselves in a place where there is no one other than
them or it is not possible for others to enter upon them. If they pray
there, there is an objection to their prayer.

**Issue 851:** When the intention of a man from the onset was not to pay
the dowry to his wife, the contract is proper and it is obligatory upon
him to pay the dowry to her.

**Issue 852:** When a Muslim whose parents or one of his parents were
Muslim, apostates, meaning that he rejects the existence of Allah or the
Prophethood of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his family,
or he rejects one of the imperative beliefs (Dharooriyaat), like the
obligation of prayer or fasting whereas its meaning is to reject the
existence of Allah or the Prophethood of the Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him and his family, his marriage is invalidated. It is
obligatory upon his wife that she withdraw from him and observe the
seclusion ('Iddah) of a deceased husband (i.e. four months and ten
days). It is permissible for her after the seclusion ('Iddah) to marry
another man. When she was menopausal or he had never had intercourse
with her, there is no need for the seclusion.

**Issue 853:** When, as part of the contract, the woman makes it
conditional that her husband not take her out of so and so city, it is
not permitted for her husband to remove her from that city without her
consent.

**Issue 854:** He who marries his son to a girl, it is permissible for
him to marry her mother. Likewise it is when he married her mother
first, then, married his son to that daughter.

**Issue 855:** When a woman becomes pregnant in an illegal manner, it is
not permitted that she abort her pregnancy intentionally. The child is
deemed hers and is a close relative (Mahram) for her, only she does not
inherit from him.

**Issue 856:** When a woman is certain that her husband has died while
traveling and she observed the seclusion ('Iddah) of death (whose
mention will come in the rules of divorce), then, she re-married, then,
her first husband returned from the journey. It is obligatory for her to
separate from the second husband immediately and she is lawful for her
first husband and there is no need for seclusion ('Iddah) when the
second husband had not had intercourse with her. However, when the
second husband had intercourse with her, it is obligatory that she
observe seclusion ('Iddah). According to obligatory precaution, the
second husband must pay her the dowry agreed upon between them. When the
standard dowry (Mahr Mithl) is more that the named dowry, he must pay
the standard dowry.


