The Rules of Breastfeeding
==========================

**Issue 857:** When a woman breast feeds a male child with the
conditions whose explanation is upcoming in the attached issues, she
will become in the ruling of the child's mother and the owner of the
milk (meaning the man who caused the pregnancy from which the milk
issues) will be in the ruling of the child's father; his father will be
in the ruling of the child's grandfather; his mother in the ruling of
the child's grandmother; his sister will be in the ruling of his
maternal aunt; his children will be in the ruling of his brothers and
sisters; the brother of his mother will be in the ruling of his maternal
uncle and his sister will be in the ruling of his maternal aunt.

Likewise, with relation to the female child, when a woman breast feeds
her, it becomes forbidden for the husband of the breast feeding woman
(to marry, with the condition that her husband already had intercourse
with the wife). As such, it is not permitted for people to marry the
mother of his wife by breast feeding because she is in the ruling of his
real mother. With another expression, when a woman breast feeds a child
with the conditions which will be mentioned in the attached issues, that
child will become a close relative (Mahram) for the following:

1) That same woman who breast fed him, she is called the mother by
breast feeding.

2) The husband of that woman, he is called the father by breast feeding.

3) The parents of that woman, although they are ascending (the family
tree) and even her parents by breast feeding.

4) The existing children of that woman or those who will be born.

5) The children of the children of that woman although they descend (the
family tree) whether they exist or will be born afterward.

6) The brothers and sisters of that woman, although they might be
(brothers and sisters) from breast feeding.

7) The paternal aunts and uncles, although they might be (paternal aunts
and uncles) from breast feeding.

8) The maternal aunts and uncles, although they might be (maternal aunts
and uncles) from breast feeding.

9) The children of the husband of that woman who is the owner of the
milk, although they descend (the family tree) and although they might be
(his children) from breast feeding.

10) The parents of the husband of that woman who is the owner of the
milk, although they be (his parents) by breast feeding.

11) The brothers and sisters of the husband of that woman who is the
owner of the milk, although they be (brothers and sisters) by breast
feeding.

12) The paternal aunts and uncles and the maternal aunts and uncles of
the husband of that woman whom he is the owner of milk, although they
ascend (the family tree) and though they be (is uncle or aunt) by breast
feeding.

Likewise, there is another group whose mention will be forthcoming in
the attached issues. They will all become a close relative (Mahram) to
the child who that woman had breast fed by reason of breast feeding.

**Issue 858:** When a woman breast feeds a child with the conditions
whose explanation is upcoming, it is not permissible for the parents of
that child to marry the children who are born from that woman. Likewise,
according to obligatory precaution, it is not permissible for them to
marry the children of her husband who is the owner of her milk. Rather,
the precaution is that they not marry with his children by breast
feeding. However, there is no objection nor anything preventing them
from marrying the children by breast feeding of that woman from another
husband.

**Issue 859:** It is not allowed for a woman to breast feed the child of
her daughter with a complete breast feeding because she would become
forbidden for her husband by that. And it could become a cause of a
great scandal. It is likewise when she breast feeds a child for her
husband's children by another wife. However, there is not preventing her
from breast feeding the son of her son.

The Conditions of the Prohibiting Breastfeeding
-----------------------------------------------

**Issue 860:** When a woman breast feeds a child, the breast fed child
becomes a close relative (Mahram) with nine conditions, they are:

1) That the milk be from childbirth. Due to this, when milk is taken
from the breast of a woman without the birth of a child, then, she
breast feeds a child, the breast fed child does not become a close
relative.

2) That the breast feeding of the child be from a living woman. When the
breast of a deceased woman is placed in the mouth of a child and he
suckles milk from, the breast fed child does not become a close
relative.

3) That the milk (not result from) an unlawful (relationship). When a
child is breast fed from the milk of a woman connected to child born
from fornication, it does bring about a close relationship.

4) That the milk be suckled from the breast, however, the obligatory
precaution is that there be no marriage with that woman and her close
relatives, although the milk is poured into the mouth of the child.

5) That the milk not be mixed with something else.

6) That the milk be from one husband. According to this, when the woman
in whose breast there is milk is divorced, then, another man marries
her, then, she becomes pregnant from him and milk remains in her breast
from the first husband until the time of delivery and the child had been
nursed, for example, with eight breast feedings from her milk from the
first husband and seven breast feedings from the milk of her second
husband, this child will not become forbidden for anyone. Likewise, when
a woman breast feeds a child from the milk of her first husband in a
complete fashion, then, she breast feeds another child from the milk of
the second husband, the first child does not become a close relative of
the second child.

7) That the child does not vomit the milk which it has drank due to
illness. However, the obligatory precaution is that those who become a
close relative with that child by reason of his breast feeding avoid
marriage to him and that they also not view him with the view a close
relative (Mahram) views (another) close relative.

8) That the child be breast fed fifteen feedings or be breast fed one
complete day and night or be breast fed in the amount that it can be
said that its bones has been strengthened (from the breast feeding) and
his flesh has grown from that milk. The recommended precaution is that
when the child was fed with fifteen breast feedings, that those who
become close relatives (Mahram) by means of breast feeding not marry him
and also not view him with the view that a close relative views
(another) close relative.

9) That the child be within the first two years. Then, when a child is
breast fed beyond the two years of his life, he does not become a close
relative of anyone. Rather, even when he was breast fed fourteen
feedings before the termination of the two years and breast fed after
the conclusion of the two years, he does not become a close relative of
anyone.

However, when two years have passed since the birth of a child for woman
and milk remains and, then, she breast feeds a child. The obligatory
precaution is that (the child) not marry with woman who become a close
relative to him by reason of breast feeding and that he also not look at
them with the view (allowed for one) close for (another) close relative.


