The Rules of Divorce
====================

**Issue 861:** It is conditional that the man who divorces his wife be
sane and the obligatory precaution is that he be mature (Baaligh) and
that his divorce be of his own volition without compulsion. Thus, the
forced divorce is invalid. (It is conditional) that his intention be
serious also. According to this, then, it is not proper to utter the
Seeghah of divorce in jest.

**Issue 862:** It is obligatory, according to obligatory precaution,
that the Seeghah of divorce be performed in correct 'Arabic and it is
obligatory that two just men hear it. When the husband himself desires
to divorce, he states the Seeghah of divorce and mentions the name of
his wife, for example he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَوْجِتي فَاطِمَةُ طَالقُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My wife Fatimah is divorced*

When he appoints a person (to perform the divorce as his
representative), it is obligatory that the representative (Wakeel) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَوْجَتةُ مُوُكّلي طَالقُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The wife of the person I represent is divorced*

**Issue 863:** It is conditional that the woman at the time of her
divorce be free of menstruation and afterbirth bleeding and her husband
has not had intercourse with her in that period of purity (i.e., when
she is free of bleeding). If he had intercourse with her in the state of
menstruation or afterbirth bleeding which has preceded this period of
purity, the divorce is not sufficient according to precaution. Rather,
it is obligatory that he wait until she menstruates another time, then,
becomes pure (the explanation of these two conditions is forthcoming in
the upcoming issue).

**Issue 864:** It is proper to divorce the wife in the state of
menstruation and afterbirth bleeding in three situations:

1) When her husband has not had intercourse with her after marriage,
without exception.

2) When she is pregnant.

3) When the woman is absent and it is not possible for the man or it is
difficult for him to be aware of the state of purity of his wife.

**Issue 865:** When he imagined the purity of his wife from menstruation
and divorced her, then, he became aware that at the time of the divorce
she was in the state of menstruation, his divorce is invalid. In the
reverse of that, when he imagined that she was in the state of
menstruation and he divorced her with that, then, it became clear that
she was pure in that time, the divorce is proper.

**Issue 866:** When (a man) knows that his wife is in the state of
menstruation or afterbirth bleeding, then, he leaves or he travels or he
desires to divorce her and it is not possible for him to become aware of
her state, it is obligatory that he wait for a period of time wherein
she usually becomes pure for menstruation or afterbirth bleeding, then,
if he wants, he can divorce her.

**Issue 867:** When a man has intercourse with his wife, then, he
desires to divorce her, it is obligatory that he wait until she
menstruates, then, becomes pure. However, when she is pregnant, it is
permissible that he divorce her after having intercourse with her
without delay. Likewise, is the menopausal woman (Yaa’isah), meaning she
who is more than fifty years old.

**Issue 868:** When a man has intercourse with his wife who was pure
from menstruation and afterbirth bleeding, then, he travels and he does
not possess the means to know her state, then, if he desires to divorce
her, the obligatory precaution is that he awaits the minimum of one
month, then, divorce her.

**Issue 869:** The woman who does not menstruate due to an illness or
some other reason, when the man desires to divorce her, it is obligatory
that he allow a period of three months to pass from (the time of) his
intercourse with her avoiding intercourse with her in this period. Then,
he can divorce her after that, if he wants.

**Issue 870:** There is no divorce for the temporary wife, rather, the
temporary wife emerges from this marriage when the established period
concludes or he grants her the remainder of the period (of the temporary
marriage). Her purity from the month custom is not conditional and,
likewise, there is no need to call upon witnesses.

The Seclusion (‘Iddah) of Divorce
---------------------------------

**Issue 871:** It is obligatory for the divorced woman to seclude
herself (in 'Iddah) except when her husband had never had intercourse
with her or he divorced her before she reached nine years of age or she
was menopausal (meaning she is more than fifty years of age). In these
three situations, it is permissible for her to marry another after her
divorce directly.

**Issue 872:** The precaution in the period of seclusion ('Iddah) with
relation to the woman who menstruates is that she wait for the amount of
time in which she menstruates two times and becomes pure. Then, after
she menstruates a third time, her seclusion concludes.

**Issue 873:** It is obligatory upon the woman who does not see a
monthly custom when she is of the usual age of menstruation, that her
husband divorce her after intercourse with the preceding conditions,
that she observe a period of seclusion ('Iddah) for three months after
the divorce. The intention of three months is when she was divorced in
the beginning of the lunar month that she waits for three complete lunar
months from that time. When she was divorced on the fifth of the lunar
month, for example, she waits until the fifth day of the fourth lunar
month so that her seclusion concludes on that day.

**Issue 874:** The termination of the seclusion of the pregnant divorced
woman is the birth of her child or its miscarriage, although the child
be born an hour after the divorce. Then, she can marry after that
without delay.

**Issue 875:** The beginning of the seclusion ('Iddah) of the temporary
marriage is after the completion of the established period (of
marriage), when she menstruates, in the amount of two complete menstrual
cycles. When she does not menstruate, it is forty five days.

**Issue 876:** The beginning point of the seclusion of divorce is the
moment in which the Seeghah of divorce is executed whether the divorced
woman knows of that or does not know. Even when she comes to know after
the seclusion ('Iddah) that she had already been divorced before, it is
not obligatory upon her to observe a second seclusion.

The Seclusion of a Woman whose Husband has Died
-----------------------------------------------

**Issue 877:** It is obligatory upon the woman whose husband has died to
observe seclusion for four months and ten days whether the marriage is
permanent or temporary, whether he had intercourse with her or had no
intercourse with her. Even the menopausal woman is obligated to observe
the seclusion of the deceased.

When the woman is pregnant, it is obligatory that she wait until she
delivers her child. When she delivers before the conclusion of four
months and ten days, it is obligatory that she observe the remainder of
the period which completes the four months and ten days.

**Issue 878:** It is obligatory for her in the seclusion of the deceased
to avoid covering with decorative clothing and using Kohl (antimony) and
all that is counted as an embellishment.

**Issue 879:** When the husband is absent and died on a journey, the
beginning of the seclusion of the deceased is from the time when the
information reaches his wife.

**Issue 880:** When the woman says: *I have finished my seclusion*, it
will be accepted from her with the condition that it not be a situation
of suspicion. Rather, the obligatory precaution is that it should be a
situation of reliability.

The Irrevocable and Revocable Divorce
-------------------------------------

**Issue 881:** Divorce is of two types: Irrevocable divorce (Baa’in) and
revocable divorce (Raj'i). The irrevocable divorce is that divorce in
which the man does not have the right of returning (Rujoo') to his wife
(the intent of return or Rujoo') is that the man returns to his
relationship with his wife without a new contract and they live together
as they had been husband and wife.

The irrevocable divorce has five types:

1) The divorce of the woman who has not completed nine years of age.

2) The divorce of the menopausal woman (Yaa’isah) who has passed fifty
years of age.

3) The divorce of the woman whom her husband had not had intercourse
with her after the marriage.

4) The divorce of the woman who has been divorced three times.

5) The Khala' and Mubaara’ah divorce whose explanation is coming
afterward.

Whatever is aside from these are the revocable divorce (Raj'i), meaning
that it is permissible for the man to return to his wife during the
seclusion ('Iddah) without need of renewing the contract.

**Issue 882:** When a man divorces a woman with the revocable divorce,
it is not permitted for him to remove her from the house except in some
of the instances which are mentioned in the detailed jurisprudence
books. Likewise, it is forbidden for the woman herself to leave the
house for unnecessary activities.

The Rules of Revoking the Divorce (Rujoo’)
------------------------------------------

**Issue 883:** It is permissible in the revocable divorce that the man
returns to his wife without the need of performing the Seeghah of a new
contract. The revocation of the divorce is of two types:

1) That the man states words whose meaning is that he accepts the
marriage of that woman a second time.

2) That the man performs an action which implies this meaning (i.e. that
he accepts the return to married life).

**Issue 884:** It is not obligatory that the man have anyone to witness
his return to his wife or inform the woman of his return to her. Rather,
it is correct when he says: *I have returned to my wife*, without anyone
understanding it.

**Issue 885:** When a man divorces his wife another time (meaning, a
second time), then, marries her or returns to her (in her seclusion and
according to the obligatory precaution in every time of intercourse with
her) and after seeing menstruation and purity, he can divorce her. In
the third divorce, that woman becomes forbidden for him. She will not be
lawful for him unless she marries another man in a permanent marriage
after the period of seclusion ('Iddah) passes. Then, (if the second
husband) divorces her, it is permissible for her first husband to marry
her another time.

Khala’ Divorce
--------------

**Issue 886:** The woman who does not desire to continue living with her
husband and fears that if their marriage continues she will fall into
disobedience, it is permissible for her to give her dowry (Mahr) or
another sum for which he will divorce her. This is called the Khala'
divorce.

**Issue 887:** According to obligatory precaution, the Seeghah of Khala'
divorce is in the following manner:

When the husband himself desires to execute the Seeghah of divorce, he
mentions the name of his wife in it saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَوْجَتِي فاطِمَةُ خَلَعْتُها عَلى ما بَذَلَتْ فَهِيَ طالِقٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My wife Fatimah is removed for what she has offered, she is divorced*

When the husband desires to have his representative execute the Seeghah,
then, the obligatory precaution is that he appoints a person from the
side of the woman and another person from the side of the man and, when,
for example, the name of the husband is Muhammad and the name of the
wife is Fatimah, the representative of the woman says

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ مُوَكِّلَتِي فاطِمَةَ بَذَلْتُ مَهْرَها لِمُوَكّلِي مُحَمَّدٍ
لِيَخْلَعَها عَلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On behalf of the person whom I represent I offer her dowry to the
person whom you represent, Muhammad, in order that he divorce her (as
Khala')*

Then, the representative of the man says immediately afterward:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَوْجَةُ مُوَكّلِي خَلَعْتُها عَلى ما بَذَلَتْ فَهِيَ طالِقٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The wife of the man I represent, he has removed her for what she has
offered, she is divorced*.

When a woman desires to offer something other than her dowry, it is also
obligatory to mention it at the time of executing the Seeghah.

Mubaara’ah Divorce
------------------

**Issue 888:** When the spouses, each one of them, dislike each other
and the wife offers her dowry or some other property for the man to
divorce her, that is called Mubaara’ah divorce.

**Issue 889:** The obligatory precaution is that the Seeghah of
Mubaara’ah is executed in the following manner:

When the man himself desires to execute the Seeghah of Mubaara’ah
divorce and the name of his wife is, for example, Fatimah, he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بارَأْتُ َزْوجَتِي فاطِمَةُ عَلى ما بَذَلَتْ فَهِيَ طالِقٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I disavow my wife Fatimah for what she has offered, she is divorced*

When the wife has offered another property other than the dowry, it is
also obligatory for her to mention it.

When a representative of the man executes the Seeghah, he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بارَأْتُ َزْوجَةَ مُوَكَّليِ عَلى ما بَذَلَتْ فَهِيَ طالِقٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I disavow the wife of the man I represent for what she has offered,
then, she is divorced*

of course, it is necessary that the wife has already given her dowry
before that or something lesser to her husband in exchange for the
Mubaara’ah divorce.

**Issue 890:** The obligatory precaution is that the Seeghah of the
Mubaara’ah divorce be executed in proper 'Arabic. However, there is
nothing preventing the wife from offering her property in Persian or any
other language (based on the translation of the following):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَذَلَتْ لَكَ المال الفُلانِي لِتُطلَقَّني
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I offer this property of such and such to you in order for you to
divorce me.*

**Issue 891:** It is permissible for the woman to seek the return of her
offering during the seclusion ('Iddah) of the Khala' or Mubaara’ah
divorce. When she gets the return of her offering, it is permissible for
the husband to return to her and take her as his wife another time with
no need of a new contract.

**Issue 892:** The property which the husband takes for the Mubaara’ah
divorce, it is obligatory that it not be more than the dowry. Rather,
the precaution is that it be less than that. However, there is no
objection in the Khala' divorce that the amount be whatever quantity.

**Issue 893:** When the woman makes it conditional at the time of the
marriage that by her own she will select divorce if her husband travels
or becomes addicted to narcotics or he becomes unable to support her,
this condition is invalid. However, when she makes it conditional that
she should be the representative on the behalf of her husband, then she
will divorce herself in these situations, this appointment is proper and
she has the right to divorce herself in this situation.

**Issue 894:** The woman who cannot find her husband and does not know
whether he is alive or not, when she desires to seek a divorce and marry
another man, it is obligatory that she consult a just Mujtahid and act
in accordance to the particular duty mentioned in the noble law.


