The Rules of Slaughtering and Hunting
=====================================

**Issue 901:** When a lawful animal is slaughtered according to view of
the conditions which will be mentioned afterward, it becomes lawful to
eat its flesh whether it be domestic or wild. Except the animal which a
person has had intercourse with. Its flesh is forbidden, even the flesh
of its offspring. Likewise, is the contaminated animal (Hayawan
Jallaal-it is that animal which is habitually fed the stool of man),
except when it is fed pure food and purified according to what is
mentioned in the Islamic law.

**Issue 902:** The undomesticated animal of lawful flesh, like the deer,
mountain ram, partridge and animals like these, and similarly, the
domesticated animal of lawful flesh which become wild afterward, like
the domesticated cow and camel which escaped and became wild, when it is
hunted with weapons (according to the method whose explanation is
upcoming), it is lawful (Halaal).

However, when the domesticated animal of lawful flesh is hunted with
weapons, it does not become lawful. As such is the undomesticated animal
of lawful flesh which has become domesticated by training.

**Issue 903:** The undomesticated animal of lawful flesh does not become
lawful except when it is able to flee. According to this, it is not
lawful to hunt the small gazelle or the small partridge that are unable
to escape.

The Method of Slaughtering an Animal
------------------------------------

**Issue 904:** To slaughter an animal, it suffices to sever the animal's
windpipe (the passageway of air) and the two jugular veins (they are the
two arteries surrounding the windpipe) in a complete manner. However,
the recommended precaution is to sever the four passageways, meaning the
windpipe (larynx), the two jugular veins in addition to the esophagus
from the lower part of the neck called the *Jauzah.*

**Issue 905:** When some of the passageways were severed and, then,
waited until the animal died, then, severed the remaining passageways,
it is of no benefit, the animal is a carcass (Maitah). Rather, even when
the wait was not to this extent, but the passageways were not severed in
a consecutive manner, as was known before. If the animal has some life
remaining in it, there are objections in it.

The Conditions of Slaughtering an Animal
----------------------------------------

**Issue 906:** Five matters are conditional in slaughtering an animal:

1) That the one slaughtering be a Muslim. According to obligatory
precaution, the Nasibi and those in the ruling of a non-Muslim who are
at enmity with the Ahlul-Bait of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
them.

2) That the instrument of slaughtering be made of iron or something from
the metals resembling it. When slaughtering is necessary and the
instrument of slaughtering is not found or it is feared that when the
animal is not slaughtered it will die and something of metal is not
available, it is permitted to cut its throat with any other sharp
instrument (like glass, stone or wood).

3) That the front part of the body of the animal be in the direction of
the Qiblah at the time of slaughtering. When the animal is faced with
its back toward the Qiblah intentionally, its flesh is forbidden.
However, when the animal had its back toward the Qiblah mistakenly or
out of ignorance of the rule and the issue or it was a mistake in the
direction of the Qiblah and the animal was slaughtered in a direction
other than the direction of the Qiblah, its flesh is not forbidden.

4) That the name of Allah be said at the time of slaughtering. It
suffices to say: Bismillah (In the name of Allah) or Subhaana-llah
(Glorified be Allah) or La Ilaaha Illa-llah (There is no God except
Allah). It is sufficient that (the saying of the name of Allah) be said
in Persian or any other language. However, when the name of Allah is
said without the intention of slaughtering, it does not suffice. There
is no objection when the name of Allah is not mentioned due to
forgetfulness.

5) It is conditional that the animal, slaughtered has some movement,
although it be that it moves its eyes or move its tail or kick its leg
to the ground such that it can be known that it was alive at the time of
slaughtering. The obligatory precaution is that a sufficient amount of
blood emerges from the animal.

**Issue 907:** It is permissible that the slaughterer be a male or
female or an immature child knowing the method of slaughter and its
rules. However, the best is that women and children be excused with the
existence of men.

**Issue 908:** It is permissible to slaughter animals by mechanical
equipment when the aforementioned conditions are taken into account.

**Issue 909:** When a number of chickens or animals are slaughtered
together, it suffices to say the name of Allah one time. Likewise, when
a large number of animals are slaughtered by equipment at one time
(according to other conditions), it suffices to say (the name of Allah)
once. When the equipment operates by repetition constantly, then, the
precaution is to repeat the (mention of Allah's name) constantly.

The Method of Slaughtering a Camel
----------------------------------

**Issue 910:** The five previously mentioned conditions are conditional
in slaughtering the camel in addition that the method of slaughtering it
is by piercing it with a knife or by any other sharp instrument in its
breast plate, it is a depression found at the lower part of the neck,
this method is called *Nahr.* The best according to some of the
narrations is that the animal be standing. However, there is no
objection in slaughtering it kneeling or laying on its side and its
front part of its body toward the Qiblah.

**Issue 911:** The unruly animal that it is not possible to slaughter
according to the legal method, and, likewise, the animal which has
fallen into a well and it is not possible to slaughter it according to
the legal method and it is probable that it will die there, if it is
possible to wound a place on its body with a sharp instrument, like a
knife, then, it dies from the effect of the wound, its flesh is lawful.
It is not obligatory to face it toward the Qiblah. However, it is
obligatory that the other conditions in slaughtering of the animal be
conditional in its killing and that which were mentioned earlier.

**Issue 912:** Sometimes animals are stunned by electrical shock to ease
the slaughtering activities in order to prepare and facilitate its
slaughter by manufacturing equipment. This action is only devoid of
objection when the animal remains alive after delivering the stun to the
animal in order to slaughter it and the animal is alive.

The Rules of Hunting with Weapons
---------------------------------

**Issue 913:** The flesh of lawful undomesticated animals is lawful when
hunted with weapons with the five following conditions.

1) That the weapon be piercing, like a sword, knife, dagger and rifle
and whatever is similar to rifles whether its bullets be sharp or not.
However, it must be such that it ruptures the body of the animal and
blood flows from it.

However, when the hunting is by means of a trap or stick or stone and
what is similar to that, it is forbidden except when the animal is
reached while alive and slaughtered according to the legal method.

2) Conditional hunter, according to the obligatory precaution is that he
be Muslim or the child of a Muslim, although he be a young child.
However, he should be decreeing and be able to distinguish between good
and evil.

3) That the weapon is used with the intention of hunting. As for when
something was aimed at with the weapon and it struck an animal by
chance, the eating of its flesh is forbidden.

4) At the time of using the weapon for hunting, the name of Allah must
be recited. There is no objection when it was forgotten.

5) That you reach the animal dead or reach it alive, but there not be a
sufficient opportunity to slaughter it. As for when there is an
opportunity to slaughter it, however, (the hunter) was negligent in
(slaughtering it). Then, the animal died, its flesh is forbidden.

**Issue 914:** When an animal is slaughtered or hunted and a fetus
emerges from its stomach alive, then, if that fetus is slaughtered
according to the legal method, it is lawful, otherwise, it is forbidden.

As for when the fetus dies by the slaughtering or hunting of its mother,
it is lawful with the condition that the constitution of that fetus is
complete and with the condition that hair or wool has appeared on its
hide.

Fishing
-------

**Issue 915:** The lawful fish are those which have scales whether its
scales be a few or numerous, small or big. Even fish whose scales are
not permanent and drops off in the net is lawful. However, the very fine
scales and what is similar that people do not call scales does not
suffice.

**Issue 916:** When a fish is captured alive and dies outside of the
water, it is pure and lawful. When it dies in a net found in the water,
it is lawful also.

**Issue 917:** When a fish is thrown from the water or waves cast it out
from the water or it remains on dry land by reason of the ebb and tide
and died there, it is forbidden. However, if it is caught by hand or
something else before it dies and, then, it dies, it is lawful.

**Issue 918:** It is not conditional that the hunter of fish be a Muslim
nor that he mention the name of Allah at the time of hunting. However,
it is obligatory that he slaughter it. Slaughtering it is taking it out
of the water alive or that it dies after falling into the net.

**Issue 919:** When fish is taken from the markets of the Muslims or
from the hand of a Muslim, it is lawful even though it is not known
whether it was captured alive or not. Also, it is not obligatory to
investigate that. However, when the fish is taken from a non Muslim, and
it is not known whether it was taken from the water alive or dropped in
a net alive or dead, it is forbidden.

**Issue 920:** Shrimp which are among the sea animals is lawful.
However, the crayfish, which are akin to land insects and the name fish
are applied to them, are forbidden and it is not allowed to eat them
except at the time of necessity for treatment.


