The Rules of Vows and Covenants
===============================

**Issue 932:** The vow (Nazr) is that people make a covenant to perform
one of the good acts for Allah or abandon an act that is better to
leave.

**Issue 933:** The vow is of two types:

First: The conditional vow. It is like saying: *When I am cured of my
illness, by Allah it is obligatory upon me to do such and such*. This is
called the vow of thankfulness (Nazr Ash-Shukr). Or when a such and such
bad act is committed, the person says: *It is obligatory upon me, by
Allah that I do a good act.* This is called the vow of prevention (Nazr
Al-Zajr).

Second: The unconditional vow. It is to say without restriction or
condition: *I vow, by Allah that I will perform the night prayer* or *By
Allah so and so is obligatory upon me.* Each of these types of vows is
proper according to Islamic law.

**Issue 934:** The vow is only proper when a Seeghah is executed for it
whether it be in 'Arabic, Persian or any other language.

**Issue 935:** It is conditional that the act which people vow is
desirable legally. According to this, it is not proper to make a vow to
perform something unlawful or to abandon something obligatory or
recommended.

**Issue 936:** It is not conditional that the particulars and the
details of the vowed act be desirable legally, rather, it suffices that
its basis be desirable legally. For example, when it is vowed to pray
the night prayer in the every night of the beginning of the month, it is
proper and obligatory to perform that act. Or when it was vowed to feed
the poor in a particular place, it is obligatory to act in accordance
with the vow.

**Issue 937:** When someone vowed to abandon an act permanently and has
not specified the interval or date, then, if he voluntarily performs
that act (again), the atonement (Kaffaarah) is obligatory upon him for
the first instance. When the vow was such that each instance of that is
independently related to the vow, then, the obligatory precaution is to
give the atonement (Kaffaarah) for each instance of breaking the vow. As
for when his intention was not as such (to vow something
unconditionally) or he doubted whether it was his intention in the
beginning or not or how (his intention was made), only one atonement
(Kaffaarah) is obligatory upon him.

**Issue 938:** When something is vowed for one of the mausoleums of the
A’immah or the children of the A’immah, upon them be peace, it is
obligatory to disburse in that mausoleum in the way of renovation or the
preparation of carpets or the lighting or for the attendants who serve
that mausoleum or things similar to that.

However, when something is vowed for the Imam himself, peace be upon
him, or the son of one of the A’immah without mentioning that mausoleum,
in addition to what we have stated, it is permissible to disburse it
establishing a mourning assemblies (Majaalis Al-'Azaa’) and lamentation
for that Imam or to spread its traditions and the traditions of Islam or
to help the pilgrims (to that mausoleum) or whatever scope is related to
it in a similar manner.

**Issue 939:** The wool of an animal who is vowed for charity of one of
the A’immah and its growth is part of the vow. When a child is born
before its disbursement in the range vowed or it yields milk, then, the
obligatory precaution is to disburse all of that in the same
disbursement (intended in the) vow.

**Issue 940:** When the father or mother makes a vow that they will
marry their daughters to a Sayyid (Haashimi), there vow is not to be
considered (as valid). Whenever the girl becomes mature, the choice is
in her hands.

**Issue 941:** The act (made obligatory) by an covenant ('Ahd) is
obligatory like the act of a vow with the condition of executing the
Seeghah of an oath, like saying: *I swear by Allah that I will not do
such and such action.* As for when the Seeghah is not executed or that
action was not desirable legally, the oath is not considered (as valid).

**Issue 942:** He who has not fulfilled his covenant with the
aforementioned conditions, the atonement (Kaffaarah) is obligatory upon
him additionally. The atonement of the covenant is like the atonement
for the vow, meaning feeding sixty (60) poor people or fasting two
consecutive months.


