Modern Issues
=============

1) Bank Transactions Institutions of (Interest) Free Loans
----------------------------------------------------------

**Issue 970:** Properties which people deposit in banks under the title
of active accounts are considered as interest free loans to the bank. It
is permissible for people to take it back and withdraw it when the
please. When this is done for compensation as a profit, it is forbidden
and the loan is invalid and it is not permissible for the bank to
utilize the deposit in this situation.

**Issue 971:** Short term and long term deposits which people deposit in
Islamic interest free banks, the profit which the bank pays is only
lawful for them when it is according to Islamic measures and the methods
of Islamic contracts and agreements (of various types, like silent
partnerships, partnerships, etc.) and the owner of the money is certain
or there is a considerable probability that the bank establishes this
contract and acts in a legal manner as a representative and authorized
agent of the owner of the deposit.

As for when it is known with certainty that these matters are only for
appearance and superficial and merely ink on paper, that profit is
unlawful.

**Issue 972:** Whatever individuals receive from banks under the title
of interest free loans (Qardhul-Hassanah) and loans other than that and,
then, something is added to the loan at the time of returning the amount
to the bank, it is only lawful when the transaction is completed in a
legal manner according to the methodology of Islamic agreements and
there is no impression of interest.

**Issue 973:** When people know of the existence of lawful money and
unlawful money in the bank, however, they do not know the money which
they are receiving is from the unlawful, there is no objection in
receiving it. However, when they are certain that the money which they
have received is taken from unlawful money, it is not permissible for
them to utilize it. It is in the ruling of lost property. Due to this,
it is obligatory to donate (this unlawful money) in the way of Allah
with the permission of the Religious Authority on behalf of the original
owner, according to obligatory precaution. In this issue, there is no
difference between foreign banks and domestic banks, governments or
non-government banks.

**Issue 974:** There is no objection in taking interest from foreign and
non-Muslim banks. It is unlawful to take interest from banks which
belong to Muslims.

**Issue 975:** There is no objection in bank transfers (drafts, checks)
from foreign banks, meaning that the bank or a businessman takes money
from one country (or city) and transfers it to another bank or another
individual in another country (or city) in order to receive a sum from
(the one desiring the transfer). In exchange for this transfer (the
banks) receive something from the owner of the money as compensation.
This transaction is lawful whether the fee of the transfer is deducted
from that transferred amount itself or the bank or businessman receives
it in an independent manner.

Likewise, when the bank or another institution gives a sum to an
individual and this individual transfers it in order to surrender it to
another branch of this bank or another person in another place, if an
amount of the money is taken as a gratuity fee for this transfer, there
is no objection in it.

**Issue 976:** When mortgage banks and others give a loan with the
condition that they profit and take collateral (as a deposit), the loan
is invalid and unlawful and the collateral is as such (unlawful for the
bank). The bank does not have the right to sell the collateral in order
to ensure its rights. It is like someone selling something the bank does
not own, except when the profit was established according to the method
of legal contracts.

**Issue 977:** The fee which is received in offices of interest free
loans in exchange for services which this office provides or (in charges
it in order) to preserve and organize the accounts of installments and
compensation (of these installments), there is no objection in it.
However, the precaution is that the amount is appropriate for the volume
of work and maintenance which the office bears, except that they are
receiving a profit from the loan with the name of a gratuity fee.

**Issue 978:** Some interest free loan offices assign something from the
(loan's) principle for business' activities or production (costs) in
order to secure from its proceeds, the expenses of the office and the
(expenses) of loans that are unpaid at times. This activity is only
permitted when the owner of the money and deposits are knowledgeable of
it and consent to it and (the bank) utilizes the proceeds of this
investment only in the maintenance of the office.

2) The Rules of The Promissory Note
-----------------------------------

**Issue 978:** The (term) promissory note (Kampayaalah) is applied to
the paper which is not a type of currency, rather, it is a certificate
of a financial debt. Due to this, no transaction occurs with it. It is
of two kinds:

1) **A Real Promissory Note**. It is considered as the certificate which
the debtor gives in compensation for his debt to the creditor.

2) **The Friendly Promissory Note** (or I.O.U). It is that which an
individual gives without it being in compensation for a debt. The intent
of this promissory note is (that one) gives this certificate to a third
person and he takes from that person an amount of currency less than
what is written in the promissory note.

**Issue 980:** When someone gives a Real Promissory Note to another
person and he transacts with a lesser amount, like he gives a
certificate whose amount is one hundred Dinaar at the time of its
realization after three months, in exchange for receiving ninety Dinaar
cash. The Real Promissory Note (valued at) one hundred Dinaar, which is
the actual liability of the debtor, is sold for ninety Dinaar cash.

This transaction is called Decreasing Promissory Note and it is proper
and there is no objection in it. However, the execution of the Friendly
Promissory Note is objectionable because a true debt doesn't exist. The
methods mentioned to resolve this difficulty are (also) not, without
exception, free of objection.

**Issue 981:** It is lawful to approach the signatory of the Promissory
Note, meaning the giver of the promissory note, when he had not paid his
debt in the established time, it is permissible for the creditor to take
his debt from that which they had placed on the Promissory Note. In
reality, the one given the promissory note is liable to the debtor such
that when (the debtor) pays his debt (the holder of the promissory note)
must go to pay his debt. This type of liability is said to add
responsibility upon responsibility and it is proper.

**Issue 982:** Transactions with salable notes or that which is called
money exchanges is permitted, meaning to exchange Syrian currency, for
example, with Iranian currency or Jordanian currency with Marks or
dollars. There is no objection in the increases and reductions in it.

However, to give a loan to someone as an amount of money whether it be
in the currency of an Islamic nation or foreign currency, it is
permitted only that he receive the same amount from him. Whatever excess
is interest and unlawful.

When a loan is given to someone in the amount of foreign currency, for
example, one hundred Marks, then, the debtor becomes in compelled to pay
in compensation of another currency, it is obligatory to figure the
common market value, except when the creditor was agreed with less than
that.

3)Key Money (Sarqufali)
-----------------------

**Issue 983:** Key money is considered as the right of priority which a
lessee obtains in a property in compensation of a sum which he pays in
the beginning to the owner. In accordance with that, the lessee is he
who pays the key money for priority over others in renting that property
in the future. This key money was not (done) in the past, it is now
existing among the intelligentsia of the people of 'Urf. It is proper
with the following conditions:

1) That the amount of the key money be known and that the two parties
execute this transaction with their consent.

2) That (the two parties) be mature (Baaligh), sane ('Aaqil) and
sensible (Rasheed) and that they know the meaning of key money and its
requirements.

**Issue 984:** It is permissible for the owner of the property to rent
his property to a person and receive a sum in addition to the payment
under the title of key money. In this situation he is not able to rent
the property which he has rented to another, although the period of the
lease has terminated.

However, when the first lessee who paid the key money agrees, it is
permissible for the owner to rent it to another person. The right of the
first lessee also is that he may consign that property to another person
for a lesser value or more than what he himself paid in the beginning
under the title of key money to the owner of the property.

**Issue 985:** When the term of the lease of the property for which the
key money was taken terminates, the owner is obligated to rent it to
that same lessee or another person the present lessee consents to. The
amount of the payment is the actual honest value and according to
reliable experts.

**Issue 986:** He who rents a property and does not pay a sum under the
title of key money, when the term of lease terminates, it is not
permitted for him to remain in that property without the permission of
the owner of the property. When he does not leave the property, he is
considered a usurper and is liable for the property and liable for an
equitable payment, whether the first term of rental was short or long,
whether the value of this payment was elevated or not. When another
person rents the property from this person, its rental is not proper,
except with the permission of the owner.

**Issue 987:** He who rents a property for a period of time along with
paying the key money to its owner, it is permissible for him to rent
that property to another person for that same amount as long as the term
of the lease remains (in effect). However, it is permissible that he
take the right of key money by any amount he can complete the agreement
with. The consent of the owner of the property is also conditional in
transferring the rental, except when he consigns this right to the
lessee in the beginning of the matter.

4)Rules of Insurance
--------------------

**Issue 988:** Insurance is a contract between the insured and the
insurance company or he whose (business) is insurance. According to
this, the foundation of establishing this (type of) company or that
(type of insurance vending) person is the compensation of losses which
are related to people or something (else) in exchange for (the amount)
paid to that company or individual.

This company, contract and independent transaction, when executed with
the conditions, which will be mentioned in the upcoming issues, is
proper whether the insurance is a kind of commercial manufacturer's
(insurance) or construction or building or car or boat or airplane or
employee and worker's or life insurance or the various types of
insurance known to the knowledgeable in our present time.

**Issue 989:** It is a condition that the two parties in the insurance
contract be sane ('Aaqil), mature (Baaligh); that they execute the
contract of insurance with (clear) intent and free will. (It is also
obligatory) that they not be incompetent (Safeeh). Likewise, it is
obligatory, in addition to what was mentioned, that they specify all of
the particularities. In brief (they are):

1) Specification of the basis of the insurance, is it building, or care
or individual insurance?

2) Specification of the two parties of the contract.

3) Specification of the installments and, likewise, the amount that the
insured is obligated to pay.

4) Specification of the period of insurance, for example, from now up to
a year.

5) Specification of the risks which bring about damages, like the risk
of burning, thunder, drowning, theft, death, illness or whatever other
risk.

6) Specification of the value of the amount which is from the revenue of
insurance, for example, to insure this house for a million Dinaar or
more or less or by the current equitable value. All of these situations
necessitate that one observes the universal principles in the habits of
the intelligent.

**Issue 990:** It is permissible to execute the wording of (the contract
of) insurance in any language possible or that the contract be written
on paper and signed.

5)The Rules of Artificial Insemination (For Women)
--------------------------------------------------

**Issue 991:** It is permissible to enter (implant) the sperm of man
into the womb of his wife by injection or other means. However, it is
obligatory the prerequisites of the action be permissible and lawful and
that the forbidden and unlawful are avoided.

**Issue 992:** It is not permissible to implant the sperm of a
non-related man in the womb of a woman, whether it is with the
permission of the woman or without her permission, whether she has a
husband or not, whether her husband gives permission for that or not. If
they do this and a child is born from it, if it resulted from confusion
that a man thought it was for his wife or the wife thought it was the
sperm of her husband and, later, it appeared otherwise, the child is
from the same couple and the rules for the child will apply.

However, when this comes about with knowledge or intent and (awareness)
that it is unlawful, the child born from this sperm is not considered a
child for the two and the rules of inheritance do not include the child.
As for when the child is a girl, it is not permissible for the owner of
the sperm to marry her. Likewise it is in the remaining issues related
to marriage.

6)The Rules of Transplanting Organs and Postmortems
---------------------------------------------------

**Issue 993:** It is permissible to transplant the heart, kidneys and
other organs, whether they be organs transplanted from a living person
or deceased, whether the deceased be a Muslim or non-Muslim. However, it
is not permissible to extract the organ from the body of a deceased
Muslim and transplant it in the body of another person, except when the
life of a Muslim depends upon it or there was another need. In every
situation, if the organs of a deceased Muslim are extracted, there is
blood money (Diyah). Its payment is obligatory according to what is
established in the detailed books of jurisprudence.

**Issue 994:** When the deceased gave permission in the state of his
life that his organs should be put at the disposal of others for
transplant into their bodies or his guardians give permission after his
death for that, the ruling of blood money and the remaining rulings are
not changed. The precaution is to pay blood money in every situation.

**Issue 995:** It is only permissible to extract the organ of living
people and implant it in other people as is usual and known in kidney
transplants where one of the kidneys of a living individual are
extracted and transplanted in the body of one whose both kidneys are
damaged, when its owner consents and it does not expose his life to
danger. The precaution, when taking a sum in exchange for that (organ),
it to put the (payment) as exchange for his permission for this action,
meaning, taking his organ from him, not in exchange for the organ
itself.

**Issue 996:** The injection of human blood in the body of another human
for treatment is permitted or for surgical activities or to save the
life of a person, whether it be the blood of a Muslim or non-Muslim, a
man or woman. There is no objection in selling and buying blood for this
purpose.

**Issue 997:** When an organ is separated from man, be he dead or alive,
and transplanted in the body of another such that it becomes part of the
body of the second person, it is not impure (Najis) nor part of a corpse
(Maitah) in this situation. As such, there is no objection in prayer
with it.

**Issue 998:** It is permitted to dissect (as in a postmortem or
autopsy) the body of the deceased Muslim for medical purposes with a
number of conditions, they are:

1) That the purpose is education and to supplement known medical facts
in order to save the lives of Muslims and that is such that it cannot be
achieved except by a postmortem.

2) That the dead body of a non-Muslim is not available.

3) That (doctors) are content with the necessary extent (for their
purposes). Therefore, whatever is in excess of that is not permitted.

Then, a postmortem with these conditions is permissible, rather,
obligatory, at times. These conditions, however, are not conditional for
the dead body of a non-Muslim.

**Issue 999:** Touching the bodies which are submitted for postmortems,
when the deceased was a Muslim and had already been given the baths of
the deceased (Ghuslul-Amwaat), does not necessitate the Ghusl for
touching the dead body (Ghusl Massil-Mayyit). In other than this
situation, the Ghusl for touching the dead body is obligatory when one
intends to pray or whatever has purity (Tahaarah) conditional in it.
When (performing the Ghusl) brings about difficulty and distress, it is
permitted to make Tayammum as a substitute for Ghusl.

When the postmortem is on bones only, not flesh or on detached flesh,
like the heart, veins and brain and whatever is similar to that, then,
there is no Ghusl. The best, if one is able, is to wear gloves, then, in
this situation, there is never a Ghusl (obligatory) for the one
touching.

**Issue 1000:** There is no blood money in the instances in which it is
legally permissible to do a postmortem on the body of man.

A number of Important Issues (People) Frequently Face
-----------------------------------------------------

**1** It is permitted to remain in the followership (Taqleed) of a
deceased (Mujtahid). When the deceased (Mujtahid) was the most learned
(A'alam), remaining (in his Taqleed) is obligatory (in the manner which
we have mentioned in the discussion of Taqleed to the most learned).

**2** When Mixed Water is of a very large quantity such that an impurity
falling in one place is not a cause of a ripple to the other side (like
a large pool filled with Mixed Water), then, all of it does not become
impure with contact by an impurity.

**3** When an animal is slaughtered by unlawful methods, it is pure
(Taahir) although eating its flesh is forbidden. According to this, the
hides of animals imported from non-Islamic countries are pure when we
know that they are from slaughtered animals.

**4** Mega-cities are cities in which each locality is an independent
city. As for the likes of Tehran and those cities like it, it is not a
mega-city. As far as the intent of residency or its being a hometown,
all of it is considered one place.

**5** He who intends to remain in one place for an extended period (like
students who intend to reside in the Howzah 'Ilmiyyah for a number of
years or traveling employees who reside in one place for two, three or
more years and do not travel from that place except for specific
purposes, the place of their residency is in the ruling of a hometown
and their prayers there (are performed) in full, although they had not
made the intent to reside there for ten days.

**6** He whose occupation is driving (like drivers who work in open
areas) or travel is a prerequisite of one's employment (like those who
reside in a city and leave it to travel to cities for studies or other
occupations) and the total of their going and coming is eight Faraasikh
(43Km/26.7 Mi), their prayers (are performed) in full and it is
obligatory for them to fast in the month of Ramadhan.

**7** When something from a year's expenses, like a house, carpet,
furniture and other necessities, are sold in that (time coming after a
year), Khums is not attached to its value, in particular, when they
intend to replace it with its equivalent.

**8** It is permissible to cut the head of an animal by mechanical means
when the legal conditions mentioned in the discussion of slaughtering
animals are observed. The likes of this animal is pure and lawful.

**9** It is permissible to sell and buy radios and televisions and
miscellaneous instruments which have lawful benefits and is considered
lawful.

**10** When a fish dies in the water after being captured in a net, it
is lawful.

**11** Interest schemes which do not have the intent of a gift as is
common are invalid. Whereas a loan is given to someone, then, a
settlement is made in its profit which, for example, could total
hundreds of Dinaar with a Kilo of sugar and whatever is similar to that
(it is invalid) and there is no basis for it. The additional amount is
considered interest (Ribaa).

**12** Bank transactions whether they are short term or long term
deposits or loans which individuals receive from banks. The profits
which are considered as compensation for that (transaction) are only
lawful when they conform to legal measures and are completed according
to the method of Islamic agreements and the one giving and receiving are
certain or there is a reasonable probability that the responsible
(employees) of the bank have established this activity in a legal manner
according to their duty.

As for when it is certain that these matters are superficial and
imaginary and only ink on paper, that profit is unlawful for both
parties.

**13** Many people give a sum as a security for a house and receive a
discount in payment. This action is proper in one instance and invalid
in another instance. When the house is rented and the contents of the
lease agreement stipulate that a sum be given under the title of a loan
and the house is put up as a security, then, the transaction is proper.
However, when the loan and the security were realized first and the
contents of the lease agreement stipulate that the payment is reduced,
this is unlawful and invalid.

**14** Liability of another, be it in the situation of transferal of
responsibility (meaning, that one make an agreement to pay a indebted
person's debt) or in the situation of “adding responsibility to
responsibility” (meaning that one make an agreement to establish the
payment of a debt when the debtor does pay it), it is proper and lawful
in both instances.

**15** Uncultivated lands do not become the property of anyone by mere
registration, rather, it is necessary to revive it, meaning to prepare
it for cultivation.

**16** The one to be punished is not limited to strokes of the stick,
rather, it includes financial penalties, prison, even identification of
the criminal through means of notification and also whatever is
comprised of that from the various types of punishments (of course, the
selection of one of these matters is related to the opinion of the
Religious Authority as is the manner of punishment and its
particularities and remaining related matters.)

**17** In the Islamic covering (Hijaab), there is no distinction in the
type of dress or its color, rather, it is obligatory to cover the entire
body besides the face and hands. However, wearing decorative clothing is
not permitted, although the body is not visible. It is foremost to
observe the conduct of the people of piety and religion among the
Muslims.

**18** Real individuals and individuals (involved in organizations, or
corporate individuals) can be owners (of properties). It is permissible
that they be one party in a transaction. According to this, if a
charitable or domestic institution which is established has (corporate)
individuals, they do not differ from real individuals.

**19**It is permissible that writing and signatures occur in all
transactions in place of executing a verbal formula (Seeghah), except in
Marriage and Divorce wherein the obligatory precaution is to execute the
verbal formula.

**20** Cigarette smoking and the remaining types of smoking, when it
contains an important harm by witness of experts, is forbidden. However,
narcotics are forbidden without exception.

**21** Selling and buying blood in order to save the life of an ill
person is permitted. However, in selling and buying limbs of the body,
like the kidney or something similar, then, the precaution is that when
one wants to receive money, it will be accepted as compensation for his
permission to remove the organ not compensation for the organ itself.
Fundamentally, this action is permissible when it does not result in
danger for the donor.

**22** The seller and purchaser are free in specifying the price of a
commodity. However, when this freedom is a cause of corruption and
disruption of the economic system in Islamic societies, in some
instances, it is permissible for the Religious Authority in these
circumstances to set the price of commodities and require people to
(adhere to those fixed prices).

**23** Defense of Islamic nations is obligatory and it is not limited to
the countries in which people may live, rather, all Muslims in the world
are obligated that some of them defend Muslim nations or Islamic Holy
Lands from foreign aggression.

**24** **Mudhaarabah** (silent partnership) is that an individual or
individuals assign property and establish that an individual or
individuals act (in a agreed upon manner) with that sum. The profit is
divided between the owner of the property and the one acting in
accordance with the contract and agreement, each having a share of the
profit.

**25** It is not obligatory in Mudhaarabah that (the money) be in minted
gold or silver, rather, Mudhaarabah is proper with any type of property.
Just as it is not conditional that the assignment of property be in
trade matters, rather, the assignment of property in matters of
production is proper (like manufacturing, agriculture, herding and
whatever is similar). According to this, it is permissible to sell the
shares of the one transacting and manufacturing and the benefit
resultant from its usage.

**26** It is not necessarily conditional in Mudhaarabah that the share
of the two sides be according to a collective deduction from the
benefits (in other words, one half or one third or similar to that),
rather, it is permissible that one of the two sides specifies an amount
of the profit for himself saying: I give this property to you in order
that you transact with it (with me as the silent partner), in exchange
you will give me one hundred Dinaar from the profits of the transaction
with the condition that the aforementioned silent partnership produces
more profit than this amount. Otherwise, the Mudhaarabah is not proper.

**27** The Mudhaarabah which banks establish with individuals who
approach them, when the aforementioned legal conditions are observed and
it is not merely ink on paper, is proper and the profit obtained from it
is lawful.

**28** Whatever loss is incurred without the negligence of the one
transacting is connected to the principle (Ra’sul-Maal) and it is not
permitted to make it the expense of the one transacting or divide it
between (the one transacting) and the owner of the property.

**29** The time of the Azaan of Fajr (for prayer and fasting) in the
moon-lit and non-moon-lit nights is one (in the same). The standard is
the appearance of light of the east in the horizon, although it may not
appear due the affects of the sun's radiance.

**30** It is permissible to dissect the body of man for medical purposes
with the condition mentioned in Issue 998. We have already explained the
ruling of touching the dead in Issue 999.

**31** A check (Sakk) and Promissory Note (Kampayaalah) are of two
kinds: Sometimes, the indication is that one has a right over another
(like when someone sells something and the purchaser gives him a note
for the amount). In this situation, it is permissible to pay the note as
a deferred payment for a period of time to that individual (the current
owner of the note) in order to take a lesser sum of cash than what is on
the note. However, when there is no debt in compensation for this note,
there is an objection to this transaction.

**32** It is not permissible for interest free banks to make conditions
for the borrower, in other words, to make a condition in compensation
for the loan which (the bank) offers to the borrower, like saying to
(the borrower) that you must open an account with us and have
pre-existing savings or make it a condition to receive a gratuity fee.
According to this, it is obligatory that the gratuity fees that it
receives from customers are something independent and have no connection
to the loan.

**33** It is customary among people that they give a loan to the owner
of a house and they take the house as a security and they make
conditional in the contents of the contract that they have the right of
residence in this house or (that they) give a reduced payment and
smaller sum. This transaction is (related to) interest and forbidden.

The proper method is that first the lessee rents the house, although it
be with an insignificant amount. Then, it is made conditional in the
contents of the lease contract that a sum of money is given like a loan
from the renter for the owner. The house is a security in compensation
for this money. Then, in this situation, there is no interest in this
transaction and the transaction is proper.

**34** **Friday Prayer**. Salatul-Jumu'ah (Friday Prayer), as we had
mentioned in Issue 289, is obligatory in the time of the sacred lawgiver
(the Holy Prophet, may the Blessings of Allah be upon him and his
family), the Infallible A’immah, upon them be peace (and the time of)
the specific representative of the Imam. However, in the time of the
absence of the Imam Al-Mahdi (may our souls be his ransom) it is Waajib
Takhyeeri, meaning that if any one of the two prayers, in other words,
Friday Prayer and Salatuz-Zuhr, are performed, it is sufficient.
However, the precaution is to prefer Salatul-Jumu'ah in the era of the
formation of the Islamic government.

**35** It is obligatory that Friday Prayer be performed in the manner of
a congregation. In the convening of the congregation, it is conditional
that the number of individuals of the congregation be five at the
minimum (the Imam of the Friday Prayer and four followers).

**36** The Friday Prayer is not obligatory upon travelers, women, the
sick and the disabled. However, when these (categories of people) are
present and pray the Friday Prayer with the congregation, their prayers
are correct. However, the precaution is that the five original
worshippers in the Friday Prayer are other than these (categories of
people).

**37** It is obligatory that there not be a distance less than one
Farsakh (5.4 Km/3.4 Mi.) between two congregations both praying the
Friday Prayer. When (the distance was) less than that, the congregation
which precedes (the other) in time is proper and the second is invalid
(meaning second in convening the congregation).

**38** Those who live around two Faraasikh (10.8 Km/6.8 Mi) from the
place of the Friday Prayer, the rule of Friday Prayer includes them.
When there is an obligatory Friday Prayer (in that area), their presence
is obligatory in this prayer.

**39** The time of the Friday Prayer is from the beginning of Zuhr in
the amount (of time necessary for) the Azaan, the sermon (Khutbah) and
the prayer, according to the customary practice. When this amount of
time has lapsed, the time for Friday Prayer terminates and it becomes
obligatory to perform Salatuz-Zuhr.

**40** **The method of The Friday Prayer**. The Friday Prayer is
considered as two Raka'ah, like Salatul-Fajr, and two sermons (which are
obligatory) to be given before the prayer. It is obligatory that the two
sermons include the following matters:

1) Praise and glorification of Allah.

2) Prayers upon the Prophet Muhammad and the family of the Prophet
Muhammad, may the Blessings of Allah be upon him and his family.

3) An exhortation, guidance and advice for fear of Allah

4) Recitation of a short Surah in each sermon, like Surah Al-Ikhlaas and
Surah Al-Kaafiroon or Surah Al-'Asr, according to obligatory precaution.

5) Just as it is obligatory upon the leader (Imam) to implore
forgiveness for himself and the believing men and women, in the second
sermon he should pray upon the Infallible A’immah, upon them be peace,
mentioning their names one by one when praying for them.

According to this, the first sermon includes five parts and the second
sermon includes six. It is obligatory that the leader give the two
sermons in the state of standing; that he sit a moment between (the two
sermons); that his voice reach (as many) worshippers as he is able and
that he admonish and give guidance (in the two sermons) in the language
and expressions which people understand.

**41** The speaker (in Friday Prayer) should wear the Turban ('Amaamah)
and cloak ('Abaa’ah) and lean on a staff or something similar to that,
(and he should) greet the believers before beginning the sermon, (and
likewise,) he should explain to people the important political, social
and ethical issues related to Muslims and the Islamic world and, in
particular, to that region. (He should) advise them of their duties and
obligations in face of these issues and warn them of the strategies of
the enemies and their agents.

A summary: It is necessary for the speaker (in Friday Prayer) to take
the most advantage of whatever is possible in the sermons in reforming
souls and familiarizing people with the important issues which is one of
the original purposes of this sermon.

The sermon should be in a clear, eloquent and penetrating language in
order that the sermon has the maximum affect on the souls of people;
(and that) the benefit of this religious, political duty be completed in
a perfect manner; (that) divisive issues are avoided and that the
Muslims are called to unity in face of their enemies.

**42** The obligatory precaution is that the worshippers, at the time of
the two sermons of Friday Prayer, are with purification (Tahaarah); that
they sit in front of the Imam and observe silence and listen to the
sermons. However, when one of them intentionally talks during the
sermon, his prayer is not invalidated, although he has committed an
offense (of deviation from the proper etiquette).

**43** When the follower did not hear the sermon and shared in the
prayer, or he only reached (in time) for one Raka'ah, the Friday Prayer
is correct. However, the obligatory precaution is that one not be late
intentionally.

**44** It is obligatory that the sermon be after the Azaan of Zuhr. When
the two sermons were performed before Zuhr, they are to be repeated.

(Compiled on the 24th of Rajab 1414)


