The Rules of Fasting
====================

The Obligation of Fasting
-------------------------

**Issue 546:** In every year it is obligatory for each adult to fast one
month of blessed Ramadhaan with the explanations that will be mentioned
in the up coming issues.

**Issue 547:** Fasting is that to which God has commanded man for
obedience to restrain from those things which invalidate the fast, from
the Azaan of the morning prayer (Fajr) until evening prayer (Maghrib).
The explanation of which is coming in the following issues.

The obligatory matters of fasting
---------------------------------

**Issue 548:** Fasting is one of the types of worship and it is
necessary to perform it with intention (Niyyah). The occurrence of
intention does not require that it be spoken by the tongue or be settled
in one's heart. This intention is sufficed in any measure by which one
leaves the actions that invalidate the fast from the Azaan of morning
prayer to evening prayer in order to obey the command of God.

**Issue 549:** It suffices that each evening in the blessed month of
Ramadhaan that the intention of fasting be made. However, it is better,
in addition to this, that in the beginning of the month, the intention
for fasting the whole month is also made.

**Issue 550:** Intention does not have a specific time, rather, any time
intention is made before the Azaan of morning prayer is sufficient. This
(making of intention) is that for eating the Suhoor (light morning meal
before beginning the fast) one rises (from bed) and if he is asked
what's your purpose (in rising)? He says: I have the intention of
fasting.

**Issue 551:** The time of intention for a recommended fast continues
the entire day even if a brief time remains until Maghrib. As long as
actions which invalidate the fast are not performed, he is able to make
the intention of a recommended fast and his fast is correct.

**Issue 552:** The person who is obligated to perform a missed fast
(Qadhaa’) of the month of Ramadhaan or another obligatory fast which he
is liable for, making a recommended fast is not permitted. If he had
forgotten and made a recommended fast, if in the case he comes to
remember before Zuhr (noon), he is able to make his intention for an
obligatory fast. However, if it is after Zuhr, his fast is invalid.

**Issue 553:** A person who has taken a payment to perform the fast of a
person who is deceased, he is able to perform a recommended fast for
himself.

**Issue 554:** Anytime a non-specific (Ghair-e-Mu'ayyin) obligatory fast
is his duty, for example the Qadhaa’ of the month of Ramadhaan or the
fast of a Kaffaarah, the time of intention remains until Zuhr. Meaning,
in the event, he had not done anything which invalidates the fast and
before Zuhr he makes the intention, his fast is correct.

**Issue 555:** The day of doubt (Yaum Ash-Shakk), meaning a day that
people have doubt that it is the end of the month of Sha'baan or the
beginning of the month of Ramadhaan, that fast is not obligatory. If one
desires to fast, he must make the intention of the month of Sha'baan or
if he has a Qadhaa’ fast as his duty, he makes the intention of Qadhaa’.
In the event that it had become known afterward to be the month of
Ramadhaan, he counts (this fast as one of the fasts) of Ramadhaan.
However, if during the day he comes to know (it is Ramadhaan), he must
immediately change his intention to the fast of the month of Ramadhaan.

Actions which render the fast invalid
-------------------------------------

**Issue 556:** Actions which render the fast invalid, according to
precaution, as nine things:  
 • Eating and drinking

• intercourse

• masturbation

• lying on God, the Prophet (S) and the Imams (AS)

• allowing thick dust to reach the throat

• immersing the entire head in water

• remaining in the state of ritual impurity or menstruation or the
bleeding of childbirth until the Azaan

• of the morning prayer

• taking a fluid enema

• intentionally vomiting.

God willing, the explanation of these issues will be explained.

### 1) Eating and Drinking

Eating and drinking intentionally renders the fast invalid, whether
eating familiar things, like bread and water, or unfamiliar things like
the bark of a tree, be it of small quantity or large. Even if a
toothbrush is taken out of the mouth and again entered into the mouth
and that moisture is swallowed, his fast becomes invalid except if that
moisture of the toothbrush is little and goes in with the water of the
mouth.

**Issue 558:** Eating and drinking inadvertently and in forgetfulness
does not invalidate the fast.

**Issue 559:** Obligatory precaution is that the fasting person
restrains himself from injections and serums which are used in place of
food and medicine. However, injections that are given in the limbs to
numb the feelings, there is no objection.

**Issue 560:** People are not able to, with fear of weakness, to ruin
their fasts. However, if finds a degree of weakness which it brings
causes him great difficulty, he is able to break his fast. In this same
manner if he has fear of illness.

### 2) Intercourse

**Issue 561:** Intercourse (Jimaa’) renders the fast of both sides
invalid although penetration was only in the amount up to the place of
circumcision and semen had also not emerged. If it is less than that and
also no semen has emerged the fast is not invalid. In the case of doubt
that this measure had be penetrated or not his fast is correct.

**Issue 562:** If by way of forgetfulness intercourse occurs or by way
of compulsion in a manner of having no choice, the fast is not
invalidated. However, in the event that during the intercourse it is
remembered or the compulsion becomes eliminated, the intercourse must be
left immediately, otherwise, his fast is invalid.

### 3) Masturbation

**Issue 563:** If a fasting person by his own actions caused semen to
emerge from himself, his fast becomes invalidated. Regarding if
involuntarily in the state of sleeping or wakefulness semen emerges, the
fast is not invalidated.

**Issue 564:** Whenever a fasting person knows that if in the day he
sleeps he will have a wet dream, meaning in sleep semen emerges from
him, it is permissible for him to sleep. In the event he has a wet
dream, there is no objection to his fast.

**Issue 565:** If a fasting person, without intention, had semen emerge
for example their mate were playing and jesting in circumstances that
are customary that in this amount of playing and jesting semen does not
emerge from him, his fast is correct. However, if coincidentally, semen
emerged, his fast has some objection. Except that before this, he was
certain that semen had not emerged from him.

### 4)To tell a lie against God and the Messenger

**Issue 566:** Whenever a fasting person tells a lie against God and the
Noble Messenger and his infallible successors (AS) whether it is
attributed by saying or by writing or by indication and similar to that,
according to obligatory precaution, his fast is invalid, although he
immediately made penance. Lying against the remaining prophets and
Fatimah-e-Zahra (AS) also has the same ruling.

**Issue 567:** Whenever a report is desired to be transmitted be it
right or false that does not have information, it is necessary to
mention the person whom that report is related or a book in which it was
written. For example, so and so is the narrator of this same report or
in so and so's book that very report has been written that the Prophet
(S) has stated.

### 5) Allowing thick dust to reach the throat

**Issue 568:** Allowing thick dust to reach the throat whenever it is
changed to slime and is swallowed, the fast is invalidated. In other
circumstances than these, the fast is correct whether it be the smoke of
something whose eating is lawful, for example flour or the smoke of
something whose eating is unlawful.

**Issue 569:** Whenever, by means of wind or sweeping the ground, thick
smoke rises and caution is not taken that the traces are reaching the
throat, his fast becomes invalid (in explanation of that which has been
said in the issue before).

**Issue 570:** The obligatory precaution is that the fasting person
refrain from cigars and tobacco and remaining tobacco products and thick
steam also should not reach the throat. However, going to the bath house
has no objection whenever the space of the bath house is filled with the
steam.

### 6) Immersing the head in water

**Issue 571:** According to obligatory precaution, the fasting person
does not intentionally immerse his entire head under water, even if the
remainder of his body is out of the water. Regarding is the whole body
and a part of the head has gone under water, however, a portion of the
head out of the water, the fast is not invalid. The immersion of the
head in any fluid like rosewater or other mixed waters have the ruling
of pure water.

**Issue 572:** A person that for the saving of a drowning person is
compelled to immerse the head in water, his fast has some objection.
However, on the pretext of saving a Muslim' soul, this action is
obligatory and afterward Qadhaa’ is made.

**Issue 573:** Divers, if they cover their heads in a headcovering and
with that they go under water, their fasts are correct.

**Issue 574:** If a fasting person involuntarily falls in the water or
his is thrown into the water and his head goes under water or he forgets
that he is fasting and his head is immersed in the water, his fast is
not invalidated. However, if he remembers, according to obligatory
precaution, it is necessary to immediately remove the head from the
water.

### 7) Remaining ritually impure until the Azaan of morning prayer

**Issue 575:** If a ritually impure (Junub) person intentionally does
not bathe until the morning, according to obligatory precaution, his
fast is invalid. If he does not have the ability to bathe or the time is
limited, he makes Tayammum. Regarding if it was not intentional, his
fast is correct. Women who do not become purified from menstruation
(Haidh) or the bleeding of child birth (Nifaas) until the Azaan of
morning prayer and not bathing are in the ruling of a person who remains
in the state of ritual impurity.

**Issue 576:** The fast becomes invalid with remembering remaining in
ritual impurity, particularly the fast of the month of Ramadhaan and the
Qadhaa’ of Ramadhaan. In other fasts, the obligation does not become
invalidated.

**Issue 577:** If the Junub in the month of Ramadhaan forgot a bath and
after one or a number of days his memory comes to him, it is necessary
that however many days he is certain he had been Junub he makes Qadhaa’.
For example, if he does not know for three or four days he had been
Junub, it is necessary to make Qadhaa’ for three days and the Qadhaa’ of
the forth day is a recommended precaution.

**Issue 578:** A person who is Junub in the night of the month of
Ramadhaan and he knows that if he sleeps until morning he will not wake
up, he must not sleep. In the event he sleeps and does not wake up, his
fast has some objection. According to obligatory precaution, he must
perform Qadhaa’ and Kaffaarah. Regarding if he has a probability of
awakening, he is permitted to sleep. Regarding the precaution in this is
that in the second instance that he awakens, he does not sleep until the
he bathes.

**Issue 579:** Whenever, in the month of Ramadhaan he wakes up after the
Azaan of morning prayer and sees that he had a wet dream, his fast is
correct whether he knows before the Azaan he had a wet dream or after
that or he has doubt.

**Issue 580:** A woman which is in the state of Istihaadhah, she
performs her bath according to the details mentioned in the rulings of
Istihaadhah and her fast will be correct.

**Issue 581:** A person who has touched a dead person and the bath of
touching a dead became obligatory, he is able, without the bath of
touching a dead, to fast. If in the state of fasting he touches a dead
body, his fast is not invalidated. However, for prayer he is required to
bathe.

### 8) Enema with fluids

**Issue 582:** The purging enema with fluids renders the fast invalid
although for treatment of a sick person or being helpless. However using
the solid enema for treatment has no objection. The obligatory
precaution is to avoid the solid enema used as a food.

### 9) Vomiting

**Issue 583:** Vomiting intentionally renders the fast invalid, although
it is for salvation from poisons or remedy for an illness and things
similar to that. However, vomiting involuntarily or inadvertently does
not invalidate the fast.

**Issue 584:** Whenever one of the nine matters previously mentioned are
performed inadvertently or involuntarily, the fast is correct. However,
if the Junub sleeps and until the Azaan of morning prayer does not
bathe, his fast has some objection, according to that which had been
previously stated.

**Issue 585:** If a fasting person inadvertently performs one of the
actions which the fast invalid, and afterward, in the belief that his
fast is invalid, he performs one of those acts intentionally a second
time, his fast is not invalidated, however, the recommended precaution
is Qadhaa’ of that fast.

**Issue 586:** If someone forced something into the throat of a fasting
person or they put his head underwater, his fast is not invalidated.
However, if there is compulsion for him that he breaks the fast himself,
for example, they say to him: if you don't eat your life will be harmed
or we will take your property and in order to prevent harm he ate food,
is fast is invalid.

Actions Which are Makrooh for the Fasting Person
------------------------------------------------

**Issue 587:** A number of actions are Makrooh (disliked) for the
fasting person, among them are:

• Mixing medicine in the eye

• applying Khol in a manner that the taste or smell of that enters into
the throat

• performing an action which causes weakness such as extracting blood
and going to the bath house

• using snuff if it is not known that it will reach the throat ,
however, if he knows it will reach the throat, it is not allowed

• smelling fragrant flowers

• a woman sitting in water, according to precaution

• using a solid enema, according to precaution

• wetting the clothes on the body

• pulling teeth and every action that is a cause for blood emerging from
the mouth and brings about weakness

• brushing (the teeth) with a new piece of wood (Miswak)

• kissing the mate without intending the emergence of semen and every
action whose movement produces desire.

Regarding if (these actions are done) with the intention of allowing
semen to emerge, the fast is invalidated.

Instances in which the Qadhaa’ and Kaffaarah are Obligatory
-----------------------------------------------------------

**Issue 588:** Actions which render the fast invalid, if they are
performed intentionally and with knowledge and information. In addition
to this that his fast becomes invalid and he has Qadhaa’ (as a duty) and
he has Kaffaarah also. However, if were that he did not know the issue,
he does have (the duty of) Kaffaarah, however, the precaution of that is
to make Qadhaa’.

**Issue 589:** Whenever, by means of lack of information and not knowing
an issue, an action is performed that is known to be unlawful, however,
he does not know that it will invalidate the fast, according to
precaution, the Kaffaarah is obligatory upon him.

### The Kaffaarah of Fasting

**Issue 590:** The Kaffaarah of fasting is one of three things: freeing
a slave or two months fasting or feeding sixty indigents fully. Or if
for each, one Mudd, which is approximately 750 grams of wheat or barley
or something similar to that, is given, it is sufficient. In our time,
in which freeing a slave has no place, the choice is between the two
other things. In place of wheat, he is able to give the amount of bread
the measure of which is one Mudd.

**Issue 591:** Whenever neither one of these three actions are not
possible he is, however, able to give a Mudd to feed the indigent. If he
is unable eighteen days of fasting are required. If he is, however,
unable, he is able to perform the fast one day. If he is unable (to do
so), he seeks forgiveness in the measure that in the heart he says: I
seek Allah's forgiveness, it is sufficient. It is not obligatory
afterward that he find the quantity to give the Kaffaarah.

**Issue 592:** A person who selected sixty days for Kaffaarah, the
obligatory precaution is that he fast 31 consecutive days. However,
observing the consectutiveness when one's duty is 18 days is not
obligatory.

**Issue 593:** If a fasting person rendered his fast invalid with
something unlawful, according to obligatory precaution, he must give all
of the Kaffaarah. Meaning freeing a slave, also two months of fasting
and also fully feeding sixty indigents (or feeding each one of them with
a Mudd of food of approximately 750 grams weight. In the case each three
are not possible, each one which is possible must be performed (although
the unlawful thing, like drinking alcohol and fornication or like having
intercourse with one's own mate in menstruation.

**Issue 594:** If a vow (Nazr) is made a specified fast, for the sake of
God is to be made, in the event that the fast is not made intentionally
or the fast is made invalid, the Kaffaarah is required to be given (and
the Kaffaarah of that is like the Kaffaarah of the month of Ramadhaan).

**Issue 595:** Whenever the saying of someone that dependency upon his
words is not acceptable and he says it has become Maghrib and break the
fast and afterward it is understood it had not become Maghrib, Qadhaa’
and Kaffaarah is obligatory upon him.

**Issue 596:** Whenever a fasting person, in the month of Ramadhaan has
intercourse with his fasting wife, in the case where she was forced, it
is necessary for him to give the Kaffaarah on behalf of both. If she had
been agreed with the intercourse, the Kaffaarah is obligatory on each
one. However, If another compelled them to break the fast, a sin has
been committed. Regarding the Kaffaarah upon each one, it is not
obligatory. Regarding the person whom his fast had been ruined, he is
required to make Qadhaa’.

Instances in which only qadha is required
-----------------------------------------

**Issue 597:** In a few circumstances only the Qadhaa’ of the fast is
required and Kaffaarah is not obligatory.

1. In the circumstance that in the night of the month of Ramadhaan one
is Junub and sleeps and awakens. For a second or third time, he sleeps
and does not awaken. In that situation, the Qadhaa’ of the fast it is an
obligatory precaution. As for the first sleeping, if he does not awaken,
he has no Kaffaarah and his fast is correct.

2. Whenever an action which makes the fast invalid is not performed, but
there had been no intention to fast or the intention is made to ruin his
own fast or by eye service the fast becomes invalid.

3. Whenever, in the month of Ramadhaan, the bath of Janaabah is
forgotten and in that same state, fasts for one or more days, according
to obligatory precaution.

4. In the month of Ramadhaan, without verification that it had become
morning or not, an action which invalidates the fast was performed,
after having known it had become morning, in the same manner if after
verifying, there was doubt or belief the it had become morning, but
after verifying, certainty was gained that it had not become morning,
and nothing was eaten after knowing it had become morning, Qadhaa’ is
not obligatory.

5. Whenever a person says that it had not become morning and time yet
remains and a person, according to his saying, performs an action
invalidating the fast and after knowing it had become morning, there
also, the Qadhaa’ is required.

6. A person says it had become morning and a person does not gain
certainty by his saying or he imagines or jokes and an action which
invalidates the fast is performed after being known it had become
morning.

7. Whenever a just person gives a report of it having become Maghrib and
he breaks the fast, afterward it had become known it had not become
Maghrib.

8. Whenever in clear skies certainty is gained that it had become
Maghrib by means of darkness and the fast is broken, afterward it became
known that it had not become Maghrib.

9. Whenever for refreshment or without intention, water is put in the
mouth and involuntarily it is swallowed, Qadhaa’ is necessary. As for if
it had be forgotten there is a fast (being observed) and water is
swallowed, he has no Qadhaa’. Likewise, if for Wudhu’ water is put in
the mouth and involuntarily it becomes swallowed, Qadhaa’ is not
obligatory for him.

10. A person who is playing with his wife and without intention he
masturbates and semen emerges from him, however, if he had certainty
that by this action semen would not emerge and by coincidence it
emerged, his fast is proper and he does not have Qadhaa’.

Rules of the Qadha Fast
-----------------------

**Issue 598:** Whenever, by means of illness, the fast of the month of
Ramadhaan is not performed and the illness becomes lengthy until the
month of Ramadhan of the following year, the fasts which he had not
performed are not obligatory. It is only required to give one Mudd
(approximately 750 Grams) of wheat or Barley and things similar to that
to an indigent. If by means of another excuse (for example, for the sake
of traveling) the fast had not been performed and his excuse remained
until the following Ramadhan, the obligatory precaution for that is that
the fasts which he had not performed, he makes Qadhaa’ after Ramadhaan
and for each day he gives one Mudd of food to an indigent. Likewise, if
the fast had been abandoned for fear of illness, after the illness had
been removed and another excuse, for example, traveling has come
forward.

**Issue 599:** Whenever, by means of an excuse, fasts of the month of
Ramadhaan are not performed and until the next Ramadhaan the Qadhaa’ of
that had intentionally not been intended and he in a situation in which
his excuse had been removed, it is required afterward to make the
Qadhaa’ of the fasts and for each day, one Mudd of food is given as a
Kaffaarah. Likewise, if in the Qadhaa’ of the fast, there is a short
time until the time becomes restricted and in the restricted time an
excuse appears, it becomes necessary afterward to perform the same
Qadhaa’ and Kaffaarah. Regarding if it had not become a short time or it
coincided with the restricted time that an excuse appeared, only Qadhaa’
is required.

Rules of fasting of a traveling person
--------------------------------------

**Issue 600:** A traveling person (having the conditions which have been
mentioned in the issues of the traveler's prayers) is not required to
fast. As a general rule, in every instance that the prayer is shorted,
the fast is required to be abandoned. In the place where the prayer is
required to be prayed in full (for example, a person that his occupation
is traveling or he intends to stay in a place for ten days) he is
required to fast, except in instances which have been mentioned in other
instances.

**Issue 601:** Traveling in the month of Ramadhaan is not forbidden.
However, if it is for escaping fasting, it is Makrooh.

**Issue 602:** Whenever a fasting person undertakes a journey after
Zuhr, he is required to complete his fast. If he undertakes a journey
before Zuhr, his fast is invalid. However, before he arrives at the
limit of the border, he is not able to break the fast. If he had broken
his fast before that, Kaffaarah is obligatory for him. The intention of
limit of the boarder is the place where the sound of the Azaan of the
town is not heard or the place where he arrives that the people of the
town are hidden from view.

**Issue 603:** Whenever, a traveler arrives before Zuhr to his city or
to a place which he intends to stay for ten days and any action which
renders the fast invalid had not been performed, he is required to fast.
If something (invalidating the fast) had been performed, Qadhaa’ is
required afterward. It is Mustahabb to remain that day abstaining.
However, if after Zuhr he arrives he is not able to fast.

Persons upon whom fasting is not obligatory
-------------------------------------------

**Issue 604:** Elderly men and women whom fasting is difficult for them,
they are able to abandon fasting. However, they are required to give one
Mudd (Approximately 750 Grams) of wheat or barley and similar to these
to an indigent. It is better that in the place of wheat and barley,
bread is selected. In this situation, the obligatory precaution of this
is that it is in the measure of wheat is in the quantity of one Mudd.

**Issue 605:** The fast of persons who are inflicted with the illness of
hydropsy, meaning they become excessively thirsty and they are not able
to fast or it is extremely difficult for them, it is not obligatory.
However, for each day one Mudd of food, which is indicated in the
previous issue, is given as a Kaffaarah. It is better that water is not
drank in more than the quantity of necessity. If, afterward, they are
able to make the Qadhaa’, the obligatory precaution is to perform the
Qadhaa’.

**Issue 606:** A pregnant woman who is close to delivery and fasting has
injury to the pregnancy, fasting for her is not obligatory. However, the
Kaffaarah mentioned in the previous issue is required to be given.
Regarding if the fast is injurious to her, it is not obligatory for her
and she also has no Kaffaarah. Afterward, she makes Qadhaa’.

**Issue 607:** Women who are (breast) feeding a child milk, whether they
be the mother of the child or a wet nurse. If fasting is reason of her
insufficient milk and the child becomes bothered, the fast is not
obligatory upon her. However, for each day, the same Kaffaarah (one Mudd
of food) is obligatory and afterward also the Qadhaa’ of the fast is
required. Regarding, that if for themselves fasting is injurious, no
fasting is obligatory nor any Kaffaarah. However, it is required
afterward that the fasts which were not performed, the Qadhaa’ is
performed.

The method of Establishing the Beginning of the Month
-----------------------------------------------------

**Issue 608:** The beginning of the month is established by six methods:

1. Sighting the moon with the eye. Regarding (sighting) with a telescope
and other means of this kind, it does not suffice.

2. The witness of a large number that from the statements of them
certainty becomes apparent (although they are not just). Likewise is all
that brings about certainty.

3. The witness of two just males. However, if these two witnesses differ
from one another in mentioning the description of the moon or the signs
which they give are ambiguous, their statements do not establish the
beginning of the month.

4. The passing of thirty complete days from the beginning of the month
of Sha'baan with which the beginning of the month of Ramadhaan can
become established. Or the passing of thirty complete days from the
beginning of the month of Ramadhaan with which the beginning of the
month of Shawwal can become established. (of course, this is in the
situation that the beginning of the previous month has complied with
this same method of becoming established.

5. The ruling of the Religious Jurist. In this situation, it is for the
just Mujtahid to establish the beginning of the month. Afterward, he
makes a ruling that that day is the beginning of the month. In this
situation, following is required for everyone, except a person who has
certainty that he has made a mistake.

The forbidden Fasts
-------------------

**Issue 609:** Two days in the year, fasting is forbidden: Eidul-Fitr
(the beginning of the month of Shawwal) and Eidul-Qurbaani (the tenth of
the month of Zil-Hijjah).

**Issue 610:** The fasting of a woman (Mustahabb Fast) in the situation
which the rights of her husband are ruined. Without his permission, it
is not permissible. If his right is not ruined, (according to obligation
precaution) also the permission of the husband is required. Likewise,
the Mustahabb fast of children, if it causes harm for the father and
mother, it is not permissible. However, getting permission from them is
not required.

**Issue 611:** A person who knows that fasting is injurious for him, it
is necessary to abandon the fast. If he fasts, it is not correct.
Likewise, if he does not have certainty. Regarding having probability
that the fast is injurious, whether this probability is obtained from
the experience of persons or from the statement of a doctor.


