The Rules of The Pilgrimage (Hajj)
==================================

**Issue 714:** The pilgrimage (Hajj), meaning visiting the house of
Allah and performing particular acts are called the rites of pilgrimage.
The pilgrimage is obligatory in life once for everyone having the
following conditions present for them:

1) Maturity (Buloogh).

2) Sanity ('Aql).

3) That one not cause an obligation to lapse more important than the
pilgrimage nor commit a major sin that is more important in the law than
abandoning the pilgrimage.

4) The ability (to perform the pilgrimage), it is ascertained by a
number of matters.

**First**: That one has the provisions and all that is required in the
journey, the means of the necessary transportation for the journey or
the money enabling one to enjoy these things.

**Second**: That the way be devoid of obstacles and (that there be a)
lack of fear of danger or harm to oneself or his goods or his property.
Therefore, if the way is blocked or one fears a (particular) danger, the
(obligation of the) pilgrimage is dropped. However, when there is
another way more remote, it is obligatory that one take it to the
pilgrimage, and (the obligation is not dropped).

**Third**: That one be physically able to (perform) the pilgrimage.

**Fourth**: That the time is sufficient to reach Makkah and perform the
rites.

**Fifth**: That one has the (resources by) which he maintains those
whose maintenance is obligatory upon him, legally and customarily.

**Sixth**: That one has the money or the (means) of earning or work
enabling him to manage his life after returning from the pilgrimage.

**Issue 717:** He who cannot eliminate his need without the seizure of
(his) owned house, the pilgrimage is not obligatory upon him, except at
the time when he has the cost of the house also. As for when it is
possible to live in a rented house or a donated house and whatever is
similar to that, he is capable (of performing the pilgrimage).

**Issue 718:** When a woman possesses property enabling her to perform
the pilgrimage, however, it is not possible for her husband to support
her after returning (from the pilgrimage) and she is not capable of
managing her life, the pilgrimage is not obligatory upon her.

**Issue 719:** When one does not possess the expenses for the
pilgrimage, however, someone expends (the expenses) for him or he gives
money in order that he can perform the pilgrimage and bears the expenses
of his wife's and his children maintenance throughout this period, the
pilgrimage is obligatory upon him, although he becomes indebted and is
not able, by himself, to manage his life after returning. Accepting this
gift is an obligatory matter, except that it be associated with a favor
or harm or unbearable difficulty, this pilgrimage will suffice for a
obligatory pilgrimage.

**Issue 720:** He who is hired for the service of an individual or
caravan in the journey to the pilgrimage, and he make the pilgrimage in
this situation, the pilgrimage will count, in this place, as his
obligatory pilgrimage. However, it is not obligatory for him to accept
this service.

**Issue 721:** When a capable individual had not performed the
pilgrimage, then, his physical ability is removed such that he loses
hope that he will be able to perform the pilgrimage himself, it is
obligatory that he appoint a person to perform the pilgrimage as a
representative on his behalf. As for when one is capable financially but
unable physically due to old age or illness, the pilgrimage is not
obligatory upon him. However, the recommended precaution is to hire
someone (to perform) the pilgrimage on his behalf.

The rules of the rites of the pilgrimage are mentioned in a separate
Book.


