The Rules of Selling and Buying
===============================

Obligatory and Recommended Business Transactions
------------------------------------------------

**Issue 722:** It is obligatory upon every Muslim to learn the rules of
business transactions to the extent of his need. It is obligatory upon
the scholars ('Ulamaa’) to teach these rules to the people.

**Issue 723:** To earn, work, labor and strive in the way of business,
agriculture and vocation and things similar to that is obligatory upon
he who does not possess the expenses (of maintenance) of his wife and
children. Likewise, it is obligatory to preserve the order of Islamic
society and secure its needs. In other than these situations, earning
and labor is emphatically recommended, in particular, to assist the poor
and for the comfort of dependents.

**Issue 724:** It is recommended that the seller make no distinction
between buyers in the price of a commodity nor be difficult nor swear
(an oath). When the buyer regrets (the purchase) and seeks to cancel the
transaction, (the seller should) accept the cancellation.

Disliked (Makrooh) Business Relations
-------------------------------------

Most Jurist (Fuqahaa’) hold the opinion in the dislike of the business
transactions which will be mentioned and the best thing is to avoid
them:

• Money Changing (Suraafah) and all that involves people with the
consumption of interest and its activities or miscellaneous unlawful
activities.

• Selling Shrouds (Kafan) in the situation of it being an established
occupation and profession in itself.

• Business dealings with the vile people and the owner of doubtful
properties in their affairs although the properties are apparently
lawful.

• Execution of business transactions between the beginning of Fajr and
sunrise.

• When someone has come forward to buy something and before the
transaction is complete, it is necessary that someone else does not
interfere in this transaction. This is what is termed as someone
interfering in bartering and it is one of the disliked acts.

Unlawful and Invalid Transactions
---------------------------------

**Issue 726:** Transactions in the following instances are invalid.

1) Selling and purchase of a source of Najaasah (Aynun-Najaasah).
Intended by Najaasah is whatever is inherently Najis (impure), according
to obligatory precaution (like urine, stool and blood). Based on this,
the selling and buying of fertilizer is objectionable. However, there is
nothing preventing benefiting from it. As for the sale of blood and
purchase of blood in our times, which is used to save the injured and
sick, then, it is permissible. Likewise is the sale of guard dogs and
hunting dogs.

2) The sale and purchase of usurped things except when its owner has
endorsed the transaction.

3) The sale and purchase of things that have unlawful advantage like the
instruments of gambling and similar examples.

4) The sale and purchase of something that has no value in the common
perception although it may possess a value with specific individuals,
like many insects.

5) Transactions in which there is interest (Ribaa).

6) The sale and purchase of counterfeited and adulterated commodities
when the purchaser is unaware of its state, like selling milk mixed with
water or oil mixed with fat or something else. This action is called
cheating (Ghashsh) and it is a major sin.

It has been reported that the Messenger of Allah, Blessings be upon him
and his family said: “He who cheats a Muslim or harms him or deceives
him is not from us.”

**Issue 727:** There is no objection in selling the Mutanajjis
(commodity). The Mutanajjis commodity is that which has contacted
Najaasah (impurity) and it is possible to purify it or use it, like
fruits, fabric and carpets. However, when the purchaser intends to use
it for eating, or acts that have purity (Tahaarah) conditional for them,
it is obligatory to inform (the purchaser) to avoid it.

**Issue 728:** When something pure becomes impure with that which it is
not possible to purify, like oil, if it is used only for eating, then,
its sale is invalid and unlawful. As for when it has other uses not
having purity condition in them, then, its sale is proper (like impure
petroleum).

**Issue 729:** Edible commodities and its likeness imported from
non-Islamic countries, when their impurity is not certain and
incontestable, there is not objection in their sale and purchase. Like
when it is likely that milk and cheese and oil is prepared and produced
by means of an automated process without hands being entered into it.

**Issue 730:** The sale and purchase of meats and fats supplied from
non-Islamic lands or taken from the hand of a non-Muslim is invalid.
Likewise are hides (leathers) according to precaution. However, there is
no objection when it is known that it is from animals slaughtered in a
legal manner or under the supervision of Muslims.

**Issue** **731:** There is no objection in selling and purchasing meats
and fats taken from the hand of Muslims. However, when it is known that
the Muslim has taken from the hand of a non-Muslim or it is supplied
from a non-Muslim country and he has not investigated the method of its
slaughter whether it is slaughtered in a legal manner or not, then, its
sale and purchase is invalid and unlawful (the ruling of hides is as
such, according to precaution). When it is taken from a Muslim, its
appearance indicating upon his restriction and obligation to the law, or
it is likely that he has investigated it, then, the transaction is
proper.

**Issue 732:** The sale and purchase of all types of intoxicants is
unlawful and invalid.

**Issue 733:** The sale and purchase of usurped (Ghasbi) property is
unlawful and invalid. It is obligatory upon the seller to return the
price to the purchaser. However, it is not correct that the purchaser
should return that usurped thing to other than its owner. When he does
not know its owner it is obligatory that he act in accordance with the
view of the Religious Authority and his opinion.

**Issue 734:** When it was the intent of the purchaser from the
beginning not to pay the price of the commodity which he has purchased,
there is an objection (to this transaction). Likewise it is when (the
purchaser's) initial intention was to pay the amount in unlawful money.
However, when this was not his intention initially and he only gave the
price of the commodity from unlawful property afterward, the transaction
is proper, however, it is obligatory that he gives (the price) from
lawful property a second time.

**Issue 735:** The sale and purchase of instruments of entertainment
(Lahw), amusement (La'b) and corruption is unlawful and invalid except
that it be an instrument shared (between lawful and unlawful) or a
instrument of exercise and similar things to that, then, its sale is
permitted.

**Issue 736:** When that which has a lawful benefit is sold to someone
who will definitely use it for the unlawful (for example, selling grapes
to the manufacturer of wines), the transaction is invalid.

**Issue 737:** The manufacture, sale and purchase of images are
objectionable. The precaution is to abandon it. However, there is no
objection in the sale and purchase of soap and similar things that are
manufactured in the form of an image or embossed patterns.

**Issue 738:** The sale and purchase of things that are obtained by
means of gambling or theft or an invalid transaction is unlawful and
invalid. It is not allowed to utilize it. When someone purchases it, it
is obligatory upon him to return it the original owner, if he is aware
of him. When he is not aware of the original owner, he acts in
accordance with whatever the Religious Authority has ordered (him to
do).

**Issue 739:** Consuming interest (Ribaa) is unlawful and it is of two
types:

First, the interest in loans whose discussion will come in the section
of loans, with the permission of Allah, the Exalted.

Second, interest in transactions. It is to sell a commodity of a
particular type, customarily sold by weight or volume, in return for a
greater quantity of the same commodity. For example that a Mann (dry
measure) of wheat is sold in exchange for one and a half Mann of wheat,
although one of them be a better kind than the other. Numerous Islamic
narrations have been reported censuring interest and it is counted as
one of the very great sins.

**Issue 740:** Consuming interest is not unlawful in the following
instances:

1) The Muslims taking interest (meaning excess) from non-Muslims.

2) Interest between the father and son.

3) Interest between the husband and wife.

The Conditions of The Seller And Purchaser
------------------------------------------

**Issue 741:** Conditional in the two parties (the seller and purchaser)
are what follows:

1) Maturity (Buloogh)

2) Sanity ('Aql)

3) That they not be restricted in utilizing the property (like the one
under the supervision of the ruling of the Religious Authority due to
bankruptcy and similar things).

4) That they be serious regarding their transactions. Therefore, there
is no effect for he who jokingly says: I will sell you my property.

5) That they not be compelled to execute the transaction.

6) That the property exchanged is owned by them or they are a
representative (Wakeel) of the original owner or both or one of them is
a guardian of a minor.

Conditions of the two Exchanged Items (The Payment and the Commodity)
---------------------------------------------------------------------

**Issue 742:** A number of matters are conditional in the commodity
(Muthman) that is being sold and the thing which is taken in return for
the commodity as an exchange (Thaman):

1) It is obligatory that the quantity (of both) is known by means of
weight, volume or number.

2) That the two (the seller and buyer) are capable of being taking the
commodity and payment into possession. According to this, it is not
proper to sell an animal that has fled from its owner.

3) That the particular affective qualities are specified for the value
of the two exchanged items ('Iwadhain) and for the interest of people to
conducting business with them (meaning, the commodity and payment).

4) That the rights of the individuals other than the two parties (the
seller and buyer) should not be connected to the two exchanged items.
According to this, it is not allowed to sell something that a person has
pawned (Rahn-meaning something given as security) without the person's
permission. As such, it is permissible for the seller to give in
exchange for cash a benefit of his possessions, like someone who buys a
carpet, then, he authorizes the use of his house for the seller as an
exchange for the carpet that he purchased.

**Issue 743:** It is not proper to sell or purchase the commodity
without seeing which is (commonly) sold or purchased by sight, like a
house, car, many kinds of rugs and carpets.

The Wording (Seeghah) of a Sale
-------------------------------

**Issue 744:** It is permissible for the two parties to execute the
wording of a sales agreement in whatever language they are both
proficient in. Based on this, if the seller translates the following
Seeghah: (I am selling this commodity for such and such amount) and the
purchaser translates the following Seeghah: (I accept) in Persian or
another language, for example, the transaction is proper. It is
likewise, when this meaning is given in another phraseology.

When the purchaser is only given the commodity for another with the
intention of a sale, and the other person takes it also with the
intention of purchase, it is sufficient (with the conditions that are
present for every transaction).

**Issue 745:** Recording the records of business transactions, whether
in an official register or something other than that stands in the place
of the verbal Seeghah.

**Issue 746:** It is obligatory that the two parties (the seller and
purchaser) intend to establish (a business transaction) at the time of
executing the Seeghah of a sale. This means that their intent in
verbalizing (the Seeghah) is the expression of consent (Ijaab) and
acceptance (Qabool) and (the consent and acceptance) is selling and
buying. Thus, whenever the active giving and taking stands in the place
of the verbal Seeghah, it is obligatory that the (two parties) intend
the establishment of (the existing nonverbal arrangement) meaning the
establishment of the sale and purchase.

Cash and Credit (Transactions)
------------------------------

**Issue 747:** When a commodity is sold in cash, it is permissible for
the seller and purchaser to seek the payment or commodity after the
transaction and to take possession (of the commodity and payment).
Taking possession of a house or land and similar things is to put it at
the disposal of the purchaser in manner that he is able to utilize it.
Taking possession of something movable like a carpet or clothing is to
place it at the disposal of the purchaser so that when he wants to
transfer it to another place, he is able to do so.

**Issue 748:** It is obligatory that the period is known when selling or
purchasing something on credit (Nasee’ah), otherwise, the transaction is
invalid.

Advanced Payment (Salaf) and its Conditions
-------------------------------------------

**Issue 749:** A sale by advance payment is that the purchaser gives the
payment in cash and takes possession of the commodity after a period of
time. It suffices in realizing this type of sale that the purchaser
says: I am giving this money and I will take such and such amount of the
commodity after six months, for example, and the seller says: I accept.
Rather, even when the verbal Seeghah is not executed and the purchaser
only gives a sum of money with this intention and the seller accepts
this sum, the transaction is proper.

**Issue 750:** Six matters are conditional in the sale by advance
payment:

1) That the qualities and particularities of the commodity which affect
its value are specified. However, numerous details are not obligatory.
It suffices that only the particularities are known. Due to this, if the
sale by advance payment is made for the commodity in which it is not
possible to specify its particularities and description (like some types
of leathers and carpets, the transaction) it is invalid.

2) It is obligatory to give the full payment before the two parties
separate. When part of the sum is given, the transaction is proper in
the amount given for payment. However, it is permitted for the seller to
invalidate this transaction.

3) It is obligatory to specify the period (of time) completely. Then,
when the seller says, for example: I will hand over the commodity to you
in the beginning of the harvest (and the beginning of the harvest) is
not known exactly, the transaction is invalid.

4) The (purchaser and seller) must both specify the period of taking
possession of the commodity and the time when this commodity will be
available, usually.

5) The (purchaser and seller) must specify the place of taking
possession of the commodity in whatever city or region that may be,
according to obligatory precaution, except if this is understood from
their conversation.

6) The (purchaser and seller) must specify the weight or volume (of the
commodity). As for the commodity that that is traded customarily by
sight, (like many of the types of carpets and rugs), then, when it is
sold to the purchaser after mentioning and explaining its
characteristics, there is no objection. However, it is obligatory that
the disparity between the item and the description of this commodity be
insignificant such that people attach no importance to it.

Instances in which it is Permissible to Cancel a Transaction
------------------------------------------------------------

**Issue 751:** The two parties (the seller and purchaser) have the right
to cancel a transaction in eleven situations. It is termed the right of
cancellation (Khiyaarul-Faskh). They are:

1) As long as they (the seller and purchaser) have not parted and left
the place of the transaction. (It is called Khiyaarul-Majlis).

2) When it becomes clear that there was fraud from one of the two sides.
(It is called Khiyaarul-Ghabn).

3) When they (the seller and purchaser) make the condition that one of
them or both of them have the right to cancel the transaction during a
specific time period. (It is called Khiyaarush-Shart).

4) When one of the two parties cheats and deceives. Then describes his
commodity with other than its (proper description). (It is called
Khiyaarut-Tadlees).

5) When the seller or purchaser makes it conditional that the other side
perform or do something or that the commodity be in a particular manner,
then, the realization of this condition is not achieved. In this
situation, it is permissible for the other side to cancel the
transaction. (It is called Khiyaar Takhalluf Ash-Shart).

6) When one of the two exchanged items (the commodity or the payment) or
both are defective and the other side does not have knowledge of that
defect. (It is called Khiyaarul-'Ayb).

7) When it becomes clear that a quantity of the commodity that was sold
to the purchaser was the property of another. Then, when the original
owner does not consent to the transaction, it is permissible for the
seller to cancel the transaction or the original owner of the property
can accept the transaction and take the payment of that quantity from
the (unauthorized) seller (It is called Khiyaarush-Shirkah or Khiyaaru
Taba’udh As-Safqah).

8) When the seller sells a commodity by description that the purchaser
has not seen. Then, it becomes clear that the commodity is not according
to that description, in this situation it is permitted for the purchaser
to cancel the transaction. This same rule is also applicable in the
instances of exchanges. (It is called Khiyaarur-Ru’yah).

9) When the purchaser delays the surrender of the payment for a
commodity which he has purchased for three days and the seller has also
not surrendered the commodity. In this situation, it is permissible for
the seller to cancel the transaction (except when the purchaser had
already made the delay in giving the payment conditional for a specific
time period). When the commodity is lawful, like some fruits, dates and
vegetables which will spoil after a day passes, then, if the payment is
not surrendered by night, it is permissible for the seller to cancel the
transaction. (It is called Khiyaarut-Ta’kheer).

10) When the commodity is an animal it is permissible for the purchaser
to cancel the transaction during three days, if he desires. (It is
called Khiyaarul-Hayawaan).

11) When it is impossible for the seller to surrender the commodity that
he has sold, it is permissible for the purchaser to cancel the
transaction. (It is called Khiyaaru Ta'azzur At-Tasleem).


