Forward
=======

Nowadays, people are getting more and more involved in Music and for
them, it has become a part of their daily life. Their mind has become so
saddled with tension, and tempo of life is so fast that they seem to
accept high blood pressure and nervous breakdown as the unavoidable side
effects of modern civilization. It is a pity that they do not pause to
think the adverse effects of music on their physical and mental
health.

I have endeavoured to present in this booklet the scientific and
spiritual points of views on music and dance etc. These observations
have been quoted from various books of Persian, Urdu and English
languages.

I am very grateful to Maulana Seyyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, the Chief
Missionary of the Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania for editing and
scrutinizing this effort of mine.

I hope this booklet will help the readers in understanding the
philosophy of the rule of Islam which forbids music.


A.H. Sherriff
1/5/1983


**1) What is Music?**

Music, according to the New National Dictionary, means "Art of
combining sounds or sequences of notes into harmonious patterns pleasing
to the ear and satisfying to the emotions; melody".

According to the Great Encyclopaedic Dictionary, this combining of
sounds is "for reproduction by the voice or various kinds of musical
instruments in rhythmic, melodious and harmonious form so as to express
thought or feeling and affect the emotion;" and the word is also used
for the "sound so produced," and for 'written or printed score of
musical compositions." Not so technically, it is also used for "pleasant
sound, e.g., song of a bird, murmur of a stream, cry of hounds."

In Islam music is called Ghina, and in Shia sheriat is counted as one
of the 'great sins'. At first, it may seem unrealistic to ban every
"pleasant sound"; but there is no need to be alarmed. The Sheriat has
defined 'Ghina' in a different way. In Islam, vocal music means:
"Prolongation and vibration of sound with variation of the pitch to such
an extent that people may say that 'he/she is singing'."

It is evident from the above definition that the sheriat does not
forbid 'pleasant sounds'; but if someone recites any thing with
prolongation of sound and variation of pitch so much so that a common
man thinks that he/she is singing, then and only then it will be 'Ghina'
and sin.

And it makes no difference whether the thing recited was the Qur'an,
religious poem or love song.

**(2) Origin of Music**

No doubt music is one of the most ancient methods of merrymaking and
enjoyment, of expressing feelings and emotions. It is called
'international language', because it encompasses the whole world and
does not know any geographical or political boundary.

Let us find out what is the reason for its worldwide prevalence. We
have it on the authority of Imam Jafer Sadique (a.s) that when Hadhrat
Adam (a.s) died, his infamous son Cain (Quabil) and Satan were very
happy. Both gathered at a place and invented some musical instruments to
celebrate the death of Hadhrat Adam (a.s). And in the words of Imam
(a.s), all such musical things which people now use for merrymaking have
originated from that. (Wasael-us-Shia; Babu
Tahrim-e-lstimal-il-Malahi).

So, religion and anthropology both agree that musk is a very ancient
thing; and therefore, no wonder it has spread widely with the spread of
the human race. But how dare a sensible 'child of Adam ' especially if
he is a Muslim) "enjoy" music, which is an invention of Satan and Cain,
the rebellious and disloyal son of Adam?

Here one may ask: But what is the harm in music? Why it has been
forbidden in Islam?

The answer is that music does have harmful effects on nervous system
and is the cause of many ailments including ulcer, diabetes and madness.
It creates imbalance in human faculties, retards spiritual development,
and lowers the ethical values.


For details, read the following chapters.

**(3) Effects of Music on Nervous System**

Before explaining its effects on nerves it is necessary to briefly
describe an intricate and awe-inspiring part of the nervous system
itself. These details are quoted here from the "Foundation of Biology"
(by William D. McElory & Carl P. Swanson and others; published by
Prentice-Hall, Inc; Englewood Cliffs, New Jersyy U.S.A. 1968) and "How
your Nervous System Works" (by J.D. Ratcliff; Reader's Digest â€” Book of
Human Body) :

"Many reflexes that help control the internal environment involve a
special part of the nervous system (ANS). This system consists of nerves
making up the motor pathway to the heart, stomach, intestine and other
internal organs These nerves are not under voluntary control; that is,
you can not make your heart beat faster on command."

"The two major divisions of the automatic nervous system are called the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems." Sympathetic nerves
leave the middle regions of the spinal cord.

"Parasympathetic nerves leave the central nervous system from the upper
regions where they travel in cranial nerves (i.e., 12 pairs of nerves
attached to the brain and serving head and neck), and from the lowermost
regions of the spinal cord where they travel in spinal nerves. "Most
internal organs of your body are supplied with both parasympathetic and
sympathetic nerve fibres." "In general, these two types of nerves work
in opposite ways. For example, impulses travelling along sympathetic
nerve fibres toward the heart increase your heart-beat rate, whereas
impulses travelling along the parasympathetic nerves leading to the
heart disease its rate. "When we examine the effects of sympathetic
stimulation of various organs, a pattern begins to emerge. We find that
sympathetic stimulation causes a number of events:

1. Widening of air passage leading to the lungs;
2. Constriction or narrowing of blood vessel in the skin and in the
intestinal tract, resulting in blood being shifted from the digestive
organs and skin to the muscles;
3. A general slowing down of movements in the intestinal tract;
4. An increase in the force and rate of heart-beat:
5. Release of the blood sugar from the liver;
6. Release of the harmones adrenaline.

All of these activities prepare the human being for emergencies such as
running or fighting. The widening of air passages makes it easier for
the human being to beathe faster and get more oxygen. Blood is shifted
from regions where it will not be needed during the emergency (the
intestinal tract, for example) to skeletal and heart muscle which will
need oxygen and blood sugar.

The heart beats faster and stronger so that blood circulates through
the muscles at a higher rate. Blood sugar is released from storage in
the liver into the blood stream where it will be available to supply
muscles with energy.

In short, sympathetic stimulation prepares the man for emergencies, and
in this process, increases the blood pressure, retards the function of
digestive system and increases the sugar contents of the blood.

The function of Parasympathetic nerves system is opposite to the
sympathetic system "It widens the veins, releases noradrenalin hormones
and generally retards activities.

"The two nervous systems run parallel to each other and in co-operation
from one part of the body to another. The co-operation of the two
systems is essential for maintaining the equilibrium of the body, which
in turn has a great bearing and effect on the physical and mental health
of man.

Should at any time there be a lack of co-operation between these two
systems, physical or mental disorders could arise resulting in one
disease or another." Some actions or movements outside human body can
adversely affect the natural equilibrium of these two systems. One of
those things is music. A brisk and lively musical programme,
particularly if it is accompanied by musical instruments, disturbs this
equilibrium of the various systems; digestion is badly affected;
palpitation of the heart is increased; blood pressure goes high and
abnormal secretion of hormones leaves a lasting bad effect upon general
health.

Music stimulates mostly the sympathetic nervous system; and it may
create insomnia (lack of sleep); it may cause tempers to flareup; sudden
laughter or nonsensical talks are amongst its possible effects. It may
even lead to mania (a kind of madness) ... Such people may be seen to
move their hands and feet in dancing pattern even when not listening to
music. Dr. Vollf Adler, who was a professor in the Columbia University,
found out that a best melodious record of music can badly harm the
nerves of a human body; and the warmer the weather the more the harm. He
proved that music upsets the nervous systems unnaturally, and causes
considerable fatigue.

This research of Dr. Adler had a widespread effect on many Americans;
many stopped listening to music altogether. The belief that music was
harmful for a progressive nation like U.S.A., reached a stage when a
member of the Senate proposed a resolution to ban the music in the
country. Relevant proofs and arguments were put before the Senate. But
in a nation steeped in lust and materialism, not many senators could be
found to vote for that resolution.

(Illustre Dimanche; No. 630; Paris; as quoted in,
"Falsafa-e-Tahrim-e-Musiqui", published by the institution "Dar
Rah-e-Haqq", Qum, Iran)

**(4) Some other Ailments and Music**

It is an accepted fact that mental tension creates many ailments.
Excitement and tension are like a fire which destroys the natural
functions of human body. And it has already been shown that music
creates excitement and tension. Not only madness and nervous breakdown,
but even ulcers and heart diseases are caused by mental tension. It has
been mentioned earlier that music releases the harmone 'adernalin' in
abnormal quantity. This harmone clots the bloodvessels, and finally
leads to heart attack. This relation between excessive release of
adernalin and heartattack was discovered in France in 1957.
(Falsafa-e-Tahrim-e-Musiqui).

Professor Celie experimented by injecting adernalin into a monkey. Its
skin became paralysed and the animal suffered a heartattack (Ibid). Dale
Carnegie quotes Dr. Joseph Montagu to have said that stomach ulcer is
caused by mental tension and violent anger. (Ibid). Many of the
presentday common diseases are the legacy of our socalled civilization
which creates tension and exhausts the tolerance of physical and mental
faculbes. One of the main causes of this tension and exhaustion is
music. The ailments, which are caused by such condition, are diabetes,
rheumatism, and even the birth of deformed or disabled children.
(Ibid).

Concentration on listening to musical concerts or Jazz bands at times
causes such violent tension that mental stability is thrown out of
window. The daily 'Kayhan' (Tehran), in its issue No 6626, published a
news of the Reuter Agency: About 50,000 youths had gathered in Melbourne
(Australia) for a musical concert. The concert overwhelmed them so much
that they started assaulting each other with fists and knives. Many were
seriously injured; some girls were molested The police was called in and
with much difficulty controlled the situation. The point to ponder is
this: The youths were so much excited that they did not know what they
were doing.

Now that we have come to Jazz, and important finding must be quoted
here from The Reader's Digest (Vol. 49, No. 565, May, 1969): "Otologists
say that youngsters are going deaf by blasting their ears with
electronic pop music.

"Experts know that prolonged exposure to a noise level above 85
decibels will eventually result in a reduction of hearing acuity in the
frequency range most important for understanding human speech. Dr.
Charles Lebo, of the Pacific Medical Centre took measuring instruments
into two San Francis co dance halls where the cacophony from amplified
instruments caused sound intensity from 100 to 119 decibels in the low
frequency range.

"Lebo estimates that under such conditions 80 per cent have their
hearing sensitivity temporarily reduced by 5 to 30 decibels; 10 per cent
suffer a temporary 40 decibel impairment. Some might suffer permanent
damage after a year of steady listening. (Time).

In short high bloodpresure, insomnia, emotional instability mania and
madness, nervous break downs, ulcers, heart troubles, diabetes,
rheumatisms temporary permanent deafness and birth of deformed or
disabled babies are the effects of music.

No wonder, Islam, being a religion from Allah, has warmed us against
this disabling habit.


**(5) From Philosophical Point of View**

According to the philosophy of Islam, man has been endowed with two
main faculties: (i) Intellect; and (ii) Emotions. Emotions may be
divided into two categories: Positive and Negative. We may call them
'Attraction' and 'Repulsion', or 'Love' and 'Hate'; or 'Desire' and
'Anger' respectively. Let us call them here 'Desire' and 'Anger'.

Thus, we have three faculties in all:

1) Intellect: Its function is to think and understand;
2) Desire: Through it man tries to attain things which are beneficial
to him or which give him satisfaction and enjoyment;
3) Anger: By this facility man defends himself against, and repulses
the things which he considers harmful to himself.

Of the above three faculties, the first one, i.e., Intellect, has been
designed by Allah to guide and control the remaining two, i.e., Desire
and Anger. If a man wants to remain on right path, he must ensure that
the two perform their functions under the guidance of Intellect.

For example, the ambition to get rich is the result of Desire. But it
is the Intellect which guides the man that the wealth should be obtained
by honest labour, hard work and not by robbery or fraud.

Likewise, the Anger inspires the man to resist pain. But it is the
Intellect that tells him, for example, to submit to the surgical
operation, so that he may avoid greater pain in future.

When the Faculty of Intellect is sufficiently developed and dominates
over the other two faculties, the man advances spiritually and
ethically; and surpasses the angels, because angels have got only the
Intellect and do not have to contend with desire and anger.

Uncontrolled desire and anger are dominating factors of animals. If
these faculties were to be nourished by the man beyond the ethical
limit, and freed from the control and guidance of Intellect, he would
sink to the abysmal depth of depravity, and would become worse than
animals. After understanding this principle, it is easy to appreciate
the reasons behind laws of Islam forbidding various actions.

It has been already described that the music is among those things
which boost the emotions and arouse the sensual powers beyond their
natural limit; music gives desire or anger an upper hand, and makes them
dominant over the Intellect. As has been shown with a few examples, this
state could reach a stage where Intellect ceases to function altogether;
man becomes the slave of his emotions â€” desire and anger.

A time comes that he forgets his Creator and does not remember the real
aim of his life (which is to know his Creator and obey Him).

The Love and Fear of Allah promotes virtues and good deeds, and
restrain the man from sins and evils. Islam aims at producing best of
the characters in its followers; and therefore, it has forbidden those
things which tend to divert attention from Allah and from man's divine
duties. Music is one of those things which have toxic effect on human
mind. Therefore, Islam has forbidden not only the playing of music, but
also listening to it; also forbidden is participation in musical
programmes whether it be in places like theaters, night clubs and
cinemas or in one's own home.

Incidentally, the same is the reason behind the law forbidding liquor
and gambling.


**(6) From Ethical Point of View**

In the last chapter, I explained the harm which music brings upon the
spiritual wellbeing of a man. Connected with it, is the effect of music
on the ethics and morals.

Those intoxicated by the music should try to reply these questions:

Why those engaged in singing and dancing profession almost always sink
to the lowest level of immorality?

Why the film actors and actresses change their wives and husbands with
every change of weather?

Why singing and dancing was considered a 'Must' for prostitutes in
Indian subcontinent?

Why marital sanctity and conjugal bliss are words without meaning in
the world of singers and dancers? Why? Oh! Why? The following quotations
from 'The Bridal Bed' (by Joseph Braddock; published by Corgi books,
Ransworld Publishers Ltd., London; 1960) will provide an answer to these
questions:

(Dance) is the start of culture. Though some of these dances are
sensationally erotic, the sexual element is present in most of the
world's dancing. It is sublimated even in ballet.

Many primitive dances, the world over, serve as preliminaries to
mating, being closely connected with the choice of a marriage partner
... A description or two will make this clear.

The Dinka, a gentle pastoral tribe, live on the east bank of the White
Nile. They are astonishingly tall, sometimes more than six and a half
feet high. Blacker than charcoal, often above a naked body, the hair
glistens a longish pale gold mop, when it has been dyed with cow's urine
... Dinka buy their wives ... But first they see the women in dance.

Within a village clearing the drums and gourd rattles are ready.
Possibly as many as three hundred Dinkas have been waiting an hour or
more under the yet powerful and declining sun, the tall girls standing
together in a line, by now worked up to a pitch of excitement bordering
on hysteria as they await the moment for the dance to develop. But what
is strange here is that, although the dance will mirror by no means
deeply buried sexual desires, it remains curiously abstract and
impersonal.

The magnificent nubile Negresses, with narrow hips and slim limbs,
suggest bronze antiquely proportioned statues Full of shy giggles, they
begin to shuffle with their feet, beads and bracelets jangling on smooth
wrist and dusty ankle. A laughing girl retreats, advances, invites her
warrior partner, her arms tapering into the narrow palms of clasped
simian hands stretched out behind her, her pointed breasts trembling.
Her bead skirt rattles and sways, as she jerks her lacquer-like thighs
forward and backwards as in love. Her partner guides her movement with
his spear, thrusting his loins forward in a mime of persuit."

In Siera Leone the 'Dance of the Susu Bundu girl's has much more actual
colour. Previously, the girls will have been circumcised in the Bundu
Bush according to the ancient rites, and instructed in household
accomplishments to prepare them for marriage. They are presumed to be
virgins. It is night, but little fires flicker red in a moon-lightened
darkness. Parents and relations of the participants cluster together
with the rest of the village to watch. Monkeys chatter noisily from the
trees.

As the girls step forward, they show gleaming teeth and the whites of
their eyes. They are wearing their best finery: lengths of garish
flower-patterned cloth are wound about their thin waists to the ground;
high turbans composed of flaring coloured silk scarves decorate their
small vivacious heads. Behind, over their skirts fall black velvet
kirtles sewn with rows of bells. Each girl carries a showy handkerchief
in one hand. Naked above the waist, her breasts, with prominent nipples,
are thrust forward. Valleyed between the shoulder-blades, her upright
back shines as though oiled. She dances with a proud, unspoiled grace of
carriage.

No sudden crash of drums heralds the opening of this dance. Instead, a
sweet wailing music from a native instrument, almost bell-like, blends
with the controlled drums and the gentle swish of calabash, as the girls
sway like dark columns of smoke, bending, skimming the earth with the
fingers of first one hand, then the other. More instruments join the
rhythmic theme, emphasizing the flowing snake-like movements. On the
girls' now serious faces appears entranced concentration. The orchestra
speeds the tempo; the sensuous vigour of the Negresses changing to such
a vibrating single energy of supple writhing forms that individually the
dancers can hardly be separated. The speed is so great that the girls
appear to be mingled in one florid streak of colour.

But from among the audience the boys have been watching with aroused
attention, picking out the girls they would like for brides. Often at
the end of such a dance, a girl will fall to the ground exhausted. Then,
in a flash, a boy will dash out, pick her up in his alms and carry her
into the bush nearby, where, with a sigh, she may thank the darkness for
preserving the myth of her virginity.

The reader should not think that these rites of the primitive tribes
have no connection with the 'refined' dances of the so-called civilized
world. It has been quoted above that "the sexual element is present in
most of the world's dancing." European civilization celebrates a
marriage with dancing. The bride is obliged to dance with the guests.
Have you ever stopped to think what is the significance of this
custom?

In early feudal times the bride might have spent her wedding night not
with her husband but with her feudal lord, who had the right to deflower
her.

For example:

Old writers of the history of Schotland say that King Evenus III â€”
contemporary with the emperor Augustus â€” 'made a law by which he and his
successors in the throne were authorized to lie with every bride, if a
woman of quality, before her husband could approach her; and in
consequence of this law the great men of the nation had a power of the
same kind over the brides of their vassals and servants.

It would seem that this law remained effective throughout the kingdom,
for more than ten centuries, until St. Margaret persuaded her husband
King Malcom III to have it abolished. After this, any vassal or servant
who wished to redeem the first night of his bride had to pay a tax in
money. In almost all countries of Christiandom, "sometimes even monks,
who were feudal lords, held the right of sleeping with the bride on her
first night as a married woman.

Now, such customs have been diluted, and the dance with the bride has
been substituted in place of sleeping with her on her first night. At
Swedish country weddings it is still usual for the bride to dance with
all the men; elsewhere in Europe, as in parts of Germany, there is
tradition that every guest who dances with the bride must pay her some
money!

In Hungary, on the day of marriage, many rites are performed. "At lasts
about midnight, comes the ritual putting bed. First every man present
dances with the now almost exhausted bride, each giving her money for
this privilege." Not only in weddings but even in social dances the
erotic factor dominates and survives. You must have seen in Western
countries (and in their blind followers) that when a state guest
arrives, the wife of the host stands with the guest and the wife of the
guest stands with the host. And the same thing happens during the dances
given in honour of the guest. Do you know the origin of this custom? In
ancient times there was a custom which still survives in the Chukchee
tribe of Asiatic Eskimos. It is the system of "Group marriage" which
anthropologists believe to be the most primitive form of marriage.

(Dr. Bogoras) states that marriage among the Chukchee does not deal
with one couple only but extends over an entire group. The men belonging
to such a marriage union are called 'companions in wives' ... but takes
advantage of his right comparatively seldom, namely, only when he visits
for some reason the camp of one of the 'companions'. Then the host cedes
him his place in the sleeping room.

As the author says, "the custom of loaning wives to strangers or
friends, for a fee or just as an act of hospitality, has been common and
widespread over many lands from time immemorial, and not only among
savage tribes."

And this system survives in the form of loaning the wife to the guest
in the danceroom, in place of the bedroom.

Now that we have seen the relation between the dance and music on one
hand and sexual promiscuity on the other, we can easily understand the
following tradition of the Holy Prophet of Islam: Music is the magic of
fornication.


