Some Traditions on Music
========================

After Ayats of the Qur’an, I mention here some of the traditions of the
Holy Prophet of Islam (S) and Imams (a.s.) about musical sound, musical
instruments, and musical parties.

1. The Holy Prophet (S) said: "When my Ummat (followers) will acquire
fifteen habits they will be visited by disasters:

1) When the booty will be treated as personal property;

2) and trust will become like a booty of war;

3) and charity will be (disliked) like a loss;

4&5) and man will obey his wife and disobey his mother;

6&7) and will be generous to his friend and tyrant to his father;

8) and voices will be high in the mosques;

9) and a man will be respected as a safeguard against his evil;

10) and the leader of the people will be the worst of them;

11) and men will wear silk;

12) and people will keep singing and dancing girls;

13) and will keep musical instruments;

14) and will drink intoxicants;

15) and fornication will increase;

At that time expect red storms or depression of land-mass or changing
your faces like the image of animals and the victory of your enemy upon
you and then you will not be helped (by Allah)."

2. The Holy Prophet of Islam describing the signs of the Day of Judgment
said: "Verily amongst the signs of the Hour is that people will neglect
prayers (will not pray in the preferred time)! And will follow their
desires, and will incline towards their own
preferences..................... In those days, there will be people who
will learn the Qur’an for other than Allah (i.e. for earning worldly
benefits) and will treat the Qur’an as musical instrument (as is
happening today in Islamic countries where Qur’an is recited on the
radios just to entertain the listeners) and there will be people who
will study religion for other than Allah (for earning prestige or wealth
as is happening today when the main purpose of study of religion is to
be come a good orator, so that higher and higher fees may be demanded
from the audience) and number of illegitimate children will increase and
people will sing the Qur’an.......... and will adore musical instruments
and will dislike enjoining the good and forbidding the
evil.............These are the people who will be called unclean and
dirty in the kingdom of heaven."

3. Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "Music is the nest of hypocrisy."

4. Also he said: "Music is the worst of the sounds."

5. Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s.) said: The place where music is performed,
Allah does not look at its participants (with mercy).

6. Also the Imam (a.s.) said: "Listening to music and vain (sounds)
grows hypocrisy as the water grows the plants.

7. Hassan (a companion of Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq a.s.) said: There was a
man in my neighbourhood who had singing girls and he always remained
immersed in music and dance. When I went to W.C., I used to stay a bit
longer (to listen to those sounds). When I went to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq
(a.s.), he told me: O Hasan, Verily the ear, and the eye and the heart,
all of them will be asked. The ear and what it listened to, the eye and
what it looked at and the heart and what it intended."

Hasan says: When I heard that Ayat of the Qur’an, it was as though I had
never heard it before. Then I repented (from my sin of listening to
music) and made a convent with Allah not to do it again.

The Imam (a.s.) said: "Stand up have bath and pray to Allah as much as
you wish. How bad would have been your position if you had died with
this habit. Repent before Allah and ask His forgiveness for every evil
because Allah does not dislike but evil, leaves evil for evil people
because for everything are its people.  
 In a list of major sins which he sent to Caliph Mamun Rashid, Imam Ali
Ar-Ridha (a.s.) mentioned the participation in the musical gatherings.  
  


