Music in the Light of Traditions
================================

Holy Prophet (S) said, "I forbid you to dance and to play the flute, the
drum and the tambourines."

Holy Prophet (S) said," Molten lead will be put in the ears of that
person who listens attentively to music and songs.

Imam Ali Reza (a.s) said," And to listen attentively to the musical
instrument (is also a greater sin )....." manufacturing, buying or
selling musical instrument is forbidden, and the profits accrued from
such dealings are illegal and the transaction is also null and void.
Even safe keeping of musical instrument is forbidden and to destroy them
is obligatory.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s) said," Allah has prohibited the manufacturing
of such things which are used for harmful purpose. And the things which
only create harm. Thus the manufacturing of harp, flute, chess, musical
instruments, cross of crucification, idols is forbidden."

Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s) said: Singing is one of those sins for which
Allah has reserved the punishment of Hell.

The place where songs and music are played, Allah’s wrath descends, as
the following traditions say:-  
 Imam Ali (a.s) said," And music and songs give rise to hypocrisy and is
one of the ways leading towards poverty and hunger.  
 Holy Prophet (S) said," Molten lead will be put in the ears of that
person who listens attentively to music and songs.  
 Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s) said," Thus to teach singing and music, to
learn to play it or to receive payment for it and to indulge in any kind
of musical pastime is forbidden."  
 Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s) said," Don’t enter a house in which Allah’s
Blessings and bounties are turned away from the habitants of the house,
at such a place neither the Supplications are responded nor the Angels
come near such place."  
 Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s) said," One who has been bestowed with
favours of Allah while in possession of such favours plays flute, he has
been unthankful to the favours of Allah."  
  


