Effects of Music
================

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s) said, "One who plays music in the house for
forty days will be beset by a Satan named Fogander. Allah will cause
that Satan to occupy each and every part of that person’s body. When
this would happen then shame would depart from him and he would not care
what he is saying nor what is being said about him. Then the Satan would
blow unto him and after that his modesty would be completely destroyed.
Then he would not feel ashamed even if the chastity of his women is
being defiled."

The Holy Prophet (S) said," the playing of violin causes hypocrisy to
grow in the heart in the same way as water becomes the cause of the
growth of greenery."

Imam Ali (a.s) said," Angels do not enter the house which has wine,
drum, tambourine or a flute. Even the innovations of the people of that
house are not accepted and the fortunate blessings from them are taken
away."

Imam Ali Reza (a.s) said," That person in whose house is kept for forty
days a drum, flute or any other musical instrument, chess or similar
things that person invokes the wrath of Allah and if that person dies
during those forty days his death shall be of a transgressor and a
libertine. His abode shall be Hell and what a terrible abode it is."

The Holy Prophet (S) said," A person who sings will be put in the group
of those people on whom Allah will not look with grace on the Day of
Judgement."

Dance halls are modern nurseries of the Divorce Courts, training shops
of prostitution, and the graduating school of infamy and vice[^1]."  
 I attack the modern dance as a reversion towards savagery. As a medical
man, I flatly charge that modern social dancing is fundamentally sinful
and evil. I charge that it is the most insidious of the manoeuvres
preliminary to sex betrayal. It is nothing more or less than damnable
diabolical animal physical dissipation. Do brother and sister dance like
that? Father & mother? Mother & son? I tell you the basic spell of the
dance is the spell of illicit physical contact..... We doctors know
trial of broken homes prove this."[^2]  
  

[^1]: Dr. l. l. Holling worth.

[^2]: Dr. E.S. Sonners.


