Influence of Music
==================

Often people are heard saying: "But music has so much influence upon our
feelings; so why such a thing should be forbidden?" But it is precisely
because of its great influence upon heart and mind that it is forbidden.
There would have been no need to ban it if it were with out any effect.
The thing which is to be decided is whether its influence is good or
bad. And it has been shown in the previous pages that music and dance
have harmful effects physiologically, spiritually and ethically upon
human beings.

Music is like intoxicants in that it makes one forget one’s surroundings
and one does not know what is happening to him or her. The following
episode is a good example of the effect of music:

Frank King is reported in ‘Reader’s Digest’[^1] as saying:-  
 "I returned home one evening and noticed a large red mark that looked
like a burn on my wife’s right cheek. When I asked her what had happened
she sheepishly told me the story. She set up the iron-board in the
living room so that she could watch a favourite television programme
while doing the ironing, the telephone table was also near at hand. As
she was intently watching TV, the phone rang and she reached out
automatically and answered the iron."

Another interesting story was published in the Tanganyika Standard[^2]
some 23 years ago. A pregnant woman attended a musical programme in a
local cinema. She became so much engrossed in it that she gave birth to
a baby on the spot without realizing what was happening to her. ‘Was it
a cinema hall or maternity home?’ asked the paper.

Realizing the importance of this engrossing quality of music, the
scientists are trying to use it as an aid in surgery. Reader’s
Digest[^3] writes:

"Audio-analgesia or painkilling by sound is one of modern science’s
newest discoveries. The combination of music and other sounds have
alleviated pain in dentistry, surgery and childbirth. Nobody can predict
how widely the technique will be used but those who have experienced it
entertained high hopes —like the new mother who wheeled from the
delivery room exclaiming, \`What a wonderful experience! I’ll always
remember south pacific.

Palcetry Galiard while on the operation table asked for one of his own
musical tapes to be played in the room. The effect was a spate of grief
which made all present cry and the operation was performed without any
anaesthetic.

All this goes a long way to prove that the music has the same effect on
nerves and mind as the anaesthesia. Nobody in his right mind would
suggest that chloroform should be daily used by the general public
because it is such a good thing in the operation theatre. If music is a
good anaesthetic let it be used in surgery and deliveries of children.
But can that use ever justify its common use in every home at all times
and in all circumstances?

**Appendix: Television, A Blessing or a curse?**

by Muntazir

*All quotations in this article unless stated or otherwise, have been
taken from "Eternity " October, 1971 and July, 1972 Issues.*

If a child is afraid of something expose him to it often and his fears
will diminish or disappear.

Dr. Victor B. Cline, a University of Utah (U.S.A.) Psychologist and four
year research assistant, wrote, "Psychologists have for years
demonstrated for example that you can overcome a person’s fear of snakes
by gradually exposing him to others who casually play with snakes."

He then adds, "It stands to reason that you can also change attitudes
and emotional responses to violence, sex and various antisocial
behaviour by repeated exposure."

Everyone, especially a Muslim, should seriously consider the effect
before he exposes himself or his children to anti-religious behaviour.

These days it is a sign of "Education" and "intelligentsia" to have
Television at home giving little thought to its long-term effect
especially on children.

Much research has been done in the United States of America on the
effect of Television on its viewers. President Nixon had appointed a
Commission to study Causes and Prevention of Violence. The commission in
its Report published in 1970 said that Television networks were
"pandering to a public preoccupation with violence that television
itself has helped to generate." The Commission concluded that on the
basis of many experimental studies "observed violence stimulates
aggressive behaviour."

Dr. Robert M. Liepert of the State University of New York at Stony Brook
(U.S.A.) after considerable research concluded: "There is a link between
televised violence and aggressive behaviour for the majority of normal
children." Although it has previously been assumed that only abnormal
children would be affected by viewing scenes of violence, Liepert
strongly disagreed. He writes, "The data show no evidence that only a
minority is influenced. This is a factual error."

Dr. Victor B. Cline, the Psychologist, says that "The media are powerful
teachers of values and ethical behaviour and sometimes may play a more
significant role than the Church."  
 To this "Newsweek" commentator, Joseph Morgenstern, adds: "If the
effect of Television violence on children has been finally demonstrated,
it’s not un reasonable to assume that ultra-violence in the movie has
some effect on adults."

The real danger of films shown on Television lies in the philosophy of
life or value system that they propagate very subtly in many cases. This
underlying system does not get edited out for television, as do most of
the sex scenes and profanity.

And one cannot switch off the set as soon as something objectionable
appears because often the viewer does not even realise the subtle moral
implication of the film. Even an intelligent and educated person can
easily be affected by such films.

On U.S.A. T.V. a film "Easy Rider" was shown which made heroes of two
young men who "earned their freedom to take a cross-country motorcycle
tour by smuggling heroin into the United States from Mexico. No
criticism of their offense or even of their own indulgence in drugs was
implied in the film. In fact, smoking marijuana was portrayed as
perfectly normal and very agreeable and even the use of hard drugs left
no ill-effects. When these points were discussed with a group of College
freshmen-all of them from highly religious homes admitted that the film
had left them confused about using drugs. "It (the film) made it look so
nice, "he said”[^4] .

In some films the main characters are portrayed as sweet, gentle, loving
and admirable young people, in spite of the fact that they are in bed
with partners whose names they do not know. Even a person with firmly
grounded sexual morals and little temptation to change them begins to
sympathize with these gentle youngsters and to feel that, after all,
such behaviour is not particularly damaging.

When children are exposed to such films, it gradually changes their
attitude and undoes what the poor Mulla or Maulana has been trying to
instil in them.

Almost every evening he sees ngomas, dances, kissing, dating, violence,
scenes of night clubs and eventually he accepts all these things as
normal and starts considering all those who oppose these things as
"abnormal".

It might be argued that not much violence or immoral films are shown on
local Television. It should, however, be borne in mind that poison,
however small the dose, seeps in and does damage.

Furthermore, it should not be forgotten that the standard of morality of
those who control showing of television programmes is different from
ours. Things which in their eyes are "innocent" are most objectionable
from our point of view. Drinking, dating, dancing, kissing, etcetera,
may be "innocent" to them but we would not like our children to accept
these ideas and follow them.

Even with much noise being made by those in authority about guarding the
morality of the public, quite often extremely objectionable films, even
from their own point of view are shown on television. Once such a highly
objectionable film was shown on Nairobi television about which "East
African Standard" had to write as follows:-

"The \`Nana’ controversy is just dying out the film having now been
"deported" to Mombasa. But another \`Nana’ in the name of \`Celestina’
appeared on V.O.K. television last Wednesday, as the Midweek movie.  
 Part of this otherwise excellent drama depicts Celestina’s husband
indulging in massage treatment to a charming and highly romantic young
girl.

The exercise develops into proper romance when Celestina’s husband
starts undressing the girl, and she obliges. The bedroom scene continues
until: Enter Celestina, looking furious.  
 Having suspected what was taking place she picks up a knife and drives
it into her husband’s heart. I would not mind seeing this film, and
particularly the sex scene, in a cinema, as it would be my individual
decision to see it by paying for it.

What V.O.K. has done is to bring right in our homes such a film with
highly romantic scenes. What are we expected to do in our houses with
children around? Just look at such scenes and laugh them off? One
wonders what sort of society we are trying to build."[^5]  
    
 The "Perry Mason" and "Falk" series films which are often shown on our
television are American films showing violence, immorality, etc, which
is likely to have an effect, specially on children. Some of these films
propagate "ends justify the means" slogan.

In a film called "Evening Rider" shown on Cost television, a teenager
was shown married to a man her father’s age and being tempted by the
husband’s own son of the same age.[^6] . It left one with the impression
that adultery, for such a teenager was justified.

"Grab Game" was shown on Nairobi television which showed a person
looking for a job attacking the manager of the firm and the manager
tells him in fear to "come next Thursday"[^7] it was nothing but
propagation of "Might is right".

That such films have an effect on even adults car be judged from the
reviews of these programmes from accredited journalists who are not only
intelligent but highly educated.

A reviewer of Television of East African Standard once wrote, "I have in
mind the fact that a procrastinating father finds himself sharing a girl
friend with his own son. One may turn round and blame the poor girl for
having extended both hands, but what about difficult time when the
father, and I bet he was doing it without the knowledge of his perhaps
halfway starving family, offers assistance, including paying overseas
academic fees and all that goes with it. ?[^8]

It can be seen that instead of revolting against the immorality of the
girl viewers are made to sympathize with her and condone her actions.

The censor Boards controlling showing of programmes on television change
and we may see a time when the Board is more lax and permissive. We may
then see highly objectionable films being shown on our television which
have brought chaos in the United States of America.

It will then be difficult to tell our children to stop viewing TV when
we have introduced it to them and made them its addict.

However strict we may be at home in trying to control what programme our
children should see, but once they are addicted to it they will see even
the highly objectionable programmes as and when they get an opportunity.
We shall be held responsible before God for introducing televisions to
them and weakening their moral fibre. God says in Quran,

***"O ye who believe, save yourselves and your families from a fire
whose fuel is men and stones." (66.7)***

Let us not expose our children to immoral behaviour and turn them into
fuel of fire.

 

[^1]: Vol. E No. 481; May 1962

[^2]: Dar-es-Salaam

[^3]: Vol. 80, No. 477; January, 1962

[^4]: Eternity-October, 1971, pp. 29

[^5]: East African Standard — 15.5.72.

[^6]: East African Standard, 19th April, 1973.

[^7]: East African Standard, 12.3.73.

[^8]: East African Standard, 26.3.73.


