Effects of music on Nervous System
==================================

Before explaining its effects on nerves it is necessary to briefly
describe an intricate and awe-inspiring part of the nervous system
itself. These details are quoted from the "*Foundation of Biology*"[^1]
and "*How your Nervous System Works*"[^2] :

"Many reflexes that help control the internal environment involve a
special part of the nervous system (ANS). This system consists of nerves
making up the motor pathway to the heart, stomach, intestine and other
internal organs. These nerves are not under voluntary control, that is,
you can not make your heart beat faster on command."

"The two major divisions of the automatic nervous system are called the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems."  
 Sympathetic nerves leave the middle regions of the spinal cord.

"Parasympathetic nerves leave the central nervous system from the upper
regions where they travel in cranial nerves (i.e., 12 pairs of nerves
attached to the brain and serving head and neck), and from the lower
most regions of the spinal cord where they travel in spinal nerves.  
 "Most internal organs of your body are supplied with both
parasympathetic and sympathetic nerve fibres."

"In general, these two types of nerves work in opposite ways. For
example, impulses travelling along sympathetic nerve fibres towards the
heart increase your heart-beat rate, whereas impulses travelling along
the parasympathetic nerves leading to the heart decrease its rate.  
 "When we examine the effects of sympathetic stimulation of various
organs, a pattern begins to emerge. We find that sympathetic stimulation
causes a number of events:

1. Widening of air passage leading to the lungs;

2. Constriction or narrowing of blood vessel in the skin and in the
intestinal tract, resulting in blood being shifted from the digestive
organs and skin to the muscles;

3. A general slowing down of movements in the intestinal tract;

4 An increase in the force and rate of heart-beat:

5. Release of the blood sugar from the liver;

6. Release of the hormone adrenaline.

All of these activities prepare the human being for emergencies such as
running or fighting. The widening of air passages makes it easier for
the human being to breathe faster and get more oxygen. Blood is shifted
from regions where it will not be needed during the emergency (the
intestinal tract, for example) to skeletal and heart muscle which will
need oxygen and blood sugar.

The heart beats faster and stronger so that blood circulates through the
muscles at a higher rate. Blood sugar is released from storage in the
liver into the blood stream where it will be available to supply muscles
with energy.  
 In short, sympathetic stimulation prepares the man for emergencies and
in this process increases the blood pressure, retards the function of
digestive system and increases the sugar contents of the blood.

The function of Parasympathetic nerve system is opposite to the
sympathetic system:

"It widens the veins, releases noradrenalin hormones and generally
retards activities.”  
 "The two nervous systems run parallel to each other and in co-operation
from one part of the body to another. The co-operation of the two
systems is essential for maintaining the equilibrium of the body, which
in turn has a great bearing and effect on the physical and mental health
of man. Should at any time there be a lack of co-operation between these
two systems, physical or mental disorders could arise resulting in one
disease or another."

Some actions or movements outside human body can adversely affect the
natural equilibrium of these two systems. One of those things is music.

A brisk and lively musical programme, particularly if it is accompanied
by musical instruments, disturbs this equilibrium of the various
systems; digestion is badly affected; palpitation of the heart is
increased; blood pressure goes high and abnormal secretion of hormones
leaves a lasting bad effect upon general health.

Music stimulates mostly the sympathetic nervous system; and it may
create insomnia (lack of sleep); it may cause tempers to flare up;
sudden laughter or nonsensical talks are amongst its possible effects.
It may even lead to mania (a kind of madness).  
 Such people may be seen to move their hands and feet in dancing pattern
even when not listening to music.

Dr. Vollf Adler, who was a professor in the Columbia University, found
out that the best melodious record of music can badly harm the nerves of
a human body and the warmer the weather the more the harm. He proved
that music upsets the nervous systems unnaturally and causes
considerable fatigue.

This research of Dr. Adler had a widespread effect on many Americans;
many stopped listening to music altogether. The belief that music was
harmful for a progressive nation like U.S.A. reached a stage when a
member of the Senate proposed a resolution to ban the music in the
country. Relevant proofs and arguments were put before the Senate. But
in a nation steeped in lust and materialism, not many senators could be
found to vote for that resolution[^3].  
  

[^1]: William D. McElory & Carl P. Swanson and others; published by
Prentice-Hall, Inc; Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey U.S.A. 1968.

[^2]: J.D. Ratcliff; Reader’s Digest — Book of Human Body.

[^3]: Illustré Dimanche; No. 630; Paris; as quoted in,
"Falsafa-e-Tahrim-e-Musiqui", published by the institution "Dar
Rah-e-Haqq", Qum, Iran.


