Some other Ailments and Music
=============================

It is an accepted fact that mental tension creates many ailments.
Excitement and tension are like a fire which destroys the natural
functions of human body. It has already been shown that music creates
excitement and tension. Not only madness and nervous breakdown, but even
ulcers and heart diseases are caused by mental tension. It has been
mentioned earlier that music releases the hormone ‘adrenalin’ in
abnormal quantity. This hormone clots the blood vessels and finally
leads to heart attack. This relation between excessive release of
adrenalin and heart attack was discovered in France in 1957[^1].

Professor Celie experimented by injecting adrenalin into a monkey. Its
skin became paralysed and the animal suffered a heart attack[^2] .Dale
Carnegie quotes Dr. Joseph Montagu to have said that stomach ulcer is
caused by mental tension and violent anger[^3].

Many of the present day common diseases are the legacy of our so called
civilization which creates tension and exhausts the tolerance of
physical and mental faculties. One of the main causes of this tension
and exhaustion is music. The ailments, which are caused by such
condition, are diabetes, rheumatism, and even the birth of deformed or
disabled children[^4].

Concentration on listening to musical concerts or Jazz bands at times
causes such violent tension that mental stability is thrown out of
window. The daily ‘Kayhan’ (Tehran), in its issue No 6626, published a
news of the Reuter Agency: About 50,000 youths had gathered in Melbourne
(Australia) for a musical concert. The concert overwhelmed them so much
that they started assaulting each other with fists and knives. Many were
seriously injured; some girls were molested. The police was called in
and with much difficulty controlled the situation. The point to ponder
is this: The youths were so much excited that they did not know what
they were doing.

Now that we have come to Jazz, and important finding must be quoted here
from The Reader’s Digest[^5] :

"Ontologists say that youngsters are going deaf by blasting their ears
with electronic pop music.”

"Experts know that prolonged exposure to a noise level above 85 decibels
will eventually result in a reduction of hearing acuity in the frequency
range most important for understanding the human speech. Dr. Charles
Lebo, of the Pacific Medical Centre took measuring instruments into two
San Francis co dance halls where the cacophony from amplified
instruments caused sound intensity from 100 to 119 decibels in the low
frequency range.

"Lebo estimates that under such conditions 80 per cent have their
hearing sensitivity temporarily reduced by 5 to 30 decibels; 10 per cent
suffer temporary 40 decibel impairment. Some might suffer permanent
damage after a year of steady listening[^6].

In short high blood pressure, insomnia, emotional instability mania and
madness, nervous break downs, ulcers, heart troubles, diabetes,
rheumatisms temporary permanent deafness and birth of deformed or
disabled babies are the effects of music.  
 No wonder, Islam, being a religion from Allah, has warned us against
this disabling habit.  
  

[^1]: Falsafa-e-Tahrim-e-Musiqui.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Vol. 49, No. 565, May, 1969.

[^6]: Time.


