From Philosophical Point of View
================================

According to the philosophy of Islam, man has been endowed with two main
faculties: (i) Intellect; and (ii) Emotions.

Emotions may be divided into two categories: Positive and Negative. We
may call them ‘Attraction’ and ‘Repulsion’, or ‘Love’ and ‘Hate’; or
‘Desire’ and ‘Anger’ respectively. Let us call them here ‘Desire’ and
‘Anger’.

Thus, we have three faculties in all:

1) Intellect: Its function is to think and understand;

2) Desire: Through it man tries to attain things which are beneficial to
him or which give him satisfaction and enjoyment;

3) Anger: By this facility man defends himself against, and repulses the
things which he considers harmful to himself.

Of the above three faculties, the first one, i.e., Intellect, has been
designed by Allah to guide and control the remaining two, i.e., Desire
and Anger. If a man wants to remain on the right path, he must ensure
that the two perform their functions under the guidance of Intellect.  
 For example, the ambition to get rich is the result of Desire. But it
is the Intellect which guides the man that the wealth should be obtained
by honest labour, hard work and not by robbery or fraud.

Likewise, the Anger inspires the man to resist pain. But it is the
Intellect that tells him, for example, to submit to the surgical
operation so that he may avoid greater pain in future.  
 When the Faculty of Intellect is sufficiently developed and dominates
over the other two faculties, the man advances spiritually and ethically
and surpasses the angels because angels have got only the Intellect and
do not have to contend with desire and anger.

Uncontrolled desire and anger are dominating factors of animals. If
these faculties were to be nourished by the man beyond the ethical limit
and freed from the control and guidance of Intellect he would sink to
the abysmal depth of depravity and would become worse than animals.

After understanding this principle, it is easy to appreciate the reasons
behind laws of Islam forbidding various actions.

It has been already described that music is among those things which
boosts the emotions and arouses the sensual powers beyond their natural
limit; music gives desire or anger an upper hand and makes them dominant
over the Intellect. As has been shown with a few examples this state
could reach a stage where Intellect ceases to function altogether; man
becomes the slave of his emotions — desire and anger.  
 A time comes that he forgets his Creator and does not remember the real
aim of his life (which is to know his Creator and obey Him).

The Love and Fear of Allah promotes virtues and good deeds and restrain
the man from sins and evils. Islam aims at producing best of the
characters in its followers and therefore it has forbidden those things
which tend to divert attention from Allah and from man’s divine duties.
Music is one of those things which has a toxic effect on human mind.
Therefore, Islam has forbidden not only the playing of music but also
listening to it; also forbidden is participation in musical programmes
whether it is in places like theatres, night clubs, and cinemas or in
one’s own home.

Incidentally, the same is the reason behind the law forbidding liquor
and gambling.  
  


