From the Ethical Point of View
==============================

In the last chapter, I explained the harm which music brings upon the
spiritual well being of a man. Connected with it is the effect of music
on ethics and morals.

Those intoxicated by music should try to reply to these questions:

Why those engaged in singing and dancing profession almost always sink
to the lowest level of immorality?

Why the film actors and actresses change their wives and husbands with
every change of weather?

Why singing and dancing was considered a ‘Must’ for prostitutes in
Indian subcontinent?

Why marital sanctity and conjugal bliss are words without meaning in the
world of singers  
 and dancers? Why? Oh! Why?

The following quotations from ‘The Bridal Bed’[^1] will provide an
answer to these questions:

(Dance) is the start of culture. Though some of these dances are
sensationally erotic, the sexual element is present in most of the
world’s dancing. It is sublimated even in ballet.  
 Many primitive dances, the world over, serve as preliminaries to
mating, being closely connected with the choice of a marriage
partner............A description or two will make this clear.

The Dinka, a gentle pastoral tribe, live on the east bank of the White
Nile. They are astonishingly tall, sometimes more than six and a half
feet high. Blacker than charcoal, often above a naked body, the hair
glistens a longish pale gold mop, when it has been dyed with cow’s
urine....Dinka buy their wives......But first they see the women in
dance.

Within a village clearing the drums and gourd rattles are ready.
Possibly as many as three hundred Dinkas have been waiting an hour or
more under the yet powerful and declining sun, the tall girls standing
together in a line, by now worked up to a pitch of excitement bordering
on hysteria as they await the moment for the dance to develop. But what
is strange here is that although the dance will mirror by no means
deeply buried sexual desires, it remains curiously abstract and
impersonal.

The magnificent nubile Negresses, with narrow hips and slim limbs,
suggest bronze antiquely proportioned statues full of shy giggles; they
begin to shuffle with their feet, beads and bracelets jangling on smooth
wrist and dusty ankle. A laughing girl retreats, advances, invites her
warrior partner, her arms tapering into the narrow palms of clasped
simian hands stretched out behind her, her pointed breasts trembling.
Her bead skirt rattles and sways, as she jerks her lacquer-like thighs
forward and backwards as in love. Her partner guides her movement with
his spear, thrusting his loins forward in a mime of pursuit."

In Sierra Leone the ‘Dance of the Susu Bundu girl’s has much more actual
colour. Previously, the girls will have been circumcised in the Bundu
Bush according to the ancient rites, and instructed in household
accomplishments to prepare them for marriage. They are presumed to be
virgins. It is night, but little fires flicker red in a moon-lightened
darkness. Parents and relations of the participants cluster together
with the rest of the village to watch. Monkeys chatter noisily from the
trees.

As the girls step forward, they show gleaming teeth and the whites of
their eyes. They are wearing their best finery: lengths of garish
flower-patterned cloth are wound about their thin waists to the ground;
high turbans composed of flaring coloured silk scarves decorate their
small vivacious heads. Behind, over their skirts fall black velvet
kirtles sewn with rows of bells. Each girl carries a showy handkerchief
in one hand. Naked above the waist, her breasts, with prominent nipples,
are thrust forward. Valleyed between the shoulder-blades, her upright
back shines as though oiled. She dances with a proud, unspoiled grace of
carriage.

No sudden crash of drums heralds the opening of this dance. Instead, a
sweet wailing music from a native instrument, almost bell-like, blends
with the controlled drums and the gentle swish of calabash, as the girls
sway like dark columns of smoke, bending, skimming the earth with the
fingers of first one hand then the other. More instruments join the
rhythmic theme, emphasizing the flowing snake-like movements. On the
girls’ now serious faces appears entranced concentration. The orchestra
speeds the tempo; the sensuous vigour of the Negresses changing to such
a vibrating single energy of supple writhing forms that individually the
dancers can hardly be separated. The speed is so great that the girls
appear to be mingled in one florid streak of colour.

But from among the audience the boys have been watching with aroused
attention, picking out the girls they would like for brides. Often at
the end of such a dance, a girl will fall to the ground exhausted. Then,
in a flash, a boy will dash out, pick her up in his alms and carry her
into the bush nearby, where, with a sigh, she may thank the darkness for
preserving the myth of her virginity.

The reader should not think that these rites of the primitive tribes
have no connection with the ‘refined’ dances of the so-called civilized
world. It has been quoted above that "the sexual element is present in
most of the world’s dancing."

European civilization celebrates a marriage with dancing. The bride is
obliged to dance with the guests. Have you ever stopped to think what is
the significance of this custom?  
 In early feudal times the bride might have spent her wedding night not
with her husband but with her feudal lord, who had the right to deflower
her.

For example:

Old writers of the history of Scotland say that King Evenus III —
contemporary with the emperor Augustus — ‘made a law by which he and his
successors in the throne were authorized to lie with every bride, if a
woman of quality, before her husband could approach her and in
consequence of this law the great men of the nation had a power of the
same kind over the brides of their vassals and servants. It would seem
that this law remained effective throughout the kingdom, for more than
ten centuries, until St. Margaret persuaded her husband King Malcom III
to have it abolished. After this, any vassal or servant who wished to
redeem the first night of his bride had to pay a tax in money.

In almost all countries of Christendom, "sometimes even monks, who were
feudal lords, held the right of sleeping with the bride on her first
night as a married woman.  
 Now, such customs have been diluted, and the dance with the bride has
been substituted in place of sleeping with her on her first night.

In Swedish weddings it is still usual for the bride to dance with all
the men; elsewhere in Europe, as in parts of Germany, there is tradition
that every guest who dances with the bride must pay her some money!

In Hungary, for example, on the day of marriage, many rites are
performed. "At last, at about midnight, comes the “putting bed” ritual.
First every man present dances with the now almost exhausted bride, each
giving her money for this privilege." Not only in weddings but even in
social dances the erotic factor dominates and survives. You must have
seen in Western countries (and in their blind \`followers) that when a
state guest arrives, the wife of the host stands with the guest and the
wife of the guest stands with the host. And the same thing happens
during the dances given in honour of the guest. Do you know the origin
of this custom? In ancient times there was a custom which still survives
in the Chukchee tribe of Asiatic Eskimos. It is the system of "Group
marriage" which anthropologists believe to be the most primitive form of
marriage.

(Dr. Bogoras) states that marriage among the Chukchee does not deal with
one couple only but extends over an entire group. The men belonging to
such a marriage union are called ‘companions in wives’......but takes
advantage of his right comparatively seldom, namely, only when he visits
for some reason the camp of one of the ‘companions’. Then the host cedes
him his place in the sleeping room.

As the author says, "the custom of loaning wives to strangers or
friends, for a fee or just as an act of hospitality has been common and
widespread over many lands from time immemorial and not only among
savage tribes."  
 And this system survives in the form of loaning the wife to the guest
in the dance room, in place of the bedroom.

Now that we have seen the relation between the dance and music on one
hand and sexual promiscuity on the other, we can easily understand the
following tradition of the Holy Prophet of Islam: Music is the magic of
fornication.  
  

[^1]: Joseph Braddock; published by Corgi books, Ransworld Publishers
Ltd., London; 1960


