The Quran on Music
==================

After briefly explaining the evil effects of Music and dance, now time
has come to give here some of the ayats of the Qur’an and some of the
traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and Imams (a.s.) on this subject.

Here are four Ayats of the Qur’an which forbid the Muslims from
indulging into music.

***"So abstain from the pollution of the idols and abstain from false
vain words." (22:30).***

The Arabic word "Zoor" has several meanings which include falsehood and
the musical expressions. According to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s.)
"pollution of the idols" means Chess and "Vain words" means music.  
 See how ‘Music’ has been joined in this Ayat with the pollution of
idols", only then you can appreciate the seriousness of the sin of
Music.

***"And of the people there is he who buys a ‘vain talk’ so that he may
lead others astray from the path of Allah without (real) knowledge and
takes it (the revelation of Allah) for a mockery for these shall be a
disgracing chastisement (punishment)." (31:6).***

‘Lahw’ means any thing which diverts the mind from serious thinking.
"Vain talk" has been interpreted by the Imam as some talk, sound or
thing which diverts the attention of man from the ultimate aim of his
creation; in other words makes him forget Allah and His commands. For
example fictions romantic stories and such useless talks. "It includes
‘Music’, intoxicants and all such diversions."[^1]

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: Music is among the things for which
Allah has promised the Fire (of Hell). Then he recited the above
Ayat[^2].

***"Indeed successful are the believers those who in their prayer are
humble and those who keep themselves aloof from Vain (words and deeds)."
(23:1-3).***

‘Laghv’ (Vain words and actions): The first Imam, Imam Ali (a.s.) said
that "all that is void of the remembrance of Allah is ‘Laghv’. According
to other authentic traditions of Imams, ‘Laghv’ means all useless
entertainment, wasteful of times among which music has been specifically
mentioned. Also included in this term are vain games played just to
while away the time.

***"And the servants of the Merciful Allah are those.......... who bear
not witness to what is false, and when they pass by what is vain they
pass with dignity"(25:72).***

The words ‘Zoor’ and ‘Laghv’ have been explained earlier. According to
the traditions of Imams (a.s.), the first part may also be translated in
this way: "who do not witness what is vain"! And accordingly, it has
been interpreted in the exegesis of the Qur’an as "do not listen to
music."

The following two traditions explain the second part:

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s.) asked some of his companions: "Where are you
staying?"  
 They replied: "With so and so, who has singing and dancing girls. Imam
said: "You should have dignity."

They thought that Imam (a.s.) had advised them to treat that man
generously. But they were not sure; so they returned to the Imam and
requested him to explain his meaning to them.  
 Imam said: "have not you heard Allah saying \`when they pass by what is
vain they pass with dignity’?

Imam meant that you should not stay with a man who has singing and
dancing girls.  
 Second tradition: Muhammad bin Abi Ibad was known to indulge in music
and liquor. He once asked Imam Ali Ar-Ridha (a.s.) about listening to
music.

Imam said: Some people in Hijaz have their own view about it but that
view is absolutely wrong. Have you not heard the word of Allah ‘when
they pass by what is vain they pass in dignity’?"

I think this much should be enough for a follower of, Muhammad (S) and
Ahul ul Bait (a.s.).

[^1]: Tafseer As-Safi.

[^2]: Kafi; Wasael us Shia; Tafseer As-Safi.


