Hadiths About Imam Ali (as) - His Virtues (part V)
==================================================

Content:

Hadith al-Mazilah: You are to me like Aaron was to Moses Hadith
al-Mazilah narrated at several other occasions Ali and Aaron as two
bright stars in the heart of the skies Hadith al-Mazilah: You are to me
like Aaron was to Moses Quran 9:42

If there had been immediate gain (in sight), and the journey easy, they
would (all) without doubt have followed thee, but the distance was long,
(and weighed) on them. They would indeed swear by Allah, "If we only
could, we should certainly have come out with you": They would destroy
their own souls; for Allah doth know that they are certainly lying.

<p dir="rtl">
لَو' كَانَ عَرَضًا قَرِيبًا وَسَفَرًا قَاصِدًا لاَّتَّبَعُوكَ وَلَـكِن
بَعُدَت' عَلَي'هِمُ الشُّقَّةُ وَسَيَح'لِفُونَ بِاللّهِ لَوِ
اس'تَطَع'نَا لَخَرَج'نَا مَعَكُم' يُه'لِكُونَ أَنفُسَهُم' وَاللّهُ
يَع'لَمُ إِنَّهُم' لَكَاذِبُونَ
</p>

The verse written above is about the hypocrites who decided to remain
behind (in Medina) instead of joining the prophet and His companions in
the expedition of Tabuk. There desire was to plunder the city and
enslave its inhabitants. When the prophet learned of their plot, he left
his cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib in Medina as his deputy. However, the
presence of Ali was a big hurdle to their plot. So they raised false
rumors that Ali was not qualified to join the prophet in his battle and
that the latter started disliking Ali. On hearing this, Ali hurried back
to the prophet and asked him if the rumors were true. The prophet
reassured him and told him: "Will you not be pleased that you will be to
me like Aaron to Moses? But there will be no prophet after me".

This is not only a virtue, but it is a clear indication that, in the
event the prophet had been killed, Ali would have been the caliph of the
Muslims. This is exactly a repetition of the story of Moses (as) who
left his brother Aaraon as the vizier when he had to go behind the
mountain to speak with his lord.

This first section consists of narrations of this hadith during the
expedition of Tabuk. In the next section, you will learn that this same
hadith was repeated by the prophet at other occasions, which testifies
that hadith al-Manzila is not only specific to the expedition of Tabuk,
but it reflects the position of Ali unto the prophet as that of Harun to
Moses throughout the entire life of the prophet. This means that Ali had
been the vicegerent of the prophet from the start of prophethood to its
end. The fact that this hadith has been narrated by the prophet at
several occasions further proves that Ali is the only one who can take
over the responsibilites of the prophet while alife and after his
demise.

The Quran states the following verses:

Quran 20:29-36 (29) "And give me a Minister from my family, (30)
"Aaron, my brother; (31) "Add to my strength through him, (32) "And make
him share my task: (33) "That we may celebrate Thy praise without stint,
(34) "And remember Thee without stint: (35) "For Thou art He that (ever)
regardeth us." (36) (Allah) said: "Granted is thy prayer, O Moses!"

وَاج'عَل لِّي وَزِيرًا مِّن' أَه'لِي {29} هَارُونَ أَخِي {30} اش'دُد'
بِهِ أَز'رِي {31}وَأَش'رِك'هُ فِي أَم'رِي {32} كَي' نُسَبِّحَكَ كَثِيراً
{33} وَنَذ'كُرَكَ كَثِيراً {34} إِنَّكَ كُنتَ بِنَا بَصِيرًا {35} قَالَ
قَد' أُوتِيتَ سُؤ'لَكَ يَا مُوسَى {36} Quran 25:35

(Before this,) We sent Moses The Book, and appointed his brother Aaron
with him as minister;وَلَقَد' آتَي'نَا مُوسَى ال'كِتَابَ وَجَعَل'نَا
مَعَهُ أَخَاهُ هَارُونَ وَزِيرًا Quran 7:142

And We appointed with Musa a time of thirty nights and completed them
with ten (more), so the appointed time of his Lord was complete forty
nights, and Musa said to his brother Haroun: Take my place among my
people, and act well and do not follow the way of the mischief-makers.

<p dir="rtl">
وَوَاعَد'نَا مُوسَى ثَلاَثِينَ لَي'لَةً وَأَت'مَم'نَاهَا بِعَش'رٍ
فَتَمَّ مِيقَاتُ رَبِّهِ أَر'بَعِينَ لَي'لَةً وَقَالَ مُوسَى لأَخِيهِ
هَارُونَ اخ'لُف'نِي فِي قَو'مِي وَأَص'لِح' وَلاَ تَتَّبِع' سَبِيلَ
ال'مُف'سِدِينَ
</p>

It is therefore clear that Harun was the only one to take over the
responsibilities of Moses during his absence and in the event of the
demise of Moses, Harun would have become his successor.

This hadith has been narrated on the authority of Shu'ba with the same
chain of transmitters. Amir b. Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas reported on the
authority of his father that Muawiya b. Abi Sufyin appointed Sa'd as the
Governor and said: What prevents you from abusing Abu Turab (Hadrat
'Ali), whereupon he said: It is because of three things which I remember
Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) having said about him that I
would not abuse him and even if I find one of those three things for me,
it would be more dear to me than the red camel.

I heard Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) say about 'Ali as he
left behind him in one of his campaigns (that was Tabuk). 'Ali said to
him: Allah's Messenger, you leave me behind along with women and
children. Thereupon Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) said to
him: Aren't you satisfied with being unto me what Aaron was unto Moses
but with this exception that there is no prophethood after me.

And I (also) heard him say on the Day of Khaibar: I would certainly
give this standard to a person who loves Allah and his Messenger and
Allah and his Messenger love him too. He (the narrator) said: We have
been anxiously waiting for it, when he (the Holy Prophet) said: Call
'Ali. He was called and his eyes were inflamed. He applied saliva to his
eyes and handed over the standard to him, and Allah gave him victory.
(The third occasion is this) when the (following) verse was revealed:"
Let us summon our children and your children." Allah's Messenger (may
peace be upon him) called 'Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain and said: O
Allah, they are my family.

References:

o Sahih Muslim, Book 031, \#5915, Book of Fada'il Al-Sahabah; Page 940,
\#(2404)-32, Arabic version o Sunan al-Tirmidhi, vol 5, \#3808 (أبواب
المَنَاقِب عَن رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَي'هِ وسَلَّم) Narrated
Ubaida: Ali said (to the people of 'Iraq), "Judge as you used to judge,
for I hate differences (and I do my best ) till the people unite as one
group, or I die as my companions have died." And narrated Sad that the
Prophet said to 'Ali, "Will you not be pleased from this that you are to
me like Aaron was to Moses?"

References:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 5, Book 57, \#56, Book of Fada'il Ashaab
al-Nabi'; Page 780, \#3706, Arabic version Narrated Sad: Allah's Apostle
set out for Tabuk. appointing 'Ali as his deputy (in Medina). 'Ali said,
"Do you want to leave me with the children and women?" The Prophet said,
"Will you not be pleased that you will be to me like Aaron to Moses? But
there will be no prophet after me."

References:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 5, Book 59, \#700, Book of al-Maghaazi; Page
917, \#4416, Arabic version Amir b Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas reports (l on the
authority of his father that Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him)
addressing 'Ali said: You are in the same position with relation to me
as Aaron- (Harun) was in relation to Moses but with (this explicit
difference) that there is no prophet after me. Sa'd said: I had an
earnest desire to hear it directly from Sa'd, so I met him and narrated
to him what (his son) Amir had narrated to me, whereupon he said: Yes, I
did hear it. I said: Did you hear it yourself? Thereupon he placed his
fingers upon his ears and said: Yes, and if not, let both my ears become
deaf.

References:

o Sahih Muslim, Book 031, \#5913, Book of Fada'il al-Sahabah; Page 939,
\#(2404)-30, Arabic version Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas reported that Allah's
Messenger (may peace be upon him) left 'Ali b. Abi Talib behind him (as
he proceeded) to the expedition of Tabuk, whereupon he ('Ali) said:
Allah's Messenger, are you leaving me behind amongst women and children?
Thereupon he (the Holy Prophet) said: Aren't you satisfied with being
unto me what Aaron was unto Moses but with this exception that there
would be no prophet after me. References: o Sahih Muslim, Book 031,
\#5914, Book of Fada'il al-Sahabah; Page 940, \#(2404)-31, Arabic
version Sa'd reported Allah's Apostle (may peace be upon him) as saying
to 'Ali: Aren't you satisfied with being unto me what Aaron was unto
Moses?

References:

o Sahih Muslim, Book 031, \#5916, Book of Fada'il al-Sahabah; Page 940,
\#(...), Arabic version أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنه لا نبي بعدي
(م ت - عن سعد؛ ه، ت (أخرجه مسلم كتاب فضائل الصحابة باب من فضائل علي رقم
(2404) ص) - عن جابر).

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 11, \#32881, \#32886
(المجلد الحادي عشر \>\> فضائل علي رضي الله عنه) More references:

Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal: v1,p173 [entire book: p157,\#1490]; v1,p174
[entire book: p158,\#1505]; v1,p175 [entire book: p159,\#1509]; v1,p177
[entire book: p160,\#1532]; v1,p179 [entire book: p162,\#1547]; v1,p182
[entire book: p164,\#1583]; v1,p184 [entire book: p165,\#1600]; v1,p185
[entire book: p166,\#1608]; v1,p330 [entire book: p272,\#3062]; v3,p32
[entire book: p798,\#11292] Sunan ibn Majah, The Introduction, Fadlo Ali
bin Abi Talib al-Jami'i li Ahkam al-Qur'an, by Imam al-Qurtubi Mustadrak
al-Hakim, by Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Hakim al Nisaboori (on the
autority of Ali ibn Abi Talib, Bukayr ibn Massar, A'amru ibn Maymoon)
Ziyadat al-Jami'i al-Sagheer, by Jalaludin al-Suyuti (on the authority
of Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqas) Sunan al-Tirmidhi (on the authority of A'amir
bin Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqas, Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqas) Fat-hil Barri, Sharh
Sahih al-Bukhari, by Imam ibn Hajar al-A'aqalani (on the authority of
Ibrahim bin Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqas) Majma'a al-Zawa'id, by al-Hafidh
al-Haythami (on the authority of Abi Sai'id al-Khudri, Asma' bint
A'amees, Umm Salama, ibn al-Abbas, Abdullah ibn U'umar, Ali bin Abi
Talib, Jabir ibn Samrat, Abi Ayyub, Zayd ibn Arqam, Bara' ibn A'azib)
Mu'ujam al-Tabarani al-Kabeer, by Imam al-Tabarani (on the authority of
Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqas and many others) ibn Athir, in Usd al-Ghabah ibn
Sa'ad in al-Tabaqa

Here is the text for the following reference: v1,p330 [entire book:
272,\#3062]:

<p dir="rtl">
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي حدثنا يحيى بن حماد حدثنا أبو عوانة حدثنا أبو
بلج حدثنا عمرو بن ميمون قال:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
-إني لجالس الى ابن عباس إذ أتاه تسعة رهط فقالوا: يا أبا عباس إما أن
تقوم معنا وإما أن تخلونا هؤلاء قال: فقال ابن عباس: بل أقوم معكم قال: وهو
يومئذ صحيح قبل أن يعمى قال: فابتدؤا فتحدثوا فلا ندري ما قالوا قال: فجاء
ينفض ثوبه ويقول: أف وتف وقعوا في رجل له عشر وقعوا في رجل قال له النبي
صلى الله عليه وسلم: لأبعثن رجلا لا يخزيه الله أبدا يحب الله ورسوله قال:
فاستشرف لها من استشرف قال: أين علي قال: هو في الرحل يطحن قال: وما كان
أحدكم ليطحن قال: فجاءه وهو أرمد لا يكاد يبصر قال: فنفث في عينيه ثم هز
الراية ثلاثا فأعطاها اياه فجاء بصفية بنت حيي قال: ثم بعث فلانا بسورة
التوبة فبعث عليا خلفه فأخذها منه قال: لا يذهب بها إلا رجل مني وأنا منه
قال: وقال لبني عمه: أيكم يواليني في الدنيا والآخرة قال: وعلي معه جالس
فأبوا فقال علي: أنا أواليك في الدنيا والآخرة قال: إنت وليي في الدنيا
والآخرة قال: فتركه ثم أقبل على رجل منهم فقال: أيكم يواليني في الدنيا
والآخرة فأبوا قال: فقال علي: أنا أواليك في الدنيا والآخرة فقال: إنت وليي
في الدنيا والآخرة قال: وكان أول من أسلم من الناس بعد خديجة قال: وأخذ
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم ثوبه فوضعه على علي وفاطمة وحسن وحسين فقال:
إنما يريد الله ليذهب عنكم الرجس أهل البيت ويطهركم تطهيرا قال: وشرى علي
نفسه لبس ثوب النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم ثم نام مكانه قال: وكان المشركون
يرمون رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم فجاء أبو بكر وعلي نائم قال: وأبو بكر
يحسب أنه نبي الله قال: فقال: يا نبي الله قال: فقال له علي: إن نبي الله
صلى الله عليه وسلم قد انطلق نحو بئر ميمون فأدركه قال: فانطلق أبو بكر
فدخل معه الغار قال: وجعل علي يرمى بالحجارة كما كان يرمى نبي الله وهو
يتضور قد لف رأسه في الثوب لا يخرجه حتىأصبح ثم كشف عن رأسه فقالوا: إنك
للئيم كان صاحبك نراميه فلا يتضور وأنت تتضور وقد استنكرنا ذلك قال: وخرج
بالناس في غزوة تبوك قال: فقال له علي: أخرج معك قال: فقال له نبي الله: لا
فبكى علي فقال له: أما ترضى أن تكون مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنك لست
نبي إنه لا ينبغي أن أذهب إلا وأنت خليفتي قال: وقال له رسول الله: أنت
وليي في كل مؤمن بعدي وقال: سدوا أبواب المسجد غير باب علي فقال: فيدخل
المسجد جنبا وهو طريقه ليس له طريق غيره قال: وقال من كنت مولاه فإن مولاه
علي قال: وأخبرنا الله عز وجل في القرآن أنه قد رضي عنهم عن أصحاب الشجرة
فعلم ما في قلوبهم هل حدثنا أنه سخط عليهم بعد قال: وقال نبي الله صلى الله
عليه وسلم لعمر حين قال: ائذن لي فلأضرب عنقه قال: أوكنت فاعلا وما يدريك
لعل الله قد اطلع الى أهل بدر فقال: اعملوا ما شئتم.
</p>

عن علي أن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم قال: خلفتك أن تكون خليفتي، قلت:
أتخلف عنك يا رسول الله؟ قال: ألا ترضى أن تكون مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى
إلا أنه لا نبي بعدي. (طس) (أورده الهيثمي في مجمع الزوائد (9/110) وقال
رواه الطبراني في الكبير والأوسط وفي إسناد الكبير يحيى بن يعلى الأسلمي
وهو ضعيف.

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 13, \#36488 (افضائل علي
رضي الله عنه) The authenticity of this virtue has already been
researched. Please refer to the link for your own conviction.

Top Hadith al-Mazilah narrated at several other occasions Umm Salim was
one of the early converts of Islam. She was the mother of Anas ibn Malik
who started serving the prophet at the age of 10. She married Abu Talha
al-Ansari after requesting him to convert to Islam. The prophet used to
visit her and talk to her at her house. One day, during a lenghty
conversation with her, he said: "Ali's flesh is of mine, and his blood
is of my own; he is to me like Aaron to Moses." Please refer to the
narrations below.

<p dir="rtl">
يا أم سليم! إن عليا لحمه من لحمي ودمه من دمي وهو مني بمنزلة هارون من
موسى (عن ابن عباس)
</p>

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 11, \#32936 (الإكمال من
فضائل علي رضي الله عنه)

o Muntakhab al-Kanz

o Mu'ujam al-Tabrani al-Kabir, by Imam al-Tabarani (باب الظاء. أحاديث
عبد الله بن العباس بن عبد المطلب بن هاشم بن عبد مناف. سعيد بن جبير عن
ابن عباس)

The prophet also narrated this hadith during the first fraternity in
Mecca prior to the migration, when the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
consumated brotherhood among the emigrants and made Ali his brother.

Five months after the migration to Medina, the prophet made the second
fraternity between the Ansars (helpers of Medina) and the Muhajireen
(emigrants). He made Ali as his brother and said: "You are to me like
Aaron to Moses except there will be no Prophet after me."

Ali said: O Messenger of Allah! My soul has expired, and my spine has
been broken, having seen what you have done for your companions while
leaving me alone. If this is a sign of your anger with me, then I
complain only to you and beg your pardon.' The Messenger of Allah said:
I swear by the One Who sent me to convey the truth about Him, I have not
spared you except for my own self. You are to me like Aaron to Moses,
except there will be no Prophet after me. You are my Brother, heir and
companion.' Ali (as) asked him: What shall I inherit from you?' He
(pbuh) answered: Whatever Prophets before me left for those who
inherited them: the Book of their Lord, and the Sunnah of their
Prophet.

You will be my companion in my house in Paradise together with my
daughter Fatima. You are my Brother and Companion.' Then he, peace be
upon him and his progeny, recited the verse: They are brethren seated
conveniently facing each other' من مسند زيد بن أبي أوفى} لما آخى النبي
صلى الله عليه وسلم بين أصحابه،

<p dir="rtl">
قال علي: لقد ذهب روحي وانقطع ظهري حين رأيتك فعلت بأصحابك ما فعلت غيري
فإن كان هذا من سخط علي فلك العتبى والكرامة فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم: والذي بعثني بالحق ما أخرتك إلا لنفسي وأنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى
غير أنه لا نبي بعدي وأنت أخي ووارثي، قال: وما أرث منك يا رسول الله؟ قال:
ما ورثت الأنبياء من قبلي، قال: وما ورثت الأنبياء من قبلك؟ قال: كتاب ربهم
وسنة نبيهم، وأنت معي في قصري في الجنة مع فاطمة بنتي وأنت أخي ورفيقي. (حم
في كتاب مناقب علي، ابن عساكر).
</p>

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 9, \#25554, \#25555,
\#36345

o Manaqib Ali, by Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal

o Ibn Asakir in his Tarikh

o al-Baghwi and al-Tabrani in their Mujmas

o al-Barudi in his Al-Marifa

o Majmau'ul Zawa'id, by Hafidh al-Haythami, vol 9, \#14925 (37. كتاب
المناقب. 11. باب في فضل جماعة من الصحابة منهم أبو بكر وعمر وغيرهما رضي
الله عنهما. )

Ibn Abbas narrated: The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) said to Ali (as):
"Are you angry because I have established brotherhood between the Ansar
and the Muhajirun and have not selected a brother for you from among
them? Are you not pleased that your status to me is like that of Aaron
to Moses, except there will be no Prophet after me?"

<p dir="rtl">
قم فما صلحت أن تكون إلا أبا تراب، أغضبت علي حين وآخيت بين المهاجرين
والأنصار ولم أؤاخ بينك وبين أحد منهم؟ أما ترضى أن تكون مني بمنزلة هارون
من موسى إلا أنه ليس بعدي نبي، ألا من أحبك حف بالأمن والإيمان، ومن أبغضك
أماته الله ميتة الجاهلية وحوسب بعمله في الإسلام. (طب - عن ابن عباس)
</p>

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 9, \#32935 (الإكمال من
فضائل علي رضي الله عنه)

o Mu'ujam al-Tabrani al-Kabir, by Imam al-Tabarani (باب الظاء. أحاديث
عبد الله بن العباس بن عبد المطلب بن هاشم بن عبد مناف. مجاهد عن ابن
عباس)

o Majmau'ul Zawa'id, by Hafidh al-Haythami, vol 9, \#14655 (أبواب مناقب
علي بن أبي طالب رضي الله عنه. 6. بابان في منزلته. 2. باب منه في منزلته
ومؤاخاته)

In another incident, Abu Bakr, 'Umar and Abu Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah were
with the prophet who was leaning on Ali. The prophet patted Ali's
shoulder and said: "O Ali! You are the strongest among the believers in
faith, the first (man) to embrace Islam, and your status to me is
similar to that of Aaron to Moses."

(مسند عمر) عن ابن عباس قال: قال عمر بن الخطاب: كفوا عن ذكر علي بن أبي
طالب فإني سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم يقول: في علي ثلاث خصال لأن
يكون لي واحدة منهن أحب إلي مما طلعت عليه الشمس، كنت أنا وأبو بكر وأبو
عبيدة بن الجراح ونفر من أصحاب رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم والنبي صلى
الله عليه وسلم متكئ على علي بن أبي طالب حتى ضرب بيده على منكبه ثم قال:
أنت يا علي! أول المؤمنين إيمانا وأولهم إسلاما! ثم قال: أنت مني بمنزلة
هارون من موسى، وكذب علي من زعم أنه يحبني ويبغضك. الحسن بن بدر فيما رواه
الخلفاء والحاكم في الكنى والشيرازي في الألقاب وابن النجار. (طب - عن ابن
عباس) Reference: o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 13,
\#36392, \#36395 (افضائل علي رضي الله عنه)

o Also quoted by: al-Hasan ibn Badr, al-Hakim in his chapter on kunyat,
al-Shirazi in his chapter on surnames, volume six, and by Ibn al-Najjar
The same virtue narrated at another occasion.

<p dir="rtl">
يا عقيل! والله إني لأحبك لخصلتين: لقرابتك، ولحب أبي طالب إياك؛ وأما أنت
يا جعفر! فإن خلقك يشبه خلقي؛ وأما أنت يا علي فأنت مني بمنزلة هارون من
موسى غير أنه لا نبي بعدي. (ابن عساكر - عن عبد الله بن عقيل عن أبيه عن
جده عقيل بن أبي طالب
</p>

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 11, \#33616 (عقيل بن أبي
طالب (أخرجه الحاكم في المستدرك (3/576) وسكتا عن درجة الحديث. وعقيل بن
أبي طالب يكنى أبا يزيد أمه فاطمة بنت أسد وتوفي في خلافة معاوية. أسد
الغابة (4/66) ص) رضي الله عنه من الإكمال)

When the companions' doors overlooking the Prophet's mosque in Medina
were ordered to close except that of Ali Jabir ibn Abdullah quotes the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, saying: "O Ali!
It is permissible for you to do at this mosque whatever is permissible
for me, and you are to me like Aaron to Moses, except there will be no
Prophet after me."

Huthayfah ibn Asid al-Ghifari has said that the Prophet, peace be upon
him and his progeny, once delivered a khutba on the occasion of closing
those doors in which he said: "There are some men who have disliked that
I got them out of the mosque while keeping Ali. Allah, the Dear and
Mighty, inspired to Moses and his brother to reside with their people in
Egypt and make their homes a qibla and say their prayers," till he said:
"Ali to me is like Aaron to Moses. He is my Brother, and none of you is
allowed to cohabit therein other than he."

Reference:

o Not found yet... Top Ali and Aaron as two bright stars in the heart
of the skies This hadith has been narrated by the prophet in the
following occasions: The Occasion of Shabar, Shubayr, and Mushbir The
Occasion of Fraternity The Occasion of Closing the Doors It is a
well-known fact that the prophet requested Ali to name his sons just
like Harun did name his sons, that is Shabar for Hassan, Shubayr for
Hussein, and Mushbir for Muhsin. The narrations that validate this fact
are numerous and again, they emphasize the similarities between Ali and
Harun.

The Messenger of Allah said: "I named Hasan and Husain and Muhsin the
names of the sons of Aaron (Haroon) who were: Shubbar, Shubair, and
Mushbir."

References:

o Sunan Abu Dawud al-Tilyasi, v1, p232 (without mentioning Muhsin)

o Fadha'il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p774, Tradition \#1365

o al-Tabarani, v3, p100

o Idhaah, Abdul Ghani, from Salman al-Farsi

o al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 3,
p292

o Ibn Habban, as quoted in al-Mawarid, p551

o Mustadrak al-Hakim, v3,\#371/4773 (المجلد الثالث \>\> -31- كتاب معرفة
الصحابة رضي الله تعالى عنهم \>\> ومن مناقب: الحسن والحسين، ابني بنت رسول
الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلم-)

o Kanz al-U'ummal, y Muttaqi ak-Hindi v13,\#37679 (المجلد الثالث
عشر \>\> فضل الحسنين رضي الله عنهما)

o Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol 1 (ومن مسند علي بن أبي طالب رضي الله
عنه)

Read more...

Sad ibn Abu Waqqas, al-Bara' ibn Azib, Ibn Abbas, Ibn Umer, and
Huthayfah ibn al-Yemani, have all said: "The Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him and his progeny, came out to the mosque once and said: Allah
inspired to his Prophet Moses to build Him a pure mosque in which nobody
other than Moses and Aaron would live. Allah has inspired to me to build
a sanctified mosque wherein only I and my brother Ali are permitted to
sleep.'"

References:

o Ali ibn Muhammad al-Khatib, the Shafii faqih who is better known as
Ibn al-Maghazli, in his book Al-Manaqib from various sources, o
Researcher al-Balkhi, in Chapter 17 of his Yanabi al-Mawaddah


