Hadiths About Imam Ali (as) - His Virtues (part Vii)
====================================================

Content:

Ali and the Quran Ali in the Quran Ali and the Quran {الإكمال} من فضائل
علي رضي الله عنه ما أنزل الله تعالى آية {يا أيها الذين آمنوا} إلا وعلي
رأسها وأميرها ( حل - عن ابن عباس؛ وقال: لا نكتبه مرفوعا إلا من حديث ابن
أبي خيثمة والناس رووه موقوفا).

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 11, \#32920 (المجلد
الحادي عشر \>\> {الإكمال} من فضائل علي رضي الله عنه) Imam Abu Abdullah
Ahmed ibn Hanbal has said: "Nobody among the companions of the Messenger
of Allah (pbuh) has possessed as many virtues as Ali ibn Abu Talib
has."

Reference:

o Mustadrak al-Hakim Ibn Abbas (RA) said: There is no verse in Quran in
which the term Believers', unless Ali is at the top of them and the
chief of them and the more virtuous one among them. Surely Allah has
admonished the companions of Muhammad (PBUH) in Quran, but He did not
refer to Ali except with honor.

Reference:

o Fadha'il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p654, tradition \#1114

o al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, v3, p229

o Tarikh al-Khulafaa, by al-Hafidh Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, p171

o Dhakha'ir al-Uqba, by Muhibbuddin al-Tabari, p89

o al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 9, section 3,
p196

o Others such as Tabarani and Ibn Abi Hatam

Ibn Abbas said: There hath not been revealed in the Book of God
regarding any one what hath been revealed concerning Ali," and that
"three hundred verses have been revealed concerning Ali."

Reference:

o Ibn Asakir

o Tarikh al-Khulafaa, by al-Hafidh Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, p171

o al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 9, section 3,
p196

Top Ali in the Quran Here is a list of Quranic verses connected to Ali
ibn Abi Talib:

Sourat 3: aal-I'imran, Verse 59-61 (Revealed on Fatima, Ali, al-Hassan
and al-Hussein - al Mubahala)

Sourat 5: al-Ma'ida, Verse 55 (The wilayah of Ali - Ghadeer Khum)

Sourat 22: al-Hajj, Verse 19-24 (Hamza, Ali, 'Ubaida bin Al-Harith as
the men of faith)

Sourat 26: al-Shua'ara', Verse 214 (Succession of Ali)

Sourat 32: al-Sajdah, Verse 18-20 (Revealed on Walid ibn Uqbah and Imam
Ali)

Sourat 33: al-Ahzaab, Verse 33 (The purification of Ahlul Bayt)

Sourat 98: al-Bayyina (The evidence), Verse 7 (Revealed on Ali and his
followers)

The marriage of Fatimah al-Zahra to Ali ibn Abi Talib

Content:

Abu Bakr and Umar proposing to Fatimah A marriage ordained by Allah The
prophet Muhammad and Ali, the best of men as chosen by Allah Abu Bakr
and Umar proposing to Fatimah

<p dir="rtl">
عن علي قال: خطب أبو بكر وعمر فاطمة إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم
فأبى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم عليهما، فقال عمر: أنت لها يا علي! قال:
مالي من شيء إلا درعي وجملي وسيفي، فتعرض علي ذات يوم لرسول الله صلى الله
عليه وسلم فقال: يا علي! هل لك من شيء؟ قال: جملي ودرعي أرهنهما، فزوجني
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم فاطمة، فلما بلغ فاطمة ذلك بكت، فدخل عليها
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم فقال: ما لك تبكين يا فاطمة! والله أنكحتك
أكثرهم علما وأفضلهم حلما وأقدمهم سلما وفي لفظ: أولهم سلما. ابن جرير
وصححه والدولابي في الذرية الطاهرة.
</p>

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 13, \#36370 (المجلد
الثالث عشر \>\> فضائل علي رضي الله عنه) A marriage ordained by Allah إن
الله تعالى أمرني أن أزوج فاطمة من علي. التخريج (مفصلا): الطبراني في
الكبير عن ابن مسعود تصحيح السيوطي: حسن

References:

o al-Jami'i al-Sagheer, Jalaludin al-Suyuti, vol 2, \#1693 (المجلد
الثاني \>\> [تتمة باب حرف الألف]) o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, vol 11, \#32891 (المجلد الحادي عشر \>\> فضائل علي رضي الله
عنه) يا أنس! أتدري ما جاءني به جبريل من عند صاحب العرش؟ قال: إن الله
أمرني أن أزوج فاطمة من علي. (هق والخطيب وابن عساكر - عن أنس) قال: كنت
عند النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم فغشيه الوحي فلما سري عنه قال: فذكره.

References:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 11, \#32929 (المجلد
الحادي عشر \>\> {الإكمال} من فضائل علي رضي الله عنه) The prophet
Muhammad and Ali, the best of men as chosen by Allah

<p dir="rtl">
حدثنا أبو بكر بن أبي دارم الحافظ، حدثنا أبو بكر محمد بن أحمد بن سفيان
الترمذي، حدثنا سريج بن يونس، حدثنا أبو حفص الأبار، حدثنا الأعمش، عن أبي
صالح، عن أبي هريرة -رضي الله تعالى عنه- قال: قالت فاطمة -رضي الله تعالى
عنها-: يا رسول الله، زوجتني من علي بن أبي طالب، وهو فقير لا مال له.
فقال: (يا فاطمة، أما ترضين أن الله -عز وجل- اطلع إلى أهل الأرض، فاختار
رجلين، أحدهما أبوك، والآخر بعلك).
</p>

Reference:

o Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol 3, \#243/4645 (المجلد الثالث \>\> -31- كتاب
معرفة الصحابة رضي الله تعالى عنهم \>\> ذكر إسلام أمير المؤمنين: علي -رضي
الله تعالى عنه)

<p dir="rtl">
عن ابن عباس قال: لما زوج النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم فاطمة من علي قالت
فاطمة: يا رسول الله! زوجني من رجل فقير ليس له شيء فقال النبي صلى الله
عليه وسلم: أما ترضين أن الله اختار من أهل الأرض رجلين: أحدهما أبوك
والآخر زوجك. (خط) فيه وسنده حسن.
</p>

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 13, \#36355 (المجلد
الثالث عشر \>\> فضائل علي رضي الله عنه) The term Shia'a

The term Shia'a is not a political term. It has been mentioned in the
Quran as well as by the prophet Muhammad, believe it or not. Literally,
Shia'a means follower. Being the Shia'a of someone means being the
follower of someone. The prophet used the term Shia'a in connection to
Ali ibn Abu Talib. The shia'a of Ali means the followers of Ali.
Following Ali ibn Abu Talib is equivalent to and implies following the
prophet Muhammad because Ali is from the purified Ahlul Bayt, who are
the second weighty thing (besides the Quran) that every Muslim should
hold fast to. This refers to the authentic hadith of al-Thaqalayn.

The leaders (Imams) we follow could be either wrong-doers and they can
be righteous. The Quran mentions two kind of leaders: Those who will
misguide you and those who will guide you to the right path. For the
first type of leaders, Allah (SWT) says: Quran 28:41-42

And We made them Imams who call to the fire, and on the day of
resurrection they shall not be assisted. And We caused a curse to follow
them in this world, and on the day of resurrection they shall be of
those made to appear hideous.

<p dir="rtl">
وَجَعَل'نَاهُم' أَئِمَّةً يَد'عُونَ إِلَى النَّارِ وَيَو'مَ
ال'قِيَامَةِ لَا يُنصَرُونَ وَأَت'بَع'نَاهُم' فِي هَذِهِ الدُّن'يَا
لَع'نَةً وَيَو'مَ ال'قِيَامَةِ هُم مِّنَ ال'مَق'بُوحِينَ
</p>

For the righteous Imams, Allah (SWT) says: Quran 28:41-42

And We appointed, from among them, leaders, giving guidance under Our
command, so long as they persevered with patience and continued to have
faith in Our Signs. وَجَعَل'نَا مِن'هُم' أَئِمَّةً يَه'دُونَ بِأَم'رِنَا
لَمَّا صَبَرُوا وَكَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا يُوقِنُونَ

Each Muslim group has a leader. The twelvers Shia'a are the followers
(Shia'a) of Ahlul Bayt. The Sunnis have five leaders: Some are the
followers (or the Shia'a) of Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal (Hanbalis), some are
the followers of Imam Abu Hanifa (Hanafis), some are the followers of
Imam Malik ibn Anas al-Ashabi (Malikis), some are the followers of Imam
Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shafii (Shafiis), or some are the followers of
Muhammad Bin Abdul-Wahaab (Wahaabis). The Quran states that each group
will follow its Imam at the day of judgement:

Quran 17:72-72

One day We shall call together all human beings with their (respective)
Imams: those who are given their record in their right hand will read it
(with pleasure), and they will not be dealt with unjustly in the least.
But those who were blind in this world, will be blind in the hereafter,
and most astray from the Path.

<p dir="rtl">
يَو'مَ نَد'عُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِم' فَمَن' أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ
بِيَمِينِهِ فَأُو'لَـئِكَ يَق'رَؤُونَ كِتَابَهُم' وَلاَ يُظ'لَمُونَ
فَتِيلاً وَمَن كَانَ فِي هَـذِهِ أَع'مَى فَهُوَ فِي الآخِرَةِ أَع'مَى
وَأَضَلُّ سَبِيلاً
</p>

The prophet never told us to follow any of the five leaders mentioned
above. The only people the prophet told us to follow after him and to
adhere to strongly are his Ahlul Bayt (besides the Quran). Who is more
knowledgeable, pure, pious, fearful to Allah, honorable and patient than
the exceptional progeny of the prophet, except the prophet himself? No
one has all these virtues. Then how can Muslims follow someone with
lesser virtues!!! It is sufficient to say that simple reasoning will
make the open-minded person follow the most knowledgeable leader. And no
one can be more knowledgeable than the city of knowledge and its gate.

Content:

Shia'a as defined by some Sunni Scholars The term Shia'a in the Quran
The term Shia'a used by the prophet Shia'a as defined by some Sunni
Scholars وقد غلَب هذا الاسم على من يَتَوالى عَلِيّاً وأَهلَ بيته -رضوان
الله عليهم أَجمعين- حتى صار لهم اسماً خاصّاً فإِذا قيل: فلان من الشِّيعة
عُرِف أَنه منهم.

<p dir="rtl">
وفي مذهب الشيعة كذا أي: عندهم. وأَصل ذلك من المُشايَعةِ، وهي المُتابَعة
والمُطاوَعة. قال الأَزهري: والشِّيعةُ قوم يَه'وَو'نَ هَوى عِت'رةِ
النبي -صلى الله عليه وسلم- ويُوالونهم.
</p>

References: o Lisan al-A'arab, by ibn Manthur al-Ifriqi, vol 8 (كتاب
العين المهملة. فصل الشين المعجمة) o al-Nihayat Fi Gharib al-Hadith wal
Athar, by imam ibn Athir, vol 2 (حرف الشين. باب الشين مع الياء)

The term Shia'a in the Quran The term Shia'a has been used by the Quran
in relation to Noah and Moses: The Shia'a of Noah and the Shia'a of
Moses, and both refer to the followers of these prophets. It's quite
clear that Allah uses this term in His book without dividing religion.
Quran 37:79-83

"Peace and salutation to Noah among the nations!" Thus indeed do we
reward those who do right. For he was one of our believing Servants.
Then the rest we overwhelmed in the Flood. Verily among those who
followed his Way was Abraham.

<p dir="rtl">
سَلَامٌ عَلَى نُوحٍ فِي ال'عَالَمِينَ إِنَّا كَذَلِكَ نَج'زِي
ال'مُح'سِنِينَ إِنَّهُ مِن' عِبَادِنَا ال'مُؤ'مِنِينَ ثُمَّ أَغ'رَق'نَا
ال'آخَرِينَ وَإِنَّ مِن شِيعَتِهِ لَإِب'رَاهِيمَ
</p>

Quran 28:15

And he entered the city at a time when its people were not watching:
and he found there two men fighting,- one of his own religion, and the
other, of his foes. Now the man of his own religion appealed to him
against his foe, and Moses struck him with his fist and made an end of
him. He said: "This is a work of Evil (Satan): for he is an enemy that
manifestly misleads!"

<p dir="rtl">
وَدَخَلَ ال'مَدِينَةَ عَلَى حِينِ غَف'لَةٍ مِّن' أَه'لِهَا فَوَجَدَ
فِيهَا رَجُلَي'نِ يَق'تَتِلَانِ هَذَا مِن شِيعَتِهِ وَهَذَا مِن'
عَدُوِّهِ فَاس'تَغَاثَهُ الَّذِي مِن شِيعَتِهِ عَلَى الَّذِي مِن'
عَدُوِّهِ فَوَكَزَهُ مُوسَى فَقَضَى عَلَي'هِ قَالَ هَذَا مِن' عَمَلِ
الشَّي'طَانِ إِنَّهُ عَدُوٌّ مُّضِلٌّ مُّبِينٌ
</p>

The term Shia'a used by the prophet The messenger was the first person
to use the term Shia'a. He used it in reference to His cousin and
brother, Ali ibn Abu Talib.

The Messenger of Allah said to Ali: "Glad tiding O Ali! Verily you and
your companions and your Shia (followers) will be in Paradise." إخواناً
على سرر متقابلين، أنت معي وشيعتك في الجنة". ثم قرأ رسول الله صلى الله
عليه وسلم: "{إخواناً على سرر متقابلين} لا ينظر أحد في قفا صاحبه". رواه
الطبراني في الأوسط وفيه سلمى بن عقبة ولم أعرفه، وبقية رجاله ثقات.

References:

o Fadha'il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p655

o Hilyatul Awliyaa, by Abu Nu'aym, v4, p329

o Tarikh, by al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, v12, p289

o al-Awsat, by al-Tabarani

o al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami , Ch. 11, section 1,
p247

o Majmau'u al-Zawa'id, al-Hafidh al-Haythami, vol 9, \#15016 (كتاب
المناقب. 4. (أبواب) مناقب علي بن أبي طالب رضي الله عنه. 17. باب جامع في
مناقبه رضي الله عنه)

o Al-Khatib ul-Baghdadi in his Muwazzih Awham uj-Jam' wa at-Tafriq vol.
1 p.43

Jabir Ibn Abdillah al-Ansari narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(PBUH&HF) said: "The Shia of Ali are the real victorious in the day of
resurrection/rising"

References:

o al-Manaqib Ahmad, as mentioned in: Yanabi al-Mawaddah, by al-Qundoozi
al-Hanafi, p62 o Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Haffidh Jalaluddin
al-Suyuti, who quotes the tradition as follows: "We were with the Holy
Prophet when Ali came towards us. The Holy Prophet said: He and his Shia
will aquire salvation on the day of judgment." The Messenger of Allah
said: "O Ali! On the Day of Judgment I shall resort to Allah and you
will resort to me and your children will resort to you and the Shia will
resort to them. Then you will see where they carry us. (i.e. to
Paradise)" References: o Rabi al-Abrar, by al-Zamakhshari

The Messenger of Allah said: "O Ali! (On the day of Judgment) you and
your Shia will come toward Allah well-pleased and well-pleasing, and
there will come to Him your enemies angry and stiff-necked (i.e., their
head forced up).

References:

o al-Tabarani, on the authority of Imam Ali

o al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p236

Ibn Abbas (RA) narrated: When the verse "Those who believe and do
righteous deeds are the best of the creation [khayrul bariyyah] (Quran
98:7)" was revealed, the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) said to Ali: "They
are you and your Shia." He continued: "O Ali! (On the day of Judgment)
you and your Shia will come toward Allah well-pleased and well-pleasing,
and your enemies will come angry with their head forced up. Ali said:
"Who are my enemies?" The Prophet (PBUH&HF) replied: "He who
disassociates himself from you and curses you. And glad tiding to those
who reach first under the shadow of al-'Arsh on the day of
resurrection." Ali asked: "Who are they, O the Messenger of Allah?" He
replied: "Your Shia, O Ali, and those who love you."

References:

o al-Hafidh Jamaluddin al-Dharandi, on the authority of Ibn Abbas o
al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar, Ch. 11, section 1, pp 246-247
حدثنا ابن حميد، قال: ثنا عيسى بن فرقد، عن أبي الجارود، عن محمد بن علي
{أولئك هم خير البرية} فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: "أنت يا علي
وشيعتك"

References:

o Jami'i al-Bayan, Imam al-Tabari, Part 30, \#29208 (الجزء 30 \>\> سورة
البينة \>\> القول في تأويل قوله تعالى: {إن الذين كفروا من أهل الكتاب
والمشركين}) "O Ali, khayrrul bariyyah is your shi-ah (follower). I will
meet your shi-ahs on the cistern of kawthar when all the people will be
gathered together for the final reckoning. Your followers will be called
ghurral mahajjalin." وأخرج ابن عساكر عن جابر بن عبد الله قال كنا عند
النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم فأقبل علي فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: "والذي
نفسي بيده إن هذا وشيعته لهم الفائزون يوم القيامة، ونزلت {إن الذين آمنوا
وعملوا الصالحات أولئك هم خير البرية} " فكان أصحاب النبي صلى الله عليه
وسلم إذا أقبل علي قالوا: جاء خير البرية.

<p dir="rtl">
وأخرج ابن عدي وابن عساكر عن أبي سعيد مرفوعا: علي خير البرية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأخرج ابن عدي عن ابن عباس قال: لما نزلت {إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات
أولئك هم خير البرية} قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم لعلي: هو أنت
وشيعتك يوم القيامة راضين مرضيين". وأخرج ابن مردويه عن علي قال: قال لي
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: "ألم تسمع قول الله: {إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا
الصالحات أولئك هم خير البرية} أنت وشيعتك وموعدي وموعدكم الحوض إذا جئت
الأمم للحساب تدعون غرا محجلين".
</p>

References:

o Jalaludin al-Suyuti, vol 8 (المجلد الثامن \>\> 98 - سورة البينة مدنية
وآياتها ثمان) The Messenger of Allah said to Ali: "The first four
individuals who will enter the Paradise are me, you, al-Hasan, and
al-Husain, and our progeny will be behind us, and our wives will be
behind our progeny, and our Shia will be on our right side and in our
company." References: o al-Tabarani, as quoted in: al-Sawa'iq
al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami , Ch. 11, section 1, p246 o
al-Manaqib, by Ahmad

ad-Daylami recorded that the Prophet (s) said: "O Ali, you and your
Shia will come to me at the Pond in Paradise quenched with shining
faces, while your enemies will come to me thirsty and necks thrust
forth."

References:

o al-Manaawi in Kunuz ul-Haqaayiq p. 203 - Bolaq edition

o al-Qanduzi al-Hanafi in Yanaabi' ul Mawaddah p. 182, - Egyptian
edition

o Muhammad Saalih at-Tirmidhi in al-Manaaqib ul-Murtazawiyya p. 101, -
Bombay Edition Ibnul-Maghazili ash-Shafi'i has mentioned, in al-Manaqib
p. 293 tradition No. 335, that the judge Abu Ja'far Muhammad bin Isma'il
al-Alawi told them that Abu Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Muhammad bin
Ithman al-Muzani, who was called ibnus-Saqqa' told them that Abu
Abdullah Ahmad bin Ali al-Razi told them that Ali bin al-Hasan bin Ubayd
ar-Razi told them that Isma'il bin Ibban al-Azdi told them that he heard
a tradition narrated by Amr bin Hurayth, from Dawud bin Sulayk, from
Anas bin Malik that the Prophet (s) had said:

Seventy thousand from among my umma will enter Paradise without there
being any reckoning. Then he looked at Ali and said: They are from your
Shia and you are their Imam. References:

o al-Manaawi in Kunuz ul-Haqaayiq p. 203 - Bolaq edition
o al-Qanduzi al-Hanafi in Yanaabi' ul Mawaddah p. 182, - Egyptian
edition
o Muhammad Saalih at-Tirmidhi in al-Manaaqib ul-Murtazawiyya p. 101, -
Bombay Edition


