Why Is It Compulsory To Follow Ahlul Bayt (hadith Al-thaqalayn)?
================================================================

The prophet (saw) has left us two important things. If we adhere to
them, we will never go astray. Several authentic narrations comfirm that
the two weighty things left to us by the prophet are the Quran and His
progeny (ahlul bayt). However, the majority of the muslims believe that
the 2 weighty things are the Quran and the Sunnah of the prophet.

It is a proven fact that hadiths were written at the time of the
prophet. After His demise, the political regimes that followed on
gathered most (and not all) of the written sources of hadiths to burn
them. Moreover, the writing of hadiths were prohibitted. The only source
of preservation was through memory.

As time rolled on, this method of preservation proved to be ineffective
because it became difficult to keep track of all the hadiths since most
of companions who lived and heard the prophet passed away. Moreover, not
everyone remembered the exact wording of the hadiths and when they were
said. To make things worse, the corrupted political regimes (Banu Umayya
and Banu Abbas) paid citizen muslims to fabricate hadiths that will
support their doctrine and promote their Islamic school of thought.

It became difficult for most muslims to tell apart a false hadith from
a true one. Therefore, the tradition that says the two weighty things
are the Quran and the Sunnah of the prophet falls apart because of these
fabrications.

The only individuals who were able to authenticate any hadith were the
Ahlul Bayt. They were the true protectors and the most knowledgeable, in
particular Ali ibn Abu Talib who had in his possession a written
document of all the authentic hadiths of the prophet, called Sahifah
al-Jamiaa'. But the corrupted political regimes were abled to isolate
these highly virtuous and knowledgeable individuals from the society,
who were the only source of guidance after the prophet.

History has witnessed Ahlul Bayt undergoing extreme sufferings from
these political regimes because they (ahlul bayt) totally rejected their
unislamic doctrine and they were a threat to all the unjust leaders. All
muslims agree that Ahlul Bayt are as truthful as the Quran is and they
can never be separated from the Quran in this life. Unfortunately, we
dont see that in practice. The hadiths of the prophet are the key to the
interpretation of the Quran.

A unique interpretation of the Quran is necessary to make a united
Ummah. Not every transmitter of a hadith is a credible one. Using
fabricated hadiths to interprete the Quran will lead to false
interpretations. To avoid any deception, the prophet has ordered us to
follow both, the Quran and ahlul bayt.

The people the most fit to transmit the Sunnah of the prophet are His
progeny because of their exceptional virtues. They have been purified by
Allah a perfect purification, which means they don't make mistakes, they
don't alter the narrations, they don't lie. Moreover, they have
inherited the knowledge of the prophet. Is not the prophet the city of
knowledge and Ali its gate? Others however, may transmit narrations with
unintentional alterations or errors because they can make mistakes and
they forget. It is just logical to take narrations that are transmitted
from reliable sources that are endowed with special virtues and have a
special place with regards to Allah.

Bottom line is that hadith al-thaqalayn proves that it is compulsory
for us to follow ahlul bayt alongside with the Quran in order not to go
astray. The Banu Umayyah and Banu Abbas have spent centuries fighting
and demeaning ahlul bayt, in order to deprive the masses of muslims from
their guidance. By isolating ahlul bayt from the society, the oppressors
were capable of exercising their tyranny over the muslims. They were
able to fabricate hadiths and twist the meanings of the Quran to fit
their doctrine.

That is exactly why the Islamic world is submerged with tragedies and
disasters. That is exactly why we have several sects that have
considerable differences. Today's islamic leadership is an exact copy of
the Banu Umayyah and Banu Abbas leadership. A leadership that fully
contradicts the teachings of the Quran.

Content:

Hadith al-Thaqalayn Hadiths conflicting hadith al-Thaqalayn Is it the
Quran and my progeny or the Quran and my Sunnah? External Links:

More on hadith al-Thaqalayn Hadith al-Thaqalayn

Yazid b. Hayyan reported, I went along with Husain b. Sabra and 'Umar
b. Muslim to Zaid b. Arqam and, as we sat by his side, Husain said to
him: Zaid. you have been able to acquire a great virtue that you saw
Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) listened to his talk, fought
by his side in (different) battles, offered prayer behind me. Zaid, you
have in fact earned a great virtue.

Zaid, narrate to us what you heard from Allah's Messenger (may peace be
upon him). He said: I have grown old and have almost spent my age and I
have forgotten some of the things which I remembered in connection with
Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him), so accept whatever I narrate
to you, and which I do not narrate do not compel me to do that. He then
said: One day Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) stood up to
deliver sermon at a watering place known as Khumm situated between Mecca
and Medina. He praised Allah, extolled Him and delivered the sermon and
exhorted (us) and said: Now to our purpose. O people, I am a human
being.

I am about to receive a messenger (the angel of death) from my Lord and
I, in response to Allah's call, (would bid good-bye to you), but I am
leaving among you two weighty things: the one being the Book of Allah in
which there is right guidance and light, so hold fast to the Book of
Allah and adhere to it. He exhorted (us) (to hold fast) to the Book of
Allah and then said: The second are the members of my household I remind
you (of your duties) to the members of my family. He (Husain) said to
Zaid: Who are the members of his household? Aren't his wives the members
of his family? Thereupon he said: His wives are the members of his
family (but here) the members of his family are those for whom
acceptance of Zakat is forbidden. And he said: Who are they? Thereupon
he said: 'Ali and the offspring of 'Ali, 'Aqil and the offspring of
'Aqil and the offspring of Ja'far and the offspring of 'Abbas. Husain
said: These are those for whom the acceptance of Zakat is forbidden.
Zaid said: Yes.

Yazid b. Hayyan reported: We went to him (Zaid b. Arqam) and said to
him. You have found goodness (for you had the honour) to live in the
company of Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) and offered prayer
behind him, and the rest of the hadith is the same but with this
variation of wording that he said: Behold, for I am leaving amongst you
two weighty things, one of which is the Book of Allah, the Exalted and
Glorious, and that is the rope of Allah.

He who holds it fast would be on right guidance and he who abandons it
would be in error, and in this (hadith) these words are also found: We
said: Who are amongst the members of the household? Aren't the wives (of
the Holy Prophet) included amongst the members of his house hold?
Thereupon he said: No, by Allah, a woman lives with a man (as his wife)
for a certain period; he then divorces her and she goes back to her
parents and to her people; the members of his household include his
ownself and his kith and kin (who are related to him by blood) and for
him the acceptance of Zakat is prohibited.

Reference:

o Sahih Muslim, Book 031, Number 5920, 5923 - Kitab Al-Fada'il
Al-Sahabah; Page 941, Number 2408-36 (Arabic version)

o Musnad ibn Hanbal, v4,p366 [Entire book:(p1409,\#19479)] - It is
narrated that the prophet repeated the sentence "I remind you in the
name of Allah about my Ahlul-Bayt" three times.

The messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) said: "I am leaving for you two
precious and weighty Symbols that if you adhere to BOTH of them you
shall not go astray after me. They are, the Book of Allah, and my
progeny, that is my Ahlul-Bayt. The Merciful has informed me that These
two shall not separate from each other till they come to me by the Pool
(of Paradise)."

<p dir="rtl">
حَدَّثَنَا أَس'وَدُ ب'نُ عَامِرٍ أَخ'بَرَنَا أَبُو إِس'رَائِيلَ يَع'نِي
إِس'مَاعِيلَ ب'نَ أَبِي إِس'حَاقَ ال'مُلَائِيَّ عَن' عَطِيَّةَ عَن'
أَبِي سَعِيدٍ قَالَ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَي'هِ
وَسَلَّمَ إِنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُم' الثَّقَلَي'نِ أَحَدُهُمَا أَك'بَرُ مِن'
ال'آخَرِ كِتَابُ اللَّهِ حَب'لٌ مَم'دُودٌ مِن' السَّمَاءِ إِلَى
ال'أَر'ضِ وَعِت'رَتِي أَه'لُ بَي'تِي وَإِنَّهُمَا لَن' يَف'تَرِقَا
حَتَّى يَرِدَا عَلَيَّ ال'حَو'ضَ
</p>

Reference:

o Musnad ibn Hanbal, v3,p14 [Entire book:(p785,\#11120)]; v3,p17
[Entire book:(p787,\#11148)]; v3,p27 [Entire book:(p794,\#11229)];
v3,p59 [Entire book:(p817,\#11582)]; v5,p181 [Entire
book:(p1591,\#21911)]; v5,p189 [Entire book:(p1597,\#21993)];

o Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, pp 662-663,328, report of 30+ companions, with
reference to several chains of transmitters.

o al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, Chapter of "Understanding the virtues of
Companions, v3, pp 109,110,148,533 who wrote this tradition is authentic
(Sahih) based on the criteria of the two Shaikhs (al-Bukhari and
Muslim).

o Sunan, by Daarami, v2, p432

o Fadha'il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p585, Tradition \#990

o al-Khasa'is, by al-Nisa'i, pp 21,30

o al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami, Ch. 11, section 1,
p230

o al-Kabir, by al-Tabarani, v3, pp 62-63,137

o History of Ibn Asakir, v5, p436

o al-Durr al-Manthoor, al-Hafidh al-Suyuti, v2, p60

o Tafsir Ibn Kathir (complete version), v4, p113, under commentary of
verse 42:23 of Quran (four traditions)

o Usdul Ghabah fi Ma'rifat al-Sahaba, Ibn al-Athir, v2, p12

<p dir="rtl">
إني تارك فيكم ما إن تمسكتم به لن تضلوا بعدي أحدهما أعظم من الآخر كتاب
الله حبل ممدود من السماء إلى الأرض وعترتي أهل بيتي ولن يتفرقا حتى يردا
علي الحوض فانظروا كيف تخلفوني فيهما. (ت عن زيد بن أرقم).
</p>

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi:
v1,\#873,\#946,\#950,\#952,\#953 (المجلد الأول \>\> الباب الثاني في
الاعتصام بالكتاب والسنة);

o al-Jaami'i al-Sagheer, by Jalaludin al-Suyuti: v3,\#2631 (المجلد
الثالث \>\> [تتمة باب حرف الألف]);

o Ziyadat al-Jaami'i al-Sagheer, by Jalaludin al-Suyuti: \#1773 (كتاب
"زيادة الجامع الصغير"، للسيوطي \>\> حرف الهمزة);

<p dir="rtl">
إني لا أجد لنبي إلا نصف عمر الذي كان قبله وإني أوشك أن أدعى فأجيب فما
أنتم قائلون قالوا نصحت قال أليس تشهدون أن لا إله إلا الله وأن محمدا عبده
ورسوله وأن الجنة حق وأن النار حق وأن البعث بعد الموت حق قالوا نشهد قال
وأنا أشهد معكم ألا هل تسمعون فإني فرطكم على الحوض وأنتم واردون الحوض وإن
عرضه أبعد ما بين صنعاء وبصرى فيه أقداح عدد النجوم من فضة فانظروا كيف
تخلفوني في الثقلين قالوا وما الثقلان يا رسول الله قال كتاب الله طرفه بيد
الله وطرفه بأيديكم فاستمسكوا به ولا تضلوا والآخر عترتي وأن اللطيف الخبير
نبأني أنهما لن يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض فسألت ذلك لهما ربي فلا تقدموهما
فتهلكوا ولا تقصروا عنهما. فتهلكوا ولا تعلوهم فإنهم أعلم منكم من كنت أولى
به من نفسه فعلي وليه اللهم وال من والاه وعاد من عاداه. (طب عن أبي الطفيل
عن زيد بن أرقم).
</p>

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi: v1,\#957 (المجلد الأول \>\>
الباب الثاني في الاعتصام بالكتاب والسنة);

<p dir="rtl">
يا أيها الناس إني قد نبأني اللطيف الخبير إنه لن يعمر نبي إلا نصف عمر
الذي يليه من قبله وإني قد يوشك أن أدعى فأجيب وإني مسؤول وإنكم مسؤولون
فما أنتم قائلون قالوا نشهد أنك قد بلغت ورسوله وأن جنته حق وناره حق وأن
الموت حق وأن البعث حق بعد الموت وأن الساعة آتية لا ريب فيها وأن الله
يبعث من في القبور يا أيها الناس إن الله مولاي وأنا مولى المؤمنين أولى
بهم من أنفسهم فمن كنت مولاه فهذا مولاه يعني عليا اللهم وال من والاه وعاد
من عاداه يا أيها الناس إني فرطكم وإنكم واردون علي الحوض أعرض ما بين بصرى
إلى صنعاء فيه عدد النجوم قدحان من فضة وإني سائلكم حين تردون علي عن
الثقلين فانظروا كيف تخلفوني فيهما الثقل الأكبر كتاب الله عز وجل سبب طرفه
بيد الله وطرفه بأيديكم فاستمسكوا به لا تضلوا ولا تبدلوا وعترتي أهل بيتي
فإنه قد نبأني اللطيف الخبير أنهما لن ينقضيا حتى يردا علي الحوض. (الحكيم
طب عن أبي الطفيل عن حذيفة بن أسيد).
</p>

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi: v1,\#958 (المجلد الأول \>\>
الباب الثاني في الاعتصام بالكتاب والسنة); Note the last sentence "These
two shall not separate from each other till they come to me by the Pool
(of Paradise)". This shows the great importance of ahlul bayt with
regards to guidance and truth. They should never be separated from the
Quran.

<p dir="rtl">
حدثنا أبو الحسين محمد بن أحمد بن تميم الحنظلي ببغداد، حدثنا أبو قلابة
عبد الملك بن محمد الرقاشي، حدثنا يحيى بن حماد، وحدثني أبو بكر محمد بن
بالويه وأبو بكر أحمد بن جعفر البزار قالا: حدثنا عبد الله بن أحمد بن
حنبل، حدثني أبي، حدثنا يحيى بن حماد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وثنا أبو نصر أحمد بن سهل الفقيه ببخارى، حدثنا صالح بن محمد الحافظ
البغدادي، حدثنا خلف بن سالم المخرمي، حدثنا يحيى بن حماد، حدثنا أبو
عوانة، عن سليمان الأعمش قال: حدثنا حبيب بن أبي ثابت، عن أبي الطفيل، عن
زيد بن أرقم -رضي الله تعالى عنه- قال:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لما رجع رسول الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلَّم- من حجة الوداع، ونزل غدير خم،
أمر بدوحات، فقمن، فقال: (كأني قد دعيت فأجبت، إني قد تركت فيكم الثقلين،
أحدهما أكبر من الآخر، كتاب الله تعالى، وعترتي، فانظروا كيف تخلفوني
فيهما، فإنهما لن يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض.
</p>

ثم قال: (إن الله -عز وجل- مولاي، وأنا مولى كل مؤمن). ثم أخذ بيد
علي -رضي الله تعالى عنه- فقال: (من كنت مولاه، فهذا وليه، اللهم وال من
والاه، وعاد من عاداه). وذكر الحديث بطوله. هذا حديث صحيح على شرط الشيخين،
ولم يخرجاه بطوله. شاهده حديث سلمة بن كهيل، عن أبي الطفيل، أيضا صحيح على
شرطهما. (ج/ص: 2/ 132) References: o Mustadrak, al Hakim, vol 3,
\#174/4576 (المجلد الثالث \>\> -31- كتاب معرفة الصحابة رضي الله تعالى
عنهم \>\> ومن مناقب أمير المؤمنين: علي بن أبي طالب -رضي الله تعالى عنه-
مما لم يخرجاه)

<p dir="rtl">
حدثنا أبو بكر محمد بن الحسين بن مصلح الفقيه بالري، حدثنا محمد بن أيوب،
حدثنا يحيى بن المغيرة السعدي، حدثنا جرير بن عبد الحميد، عن الحسن بن عبد
الله النخعي، عن مسلم بن صبيح، عن زيد بن أرقم -رضي الله تعالى عنه- قال:
قال رسول الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلَّم-: (إني تارك فيكم الثقلين كتاب الله
وأهل بيتي، وإنهما لن يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض).
</p>

هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد على شرط الشيخين، ولم يخرجاه. (ج/ص: 3/161)

References:

o Mustadrak, al Hakim, vol 3, \#309/4711 (المجلد الثالث \>\> -31- كتاب
معرفة الصحابة رضي الله تعالى عنهم \>\> ومن مناقب أهل رسول الله -صلَّى
الله عليه وسلم-)

Consider the tradition that says the 2 weighty things are the Quran and
the Sunnah. Which version of the sunnah do we follow? The Hanbalis? The
Hanafis? The Shafiis? Or the Malikis? Or the Twelvers? Aren't these 5
different islamic school of thoughts? One of each being the fundamentals
of religion education of a specific muslim country? The emergence of
these 5 schools of thoughts have resulted in the divergence of the
interpretation of the Quran among them.

Don't you think the prophet knew this would have happened? That some
corrupted people would fabricate new haddiths and alter existing ones
for political and other reasons. Don't you think he knew that future
generations will rely on fabricated hadiths to explain the Quran. The
more the school of thoughts are in desagreement with each others, the
more confused we become, and the further away from the truth we are.
This is just common sense. The sole fact that there are many schools of
thoughts is an indication that all 5 differ in their jurisprudence.
Otherwise, what is the point of their existence?

So which Sunnah do we follow? The answer is in Sahih Muslim and many
other reliable shia and sunni references: The sunnah of the Prophet as
carried and transmitted by Ahlul Bayt. The prophet did not order us to
follow Ahmad ibn Hanbal, or Hanafi or Malik ibn Anas or Muhammad ibn
Idris al-Shafii. He simply ordered us to adhere to the members of Ahlul
Bayt because they are the protectors of the hadiths and the correct
interpreters of the Quran and the authentic transmitters of the
teachings of the prophet. If muslims had followed hadith al-thaqalayn,
then there would have been only one school of thought: that of the
prophet and the Islamic nation would have been united under one
jurisprudence.

If each school of thought says they are right about everything, then
why are they different? How do you learn about the Sunnah of the prophet
when you have several versions and interpretations? How do you learn
about islam? The Quran by itself is not enough, we need a genuine sunnah
to interprete its content. We need reliable sources. Think it through.
Use common sense.

Hadiths conflicting hadith al-Thaqalayn There are several hadiths that
appear to be contradicting hadith al-Thaqalayn. Could the prophet
contradict himself? Certainly not! All of these conflicting hadiths
share one thing in common: They are not found in the reliable hadiths
sources of the Twelvers Shiah. In fact, the Twelvers Shiah do not
consider them as authentic. They are only found in the Sunnis books.

Adhere to my sunnah and the sunnah of the rightly-guided successors
after me. Hold on to it and cling on to it stubbornly.

Hadith al-thaqalayn is known to have been narrated by more than 30
companions of the prophet and is proven to be authentic by the Sunnis
and Shiah school of thoughts. This means that any conflicting narration
to hadith al-thaqalayn is likely to be a fabrication. According to the
Sunnis, the rightly guided caliphs are Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali,
which is not the case for the Twelvers Shiah.

It has already been proven that the first three caliphs have introduced
innovations to Islam during their leaderships. How could the prophet
tell us to follow his progeny and at the same time follow the "rightly
guided" caliphs, three of which have not only alter the rulings of
Islam, but have also fought Ahlul Bayt. Besides, what purpose does the
Sunnah of the prophet serve if we have to follow the Sunnah of the
"rightly guided" caliphs?!? Wasn't the purpose of the prophet to fight
those who contradict the teachings of Allah?

The only Sunnah to follow is that of the prophet and no one else!
Accepting this hadith is insulting to the purpose and special virtues of
the prophet. He was sent to guide all of us. We therefore follow his
teachings and guidance.

Take part of your religion from this Humayra' (i.e. A'ishah).

The above narration is another contradiction to the hadith of
al-thaqalayn. How can you take part of Islam from Aisha who was
disrespectful to the prophet in many instances. She conspired with the
other wives against Him. She fought Ali, the beloved brother of the
prophet, causing the death of thousands of Muslims. She disobeyed Allah
by leaving her house to wage a war against Ali. She became violent
because of her excessive jealousy. She spread her legs in front of the
prophet while he was praying. She mistrusted Him. She confirms that the
prayer of the traveler is 2 rakaa's, yet prays 4 rakaa's so as to please
Uthaman ibn Affan.

She spoke ill and with disrespect (in front of the prophet) of our
beloved mother, Khadija (the first wife of the prophet) who the angel
Gabriel gave glad tidings and whom Allah has built a castlle for in
paradise. She hated Ali, the beloved cousin and brother of the prophet,
about whom He said: "O 'Ali! none but a true believer loves you, and
none but a hypocrite hates you". How can you take part of Islam from
her? Is such an examplar for women to follow? Is it possible for the
prophet to tell us to learn Islam her? Read more about Aisha, the second
wife of the prophet Muhammad, and you will soon realize whether you can
really learn about half of Islam from her! Many reliable Sunnis scholars
have rejected this hadith and treated it as a fabrication. Among them,
there are:

Reference: (taken from al-shia.com)

o alMizzi and alDhahabi as mentioned in alTaqrir wa al-tahbir fi sharh
alTahrir, iii 99

o Ibn Qayyim alJawziyyah, who has considered all traditions with the
words "ya Humayra" and "al-Humayrah" as fabrications

o Ibn Kathir as quoted in alDurar almuntashirah fi al-'ahadith
almushtahirah, 79

o Ibn Hajar alAsqalani as quoted in al-Taqrir wa altahbir, iii, 99

o Ibn alMulaqqin, alSubki, Ibn Amir al-Hajj, alSakhawi, alSuyuti,
alShaybani, alShaykh Ali alQari, al-Zarqani, Abd alAli alShawkani and
others Follow those who will come after me, Abu Bakr and Umar.

Ibrahim ibn Ismail, Ismail ibn Yahya, Yahya ibn Salamah ibn Kuhayl and
Abu alZara' are the transmittters of this hadith. They have been
considered as unreliable transmitters by Abu Zurah, Abu Hatim, Ibn
Numayr, alDarqutni, alBukhari, alNasa'i, Ibn Muin, Ibn Hibban,
al-Tirmidhi and others. Read the comments made after the next hadith to
understand why the above hadith cannot have been narrated by the
prophet. Verily, my Companions are like the stars (nujum) in the sky;
whichever of them you follow, you shall be guided rightly. The
disagreement of my Companions is a blessing for you.

The prophet spent his life establishing the rulings of Islam as well as
fighting those who were hostile to them. Allah does not allow an unjust
person to rule His nation, Allah does not allow an individual to
introduce innovations to His religion. Abu Bakr and Umar, as well as the
third caliph, Uthman, have done a lot of things that are unacceptable to
the religion that the prophet dedicated His life to. Today, all muslims
are affected by these changes which have created tensions among the
different sects of Islam for holding on to different beliefs.

Haven't many of the companions turned their backs to religion? Haven't
they become infidels after cutting the throats of one another in the
battles of Siffin and the Camel? Haven't they fought each others for the
pleasures of this world? Haven't they introduced innovations to the
religion? Then how can we be guided by anyone of them after all their
unislamic deeds? Is not their behavior a sign of misguidance? The
companions desagreed among themselves on religious rulings (Umar was
ignorant of the concept of Tayammum, others rejected the concept of
temporary marriage (hadith of sahih Muslim \#3261) as well as political
positions. How many of them joined Muawiyah or the mother of the
believers, Aisha to fight Ali ibn Abi Talib? I dont see how the
desagreement among them is a blessing for us! In fact, this desagreement
is what has mutilated Islam and its followers. If they were to follow
the hadith of al-thaqalayn (starting with Umar who said the Quran was
sufficient for us - see the calamity of thursday), we would have been in
a better condition!

The last hadith has 2 problems. First, not all companions were
righteous. If we were indeed asked to follow them, only the righteous
ones ought to be followed. Fortunately, the fabricators of this hadith
were not smart enough to distinguish between the good and the bad
companions. Second, the companions are not to be followed. Their duties
were to help spread Islam, teach and implement its rules and set
themselves as examples to the community. They themselves needed
guidance! We ought to follow those to whom guidance was given to, that
is the prophet Muhammad and His pure progeny, who should never be
separated from the Quran.

Moreover, a long list of Ulamas have declared this hadith as a mere
fabrication to bring a strong support the companions and isolate the
progeny of Ahlul bayt from the society.

Is it the Quran and my progeny or the Quran and my Sunnah? The muslim
Ulamas have proven the strong authenticity of the hadith of al-thaqalayn
that orders us to follow the Quran and the progeny of the prophet.
Knowing the virtuous of the members of Ahlul Bayt, there is no doubt
that Allah has endowed them with the knowledge to explain the Quran and
guide the muslims. The tradition has been accepted as authentic by
Muslim, al-Tirmidhi, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, as well as the Twelvers Shiaa
scholars.

As far as the second version that states "the Quran and my Sunnah", the
chain of narrators have been proven to be a weak source by many reliable
Sunnis scholars. Two members of the chain of narrators are Ismael bin
Owais from Abi Owais and are both considered unreliable narrators.
Another chain of transmission is: Al-Zabee from Saleh bin Musa Al- talhe
from Abdul-Aziz bin Rafia from Abi Saleh from Abu Huraira. Saleh bin
Musa is also considered a weak source of hadith by many scholars.

A third chain of transmission is:Abdul-Rahman bin yahya from Ahmad bin
Saeed from Muhammed bin Ebrahim Al-Dbaili from Ali bin Zaid Al-fraedi
from Al-hurairi from Katheer bin Abdulla bin Omar bin Auf from his
father and from his grandfather. Imam Shafii and Abu Dawood (the author
of Sunan of Abu Dawood, d.276 A.H.) consider Katheer bin Abdulla a liar.
Moreover, Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal said about Katheer bin Abdulla: "His
traditions are rejected and he is not reliable".

Moreover, "the Quran and my Sunnah" version of the hadith is not
mentioned in Sahih Muslim or Sunan al-Tirmidhi.


