How To Send Greetings To Prophet Muhammad (s)?
==============================================

Quran 33:56

Allah and His angels send blessings on the Prophet: O ye that believe!
Send ye blessings on him, and salute him with all respect. It is clear
that Allah has commanded us to send our blessings on the prophet and to
salute him with all respect. Don't we all send our blessings to the
prophet and His household during our daily prayers? Is this not an
indication of how important the ahlul bayt are? Does it not mean that
Allah has His mercy and love on Ahlul Bayt?

Content:

What to say when the name prophet is mentioned?

How to send our blessings to the prophet Muhammad?

Do not send an amputed prayer A supplication does not reach the heavens
unless you send your blessings to the prophet What to say when the name
prophet is mentioned? When the Shia'a mention the name of the prophet,
they say salallah a'alayhi wa aalihi wa salam. The sunnis however, say
salallah a'alayhi wa salam. This, unfortunately can inform you if the
Muslim you are speaking with is a Sunni or a Shia'a. I don't understand
where the difference comes from. Although, many Sunni sources contain
the phrase salallah a'alayhi wa aalihi wa salam. ...صلى الله عليه و آله
وسلم...

Reference:

o al-Jami'i al-Sagheer, by Jalaludin al-Suyuti, vol 2, \#1450 (تتمة باب
حرف الألف); vol 4, \#4849, \#4899, \#5055, 5219

o Mu'ujam al-Tabarani al-Kabeer, by Imam al-Tabarani (باب الظاء. عبد
الله بن مسعود الهذلي)

o Mustadrak al-Hakim, by Muhammad ibn Abdullah al-Hakim al-Nisaboori

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi

o Sahih al-Bukhari and Muslim and many others...

How to send our blessings to the prophet Muhammad?

<p dir="rtl">
عن علي قال قلت وفي لفظ قالوا: يا رسول الله كيف نصلي عليك؟ قال: قولوا
اللهم صل على محمد وعلى آل محمد، كما صليت على إبراهيم وعلى آل إبراهيم إنك
حميد مجيد، وبارك على محمد وعلى آل محمد، كما باركت على إبراهيم وعلى آل
إبراهيم إنك حميد مجيد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
(ابن مردويه خط)
</p>

Reference:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, \#3993 (narrated by Ali),
\#3994 (by Talha) (باب في الصلاة عليه صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم) o Kanz
al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, \#4006, \#4013 (by ibn Masu'ud),
\#4014 (by Aisha) (باب في الصلاة عليه صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم) Abdullah
b. Zaid-he who was shown the call (for prayer in a dream) narrated it on
the authority of Mas'ad al-Ansiri who said: We were sitting in the
company of Sa'id b. 'Ubida when the Messenger of Allah (may peace be
upon him) came to us. Bashir b. S'ad said: Allah has commanded us to
bless you. Messenger of Allah! But how should we bless you? He (the
narrator) said: The Messenger of Allah (may peace be upon him) kept
quiet (and we were so much perturbed over his silence) that we wished we
had not asked him. The Messenger of Allah (may peace be upon him) then
said: (For blessing me) say:" 0 Allah, bless Muhammad and the members of
his household as Thou didst bless the members of Ibrahim's household.
Grant favours to Muhammad and the members of his household as Thou didst
grant favours to the members of the household of Ibrahim in the world.
Thou art indeed Praiseworthy and Glorious" ; and salutation as you
know.

Reference:

o Sahih Muslim, Book 004, Number 0803 - Book of Prayers - (English
version)

o Sahih Muslim, Page 159, Number 405-65, Book: Al-Salat - (Arabic
version)

Ibn Abi Laila reported: Ka'b b. 'Ujra met me and said: Should I not
offer you a present (and added): The Messenger of Allah (may peace be
upon him) came to us and we said: We have learnt how to invoke peace
upon you; (kindly tell us) how we should bless you. He (the Holy
Prophet) said: Say: "O Allah: bless Muhammad and his family as Thou
didst bless the family of Ibrahim. Verily Thou art Praiseworthy and
Glorious, O Allah." Reference: o Sahih Muslim, Book 004, Number 0804 -
Book of Prayers - (English version)

o Sahih Muslim, Page 159, Number 405-66, Book: Al-Salat - (Arabic
version) Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Laila: Ka'b bin Ujrah met me and
said, "Shall I not give you a present I got from the Prophet?"
'Abdur-Rahman said, "Yes, give it to me." I said, "We asked Allah's
Apostle saying, 'O Allah's Apostle! How should one (ask Allah to) send
blessings on you, the members of the family, for Allah has taught us how
to salute you (in the prayer)?' He said, 'Say: O Allah! Send Your Mercy
on Muhammad and on the family of Muhammad, as You sent Your Mercy on
Abraham and on the family of Abraham, for You are the Most
Praise-worthy, the Most Glorious. O Allah! Send Your Blessings on
Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, as You sent your Blessings on
Abraham and on the family of Abraham, for You are the Most
Praise-worthy, the Most Glorious.'"

Reference:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 4, Book 55, Number 589 - Book of The Prophets -
(English version)

o Sahih Bukhari, Page 711, Number 3370, Book: al-Anbiya' - (Arabic
version)

Narrated Ka'b bin Ujra: It was said, "O Allah's Apostle! We know how to
greet you, but how to invoke Allah for you?" The Prophet said, "Say:

Allahumma salli ala Muhammadin wa'ala Alli Muhammaddin, kama sallaita
'ala alli Ibrahim, innaka Hamidun Majid." Reference:


o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 6, Book 60, Number 320 - Book of al-Tafseer -
(English version)

o Sahih Bukhari, Page 1035, Number 4797, Book: Tafseer of The Prophet -
(Arabic version)

Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: We said, "O Allah's Apostle! (We know)
this greeting (to you) but how shall we invoke Allah for you?" He said,
"Say! Allahumma salli ala Muhammadin 'Abdika wa rasulika kama- sallaita
'ala alli Ibrahim wa barik ala Muhammadin wa'ala alli Muhammadin kama
barakta 'ala alli Ibrahim.' Al-Laith said: 'Ala Muhammadin wa 'ala alli
Muhammadin kama barakta ala alli Ibrahim.

Reference:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 6, Book 60, Number 321 - Book of al-Tafseer -
(English version)

o Sahih Bukhari, Page 1035, Number 4798, Book: Tafseer of The Prophet -
(Arabic version)

Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Laila: Ka'b bin 'Ujra met me and said,
"Shall I give you a present? Once the Prophet came to us and we said, 'O
Allah's Apostle ! We know how to greet you; but how to send 'Salat' upon
you? He said, 'Say: Allahumma Salli ala Muhammadin wa 'ala Alli
Muhammadin, kama sal-laita 'ala alli Ibrahima innaka Hamidun Majid.
Allahumma barik 'ala Muhammadin wa 'ala alli Muhammadin, kama barakta
'ala alli Ibrahima, innaka Hamidun Majid."

Reference:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 8, Book 75, Number 368 - Invocations - (English
version)

o Sahih Bukhari, Page 1355, Number 6357, Book: al-Daa'wat - (Arabic
version)

Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri: We said, "O Allah's Apostle This is (i.e.
we know) the greeting to you; will you tell us how to send Salat on
you?" He said, "Say: 'Allahumma Salli 'ala Muhammadin 'abdika wa
rasulika kama sal-laita 'ala Ibrahima wa barik 'ala Muhammadin wa alli
Muhammadin kama barakta 'ala Ibrahima wa Alli Ibrahim."

Reference:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 8, Book 75, Number 369 - Invocations - (English
version)

o Sahih Bukhari, Page 1355, Number 6358, Book: al-Daa'wat - (Arabic
version)

<p dir="rtl">
صلوا علي، واجتهدوا في الدعاء، وقولوا: "اللهم صل على محمد وعلى آل محمد،
وبارك على محمد و آل محمد، كما باركت على إبراهيم و آل إبراهيم، إنك حميد
مجيد" التخريج (برموز السيوطي): (حم ن) وابن سعد وسمويه والبغوي والبارودي
وابن قانع (طب) عن زيد بن خارجة التخريج (مفصلا): أحمد في مسنده والنسائي
وابن سعد وسمويه والبغوي والبارودي وابن قانع الطبراني في الكبير عن زيد بن
خارجة - تصحيح السيوطي: صحيح
</p>

Reference:

o al-Jaami'i al-Sagheer, by Jalaludin al-Suyuti, \#5033 (باب: حرف
الصاد)

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, \#19890, \#19891 ({الصلاة
عليه في التشهد} صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم.)

<p dir="rtl">
إذا صليتم علي فقولوا: اللهم صل على محمد النبي الأمي وعلى آل محمد كما
صليت على إبراهيم وعلى آل إبراهيم وبارك على محمد النبي الأمي وعلى آل محمد
كما باركت على إبراهيم وعلى آل إبراهيم إنك حميد مجيد. (حم حب قط هق) عن
أبي مسعود. التخريج (برموز السيوطي): (حم ق د ن ه) عن كعب بن عجرة التخريج
(مفصلا): أحمد في مسنده ومتفق عليه [البخاري ومسلم] وأبو داود والنسائي
وابن ماجة عن كعب بن عجرة تصحيح السيوطي: صحيح
</p>

Reference:

o Ziyadat al-Jaami'i al-Sagheer, al-Durr al-Manthur, by Jalaludin
al-Suyuti: \#495 (حرف الهمزة)

o Ziyadat al-Jaami'i al-Sagheer, al-Durr al-Manthur, by Jalaludin
al-Suyuti: \#2284 (حرف القاف)

o al-Jaami'i al-Sagheer, by Jalaludin al-Suyuti, \#6162 (باب: حرف
القاف)

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, \#2185, \#2187 ()

<p dir="rtl">
إذا تشهد أحدكم في الصلاة فليقل: اللهم صل على محمد وعلى آل محمد وبارك
على محمد وعلى آل محمد وارحم محمد وارحم محمدا وآل محمد كما صليت وباركت
وترحمت على إبراهيم وعلى آل إبراهيم إنك حميد مجيد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
(ك هق) عن ابن مسعود.
</p>

Reference:

o Ziyadat al-Jaami'i al-Sagheer, al-Durr al-Manthur, by Jalaludin
al-Suyuti: \#321 (حرف الهمزة)

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, \#2183 ()

More References: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal: v4,p241 [Entire
book:(p1318,\#18283)]; v4,p241 [Entire book:(p1318,\#18285)]; v4,p243
[Entire book:(p1320,\#18307)]; v4,p244 [Entire book:(p1320,\#18313)]

Do not send an amputated prayer

"Do not send an amputed prayer." The companions asked: "What is an
amputed prayer?" He said: "When you say, 'Allahumma salli 'ala Muhammad'
and stop. You should say, 'Allahumma salli 'ala Muhammad wa al-i
Muhammad'."

Reference:

o Yanabi'i al-Muwaddah, 2:59; al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, ibn Hajar,
section 1 ch.11 A supplication does not reach the heavens unless you
send your blessings to the prophet عن علي قال: كل دعاء محجوب عن السماء
حتى يصلي على محمد وعلى آل محمد.

(عبيد الله بن محمد بن حفص العيشي في حديثه وعبد القادر الرهاوي في
الأربعين) Reference: o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, \#3988
(باب في الصلاة عليه صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم) Hadiths about sitna Fatimah
al-Zahra (AS) - Her virtues Fatimah al-Zahra was born in Meccah on a
friday, 615 AD and died in Medina, year 632 AD, at the age of 18. Her
mother was the first wife of the prophet, Khadija bint-e-Khuwailid.
Allah (SWT) commanded her marriage to Ali ibn Abi Talib, the cousin and
brother of the prophet. Before this marriage, many muslims came to the
prophet to propose to her, including Abu Bakr and Umar ibn al-Khattab,
but they were denied. She delivered 4 children: imam Hasan, imam husayn,
zaynab and umm-kultum.

I quote the circumstances of her birth, as described by her mother,
Khadija: 'At the time of the birth of Hadrat Fatimah, I sent for my
neighboring qurayshite women to assist me. They flatly refused, saying
that I had betrayed them by supporting Muhammad. I was perturbed for a
while, when , to my great surprise,

I sighted four strange tall women with halos around them , approaching
me. Finding me dismayed, one of them addressed me thus, " O Khadijah! I
am Sarah, the mother of Ishaq, and the other three are, Mary the mother
of Christ, Asiyah the daughter of Muzahim, and Umm kulthum, the sister
of Moses. We have all been commanded by God to put our nursing knowledge
at your disposal." saying this, all of them sat around me and rendered
the services of midwifery till my daughter Fatimah was born. The
motherly blessings and affection received by Hadrat Fatimah were only
for five years, after which Hadrat Khadijah left for her heavenly home .
Hereafter the Holy Prophet brought her up.'

A lot of muslims know little about the beloved and only daughter of the
greatest prophet of all times, Muhammad. The daughter of our mother,
Khadija. She is the woman some of the companions dared to attack,
brutalize and oppress. She is the woman who was deprived of her
inheritance (land of fadak) and was made angry until her demise.

Abu Bakr said himself:

Narrated 'Aisha: ...Abu Bakr then spoke saying, "By Allah in Whose
Hands my life is. I love to do good to the relatives of Allah's Apostle
rather than to my own relatives" Abu Bakr added: Look at Muhammad
through his family (i.e. if you are no good to his family you are not
good to him)....

<p dir="rtl">
فَتَكَلَّمَ أَبُو بَك'رٍ فَقَالَ وَالَّذِي نَف'سِي بِيَدِهِ لَقَرَابَةُ
رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَي'هِ وَسَلَّمَ أَحَبُّ إِلَيَّ أَن'
أَصِلَ مِن' قَرَابَتِي أَخ'بَرَنِي عَب'دُ اللَّهِ ب'نُ عَب'دِ
ال'وَهَّابِ حَدَّثَنَا خَالِدٌ حَدَّثَنَا شُع'بَةُ عَن' وَاقِدٍ قَالَ
سَمِع'تُ أَبِي يُحَدِّثُ عَن' اب'نِ عُمَرَ عَن' أَبِي بَك'رٍ رَضِيَ
اللَّهُ عَن'هُم' قَالَ ار'قُبُوا مُحَمَّدًا صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَي'هِ
وَسَلَّمَ فِي أَه'لِ بَي'تِهِ
</p>

References:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 5, Book 57, 60 - Companions of the Prophet;
Page 782, \#3711, \#3712, \#3713 (Arabic version) She is part of the
prophet. Whoever disturbs, disturbs the prophet. Whoever angers her,
angers the prophet and therefore angers Allah. Whoever hurts her, hurts
the prophet. Whoever tortures her, tortures the prophet. She is one of
the 4 greatest women of this world. She is the ideal woman that every
female should follow.

When the name of Fatima is mentioned, peace be upon her (Alayhal salam)
should follow. This fact, which shows her elevated status, is supported
by the sihah. This virtue applies to all the members of Ahlul Bayt,
except to the prophet to whom we say: Peace be upon him and his progeny.
To find all the related narrations regarding Fatimah (as)

Type the following: فاطمة عليها السلام. If your keyboard does not allow
you to type it directly into the search text fields, click on the top
keyboard icon. A scripted keypad will appear with all the arabic
characters you need. Use the embedded keys to write your search
criteria. Then copy paste it to one of the four search text fields.
Select one or more books for your search and click the "Start Search"
button. You will have enough narrations that supports this fact.

Here is a list of references to some of these narrations from just the
Sahih of al-Bukhari: Sahih Bukhari, Book of al-Maghaazi, Page 124,
\#520, Read it Sahih Bukhari, Book of al-Jihad wal Sayr, Page 613,
\#2911, Read it Sahih Bukhari, Book of al-Khumus, Page 651, \#3092, Read
it Sahih Bukhari, Book of al-Khumus, Page 655, \#3110, Read it Sahih
Bukhari, Book of al-Khumus, Page 656, \#3113, Read it Sahih Bukhari,
Book of al-Jaziya wal Mouwada'at, Page 673, \#3185, Read it Content:

One of the most excellent woman of all the world and the leader of the
ladies of paradise Other virtues of Fatimah al-Zahra The prophet
foretells His and her demise One of the most excellent woman of all the
world and the leader of the ladies of paradise Abu Saei'id al-Khudri
narrates that the Messenger of Allah said: Fatimah is the leader of the
ladies of paradise." References: o Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal: v3,p80
[entire book: p832,\#11778] Hudhayfa, a well known companion and
traditionist, reported that the Prophet said: 'An angel is here who
never came down to earth before this night. He sought permission from
his Lord to come down and greet me, and to bring me the glad tidings
that Fatima is the mistress of the women of Paradise, and that Hasan and
Husayn are the masters of the youths of Paradise.

<p dir="rtl">
'حدثنا عبد الله بن عبد الرحمن وإسحاق بن منصور قإلا أخبرنا محمد بن يوسف
عن إسرائيل عن ميسرة بن حبيب عن منهال بن عمرو عن زر بن حبيش عن حذيفة قال:
"سألتني أمي متى عهدك؟ تعني بالنبي صلى الله عليه وسلم؛ فقلت مالي به عهد
منذ كذا وكذا، فنالت مني فقلت لها دعيني آتي النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم
فأصلي معه المغرب وأسأله أن يستغفر لي ولك؛ فأتيت النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم
فصليت معه المغرب فصلى حتى صلى العشاء ثم انفتل فتبعته فسمع صوتي فقال من
هذا؟ حذيفة؟ قلت نعم. قال ما حاجتك غفر الله لك ولأمك؟ قال إن هذا ملك لم
ينزل إلى الأرض قط قبل هذه الليلة، استأذن ربه أن يسلم علي ويبشرني بأن
فاطمة سيدة نساء أهل الجنة، وأن الحسن والحسين سيدا شباب أهل الجنة".
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هذا حديث حسن غريب من هذا الوجه لا نعرفه إلا من حديث إسرائيل.
</p>

References: o Sunan al-Tirmidhi, v2, p307; v5,\#3870 (المُجَلَّد
الخَامِس \>\> أبواب المَنَاقِب عَن رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ
عَلَي'هِ وسَلَّم \>\> 110- باب) o Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal: v5,p391
[entire book: p1732,\#23718]

<p dir="rtl">
عن حذيفة قال: سألتني أمي متى عهدك بالنبي صلى الله عليه وسلم؟ فقلت: مذ
كذا وكذا، فدعيني أصلى معه المغرب ثم لا أدعه حتى يستغفر لي ولك، فصليت معه
المغرب فصلى حتى صلى العشاء الآخرة ثم صلى حتى لم يبق في المسجد أحد فعرض
له عارض فناجاه ثم انفتل فعرف صوتي فقال: حذيفة؟ فقلت: نعم، قال: ما جاء
بك؟ غفر الله لك ولأمك يا حذيفة! هذا ملك لم يكن نزل قبل الليلة إلى الأرض،
استأذن ربه أن يسلم علي فأذن له وبشرني أن فاطمة سيدة نساء أهل الجنة
والحسن والحسين سيدا شباب أهل الجنة.
</p>

References:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 13, \#37620 (المجلد
الثالث عشر \>\> فصل في فضلهم مجملا)

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 13, \#37730 (المجلد
الثالث عشر \>\> فاطمة رضي الله عنها)

The Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) said: "The most excellent of the women
of all worlds whom Allah chose over all women are: Asiya the wife of
Pharaoh, Mary the daughter of Imran, Khadija the daughter of Khuwaylid,
and Fatimah the daughter of Muhammad."

<p dir="rtl">
عن أبي هريرة أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال: "بحسبك من نساء
العالمين أربع: فاطمة بنت محمد وخديجة بنت خويلد ومريم بنت عمران وآسية بنت
مزاحم". رواه الطبراني في الأوسط، وفيه سليمان الشاذكوني وهو ضعيف
</p>

References:

o Majmau'u al-Zawa'id, al-Hafidh al-Haythami, vol 9, \#15269 (. كتاب
المناقب. 22. باب فضل خديجة بنت خويلد زوجة رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم)

o Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v5, p702

o Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal: v3,p135 [entire book: p874,\#12418]

o Fadha'il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p755, Tradition \#1325

o al-Awsat by al-Tabarani, as well as Ibn Habbani

<p dir="rtl">
حدثنا أبو بكر بن إسحاق، أنبأ هشام بن علي، حدثنا موسى بن إسماعيل، حدثنا
هاود بن أبي الفرات، حدثنا علباء بن أحمر، عن عكرمة، عن ابن عباس قال: قال
رسول الله - صلى الله عليه وسلم -: (أفضل نساء العالمين: خديجة بنت خويلد،
وفاطمة بنت محمد، ومريم بنت عمران، وآسية بنت مزاحم امرأة فرعون).هذا حديث
صحيح الإسناد، ولم يخرجاه بهذا اللفظ.
</p>

References:

o al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v2, 170/4160 (كتاب تواريخ المتقدمين من
الأنبياء والمرسلين. -24 - ذكر نبي الله، وروحه: عيسى بن مريم صلوات الله
وسلامه عليهما)

o al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, 343/4745 (كتاب معرفة الصحابة رضي الله
تعالى عنهم. ذكر مناقب: فاطمة بنت رسول الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلم)

o al-Mustadrak, by al-Hakim, v3, 344/4746 (كتاب معرفة الصحابة رضي الله
تعالى عنهم. ذكر مناقب: فاطمة بنت رسول الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلم)

Narrated 'Aisha: Once Fatima came walking and her gait resembled the
gait of the Prophet . The Prophet said, "Welcome, O my daughter!" Then
he made her sit on his right or on his left side, and then he told her a
secret and she started weeping. I asked her, "Why are you weeping?" He
again told her a secret and she started laughing. I said, "I never saw
happiness so near to sadness as I saw today." I asked her what the
Prophet had told her.

She said, "I would never disclose the secret of Allah's Apostle ." When
the Prophet died, I asked her about it. She replied. "The Prophet said.)
'Every year Gabriel used to revise the Qur'an with me once only, but
this year he has done so twice. I think this portends my death, and you
will be the first of my family to follow me.' So I started weeping. Then
he said. 'Don't you like to be the mistress of all the ladies of
Paradise or the mistress of all the lady believers? So I laughed for
that."

<p dir="rtl">
أ- أخبرنا زكريا بن أبي زائد، عن فراس، عن الشعبي، عن مسروق، عن
عائشة -رضي الله تعالى عنها-: أن النبي -صلَّى الله عليه وسلَّم- قال وهو
في مرضه الذي توفي فيه: (يا فاطمة، ألا ترضين أن تكوني سيدة نساء العالمين،
وسيدة نساء هذه الأمة، وسيدة نساء المؤمنين؟)
</p>

References:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 4, Book 56, Number 819: - al-Manaqib - (English
version)

o Sahih Bukhari, Page 762, Number 3623-3624, Book: al-Manaqib - (Arabic
version)

o Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal: v6, p282 [entire book: p1964,\#26945]

o Mustadrak al-Hakim, v3,\#338/4740 (المجلد الثالث \>\> -31- كتاب معرفة
الصحابة رضي الله تعالى عنهم \>\> ذكر مناقب: فاطمة بنت رسول الله -صلَّى
الله عليه وسلم)

Narrated 'Aisha: He added, 'But this year he reviewed it with me twice,
and therefore I think that my time of death has approached. So, be
afraid of Allah, and be patient, for I am the best predecessor for you
(in the Hereafter).' " Fatima added, "So I wept as you ('Aisha)
witnessed. And when the Prophet saw me in this sorrowful state, he
confided the second secret to me saying, 'O Fatima! Will you not be
pleased that you will be chief of all the believing women (or chief of
the women of this nation i.e. my followers?")

References:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 8, Book 74, Number 301: - Asking Permission -
(English version)

o Sahih Bukhari, Page 1342, Number 6285-6286, Book: al-Isti'dhan -
(Arabic version)

'A'isha reported: We, the wives of Allah's Apostle (may peace be upon
him), were with him (during his last illness) and none was absent
therefrom that Fatima, who walked after the style of Allah's Messenger
(may peace be upon him), came there, and when he saw her he welcomed her
saying: You are welcome, my daughter. He their made her sit on his right
side or on his left side. Then he said something secretly to her and she
wept bitterly and when he found her (plunged) in grief he said to her
something secretly for the second time and she laughed. I ('A'isha) said
to her: Allah's Messenger has singled you amongst the women (of the
family) for talking (to you something secretly) and you wept.

When Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) recovered from illness,
I said to her. What did Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) say to
you? Thereupon she said: I am not going to disclose the secret of
Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him). When Allah's Messenger (may
peace be upon him) died, I said to her: I adjure you by the right that I
have upon you that you should narrate to me what Allah's Messenger (may
peace be upon him) said to you. She said: Yes, now I can do that (so
listen to it).

When he talked to me secretly for the first time he informed me that
Gabirel was in the habit of reciting the Qur'an along with him once or
twice every year, but this year it had been twice and so he perceived
his death quite near, so fear Allah and be patient (and he told me) that
he would be a befitting forerunner for me and so I wept as you saw me.
And when he saw me in grief he talked to me secretly for the second time
and said: Fatima, are you not pleased that you should be at the head of
the believing women or the head of this Umma? I laughed and it was that
laughter which you saw.

References:

o Sahih Muslim, Book 031, Number 6004-6005: - Fada'il al-Sahabah -
(English version)

o Sahih Muslim, Page 955, Number 2450-98; 2450-99, Book: Fada'il
al-Sahabah - (Arabic version)

<p dir="rtl">
حدثنا أبو العباس محمد بن يعقوب، حدثنا الحسن بن علي بن عفان العامري،
حدثنا إسحاق بن منصور السلولي، حدثنا إسرائيل، عن ميسرة بن حبيب، عن
المنهال بن عمرو، عن زر بن حبيش، عن حذيفة -رضي الله تعالى عنه- قال: قال
رسول الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلَّم-: (نزل ملك من السماء، فاستأذن الله أن
يسلم علي لم ينزل قبلها، فبشرني أن فاطمة سيدة نساء أهل الجنة).
</p>

Reference:

o Mustadrak al-Hakim, v3,\#319/4721 (المجلد الثالث \>\> -31- كتاب معرفة
الصحابة رضي الله تعالى عنهم \>\> ذكر مناقب: فاطمة بنت رسول الله -صلَّى
الله عليه وسلم-)

o Mustadrak al-Hakim, v3,\#320/4722 (المجلد الثالث \>\> -31- كتاب معرفة
الصحابة رضي الله تعالى عنهم \>\> ذكر مناقب: فاطمة بنت رسول الله -صلَّى
الله عليه وسلم-)

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 12, \#34231, \#34249
(المجلد الثاني عشر \>\> الإكمال من فاطمة رضي الله عنها) وعن أبي هريرة أن
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال:

<p dir="rtl">
"إن ملكاً من السماء لم يكن زارني فاستأذن الله في زيارتي فبشرني - أو
أخبرني - أن فاطمة سيدة نساء أمتي". رواه الطبراني ورجاله رجال الصحيح غير
محمد بن مروان الذهلي ووثقه ابن حبان.
</p>

Reference:

o Majmau'u al-Zawa'id, al-Hafidh al-Haythami, vol 9, \#15191 (كتاب
المناقب. 17. (بابان في مناقب السيدة فاطمة رضي الله عنها). 1. باب مناقب
فاطمة بنت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم رضي الله عنها), Narrated by Abu
Hurayra حدثنا أبو جعفر محمد بن علي بن دحيم الصايغ بالكوفة، حدثنا محمد بن
الحسين بن أبي الحسين، حدثنا علي بن ثابت الديان، حدثنا منصور بن أبي
الأسود، عن عبد الرحمن بن أبي نعم، عن أبي سعيد الخدري -رضي الله تعالى
عنه- قال: قال رسول الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلَّم-: (فاطمة سيدة نساء أهل
الجنة إلا ما كان من مريم بنت عمران) Reference: o Mustadrak al-Hakim,
v3,\#331/4733 (المجلد الثالث \>\> -31- كتاب معرفة الصحابة رضي الله تعالى
عنهم \>\> ذكر مناقب: فاطمة بنت رسول الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلم-)

Other virtues of Fatimah al-Zahra

<p dir="rtl">
إنما فاطمة بضعة مني، فمن أغضبها فقد أغضبني. (ش - عن محمد بن علي
مرسلا)
</p>

References:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 12, \#34244 (المجلد
الثاني عشر \>\> الإكمال من فاطمة رضي الله عنها) إن الله عز وجل ليغضب
لغضب فاطمة ويرضى لرضاها. (الديلمي عن علي

References:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 12, \#34237, \#34238
(المجلد الثاني عشر \>\> الإكمال من فاطمة رضي الله عنها) أول شخص يدخل
الجنة فاطمة بنت محمد، ومثلها في هذه الأمة مثل مريم في بني إسرائيل. (أبو
الحسن أحمد بن ميمون في كتاب فضائل علي والرافعي عن بدل بن المحبر عن عبد
السلام ابن عجلان عن أبي يزيد المدني).

References:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 12, \#34234 (المجلد
الثاني عشر \>\> الإكمال من فاطمة رضي الله عنها)

<p dir="rtl">
خير رجالكم علي؛ وخير شبابكم الحسن والحسين، وخير نسائكم فاطمة. (الخطيب
وابن عساكر - عن ابن مسعود).
</p>

References:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 12, \#34191 (المجلد
الثاني عشر \>\> الإكمال من الفصل الأول في فضل أهل البيت مجملا) حدثنا
إبراهيم بن سعيد الجوهري، أخبرنا الأسود بن عامر، عن عبد الله بن عطاء، عن
ابن بريدة، عن أبيه قال: "كان أحب النساء الى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم
فاطمة ومن الرجال علي".


Reference:

o Sunan al-Tirmidhi, v5,\#3960 (المُجَلَّد الخَامِس \>\> أبواب
المَنَاقِب عَن رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَي'هِ وسَلَّم \>\> باب
ما جَاءَ في فضل من رأى النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم وصحبه)

<p dir="rtl">
{أيضا} عن سويد بن غفلة قال: خطب علي ابنة أبي جهل إلى عمها الحارث بن
هشام فاستشار النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم، فقال: أعن حسبها تسألني؟ قال علي:
قد أعلم ما حسبها، ولكن أتأمرني بها؟ قال: لا، فاطمة بضعة مني ولا أحب أنها
تحزن أو تجزع، فقال علي: لا آتي شيئا تكرهه.(ع).
</p>

References:

o Kanz al-U'ummal, by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol 13, \#37729, \#37738,
\#37739, \#37740 (المجلد الثالث عشر \>\> فاطمة رضي الله عنها) Narrated
'Ali bin Al-Husain: That when they reached Medina after returning from
Yazid bin Mu'awaiya after the martyrdom of Husain bin 'Ali (may Allah
bestow His Mercy upon him), Al-Miswar bin Makhrama met him and said to
him, "Do you have any need you may order me to satisfy?" 'Ali said,
"No." Al-Miswar said, Will you give me the sword of Allah's Apostle for
I am afraid that people may take it from you by force? By Allah, if you
give it to me, they will never be able to take it till I die."

When Ali bin Abu Talib demanded the hand of the daughter of Abi Jahal
to be his wife besides Fatima, I heard Allah's Apostle on his pulpit
delivering a sermon in this connection before the people, and I had then
attained my age of puberty. Allah's Apostle said, "Fatima is from me,
and I am afraid she will be subjected to trials in her religion (because
of jealousy)." The Prophet then mentioned one of his son-in-law who was
from the tribe of 'Abu Shams, and he praised him as a good son-in-law,
saying, "Whatever he said was the truth, and he promised me and
fulfilled his promise. I do not make a legal thing illegal, nor do I
make an illegal thing legal, but by Allah, the daughter of Allah's
Apostle and the daughter of the enemy of Allah, (i.e. Abu Jahl) can
never get together (as the wives of one man) (See Hadith No. 76, Vo.
5).

References:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 4, Book 53, \#342, Book of al-Khums; Page 655,
\#3110, Arabic version Miswar b. Makhramali reported that he heard
Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) say, as he sat on the pulpit:
The sons of Hisham b. Mughira have asked my permission to marry their
daughter with 'Ali b. Abi Talib (that refers to the daughter of Abu Jahl
for whom 'Ali had sent a proposal for marriage). But I would not allow
them, I would not allow them, I would not allow them (and the only
alternative possible is) that 'Ali should divorce my daughter (and then
marry their daughter), for my daughter is part of me. He who disturbs
her in fact disturbs me and he who offends her offends me.

References:

o Sahih Muslim, Book 031, Number 5999, Kitab Al-Fada'il al-Sahabah;
Page 954, Number 2449-93 (Arabic version) I heard Allah's Apostle who
was on the pulpit, saying, "Banu Hisham bin Al-Mughira have requested me
to allow them to marry their daughter to Ali bin Abu Talib, but I don't
give permission, and will not give permission unless 'Ali bin Abi Talib
divorces my daughter in order to marry their daughter, because Fatima is
a part of my body, and I hate what she hates to see, and what hurts her,
hurts me."

References:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 7, Book 62, Number 157 - Wedlock, Marriage
(Nikaah); Page 1149, Number 5230 (Arabic version) Miswar b. Makhramah
reported Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) as saying: Fatima is
a part of me. He in fact tortures me who tortures her.

References:

o Sahih Muslim, Book 031, Number 6000 - Kitab Fada'il Al-Sahabah; Page
954, Number 2449-94 (Arabic version) Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
Allah's Apostle said, "Fatima is a part of me, and he who makes her
angry, makes me angry." References: o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 5, Book 57,
Number 61; \#111: - Kitab Fada'il Al-Sahabah; Page 782, Number 3714;
Page 790, Number 3767 (Arabic version) حدثنا أحمد بن منيع، أخبرنا
إسماعيل بن علية، عن أيوب عن ابن أبي مليكة عن عبد الله بن الزبير، ان عليا
ذكر بنت أبي جهل، فبلغ ذلك النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم فقال: إنما فاطمة بضعة
مني، يؤذيني ما آذاها، وينصبني ما أنصبها".

References:

o Sunan al-Tirmidhi, v5,\#3961 (المُجَلَّد الخَامِس \>\> أبواب
المَنَاقِب عَن رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَي'هِ وسَلَّم \>\> باب
ما جَاءَ في فضل من رأى النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم وصحبه)

<p dir="rtl">
حدثنا أبو سهل أحمد بن محمد بن زياد القطان ببغداد، حدثنا إسماعيل بن
إسحاق القاضي، حدثنا إسحاق بن محمد الفروي، حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر
الزاهري، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن عبد الله بن أبي رافع، عن المسور بن
مخرمة -رضي الله تعالى عنه- قال: <p dir="rtl">
قال رسول الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلَّم-:
</p>
إنما فاطمة شجنة مني، يبسطني ما يبسطها، ويقبضني ما يقبضها
</p>

Reference:

o Mustadrak al-Hakim, v3,\#332/4734 (المجلد الثالث \>\> -31- كتاب معرفة
الصحابة رضي الله تعالى عنهم \>\> ذكر مناقب: فاطمة بنت رسول الله -صلَّى
الله عليه وسلم-)

<p dir="rtl">
أخبرنا أحمد بن بالويه العقصي من أصل كتابه، حدثنا محمد بن عثمان بن أبي
شيبة، حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله بن نمير، حدثنا أبو مسلم قائد الأعمش، حدثنا
الأعمش، عن سهيل بن أبي صالح، عن أبيه، عن أبي هريرة -رضي الله تعالى عنه-
قال:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قال رسول الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلَّم-:
</p>

(تبعث الأنبياء يوم القيامة على الدواب، ليوافوا بالمؤمنين من قومهم
المحشر. ويبعث صالح على ناقته. وأبعث على البراق، خطوها عند أقصى طرفها،
وتبعث فاطمة أمامي). هذا حديث صحيح على شرط مسلم، ولم يخرجاه. Reference: o
Mustadrak al-Hakim, v3,\#325/4727

(المجلد الثالث \>\> -31- كتاب معرفة الصحابة رضي الله تعالى عنهم \>\>
ذكر مناقب: فاطمة بنت رسول الله -صلَّى الله عليه وسلم)

The prophet foretells His and her demise Narrated 'Aisha: The Prophet
called his daughter Fatima during his illness in which he died, and told
her a secret whereupon she wept. Then he called her again and told her a
secret whereupon she laughed. When I asked her about that, she replied,
"The Prophet spoke to me in secret and informed me that he would die in
the course of the illness during which he died, so I wept. He again
spoke to me in secret and informed me that I would be the first of his
family to follow him (after his death) and on that I laughed."

References:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 5, Book 57, Number 62: - Companions of the
Prophet - (English version)

o Sahih Bukhari, Page 782, Number 3715-3716, Book: Fada'il al Sahabah -
(Arabic version)

o Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal: v6,p282 [entire book: p1964,\#26946]; v6,p77
[entire book: p1833,\#24988]; v6,p240 [entire book: p1936,\#26560]

Narrated 'Aisha: The Prophet in his fatal illness, called his daughter
Fatima and told her a secret because of which she started weeping. Then
he called her and told her another secret, and she started laughing.
When I asked her about that, she replied, The Prophet told me that he
would die in his fatal illness, and so I wept, but then he secretly told
me that from amongst his family, I would be the first to join him, and
so I laughed."

References:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 4, Book 56, Number 820: - al-Manaqib - (English
version)

o Sahih Bukhari, Page 763, Number 3625-3626, Book: al-Manaqib - (Arabic
version)

Narrated 'Aisha: The Prophet called Fatima during his fatal illness and
told her something secretly and she wept. Then he called her again and
told her something secretly, and she started laughing. When we asked her
about that, she said, "The Prophet first told me secretly that he would
expire in that disease in which he died, so I wept; then he told me
secretly that I would be the first of his family to follow him, so I
laughed ( at that time)."

References:

o Sahih Bukhari, Volume 5, Book 59, Number 718: - al-Maghazi - (English
version)

o Sahih Bukhari, Page 923, Number 4433-4434, Book: al-Maghazi - (Arabic
version)

'A'isha reported that Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) called
his daughter Fatima (during his last illness). He said. to her something
secretly and she wept. He again said to her something secretly and she
laughed. 'A'isha further reported that she said to Fatima: What is that
which Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) said to you secretly and
you wept and then said to you something secretly and you laughed?
Thereupon she said: He informed me secretly of his death and so I wept.
He then again informed me secretly that I would be the first amongst the
members of his family to follow him and so I laughed.

References:

o Sahih Muslim, Book 031, Number 6003: - Fada'il al-Sahaba - (English
version)

o Sahih Muslim, Page 955, Number 2450-97, Book: Fada'il al-Sahaba -
(Arabic version)


