Introduction
============

Prophet Muhammad (S) said: “I have not been sent except to perfect the
ethical system (*makārim al-akhlāq*).”[^1]

One's actions, when performed out of choice, are due to knowledge,
belief and habits. For example, suppose one is thirsty, knows that water
is near him and knows that water will relieve his thirst. In this case
he will drink water because of his knowledge.

There are also examples of habits. For example, a stingy person will not
want to help a needy person, even if he realizes his need, while a
generous person will help a needy person without thinking about it. His
generosity pushes him towards helping the needy person.

There are rules found in Islam with the purpose of obtaining correct
beliefs and habits. The blessings of good habits are found in one's
actions.

There are many traditions from the infallibles (a) that claim that good
ethics were the Prophets' most important trait. They said that Allah
gave them these high traits and that they encouraged mankind to obtain
these high traits.[^2]

Muhammad (S) Had The Best Ethical Traits
----------------------------------------

Prophets were chosen by Allah and ordered to guide mankind and better
humanity. The leader of the Prophets is the seal of the Prophets,
Muhammad (S). He was raised by Allah. In the Qurān it says that Allah
taught him what he did not know.[^3] The Qurān says that he had the best
ethical traits in order for him to be able to improve his nation until
the Day of Judgment.[^4] The Qurān says that he is high in every ethical
trait.[^5] The Qurān also says that his mission was to teach and better
humanity.[^6]

Imām ‛Alī (a) said the following about Prophet Muhammad (S): “Allah sent
his highest angel to show Muhammad (S) the right path and correct
ethical traits from the time he breastfed.[^7]

With this said he would ask Allah to give him good ethical traits and to
be safe from bad ethical traits.[^8]

Allah Purifies (Spiritually) Whoever He Desires
-----------------------------------------------

It is clear that *'muzakka*' is Allah's purifying ability found in the
verse: ***“..Allah purifies whomever He wishes.”***[^9] Nobody can
purify his own self; instead he must follow the Islamic laws which would
result in purification. How is one able to purify himself when it is
necessary to have complete knowledge of one's self and complete
knowledge of how to correct one's self?

Man only has surface knowledge of himself. The Qurān even says that man
has been given only a little bit of knowledge.[^10]

Obtaining Correct Ethical Traits
--------------------------------

Man, from childhood, begins to be attracted to certain things, for
example milk and toys. Eventually, he becomes attracted to money and he
finds a sense of self-love. A child struggles to get what he wants,
delicious food or interesting toys, and shows a negative reaction when
denied what he wants.

Purifying Comes Before Teaching
-------------------------------

The Qurān mentions two verses[^11] regarding the Prophet's duties. The
word purifying has been mentioned before teaching in these two verses.
The reason for this might be that one must build the foundation before
he can fill the house with knowledge.

A person who has knowledge, but does not act upon it, is, as the Qurān
says, like a dog.[^12] The Qurān also likens him to a donkey that
carries books.[^13]

Theoretical And Practical Ethics
--------------------------------

One can obtain good ethical traits by both theory and practice. One who
wants to rid himself of bad ethical traits and obtain good ethical
traits must know what good and bad characteristics are. After he knows
the good and bad traits he should take advice from the best ethical
teachers, Prophet Muhammad (S) and the Ahl al-Bayt (a).

A point that must be mentioned is that Allah is the one who purifies
people. So, one must ask Allah for help in obtaining these traits. Imām
Sādiq (a) said: “Whoever has these great ethical traits should thank
Allah, and whoever does not have them should ask Allah for them.”[^14]

The Importance That Shahīd Dastghayb Gave To Lectures On Islamic Ethics
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The martyr had a special desire to help the seminary students purify
themselves. He would teach Islamic ethics every Thursday. He would tell
them that they would have to be the role models of the Islamic ethical
system in the society and that the more they worked on themselves, the
more they worked on society. This is because one must guide people with
their actions and manners before their words.

After Imām Khomeini (r) talked about the importance of unity between the
university and the religious seminary, Shahīd Dastghayb invited
university students to his Thursday lectures as well. Many young men and
women accepted his invitation and took part in his lectures every week.

Thirteen lectures were given and then the class was cancelled due to
summer vacation. Shahīd Dastghayb wanted to continue them, but the
hypocrites took him away from us.

This book is a collection of these lectures.

[^1]: Shaykh ‛Alī Namāzī, Mustadrak Safīnat al-Bihār, volume 1, page
410.

[^2]: Shaykh Kulaynī, Usūl al-Kāfī, volume 3, page 95.

[^3]: Refer to 4:113.

[^4]: Refer to 93:6.

[^5]: Refer to 68:4.

[^6]: Refer to 3:164.

[^7]: Shaykh ‛Alī Namāzī, Mustadrak Safīnat al-Bihār, volume 1, page
415.

[^8]: Shaykh ‛Alī Namāzī, Mustadrak Safīnat al-Bihār, volume 1, under
the word ‘khalq’.

[^9]: 4:49.

[^10]: Refer to 17:85.

[^11]: Refer to 3:163 and 62:2.

[^12]: Refer to 7:176.

[^13]: Refer to 62:5.

[^14]: Shaykh Kulaynī, Usūl al-Kāfī, chapter Makarim al-Akhlāq.


