Lecture 10: Showing Anger with The Tongue, Hand or Heart
========================================================

Sometimes one can be excessive in anger at a time when one should be
angry. This is not good, if it occurs. One should become angry at
oppression and sin with his tongue, with his hand and with his heart,
but should make sure to act in the correct fashion. How angry should one
become? The different stages of anger using one's tongue hand or heart
will become clear by giving some examples.

Exceeding the limits using the tongue - It is natural that a believer
will become angry when someone says something bad to him. In this case,
the best thing to do in the view of Islam is control one's anger and
remain silent.

Answer Bad With Good
--------------------

It would be very good if one could not only refrain from replying with
bad language, but give the person advice in a nice tone using good
manners. For example if one would tell him: “You are a respected person
whom people look up to. It would be a shame if your respect would be
lowered in their eyes.”

If a Muslim is able to answer bad language with good language, he should
answer bad actions with good actions. For example, you can give someone
who needs something what he needs even if that same person did not help
you out when you were in need. If one is able to answer bad with good,
his enemies would lose their hatred for him and would become his
friends, even better than friends, they would become like family
members.

Of course, not everyone is able to do this. Only the people who have a
high level of faith are able to do this and benefit from their good
habits.

The Other Person Will Be Ashamed When You Act Well With Them
------------------------------------------------------------

At first it is difficult to answer with good words someone who swore at
you, but later it becomes pleasurable to do so. Sometimes men, in order
to feel better, answer one swear with ten different swears. Not only
does this make that person feel worse, he gets even angrier and it
results in making an enemy.

A person who answers bad language with good language, who controls his
anger, who acts like an adult, is the one who will become calm and feel
better while the person who used bad language will be ashamed and
regretful.

An Eye For An Eye Limited By The Divine Decree
----------------------------------------------

One can perform one of the following three actions to someone who swears
at him. He can either forgive him and remain silent or answer his bad
language with good language, or if he cannot do any of these he can
swear at the person just like the latter swore at him. For example if
someone called him stupid he can reply: “You're the stupid one.” But, he
does not have the right to say anything against his father, mother or
brother.

The Qurān says: ***“..Should anyone aggress against you, assail him in
the manner he assailed you.***”[^1] One is unable to oppress the
oppressor to a higher degree of oppression than he was oppressed
himself. If one swears twice responding to one swear, he has crossed the
limits.

There is no eye for an eye regarding false accusations. The accused
cannot claim that the accuser committed the crime that he says was
committed. For example, the accused cannot accuse the accuser of
committing adultery in return for a false accusation. What the accused
can do is charge the accuser of making false accusations and if it is
confirmed he will be punished Islamically.[^2]

The danger here is one losing control of one’s tongue in the state of
anger and saying more than one is allowed to say which results in
becoming divinely responsible.

But, in any case, one may respond with bad language, if it is not a
false accusation, lie or slander and not outside the limits. One's
tongue easily goes out of control and the only thing there is to control
it is the fear of Allah.

Dignity And Comfort In Front Of Tribalism
-----------------------------------------

Here we will mention a verse from Surah al-*Fath*: “When the faithless
nourished bigotry in their hearts, the bigotry of pagan ignorance, Allah
sent down His composure upon the Apostle and upon the faithful, and made
them abide by the word of God-wariness, for they were the worthiest of
it and deserved it, and Allah has knowledge of all things”.[^3]

The Arabs in the age of Ignorance, in addition to having satanic and
animalistic anger, were more racist and more tribalistic than other
nations. According to a prophetic tradition, tribalism was the cause of
their fall. Their tribalism made them arrogant, and because of it they
continued to accept the false slogans that their fellow tribesmen would
say.

The unbelievers had this spirit of ignorant tribalism while Allah gave
his Prophet and those who followed him peace and comfort so that they
had dignity in front of the unbelievers.

The Peace Treaty Of Hudaybīyah
------------------------------

This verse was revealed about the peace treaty of Hudaybīyah which has
been mentioned in Islamic history and is outside of our discussion. The
polytheists sent Suhayl bin ‛Amr to the Prophet (S) as their
representative in writing the treaty. The Messenger of Allah (S) recited
the peace treaty and the Commander of the faithful (a) wrote it down.
The Prophet said: “Write 'In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the
Merciful’.” The Commander of the faithful wrote it.

Suhayl said: “We do not know the Compassionate, the Merciful. Nothing
has reached us about this from our ancestors.” Some Muslims complained
and said that the sentence must remain as it was.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “What should we write?”

Suhayl said: “Writing: ‘in your name, O Allah’, is common amongst us.”

The Prophet said; “‛Alī, erase what you wrote and write: ‘in your name,
O Allah’.”

This is not something so serious that one should fight over and ruin the
peace treaty which is in the benefit of Islam and the Muslims. What loss
will those words cause? The principle is that it should be started in
the name of Allah; it does not matter with which sentence. Those people
had a satanic form of tribalism in their hearts and for that reason
Allah gave the Muslims peace in their hearts to bear what he said.

In Any Case, Muhammad (S) Is A Prophet
--------------------------------------

The Prophet (S) then said: “Write: ‘This document is between Muhammad,
the Messenger of Allah, and Suhayl bin ‛Amr.”

When it was written, Suhayl said: “We would not have fought you if we
thought that you were a prophet sent from Allah.”

The companions got angry and a fight was about to break out when the
Prophet (S) said: “No problem, erase it.”

‛Alī (a) asked: “O Messenger of Allah (S)! How can I erase your title?”

The Prophet took the document and erased the words 'the Messenger of
Allah' himself.

Muhammad is a Prophet whether they write it or not. Is writing that
Muhammad was the messenger of Allah worth fighting over? Is it worth
destroying the peace treaty over?

Do Not Lose Your Calm
---------------------

A believer is one whose soul and veins are full of piety. A believer
always considers Allah to be present and watching everything. His tongue
and eyes are in his control and he does not become angry because of his
*nafs*. If he becomes angry it is for Allah.

Suhayl bin ‛Amr disrespected the Prophet (S) and the Prophet refrained
from getting angry. This is the *sunnah* of the Prophet (S). One must
not lose his calm. One should remain pious. One should not show satanic
and animalistic anger at ignorance. One must show dignity and calmness
when dealing with ignorant, tribalistic people. The Qurān describes the
believers as having the following characteristic: “..When ignorant
people address them they say peace (*salām*).”[^4] The Arabic term
*salām* is derived from *salama*. It means that we do not have any fight
with you. We are not like you ignorant people who use such bad language
with someone. A Muslim is one with whom other Muslims feel safe.[^5]

Stepping Over The Limits Of Anger
---------------------------------

According to the Qurān it is better to forgive someone who slaps
you.[^6] One should not say that if I forgive him, he will slap another
person. It is usual for a criminal to feel upset and ask for repentance
when the victim forgives him. It is better to fight one's *nafs* and
forgive that person rather than seeking revenge. The reason for this is
that the revenge must equal the harm that was inflicted and doing that
is very difficult. For this reason, forgiving the person is closer to
piety than seeking revenge.

Do Not Bear Oppression At The Beginning
---------------------------------------

We should also remember the verse of Qurān that says: ***“Do not commit
oppression nor be oppressed.”***[^7] This is regarding oppression at the
first stage. For example, nobody said let a person who wants to hit you,
hit you. Likewise, nobody said to let someone who wants to kill you,
kill you. The Commander of the faithful (a) said that someone who does
this is like someone who commits suicide.[^8] The reason for this is
because he did not defend himself even though he was able to prevent the
other person from killing him.

They say that it is better to forgive someone rather than seeking
revenge after he has hit you. There is a pleasure that is in forgiving
that is not found in revenge.

The following has been mentioned in the explanation of the verse that
says forgiving is closer to piety: there are three things that one can
do after being wounded. The first is forgiving the criminal, the second
is asking for blood money and the third is physically punishing him.
This verdict must be given by the Islamic judge (*hākim al-shari‛*). The
punishment cannot be any bigger than the wound itself. For example,
Qanbar, Imām ‛Alī's (a) servant was whipping someone as an Islamic
punishment. He accidentally whipped the person one extra time and the
Imām said that Qanbar must be whipped one time by the person who was
whipped.

It is better to forgive the person because punishing someone equally is
difficult. In any case, the best thing to do is forgive the person and
the second best thing to do is ask for blood money. But, if someone
wants to physically punish the criminal, he must do so equally.

So, you are not allowed to slap someone twice who slapped you once.
Also, you cannot hit someone who struck you and left a red mark, in such
a way so as to leave a black mark. If one does this he must pay the
extra amount in blood money.

[^1]: 2:194

[^2]: One can refer to the book “Greater Sins” for more explanation.

[^3]: 48:26.

[^4]: 25:63.

[^5]: Shaykh Kulaynī, Usūl al-Kāfī, volume 2, page 234.

[^6]: Refer to 2:237.

[^7]: 2:279

[^8]: Shaykh ‛Alī Namāzī, Mustadrak Safīnat al-Bihār, volume 2, page
407.


