Lecture 11: Envy Destroys One’s Health
======================================

We must understand what creates envy and refrain from it. This sickness
is worse than cancer for one's spirit. From the beginning, one must
control himself so that he does not become afflicted with this disease
that can destroy one's family. Envy starts from becoming angry at the
wrong times or becoming excessively angry. Examples of these have been
mentioned earlier.

For example, suppose there are two workmates. One of them gets a
promotion and the other one does not. The one who did not get promoted
gets angry at the fact that his workmate got promoted but he did not.
This anger will result in envy. His envy will grow and he will wish that
his former workmate gets demoted. This form of envy is harmful for one's
body and soul. The Commander of the faithful (a) said in the *Nahj
al-Balāghah*: “It is strange that an envious person does not pay
attention to his health.”[^1] It is true that envy destroys one's
physical health.

He (a) also said: “Health comes from a lack of envy.”[^2]

A man's spirit has many duties including taking care of his body and
protecting his abilities. When one becomes envious his spirit only
thinks about what he is envious about. His spirit becomes upset because
it feels that it has less than what he is envious about. This even has
an effect on one's appetite.

Envy Does Not Allow Faith To Remain In One’s Heart
--------------------------------------------------

Envy also destroys one's soul. The following tradition has been narrated
from *Usūl al-Kāfī* and other books: the Messenger of Allah (S) said:
“Envy consumes one’s faith just like fire consumes firewood.” Have you
seen what fire does to firewood? He (S) said that envy does the same
thing to one's faith. One will die without faith if envy grows inside of
him, because envy does not allow faith to remain in his heart.

In another tradition, the Messenger of Allah (S) said to his companions:
“Beware, a sickness that was in previous nations has been found amongst
you. Know that this is a terminal disease; it is a disease that destroys
your religion.”[^3]

This was a warning sign that the Prophet gave to his companions at the
end of his life. Envy is what took the followers of the previous
prophets off the path of religion and we saw what envy did to the
Muslims after the Prophet (S) passed away. Envy was the reason for the
death of thousands of people in the battles of *Jamal* and *Siffīn*.
Review the history of Islam; you will see that envy was behind every
social catastrophe that befell Muslims.

Envy Kills Scholars
-------------------

The late Shaykh Jawāhirī wrote in his book *Jawāhir al-Kalām*, in the
chapter of giving testimony, about the conditions of a witness: “A
witness must not be envious. In Islam, a witness's testimony is not
accepted if he is envious. He is not just. In other words, envy is one
of the greater sins.” Shaykh Jawāhirī used a tradition from the
Messenger of Allah (S) to prove that envy is one of the greater sins.
The tradition described the sins that would force different segments of
society into Hell. One of the things that he (S) said was: “The
religious scholars [will be sent into Hell] because of their envy.” Envy
will make those who learn about religion go to Hell if they are not
careful and if they do not purify themselves.

It is better if I relate something while we are talking about this
tradition. Tomorrow is the birthday of the ninth Imām, Imām Jawād (a).
Before I read a tradition from him I would like to say that the envy
that destroys scholars is not exclusive to scholars who study Islamic
jurisprudence, instead it encompasses university students and scholars
of other fields as well. As a principle, knowledge brings about envy, be
it religious knowledge or any other knowledge. This is a warning to
anyone who has become knowledgeable in any field. Because of this Imām
Khomeini (r) said that a student in the religious seminary or a student
in the university will be dangerous for the society if he has not
purified his self. His harm would be more than his benefit.

The Envious Judge Tries To Give The Imām The Death Penalty
----------------------------------------------------------

Have you heard about the story of Abū Līlāī, who was a judge during the
time of Imām Jawād? Abū Līlāī was a judge in the Abbasid *khalīfa*,
Mutawakkil's so called Islamic government. He was the head judge and in
charge all of the courthouses in the country. A store owner lived close
to his house by the name of Zaraqā'. The judge and the store owner were
friends. One day the judge went to see Zaraqā' while he was very
distressed. The store owner asked: “Your honor, why are you so upset
today?”

The judge responded: “If you only knew what happened to me in front of
the *khalīfa* today. They brought a thief in front of me. They asked me
how much of his hand should be cut and I said that the Qurān said that a
person’s hand up to his elbow must be washed in *wudū*.[^4] So, I said
that his hand must be cut from the elbow.

“The *khalīfa* asked other judges who were present in the courtroom
about their opinion and they said that the hand must be cut from the
wrist because all considered that to be the hand in regards to
*tayammum*.

“The *Khalīfa* then turned to the Imām of the Shī‛a, Imām Jawād (a).

Imām Jawād (a) said: “They said what the ruling is”

The *Khalīfa* said: “You tell me the ruling as well.”

Imām again said: “They already said what the ruling is.”

The *Khalīfa* insisted that the Imām tell him his opinion and the Imām
said: “His fingers must be cut off because Allah said that the *masājid*
belong to Allah.[^5] *Masājid* is the plural form of *masjid* which
means parts of one's body that are on the floor when he prostrates. This
thief will want to pray and he must put the seven parts of his body on
the ground when he prostrates. He must put his two palms on the ground
and for this reason they should not be cut. Instead, only his fingers
should be cut.

When the Imām said this, the *Khalīfa* said; “Excellent!” and
immediately ordered the thief to be punished in the way that the Imām
said.

At this time it was like the world fell on my head. How was a 25 year
old man ahead of me in knowledge? I'm upset and I will not get over it
until I do what I have to do, even though I know that whoever helps in
the murder of this young man will go to Hell.

Zaraqā' tried to advice him against it but he did not accept. The next
day he went to the *khalīfa* and asked him: “Do you know what happened
yesterday? Instead of suppressing the person whom a large number of
Muslims consider as their Imām and as the rightful *khalīfa* of the
Prophet (S), who consider you to be unjust, you put him forward and
strengthened him. Those who thought he was the rightful *khalīfa* are
now saying; 'Didn't you see, even the *khalīfa* understands that he is
higher.' They are saying that he is better than others. What a big
political mistake you made!” He kept making statements like this to the
*khalīfa* until the latter was convinced about killing the Imām (a).
Finally, they poisoned him (a).

Understanding Reality Will Not Come From Reading Books Alone
------------------------------------------------------------

Look and see how many scholars are in danger of this. Mujtahids,
doctors, engineers and scientists, they are all in danger of this.

But, the knowledge that has been praised in the Qurān and traditions is
a light that shines in one's heart. An example of this is: “The scholars
are the inheritors of the Prophets.”[^6] This knowledge, the knowledge
of reality, the knowledge of the mortality of this world and the
immortality of the next, is not achieved by reading alone. It is a light
that is given by Allah to a person who has prepared himself to receive
it.

[^1]: Imām ‛Alī, Nahj al-Balāghah Fayd al-Islām, volume 2, page 1186,
saying number 216.

[^2]: Imām ‛Alī, Nahj al-Balāghah Fayd al-Islām, volume 2, page 1200,
saying number 248.

[^3]: Shaykh ‛Alī Namāzī, Mustadrak Safīnat al-Bihār, volume 1, page
251.

[^4]: Refer to 5:6.

[^5]: Refer to 72:18.

[^6]: Shaykh Kulaynī, Usūl al-Kāfī, volume 1, page 24.


