Lecture 12: Knowledge, Like Property and Social Status, Brings About Arrogance
==============================================================================

There is an important point that is necessary to tell you religious
students and university students about. It is a danger that will ruin
all your efforts if not understood. This danger is arrogance. This
danger is found in every group of people, but it is more common amongst
scholars. The knowledge that one has in any field can cause arrogance.
Arrogance destroys people, just like it destroyed Iblīs. There is a
tradition that says that the first sin on earth was Iblīs's arrogance.
He fell due to his arrogance to a place where everyone curses him.

The definition of arrogance, its danger and why it is common amongst
scholars will be made clear.

One is arrogant when he imagines himself to be of importance or imagines
that he has special characteristics. He thinks that he does not have any
needs. He considers himself important because he learned some jargon or
he considers himself someone who does not have any needs because he has
become rich. Someone is more likely to become arrogant if his social
status increases after he has gained knowledge. When one becomes a
president of a company he sees greatness in himself.

Compound Ignorance Makes One Forget That He’s A Servant
-------------------------------------------------------

The danger of arrogance is that one will leave worship and enter into a
state of compound ignorance. Ignorance is when one does not see reality.
He considers his imagination to be true, not reality. One reality, for
example, is that every existence in every level is less than the
existence of the Seal of the Prophets (S). Whoever considers his
existence to be dependent, and his existence to be from someone else, is
present and everlasting. But, whoever thinks that his existence is in
his own hands must see that he will die even if he does not want to and
he will continue to live even if he does not want to. One will not die
until Allah allows him to die, even if he tries to kill himself.

Not only is his life in someone else's hands, but his death is in
someone else's hands as well. Drinking poison and death is from Allah.
If Allah wants one to die by drinking poison he will die, but if Allah
does not want this, even if he drinks poison he will not die.

He Tried To Kill Himself In Two Different Ways, But Survived
------------------------------------------------------------

I read in an article that a man in New York took a loan for millions of
dollars in order to build a skyscraper. The skyscraper was left half way
done and he did not have the ability to complete it. Nobody else would
give him a loan. Now, he has a huge debt on his shoulders that is
increasing daily due to interest and his skyscraper remained half way
done and nobody wanted to rent it. He decided to commit suicide by
jumping off the top floor. He then thought, maybe I will not die by
jumping so it is better to drink poison and then jump off the building.
He thought that he would definitely die from one of the two reasons. He
drank the poison and jumped, head-first, off the building. On his way
down he crashed into a pole on the building and threw up the poison. So,
he did not die in either way that he had thought he would. When Allah
does not want something, there is nothing that one can do.

We must understand that life is not in our hands, not the start of life
and not the continuance of life. Likewise, death is also not in our
hands. We have been created, raised and remain living without choice.
Everyone is dependent on Allah and Allah is the only independent
existence. Man must have the ability to do whatever he wants to do. Is
he able to bring about this ability in himself?

Do not say: “I am doing this.” Do you have the ability to do what you
want? Your existence is not in your hands for you to be able to say that
qualities such as ability are in your hands. *Lā hawla wa lā quwata illa
billah*.

A Scholar Is Also In Need Of Allah Regarding His Knowledge
----------------------------------------------------------

One should not consider himself independent, no matter how much
knowledge he has. Being dependent is part of man's nature. One must not
forget that he is dependent as long as he is alive.

The place of knowledge is in one's memory. Allah decides how long
knowledge remains in one's memory. Fifty years ago, there was a scholar
who taught a book called *Muttawil*. One day when he woke up he forgot
how to recite the first chapter of the Qurān. He was in a state of
forgetfulness. When he entered the classroom it was as if he had never
read the book before, and as if he had never attended school before. He
even forgot how to say 'in the name of Allah.'

The memory stores knowledge like a computer and this memory is one of
the proofs that one's *nafs* is immaterial. The memory holds all
information learned, for example the alphabet that one learns in first
grade. If one's memory is taken from him he will even forget the
alphabet. So, a scholar is still in need of Allah, even in regards to
his knowledge.

A Doctor Who Accidentally Killed His Own Son
--------------------------------------------

A doctor is able to benefit from what he learned if his knowledge
remains in his memory. But what would happen if Allah didn't want it to
remain in his memory?

The son of a doctor, around 30 years ago, had a fever and the doctor
thought that his son had malaria. The doctor treated him as if he had
malaria when in reality he had typhoid fever. The medication of typhoid
fever and malaria are different. The son died after a few days. There is
nobody who would work harder in finding a cure for that child other than
his father, but everything is from Allah.

There was a religious doctor who passed away. He told me: “Sometimes I
give someone medication which I am certain will work. Later I see that
it did not have a positive effect. Sometimes medication that I thought
might work works perfectly.” It is clear that the effect is also from
Allah. A doctor, like a mujtahid, is in need of his knowledge and for
that reason he should not become arrogant.

A Scholar Must Be Humble
------------------------

A mujtahid, a doctor and an engineer must be humble. He should not
consider himself to be different from the laity. Likewise a millionaire
must not consider himself different from a poor person. The million
dollars that one has did not make him a person without needs. Can one's
money cure him from an incurable disease?

It should not be left unsaid that this is related to the person himself.
The mujtahid should not consider his self high and others low. He should
not have huge expectations of respect. But, it is other people's duty to
respect him and hold him high. A scholar in any field must be respected,
especially the religious scholars. Many traditions have been mentioned
about this, for example, respecting a religious scholar is like
respecting the Messenger of Allah (S) just like mistreating a religious
scholar is like mistreating the Messenger of Allah (S).


