Lecture 13: The Cure of Arrogance, According To Imām ‛Alī (A)
=============================================================

First one must understand what arrogance is and where it comes from,
then he will realize how great a sin it is.

Arrogance is a state of feeling important, feeling that one has a
special place. Reality is taken from him and he only uses his
imagination. Everyone, in reality, is nothing. Every body is from dirt
and will return to dirt. One's self is also in real need, his life,
health and property are not in his hands.

The Commander of the faithful (a) says in one of his speeches found in
*Nahj al-Balāghah*: “O' creatures of Allah! Allah created you without
you having a choice and takes care of you for as long as you are
alive.”[^1]

Man is naturally needy, low and in reality nothing. Imām ‛Alī (a) said
in another tradition: “I'm surprised about the person who is arrogant.
At the beginning he was unclean semen and at the end he will be a
decomposed body and between these two he is good for nothing.”[^2] Right
now, under our skin, is *najis* blood and it is known what is in our
stomachs and intestines.

One Becomes The Measure Of Reality When Arrogance Grows In One’s Spirit
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Arrogance is the reason behind many of the sins that man commits. One
will not accept reality if arrogance is left to grow. One will stand
against the truth; one will even think that he himself is the truth. He
will think that his own opinions and customs are correct; he will not be
a servant of Allah anymore. He will not serve Allah's friends (*awlīyā
Allah*). They will be like those who were arrogant and stood up against
the Commander of the faithful (a), they either did not pay allegiance to
him or they disobeyed him after they paid allegiance.

What creates arrogance and what strengthens it?

Arrogance Because Of Property Is The Result Of Being Ignorant About Reality
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first thing that creates arrogance is property. The natural result
of an increase in wealth is an ignorant form of arrogance. I said that
arrogance stems from ignorance, because a rational person would
understand that wealth does not add anything to his existence. There is
no difference between him and a poor person, even if he has millions of
dollars. But, when his wealth is increases he sees himself better than
poor people.

Have you heard the tradition where the Messenger of Allah (S) was
sitting with a rich person and a poor person entered and sat next to his
rich brother in Islam? When he sat down the rich person tucked his
clothing in and the Messenger of Allah (S) protested and asked him why
he did that.

He immediately became regretful and said that there is something in me
that forces me to do these bad actions (arrogance was in him). He said
that he is regretful for his actions and to make it up he gave half of
his belongings to his poor brother in Islam.

The Messenger of Allah (S) asked the poor person if he accepted that and
he said: “No, because I am afraid that if I take it I will do the same
thing to another poor person.”

Being Arrogant Because Of Knowledge Is Dangerous
------------------------------------------------

Knowledge that one obtains from learning in a university, for example,
is worse than property when one thinks that he is important because of
his knowledge. He looks down on others. It is even worse if he thinks
this way about religious knowledge and considers himself to be as the
tradition says: “The scholars are the inheritors of the Prophets.”[^3]
It is dangerous when he thinks that others must obey him due to his
knowledge.

This danger is more evident for religious students than others because
in others arrogance shows itself in monetary situations. But, with
religious students, arrogance shows itself in position; his *nafs* wants
to be in a higher position. He says: “I am more knowledgeable than him,
I have studied more than he has.” In reality he is worse than the humble
illiterate person. Position is in relation to faith and actions. The
knowledge that is important is the knowledge of Allah and the last day;
it is a light found in one's heart that humbles him.

I Am The Lowest Of The Lowest
-----------------------------

One, no matter how much knowledge he has, is like a drop of water in
respect to the ocean with regard to the Imām (a). He will admit this if
he is a rational being. Look at what the Imām, who is a source of
knowledge, who is the holder of all fields of knowledge, does.

Imām Zayn al-‛Ābidīn (a) said in *Sahīfah al-Sajjādīyah*: “I am the
least of the least and the lowest of the lowest. I am even smaller than
an atom.” The infallible Imām said that he was smaller than the smallest
thing in the eyes of Allah. Now, should a person who considers himself
to be a scholar arrogantly say that he is better than so and so? Allah's
scale is piety. A religious student must not forget that he is needy and
incapable. He must not consider himself better than others. He should
not consider himself to be part of a special segment of society and the
rest of the people to be of the laity.

I Feel Lower Than You
---------------------

One would realize the scale is something other than knowledge if he has
become a scholar. For this reason he should think that maybe that person
who religiously follows me (*taqlīd*) will go to heaven and maybe I will
go to Hell. His humility grows and he sees himself lower than others.

The third reason for someone to become arrogant is because of popularity
or social status. Sometimes this even comes from family relations, for
example one who is from a certain tribe or a certain country looks down
at others and even refrains from marrying people from other segments of
society.

Sometimes this arrogance comes from being a *sayyid*. A *sayyid* is
someone who is from the Messenger of Allah's (S) lineage. How did the
Messenger of Allah (S) act? He would sit on the floor and always be the
first to greet someone, even a child. But, such and such a *sayyid*
expects others to greet him, only because he is a *sayyid*.

An Undeserving Scholar’s Fanaticism
-----------------------------------

Shaykh wrote a tradition from Imām Hasan al-‛Askarī (a) in *Risā'l*, in
the section of the single transmission. The Imām described the bad
scholar whose harm for the Muslim nation is great. He (a) said: “One of
the signs of a bad scholar is fanaticism. The more people who follow him
the greater he feels, even if they are corrupt. But, he does not pay
attention to someone who does not follow him, even if he is a good
person.”

Anybody from any social class who obtains a social position is afflicted
with this sickness. He must do something to save himself. A rational
person would try to escape from having power; he would not accept it
unless he is forced to.

Wanting To Serve People And Seeking Power Are Two Different Things
------------------------------------------------------------------

It should not be misunderstood, a leader is necessary in Islam. We need
judges and mayors. What is meant is that one should not want position,
but if it happens he should serve the people. He should not want to be
the mayor; he should want to serve the city and the Muslims. The danger
is when one wants to be in power.

The Cure Of Arrogance
---------------------

The cure of arrogance is being humble. For example, Prophet Dāwūd became
a political leader. He was both a Prophet and a political leader. The
following has been taken from the book *Man* *Lā yahdaruhu al-faqīh*: a
voice came from the sky: “Dāwūd, you are a good servant, but you make a
living from the public treasury.” Dāwūd cried to Allah for forty nights
until Allah taught him how to make armor. Then, Dāwūd would make and
sell armor for a living. It has been related that he sold every piece of
armor for 300 Dirhams. He would give 100 Dirhams in charity, 100 Dirhams
to the public treasury and would spend the rest of it on himself.

Likewise, his son Sulaymān, who had power over jinn, men, birds and
other animals, would make a living from making and selling baskets.

It is understood from traditions like these that a person who has
obtained power can fight against arrogance if he makes his living like
other people; if he is humble. I will not say; “I'm the president!” or
“I'm the one behind the desk!” or “Others must stand when I walk in the
room!”

In a tradition, Imām Sādiq (a) ordered one of his highest companions,
Muhammad bin Muslim to take some dates next to the Kūfa Mosque and sell
them. Even though Muhammad was part of the upper class in society he,
with all of his heart, accepted the order. One must fight against
arrogance even if it is by selling dates.

Practice Not Giving Orders
--------------------------

Another thing one can do is not give orders because when one gives an
order it means that he thinks he is bigger than others.

Some trustworthy people relate that the late Mīrzā Muhammad Taqī Shīrāzī
would even refrain from giving orders in his house. He would not order
his wife to bring dinner or clear dishes. He would go without dinner if
his family forgot to give it to him. Of course, I am not saying that it
is forbidden. It is not forbidden to give orders, but one must practice
fighting against his *nafs* if he wants to be a man.

[^1]: Imām ‛Alī, Nahj al-Balāghah Fayd al-Islām, page 183, speech 82

[^2]: Shaykh ‛Alī Namāzī, Mustadrak Safīnat al-Bihār, volume 2, page 360

[^3]: Shaykh ‛Alī Namāzī, Mustadrak Safīnat al-Bihār, volume 2, page 219


