Lecture 2: Human Intellect
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَنظُرِ الْإِنسَانُ مِمَّ خُلِقَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Now let man but think from what he is created!***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُلِقَ مِن مَّاء دَافِقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He is created from a drop emitted-***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَخْرُجُ مِن بَيْنِ الصُّلْبِ وَالتَّرَائِبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs[^1]22

The previous lecture was about the importance of thought. There is a
purpose behind every strength or ability that Allah gives us. Man must
use these strengths and abilities or else he will prevent himself from
achieving their blessings. The power of thought is the best ability and
the best blessing that Allah gave man. This power is what separates man
from animal. In the Qurān it says that man is respected.[^2] This
respect comes from the power of thought. Man will reach the high status
that he was created for if he uses this power, but if he refrains from
using it he will become lower than animals.

The Qurān answers the question about why some people go to Hell from the
tongue of those who are in the Hellfire. They said: “If we listened to
the warnings and used our power of thought we would not be in the
Hellfire.”[^3]

Man must think about what he was created from so that he can understand
his God. He will see the great power of creation when he realizes that
he was only a drop of water which changed into a blood clot which
changed into bones and flesh and then his spirit was blown into him. One
must ask the following questions when he grows up and is able to use his
intellect: what was I and what have I become?

It Is Impossible For Something To Come Into Existence Without A Creator
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The first thought: Is it possible for something to come into existence
by itself? Everything that has been created has a creator.

The late Sayyid Ibn Tāūs writes in the book *Kashf al-Mahajja*: “The
thought that every thing that has been created has a creator is in man’s
divine disposition (*fitrat*). From the days where he is able to use his
power of thought he knows that every effect has a cause.”

We will use a two-year-old baby as an example for this. Suppose a baby
is sitting down and does not know that you are behind him, then you drop
a toy over his shoulder. Before the baby takes the toy he will look
behind him at the person who put it there. He does this because he knows
that there was nothing there and now something appeared and nothing can
appear without a cause.

This is one of the self-evident truths. So, every thing that has been
created has a creator. The characteristics of this creator can be found
in what he created. It is clear that the creator is extremely wise and
intelligent if his creation has knowledge and wisdom. The creator must
also be extremely powerful.

Would someone accept that a watch came into existence by itself? Would
someone accept that an animal made a watch? It is clear that the person
who invented a watch, who made the little and big parts of the watch run
together in unison, must have had enough knowledge and power for the
task.

The creator, being knowledgeable and wise, becomes evident when one
looks at creation. If one seriously looks at his body he will see that
there is not one extra vein or organ in it. Everything has a purpose.

The Fingernail
--------------

To make an example, we will allude to a part of the body that is
normally overlooked. One of these parts is the fingernail. The
fingernail, like hair and feces, is made from the excess of food that
one eats. What is the purpose behind this? Why is the fingernail hard?
Many uses for the fingernail have been discovered. The fingernail is
something that the tip of the finger can lean against. As you know, man
uses his hands a lot.

Sometimes he picks heavy things up with them, and because of that, the
finger needs something to lean against in order to relieve some of the
pressure of the heavy thing. Man would not be able to lift heavy things
if the fingernail was not there and the finger did not have anything to
lean against. When one does not have a fingernail he feels pain when he
tries to lift up something heavy. What an amazing part of the body this
fingernail is!

Was The Creator Unaware?
------------------------

Is the Creator unaware of this body? Is he physical? Would the mind
accept this?

Some say that Allah has not seen the places that we have gone. One must
use his mind and think about the degree of his eyesight. Eyes are a body
part that is common between all animals. These eyes have the ability to
see big things but cannot see small things. It cannot even see air. So
how can one so easily dismiss something that he has not seen? Air, which
is physical but very small, is invisible for mankind. But, one accepts
it, because he feels it and he breathes it. Sometime one is unable to
see the water in a glass. In short, there are conditions for one to be
able to see something. Is one unable to deny the existence of
electricity?

A Proof Of The Day Of Judgment
------------------------------

The concept of resurrection is accepted after one uses this faculty of
thought. Is it possible for one to create this amazing body without a
purpose?

What is all this wisdom and knowledge that has been given to man for?
Was man created to live on earth for a couple of days, eat, sleep,
produce babies, satisfy his desires and die? This would be pointless.
The Qurān says:

***“Did you think that we created you in vain and that you will not
return to us?”***[^4]

The creation of man would be in vain if the Day of Judgment did not
exist. Man would have been created to eat in order to defecate and
defecate in order to eat. This is a never ending circle which is
illogical.

One would be able to figure out that there has to be another world; the
world that man was created for. One would be able to figure this out
without using the help of Prophets and revelation. One would understand
that this world is not the principal dwelling place of man. One would
realize that there has to be another world, a world without the
difficulties, discomforts, diseases and evil found here, a world full of
pleasure and success. This world is the dwelling place for animals, but
the next world is the dwelling place for man.

They ask: “How is it possible for man to be given life and raised after
he has died and been decomposed?” The answer is in the verse: “Verily He
is able to bring him back.” Allah is definitely able to bring them back;
He just has to create them again.

Whatever is found in this earth is an example of Allah's power and
strength. Allah says in chapter *Hijr*, verse 21:

“There is not a thing but its (sources and) treasures are with Us; but
We only send down thereof in due and ascertainable measures.”

Some of the bounties that Allah will give can be found, to a small
degree, on the earth. For example, one of Allah's bounties is a
beautiful fragrance. Some fragrances, like flowers and perfumes, can be
found on earth. The best fragrance was that of Prophet Muhammad (S),
because he is heaven.

The fragrances of the world are limited and will not overstep their
bounds. They are limited in the fragrance itself as well as the duration
of the fragrance. But, the fragrances of heaven, according to a
tradition from Imām Sādiq (a) last for one thousand years. Also, there
are traditions that say that one who severs relations with his family
will not even be able to even smell the fragrance of heaven.

The Pious Will Benefit From Allah’s Everlasting Rewards
-------------------------------------------------------

Allah will give his eternal blessings to the pious.[^5] The conditions
for receiving these blessings are being unattached to this world and
refraining from following carnal desires.2 On the Day of Judgment,
people will have the form of their insides, not their outside appearance
that they have in this world. Man is an amazing creature because he has
a part of every other creature; he can become any other creature. Man
can become a predator like a wolf or leopard. Man can become a farm
animal like a sheep. Man can also become a pig or a fox. On the other
side, the good actions of angels can be seen in man. Man can become
whatever he wants while he is in this world.

How Much Should Man Strengthen His Nature
-----------------------------------------

If the purpose of life was to fill one's stomach, becoming like a sheep
would be enough. If the purpose of life was following one's base
desires, becoming like a pig would be enough. If the purpose of life was
obtaining power, becoming like an arrogant leopard would be enough. If
one climbs a certain leopard's mountain it will attack him in such a way
that he would never try to climb that mountain again. But, there is no
danger in being below a leopard that is full. A person who is after
power is ready to commit any atrocity to his rivals in order to get
ahead.

In short, there is an example of every form of existence in man. One may
reach salvation if he controls himself, does not try and push himself in
the front, and is not after satisfying his carnal desires.

Greed Compels One To Commit Any Crime
-------------------------------------

Greed is found in some animals, especially the ant. A greedy person
becomes lower than an ant or mouse. This trait causes one to commit
atrocities, to be unjust and to sell things for way more than they are
worth. They think that they will be able to keep their wealth.[^6]

There are others who walk the road of the angels. They become true human
beings. How easy it is to be an animal and how hard is it to be a human!
Sometimes man serves others and forgets that he was sperm and will
become a decomposed dead body.

Have you heard that Imām ‛Alī (a) went to the marketplace and bought two
shirts with Qanbar? Imām ‛Alī (a) gave the better shirt to his servant
Qanbar. Qanbar said: “But, you're my master and the leader (*khalīfa*)
of the Muslims?”

Imām ‛Alī (a) said: “I would become shy in front of Allah if I placed
myself above you.”

‛Alī (a) was created and Qanbar was created as well. If ‛Alī's (a)
station is higher than Qanbar it is only because Allah gave it to him,
but, in regards to being created, they are the same. The Shī‛a must use
these kinds of examples to show ‛Alī's greatness. One should not
consider himself higher or better than another. One should not sit
comfortably while someone else is serving him; instead one should serve
others.

Bearing The Difficulties With Travelers Who Are Visiting Imām Husayn’s Grave
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The following has been related by some trustworthy people in Najaf by
one of students of the late mujtahid Akhūnd Mullā Husaynqulī. When the
student met his teacher, Mullā Husaynqulī asked him what he did the
previous night. The student said: “Nothing.”

Mullā Husaynqulī said: “What did you do in the middle of the night?”

The student said: “I did not do anything; I was sleeping.”

Mullā Husaynqulī: “This can't be; tell me everything from the beginning
of the night.”

The student said: “Last night I had some guests who came here from
Karbala to visit Imām ‛Alī's (a) shrine. My room was small and we all
slept there after dinner. In the middle of the night I felt something
heavy on my chest and woke up in discomfort. I saw that one of these
travelers was in a deep sleep with his foot on my chest. I wanted to
move his foot, but then I thought that he is on a zīyārat trip and is
also a scholar. The Prophet (S) also said that we must be respectful and
generous to our guests. I bore this difficulty until he moved his leg
himself.

Mullā Husaynqulī said: “That is it. I can see the gleam in your face
from this action last night. You did not have this light before, did you
think what you did was small?”

I Wish I Could Be A Flower, But If I’m Not I Do Not Want To Be A Thorn
----------------------------------------------------------------------

A real man wants others to be comfortable and does not seek comfort for
himself. He tries to lessen other people's struggles and difficulties
instead of making difficulties for others. He tries to give other people
honor, not take honor away from people. He tries to fill people's
stomachs, not eat people’s bread. Man can have the characteristics of
angels or animals. An animal does not want to serve others while an
angel's job is serving humanity.

In short, how have you built yourself? Look at yourself. Have you become
a wolf? A fox? If you have you will be this in the next world. If you
have become an angel you will be one in the next world as well. Your
place will not be heaven until you acquire the traits of an angel.

Bashīr And Mubashshir Are The Same As Nakīr And Munkar
------------------------------------------------------

Have you heard that two angels come and interrogate the dead person on
the first night, after he is buried? The popular opinion is that their
names will be Nakīr and Munkar. These two words come from the Arabic
root meaning something distasteful or something that will cause harm and
unhappiness. Who are Nakīr and Munkar sent for? They are sent for people
who have died before they purified themselves. But, Nakīr and Munkar are
not sent for the pious, instead Bashīr and Mubashir, the givers of glad
tidings, are sent.

In one of the supplications of the month of Rajab we say: “O' Allah do
not send Nakīr and Munkar to me on the first night in my grave; instead
send Bashīr and Mubashshir.” So, the two angels that come to the
believer's grave are Bashīr and Mubashshir and the two angels that come
to the unbeliever's grave are Nakīr and Munkar.

[^1]: 86:5-7.

[^2]: Refer to 17:70.

[^3]: Refer to 67:10.

[^4]: 23:115.

[^5]: Refer to 3:133 and 26:90.

[^6]: Refer to 104:3.


