Lecture 4: Divine Wisdom is Found From One’s Head To Toe
========================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَنظُرِ الْإِنسَانُ مِمَّ خُلِقَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Now let man but think from what he is created!***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُلِقَ مِن مَّاء دَافِقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He is created from a drop emitted-***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَخْرُجُ مِن بَيْنِ الصُّلْبِ وَالتَّرَائِبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs [^1]

It was said in the previous lecture that Allah ordered man to think
about his beginning. One must think that he was made from sperm, a
substance that everyone hates. It is said that there are 34 bones in
one's hand and if one of those bones was not there man would fall into
many difficulties. Each finger has three parts so that one can make a
fist, pick things up, and open and close his hands.

One would see wisdom if he carefully looked at his body. He would see
that no part has been created in vain. There are not any extra veins or
bones. If one thinks that there is a part of his body that was created
in vain, he must realize that his thought has a problem.

Nature’s Choice, A Clear Contradiction
--------------------------------------

What does choice mean? A person who has intellectual capabilities
chooses the better of two choices. The chooser must have an intellect,
knowledge and understanding to be able to choose the better option. If
nature does not have an intellect, what does choice mean? Does sperm
have a brain which enables it to make a body?

Pay attention to your eyelids. The upper eyelids curl upwards and the
lower eyelids curl downwards. In this way they become pairs. If it was
not like this they would not pair up; instead they would clump up
together and would not be able to protect the eye from dust.

Millions Of Cells In Each Body Part
-----------------------------------

Many research reports have been written and will be written about how
many of the wisdoms found in the body are left unknown, but might be
found out in the future. Likewise, we understand many things that the
people of the past did not understand.

One's hearing faculty is comprised of three million cells, and if some
of them are missing one will become deaf. One of my family members was
deaf and went to the doctor. The doctor said that the reason he can not
hear is that he is missing 16,000 of the three million cells necessary
to hear.

It is really amazing to look at one's creation and see what happened.

Two of the names of Allah are All-wise and All-knowledgeable. Look at
the complete wisdom and knowledge of Allah's actions that can be found
in the body.

Ibn Sīnā made an interesting remark. He said: “Man becomes astonished at
a magnet that picks up a little bit of metal, but does not become
astonished at the fact that his intellect picks up and moves his heavy
body with ease.” This is the same body that a few people struggle to
move after death. What kind of ability is this that one can move just by
having the desire to do so? Where does this ability come from? What
great abilities Allah gave to the soul!

Humility In Front Of Allah’s Favors
-----------------------------------

One must continue thinking like this. Study the wonders of the body.
Ponder upon them and then say: “Glory be to Allah, the Best creator.”

When man understands these things, his intellect tells him to be humble
in front of such a Creator.

Great men have correctly stated that man is the slave of goodness. It is
his nature to like and be humble in front of people who treat him
kindly. If one thinks about the abundant favors from Allah, if one
realizes that blessings from other than Allah do not exist, one will
become humble in front of the truth.

Understand The Favor Before It Goes Away
----------------------------------------

A few years ago my ears got clogged up and I couldn't hear anything for
a few days. I was forced to go to a doctor and he cleaned my ears for
me. An hour after my ears were cleaned I heard a sound. I became so
happy and said: “O' Allah! What a great blessing you have given me but I
was unaware of it.” Man is like this, he does not know the greatness of
a blessing until it is taken away from him. I hope that you will not
wait for a blessing to be taken away from you for you to understand its
greatness.

The greatness of one's ability to speak becomes clear if it is taken
away. We should praise Allah with this ability, we should say: “Allah is
the greatest.” Do not ever forget Allah. Allah gave so many blessings,
internal blessings, external blessings, material blessings and spiritual
blessings. He created the earth, skies and stars for mankind.

It has been heard that some say that Allah does not need our worship or
thanks. This is true, but you are in need of it. Whatever man does is
for himself.[^2] He receives the results of his actions, be they good or
be they bad. If one thanks Allah he will become higher than the angels
and will receive a lofty reward from Allah. But, it is to your own loss
if you do not thank Allah. At the end, Allah knows where there is hope;
he helps everyone reach the goal which is being in the presence of Allah
(*liqā' Allah*).

[^1]: 86:5-7.

[^2]: Refer to 2:285.


