Lecture 5: The Means Of Understanding Man’s Beginning And End
=============================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَنظُرِ الْإِنسَانُ مِمَّ خُلِقَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Now let man but think from what he is created!***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُلِقَ مِن مَّاء دَافِقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He is created from a drop emitted-***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَخْرُجُ مِن بَيْنِ الصُّلْبِ وَالتَّرَائِبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs [^1]

Two principle Islamic beliefs are the creation and the resurrection. It
is obligatory for man to know about his creation and Creator, then to
know about his end and return.

These two verses tell man to think about his creation. It is clear that
man must look into his creation so he can understand his Creator and his
end. What an amazing structure was created out of a drop of water; a
structure that from its head to toe is full of wisdom, in such a way
that even one vein was not created without purpose. An extra bone was
not created. What one can understand from this body is that Allah is
All-powerful and there is no limit to His ability. He created this
amazing body, a body that has been researched for thousands of years,
but still not completely understood, in triple darkness from a drop of
water.

Lifeless Objects Are Unable To Create
-------------------------------------

Is the One who created unaware?[^2] Was the One who created in such a
way that there is no atom that does not have a purpose, unintelligent?
Communists, who reject the concept of God and the higher world, claim
that whatever exists is the result of the perfection of nature. What do
they say about all the wisdom that is found all over the world? Is it
possible that an unwise being created it? They say that material is
unintelligent; how does this fit? It is a contradiction. From one side
they say that material objects and nature do not have intelligence and
on the other side they say 'nature's choice.' Choosing is an action that
depends on intelligence.

A Big Problem With Darwin’s Proposition
---------------------------------------

Or some say that man was originally a monkey perfected by nature. They
say that the monkey loosed its tail and hair and stood up straight. If
this is true there should not be any more monkeys on earth. How did one
monkey become a human while the rest remained monkeys? If it is nature
that perfects itself, what is the difference between the monkeys that
remained monkeys and the monkeys that became human? Is it that one
monkey became perfected and another did not become perfected?

It is clear that they are not willing to accept the truth. They do not
want to sincerely use their abilities to find the truth out. They reject
clear truths so that they won't be called 'religious.'

Man’s Understanding Is Not An Offspring Of Something Material
-------------------------------------------------------------

Does man have an intellect or not? Every man knows that he has an
intellect. Was the One who built you unintelligent? Every man was a drop
of sperm; did a material object give him his intellect?

Did a drop of sperm or another material object give you your intellect?
Is it possible for someone to claim this? There is no other choice
except to say that the Creator, All-knowledgeable and Living, gave me my
intellect. Just like the body is a creation, it came from nothing into
existence; the intellect is a creation that came from nothing into
existence. Someone had to have given man his intellect. Where did this
intellect come from? Is it possible to say that a material object made
it or it was 'nature's best choice'? Does your intellect accept this?
The intellect that man has is able to find new galaxies and new stars.
This is even a proof that one's spirit is immaterial.

Encompassing Knowledge Is A Sign Of The Immaterial Soul
-------------------------------------------------------

What is this man who can learn about everything in the world? What power
gives us the ability to know about our insides and how they work? This
is one of the biggest proofs that the soul is immaterial. A leaf of a
tree is unaware of other leaves. A finger is unaware of other fingers.
Each atom of one's body is unaware of other atoms. It becomes clear that
man is something other than his body, there is a power from his head to
his toe. This power is aware of all the different parts of his body. Can
someone deny the fact that he has knowledge? Is this knowledge material,
was it given to you by a material object or did the one who create you
give you this knowledge? Man's intellect is the biggest proof that he is
immaterial; his soul is immaterial.

When man thinks about his creation he realizes that he was created by
Allah, the All-knowledgeable, the All-powerful. The intellect he uses to
think about this is immaterial and he also realizes that Allah is able
to create this body again.

The Body In The Hereafter is not Affected by Materialism
--------------------------------------------------------

The body in the next world is different from the body in this world. For
example, there is no waste or defecation in heaven. There is no urine,
feces, hair or fingernails. In addition to this, the body does not
become tired due to working in the next life. There are no sicknesses.
The body in the next life is the same body as we have here, but its
make-up is in such a way that the necessary wastes of a material body
are not there. Right now we are unable to imagine this perfectly because
these wastes and defecations are necessary parts of material beings.

People have made a similitude for this. No matter how much you would try
to make a fetus understand that outside of its mother's stomach is a
huge world full of fruit, food, plants and animals he would not
understand. Man is the same way when he is in the stomach of the natural
world in relation to the unnatural world. However much one wants to make
man understand about the different attractions of the next world he will
not understand.

The Qurān said:

“No one knows what has been kept hidden for them of comfort (in the
hereafter) as a reward for what they used to do.”[^3]

We will now discuss some verses related to the Resurrection.

The Rejectors Do Not Have Any Proof
-----------------------------------

Those who reject the hereafter only say that it is impossible; they do
not have any proof. In the same way that they reject the creation, they
raise the question: how can Allah bring dead bones back to life?

The biggest proof for the resurrection is the verse: ***“Verily, Allah
is able to bring him back”***[^4] One who was able to create the body
out of a drop of sperm can create it out of a handful of dirt as well.
The Qurān even says that it is easier for him to do that. Bringing back
to life is easier than creating from scratch. Another nice point has
been made in chapter *Qiyāmat*:

“We are able to make man's fingerprints.”[^5]

Tantāwī, an Egyptian Qurānic scholar wrote that the point of the
previous verse was unknown until the modern century. He claims that it
is one of the miracles of the Qurān. Previously people did not pay
attention to the fact that every person has a special fingerprint. Four
and a half billion people have different fingerprints. Because of this,
people must give their fingerprints as a signature and there are places
that catch criminals by finding their fingerprints.

The Differences In People’s Faces
---------------------------------

No two people have the exact same face. Even twins have small
differences. Similarly, no two voices are exactly the same. What
atrocities would happen if they were the same? The order of the world
would be destroyed. There would not be a social life because nobody
would be able to differentiate between two people. Here we can see that
the wise Creator made a wise decision in this regard.

The creation and the resurrection are necessary beliefs, evident beliefs
and in accordance with one's intellect and divine disposition.

Respecting Graves Is A Sign Of Accepting The Hereafter
------------------------------------------------------

People wrote; when Stalin would be faced with a difficult situation,
which was not solved by consultation, he would visit Lenin's grave. He
would stay there until his problem was solved. This materialist's
conscience did not believe that Lenin's soul was dead. If he did, why
would he go to Lenin's grave? Why would he ask help from Lenin? Why do
others build monuments over the graves of unknown soldiers and then
respect them? Their consciences testify to the fact that there is a God
and that there is life after death. If revelation did not exist, this is
what man's conscience or divine disposition would do.

The problem is this: if this is so clear why does most of mankind reject
it?

The answer to this question is found in chapter *Qiyāmat*:

“Rather man desires to go on living viciously.”[^6]

For this reason they overlook every truth. If one wants to enjoy power
he must overlook his responsibilities. If he does not do this he will
realize that he is a servant of Allah and has responsibilities that he
must fulfill. After he realizes this, would he continue to say
'I..I..I'? Arrogance and *tawhīd* are opposites; they cannot come
together.

One who considers himself a needy servant of Allah will not be arrogant
or after power. He will not want to be above others. For this reason,
those who follow their carnal desires close their eyes to all forms of
truth, even if it is a self-evident truth.

Hārūn And Mamūn Knew The Station Of The Imāms
---------------------------------------------

It is said that someone asked Mamūn how he came to like Imām Ridā (a).
He said that he learned this from his father. He was with his father in
Medina and important people came to see him. He said: “One day a person
came in and my father stood up and sat that man down next to him and
spoke to him with the highest form of manners. That night, I asked my
father who that man was that you were so humble in front of and he
replied that it was Mūsa bin Ja‛far (a). I then asked who Mūsa bin
Ja‛far was and he replied that he is my Imām and your Imām. I then
asked; 'You are not the rightful possessor of the *khilāfat*? My father
replied; 'No, he is the rightful *khalīfa*.”

I then angrily told my father: “If this is the case why do you want to
imprison and exile him?”

He said: “Power does not even know a son. If he was a problem I would
kill him or take his son's eyes out like other kings have done.”

The purpose of this story is to show how bad man can be, he can put the
truth to the side even if it is as clear as the sun.

Love Of This World Is The Root Of Sin
-------------------------------------

We should not forget that last year, when Imām Khomeini wanted to swear
in the new president he said: “The love of the world is the root of all
sins.”

This is a warning bell for everyone. Love of the world is such a trait
that when one has it he is willing to overlook all truths and willing to
unlawfully get rid of all adversaries. This arrogance and narcissism is
dangerous. So, now it is clear why so many reject the truth even if it
is so clear.

[^1]: 86:5-7.

[^2]: 67:14.

[^3]: 32:17.

[^4]: 86:8.

[^5]: 75:4.

[^6]: 75:5.


