Lecture 8: Lust Results In The Continuation Of Human Life
=========================================================

Lust and anger are two traits, two powers that Allah put inside man. The
continuation of mankind is dependent on these two traits. Lust is used
to attract benefits and anger is used to keep away loss. If one did not
have any lust or desire he would not go after the things that his body
needs. One would not eat if he did not have a desire for food, and when
he does not eat he would die. So, it is a blessing that one has this
desire for food that forces him to struggle to obtain something to eat.

Sexual desires are also necessary for the prolongation of human life.
Nobody would get married if sexual desires did not exist, because
married life has its difficulties and bad times. For this reason there
must be a desire, a lust in man for him to marry and have children. So,
sexual desires are necessary for the continuation of human life.

Spiritual Growth Is Also Found In Anger and Lust
------------------------------------------------

The social order of man would become destroyed if man did not get angry,
if man was indifferent to his property being stolen, to his life being
taken or to the life of his loved one's being taken. That person would
not do anything; he would not protect his money or his honor. So, anger
is necessary to protect him from all sorts of losses that he would be
faced with.

These traits, lust and anger are necessary in this world and are also
necessary for the next world. One's religion is also dependent on these
two traits. One must choose the middle course in these traits; one must
not become, for example, too angry or not angry enough. Both becoming
too angry or not angry enough are mistakes.

Determining the middle course is dependant on the intellect and
religious decrees. One's intellect, when it has grown enough to be able
to determine right from wrong, and divine laws guide man to finding the
middle course.

Becoming Too Angry Or Lustful Or Not Angry Or Lustful Enough Is Dangerous
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

A man who becomes too angry or too lustful or not angry enough or not
lustful enough will be lower than any animal.

The middle course of these two traits is the straight path (*sirāt
al-mustaqīm*).[^1] One's state in the hereafter depends on his state in
this world. The person who falls off the middle course in this world
will fall in the next world as well. Most of the bad things and
difficulties that happen in this world are because of man's actions.[^2]

The Middle Course In Eating; Not Being Excessive
------------------------------------------------

One will be healthy if he follows the middle course regarding the desire
for food. The middle course in eating is eating the necessary amount and
variety of food. The Qurān orders us: ***“Eat and drink, but do not be
excessive.”***[^3]

The commander of the faithful, Imām ‛Alī (a) also has given an order in
this regard. He said that one should not eat until one is hungry and
should stop eating before one is full. If one eats when he is full he
will get a digestive disease. This is being excessive. On the other side
not eating enough is not eating anything for 24 hours. For this reason,
it has been commanded for a person who is fasting to eat something at
night. For this reason eating something before dawn has become part of
the Islamic culture.

The poet S‛adī has wrote a poem in this regards: “Do not eat so much so
that food falls out of your mouth and do not eat so little so that you
die of weakness.”

One should not become weak due to lack of eating and one should not eat
so much that he would become sick and get digestive diseases. Some have
said: “The stomach is the home of all pain.” This was about the amount
of food, but about the kinds of food:

A Colorful Dinner Table And Different Diseases
----------------------------------------------

Never become accustomed to eating all kinds of different food at once.
The more kinds of food that man eats the more health problems he will
have. He thinks that he will become stronger from eating these different
kinds of foods, but it is the opposite. The different kinds of sweets
and fatty foods that one eats bring him closer to getting diabetes and
other diseases.

One who is used to eating different kind of foods must also spend a lot
of money. For this reason it is possible for him to commit any crime in
order to provide his stomach with what it wants. But when one is
satisfied with whatever is brought to him, when one does not care to eat
different kinds of food he will not commit these crimes; instead he will
fight against his *nafs*.

You have heard how Abu Dharr fought against his personal desires and did
not accept Mu‛āwīyah's elaborate dinner invitations or pouches of gold.
Instead, he was satisfied with barley bread.

One who is satisfied is honored. He pays attention to what is allowed
and what is forbidden.

So, being excessive in eating or not eating enough is when one steps out
of the ordinary and necessary amount or varieties of food that the body
needs. The middle course is eating the necessary amount and varieties of
food that the body needs.

One Must Follow The Middle Course In Sexual Desires As Well
-----------------------------------------------------------

The middle course must be followed in sexual desires; the desire to
touch the opposite sex. One should not refrain from marriage because
this has been ordered against. The Prophet of Islam (S) said: “Marriage
is a good custom (*sunnah*) and something that I have done. One who does
not act according to my customs is not from me.”[^4]

Refraining from marriage all together is a form of negligence. Allah
gave man sexual desires so that man will procreate. There has been a
tradition from the Messenger of Allah (S) regarding this as well. He
said: “Get married and have children. Increase in population so I can
take pride at your being larger than other communities on the Day of
Judgment.”[^5]

Being excessive in sexual desires is also a mistake. Suppose one is not
able to take care of one woman, he will only cause himself and others
pain in getting another wife. Also, different diseases occur when one
performs the act excessively. One's life span also becomes shorter when
he does this in excess.

The Middle Course In Marriage Is Relative
-----------------------------------------

The middle course regarding sexual desires must be adhered to. One
should marry according to what the divine law says and according to what
man's nature says. After marriage, one should perform the act according
to his body's ability. The ability of men's bodies differ; likewise the
middle course differs from man to man. For some once a week is the
middle course, for some twice a week and for some once every two weeks.

The Spiritual Benefits Of Making A Family
-----------------------------------------

It is necessary for one's soul to make a family. One finds perfection
after dealing with the difficulties of marriage and childbearing. As I
alluded to before, religious decrees are related to man's nature and
instincts. One who acts in excess or refrains from satisfying his
desires not only has acting against divine orders but will also suffer
spiritual and physical diseases. He will lose the blessings of having a
household which will perfect him on a spiritual level.

Do Not Oppress Nor Be Oppressed
-------------------------------

Anger also has a middle course. The middle course of anger is necessary
and man becomes perfected in it.

One must not remain indifferent when his property, loved ones, honor or
life is put in danger. It is correct to be angry at these times. As long
as one is able, he must not let someone take away the *halāl* money that
he has obtained. The same goes for his honor, life and loved ones.

The Qurān says: ***“Do not oppress nor be oppressed.”***[^6] Do not hit
someone without reason and do not allow someone to hit you.

A sentence from the Bible has been narrated that I do not believe is
from divine revelation. There is no doubt that the Bible and the Torah
have been tampered with. They say that Jesus (a) said: “Whenever someone
hits you, turn your cheek so that they could hit the other side as
well.”

This is in opposition to justice and man's nature. Do not kill and do
not let someone kill you. Do not hit and do not let someone hit you. Do
not fight without a cause, but fight if there is a cause.

Being Indifferent
-----------------

Suppose someone is indifferent and says: “They came, what's it to me?
They left, what's it to me? They were killed, what's it to me?” This
person is like what the Commander of faithful (a) said: “A person who
does not move to fight against wrong, or at least, does not feel angry
in his heart, is like a dead man walking.”

I have previously described what being too angry is and what not being
angry enough is. Not being angry enough is being indifferent to someone
taking one's property, life, loved ones or honor. Being too angry is
becoming angry when one should not become angry or exceeding the limits
of anger even when one should be angry. One must refrain from both of
these cases. I gave examples of both of these cases in the last lecture.
I explained that some of the cases where one should not become angry are
due to having false expectations. For example, one expects everyone to
stand up and treat him with respect when he enters a room, but when one
or two people do not stand up he gets angry. What kind of expectation
was that?

The Prophet (S) Did Not Want Respect
------------------------------------

It is a mistake to expect man to respect you. The Messenger of Allah
(S), with all of his majesty, said that he did not agree with the way
that everyone showed him respect when he entered a meeting.

The Prophet (S) did not expect others to respect him; he did not
consider himself better than others. It is the community's duty to
respect him, but he wanted to show that one should not expect others to
respect him nor should he consider himself better than others. The
Messenger of Allah (S) did not consider himself better than his nation;
instead he considered himself their servant. He did not expect anything
from them, he was a servant sent by Allah. For this reason, his reward
is also with Allah.[^7] Respecting and loving his family, which has been
ordered, is for the Muslims; it is a benefit for the Muslims
themselves.[^8]

Be Happy If Someone Did Not Treat You Ill
-----------------------------------------

Especially, the religious scholars and seminary students should follow
this strategy of the Prophet (S). One of the great scholars said that a
scholar should expect people to throw stones at him when he leaves his
house and when that does not happen he should be thankful. A scholar
should not expect people to greet him, treat him with respect and kiss
his hands. You are a follower of the Prophet (S); you have and heard
about how much he has been tortured, how bad he has been treated, how
much he has been hit by stones and bones. Now, I should say: “I am a
scholar. I am a *sayyid*. Respect me.” But, if they do not respect me
should I become angry?

The Prophet (S) And Imāms (A) Did Not Have Expectations
-------------------------------------------------------

You should not expect others to serve you; instead you should serve
mankind. Do not desire to become higher or better than others; instead
follow the path of the Prophet (S) and the pure Imāms (a).

It has been related that, in one of the Islamic wars, the Prophet's
companions slaughtered a sheep. Every one of them had a certain job to
do. The Messenger of Allah (S) went to collect firewood and they told
him: “We are your servants, O Messenger of Allah. Sit down and relax, we
will collect the firewood ourselves.” The Prophet responded by saying
that he would feel shy from his Lord if he would consider himself in a
higher position than his companions.[^9]

We Should Not Expect Greetings And Respect
------------------------------------------

I am trying to say that the scholars must lower their expectations. They
should not expect people to serve them. (Of course, the people have
their own duty, they should respect scholars.) For example, a scholar
should not expect the people to greet him; instead they should follow
the Prophet's (S) example and greet the people. Just like the Prophet
said: “There are three things that I will not leave as long as I am
alive; one of them is greeting the people before they greet me.” (The
second and third things are sitting on the ground and not walking in
front of others.)

[^1]: Refer to 6:153.

[^2]: Refer to 42:30.

[^3]: 7:31.

[^4]: ‛Allāmah Majlīsī, Bihār al-Anwār, volume 103, page 220.

[^5]: Same as above.

[^6]: 2:279.

[^7]: Refer to 42:23.

[^8]: Refer to 34:47.

[^9]: ‛Allāmah Majlīsī, Bihār al-Anwār, volume 6.


