10. the House of Doom
=====================

Fâtemeh used to cry a lot because of her longing for her father… She
cried night and day. She was restless and full of sorrow. Finally, some
foolish and unthoughtful persons came to see Ali, And began to complain
about Fâtemeh’s crying. They told him that either Fâtemeh should mourn
her father by nightfall, and remain silent by morning, or mourn by
morning, and remain silent by nightfall.

They said that they couldn’t bear her mornings any longer, and that Ali
should find a way to keep her quiet. On hearing this, Fâtemeh got used
to take the little hands of her two sons, and go at the end of the
“Baghi “ graveyard, under a thorny shrub, to be able to mourn properly
her beloved father and cry at her will. Her wailing were so strong and
pitiful, that every caravan that passed from Medina, on hearing these
sobbing and wailings, paused for a few minutes to think about this
strange, unending sorrow…

Finally by nightfall, the enemies uprooted the said shrub, so that
Fâtemeh could not even go there anymore. But Ali, put a sort of a tent
there by the name of “ The House of doom “[Beytol Ahzân] for the sake of
the Prophet’s daughter, so as to show their enemies, their untamable
independence, and their

infinite freedom of mind, which were the characteristics of the
Household of Hazraté Ali Ibn Abi Tâléb and his wife Fâtemeh.

Fâtemeh because of her daily mourning and sufferings which she had
received from their enemies was becoming weak and weaker every day. At
last she became ill…

Ali became the only person who took care of her during her illness.
Another person was a woman by the name of Asmâ Bent Omeyss. At last, the
news of her illness reached the ears of the citizens of Medina.

A multitude of Muslim women came to see her, and to help her recuperate
her lost health. But their number was so great, that they couldn’t enter
her house; so, many of them remained in the outside. The house of
Fâtemeh was so simple and poor, and her personality was so sweet and
humble, so great in her magnitude and glory, that everybody grew silent 
and nobody could utter a word in her presence…

Finally, Fâtemeh in answer to a lady, began to talk and say very
important things to all of them. While she was talking, she admitted
that:” My state of mind is such, that I verily love no more the earthly
world, and I despise your men… I tried to examine and test their
mentality and their readiness to come to my aid, but the sad result was
that I grew very unsatisfied and very upset by their reaction… so, I
left them be with their way of behavior and thinking.”

The reaction of  Fâtemeh’s complaint on her illbed, produced a spiritual
awakening on Ansâri women; so much so that the enemies of Ali were
forced to go and negotiate with him, to silence this rebellion. They

found a way : could they come and pay a visit to Fâtemeh?...

But not only their visit to Fâtemeh, did not improve the situation, but
it also worsened their case, and made them more hateful and mean and
petty in front of the others…

Unfortunately, the health of Fâtemeh went away slowly and each passing
day, she grew worse… Finally, in the last day of her very short life, in
midday, she went to a deep sleep. In her dream, she saw her beloved
father who told her that on that very same night, she would come to meet
him at last…

Fâtemeh, woke up and decided to prepare herself for her deathbed; she
washed her body, put on a neat dress and then lied down to the direction
of the Qibla. She then put her fragile, innocent and pure hands on her
bosom.

After that, Fâtemeh told Ali about her beatific vision, and gave him her
last directions, and made her testament.

She said: ‘‘In the Name of God, The Most Merciful, The Most
Compassionate! This is the testament of Fâtemeh, the Prophet’s daughter.
I attest that there is no God, but He, and Mohammad is His last
Messenger. Heaven and Hell exist truly, and the Resurrection will be
accomplished, and nobody should doubt this undeniable truth. For God
will truly resurrect all who have slept in their grave… O Ali! I am
Fâtemeh, daughter of Mohammad.

God has made me your wife, so that not only in this world, but also in
the Hereafter, I will be your faithful

companion, and be always at your side my noble husband…

You were more dignified and worthier than all, to become my husband.

O Ali! After my death… and after some time has elapsed, make a prayer
for my sake, and then put me on earth, so that nobody learns of this
news, and nobody finds out the whereabouts of my grave! I entrusted thee
to God, and till the Resurrection Day, I tell thee my farewell and my
good wishes : to thee and to my beloved children…!”

After that, only a few seconds had passed, when Fâtemeh looked at the
corner of the room in which she was lying down, and said joyfully:” I
salute thee, O Gabriel! I salute thee, O Messenger of God!”

And then, her eyes were shut, and her soul flew up lightly to Heaven…

\*       \*       \*
