11. Mourning For Zahra
======================

In the middle of the night, the cry of a hopeless sorrow flew of this
house. And then some more…

The women from the Ghorayche tribe, especially those from the Bani
Hashem tribe, came out of their house, and with hair flowing on their
shoulders to show the depth of their sorrow, they began marching to
Fâtemeh’s house, to make their condolences to Hazrâte Ali, and to
Fâtemeh’s little children, now orphans…

The men of Medina came by large groups to show their respect to Ali, and
to mourn with him. Ali was seated in a corner, and Hassan and Hosseyn
and Zeynab and Ommo Kolssoum were crying unendingly…

The people, on seeing this scene began to cry. Because of what Fâtemeh
had demanded from Ali, he announced to his friend Abuzar:” Tell these
people that the funeral has been postponed…”

Finally, nightfall came. Ali, with the help of Asmâ, washed the fragile,
slim and pure body of Fâtemeh, and covered her with a shrine. When he
wanted to close the shroud, he called out his children to come and see
their beloved mother for the last time, and to bid farewell to her…

Some say that she was only eighteen, and some say that she was twenty
eight years old when she died.

Hassan and Hosseyn, ran hopelessly and sorrowfully to touch once again
the dead body of their young mother… Gone so soon. They wanted to remain
at her side and feel her presence near them. Minutes passed by, with
only the sound of a tragic crying in the room, they talked lovingly and
desperately to their mother, and verily, their sorrow was so deep that
none can ever describe it.

They said: “O Beloved Mother of Hassan! O Beloved Mother of Hosseyn! We
shall feel your absence more deeply by each passing day, and also the
absence of our our beloved Grandfather, Mohammad Mostafâ  [ Peace be
upon Him! ]. When you reach the realm in which he lives now, please send
our love to Him…! Tell him that we are left all alone in this whole
world…!”

And then, Fâtemeh’s body was taken outside, and with the help of Hassan
and Hosseyn, Ammâr, Yâsser, Meghdâd, Aghil, Zobeyr, Abouzar, Salmân, and
some of the Bani Hashem tribe, they left town to take Fâtemeh’s body to
the graveyard.

Ali, most painfully and desperately, laid down his beloved and innocent
wife on the ground, and with indescribable sorrow, bid her farwell…

After finishing what was expected of him, he threw with utter
desperation and love, some dust on his wife’s grave, and then looked
sadly at the Prophet’s grave.

He then approached his grave and began a long confidence with him, which
lasted a long time…
