13. the Prophet of God and Fâtemeh the Proper Prayer Before Sleep
=================================================================

Fâtemeh is known to have recounted this interesting true story:”

One day, as I was preparing myself  to sleep, suddenly I saw my father
entering our room. He said:” My beloved daughter! Never sleep at night,
unless you have accomplished four things…!

First, You have to read your Quran from the beginning to end.

Then you have to ask for the great Prophets of God to intercede in your
favor after your death.

The third thing you should remember, is that you have to make all the
faithful believers happy and content of you.

And finally, you have to go to Mecca, and accomplish the Pilgrimage of
Hajj”.

Fâtemeh said:” After having said that, my father began to perform his
prayer, and I had to wait until he finished his prayer to ask more
information from him. I said most confused:” O Messenger of God you

have ordered me to do four things before sleep… But beloved father, I
cannot see myself executing such things! I am unable to accomplish them
at this late hour!”

The Prophet smiled graciously, and answered: “If you say three times the
“Ikhlas” sourate, it’s as though you have read the Holy Quran from the
beginning to end. If you say greetings and salutations to me and to the
other great Prophets, you make us intercede in your favour. If you pray
for the faithful believers, you have made them happy and content. And at
last, if you say “Sobhân Allâhé, valhamdolléllâhé, valâ élâha éllâllâhé
vallâho akbar…” “it’s as though you have accomplished the Pilgrimage of 
Hajj…”

\*       \*       \*

The best gift in the world!
---------------------------

Fâtemeh has also recounted that once, she went to see her beloved
father, to ask for a maid, so that she could do the house chores with
her help.

Our Prophet asked her:” Do you wish me instruct you of something much
more valuable than these wordly thing?” And then he added:” when you go
to bed, always remember to say 33 times “Sobhanallâh’’, 33 times
“Alhamdolléllâh’’ 34 times ‘ Allâho Akbar”.

This is much better than anything in this world for you! My beloved
daughter, are you happy, now that I have taught you this precious
prayer?”

And Fâtemeh had replied:” Yes father, I am much obliged and I thank
you!”

\*       \*       \*

Greetings to Fâtemeh
--------------------

Fâtemeh is known to have said: ‘‘When My father, was alive, he once had
told me:” If anyone greets me or you three times in one day, he or she
shall enter the paradise.”

Somebody had asked:” O beloved Prophet! While you are still alive, or
even after your death?”

He had replied:” Not only in my lifetime, but also after my death.”

And Ali had heard from Fâtemeh that her father had announced that anyone
who greets and salutes him or Fâtemeh, shall undoubtedly enter the
Paradise.

Ali, as the savior of people
----------------------------

Fâtemeh is known to have said:” My beloved father had said:” O Ali! You
are truly a benefactor of the Paradise! It’s you who will knock on the
Gate of the Paradise, and without counting, shall let the people who
love you and your family, enter the Paradise…!”

The ninth child
---------------

Hazraté Imâm Hosseyn had said:” My mother told me once that when I was
born, my grandfather came to see me.

I was clad in a yellow cloth, and my beloved grandfather took instead a
white cloth to envelop me with it, and when he had finished doing this,
he then said the “ Azân “ in my right ear, and then the “Ighâmah’’ in my
left ear. He had said then to my mother:” O Fâtemeh! Take good care of
your baby. He will be the father of many Imâms! These nine Imâms shall
be his progeny, and they will be a very great and holy Imâms! And the
ninth one, will be none other than Imâm Mahdi [ May we offer gladly our
lives for him! ]! “

The reward
----------

Fâtemeh is known to have said:” I heard from my husband, and he too
heard this from my beloved father that:” Whoever in this whole world has
done a good deed for one of my progeny, and yet, has not received a
great reward from God Almighty? Himself..?!”

\*       \*       \* 

Fâtemeh is known to have said:” My father has said the best people are
those who prefer to be modest and humble, and who respect their
companion in life [ either his wife or her husband ].”

Fâtemeh is known to have said:” Everybody should kneel down in front of
his or her mother. Because Paradise is under the sweet feet of the
mothers…”

Once the Prophet asked some women :” What is the best thing for women to
do ? “ As these women didn’t know the answer, they hurried to Fâtemeh’s
house to ask her the same question. She replied:” the best thing for a
woman to do, is that she should never look directly at any man’s face,
and never let other men gaze at her directly.”

\*       \*       \*

Fâtemeh is known to have said:” Anyone who should wear an agate ring in
his or her finger, has done a great benefit to himself or herself.”

Fâtemeh is known to have said: ‘‘Every one who reads the following
sourates: ‘‘Hadid”, “Wâ’ghiah’’, “Ar-rahmân’’, will surely enter the
Paradise!”

\*       \*       \*

If you are troubled or anxious, or you have a great unsolved problem,
and you think as though your heart is about to explode from sorrow or
desperation, you have to perform a two Rikat prayer. After you have
finished it, you have to say three times “ Allâho Akbar “, then you have
to pronounce ‘‘Fâtemeh’s four Way Praises of God’’, and then you have to
prostrate and tell hundred times this sentence:” Yâ Mollâty, Ya Fâtémato
Aghisseyni…” Then you have to put your right cheek first and then your
left cheek on the ground, and repeat this sentence for another hundred
and ten times. With  God’s Will, your wish shall be fulfilled, and your
sorrow will fly away…”

\*       \*       \*

Once, Fâtemeh asked her beloved father:” O Father! In the Day of
Resurrection, where shall I meet you? “

the Prophet answered her:” O Fâtemeh! At the Paradise’s Gate. There, I
will have the banner of Pure

Monotheism with me, and I well be interceding for my Ummah to God…”

Fâtemeh asked him:” And if I didn’t see you there?”

“ Then you will find me near the Fountain, where I am offering some
water to my Ummah.”

“And if I didn’t see you there?”

“ Then you will meet me at the Bridge of Serât. I will stand up there
and say to God:” O Lord! Make my Ummah pass safely from this Bridge!”

“ And if I didn’t see you there?”

“ Then I will surely be at the Gate of Hell, protecting my Ummah from
the Fire…”

Fâtemeh on hearing this, was greatly overjoyed.

We salute most respectfully and most humbly our Lady Fâtemehyeh Zahra!

\*       \*       \*
