14. the Hadis of Kessa
======================

Jâbber Ibn Abdollâh Ansâri  [ God rest his soul ] recounted that :” One
day, I heard this story from the daughter of our Prophet. She said:” One
day, I was at home when my beloved father came to see me and said:”
Greetings to you, O Fâtemeh! I replied to him: ‘‘And to you, O beloved
Father!’’ He said: ‘‘I feel somehow weak…”

“Dearest father, I entrusted you to God, so that He takes all your
weakness away…”

He asked her:” Would you please bring me my Yemeni mantle and envelop me
in it…?”

Fâtemeh did as she was told, and enveloped her father in it.

She related:” As I was looking at my father’s sweet face, I saw that it
glowed with such a splendid Light that my gaze couldn’t endure it after
a while…”

Fâtemeh continued and said: ‘‘Slightly less than an hour had passed,
when Hassan, my first born, came into the room and greeted me. I
answered him back and told him:” Greetings to you, my dear son! O, thou,
the apple of my eyes! O, the sunshine of my heart!”

My son Hasan said: ‘‘Mother, I smell a sweet fragrance here… Is it that
my beloved grandfather has come to see us?”

“Yes, my son! He is enveloped in his mantle [abâ]…”

Hassan went hear the abâ, and after a respectful greetings to him, asked
permission to join his grandfather under the mantle:” Will you permit
me, o beloved grandfather to join you under your abâ…?”

The Messenger of God answered him most tenderly: ‘‘And greetings to you
my beloved son! O, thou, who shall be the Guardian of my Faountain in
Paradise, on the Day of judgement! Of course you may enter…!”

After another hour, my second born son Hosseyn, entered the room, and in
response to his greetings, I said:” Greetings to you, o my beloved
little one! Thou, the sunshine of my eyes! “

He said:” I smell a wonderful fragrance in this room… Is my grandfather
here?”

I answered him:” Yes! He’s under the Abâ, and your brother is also with
him.”

He approached his grandfather and after his respectful greetings to him,
he too asked permission to join them.

My father answered him most lovingly: ‘‘And greetings to you, my beloved
son! O, thou who shall be the Interceder of my people [Ummah] on the day
of Judgment! Of course you may join me and your brother!”

Suddenly, Hazraté Ali Ibn Abi Tâléb [may God’s Greetings  reach him!]
entered the room, and after asking me about my welfare, he announced:
‘‘What a beautiful fragrance I smell in here! It’s as though my beloved
brother and cousin, our venerable Prophet has entered in this room…!”

I answered him back and said: ‘‘Yes, you are right indeed. He is with
our two sons under the Abâ…”

At that moment, Ali went also near the abâ, and after a most respectful
greetings to my father, asked permission to enter and join them.

The Prophet answered him back:” Greetings to you, o, my beloved brother!
Thou, who shall be my heir and successor, and who shall keep up the
banner of Islam! Of course you may join us!”

At last it was Fâtemeh’s turn to ask permission to join her family under
the abâ. The Prophet replied: ‘‘Of course you may join us, my beloved
daughter!”

When all of them were under the abâ, the Messenger of God took the helm
of his abâ in his left hand, and raised his right hand in the sky and
declared:” O God! These are from my Household, and those I love dearly
and tenderly! These are from my own flesh and blood. Whatever that will
make them upset, will also upset me, and whatever that shall be a burden
to them, shall be my burden too… Whoever wants to challenge or oppose
them, has challenged or opposed me. And whoever is in peace with them
and shows them his friendship, is in peace with me, and shows his
friendship to me. Whoever shows them his enmity, show his enmity towards
me. And at last, whoever loves them and is devoted to them, is loving

me, and is devoted to me. They come from me, and I come from them…

O Merciful God! Send Thy Greetings, Favors, Bounty, Abundance, Grace and
Forgiveness to us, and purify them from any unholiness and wickedness
whatsoever!”

At that moment, God announced graciously:” O, Angels of mine! O, You who
reside in Heavens! I did not make the sky, I did not create Earth, I did
not create the moon and the sun, I did not let the waters flow, unless
for the love of these five persons who are under the abâ…!

At that moment, the Archangel Gabriel said:” O, God! Wouldst Thou permit
me to go on Earth, and be the sixth person under this abâ?”

God granted His Archangel this wish, and announced: ‘‘Thou mayest go.”

The Archangel Gabriel came down to earth and said:” O, Messenger of God!
Greetings to you! Thy God Almighty has sent His Greetings to thee. He
commands that everybody should respect you, and He says:” I swear by my
Magnificence and My Greatness, that I did not make the sky, did not
create Earth, did not create the moon and the sun, did not let the
waters flow, unless for the love of these five persons who are under the
abâ…!”

He then granted me the permission to join you, and be one of you. Now,
would you permit me to join you, O Messenger of God?”

The Prophet replied to him:” Greetings to Thee, o Gabriel! O, Thou who
art entrusted with the Divine Revelations! I gladly permit Thee to join
us…”

The Archangel Gabriel then said: ‘‘Merciful God has sent thee a
Revelation, and has announced:” God’s Will is that all unholiness and
all sins be forever out of thy family, and that you become purified and
holy and free of all sins!”

At that moment, Ali asked from the Prophet:” O Messenger of God! Does
our presence under this abâ, have some special meaning, or some sort of
a privilege in God’s Eye?”

The Prophet answered him:” I swear to God, I swear to He, Who chose me
as the Prophet, that the news of our gathering under this abâ, shall not
remain unnoticed in all the earthly gatherings in which all the people
who love us verily and all the Shiites who are devoted to us, are
participating. And everybody who listens to this story, shall receive a
great reward and favor from me. Be certain that in these gatherings,
there will be many Angels, and they will ceaselessly ask Forgiveness for
all the people who are present there, until the end of the gathering.”

Hazraté Ali Ibn Abi Tâléb said then:” I swear to God Almighty that we
have been saved and reached Salvation, and that God’s Grace has reached
us…! I also swear to the God of Ka’ba, that all the Shiites in this
world and in the Hereafter shall be saved and forgiven!”

Then my beloved father declared:” O Ali! I swear to the Merciful God who
chose me rightfully and made me his Messenger, that whenever the news of
this gathering is recounted in any worldly gathering, held by people who
are devoted to our Household, it shall bring blessings and solace to
them. And if any Shiite is affected per chance by some misfortune or
sorrow,

it will be taken away from him within the shortest time, whatever his
wishes may be, it shall be fulfilled most rapidly, and God shall free
these Shiites from any problem whatsoever!”

Ali replied:” Then I swear to God, that we have been saved and received
verily God’s Grace! I swear to the God of Ka’ba that all the Shiites
will also be saved and shall receive God’s Grace!”

The End {align="center" style="text-align:center"}
=======

***Alhamdollellahe Rabbel Alamine***

***Tehran, March 27th 2008***

***Rabiol awwal 19th 1429***

***Farvardin 8th 1387***

***Translated by : Seyyed  Farid Mohammadi***
