2. Her Birth
============

It was in the fifth year, or the end of the fourth year before Hegira,
when the Archangel Gabriel, appeared before our Prophet [ Peace be upon
him! ] and announced to him :” O Mohammad! God Almighty has sent thee
His Greetings, and He orders thee to keep thyself away from Hazraté
Khadijeh for forty days! “

Our Prophet, even though he had a great affection and sweet feelings for
his sweet and kind wife, in order to obey God Almighty, submitted
himself to this ordeal.

So, for forty days, our Prophet spent his days in fasting, and his
nights in deep meditation and prayers. Until the Archangel Gabriel came
down to Earth once again and announced to him:” O Mohammad! God sends
His supreme Greetings to thee! He orders thee to be prepared for His
precious and worthy gift, and His best wishes.”

And then the Archangel Gabriel provided a meal for him, and said:” O
Mohammad! Thou should eat from this meal…”

‘‘After our Prophet broke his fast, by eating from the Heavenly plate
that the Archangel Gabriel had offered him, he received the order to go
home, to his

sweet and dear wife. After this event, the Archangel Gabriel came down
to our Prophet, and told him:” ‘‘God has given His solemn Oath to
Himself that this very night, a child shall be conceived from thee and
thy wife.”

Hazraté Khadijeh, after having married our Prophet, had been suddenly
left alone and ignored most cruelly by other women from her tribe, named
“Ghoraysh’’.

The woman of her tribe didn’t approve of her marriage with our Prophet,
so, when she got pregnant, the unborn baby, in her womb, became her sole
friend in her utter isolation and solitude…

One day, when Khadijeh was talking with the baby in her womb, our
Prophet entered the house suddenly, and asked her most curiously, with
whom she had been talking during his absence?! She told him what was
happening… Our Prophet said to her:” The Archangel Gabriel has told me
about my beloved daughter.

My race would be coming forth from the womb of this very daughter. There
will be religious leaders, who shall come to this world, from this
lineage, and after the ending of the Revelations to me, these
descendants of mine, shall be my rightful successors…”

So, Khadijeh spent her days of pregnancy in this manner, and finally,
the happy day in which her beloved daughter was destined to be born,
arrived. Our Prophet sent messages to the Ghoraysh women, so that they
would come and help his tender and beloved wife for the delivery of the
child. But the Ghoraych women refused to do so, and replied: ‘‘she

didn't listen to us when we told her not to get married to you! Why did
she get married to a poor man like you…?!’’

But God The Merciful, was aware of the hard condition of Khadijeh, and
He wouldn’t leave her alone… he sent some of His Intimates to help her
out…

Just as Khadijeh was beginning to deliver her baby, she suddenly saw
four women who entered unexpectedly into her private room. They were
enveloped by a heavenly Light that filled her room…

They were none others than : Sara, Abraham’s wife, Assieh, Mozahem’s
daughter [and Pharo’s wife], Mary, Imran’s daughter [and the mother of
Jesus], and finally Safoura, Joshua’s daughter… With the gracious help
that they procured, she could deliver her baby safely into the world.

The baby, as soon as she opened her innocent and beautiful eyes into the
world, began to talk. She said:” I testify to the great Mission of my
holy father bestowed upon him by the Merciful God. My father is the last
Prophet, and he is the Messenger of God!. My husband is the patron of
great men, and my two sons, are the heralds of our Religion…”

The Angels brought forth the joyous news of Fâtemeh’s birth to Heavens,
and because of her birth, there appeared a brilliant light in the sky,
and it lighted everywhere! Never had the Angels of Heavens seen such a
beautiful and bright light in Heavens!

This holy baby had nine names : Fâtemeh, Sédigheh, Mobârakeh, Tâhereh,
Zakieh, Râzieh, Marzieh, Mohadésseh, and finally Zahrâ…
