4. Her Marriage
===============

Fâtemeh had many suitors, and as one would imagine, every body longed to
become the son in law of Hazraté Mohammad-é- Mostafâ [Peace be upon
him!]; it was something to be desired, and everybody wished to become
such, from the bottom of his heart, and to be granted this supreme
honor…

But also because a gracious lady such as Fâtemeh, who was great in
wisdom, spiritual beauty, and had the sweetest character, doubled this
fervent wish among arab men.

But Hazraté Mohammad-é- Mostafâ [ Peace be upon him! ], refused all her
suitors, and had always the same answer:” I am waiting for the Divine
Command …”

Finally Ali Ibn Abi Tâléb [ May the Divine Greetings reach him! ], who
was our Prophet’s cousin and his beloved brother and friend, and had
grown up beside the holy Prophet himself, took his courage into his
hand, and asked for the hand of Fâtemeh. He came respectfully to the
house of our Prophet, and knelt in complete respect and submission
before our beloved Prophet, without uttering any word, whatsoever, but
just waiting…

Our Prophet, by seeing him thus, asked him curiously:” Son of Abou
Tâléb! Why have you come to see me? “

He answered:” I have come to ask for the hand of Fâtemeh…”

Our Prophet was overjoyed so he said:” Very well! I welcome this
announcement. “ and then nothing more.

Ali asked permission to take his leave. When the people who knew him
well, saw him, they asked him most curiously about the outcome of his
request.

Ali repeated the sentence that our Prophet had given him. Those who were
listening said:” You should satisfy yourself with this answer. It seems
that our Prophet has granted you your wish, and has accepted you into
his household.”

The fact is : if Ali had not come forth, nobody could have become
Fâtemeh’s husband. This irrefutable truth is assured by what Hazraté
Imâm Sâdigh has said about this matter:” If God hadn’t created Ali,
nobody would have been dignified or worthy enough to become Fâtemeh’s
husband…”

Our Prophet, talked about this matter to his beloved daughter, and asked
her opinion. Fâtemeh, in front of his father, blushed and kept quiet.
But our Prophet had seen enough: he had seen the signs of deep joy in
Fâtemeh’s innocent face, and had known that her daughter’s silence, was
in fact her approval. Our Prophet came back quickly to tell the good
news to his dear Ali.

Our Prophet then required from Ali, to respect the custom of giving a
dowry to his daughter. Ali had to

determine the sum of money that he wished to give to his wife to be… Ali
began to enumerate his very limited possessions and said:” All I have is
one sword, one camel that helps me bring out water from the well, and
one armor…”

Our Prophet answered:” Go my son, and sell your armor. Then you could
procure the sum of my daughter’s dowry.”

Ali sold his armor at 480 dirhams, and then came back quickly to give
this sum to our Prophet, and to submit himself to his wishes for further
demands.

Our Prophet took a small sum of it to buy some possessions for their
home [ Ali and Fâtemeh’s ], he also took a small portion of it to buy
some perfume for her daughter, and to buy some things for the wedding
night.

The list of this simple dowry, is as follows :

         **A dress at the price of 7 Dirham**

         **A fabric at the price of 4 Dirham**

         **A black towel from Kheybar**

         **A bed, woven with palm leaves**

         **Two cotton mattresses: one made of palm leaves**

         **The other one from sheep’s wool**

         **Four leather pillows**

         **A woolen curtain**

         **A simple  bed**

         **A manual mill**

         **A leather goatskin [ water skin ]**

         **A wooden bowl**

         **A bowl for milking**

         **A bowl for drinking water**

         **A green pitcher**

         **Some  earthen pots and jars**

When those ho had bought these things, came back home, they showed them
all to our Prophet and he said:” May God bestow from His Heavenly
Provisions to this family…”

And then the vows of marriage took place…

A month passed by, without Ali having the courage to take his bride to
his home. Ali went everyday to the mosque, but with no result…

Finally, one of the most respected wives of our Prophet said
sympathetically to Ali:” Do you wish me to ask respectfully from our
Prophet, to grant you the permission to take your bride to your home? “

Ali joyously and gratefully acknowledged this, and confirmed his wish to
settle this matter.

When our Prophet knew of this matter, he said:” I was expecting Ali to
come to me about this matter, and I was hoping that he would tell me
himself about his wish…”

But Ali answered:” O Prophet of God! I was verily ashamed to ask you
such permission…”

So then, our Prophet asked his wives to prepare a room in their home
[our Prophet’s house] for Ali and Fâtemeh.

Then a great number of and Muslims and Ansârs  and also from the
Christian community were invited to come to Fâtemeh’s marriage banquet
and eat their fill and enjoy themselves… From what history has left to
us, that night our Prophet, with his gracious and generous hand,
provided miraculous food for four thousand guests…

Then he put the hand of Fâtemeh into Ali’s hand, and prayed for them and
said:” May God bring happiness and joy to the beloved daughter of His
Prophet!”

\*       \*       \*
