5. Her Married Life
===================

There began the married life of Ali and Fâtemeh. From the first, every
chore was divided among them : what was inside the house, came to
Fâtemeh’s responsibility, and what was outside of their home came to
Ali’s responsibility.

Their life was very simple, and required many efforts, so much so that
Fâtemeh’s hands soon became hurt and painful, from the manual
mill…Finally a day came when Fâtemeh, in utmost despair, asked her
father to give her a maid. Her father asked which of the two things were
more precious to her? A maid, or something much deeper and much better…?
Ali was near them; Fâtemeh, with her husband’s help, chose what was the
better of the two, and our Prophet concluded that the better thing was
indeed a prayer that every Muslim should feel grateful and most honored
to pronounce it, after the daily prayers. He explained: ‘‘You have to
say 34 times “Allâho Akbar’’, 33 times “Alhamdoléllâh’’ and 33 times “
Sobhânallâh”!’’

The fact is, their poverty was because they helped the poor. They gave
so much to the needy that the reader may indeed feel confused…

One wishes to know if they were indeed humans or were they some heavenly
creatures, come to Earth?

It is indeed impossible to comprehend such spiritual greatness and
generosity and abnegation…

Fâtemeh was a pure example in her life, but also in her ways of praying.
When she would finish her chores, and after having taken care of her
little children, she used to begin her long prayers… In Friday nights,
she used to pray until dawn, and cry and ask God that the whole humanity
be granted the Divine Salvation…

\*       \*       \*
