8. the Event That Took Place in Saghifeh
========================================

The Ansârs, after the death of our Prophet, decided to organize a
meeting in a place called “ Saghifeh Bani Sâédeh “ to choose and name
their caliph. But the immigrants [ Abubakr, Omar and Abu Obeydeh Jarrâh
were their leaders ] soon knew of this meeting, and they came to talk
and negotiate with the Ansârs.

The immigrants wanted desperately to rob the Leadership from the Ansârs,
and to come to power themselves. So, to persuade the other party, they
talked about many things with them.

Finally, they decided to choose Abubakr, as the rightful calife. In the
midst of it all, there came an old man who, seeing that he had no choice
but to reunite with Abubakr, told him:” It’s like the day of Adam…”
[that is : as Satan was forced to adore Adam, he suddenly refused to do;
and the same was being repeated there and then, and by doing this, all
the human race was surely to be forced out of Heaven once more…]

Now, outside Saghifeh, Ali was busy with the Prophet’s funeral. Suddenly
Salmâné Fârsi came and told him about the reunion of some of the

immigrants with the Ansârs, and the leadership of Abubakr.

Ali, after having all the preparations that was needed for that holy
funeral, stopped to perform his prayer in front of the sanctified body
of our Prophet. Many people came to show their dutiful respect to the
Messenger of God for the last time, and to perform the prayer of the
dead before his sanctified body and to bid him farewell…

Afterwards, Ali did not linger with the mourners who had gathered there
to show their loyalty to him.

But unfortunately, the majority of Muslims had given their oath to
Abubakr.

Afterwards, when they saw Fâtemeh, they used to say most peevishly: “we
would rather have given our oath to your dignified husband than to
Aboubakr… but Abubakr was the first to ask for our allegiance …”

And Fâtemeh would reply: ‘‘What you mean is that my husband should have
left the sanctified body of my respectful and noble father as it was
lain on the floor, untouched, and that he should have come rapidly to
you, to ask for your allegiance…?! You mean to tell me that he should
have left my beloved father, without the benefit of preparing him a
dignified funeral?! You mean to tell me that he should have thought
about his leadership, and begin a dispute for this earthly matter,
instead of mourning my father?! All right… May God remember your
actions, and take measure for your deeds!”

After a while, the responsible man for that conspiracy decided to make
Ali swear allegiance to

them, so as to empower their fragile yet strong new position.

But Ali, by pretending that he was fully concentrated on collecting all
the sourates of the Holy Qur’an replied:” I have sworn solemnly that
until I have not collected all the sourates of the Holy Qur’an, and
until I have not set them right, not to go out of my home and not to put
my cloak [ Abâ ] on my shoulders… “ so he refused firmly to swear
allegiance to them. Unfortunately, the enemies had made a plan in case
Ali would refuse to join them.

Someone by the name of Ghanfaz and his cruel gang, came in front of
Ali’s house to take him by force to mosque, so that he would swear
allegiance to the new caliph.

But they were faced with Fâtemeh’s refusal to open the door. With a sign
from Omar Ibn’l Khatâb , the hateful servants of these men, with the
leadership of Ghanfaz, made a fire and burnt the entrance door of Ali
and Fâtemeh’s house. Then they kicked the burnt out door aside… But what
of it?

The door opened all right, but by having been shut open, the peg of the
door encountered with Fâtemeh’s fragile bossom and hurt deeply the
beautiful flower of the household of  Mohammad…

Suddenly the enemy entered the house. One hand on the sword, the other
hand on the whip…

Fâtemeh on seeing this, cried out loud:” O Father!

O Messenger of God!” The enemy took out his sword, and with the width of
his weapon, pushed her hard towards the wall, so much so that the ribs
of this sweet, beloved lady, broke, and it resulted in a

miscarriage… The stillborn would have been a boy named Mohassa, even
though it wasn’t born yet…

Fâtemeheye Zahrâ hurt so much that she fell hardly on the ground, and
began sobbing and crying out to her maid: “O Fezzeh! Help me… I swear to
God that I have a miscarriage…’’

They then put a cord on Hazraté Ali’s neck, to take him by force to the
Mosque. Fâtemeh pushed herself up, so that she could take the hem of
Ali’s clothes, and make him stay. But the hellish and hateful Ghanfaz,
on seeing this, slashed Fâtemeh’s arm with his whip so violently that
her arm swelled at once…

On the way to the mosque, a jewish man, upon seeing Hazraté Ali, greeted
him most respectfully, and suddenly began to say the proper sentences [
The Shahadateyn ] so as to become a Muslim.

Somebody asked him curiously: ‘‘What made you believe the truth about
Islam?’’

He answered promptly :” It was the innocence I perceived in Hazraté
Ali’s being…”

They took Hazraté Ali to the mosque and told him: ‘‘If you don’t swear
your allegiance to the new caliph, we will behead you surely!’’

Hazraté Ali replied to them :” If you do this, not only have you
undoubtedly murdered a servant of God, but also the brother of our
Prophet…”

Fâtemeh, after receiving such a terrible blow from her enemy, had fallen
hardly on the groond and lost consciousness for a while. But after some
time, she opened her eyes and said : “ Fezzeh! Where is my lord, Ali? “

Her servant answered her sadly:” O milady! They took him to the mosque!”

Fâtemeh took the hands of her two little sons Hassan and Hosseyn, and
there she entered the mosque and began making a little speech, there and
then.

She said:” Leave my cousin and husband alone! Otherwise I will discover
my hair, to show my utter desperation and grief in this very place… I
have put the very cloth that the Prophet used to wear, on my head, and
then I will go to the grave of my Father and will complain against you
all! “

The fiery words of Fâtemeh, with the refusal of  Hazraté Ali to swear
his allegiance, and the arrival of the faithful friends of the Messenger
of God in that moment, made the enemies retreat, and they were forced to
let Hazraté Ali go his way… By what is written officially, this event
took place exactly six days after the death of the Prophet…

\*       \*       \*
