9. the Property Called Fadak
============================

Only a few days  after the burial of the holy Prophet, the enemies took
Fadak by force. Fadak which had been the property that was in possession
of Fâtemeh while the Messenger of God was still alive. But soon after
the Prophet’s decease, they suddenly took Fadak from the daughter of the
Messenger of God, by Abubakr’s order, and they also let out all the
persons who used to work there…

Unfortunately, despite all the things that Fâtemeh or Hazraté Ali or
even the witnesses of this event told and testified, everything remained
unheeded and unheard by the enemies, and they ignored the testimony of
the illustrious daughter of our noble and gracious Prophet…

So one day, Fâtemeh and a group of immigrant [Ansâr] ladies decided to
go to the mosque. Inside the mosque,  there was a curtain which divided
the space in two parts, so that men were not permitted to look upon the
part where the ladies were seated. Fâtemeh approached that curtain to
talk and make the men, hear what she had to say.

Fâtemeh cried out loud, so much so that the whole mosque began to
tremble by the deep sorrow that

was surging out, from the bottom of  Fâtemeh’s heart… Many people began
to cry by listening to her discourse; she began first by praising the
Lord Almighty.

Everybody was listening intently to what she was going to say. And then
she began to utter those unforgettable sentences which have remained to
this day, as the most memorable and the most tragic discourse ever made
by a Muslim woman…

At the end of her discourse, she began to talk in a way that made
everybody think that she was confiding to the glorious soul of her
beloved father, and was telling him of all the things that had happened
to her and her family, since his departure from this world, and what
wrongs she had suffered, and what disrespect she had been forced to
face, and what pains and agonies she had endured in silence…

After this, she came back home. Ali was waiting for her. Fâtemeh on
seeing his beloved husband, made some complaints about the ungracious
behavior of those who has come to power, and told him about her longing
to see her father again. She also talked about her concern about Ali’s
leadership, and the fact that the people hadn’t supported them in any
ways…

Hazraté Ali replied to her :” O daughter of the best man in the
universe! O, thou who art the best reminiscence and reminder of the last
Prophet on Earth! Don’t be sad… Don’t complain, because thy sufferings
will not go away… Be certain that all thy enemies owe thee lots of
things… I don’t remain in the house because of laziness or some weakness
of character. But because I have done everything that was possible for
me to do.

If thou wishest  for a better life, thy sustenance has remained
untouched and is at thy disposal, and fortunately thou dost not need thy
enemies’ help!  Leave  them be, and wait until the time when God shall
take care of each one of them.”

Fâtemeh said:” All right… I will say no more… I will leave them. May God
take care of them in His proper time. I will entrust myself into God’s
Will.”

\*       \*       \*
