Introduction
============

One of the distinctive features of Islam is its emphasis on knowledge.
The Qur’an and the Islamic tradition (*sunnah* ) invite Mus­lims to seek
and acquire knowledge and wisdom and to hold men of knowledge in high
esteem. Some of the Qur’anic verses and relevant traditions will be
mentioned in the course of our discussion.

At the outset we may recall a famous hadith of the Holy Prophet upon
whom be Allah's peace and benedictions‑that has come down through
various sources; it says: “Acquisition of knowledge is incum­bent on
every Muslim.”1 This tradition brought up the discussion as to what kind
of knowledge a Muslim should necessarily acquire‑an issue around which
various opinions were offered in the past.

Abu Hamid Al‑Ghazzali (died A.D. 1111), in his famous book*Ihya ulum al*
*‑* *din* (The Revival of Religious Sciences), mentions that he had come
across twenty different answers to the above question. The theologians
considered that learning of Islamic theology (*kaldm* ) was an
obligation, while the jurisprudents (*fuqaha'* ) thought that Islamic
juris­prudence (*fiqh* ) was implied in the prophetic tradition.
Al‑Ghazzali himself favoured the view that the knowledge whose
acquisition is a religious obligation is limited to what one must know
for correct per­formance of the acts obligatory for a person within the
framework of the Islamic Shari'ah.2

For instance,one whose occupation is animal husbandry should acquaint
himself with the rules concerning zakat. If one were a merchant doing
business in an usurious environment, he ought to be aware of the
religious injunction against usury so as to be able to effectively avoid
it.

Al‑Ghazzali then proceeds to discuss sciences whose knowledge is*wajib
kifa'i* 3 (something which is obligatory for the whole society as long
as the duty for fulfillment of a social need exists, but as soon as the
duty is shouldered by enough number of individuals, others are
automatically relieved of the obligation). Subsequently, he classifies
all knowledge into “religious” and “non‑religious” sciences. By
“religious sciences” (‘ulum al‑shar) he means the bulk of knowledge
imparted through prophetic teachings and the Revelation.

The rest constitute the “non‑religious” sciences. The non‑religious
sciences are further classi­fied into “praiseworthy” (*mahmud* ),
“permissible” (*mubah* ) and “un­desirable” ones (*madhmum* ). He puts
history in the category of permis­sible sciences (*mubah* ) and magic
and sorcery in the category of the un­desirable fields of “knowledge”.
The “praiseworthy” sciences (*mah­mud* ), according to him, are those
whose knowledge is necessary in the affairs of life and these are wajib
kifai; the rest of them bring addi­tional merit to the learned who
pursue them.

He puts medicine, mathe­matics and crafts, whose sufficient knowledge is
needed by the society, in the category of sciences of which are wajib
kifai. Any further research into the detail and depth of problems of
medical science or mathematics is put by Al‑Ghazzali in the second
category which involves merit for the scholar without entailing any
manner of obligation.

Al‑Ghazzali classifies the religious sciences also into two groups:
praiseworthy (*mahmud* ) and undesirable (*madhmum* ). By “undesirable
religious sciences” he means those which are apparently oriented towards
the Shari'ah but actually deviate from its teachings. He sub­divides the
“praiseworthy” religious sciences into four groups:

1.*Usul* (principles; i.e. the Qur’an, the*sunnah* ,*ijma*   or
consensus and the traditions of the Prophet's companions)

2.*Furu* (secondary matters; i.e. problems of jurisprudence, ethics and
mystical experience)

3. Introductory studies (Arabic grammar, syntax, etc.)

4. Complementary studies (recitation and interpretation of the Qur’an,
study of the principles of jurisprudence*, ilm al* *‑* *rijal* or
biogra­phical research about narrators of Islamic traditions etc.)

Al‑Ghazzali considers the knowledge of the disciplines contained in the
above four groups to be wajib kifa'i.

As to the extent to which one should learn the “praiseworthy” sciences,
Al‑Ghazzali's view is that in matters of theology such as know­ledge of
God, Divine qualities, acts and commands, one should try to learn as
much as is possible. However, as to religious topics whose knowledge is
wajib kifa'i, one should learn as much as is sufficient.

Here the summary of his views is that one should not pursue learning of
those sciences if there are already others devoting themselves to their
study, and if one were to do so, he should refrain from spending all his
life for their learning, “for knowledge is vast and life is short. They
are preliminaries and not an end in themselves.”4

As to theology (kalam), his opinion is that only as much of it as is
corroborated by the Qur’an and hadith is beneficial. Moreover, he says,
“now that the heretics attempt to induce doubts (in the minds of
un­sophisticated believers), adequate knowledge of theology is necessary
to confront them.”

Regarding philosophy, Al‑Ghazzali thinks that it is distinguishable into
four parts:5

1. Mathematics and geometry, which are legitimate and permissible.

2.Logic, which is a part of theology.

3. Divinities, which discusses Divine essence and qualities and is also
a part of theology.

4. Physics, which may be divided into two sections: One part which
involves discussions opposed to the Shari'ah and accordingly cannot even
be considered a “science”; the other part discusses the qualities of
bodies. The second part is similar to the science of medicine, although
medicine is preferable to it. This section of physics too is useless
while medicine is needful.

Mulla Muhsin Fayd al‑Kashani, in his book Muhajjat al‑bayda', says:

It is a personal obligation (wajib ayni) of every Muslim to learn
Islamic juris­prudence to the extent of his needs. Further, learning of
fiqh to fulfil the need of others is wajib kifa’i for him.6

Regarding philosophy, Kashani says:

The components of philosophy are not the only ones distinguished by Abu
Hamid (Al‑Ghazzali)‑upon whom be God's mercy. Philosophy covers many
other fields of religious and mundane matters (for example astronomy,
medicine and rhetoric etc.)... Whatever of these sciences that is about
the Hereafter

exists to the point of perfection in the Shari'ah, and that which is not
useful for the Hereafter is not needed; moreover, it may even hinder the
pursuit of the path of Allah. In the case of those portions which are
effective for the knowledge of the Divine and are encouraged by the
Shari’ah (like astronomy), it is sufficient to be satisfied with the
simple unelaborated discussions of the Shariah about such matters.7

In brief, in Kashani's opinion anyone who wishes to learn these sciences
should first acquaint himself with the religious sciences.

Sadr al‑Din Shirazi (Mulls Sadra) in his commentary on Usul al‑Kafi
regards Al‑Ghazzali's opinion about the limitation of obligatory
knowledge for a Muslim to the matters of ritual practice and legitimate
deal­ings as unacceptable.8

In his opinion, learning of religious sciences (such as tawhid, Divine
qualities and acts) and human sciences (such as dis­positions of the
soul, its delights and afflictions) are also obligatory for the majority
of human beings. Secondly, he believes that it is not at all essential
that what is obligatory (wajib ayni) for all to learn should apply
identically in case of every individual and what is obligatory for one
individual be regarded as being equally obligatory for another.


