Sciences whose Knowledge is Wajib Kifa’i
========================================

Here we do not intend to enter into a discussion about sciences whose
learning is obligatory (wajib ayni) for every responsible Muslim
individual (mukallaf). Rather, we propose to discuss those sciences
whose knowledge is a wajib kifa’i for all the Muslim Ummah. To begin
with, we consider some of the opinions of Imam Al‑Ghazzali and Muhaqqiq
Kashani in this regard as disputable and shall proceed to examine them.
However, before we start, we think it will be beneficial to revert to
certain important points mentioned by Mulla Sadra in his commentary on
Usul al‑Kafi under the tradition:

<p dir="rtl">
طلب العلم فريضةٌ على كل مسلم
</p>

Acquisition of knowledge is an obligation of every Muslim.

1. The word*ilm* (knowledge or science), like the word “existence”
(wujud) has a broad range of meanings which vary from the viewpoints of
strength or weakness, perfection or deficiency.9 The word's generic
sense covers this whole spectrum of meaning in which it has been used in
the prophetic tradition. This broad sense of the word*ilm* is common to
all its varied meanings.

Accordingly, the tradition intends to state that whatever stage of
knowledge one may be in, he should strive to make further advance. The
Prophet means that acquisition of know­ledge is obligatory for all
Muslims, scholars as well as ignorant men, beginners as well as learned
scholars. Whatever stage of knowledge man may attain, he is still like a
child entering into adulthood as far as this tradition is concerned;
i.e. he should learn things which were not obliga­tory for him before.

2. The tradition implies that a Muslim can never be relieved of his
responsibility of acquiring knowledge'.10

3. No field of knowledge or science is undesirable or detestable in
itself; for knowledge is like light and so it is always desirable. The
reason that some of the sciences have been regarded as “undesirable” is
because of their occasional misuse.11

We do not accept the division of knowledge into “religious” and
“non‑religious” sciences; for, as the Martyr Murtada Mutahhari has
rightly pointed out, this classification may bring about the
misunder­standing that the “non‑religious” sciences are alien to Islam.
And this is not compatible with the comprehensive unity held up by Islam
in all affairs of life.

A religion which claims the ability to bring about condi­tions for
perfect felicity of mankind and considers itself to be self­-sufficing
cannot estrange itself from things which play a vital role in the
provision of welfare and independence for an Islamic society. Accord­ing
to the late Mutahhari, “Islam's all‑inclusiveness and finality as a
religion demands that every field of knowledge that is beneficial for an
Islamic society be regarded as a part and parcel of the “religious
sciences.”12


