Necessity of Learning Other Sciences
====================================

There is no division of opinion on the necessity of acquiring know­ledge
particular to religious studies.

Accordingly, we shall abstain from any further discussion of the
subject.24 Instead, it is worthwhile to con­centrate on the question of
necessity of learning other sciences in the view of the Qur’an and
sunnah. In this regard there are a number of argu­ments whose discussion
we shall take up immediately.

1. If knowledge of a science is a preliminary requirement for attaining
an Islamic goal as envisaged by the Shari ah, its pursuit is an
obligation (wajib) since it entails the preliminary condition for
fulfill­ment of a duty prescribed by the Shariah. For example, the
physical welfare of individuals in an Islamic society is necessary,
hence it is a wajib kifa'i for the Muslims to study medicine.

Some are of the opinion that in this context the duty to learn any
specific science depends on the need of the society for it. For example,
in our day, in order to succeed in large‑scale agriculture or commerce,
specialized knowledge of these subjects is necessary. Accordingly, it is
a wajib kifa’i for Muslims to acquire specialty in these fields.

Evidently, if the Muslims restrict themselves to the religious sciences
and limit themselves to a minimum of what is necessary for their
survival, they can never hope to overtake the non‑Muslim world in its
scientific progress.

2. The society envisioned by the Qur’an is an independent society of
majesty and grandeur, not one subservient to and dependent on the
unbelievers, as can be seen from this verse of the Qur’an:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَن يَجْعَلَ اللَّـهُ لِلْكَافِرِ‌ينَ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ سَبِيلًا
</p>

***...and Allah does not grant the unbelievers any way (of domination)
over the believers. (4:141)***

In order to realize this goal set by the Qur’an, it is essential that
the Islamic society should have cultural, political and economic
indepen­dence; this in turn necessitates training of specialists of high
calibre in every field and creation of the necessary scientific and
technical facili­ties in Islamic societies. It is clear that one of the
reasons of decline of Muslim societies in the recent centuries is that
they left the study of those sciences to others which they themselves
deserved to study most and made themselves dependent on others.

Should not the Muslims equip themselves in every way to defend
themselves against the non‑believers as stressed by the following verse?

<p dir="rtl">
**وَأَعِدُّوا لَهُم مَّا اسْتَطَعْتُم مِّن قُوَّةٍ وَمِن رِّ‌بَاطِ
الْخَيْلِ تُرْ‌هِبُونَ بِهِ عَدُوَّ اللَّـهِ وَعَدُوَّكُمْ وَآخَرِ‌ينَ
مِن دُونِهِمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَهُمُ اللَّـهُ يَعْلَمُهُمْ وَمَا تُنفِقُوا
مِن شَيْءٍ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّـهِ يُوَفَّ إِلَيْكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ لَا
تُظْلَمُونَ**
</p>

***And prepare against them what force you can...so that you may dismay
the enemy of God and your enemy and others beside them whom you know
not; God knows them. Whatever you spend in the way of God it will be
repaid to you in full, and you will not be cheated. (8:60)***

And is it not true that in our world today, possession of defence
facilities to face the enemies of Islam requires all kinds of scientific
and technical

know‑how? Then why don't the Muslims give the neces­sary attention to
the issue of preparing themselves adequately for their self‑defence?

In the modern age, human life is inextricably linked with the effort for
scientific advancement and the key to success in all affairs lies in
knowledge. It is an obligation of Muslim scholars and researchers,
living in the countries of the Eastern or Western block and are engaged
in education, to acquire the latest and most complete scientific and
tech­nical knowledge. Otherwise their societies will inevitably remain
under the domination of one superpower or another. Imam Ja'far al‑Sadiq
(A) says:

<p dir="rtl">
العالم بزمانه لا تهجم عليه اللوابس
</p>

A knowledgeable man who is abreast of his time will not be overwhelmed
by unexpected problems.25

To sum up, if the Muslims want to succeed in their struggle against the
evil powers of this age, they should equip themselves with the
essen­tials of scientific advancement and endeavour to make up their lag
in scientific and technical fields. Whatever subject is essential for
safe­guarding the existence and vitality of the islamic societies should
be learnt.

3. The Holy Qur’an invites mankind to study the system and scheme of
creation, the wonders of nature and the causes and effects of all things
that exist, the conditions of living organisms, and in short all signs
of God discernable in the external universe and the inner depths of the
human soul. The Qur’an enjoins thought and meditation about all aspects
of creation and requires human beings to apply their reason and
perceptual faculties for the discovery of the secrets of nature. Few of
these verses we shall quote here:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالْأَرْ‌ضَ مَدَدْنَاهَا وَأَلْقَيْنَا فِيهَا رَ‌وَاسِيَ وَأَنبَتْنَا
فِيهَا مِن كُلِّ زَوْجٍ بَهِيجٍ تَبْصِرَ‌ةً وَذِكْرَ‌ىٰ لِكُلِّ عَبْدٍ
مُّنِيبٍ
</p>

***What, have they not beheld heaven above them, how We have built it,
and decked it out fair, and it has no cracks? And the earth‑We stretched
it forth, and cast on it firm mountains, and We caused to grow therein
of every joyous kind for an insight and a reminder to every penitent
servant. (50:7-8)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِلَى السَّمَاءِ كَيْفَ رُ‌فِعَتْ وَإِلَى الْجِبَالِ كَيْفَ نُصِبَتْ
وَإِلَى الْأَرْ‌ضِ كَيْفَ سُطِحَتْ
</p>

***What do they not consider how the camel was created, how heaven was
lifted up, how the mountains were hoisted, how the earth was
outstretched? (88:18‑20)***

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ سِيرُ‌وا فِي الْأَرْ‌ضِ فَانظُرُ‌وا كَيْفَ بَدَأَ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ
اللَّـهُ يُنشِئُ النَّشْأَةَ الْآخِرَ‌ةَ إِنَّ اللَّـهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ‌
</p>

***Say: Journey in the land, then behold how He originated creation;
then God causes the second growth; God is powerful over everything.
(29:20)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَفِي الْأَرْ‌ضِ آيَاتٌ لِّلْمُوقِنِينَ وَفِي أَنفُسِكُمْ أَفَلَا
تُبْصِرُ‌ونَ
</p>

***In the earth are signs for those having sure faith; and in
yourselves; what, do you not see? (51:20‑21)***

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْ‌ضِ وَاخْتِلَافِ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ‌ لَآيَاتٍ لِّأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُ‌ونَ
اللَّـهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىٰ جُنُوبِهِمْ وَيَتَفَكَّرُ‌ونَ فِي
خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْ‌ضِ رَ‌بَّنَا مَا خَلَقْتَ هَـٰذَا
بَاطِلًا سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ‌
</p>

***Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and in the
alternation of the night and day there are signs for men possessed of
minds who remember God, standing and sitting and on their side, and
reflect upon the creation of the heavens and the earth: O Lord, Thou
hast not created this out of falsehood. Glory be to Thee! Guard us
against the chastisement of the Fire..' (3:190‑191)***

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْ‌ضِ وَاخْتِلَافِ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ‌ وَالْفُلْكِ الَّتِي تَجْرِ‌ي فِي الْبَحْرِ‌ بِمَا يَنفَعُ
النَّاسَ وَمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّـهُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مِن مَّاءٍ فَأَحْيَا
بِهِ الْأَرْ‌ضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا وَبَثَّ فِيهَا مِن كُلِّ دَابَّةٍ
وَتَصْرِ‌يفِ الرِّ‌يَاحِ وَالسَّحَابِ الْمُسَخَّرِ‌ بَيْنَ السَّمَاءِ
وَالْأَرْ‌ضِ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ
</p>

***Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of night and day and the ship that runs in the sea with
profit to men, and the water God sends down from heaven therewith
reviving the earth after it is dead and His scattering abroad in it all
manner of crawling thing, and the turning about of the winds and clouds
compelled between heaven and earth‑‑surely there are signs for a people
having understanding. (2:164)***

As can be seen from the foregoing verses, God refers to all existing
things in the universe as the “signs” of their Creator, and the system
of the universe as the imprint of an omniscient designer and programmer.
The study of the universe and what exists in it is considered one of the
most important means for knowledge of God and recognition of the majesty
of its Creator. The prophets also based their invitation to belief on
this point. The Prophet Moses (A) makes a similar argument in his
confrontation with Pharaoh. The Qur’an quotes Moses as putting his
argument in these words:

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ رَ‌بُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَىٰ …
الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْ‌ضَ مَهْدًا وَسَلَكَ لَكُمْ فِيهَا سُبُلًا
وَأَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَخْرَ‌جْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجًا مِّن
نَّبَاتٍ شَتَّىٰ
</p>

***He said, Our Lord is He who gave everything its creation, then guided
it... He who appointed the earth to be a cradle for you and therein
threaded roads for you and sent down water out of heaven, and therewith
We have brought forth diverse kinds of plants. (20:50‑53)***

Prophet Noah (A) is quoted in the Qur’an as saying to his people:

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ رَ‌بِّ إِنِّي دَعَوْتُ قَوْمِي لَيْلًا وَنَهَارً‌ا ﴿٥﴾ فَلَمْ
يَزِدْهُمْ دُعَائِي إِلَّا فِرَ‌ارً‌ا ﴿٦﴾ …فَقُلْتُ اسْتَغْفِرُ‌وا
رَ‌بَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفَّارً‌ا ﴿١٠﴾ … مَّا لَكُمْ لَا تَرْ‌جُونَ
لِلَّـهِ وَقَارً‌ا ﴿١٣﴾ وَقَدْ خَلَقَكُمْ أَطْوَارً‌ا ﴿١٤﴾ أَلَمْ
تَرَ‌وْا كَيْفَ خَلَقَ اللَّـهُ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا ﴿١٥﴾ وَجَعَلَ
الْقَمَرَ‌ فِيهِنَّ نُورً‌ا وَجَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ سِرَ‌اجًا ﴿١٦﴾ وَاللَّـهُ
أَنبَتَكُم مِّنَ الْأَرْ‌ضِ نَبَاتًا
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
﴿١٧﴾ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُكُمْ فِيهَا وَيُخْرِ‌جُكُمْ إِخْرَ‌اجًا ﴿١٨﴾
وَاللَّـهُ جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْ‌ضَ بِسَاطًا ﴿١٩﴾ لِّتَسْلُكُوا مِنْهَا
سُبُلًا فِجَاجًا ﴿٢٠﴾
</p>

***He said, “My Lord, l have called my people by night and by day, but
my call­ing has only increased them in flight...and I said, Ask you
forgiveness of your Lord; surely He is ever All‑forgiving...u7zat ails
you, that you look not for majesty in God, seeing He created you by
stages? Have you not regarded how God created seven heavens one upon
another, and set the moon therein for a light and the sun for a lamp?
And God cause you to grow out of the earth, then He shall return you
into it, and bring you forth. And God has laid the earth for you as a
carpet, and thereof you may tread ways, ravines.' “ (71:5‑20)***

Obviously, it is not for everyone to be able to read the “book” of the
universe. The Qur’an considers only men of knowledge to be capable of
benefiting from the book of nature as can be seen from the follow­ing
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَمْ تَرَ‌ أَنَّ اللَّـهَ أَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَخْرَ‌جْنَا
بِهِ ثَمَرَ‌اتٍ مُّخْتَلِفًا أَلْوَانُهَا وَمِنَ الْجِبَالِ جُدَدٌ بِيضٌ
وَحُمْرٌ‌ مُّخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهَا وَغَرَ‌ابِيبُ سُودٌ ﴿٢٧﴾ وَمِنَ
النَّاسِ وَالدَّوَابِّ وَالْأَنْعَامِ مُخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهُ كَذَٰلِكَ
إِنَّمَا يَخْشَى اللَّـهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاءُ إِنَّ اللَّـهَ
عَزِيزٌ غَفُورٌ‌ ﴿٢٨﴾
</p>

***Hast thou not seen how that God sends down out of heaven water, and
there­with We bring forth fruits of diverse hues? And in the mountains
are streaks White and red, of diverse hues, and pitchy black; men too,
and beasts and cattle‑,diverse are their hues. Even so only those of His
servants fear God who have knowledge; surely God is Almighty,
All‑forgiving. (35:27-8)***

The Qur’an regards only men of knowledge as being capable of discerning
the majesty and magnificence of God's creation and as pos­sessing the
humility produced by their knowledge of Divine power and greatness. This
point is stressed in other verses of the Qur’an:

<p dir="rtl">
وَتِلْكَ الْأَمْثَالُ نَضْرِ‌بُهَا لِلنَّاسِ وَمَا يَعْقِلُهَا إِلَّا
الْعَالِمُونَ ﴿٤٣﴾
</p>

***And these similitudes‑We strike them for the people, but none
understands them save those who know. (29:43)***

<p dir="rtl">
بَلْ هُوَ آيَاتٌ بَيِّنَاتٌ فِي صُدُورِ‌ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ
وَمَا يَجْحَدُ بِآيَاتِنَا إِلَّا الظَّالِمُونَ ﴿٤٩﴾
</p>

***Nay; rather it is signs, clear signs' in the breasts of those who
have been given knowledge; and none denies Our signs but the evildoers.
(29:49)***

Obviously, as implied by the abovementioned verses, understanding of the
“signs” of the Creator, is considered possible only for the learned and
the men of knowledge who have strived to fathom the secrets of nature
and have acquired knowledge in their fields of study. Otherwise, only a
superficial acquaintance with the “book of creation” is not very
revealing.

A suitable initiation into this book of nature can only be achieved
through such sciences as mathematics, physics, chemistry, astronomy,
botany, zoology (which we shall refer to as natural sciences'). It is
with the

aid of these and the rational sciences that we discover the laws of
nature and unravel the wonderful order and scheme of creation that
underlies nature. It is in this light that we should read the verses of
the Qur’an as the following:

<p dir="rtl">
الَّذِي خَلَقَ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا مَّا تَرَ‌ىٰ فِي خَلْقِ
الرَّ‌حْمَـٰنِ مِن تَفَاوُتٍ فَارْ‌جِعِ الْبَصَرَ‌ هَلْ تَرَ‌ىٰ مِن
فُطُورٍ‌ ﴿٣﴾ ثُمَّ ارْ‌جِعِ الْبَصَرَ‌ كَرَّ‌تَيْنِ يَنقَلِبْ إِلَيْكَ
الْبَصَرُ‌ خَاسِئًا وَهُوَ حَسِيرٌ‌ ﴿٤﴾
</p>

***Thou seest not in the creation of the All‑merciful any imperfection.
Return thy gaze; seest thou any fissure? Then return thy gaze, and
again, and thy gaze comes back to thee dazzled, aweary. (67:3‑4)***

It means that the further does human knowledge make progress in
understanding God's creation, the more His Greatness and Majesty will
become obvious to men. Consider the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
سَنُرِ‌يهِمْ آيَاتِنَا فِي الْآفَاقِ وَفِي أَنفُسِهِمْ حَتَّىٰ
يَتَبَيَّنَ لَهُمْ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ
</p>

***We shall show them Our signs in the horizons and in themselves, till
it is clear to them that it is the truth. (41:53)***

In the above verse God promises revelation of His signs, in the universe
‑without and the world of spirit within, to mankind in future so as to
make them convinced that it (the Qur’an) is indeed absolutely the Truth.

Another reason for the study of the natural phenomenon and the scheme of
creation is that the knowledge of the laws of nature and characteristics
of things and organisms can be useful for improvement of conditions of
human life. This aspect is emphasized by numerous verses of the Qur’an
of which we quote a few:

<p dir="rtl">
وَسَخَّرَ‌ لَكُمُ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ‌ وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ‌.
وَالنُّجُومُ مُسَخَّرَ‌اتٌ بِأَمْرِ‌هِ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ
لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ ﴿١٢﴾ وَمَا ذَرَ‌أَ لَكُمْ فِي الْأَرْ‌ضِ
مُخْتَلِفًا أَلْوَانُهُ  إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِّقَوْمٍ
يَذَّكَّرُ‌ونَ ﴿١٣﴾
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وَهُوَ الَّذِي سَخَّرَ‌ الْبَحْرَ‌ لِتَأْكُلُوا مِنْهُ لَحْمًا طَرِ‌يًّا
وَتَسْتَخْرِ‌جُوا مِنْهُ حِلْيَةً تَلْبَسُونَهَا وَتَرَ‌ى الْفُلْكَ
مَوَاخِرَ‌ فِيهِ وَلِتَبْتَغُوا مِن فَضْلِهِ وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُ‌ونَ
﴿١٤﴾ وَأَلْقَىٰ فِي الْأَرْ‌ضِ رَ‌وَاسِيَ أَن تَمِيدَ بِكُمْ
وَأَنْهَارً‌ا وَسُبُلًا لَّعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ ﴿١٥﴾ وَعَلَامَاتٍ
وَبِالنَّجْمِ هُمْ يَهْتَدُونَ ﴿١٦﴾
</p>

***And He subjected to you the night and day, and the sun and moon; and
the stars are subjected by His command. Surely in that are signs for
people who understand. And that which He has multiplied for you in the
earth of diverse hues. Surely in that is a sign for a people who
remember.***

***It is He who subjec­ted to you the sea, that you may eat of it fresh
flesh, and bring forth out of it ornaments for you to wear; and thou
mayest see the ships cleaving through it; and that you may seek of His
bounty, and so haply you will be thankful. And He cast on the earth firm
mountains, lest it shake with you, and rivers and ways; so haply you
will be guided; and waymarks; and by the stars they are guided.
(16:12‑16)***

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَمْ تَرَ‌وْا أَنَّ اللَّـهَ سَخَّرَ‌ لَكُم مَّا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَمَا فِي الْأَرْ‌ضِ وَأَسْبَغَ عَلَيْكُمْ نِعَمَهُ ظَاهِرَ‌ةً
وَبَاطِنَةً وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُجَادِلُ فِي اللَّـهِ بِغَيْرِ‌ عِلْمٍ
وَلَا هُدًى وَلَا كِتَابٍ مُّنِيرٍ‌ ﴿٢٠﴾
</p>

***Have you not seen how that God has subjected to you whatsoever is in
the heavens and earth, and He has lavished on you His blessings, outward
and inward? And among men there is such a one that disputes concerning
God without knowledge or guidance, or an illuminating book. (31:20)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَسَخَّرَ‌ لَكُم مَّا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْ‌ضِ جَمِيعًا
مِّنْهُ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُ‌ونَ ﴿١٣﴾
</p>

***And He has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the
earth, all together, from Him. Surely in that are signs for a people who
reflect. (45:13)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَالَّذِي خَلَقَ الْأَزْوَاجَ كُلَّهَا وَجَعَلَ لَكُم مِّنَ الْفُلْكِ
وَالْأَنْعَامِ مَا تَرْ‌كَبُونَ ﴿١٢﴾ لِتَسْتَوُوا عَلَىٰ ظُهُورِ‌هِ
ثُمَّ تَذْكُرُ‌وا نِعْمَةَ رَ‌بِّكُمْ إِذَا اسْتَوَيْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ
وَتَقُولُوا سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي سَخَّرَ‌ لَنَا هَـٰذَا وَمَا كُنَّا لَهُ
مُقْرِ‌نِينَ ﴿١٣﴾
</p>

***He who created the pairs, all of them, and appointed for you ships
and cattle such as you ride, that you be seated on their backs and then
remember your Lord's blessing when you are seated on them, and say,
Glory be to Him, who has subjected this to us, and we ourselves were not
equal to it.' (43:12‑13)***

According to the Qur’an, the study of the book of nature reveals to man
its secrets and manifests its underlying coherence, consistency and
order. It allows men to use the agency of knowledge to uncover the
riches and resources hidden in nature and to achieve material welfare
through his scientific discoveries.

God has appointed man His vicegerent or deputy upon the earth and
provided him with unlimited opportuni­ties. It is for him to recognize
his own possibilities and benefit from his opportunities and acquire the
power and wisdom befitting his role as a deputy' of God and a sign' of
His wisdom and omnipotence:

<p dir="rtl">
وَهُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَكُمْ خَلَائِفَ الْأَرْ‌ضِ وَرَ‌فَعَ بَعْضَكُمْ
فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ دَرَ‌جَاتٍ لِّيَبْلُوَكُمْ فِي مَا آتَاكُمْ. إِنَّ
رَ‌بَّكَ سَرِ‌يعُ الْعِقَابِ وَإِنَّهُ لَغَفُورٌ‌ رَّ‌حِيمٌ ﴿١٦٥﴾
</p>

***It is He who has appointed you viceroys in the earth, and has raised
some of you in ranks above others, that He may try you in what He has
given you. Indeed your Lord is quite in retribution, and He is Forgiving
and. Merciful. (6:165)***

In fact, this station of being God's viceroy or deputy upon the earth
has been bestowed upon man as a result of his capacity for acqui­sition
of knowledge as borne out by this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَعَلَّمَ آدَمَ الْأَسْمَاءَ كُلَّهَا ثُمَّ عَرَ‌ضَهُمْ عَلَى
الْمَلَائِكَةِ فَقَالَ أَنبِئُونِي بِأَسْمَاءِ هَـٰؤُلَاءِ إِن كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ ﴿٣١﴾
</p>

***He taught Adam all the names then presented them to the angels; then
He said: Tell me the names of those if you are right.' (2:31)***

Unfortunately Muslims have since long tended to overlook such verses of
the Qur’an as quoted above, while this matter was appreciated by
non‑Muslims who afterwards monopolized the scientific tradition.

Heretofore we have tried to establish that the injunction to acquire
knowledge as found in the Qur’an and prophetic traditions is not
restricted to the knowledge of the teachings of the Shari ah, but
equally applies to all fields of knowledge that are beneficial for
man­kind.

We have tried to make the point that every science that serves as a
preliminary to the performance of a religious obligation or serves the
necessary requirements of an Islamic society, or helps in our
under­standing of the creation and the knowledge of God, or allows us to
benefit from Divine blessings that are provided to man, should
necessa­rily be regarded as useful knowledge by Muslims.

Now in the light of the verses quoted below, we may as well assert that
the basic criterion for the utility of a scientific discipline is that
it should be an equivalent of worship of God, be instrumental in
obtaining His good pleasure and bring man closer to His Creator. Here
are the Qur’anic verses:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ ﴿٥٦﴾
</p>

***I have not created jinn and mankind except to worship Me. (51:56)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا أُمِرُ‌وا إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُوا اللَّـهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ
حُنَفَاءَ وَيُقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُوا الزَّكَاةَ وَذَٰلِكَ دِينُ
الْقَيِّمَةِ ﴿٥﴾
</p>

***They were not commanded but to serve in all sincerity of their
religion. (98:5)***

Knowledge is useful and beneficial for mankind only if it is seen as an
instrument for obtaining knowledge of God, His good pleasure and
nearness; otherwise knowledge itself is an iron curtain, a great
inscru­table veil (hijab akbar), whether it is linked with the natural
sciences or the sciences of the Shariah. The great Prophet of Islam (S)
has said:

<p dir="rtl">
من تعلَّمَ علماً لغير الله و أرادَ به غير الله فليتبوأ مقعده من النار.
</p>

Anyone who seeks knowledge not for the sake of God and uses it not in
the way of God, should be certain of his place in hell.26

<p dir="rtl">
إنَّ الله عز وجل يقول تذاكر العلمَ بين عبادي ممّا تحيى عليه القلوب
الميته اذا انتهوا فيه الى امري
</p>

A scholar who seeks knowledge for the sake of God will receive the
reverence of everything; whereas a scholar who seeks knowledge as a
means to amass wealth will be awed by everything.27

<p dir="rtl">
إنَّ الله عز وجل يقول تذاكر العلمَ بين عبادي ممّا تحيى عليه القلوب
الميته اذا انتهوا فيه الى امري
</p>

God, the Most exalted, has said: Learned discussion between My servants
enlivens their hearts if it leads them towards My command.’28


