Endeavors for Obtaining Closeness to God
========================================

Evidently, there are various dimensions to endeavour for obtaining
closeness to God and His good pleasure. These include the obligatory
worship, acquaintance with Divine teachings, refinement of one's inner
self, recognition and understanding of the signs of God and service of
His creatures.29 In this context attention is drawn to the following
con­clusions:

1. When considered in the context of what we have mentioned above, all
theological sciences are means for obtaining proximity to God, and the
natural Sciences‑since they also reveal truth‑are sacred as long as they
play this role. However this sanctity is not intrinsic as Martyr Dr.
Beheshti has pointed out: “Any area of knowledge as long as it does not
become an instrument in the hands of taghut (non‑God or anti‑God) is a
means of enlightenment; otherwise knowledge may also become a means of
misguidance.”

2. Viewed in this perspective, there can be no separation or aliena­tion
between various sciences. On the other hand they help us in deci­phering
the book of creation, as the great mystic Shaykh Mahmud Shabistari has
said:

<p dir="rtl">
بنــزد آنـكــه جــانــش در تجــلـى اســت
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
همــه عالــم كتــاب حق تعالى اسـت
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ا زاو هر عالمى چون سواره اى خاص
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يكى زان فاتحه و آن ديگر اخـلاص
</p>

To him whose spirit is enlightened

The entire universe is a sacred book of the Most High;

Every sphere of universe is a different chapter,

One is the Opening Surah, and another the Surah of Ikhlas.

In the pages of this Divine book, some chapters may have prece­dence and
priority over others, but nevertheless, all of them are essen­tial for
the appreciation of God's signs in dfdq (horizons) and anfus (souls),
that is in the universe without and within.

In the early centuries of Islamic civilization, when it was at its peak,
the Muslim intellectuals approached the question of learning with a
vision similar to the one discussed above. Different sciences were seen
in a single perspective and considered interrelated as branches of the
tree' of knowledge. The goal of all sciences was seen as discovery of
unity and coherence in the world of nature.

Accordingly, the source of all knowledge was considered as being one.
They utilized the experi­mental as well as the intellectual and
intuitive approaches for under­standing of various levels and stages of
existence. During that period we find numerous examples of scholars who
combined authority in religious sciences with encyclopedic knowledge of
the natural sciences. Men like Ibn Sina, Umar Khayyam, Khwajah Nasir
al‑Din Tusi and Qutb al‑Din Shirazi are some names among many. As long
as this vision and perspective ruled Muslim scholarship and science, the
Muslims

were at the vanguard of the human civilization in those days and their
cities were centers of specialized learning.30

George Sarton admits that during the period between A.D. 750 and 1100,
the Muslims were undisputed leaders of the intellectual world and
between A.D. 1100 and 1350 the centers of learning in the Muslim world
retained their global importance and attraction.

After 1350 the European world began to advance and the Islamic world not
only became stagnant but also failed to absorb the progress made
out­side it. The theological schools excluded all natural sciences from
their curriculum except astronomy and mathematics: This restriction
imposed on the religious madrasahs led to grave repercussions on the
Islamic world. Here we point out a few of these effects:

1. Whereas the Europeans were striving to unravel the hidden laws of
nature and to discover ways of exploiting its treasures and resources,
the Muslims set aside these activities, and left to others what they
deserved most to handle. Today they have reached the point where they
have to depend on America and Europe to satisfy their elementary needs.
They remain largely unable to use their resources, which they continue
to leave to foreigners to exploit.

2. Those Muslims who pursued the experimental sciences were mostly
estranged from the religious sciences. Accordingly, they lacked the
Islamic world‑outlook which was replaced by the atheistic vision that
dominates the Western scientific tradition.

3. The elimination of the study of the natural sciences from the
curricula of the religious madrasahs and the lack of direct touch with
the sources of modern science on the part of religious scholars gave
rise to the two deviated intellectual currents in the Muslim world:

a) Some Muslims, under the influence of Western scientific and technical
progress and without any knowledge of the limitations of empirical
sciences, became singularly possessed with them ....to the extent that
they even tried to interpret the Qur’an and hadith according to their
findings. The Qur’anic exegeses written by Tantawi and Sir Sayyid Ahmad
Khan belong to this class. Others have gone still further claiming that
all the findings of the modern sciences are found in the Qur’an and the
texts of Islamic tradition (hadith). The claim, supposedly, was aimed at
demonstrating the miraculous and Divine nature of the Qur’an.31

In the introduction to his exegesis of the Qur’an, Shaykh Mahmud
Shaltut, the late head of Al‑Azhar University, writes: “God did not send
down the Qur’an to inform mankind of scientific theories and
technological techniques...If we try to attempt a conciliation between
Qur’an and indurable scientific hypotheses, we will thereby subject it
to reversals of times to which all scientific theories and hypotheses
are prone.

That would result in presenting the Qur’an in an apologetic and
defensive perspective. Whatever is mentioned in the Qur’an about the
mysteries of creation and natural phenomena is intended to impel
man­kind to speculation and inquiry into these matters so that thereby
their faith in it is enhanced.”32

b) Some scholars of religion have considered scientific theories as
opposed to the doctrines of religion and accordingly set out to attack
science. This resulted in the repercussion that many Muslims turned away
from religion. Had the natural sciences not been exiled from the
religious curricula, this tragedy would not have occurred.

Any fruitful criticism of ideas based on scientific theories requires,
in the first place, familiarity with the various experimental
disciplines within modern science, so that any unwarranted conclusions
derived from scientific findings may be properly exposed and rejected.
How is it possible to claim that the natural sciences result in man's
estrangement from God, when the Qur’an unambiguously declares:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْ‌ضِ وَاخْتِلَافِ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ‌ لَآيَاتٍ لِّأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ ﴿١٩٠﴾ الَّذِينَ
يَذْكُرُ‌ونَ اللَّـهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىٰ جُنُوبِهِمْ
وَيَتَفَكَّرُ‌ونَ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْ‌ضِ رَ‌بَّنَا مَا
خَلَقْتَ هَـٰذَا بَاطِلًا سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ‌ ﴿١٩١﴾
</p>

***Surely in the creation of the heavens and earth and in the
alternation of night and day there are signs for men possessed of minds
who remember God, standing and sitting and on their sides, and reflect
upon the creation of the heavens and the earth: Our Lord, Thou hast not
created this for vanity. Glory be to Thee! Guard us against the
chastisement o f the Fire.' (3:190‑191)***

If the line of demarcation between religion and science is made clear,
there is no reason for any conflict between these two. In fact they
would complement each other. Science is like the lamp of life and
religion its guide.


