Foreword by the Publisher
=========================

In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful

All praise belongs to Allah, the one who created us and then sent to us
His Messengers, specifically His final Prophet, and made apparent for us
the divinely appointed guardianship of His intimate friends, the A’immah
of true guidance, for the perfection of the faith.

He then guided us towards the best of ethical traits and the keys for
the acceptance of our actions and permitted us to seek the reward of our
actions so that we may enter into the haven of peace that we may reside
in the permanent gardens, where He will allow us to witness the Angel
who will say to us, Salam [Peace] this is the word from your Lord, the
Merciful.

May the prayers and salutations be upon the final Messenger of Allah,
Muhammad al-Mustafa and upon his pure and immaculate family members –
those who came to explain to us the responsibilities which we must
fulfill (towards Allah) through their righteous words, and who came to
lead the servants toward the oceans of light using the flame which is
like a Glowing lamp lit from the oil of the blessed olive tree.

Since the dawn of civilization, humanity has had to grapple with the
forces of good versus evil. Societies sometimes live in periods of
relative calmness and security, but just when everyone starts to get
comfortable, oppression raises its ugly head, bringing peace to a
standstill.

This has been the situation since the coming of the first human being on
Earth, namely Prophet Adam, and will persist until as we continue to
‘progress’ in terms of science and technology, we see that humanity is
‘digressing’ in terms of morality, culture and its interaction with
other nations.

Asides from the countless ‘natural disasters’ which have displaced and
killed millions of people over the ages, the current century has seen
wars on the increase, and it is the innocent men, women and children who
are caught in this cross fire.

How can it be that humanity has evolved to such a level that they can
penetrate the furthest points of the solar system, but we cannot live in
harmony with our neighbors? Why is it that we can feed our insatiable
appetite for the latest technological gadgets, but we cannot manage to
nourish the hungry children dying of malnutrition?

How is it possible that we can spend billions of dollars on the design
and production of the latest weapons of mass destruction, but we cannot
afford to provide education and basic health care services to the most
vulnerable of our society? Is there any hope for the underprivileged and
deprived people of the world? Yes there is a beacon of hope.

The belief in an awaited reformer and savior of humanity is an
embodiment and a symbol of an aspiration cherished by mankind, in spite
of its divergent religious doctrines. The Mahdi (ajtf) as he is referred
to in the Islamic beliefs is the crystallization of an inspiration
through which all people, regardless of their religious affiliations,
are waiting for.

They all look forward to a day when the Heavenly mission will
materialize when the tiring march of humanity across history will
culminate and the world will be able to live in peace and tranquility.

Religion, when it endorses this common consciousness and stresses that
in the long run, this world will be filled with justice and equity after
having been filled with injustice and oppression, gives it a factual
value and converts it into a definite belief.

This belief is not merely a source of consolation rather it is a source
of *virtue* and *strength*. It is a source of *virtue* because the
belief in the Mahdi (ajtf) means the total elimination of injustice and
oppression prevailing in the world and it is a source of inexhaustible
*strength* because it provides hope which enables humanity to resist
frustration, however hopeless and dismal the circumstances may be.

The belief in the appointed day of his advent proves that it is possible
for the forces of justice to face and prevail over a world previously
filled with injustice and oppression and reconstruct the world order.

After all, prevalence of injustice howsoever dominant and extensive it
may have become is an abnormal state and must be eliminated. The
prospect of its elimination after having reached its climax infuses a
great hope in every persecuted individual and every oppressed nation,
that it is possible to change the state of affairs of this world.

The concept of a Mahdi (ajtf) is more widespread than just within the
Muslim community however its detailed features, as determined and
explained by Islam, are more in line with mankind’s aspirations and
dreams.

The Islamic concept of the Mahdi (ajtf) is in greater conformity with
the feelings and sentiments of the oppressed and the persecuted of all
times, more so than in any other religion or tradition. It is Islam
which has given a concrete shape to an abstract idea!

It is no longer necessary to look forward to an unknown savior, who
*may* come into the world at a distant future, rather as the savior *is*
already here we simply have to look forward to the day when the
circumstances are appropriate for him to reappear and begin his great
mission.

The Mahdi (ajtf) is no longer an idea. He is no longer a prophecy. We do
not need to wait for his birth. He *already* exists. We only have to
*wait* for the inauguration of his role. He is a specific entity living
among us in his real human form and he shares our hopes and our joys;
and grieves at our sorrows and times of distress.

He witnesses all the acts of oppression and persecution which are
perpetrated on the face of the earth, and somehow or another, he is
affected by them. He too is anxiously waiting the moment when he will be
able to extend his helping hand to *everyone* upon whom any wrong has
been done, and that he will be able to eradicate injustice and
oppression completely.

Although this *Awaited Savior* is living among us, waiting for the
appointed moment of his advent, however, he has been ordained not to
proclaim himself, nor disclose his identity.

The concept of the Mahdi (ajtf) as espoused by Islam shortens the gap
between the oppressed and the expected savior. It connects the bridge
between them, howsoever long the period of waiting may be.

The traditions *(ahadith)* urge the believers in the Mahdi (ajtf) to
keep on waiting for him and to continue looking forward to solace. The
idea is to establish a close spiritual and intuitive link between the
believers on the one hand and with the Mahdi(ajtf) and all that he
stands for, on the other hand.

It is not possible to establish such a link without believing that the
Mahdi (ajtf) has already been born and that he is a living and
contemporary personality.The late Professor Henry Corbin, philosopher
and researcher on Islam, and a student of the late ‘Allamah Sayyid
Muhammad Husain Taba\`taba’i has stated:

*“To my mind, the Shi’ite is the only sect which has preserved and
perpetuated the link of Divine guidance between man and God through its
belief in the Imamate. According to the Jews, the prophethood, a real
link between man and God, came to an end with Moses. They do not believe
in the Prophethood of Jesus and Muhammad. The Christians too, do not go
beyond Jesus. The Sunnite sect has also stopped at the Prophet Muhammad
and believes that the link between man and God has been severed with the
end of the Prophethood.”*

Thus, it is only the Twelve Shi’a, who believes that the link between
man and God still exists through the Mahdi, and this belief will
continue to exist forever!

However, being in a state of Intiďar or ‘active expectation’ for the
awaited savior of humanity, the Shi’a differ greatly from other
religious traditions and the various schools of thought within the
Islamic world, Since it is them who have been ordered to and are
actively working to lay the foundations which will herald the glorious
advent of Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf).

The word, Intiďar comes from the ‘Arabic root word **“نظر”** which
literally means “to see” something. However, when it is put into the
fourth of the ten (most common) ‘Arabic verbal forms, it becomes
**“إنتظار”** which literally means “to wait or to anticipate
(something)”.

From the Islamic texts and the writings of the scholars, we understand
that Intiďar is an active state which a true believer must be in 24
hours a day. What is the proof of this?

One of the great Mara’ja (sources of emulation) of this current era and
the foremost authority on issues of the 12th Imam, Ayatullah al-’Uzma
al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Lutfullah Safi Gulpaygani (may Allah keep him under
His projection) explains that term of actively waiting for the Mahdi
(ajtf) in his work, “Intiďar: The Force Behind Resistance and Opposition
[to Tyranny].”

In this work he states:

*“Intiďar is a state (which a person finds himself in) which is
comprised of true faith and firm belief in the sources (of legislation)
in the faith of Islam (The Qur\`an and Sunnah of the Prophet and
A\`immah) and in the mastership and guardianship (Wilayah) of Imam
al-Zaman* *(ajtf). It (Intiďar) is a spirit of zeal and keen desire for
the advent, governance and living along side with the Ahlul Bayt (as).*

*It is the detestation of the current state which we are in times of
imperfection, corruption, perversity and degeneration of our
surroundings. This state of affairs (being separated from the Imam and
the corruption around us) burns deep within the heart of a person and
creates turbulence within the heart and affects one’s entire presence
including one’s individual actions and struggles to better the entire
society…”*

The late Henry Corbin stated the following in regards to the
anticipation of the Imam:

*“In the meantime it is the duty of all the Muslims, especially the
Shi’a, to strive steadfastly for the creation of the proper atmosphere
and the right climate for the establishment of a world order based on
justice, virtue and piety.*

*They should not only mould their individual lives according to the
teachings and high ideals of Islam, but they should also bend their
efforts to set up the Islamic order on the collective and communal
level.*

*They should devote themselves to the service of the faith and be
prepared to receive the Awaited Savior. That is what was meant by the
Imams when they exhorted the Muslims to keep on waiting for the Mahdi
(ajtf).”*

The founder and leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the late
Ayatullah al-’Udhma al-Hajj Sayyid Ruhullah Khumayni (may his spirit be
sanctified) stated the following in regards to awaiting the final Imam
(ajtf):

*“What has value is that a person stands up in opposition to oppression.
He stands up and puts an end to the face of despotism and does not
permit inhuman acts of injustice to take place this is what has value
and worth!*

*We have a responsibility! It is not correct to believe that since we
are awaiting the advent of Imam al-Zaman (ajtf), we just sit at home,
take the prayer beads (tasbih) in our hands and merely repeats the
prayer, ‘may his return be a speedy one.’ Rather, the swift return of
the Imam must be made such by our own actions! We ourselves must lay the
groundwork for the return of the awaited Imam!”*

Therefore, we see that we have a very important role in preparing
ourselves and the society for the return of the Mahdi (ajtf).

He is alive and visits different places and takes an interest in world
events. He often attends the assemblies of the faithful, but does not
disclose his true identity. He will reappear on the appointed day, and
will fight against the forces of evil, lead a global revolution and set
up a new world order based on justice, righteousness and virtue.

Allah in the Noble Qur\`an has clearly promised that a day will come
when truth will prevail and the righteous will come to power:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللٌّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَـيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُمْ فِي الأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَى
لَهُمْ... 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has promised those of you who believe and do good deeds that
He will surely make them successors on the Earth as He made those who
were before them and that He will surely establish their religion which
He has chosen for them...”*** ***(Suratul Noor, 24: 55)***

It is clear from this and other verses that ultimately, the righteous
will take the world administration in their hands and Islam will be
victorious over all the other religions. However, as we are instructed,
those awaiting the glorious advent and the eradication of all forms of
evil need to actively engage in laying the groundwork for the return of
Imam al-Mahdi (May Allah hasten his reappearance).

The book that you have in your hands details over 80 responsibilities,
divided into 99 chapters which provide us with practical steps that need
to be performed and implemented in order to put in place the foundations
for the advent of the Imam of our time.

Some of the responsibilities mentioned in this work perhaps are things
which we already perform on a regular basis, without being aware that
they are our duties towards the Imam. By simply ‘shifting’ our intention
and enacting them with the thought in mind that they are being done to
heard the return of the Awaited Savior, we can do our part to ensure
that his advent is hastened and that we have done whatever is in our
power to assist him.

We would like to thank everyone who played a role in helping this
publication materialize, for without your continued support of this and
our other publications, such works would not see the light of day.

Our sincerest appreciation is extended to the numerous private
contributors, who have requested anonymity, who graciously donated
financially to this project. In addition, we need to acknowledge the
various non-profit charitable organizations who also contributed
financially \`to this work, specifically the following (in alphabetical
order): *The Islamic Humanitarian Service* of Kitchener, Ontario, Canada
and *The Mohsin and Fauzia Jaffer Foundation* of Oprington, Florida, USA
– all of your rewards are with Allah alone.

Our special thanks are also extended to Shaykh Tahir-Ridha Jaffer for
his meticulous proof reading of the ‘Arabic text of this book and to
Sister Arifa Hudda for a thorough review and editing of the English text
not an easy task for either of them given their other responsibilities
and commitments. Indeed, without the assistance of these two
individuals, this publication would have further been delayed.

We pray to Allah that He grants all of the donors and anyone who had a
role in the publication of this book the greatest blessings, and keeps
them under His Mercy and Protection, and that He accepts this humble
work from us, and Insha-Allah, enables us to be among the helpers and
Shi’a of Imam al-Zaman (may Allah hasten his glorious advent).

Islamic Publishing House  
 February 3rd, 2008 ce

Muharram 25th, 1429 ah  
 Martyrdom anniversary of Imam ‘Ali b. Husayn Zainul ‘Abidin (peace be
upon him)


