Responsibility 98: Fulfilling the Financial Rights of the Imam
==============================================================

Another responsibility of the believers is to fulfill the financial
rights of Imam al-Zaman (ajtf) namely the Khums which is one of the
obligatory “taxes” in the Shari’ah.

As we know, Khums is considered as one of the Furu’ ad-Din (Branches of
the Faith) of Islam and we must fulfill this requirement. In addition,
we must ensure that we do not spend any money upon which the Khums is
due as this is not permitted (for other details regarding the Khums,
refer to your Mar’ja Taqlid or the relevant books on the topic).

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَشَدَّ مَا فِيهِ النَّاسُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَنْ تَقُومَ
صَاحِبُ الْخُمْسِ فَيَقُولُ: يَا رَبِّ خُـمْسِي!
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely the hardest of thing for a person to bear on the Day of
Resurrection is when the person whom the Khums belonged to stands up to
protest and says: “O’ Lord! (What about) My Khums!’”[^1]

There is a letter which is from one of the specific representatives of
Imam al-Hujjah (ajtf) written to Abul Hasan Asadi which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيمِ، لَعْنَةُ اللٌّهِ وَ
الْمَلاَئِكَةِ وَ النَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ عَلـى مَنِ اسْتَحَلَّ مِنْ
أَمْوَالِنَا (مَالِنَا).
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. May the
curse of Allah and the Angels and all of mankind be upon that person who
considers (the use of) the portion of our wealth as being permissible
for them.”

Abul Hasan Asadi stated: “My heart trembled that such a curse would be
justified for that person who takes even one dirham of the wealth of the
Imam and considers it is as being permissible for him...”

He continued and said: “I swear by the One who raised Muhammad with the
truth and made him as a giver of good tidings, that after I saw this
letter and I looked into my heart (and what I thought of this issue), I
completely changed (my outlook on the Khums).”

The 12th Imam (ajtf) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيمِ، لَعْنَةُ اللٌّهِ وَ
الْمَلاَئِكَةِ وَ النَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ عَلـى مَنْ أَكَلَ مِنْ مَالِنَا
دِرْهَماً حَرَاماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. May the
curse of Allah and the Angels and all of mankind be upon that person who
uses even one dirham of our wealth without permission.”[^2]

Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf) also told us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ أَكَلَ مِنْ أَمْوَالِنَا شَيْئاً فَإِنَّمَا يَأْكُلُ فِي
بَطْنِهِ نَاراً وَ سَيَصْلـى سَعِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person who consumes anything from our wealth has surely put fire in
his stomach and soon he shall enter the flaming fire.”

Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf) has said the following in relation to that person
who considers the using of the wealth of the Imam (Khums) as being
permissible:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ فَعَلَ ذٌلِكَ فَهُوَ مَلْعُونٌ وَ نَحْنُ خُصَمَاؤُهُ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ وَقَدْ قَالَ النَّبِيُّ الْمُسْتَحِلُّ مِنْ عِتْرَتِـي
مَا حَرَّمَ اللٌّهُ مَلْعُونٌ عَلـى لِسَانِي وَ لِسَانِ كُلِّ نَبِيٍّ
مُجَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person who does so (inappropriate our wealth which we are entitled
to) is cursed and we will be his enemies on the Day of Resurrection and
surely the Prophet (Muhammad) has said: ‘The person who considers it
permissible to use that which belongs to my progeny, which Allah has
made impermissible, is cursed by my tongue and the tongue of all the
prophets whose supplications are accepted.’”[^3]

[^1]: ‘Awail al-Layali, vol. 3, pg. 127, sec. on Khums; al-Muqnah, pg.
280, sec. on the Ziyarat.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 53, pg. 183, sec. 31, no. 12; Kamal ad-Din,
pg. 522

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 53, pg. 182, sec. 31, no. 11; al-Ihtijaj, pg.
479


