Responsibility 11: Absolute Obedience to the Imam
=================================================

Another responsibility of the believers is to obey the Imam, during the
time of his advent and also during his occultation. Obeying him means
that we must adhere to the legislations sent by Allah.

During the period of the occultation, obeying the Imam can be achieved
by following the commandments of his noble ancestors which are found in
the books of narrations.

Imam ‘Ali b. Husain as-Sajjad (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ كَرَمَ إِلاَّ بِتَقْوَى وَ لاَ عَمَلَ إِلاَّ بِالنِّيَّةِ وَ لاَ
عِبَادَةَ إِلاَّ بِالتَّفَقُّهِ‏ أَلاَ وَ إِنَّ أَبْغَضَ النَّاسِ
إِلـى اللٌّهِ مَنْ يَقْتَدِي بِسُنَّةِ إِمَامٍ وَ لاَ يَقْتَدِي
بِأَعْمَالِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is no honour except by being Godwary, and there is no action
except when accompanied by the (correct) intention, and there is no
worship except with contemplation. Surely the most hated of people in
the sight of Allah is one who follows the tradition of the Imam, however
does not follow him in his actions.”[^1]

In a second tradition from one of the Imams it has been stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُونُوا لَنَا زَيْناً وَ لاَ تَكُونُوا عَلَيْنَا شَيْناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Be a beautification for us (the Ahlul Bayt) and not a source of
embarrassment to us.”[^2]

In a final tradition for this responsibility, we quote the words of the
sixth Imam, Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) who said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا لاَ نَعُدُّ الرَّجُلَ مُؤْمِناً حَتَّـى يَكُونَ لِجَمِيعِ
أَمْرِنَا مُتَّبِعاً مُرِيداً أَلاَ وَ إِنَّ مِنِ التِّبَاعِ أَمْرِنَا
وَ إِرَادَتِهِ الْوَرَعَ فَتَزَيَّـنُوا بِهِ يَرْحَمْكُمُ اللٌّهُ وَ
كِبِّدُوا أَعْدَائَـنَا بِهِ يَنْعَشْكُمُ اللٌّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed we do not classify a person as a true believer until he follows
all of our teachings. Certainly piety is attained by following our
teachings so beautify yourselves with it, may Allah have mercy upon you,
and hurt our enemies with it and Allah will enliven your spirits.”[^3]

[^1]: al-Kafi, vol. 8, pg. 234, sec. 8, no. 312

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 68, pg. 151, sec. 19, no. 6

[^3]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 78, sec. al-Wara’, no. 13


