Responsibility 13: Knowing the Scholars of the Faith
====================================================

Another responsibility is to know the narrators of traditions, scholars
of the religion and those who are well acquainted with the traditions of
the Ahlul Bayt (as), especially those who (in addition to knowing these
sciences), act according to what they know.

These are none other the people who make up the glorious chain of great
Jurisprudents and respected scholars (who are worthy of being followed).

The second section of this responsibility is to obey the rulings of such
scholars and this is one of the most important responsibilities of a
servant of Allah during the occultation. Rather, even in the period of
the Imam’s advent, this will also be one of the most important duties.

During the occultation, it is obligatory to have faith in and testify to
such scholars and it is also mandatory upon the people to perform taqlid
(to follow) one of the Mujtahidin from amongst them.

It goes without saying that a detailed discussion regarding taqlid
cannot be covered in this book. However in brief we can state that
during the period of occultation, a true believer has one of three
choices, He himself becomes a Mujtahid; he acts according to precaution
(Ihtiyat) in the performance of all his actions or becomes a ‘muqallid’
which means that he follows a person who is at the highest level of
Ijtihad.

If one does not fit into the first two categories, then one must perform
taqlid of a Marja’ who fulfills all of the requirements to be
followed[^1] in all areas of the Furu’ ad-Din (the practical Islamic
regulations).

Just as the narrators of traditions and the scholars of the religion
have been ordered to guide the people in their religious injunctions and
issues related to the next life, so too the people have been commanded
to take guidance from such scholars of the faith.

Through relying upon our intelligence and the Islamic proofs, we can
deduce that not only is it permissible to refer to the people of
knowledge when an issue comes up, rather it is the only way to achieve
success and reach our goals!

The Qur\`an clearly tells us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 فَاسْئَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْــتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Ask the people of the remembrance (those who have knowledge on a
particular issue) if you do not know.” (16:43)***

In regards to issues of the next life and this transient world and how
to achieve success in both, the only path of salvation lies in referring
to the people of knowledge and those who are permitted to express their
opinion the scholars of the faith who act according to their knowledge.

At the head of all responsibilities which we have, it is this one which
makes the duty of a true believer clear in regards to the representative
(of Allah).

It is through following this commandment that a person’s actions, in
relation to the life of this transient world and the next, are given a
stable footing; it is under the shadow of obeying the commandments of
the Marja’ through the act of taqlid that obedience to the Imam is
realized it is also through this act that happiness in this transient
life and the next world are guaranteed.

In reality, following the commandments of the Imam can never materialize
except under the shadow of obedience to a Marja’ who fulfills all of the
requirements to be followed[^2] and this status can be referred to as
Wilayatul Faqih or the Guardianship of the Jurisprudent.

The only way that one can obey Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf) is by obedience to
his general representative, as it is this person who is at the forefront
of the narrators of the tradition, scholars and callers towards the
faith.

The principle of Wilayatul Faqih is the foremost foundation of Islam and
the person who wishes to possess true faith during the period of
occultation must believe in and accept this.

Even if the term Wali al-Faqih is thought of as being coined in our
current era, we see that it simply means to follow the Marja’ who
fulfills all of the requirements (of being followed) as it is he who is
responsible for leading the Islamic society.

He is the one who is permitted to lead the Muslim community as they have
accepted his leadership and authority (Wilayah). Therefore, once he is
entrusted with this authority, his obedience is at the pinnacle of all
obligatory acts.

Without doubt, it is obligatory to obey all of those who narrate the
traditions and are considered as true scholars of the faith, however if
from amongst these, there are Mara’ja who fulfill the requirements, and
amongst this select group there is an individual who is recognized as
the Wali al-Faqih, then he is the first one who must be followed since
he possesses the guardianship over the entire Muslim nation.

As we know, following Imam al-Hujjah (ajtf) can only be done under the
shadow of following the orders of the Wali al-Faqih who has taken on the
responsibility of guardianship of the entire community. Therefore, to
disobey his orders is tantamount to disobeying the commandments of Imam
al-Hujjah (ajtf).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ اللٌّهُ تَعَالـى لِعِيسَى  عَظِّمِ الْعُلَمَآءَ وَ اعْرِفْ
فَضْلَهُمْ فَإِنِّي فَضَّلْـتُهُمْ عَلَـى جَمِيعِ خَلْقِي إِلاَّ
النَّبِيِّينَ وَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ كَفَضْلِ الشَّمْسِ عَلـى الْكَوَاكِبِ
وَ كَفَضْلِ الآخِرَةِ عَلـى الدُّنْـيَا وَ كَفَضْـلِــي عَلى كُلِّ
شَـيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah, the Most High, said to ‘Isa: “Hold the scholars in great esteem
and recognize their greatness since surely I have granted them greatness
above all My creations, with the exception of those who have been sent
as Prophets and Messengers just like the sun enjoys greatness over the
other stars, and the next life enjoys greatness over the transient
world, and like My greatness over all other things.”[^3]

In a letter which Imam al-Hujjah (ajtf) wrote to Ishaq b. Ya’qub, he
stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَمَّا الْحَوَادِثُ الْوَاقِعَةُ فَارْجِعُوا فِيهَا إِلـى رُوَاةِ
حَدِيـثِنَا فَإِنَّهُمْ حُجَّتِي عَلَيْكُمْ وَ أَنَا حُجَّةُ اللٌّهِ
(عَلَيْهِمْ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

“As for (guidance in) the events which transpire, refer to those who
narrate our traditions, since they are my proof over all of you and I am
the proof of Allah (over them).”[^4]

In a tradition from Imam Hasan b. ‘Ali al-’Askari, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا مَنْ كَانَ مِنَ الْفُقَهَاءِ صَائِـناً لِنَفْسِهِ حَافِظاً
لِدِيـنِهِ مُخَالِفاً عَلـى هَوَاهُ مُطِيعاً لِأَمْرِ مَوْلاَهُ
فَلِلْعَوَامِّ أَنْ يُقَلِّدُوهُ وَ ذٌلِكَ لاَ يَكُونُ إِلاَّ بَعْضَ
فُقَهَاءِ الشِّيـعَةِ لاَ كُلُّهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“As for the one who is from amongst the Fuqaha (scholars) and who
protects his soul safe guards his faith goes against the passions of his
lowly desires obeys the commands of his master (Allah) it is required
that the common people should follow him. However these characteristics
are present only in some of the Fuqaha of the Shi’a not all of
them.”[^5]

[^1]: Refer to the Tawdhiul Masa’il of any Marja’ Taqlid, section on
Taqlid, issue 1

[^2]: A Mujtahid who fulfills all of the requirements [Jami’ul Shara’it]
in order to be followed must possess the following qualities: male,
mature (Baligh), Shi’a Ithna-Asheri, of legitimate birth, alive and Just
(‘Adil), one who protects his own soul (from sins), one who protects and
safeguards his religion, one who goes against the desires of his lower
soul and follows the commands of Allah, the Most High. (Risalah Tawdhiul
Masa’il, section on Taqlid, issue 2)

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 2, pg. 25, sec. 8, no. 91; Muniyat al-Murid,
pg. 121, sec. on the Greatness of Knowledge

[^4]: Wasa\`il ash-Shi’a, vol. 18, pg. 101, section 11, no. 9; Biharul
Anwar, vol. 2, pg. 90, sec. 14, no. 13

[^5]: Wasa\`il ash-Shi’a, vol. 27, pg. 131, sec. 10, no. 33401; Biharul
Anwar, vol. 2, pg. 88, sec. 14, no. 12; al-Ihtijaj (Tabrisi), vol. 2,
pg. 283


