Introduction by the Author
==========================

All Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the Universe. May the prayers
and salutations be upon our master and leader, the chief of all the
Prophets and those who have been sent by Him, the beloved of the Lord of
the Universe, the best of His creations and the best of humanity, Abul
Qasim Muhammad (S).

In addition, may prayers and salutations be upon his family, the
righteous and pure Infalliables (as) especially the Remnants of Allah on
His Earth, Imam al-Hujjah ibnil Hasan al-’Askari (ajtf). Finally, may
the greetings and salutations be upon all of the great Maraja’ [sources
of emulation] of the faith and the shining lights of the Shari’ah the
past and present especially the late Ayatullah Khumayni, may Allah be
pleased with all of them.

The purpose of humanity’s creation is for them to attain spiritual
growth and advancement towards the pinnacles of greatness and closeness
to Allah, the Most High. The only path which one can traverse to reach
this station is The Straight Path (as-Siratul Mustaqim) and we cannot
diverge from this course.

According to the accepted proofs[^1], The Straight Path is nothing other
than the Imam whom we have been ordered to follow. Therefore, in every
time period, the Imam and Divinely appointed proof of Allah, the Most
High, is the true straight path and his is the only direction which
leads towards happiness in both worlds.

In the time which we are living, which is full of tribulations and
calamities, and during this state of uneasiness and anguish, the
straight path which leads to Allah, the Most High, is none other than
the 12th Imam who is in occultation *(ghaybah)* and whose advent is
awaited by all.

He is the proof of Allah on this Earth, even though he is behind the
curtains of occultation and his example is just like the sun which
occasionally veils itself behind the clouds; however we still benefit
from its rays.

In fact, the twelfth Imam (ajtf) has stated: “During my period of
occultation, you will benefit from me just as you benefit from the sun
when it goes behind the clouds and is veiled from your sight. Thus, I am
the source of refuge and protection for the people of Earth.”[^2]

During the current age, acquiring *ma’rifah* (a deep understanding and
insight into the Imam, his characteristics and traits), bringing about
true faith and love for him, and complete obedience to him is the
straight path of Allah and is the only road towards salvation and
happiness.

We must traverse this path and must not show any lapses rather, we must
expend all of our energies in attaining piety and consciousness of Allah
so that we may reach to the highest level of our goal. The purification
of our soul and the attainment of the consciousness of Allah in our
heart.

Taqwa of Allah is the only component which makes up the reality of the
straight path, and is the true essence of the path. It is also the same
reality and firm foundation which the Imam and proof of Allah of our
time, al-Hujjat ibnil Hasan (as) has invited his Shi’a (followers) and
those who are actively awaiting his noble advent to observe:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَـاتَّقُوا اللٌّهَ جَلَّ جَلاَلُهُ وَ ظَاهِرُونَا عَلـى
انْتِـيَاشِكُمْ مِنْ فِـتْنَةٍ قَدْ أَنَافَتْ عَلَيْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So be conscious of Allah, Majestic is His Glory, and help us to save
you from a seditious matter that is about to overcome you.”[^3]

He has also stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَّقُوا اللٌّهَ وَ سَلِّمُوا لَنَا وَ رُدُّوا الأَمْرَ إِلَيْنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Be conscious of Allah and submit to us and refer all affairs to
us.”[^4]

In addition, he has told us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْعَاقِبَةُ بِجَمِيلِ صُنْعِ اللٌّهِ سُبْحَانَهُ تَكُونُ حَمِيدَةً
لَهُمْ مَا اجْـتَنَبُوا الْمَنْهِيَّ عَنْهُ مِنَ الذُّنُوبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The end result, by virtue of the excellent arrangement of Allah,
Glorious is He, shall be praiseworthy for them (our followers) because
they avoided committing the sins which He forbade them to perform.”[^5]

Those who have a claim over us are many the greatest of which is Allah
after Him, His friend *(wali)* and representative on the Earth
*(khalifah)* has a right over us and thus, the true definition of taqwa
is to fulfill the rights of these individuals.

The rights which must be observed while on the path of truth and which
belong to the representative of Allah, Imam Waliul ‘Asr (ajtf) are many.
Some are related to particular individuals, while others are related to
the believers in general.

In this work, we have restricted ourselves to the second category the
rights related to the believers in general and as the reader can
appreciate, we can only cover some of them.

Our purpose in compiling this work was to make these responsibilities
available to the lovers of the Imam (ajtf) and those who are seeking to
follow the path of true guidance. It is hoped that the believers will be
able to uphold these responsibilities which we have to Imam al-Hujjah
(ajtf).

In addition, the believers will also be acquainted with responsibilities
which the Imam (ajtf) himself has to fulfill towards his followers.

In the current era, the enemies of the faith have increased and have
been able to use various weapons against the believers. Through their
onslaught, they have launched wars against religion and those who follow
Divine guidance, and without doubt, one of their aims is to misguide the
young generation of Muslims.

Unfortunately, those who are unaware of their personal responsibilities
have fallen into the trap of the enemies, and either knowingly or
unknowingly, has assisted them and may actually be at the forefront of
helping them.

The actions of the enemies of Islam, both in the past and present, have
been enacted in order to remove the aura of spirituality which exists
amongst the true believers and to delude the people from their primary
goals of life.

In such a time, it is incumbent upon the scholars and researchers of the
faith of Islam to elucidate upon the spiritual issues and pure teachings
of the religion of Islam.

In order to further advance the spiritual teachings, one must pay
attention to the discussions related to Imam al-Zaman (ajtf) as he is
the spiritual sun of the universe and the primary reason for all
spiritual movements. It is through the dissemination of these teachings
that we will arrive to the best methods of explaining the spiritual
issues, which will in turn, have a favourable impact upon the entire
Islamic society.

Thus, we hope that this book will lead to a continuation of discussions
in regards to Imam al-Hujjah (ajtf) especially those which focus on the
practical actions which we must perform.

As mentioned previously, this work focuses on the rights and
responsibilities which the true believers have to the Imam. As we know,
the best way which one can fulfill such responsibilities is through
purification of the soul and in addition, a spiritual change must take
place within each person and we must seek to maintain closeness to
Allah.

Therefore, with the permission of Allah, and through the blessings which
we pray are showered upon us by Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf), may our souls be
sacrificed for him, we hope to be able to reach our goal and encounter a
favourable end while on this path.

We pray that we are able to grant contentment and happiness to the Imam
(ajtf) and that we are given a grand status for our endeavours.

This book is an abridgment of various books which have been written on
this topic and its contents has been extracted from works such as
*Mikyalul Makarim*[^6] and *Spiritual Links with the Sacred Presence of
the Mahdi*[^7] however the work in your hands has been presented with
slight modifications from these two books.

We have elucidated upon close to eighty responsibilities, however when
we look at all the responsibilities and their sub categories as
presented in this book, the number reaches ninety-nine.

Where we have deemed necessary and in order to offer a deeper
explanation, we have divided a duty into numerous discussions.
Obviously, all of the branches of that particular responsibility are
merely extensions of the primary responsibility.

As you shall see, responsibilities which are branches of the general
responsibility are noted accordingly.

17th of Rabi’ al-Awwal, 1420 ah

Birth Anniversary of Prophet Muhammad b. ‘Abdullah (S) and Imam Ja’far
b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) Sayyid Muhammad Rida Husaini Mutlaq

[^1]: These proofs can be seen in the books of traditions such as
Biharul Anwar, and Usulul Kafi in the discussions related to the
Divinely appointed leadership (Imamah).

[^2]: Kamal ad-Din wa Tamam an-Ni’mah, pg. 483 – the letter given by the
Imam in response to questions by Ishaq b. Ya’qub; al-Ihtijaj
(al-Tabrisi), vol. 2, pg. 284

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 53, pg. 175, sec. 31, no. 8 (the letter
written by the Imam to Shaykh al-Mufid)

[^4]: al-Ghaybah of Shaykh Tusi, pg. 285; Biharul Anwar, vol. 53, pg.
179, sec. 31, no. 9

[^5]: al-Ihtijaj, pg. 498 (The letter written by the Imam to Shaykh
al-Mufid); Biharul Anwar, vol. 53, pg. 177, sec. 31, no. 8

[^6]: Written by the late Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Taqi Musawi
ISfahani.

[^7]: Written by the late Sadrul Islam Mirza ‘Ali Akbar Hamdani.


