Responsibility 21: Enmity for the Enemies of the Imam Part 2
============================================================

Another responsibility is to ask Allah to remove His mercy from the
enemies of the Imam, as this is one of the best ways to show our hatred
for his enemies.

A true believer must keep these enemies in mind, ask Allah to remove His
specific mercy from them, and pray to Allah  to increase His
chastisement over them. This act is actually considered as a good deed
and in addition, it has a positive effect on the spirit of a person and
will assist in strengthening his soul against the opposing enemies!

The greatest historical enemies of Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf) include the Bani
Umayyah and Bani ‘Abbas and the believer must remember to curse these
people every day and night with his heart and tongue.

The simplest level of ‘cursing’ them is to detest them through one’s
actions. In this regards, Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Baqir (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا انْحَرَفْتَ عَنْ صَلاَةٍ مَكْتُوْبَةٍ فَلاَ تَنْحَرِفْ إِلاَّ
بِانْصِرَافِ لَعْنِ بَنِي أُمَيَّةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When you have departed from your obligatory Salat then do not leave
(your prayer area) until you have cursed the Bani Umayyah.”[^1]

The Messenger of Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ ضَعُفَ عَنْ نُصْرَتِنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ فَلَعَنَ فِي خَلَوَاتِهِ
أَعْدَائَنَا بَلَّغَ اللٌّهُ صَوْتَهُ جَمِيعَ الأَمْلاَكِ مِنَ الثَّرى
إِلــى الْعَرْشِ فَكُلَّمَا لَعَنَ هٌذَا الرَّجُلُ أَعْدَائَنَا
لَعْناً سَاعَدُوهُ فَلَعَنُوا مَنْ يَلْعَنُهُ ثُمَّ ثَنَّوْهُ
فَقَالُوا: أَللٌّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلـى عَبْدِكَ هٌذَا الَّذِي قَدْ بَذَلَ
مَا فِي وُسْعِهِ وَ لَوْ قَدَرَ عَلـى أَكْثَرَ مِنْهُ لَفَعَلَ.
فَإِذَا النِّدَاءُ مِنْ قِبَلِ اللٌّهِ تَعَالـى: قَدْ أَجَبْتُ
دُعَاءَكَمْ وَ سَمِعْتُ نِدَاءَكُمْ وَ صَلَّيْتُ عَلـى رُوْحِهِ فِي
الأَرْوَاحِ وَ جَعَلْتُهُ عِنْدِي مِنَ الْمُصْطَفَينَ الأَخْـيَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If one is too weak to support us the Ahlul Bayt (in open) and thus
curses our enemies in secret, Almighty Allah makes his voice reach all
the creatures from the earth up to the Divine Throne (‘Arsh).

Hence, whenever one curses our enemies, they support him by cursing the
one whom he is cursing then they laud him saying: “O Allah! (Please)
send blessings on this servant of yours who is doing the best he can and
who would certainly do more if he could.”

Almighty Allah answers: “I have responded to your prayers and have
listened to your requests therefore, I send blessings upon the soul of
this servant and I include him with the ‘Company of the Elect, the
Virtuous.’”[^2]

[^1]: Wasa\`il ash-Shi’a, vol. 4, pg. 1038, sec. 19, no. 2; Biharul
Anwar, vol. 86, pg. 58, sec. 38, no. 64

[^2]: Tafsir of the Qur’an by Imam Hasan b. ‘Ali al-’Askari, pg. 47, no.
21


