Responsibility 22: Keeping a Distance from People of Ill-Reputation
===================================================================

Another responsibility of a true believer is to keep away from people
who are not worthy of associating with those who are not on the path of
the Imam or do not follow his way of life. People who have distanced
themselves from the righteous and noble individuals and do not remember
the Imam. This is definitely one of the important responsibilities for
one who loves and is seeking closeness to the Imam.

It is possible for a person to be considered as a Muslim and even a
Shi’a and it is possible that he performs the Salat, Sawm, pays his
Zakat and other charities and Islamically legislated “taxes” and
fulfills all other obligations, but is still considered as one who is
not worthy of associating with.

In essence, these people spend most of their time preoccupied with the
material world and follow their lower desires and passions. They pay
very little attention to spiritual issues, the spiritual journey towards
the final abode or treading on the path towards Allah. They have fled
the difficult paths (of this life), have run away from the slope that
leads towards the next life and have given preference to a life of ease,
comfort, relaxation and negligence (of the faith).

If they approach the Salat and fasting and other Islamic acts, then they
do so because they are seeking a good outcome in the next life and
because of their fear of the hell fire. Thus, the only reason for them
to perform these acts is in order to get a lofty place in Paradise!

When a person looks at their acts of worship, one sees that they are
performed in a particular manner such that it does not intrude with the
goals of the transient world!

How many times has it been seen that their acts of worship are simply
performed because they wish to look good amongst the people (that others
see them perform these acts) and to gain something for this world from
another person. Therefore, such people actually seek to acquire even
more of the transient world by misleading the people (through the acts
of worship!)

Even in the face of many solid proofs, they refuse to submit to true
guidance and refuse to turn away from the path they are on (of seeking
the material world). Such individuals are drowning themselves in
unattainable desires and wishes.

These types of people, whose number is not small, and whom we can safely
say make up a large percentage of the followers of the path of truth(The
Shi’a) If they are not classified as enemies of the Imam, it can safely
be said are not true friends of the Imam either! Thus, the true
followers of the Imam must keep their distance from such people.

In addition, one should also keep away from them when it comes to
business dealings and working with them in other issues of life - except
in the case of necessity.

Of course, there is no problem in guiding them and taking them by the
hand to enlighten them with the hope that this will have an effect on
them and that some change may take place. Rather, this is actually
obligatory (wajib) upon the true believer! However, in other than this
situation, one must keep their distance from them.

One who associates with them, speaks with them and remembers them, will
definitely forget the Imam even though they apparently may be righteous
people.

If being with a certain individual or speaking with him makes one forget
the love of the Imam, then it is not worth associating with that
person - even if he or she is not an enemy of the Imam and is a part of
the nation of the Imam! In essence, any person who makes a true believer
negligent of his responsibilities to the Imam is not worth associating
with!

In addition, if a person does not help his brother or sister in their
spiritual growth and achieving closeness to the Imam, then it is not
advisable to associate with that person - even if they does not prevent
one from these things.

The only people who are worthy of keeping company with are those who
help one another on the path towards the Imam; those who have the same
spiritual course in life; and those who have the same desires and goals
and are actively awaiting the Imam.

Of course, that which has been expressed in this responsibility does not
go against the reciprocal rights that one must fulfill in relation to
brothers in the faith. For example, if one does not associate with a
person who is not worthy of associating with, this does not mean that he
has broken off family ties (which is a sin in Islam).


