Responsibility 25: Getting Spiritually Closer to the Imam Part 1
================================================================

Another responsibility of the believers during the period of occultation
of the Imam is that they should consider the door to Imam al-Zaman
(ajtf) open at all times. However, it should be noted that the
applicability of this issue, its meaning, and realization cannot be
realized by just anyone.

A true believer must accept the fact that the path towards the Imam is
open and thus, he must speak to him and ask his wishes since the Imam
can see and hear us and without doubt, he will reply to the requests of
the believers.

A companion of the Imam once said: “I wrote to Abul Hasan that there is
a person who would like to convey something directly to his Imam and to
Allah, the Great.” The Imam replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ كَانَتْ لَكَ حَاجَةٌ فَحَرِّكْ شَفَـتَيْكَ فَإِنَّ الْجَوَابَ
يَأْتِيكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If you have a need, then move your lips (and mention it) and the reply
will surely come to you.”[^1]  
 It is mentioned in the traditions that Imam ‘Ali. Muhammad once said to
a man:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا أَرَدْتَ أَنْ تَسْأَلَ مَسْأَلَةً فَاكْـتُبْهَا وَ ضَعِ
الْكِتَابَ تَحْتَ مُصَلاَّكَ وَ دَعْهُ سَاعَةً ثُمَّ أَخْرِجْهُ
وَانْظُرْ فِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If you want to ask a question (to your Imam), then write it down and
place the writing under your prayer mat and leave it there for an hour.
Then take it out and look at the paper.”[^2]

The companion stated: “I did just as I was told and received the answer
that I was looking for. The signature of the Imam was even on the
paper!”

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 50, pg. 155, sec. 3, no. 41

[^2]: al-Kharaij, pg. 419, Biharul Anwar, vol. 50, pg. 155, sec. 3, no.
41


