Responsibility 27: Getting Spiritually Closer to the Imam Part 3
================================================================

A true believer must perform the supplications, Salat and other acts of
worship which the A\`immah of guidance have instructed us to perform as
a form of Tawassul (seeking assistance) from the Imam in order to
fulfill our needs and remove any difficulties that we have.

In this responsibility, we mention some of these prayers and
supplications which are various ways and means that we can request our
needs from our Imam.

**One Salat:** On either a Wednesday or Thursday night, one should go
under the open sky with one’s head uncovered and perform a two Rak’at
Salat. After the Salat, the following should be said 55 times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا حُجَّةُ الْقَائِمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’ Hujjatul Qa\`im.”[^1]

**One Du’a:** This Du’a was taught by our twelfth Imam to a man who had
been sent to prison. After reciting this short supplication, he was
freed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلٰـهِي عَظُمَ الْبَلاَءُ وَبَرِحَ الْـخَفَاءُ وَانْكَشَفَ الْغِطَاءُ
وَانْقَطَعَ الرَّجَاءُ وَضَاقَتِ الأَرْضُ وَمُنِعَتِ السَّمَاءُ
وأَنْتَ الْـمُسْتَعَانُ وَإِلَيْكَ الْـمُشْـتَكٰى وَعَلَيْكَ
الْـمُعَوَّلُ فِي الشِّدَّةِ والرَّخَاءِ. أَللّٰـهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلىٰ
مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ أُولِي الأَمْرِ الَّذِينَ فَرَضْتَ عَلَيْنَا
طَاعَتَهُمْ وَعَرَّفْـتَنَا بِذٰلِكَ مَنْزِلَــتَهُمْ فَفَرِّجْ عَنَّا
بِحَقِّهِمْ فَرَجاً عَاجِلاً قَرِيـباً كَلَمْحِ الْبَصَرِ أَوْ هُوَ
أَقْرَبُ. يَا مُحَمَّدُ يَا عَلِيُّ يَا عَلِيُّ يَا مُحَمَّدُ
إِكْـفِيَانِي فَإِنَّكُمَا كَافِيَانِ وَانْصُرَانِي فَإِنَّكُمَا
نَاصِرَانِ. يَا مَوْلاَنَا يَا صَاحِبَ الزَّمَانِ، أَلْغَوْثَ
أَلْغَوْثَ أَلْغَوْثَ، أَدْرِكْنِي أَدْرِكْنِي أَدْرِكْنِي،
أَلسَّاعَةَ أَلسَّاعَةَ أَلسَّاعَةَ، أَلْعَجَلَ أَلْعَجَلَ أَلْعَجَل.
يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ بِحَقِّ مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ الطَّاهِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’ Allah, terrible is the calamity; and its evil consequences are
visible the covering has been removed (all) hopes have been cut off; the
(plentiful) Earth has shrunk (with very little room to spare); the
heavenly blessings have been withheld.

You alone can help, we refer our grief and sorrow to you, we have full
faith in you, in the times of distress, as well as in good fortune.

O’ Allah send Your blessings on Muhammad and the family of Muhammad,
whom we must obey as per Your command, through which we become aware of
their rank and status, and let there be joy after sorrow for us, for
their sake, right away, in the twinkling of an eye or even more rapidly
than that.

O’ Muhammad, O’ ‘Ali, O’ ‘Ali, O Muhammad, Give me enough, because both
of you provide sufficiently (by the permission of Allah). Help me,
because both of you help and protect (by the permission of Allah). O’
our master, O’ the Imam of our Time! Help me, help me, help me! Assist
me! Assist me! Assist me!

At once, in this hour. Be quick, be quick, be quick. O’ the Most
Merciful of those who show mercy, for the sake of Muhammad and his pure
family.”[^2]

**One written request:** It is mentioned in the traditions that if a
person has a legitimate desire, then he should write the following on a
piece of paper and place it inside the grave of one of the A\`immah.

If this is not possible, then he may seal it with pure mud and place it
in a deep well, river or any other body of flowing water and it will
reach to Imam Sahib al-Zaman (ajtf). The Imam himself has guaranteed
that he will answer the requests of the person:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَتَبْتُ يَا مَوْلاَى صَلَوَاتُ اللٌّهِ عَلَيْكَ مُسْتَغِيثاً
وَشَكَوْتُ مَا نَزَلَ بِي مُسْتَجِيراً بِاللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ ثُمَّ
بِكَ مِنْ أَمْرٍ قَدْ دَهِمَنِي وَأَشْغَلَ قَلْبِي وَأَطَالَ فِكْرِي
وَسَلَبَنِي بَعْضَ لُبِّي وَغَيَّرَ خَطِيرَ نِعْمَةِ اللٌّهِ عِنْدِي
(أَسْلَمَنِي عِنْدَ تَخَيُّلِ وُرُودِهِ الخَلِيلُ وَتَبَرَّأَ مِنِّي
عِنْدَ) تَرَائِي إِقْبَالِهِ إِلَيَّ الْحَمِيمُ وَعَجَزَتْ عَنْ
دِفاَعِهِ حِيلَتِي وَخَانَنِي فِي تَحَمُّلِهِ صَبْرِي وَقُوَّتِي،
فَلَجَأْتُ فِيهِ إِلَيْكَ وَتَوَكَّلْتُ فِي الْمَسْئَلَةِ لِلٌّهِ
جَلَّ ثَنَاؤُهُ عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَيْكَ فِي دِفَاعِهِ عَنِّي عِلْماً
بِمَكاَنِكَ مِنَ اللٌّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ وَلِيِّ التَّدْبِيرِ
وَمَالِكِ الأُمُورِ وَاثِقاً بِكَ فِي الْمُسَارَعِةِ فِي الشَّفَاعَةِ
إِلَيْهِ جَلَّ ثَنَائُهُ فِي أَمْرِي مُتَيَقِّناً لِإِِجَابَتِهِ
تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى إِيَّاكَ بِإِعْطَائِي سُؤْلِي وَأَنْتَ يَا
مَوْلاَيَ جَدِيرٌ بِتَحْقِيقِ ظَنِّي وَتَصْدِيقِ أَمَلِي فِيكَ فِي
أَمْرِ كَذٌا وَكَذٌا... (فِي) مِمَّا لاَ طَاقَةَ لِي بِحَمْلِهِ وَلاَ
صَبْرَ لِي عَلَيْهِ وَإِنْ كُنْتُ مُسْتَحِقًّا لَهُ وَلِأَضْعَافِهِ
بِقَبِيحِ أَفْعالِي وَتَفْرِيطِي فِي الْوَاجِـبَاتِ الَّتِي لِلٌّهِ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فَأَغْثِنِي يا مَوْلايَ صَلَواتُ اللّهِ عَلَيْكَ عِنْدَ
اللَّهْفِ وَقَدِّمِ الْمَسْأَلَةَ لِلٌّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِي أَمْرِي
قَبْلَ حُلُولِ التَّلَفِ وَشَماتَةِ الأَعْدآءِ فَبِكَ بَسَطَتِ
النِّعْمَةُ عَلَيَّ وَاسْئَلِ اللٌّهَ جَلَّ جَلالُهُ لِي نَصْراً
عَزِيزاً وَفَتْحاً قَرِيباً فِيهِ بِـبُلُوغِ الآمَالِ وَخَيْرِ
الْمَبَادِي وَخَواتِيمِ الأَعْمالِ وَالأَمْنِ مِنَ الْمَخَاوِفِ
كُلِّهَا فِي كُلِّ حَالٍ إِنَّهُ جَلَّ ثَنَاؤُهُ لِمَا يَشَاءُ
فَعَّالُ وَهُوَ حَسْبِي وَنِعْمَ الْوَكِيلُ فِي الْمَبْدَءِ وَالْمآلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I am writing to you, O my master, may Allah’s blessings be upon you,
seeking your aid. And I am complaining about what has befallen me,
seeking protection from Almighty Allah and then from you against the
trouble that has inflicted me; busied my heart; occupied my mind;
deprived me of my prudence; and changed the great favors of Almighty
Allah upon me.

It has disappointed me after I had thought of it as my friend; and
disavowed me after it had pretended itself as my close comrade. Thus,
all my means have failed to defend me against it; and my endurance and
power have been too short to bear it.

I therefore resort to you against it and I depend upon Allah, the
greatly Praised, and upon you, on account of my confession of your
(unique) standing with Allah, the Lord of the Worlds, the Source of
perfect management, and the Prevailer over all affairs, in protecting me
against it and I am sure that you will expedite interceding for me
before Allah, the greatly Praised, regarding my affair.

I am certain that He, the Blessed and Elevated, will respond to me by
answering my appeal. Verily, you, my master, are worth causing my
expectation to come true and making my hope achievable concerning
**so-and-so**...”

*In the place of the last words in bold, the person would proceed to
write his needs and then continue by writing:*

“...which I cannot stand to bear although I have deserved not only that
problem but also many times as many as it due to my misdeed and
negligence of my duties towards Almighty Allah. O my master!

May Allah’s blessings be upon you, (please) aid me as I am anxious, and
provide my request before Almighty Allah before I am injured and my
enemies gloat over my grief. It is through you that the bounties have
been spread over me.

Please ask Almighty Allah to grant me a great assistance and a near
victory through which my hopes may be attained, the commencements and
ends of my deeds may be made good, and all my apprehensions secured
under all circumstances. Verily, He, the greatly Praised does whatever
He wills; and He is Sufficient for me! Most Excellent is He in whom we
trust first and last.”

The person should then stand near the river or body of water and by
taking the name of the one four specific representatives of the Imam (it
is best to take the name of Hasan b. Ruh) call upon him and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا فُلاَنَ بْنَ فُلاَنٍ (حَسَنَ ابْنَ رُوحٍ): سَلاَمٌ عَلَيْكَ.
أَشْهَدُ أَنَّ وَفَاتَكَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ وَ أَنْتَ حَيٌّ عِنْدَ
اللهِ مَرْزُوقٌ وَ قَدْ خَاطَبْـتُكَ فِي حَيَاتِكَ الَّتِي عِنْدَ
اللهِ جَلَّ وَ عَزَّ وَ هٰذِهِ رُقْعَـتِي وَ حَاجَتِي إِلـىٰ
مَوْلاَنَا فَسَلِّمْهَا إِلَيْهِ فَأَنْتَ الثِّقَةُ الأَمِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’ so and so (Hasan b. Ruh): Peace be upon you! I bear witness that
surely your death was in the way of Allah and that indeed you are alive
in the presence of Allah being sustained (by Him) and thus I address you
in your life which you have in the presence of Allah, the Noble and
Grand, and this writing of mine has my needs that are to be given to our
master so then submit this to him since you are the trustworthy and
reliable.”

The person should then throw the paper into the flowing water so that
his desires will be fulfilled, Insha-Allah.[^3] [This is common known as
the Areezah.]

**One ziyarat:** Among the best rites of visitation that can be recited
for the Imam to have our legitimate desires fulfilled (by the permission
of Allah ) is the Ziyarat of Aale Yasin[^4] which has been recorded and
preserved in many books of supplication and it is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْـمٰنِ الرَّحِيٖمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلاَمٌ عَلىٰ آلِ يٰـسۤ أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا دَاعِيَ اللهِ
وَرَبَّانـِيَّ آيَاتِهِ. أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا بَابَ اللهِ
وَدَيَّانَ دِيْـنِهِ. أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا خَلِيفَةَ اللهِ
وَنَاصِرَ حَقِّهِ. أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا حُجَّةَ اللهِ وَدَلِيلَ
إِرَادَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Peace be upon (the) progeny of Yasin. Peace be upon you, O the caller
of Allah and place of manifestation of His signs. Peace be upon you, O
the door of Allah and the devout one of His religion. Peace be upon you,
O the vicegerent of Allah and the helper of His truth. Peace be upon
you, O the proof of Allah and the symbol of His ordinance.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا تَالِيَ كِتَابِ اللهِ وَتَرْجُـمَانَهُ.
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ فِي آنَاءِ لَيْلِكَ وَأَطْرَافِ نَـهَارِكَ.
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا بَقِيَّةَ اللهِ فِي أَرْضِهِ. أَلسَّلاَمُ
عَلَيْكَ يَا مِيثَاقَ اللهِ الَّذِي أَخَذَهُ وَوَكَّدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the reciter of Allah’s book and its interpreter.
Peace be upon you in your night and in your day. Peace be upon you, O
the vestige of Allah on His earth. Peace be upon you, O the covenant of
Allah, which He took and affirmed.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا وَعْدَ اللهِ الَّذِي ضَمِنَهُ.أَلسَّلاَمُ
عَلَيْكَ أَيُّهَا الْعَلَمُ الْـمَنْصُوبُ وَالْعِلْمُ الْـمَصْـبُوبُ
وَالْغَوْثُ وَالرَّحْمَةُ الْوَاسِعَةُ وَعْداً غَيْرَ مَكْذُوبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the promise of Allah which He guaranteed. Peace by
upon you, O the raised flag and the one who is molded with knowledge,
the help, the far-reaching mercy and the promise which is not a lie.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ حِينَ تَقُومُ، أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ حِينَ
تَقْعُدُ، أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ حِينَ تَقْرَأُ وَتُـبَيِّنُ،
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ حِينَ تُصَلِّي وَتَـقْنُتُ، أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ
حِينَ تَرْكَعُ وَتَسْجُدُ، أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ حِينَ تُـهَلِّلُ
وَتُكَبِّرُ، أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ حِينَ تَحْمَدُ وَتَسْتَغْفِرُ،
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ حِينَ تُصْبِحُ وَتُـمْسِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you while you are standing. Peace be upon you while you
are sitting. Peace be upon you when you are reading and explaining (the
Qur\`an). Peace be upon you when you are praying and supplicating.

Peace be upon you when you are bowing (in Ruku’) and prostrating (in
Sajdah). Peace be upon you when you are announcing the Tahlil (saying:
‘There is no god but Allah’) and Takbir (saying: ‘Allah is greater [than
can be described].’) Peace be upon you when you are praising (Allah) and
seeking forgiveness. Peace be upon you when you enter the morning and
the evening.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ فِي اللَّيْلِ اِذَا يَغْشىٰ وَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا
تَجَلَّى، أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ أَيُّهَا الإِمَامُ الْـمَأْمُونُ،
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ أَيُّهَا الْـمُقَدَّمُ الْـمَأْمُولُ، أَلسَّلاَمُ
عَلَيْكَ بِجَوِامِعِ السَّلاَمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you in the night when it envelops and the day when it
becomes manifest. Peace be upon you, O the protected leader. Peace be
upon you, O the one whose coming is hoped for. Peace be upon you by the
collections of the salutations.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُشْهِدُكَ يَا مَوْلاَى أَنِّـي أَشْهَدُ أَنْ لاَ اِلٰهَ اِلاَّ اللهُ
وَحْدَهُ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَـهُ وَأَنَّ مُحَمَّداً عَبْدُهُ وَرَسُوْلُهُ
لاَ حَبِيبَ اِلاَّ هُوَ وَأَهْلُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I call you as a witness, O my Master, that certainly I testify that
there is no god except Allah, He is alone, there is no partner with Him.
And (I testify) that indeed Muhammad is His servant and His Apostle;
there is no beloved except him and his progeny.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُشْهِدُكَ يَا مَوْلاَيَ أَنَّ عَلِيّاً أَمِيرَ الْـمُؤْمِنِينَ
حُجَّتُهُ، وَالْـحَسَنَ حُجَّتُهُ، وَالْـحُسَيْنَ حُجَّتُهُ، وَعَلِيَّ
بْنَ الْـحُسَيْنِ حُجَّتُهُ، وَمُحَمَّدَ بْنَ عَلِيٍّ حُجَّتُهُ،
وَجَعْفَرَ بْنَ مُحَمَّدٍ حُجَّتُهُ، وَموُسَىٰ بْنَ جَعْفَرٍ
حُجَّتُهُ، وَعَلِيَّ بْنَ موُسىٰ حُجَّتُهُ، وَمُحَمَّدَ بْنَ عَلِيٍّ
حُجَّتُهُ، وَعَلِيَّ بْنَ مُحَمَّدٍ حُجَّتُهُ، وَالْـحَسَنَ بْنَ
عَلِيٍّ حُجَّتُهُ، وَأَشْهَدُ أَنَّكَ حُجَّةُ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I call you as a witness, O my Master, that certainly ‘Ali, the
Commander of the Believers is His proof and Hasan is His proof and
Husain is His proof and ‘Ali, son of Husain is His proof and Muhammad,
son of ‘Ali is His proof and Ja’far, son of Muhammad is His proof and
Musa, son of Ja’far is His proof and ‘Ali, son of Musa is His proof and
Muhammad, son of ‘Ali is His proof and ‘Ali, son of Muhammad is His
proof and Hasan, son of ‘Ali is His proof and I testify that indeed you
are the proof of Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتُمُ الأَوَّلُ وَالآخِرُ وَأَنَّ رَجْعَتَكُمْ حَقٌّ لاَ رَيْبَ
فِيهَا يَوْمَ لاَ يَنْفَعُ نَفْساً إِيْـمَانُـهَا لَمْ تَكُنْ آمَنَتْ
مِنْ قَبْلُ أَوْ كَسَبَتْ فِي إِيْـمَانِـهَا خَيْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

You (all) are the first and the last. And surely your return is a truth,
there is no doubt in it, (on) the day when (the) belief of none will
benefit him who previously did not believe or acquired goodness through
his belief.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ الْـمَوْتَ حَقٌّ وَأَنَّ نَاكِراً وَنَكيراً حَقٌّ وَأَشْهَدُ
أَنَّ النَّشْرَ حَقٌّ وَالْبَعَثَ حَقٌّ وَأَنَّ الصِّرَاطَ حَقٌّ
وَالْـمِرْصَادَ حَقٌّ وَالْـمِيزَانَ حَقٌّ وَالْحَشْرَ حَقٌّ
وَالْحِسابَ حَقٌّ وَالْجَـنَّةَ وَالنَّارَ حَقٌّ وَالْوَعْدَ
وَالْوَعِيدَ بِهِمَا حَقٌّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And indeed death is (an inescapable) truth; and indeed (the questioning
of) Nakir and Nakir is a truth; and I testify that indeed the dispersion
(in Qiyamat) is a truth; and the resurrection is a truth; and indeed the
(narrow) path (over hell) is a truth; and the place of observation is a
truth; and the (measuring) scales is a truth; and the gathering (of all
human beings) is a truth; and the accounting (of deeds) is a truth; and
Paradise and Hell is a truth; and the promise and the threat are both a
truth.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا مَوْلايَ شَقِيَ مَنْ خَالَــفَكُمْ وَسَعِدَ مَنْ أَطَاعَكُمْ
فَاشْهَدْ عَلىٰ مَا أَشْهَدْتُكَ عَلَيْهِ وَأَنَا وَلِيٌّ لَكَ
بَرِيـئٌ مِنْ عَدُوِّكَ فَالْحَقُّ مَا رَضِـيتُمُوهُ وَالْبَاطِلُ مَا
سَخِطْـتُمُوهُ وَالْـمَعْرُوفُ مَا أَمَرْتُمْ بِهِ وَالْـمُنْكَرُ مَا
نَـهَـيْتُمْ عَنْهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, one who opposes you (all) is wretched and the one who obeys
you (all) is successful. Then testify whatever I made you a witness
upon. And I am a friend of yours, distanced from your enemy. So the
truth is whatever you are pleased with, and falsehood is whatever you
are angry with, and goodness is whatever you have ordered, and evil is
whatever you have prohibited.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَنَفْسِي مُؤْمِنَةٌ بِاللهِ وَحْدَهُ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَهُ وَبِرَسُولِهِ
وَبِأَمِيرِ الْـمُؤْمِنِينَ وَبِكُمْ يَا مَوْلاَيَ أَوَّلِكُمْ
وَآخِرِكُمْ وَنُصْرَتِي مُعَدَّةٌ لَكُمْ وَمَوَدَّتِي خَالِصَةٌ
لَـكُمْ آمِينَ آمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

So I am a believer in Allah, the One, He has no partner, and (I am a
believer) in His Messenger and in the Commander of the Faithful and in
you O my master, the first among you and the last among you. And my help
is ready for you and my love is purely for you. Ameen! Ameen! (Accept!
Accept! [whatever I have asked for])”

The following du’a should then be recited to complete this Ziyarat:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ أَنْ تُصَلِّيَ عَلىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ نَبِيِّ
رَحْمَتِكَ وَكَلِمَةِ نُورِكَ وَأَنْ تَـمْلأَ قَلْـِبي نُورَ
الْيَقِينِ وَصَدْرِي نُورَ الإِيـمَانِ وَفِكْرِي نُورَ النِّيَّاتِ
وَعَزْمِي نُورَ الْعِلْمِ وَقُوَّتِي نُورَ الْعَمَلِ وَلِسَانِي نُورَ
الصِّدْقِ وَدِيـنِي نُورَ الْبَصَائِرِ مِنْ عِنْدِكَ، وَبَصَرِي نُورَ
الضِّـيَآءِ وَسَمْعِي نُورَ الْحِكْمَةِ وَمَوَدَّتِي نُورَ
الْـمُوَالاَةِ لِـمُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ عَلَيْهِمُ أَلسَّلاَمُ حَتّٰى
أَلْقَاكَ وَقَدْ وَفَيْتُ بِعَهْدِكَ وَمِيثَاقِكَ فَتُغَشِيَّنِي
رَحْمَتَكَ يَا وَلِيُّ يَا حَمِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah, surely I ask you to send blessings upon Muhammad - the Prophet
of Your mercy and the aphorism of your light. And fill my heart with the
light of certainty; and my chest with light of faith; and my thinking
with the light of intentions and my determination with the light of
knowledge and my strength with the light of action and my tongue with
the light of truthfulness.

And my religion with the light of understanding from You and my vision
with the light of illumination and my hearing with the light of wisdom
and my love with the light of friendship for Muhammad and his progeny,
peace be upon (all of), them until I meet You having certainly fulfilled
(my duty to) Your promise and Your covenant. So you cover me with your
mercy, O Master! O Praiseworthy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰـهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلٰى مُحَمَّدٍ حُجَّتِكَ فِي أَرْضِكَ
وَخَلِيفَتِكَ فِي بِلاَدِكَ وَالدَّاعِي إِلـىٰ سَـبِيـلِكَ
وَالْقَائِمِ بِقِسْطِكَ وَالسَّائِرِ بِأَمْرِكَ، وَلِـيِّ
الْـمُؤْمِنِينَ وَبَوَارِ الْـكَافِرِينَ وَمُجَلِّي الظُّلْمَةِ
وَمُنِيرِ الْحَقِّ وَالنَّاطِقِ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَالصِّدْقِ وَكَلِمَتِكَ
التَّآمَّةِ فِي أَرْضِكَ، الْـمُرْتَقِبِ الْخَآئِفِ وَالْوَلِيِّ
النَّاصِحِ، سَـفِينَةِ النَّجَاةِ وَعَلَمِ الْـهُدى وَنُورِ أَبْصَارِ
الْوَرىٰ وَخَيْرِ مَنْ تَقَمَّصَ وَارْتَدىٰ وَمُجَلِّي الْعَمَىٰ
الَّذِي يَـمْلاَءُ الأَرْضَ عَدْلاً وَقِسْطاً كَمَا مُلِئَتْ ظُلْماً
وَجَوْراً، إِنَّكَ عَلىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَديرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah send your blessings upon Muhammad, your proof on your earth,
your vicegerent over your lands the caller towards your way, the
establisher of your justice, the one who follows Your command. The
master of the believers and the (cause of) ruin of the disbelievers, the
enlighten of the darkness, the illuminator of the truth the speaker with
wisdom and truth.

Your complete word on Your earth, the anxious anticipator and the
counseling master, the ship of salvation, the flag of guidance, the
light of the sight of mankind, best of he who was attired and was
clothed and the illuminator of the blind, the one who will fill the
earth with justice and equity, just as it was filled with injustice and
oppression. Surely you are Powerful over all things.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلىٰ وَلِيِّكَ وَابْنِ أَوْلِيَائِكَ الَّذِينَ
فَرَضْتَ طَاعَتَهُمْ، وَأَوْجَبْتَ حَقَّهُمْ، وَأَذْهَبْتَ عَنْهُمُ
الرِّجْسَ وَطَهَّرْتَـهُمْ تَطْهِيراً. أَللّٰـهُمَّ انْصُرْهُ
وَانْـتَصِرْ بِهِ لِدِيـنِكَ وَانْصُرْ بِهِ أَوْلِيَائَكَ وَ
أَوْلِياَئَهُ وَشِيعَتَهُ وَأَنْصَارَهُ وَاجْعَلْنَا مِنْهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ Allah send your blessings upon your close friend and son of your
close friends those whom you have ordered (us) to obey, you made (the
observation of) their rights compulsory, you removed from them all
uncleanliness and purified them a thorough purification. O’ Allah help
him and come to the aid of your religion through him and help your close
friends (those who are) his friends and his followers and his helpers,
and place us among them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰـهُمَّ أَعِذْهُ مِنْ شَرِّ كُلِّ بَاغٍ وَطَاغٍ وَمِنْ شَرِّ
جَمِيعِ خَلْقِكَ، وَاحْفَظْهُ مِنْ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ
وَعَنْ يَـمِيـنِهِ وَعَنْ شِـمَالِهِ وَاحْرُسْهُ وَامْنَعْهُ مِنْ أَنْ
يُوصَلَ إِلَيْهِ بِسُوءٍ وَاحْفَظْ فِيهِ رَسُولَكَ وَآلَ رَسُولِكَ
وَأَظْهِرْ بِهِ الْعَدْلَ وَأَيِّدْهُ بِالنَّصْرِ وَانْصُرْ نَاصِرِيهِ
وَاخْذُلْ خَاذِليهِ وَاقْصِمْ قَاصِمِيهِ وَاقْصِمْ بِهِ جَبَابِرَةَ
الْكُفْرِ وَاقْـتُلْ بِهِ الْكُفَّارَ وَالْـمُنَافِقِينَ وَجَمِيعَ
الْـمُلْحِدِينَ حَيْثُ كَانُوا مِنْ مَشَارِقِ الأَرْضِ وَمَغَارِبِهَا
بَرِّهَا وَبَحْرِهَا، وَامْلَأْ بِهِ الأَرْضَ عَدْلاً وَأَظْهِرْ بِهِ
دِينَ نَـبِيِّكَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Protect him from the evil of every tyrant and despot and from
the evil of all your creatures and grant him protection from his front,
his back, his right and his left and protect him and prevent from him
the reaching of any evil.

Protect Your Apostle and the progeny of Your Apostle through him and
make justice manifest through him; support him by victory; aid his
helpers and abandon his deserters; crush his enemies and break up the
forces of disbelief through him.

Through him, kill the disbelievers and the hypocrites and all the
infidels wherever they be, in the east of the earth and its west, its
land and its sea. Fill the earth with justice through him and manifest
the religion of Your Prophet, blessings be upon him and his progeny
(through him).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْنِي اللّٰهُمَّ مِنْ أَنْصَارِهِ وَأَعْوَانِهِ وَأَتْبَاعِهِ
وَشِيعَتِهِ، وَأَرِنِي فِي آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ مَا
يَأْمُلُونَ وَفِي عَدُوِّهِمْ مَا يَحْذَرُونَ، إِلٰهَ الْحَقِّ آمِينَ
يَا ذَا الْجَلاَلِ وَالإِكْرَامِ يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And place me, O Allah, among his helpers and his aides and his followers
and his partisans. And show me in the progeny of Muhammad peace be upon
them, whatever they are hoping for and in their enemies whatever they
(the enemies) are afraid of. O Lord of the truth, Ameen (Accept). O the
Possessor of Splendor and Honor! O the Most Merciful of all the
Merciful.”

**One dhikr:** When a person has a legitimate need that must be
fulfilled, he should stand facing the Qiblah with his head uncovered,
and say the following 570 times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا حُجَّةُ الْقَائِمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’ Hujjatul Qa\`im.”[^5]

**One form of tawassul:** We are able to seek an intermediary to Allah
through the 12th Imam (ajtf) by reciting this supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ وَ أَسْأَلُكَ
اللّٰهُمَّ بِحَقِّ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ ابْنَتِهِ وَ ابْنَيْهَا الْـحَسَنُ وَ
الْـحُسَينُ إِلاَّ أَعَنْـتَنِي بِهِمْ عَلىٰ طَاعَتِكَ وَ رِضْوَانِكَ
وَ بَلَّغْـتَنِي بِهِمْ أَفْضَلَ مَا بَلَّغْتَهُ أَحَداً مِنْ
أَوْلِيَائِهِمْ فِي ذٰلِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’ Allah! Send your blessings upon Muhammad (S) and his household (as)
and I beseech you, O Allah, in the name of Muhammad (S), his daughter
(sa), and her two sons, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (as), that by their right
you help me to obey you and attain your pleasure and that you grant me
the best of all that which you have ever granted to any of their close
friends.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَسْأَلُكَ بِحَقِّ وَلِيِّكَ أَمْيرِ الْـمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلِيِّ بْنِ
أَبِي طَالِبٍ إِلاَّ انْتَقَمْتَ لِي بِهِ مِـمَّنْ ظَلَمَنِي وَ
كَفَيْتَنِي بِهِ مَئُونَةَ مَنْ يُرِيدُنِي بِظُلْمٍ أَبَداً مَا
أَبْقَيْتَنِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I beseech you in the name of Your close servant, the Commander of
the Faithful, ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, that by his right, You take revenge on
him who has wronged me, and by his right, You stand against anyone who
intends to injure me as long as You will to keep me alive.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَسْأَلُكَ بِحَقِّ وَلِيِّكَ عَلِيِّ بْنِ الْـحُسَينِ إِلاَّ
كَفَيْتَنِي بِهِ وَ نَجَّيْتَنِي مِنْ جَوْرِ السَّلاَطِينَ وَ نَفْثِ
الشَّيَاطِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I beseech you in the name of Your close servant, ‘Ali b. al-Husayn,
that by his right, You protect and save me from the persecution of the
rulers, and the evil inspirations of the devils.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَسْأَلُكَ اللّٰهُمَّ بِحَقِّ وَلِيِّيكَ مُحَمَّدٍ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ وَ
جَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ إِلاَّ أَعَـنْتَنِي بِهِمَا عَلىٰ أَمْرِ
آخِرَتِي بِطَاعَتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I beseech you in the name of your two close servants, Muhammad b.
‘Ali and Ja’far b. Muhammad, that by their right, you help me manage the
affairs of my next life by means of obedience to you.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَسْأَلُكَ اللّٰهُمَّ بِحَقِّ وَلِيِّكَ الْعَبْدِ الصَّالِـحِ
مُوسىٰ بْنِ جَعْفَرٍ الْـكَاظِمِ بِغَيْظِهِ إِلاَّ عَافَيْتَنِي بِهِ
مِـمَّا أَخَافُهُ وَ أَحْذَرُهُ عَلىٰ بَصَرِي وَ جِـمِيعِ سَائِرِ
جَسَدِي وَ جَوَارِحِ بَدَنِي مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا وَ مَا بَطَنَ مِنْ
جَمِيعِ الأَسْقَامِ وَ الأَمْرَاضِ وَ الأَعْلاَلِ وَ الأَوْجَاعِ
بِقُدْرَتِكَ يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I beseech You, O Allah, in the name of Your close righteous servant,
Musa b. Ja’far, who suppressed his anger (al-Kadhim), that by his right,
You safeguard me against all that which I fear and and am careful about
regarding my sight and the rest of my entire body, and all my organs the
external and the internal from all illnesses, diseases, ailments, and
pains, out of Your power, O the most Merciful of all those who show
mercy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَسْأَلُكَ اللّٰهُمَّ بِحَقِّ وَلِيِّكَ عَلِيِّ بْنِ مُوسىٰ
الرِّضَا إِلاَّ أَنْجَيْـتَنِي بِهِ وَ سَلَّمْـتَنِي مـِمَّا أَخَافُهُ
وَ أَحْذَرُهُ فِي جَمِيعِ أَسْفَارِي فِي الْبَرَارِي و الْقِفَارِ وَ
الأَوْدِيَةِ وَ الْغِيَاضِ وَ الْبِحَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I beseech You, O Allah, in the name of Your close servant, ‘Ali b.
Musa al-Riďa, that through him, You rescue me and guard me against all
that I fear and am careful about in all my journeys through the lands,
deserts, valleys, jungles, and seas.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَسْأَلُكَ اللّٰهُمَّ بِحَقِّ وَلِيِّكَ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ الْجَوَادِ
إِلاَّ جُدْتَ عَلَيَّ بِهِ مِنْ فَضْلِكَ وَ تَفَضَّلْتَ عَلَيَّ بِهِ
مِنْ وُسْعِكَ مَا أَسْتَغْنِي بِهِ عَمَّا فِي أَيْدِي خَلْقِكَ وَ
خَاصَّةً يَا رَبِّ لِئَامَهُمْ وَ بَارِكْ لِي فِيهِ وَ فِيمَا لَكَ
عِنْدِي مِنْ نِعَمِكَ وَ فَضْلِكَ وَ رِزْقِكَ إِلٰـهِي انْقَطَعَ
الرَّجَاءُ إِلاَّ مِنْكَ وَ خَابَتِ الآمَالُ إِلاَّ فِيكَ يَا ذَا
الْجَلاَلِ وَ الإِكْرَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I beseech you, O Allah, in the name of your close servant, Abu
Ja’far al-Jawad, that by his right, you generously confer upon me your
favours and bestow upon me with your expansive grace so that I will no
more need what is possessed by Your creatures and in particular the
cruel among them.

Bless all that which you confer upon me as well as your favours, grace,
and sustenance that I possess. O my God! All my hopes have failed except
that which I put in you, and all the expectations have been
disappointed, except those which I expect from You; O the Lord of
Majesty and Honour.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْأَلُكَ بِحَقِّ مَنْ حَقُّهُ عَلَيْكَ وَاجِبٌ أَنْ تُصَلِّيَ عَلىٰ
مُحَمَّدٍ وَ أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ وَ أَنْ تَبْسُطَ عَلَيَّ مَا حَظَرْتَهُ
مِنْ رِزْقِكَ وَ أَنْ تُسَهِّلَ ذٰلِكَ وَ تُيَسِّرَهُ فِي خَيْرٍ
مِنْكَ وَ عَافِيَةٍ وَ أَنَا فِي خَفْضِ عَيْشٍ وَ دَعَةٍ يَا أَرْحَمَ
الرَّاحِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I beseech You in the name of him whose right You have made incumbent
upon you, that You bless Muhammad and his Household, and grant me the
sustenance which You have kept from me, and make it easy for me (to
acquire) in goodness and wellbeing while I enjoy good living and
comfort; O the most Merciful of all those who show mercy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَسْأَلُـكَ اللّٰهُمَّ بِحَقِّ وَلِيِّكَ عَلِيِّ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ
إِلاَّ أَعَنْتَنِي بِهِ عَلىٰ قَضَاءِ نَوَافِلِي وَ بِرِّ إِخْوَانِي
وَ كَمَالِ طَاعَتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I beseech You, O Allah, in the name of Your close servant, ‘Ali b.
Muhammad, that through him, You help me perform my supererogatory
actions, act righteously with my brethren-in-faith, and obey You
perfectly.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَسْأَلُكَ اللّٰهُمَّ بِحَقِّ وَلِيِّكَ الْحَسَنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ
الْـهَادِي الأَمِينِ الْكُرِيـمِ النَّاصِحِ الثِّقَةِ الْعَالِمِ
إِلاَّ أَعَنْتَنِي بِهِ عَلىٰ أَمْرِ آخِرَتِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I beseech You, O Allah, in the name of your close servant, Hasan b.
‘Ali al-Hadi, the trustworthy, the generous, the sincere counselor, the
trust-worthy scholar; that through him, you help me in the affairs
(which are beneficial) for my next life.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَسْأَلُكَ اللّٰهُمَّ بِحَقِّ وَلِيِّكَ وَ حُجَّتِكَ عَلىٰ
عِبَادِكَ وَ بَقِيَّتِكَ فِي أَرْضِكَ الْـمُنْتَقِمِ لَكَ مِنْ
أَعْدَائِكَ وَ أَعْدَاءِ رَسُولِكَ بَقِيَّةِ آبَائِهِ الطَّاهِرِينَ وَ
وَارِثِ أَسْلاَفِهِ الصَّالِـحِينَ صَاحِبِ الزَّمَانِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَ عَلىٰ آبَائِهِ الْكِرَامِ الْـمُتَقَدِّمِينَ الأَخْيَارِ
إِلاَّ تَدَارَكْتَنِي بِهِ وَ نَـجَّيْتَنِي مِنْ كُلِّ كَرْبٍ وَ هَمٍّ
وَ حَفِظْتَ عَلَيَّ قَدِيـمَ إِحْسَانِكَ إِلَيَّ وَ حَدِيْثَهُ وَ
أَدْرَرْتَ عَلَيَّ جَمِيلَ عَوَائِدِكَ عِنْدِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I beseech You, O Allah, by Your close servant, and Your proof over
Your servants, and Your representative in Your lands, (the one) who will
take revenge on Your enemies and the enemies of Your Messenger; the
perfection of his Immaculate fathers, the inheritor of his Infallible
predecessors, the Patron of the Age, may Allah’s blessings be upon him
and upon his fathers, the virtuous, the preferred ones, and the
honourable ones that You make me his follower and deliver me from all
misfortunes and griefs, and protect Your favours upon me, old and new,
and shower upon me with Your excellent boons.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا رَبِّ أَعِنِّي بِهِ وَ نَجِّنِي مِنَ الْـمَخَافَةِ وَ مِنْ كُلِّ
شِدَّةٍ وَ عَظِيمَةٍ وَ هَوْلٍ وَ نَازِلَةٍ وَ غَمٍّ وَ دَيْنٍ وَ
مَرَضٍ وَ سُقْمٍ وَ آفَةٍ وَ ظُلْمٍ وَ جَوْرٍ وَ فِتْنَةٍ فِي دِيْنِي
وَ دُنْـيَايَ وَ آخِرَتِي بِـمَنِّكَ وَ رَأْفَتِكَ وَ رَحْمَتِكَ وَ
كَرَمِكَ وَ تَفَضُّلِكَ وَ تَعَطُّفِكَ يَا كَافِيَ مُوسىٰ فِرْعَونَ وَ
يَا كَافِيَ مُحَمَّدٍ صَلَوَاتُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ مَا أَهَمَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Lord! help me through him and save me from the fear (that I have) and
from all hardships, calamities, horrors, disasters, griefs, debts,
illnesses, diseases, epidemics, persecutions, prejudices, and seditious
matters concerning my religion, worldly affairs, and affairs of my next
life out of Your grace, compassion, mercy, magnanimity, favour and
sympathy.

O He Who saved (Prophet) Musa from the Pharaoh! O He Who relieved
Muhammad, Allah’s blessings be upon him and his Household, all that
which grieved him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يَا كَافِيَ عَلِيٍّ مَا أَهَمَّهُ يَوْمَ صِفِّينَ وَ يَا كَافِيَ
عَلِيِّ بْنِ الْـحُسَينِ يَوْمَ الْـحَرَّةِ وَ يَا كَافِيَ جَعْفَرِ
بْنِ مُحْمَّدٍ أَبَا الدَّوَانِيقِ صَلِّ عَلىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ وَ
اكْفِنِي مَا أَهَمَّنِي فِي دَارِ الدُّنْـيَا وَ كُلَّ هَوْلٍ دُونَ
الْـجَنَّةِ بِرَحْمَتِكَ يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ يَا قَاضِيَ
الْحَوَائِجِ يَا وَهَّابَ الرَغَائِبِ يَا مُعْطِيَ الْـجَزِيلِ يَا
فَكَّاكَ الْعُنَاةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ He who rescued ‘Ali from that which grieved him on the day of Siffin,
O’ He Who rescued ‘Ali b. al-Husayn on the day of (the Battle of)
al-Harrah, O’ He Who saved Ja’far b. Muhammad against Abu al-Dawaniq
(i.e. Abu-Ja’far al-ManSur, the ‘Abbasid ruler).

Send blessings upon Muhammad and his Household and relieve me against
all that which has grieved me in this worldly abode and against all
horrors aside from Paradise out of Your mercy, O’ the most Merciful of
all those who show mercy. O’ He Who grants all needs! O’ He Who fulfills
all the desires! O’ He Who provides abundantly! O’ He who delivers from
anguish.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰهُمَّ إِنَّكَ تَعْلَمُ أَنِّي أَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ قَادِرٌ عَلىٰ
قَضَاءِ حَوَائِجِي فَصَلِّ عَلىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ وَ عَجِّلْ يَا
رَبِّ فَرَجَ وَلِيِّكْ وَ ابْنِ بَنْتِ نَبِيِّكَ وَ اقْضِ يَا اللهُ
حَوَائِجَ أَهْلِ بَيتِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ اقْضِ لِي يَا رَبِّ بِـمُحَمَّدٍ
وَ أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ حَوَائِجَ الدُّنْـيَا وَ الآخِرَةِ صَغِيرَهَا وَ
كَبِيـرَهَا فِي يُسْرٍ مِنْكَ وَ عَافِيَةٍ وَ تَـمِّمْ نِعَمْتَكَ
عَلَيَّ وَ هَنِّئْنِي بِهِمْ كَرَامَتَكَ وَ أَلْبِسْنِي بِهِمْ
عَافِيَتَكَ وَ تَفَضَّلْ عَلَيَّ بِعَفْوِكَ وَ كُنْ لِي بِحَقِّ
مُحَمَّدٍ وَ أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ فِي جَمِيعِ أُمُورِي وَلِيًّا وَ حَافِظاً
وَ نَاصِراً وَ كَالِئاً وَ رَاعِياً وَ سَاتِراً وَ رَازِقاً مَا شَاءَ
اللهُ كَانَ وَ مَا لَمْ يَشَأْ لَمْ يَكُنْ لاَ يُعْجِزُ اللهَ شَيْءٌ
طَلَبَهُ فِي الأَرْضِ وَ لاَ فِي السَّمَاءِ هُوَ كََائِنٌ هُوَ كَائِنٌ
إِنْ شَاءَ اللهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ Allah! You indeed know that I admit that You have the power to grant
all my needs, therefore, bless Muhammad and his Household and hasten, O’
Lord, the advent of Your close servant, the son of Your Prophet’s
daughter, and grant, O’ Allah, the needs of Muhammad’s household, and
grant, O’ Lord, in the name of Muhammad and his household, all my needs
in this world as well as in the Next World.

Be they big or small, with easiness and wellbeing from You; and perfect
Your graces for me, and make me enjoy Your honor, and dress me with Your
(bounty of) wellbeing, and confer upon me with Your pardon, and, in the
name of Muhammad and his Household, be my Guardian, Custodian,
Supporter, Savior, Overseer, Protector and Sustainer, in all of my
affairs. Only that which Allah wills shall occur; while that which He
does not will shall not occur. Nothing is difficult for Allah to do in
the Earth or in the Heavens. This shall be; this shall be, Allah
willing.”[^6]

It may be possible that some of the lovers of the Imam may have other
ways which they use to seek help and assistance from the Imam to fulfill
their needs and requests.

For example, it is possible that a person has a need which he wants
fulfilled and he conveys this to the Imam either in his dreams or even
while awake in a state of Mukashifa (an awaken state in which one
experiences the presence of the Divine or His appointed agents) with the
answer coming directly from the Imam.

In addition, it is possible that a person verbally declares his desires
and an answer comes from the Imam.

Also, it is possible that a person may write his requests to the Imam
and keep it under his prayer rug and one will see his answer written on
that paper.

In this regards, Imam ‘Ali b. Muhammad (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا أَرَدْتَ أَنْ تَسْأَلَ مَسْأَلَةٍ فَاكْـتُبْهَا وَ ضَعِ
الْكِتَابَ تَحْتَ مُصَلاَّكَ وَ دَعْهُ سَاعَةً ثُمَّ أَخْرِجْهُ وَ
انْظُرْ فِيهِ. قَالَ الرَّاوِي: فَفَعَلْتُ فَوَجَدْتُ جَوَابَ مَا
سَأَلْتُ عَنْهُ مُوَقَّعاً فِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When you wish to ask for something, then write it down (on paper) and
place this writing underneath your prayer mat. Wait for an hour and then
take the paper out and look at it.” The narrator said: “I did just this
and I found the answer to what I has asked for with the signature of the
Imam on it (the paper).”[^7]

[^1]: Spiritual Bond with the Sacred al-Mahdi, pg. 252

[^2]: MiSbah of al-Kaf’ami, pg. 176; Mafatih al-Jinan after Du’a
at-Tawassul

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 102, pg. 234, sec. 10, no. 2; al-Balad
al-Amin, pg. 157; MiSbah al-Kaf’ami, pg. 404

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 53, pg. 171, sec. 31, no. 5

[^5]: Spiritual Bond with the Sacred Mahdi, pg. 252

[^6]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 102, pg. 252, sec. 10, no. 10

[^7]: al-Kharaij, pg. 419; Biharul Anwar, vol. 50, pg. 155, sec. 3, no.
41


