Responsibility 1: Ma’rifat of the Imam (as) Part 1
==================================================

One of the most important responsibilities for a Shi’a is to acquire
ma’rifah (a detailed and profound understanding) of the Imam of the
time, and the testimony to this can be seen in both the logical and
narrated proofs (ahadith).

It is clear from the traditions that we must know the characteristics
and specific traits of the Imam (as) whom we are all obliged to follow.
This must be done so that we do not mistake him for someone who claims
his status. In addition, there are also numerous traditions which oblige
us to have a ma’rifah of our Imam (as).

It has been related from Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) that the
Prophet of Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ مَاتَ وَ لَمْ يَعْرِفْ إِمَامَ زَمَانِهِ مَاتَ مِيـتَةً
جَاهِلِـيَّةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“One who dies while he does not have ma’rifah of the Imam (as) of his
time, dies the death of Jahiliyyah (the period of Ignorance before the
time of the Prophet (saws))”[^1]

In another tradition, this one from the eleventh Imam, Hasan ‘Ali
al-’Askari (as), it is mentioned that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَّ الأَرْضَ لاَ تَخْلُو مِنْ حُجَّةِ اللٌّهِ عَلـى خَلْقِهِ وَ
أَنَّ مَنْ مَاتَ وَ لَمْ يَعْرِفْ إِمَامَ زَمَانِهِ مَاتَ مِيـتَةً
جَاهِلِيَّةً فَقَالَ: إِنَّ هٌذَا حَقٌّ كَمَا أَنَّ النَّارَ حَقٌّ
فَقِيلَ: يَا ابْنَ رَسُولِ اللٌّهِ فَمَنِ الْحُجَّةُ وَ الإِمَامُ
بَعْدَكَ؟ فَقَالَ: إِبْـنِـي مُحَمَّدٌ هُوَ الإِمَامُ وَ الْحُجَّةُ
بَعْدِي فَمَنْ مَاتَ وَ لَمْ يَعْرِفْهُ مَاتَ مِيـتَةً جَاهِلِيَّةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Unquestionably, the Earth can never remain devoid of a hujjat (proof)
of Allah over His creations. Indeed the person who dies without
recognizing the Imam of his age has died the death of Jahiliyyah.” The
Imam (as) continued: “Surely this (the issue of an Imam existing for all
ages) is true, just as the (existence of) hell fire is true.”

It was said to the Imam: “O’ son of the Messenger of Allah! Who is the
hujjat and Imam after you?” The Imam replied: “My son, Muhammad is the
Imam and hujjat after me. Whoever dies and has not recognized him (as
his Imam) has died the death of Jahiliyyah.”[^2]

Without doubt, the meaning of these traditions which state that it is
obligatory to recognize the Imam of the time is that those who possess
true faith must know the Imam in the way and to the extent that would
lead to their happiness in this world and the next.

In addition, the recognition of the Imam must be such that there remains
no room for misguidance or confusion in regards to this noble
personality.

Thus, recognition can be divided into two types:

1. Ma’rifah of the personality of the Imam;

2. Ma’rifah of the Imam himself.

In order to acquire these two forms of ma’rifah, we must refer to the
writings of the scholars of the faith.[^3]

We must realize that recognizing the character and personality of the
Imam can only be achieved through understanding his qualities,
attributes and special traits which are related to the status of
Imamate.

If we are successful in becoming acquainted with the status of Imamate,
its central role in Islam and its characteristics and qualities, then we
will become acquainted with any Imam since all of the A\`immah are
created from one nur (Divine celestial light) and in the words of the
leaders of true guidance themselves:

“The first of us is Muhammad, the middle of us is Muhammad and the last
of us is Muhammad!”[^4] Thus, we must have ma’rifah of the merits and
excellence of all of our A\`immah (as) since they share these traits
amongst themselves

On the other hand, we must also become acquainted with the merits of
excellence which are specific to the Imam whom we wish to know more
about so that our ma’rifah of him can become complete. This form of
ma’rifah can be acquired through knowledge of his name, title, titles of
appellation, genealogy, characteristics, virtues, and other traits which
relate to the specific time and place in which he lives.

The minimum and maximum limits of these two types of ma’rifah of the
Imam can be understood by our intellect and in brief, we will mention
the minimum limit as stated in the traditions.

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said: “The minimum level of
ma’rifah of the Imam is to know that he is on par with the Prophet
except in the status of prophethood. The Imam is the inheritor of the
Prophet, and obedience to the Imam is equivalent to obedience of Allah
and the Messenger of Allah.

Thus, you must submit to the Imam in all issues, and all questions must
be referred to him. You must act in accordance with his commands and
must know that the Imam after the Messenger of Allah was ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib (as). After him it was Hasan (as), then Husain (as), then ‘Ali b.
al-Husain (as), then Muhammad b. ‘Ali (as), then Ja’far b. Muhammad
(as), then Musa b. Ja’far (as), then ‘Ali b. Musa (as), then Muhammad b.
‘Ali (as), then ‘Ali b. Muhammad (as), then Hasan b. ‘Ali (as) and then
al-Hujjah b. al-Hasan (ajtf) – these are your leaders.”[^5]

As was previously mentioned, in order to recognize the Imam, we must
know his name, titles of appellation, the name of his father and other
incidental facts. However, we must also know his qualities of excellence
and special merits.

The Imam of our time (ajtf) shares the same first name as the Prophet
Muhammad (S). His title is also the same as that of the Prophet of Allah
(S) (Abul Qasim) and his title of appellation is al-Mahdi. He has a
beautiful black mark on his right shoulder blade, a very handsome face
with a nose that is slightly protruded and is of average height.

In addition, we also need to understand the specialties related to the
time and place of the Imam and the events surrounding him including his
actions and speech.

For example, we need to know that in order for the Imam to make his
advent, five signs must be fulfilled. We know that when he makes his
appearance, the Earth would be full of oppression and corruption.
However, before his advent, a sound will be heard from the sky an image
of a hand will be seen on the moon the staff of Musa will be seen with
him and many other signs.

It should be noted that all of these signs are mentioned in the books of
traditions[^6] and the appearance of these will herald his return. In
addition, there are also other special signs related to him which we
must know and understand. Therefore knowing these signs constitutes one
of the ways in which we can recognize our living Imam.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 53, pg. 175, sec. 31, no. 7; al-Ihtijaj, pg.
498

[^2]: Wasa\`il ash-Shi’a, vol. 11, pg. 491, sec. 33, no. 23

[^3]: Books such as: al-Ghaybah, written by Shaykh Muhammad b. Ibrahim
Nu’mani better known as Ibne Abi Zainab; al-Ghaybah of Shaykh Tusi; Najm
al-Thaqib of Shaykh Tabrisi Nuri; Kamal ad-Din wa Tamam an-Ni’mah of
Shaykh Saduq; A’yan ash-Shi’a (section on Imam al-Mahdi); Biharul Anwar
(section on Imamah and the book of Imam al-Mahdi); Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1
and 2.

[^4]: al-Ghaybah of Nu’mani, pg. 85; Biharul Anwar, vol. 36, pg. 399,
sec. 46, no. 9

[^5]: al-Burhan, vol. 2, pg. 35, no. 3

[^6]: Books such as al-Ghaybah of Shaykh Muhammad b. Ibrahim Nu’mani
better known as Ibne Abi Zainab; al-Ghaybah of Shaykh Tusi; Najm
al-Thaqib of Shaykh Tabrisi Nuri; Kamal ad-Din wa Tamam an-Ni’mah of
Shaykh Saduq.


