Responsibility 32: Observing Proper Manners Part 1
==================================================

Another responsibility of the true believer is to observe the proper
etiquette and to refrain from anything which would be considered as bad
manners in the presence of Imam al-Zaman (ajtf).

Taking part in gatherings in which Imam al-’Asr (ajtf) is spoken about
in a bad way or in which people openly question and deny his existence,
or where he is made fun of, are examples of things which would be
classified as bad manners in relation to the Imam.

In addition, we must also stay away from programs which do not have the
remembrance of Allah and Imam al-’ASr (ajtf) as this too is a sign of
not observing manners and etiquette in relation to the Imam.

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq(as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَانَ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللٌّهِ وَ الْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ فَلاَ يَجْلِسُ
مَجْلِساً يُنْـتَقَصُ فِيهِ إِمَامٌ أَوْ يُعَابُ فِيهِ مُؤْمِنٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He who has true belief in Allah and the Last Day will not attend
gatherings in which the Imam is being disparaged or in which the defects
of a believer are being spoken about.”[^1]

Actions such as not observing the responsibilities which one has to
fulfill in regards to Imam al-Zaman (ajtf) displaying our own
shortcomings in relation to these rights, seeking help (tawassul) from
other than the Imam or his pure family in times of difficulties, trying
to find faults and defects in the rulings of the religion and that which
the Prophet of Islam brought, or insulting the laws of Allah are all
things which are equivalent to insulting the Imam.

In addition, actions such as having hatred for the friends and lovers of
Imam al-Zaman (ajtf), or loving the enemies of the Imam and enemies of
the religion are also practical examples of showing disrespect and not
observing the correct etiquette in relation to the Imam.

Therefore, these and many other things which are considered as showing
disrespect to the Imam must be kept away from and without doubt, those
with intellect and understanding can clearly under this responsibility.

[^1]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, Pagre 377, no. 9


