Responsibility 37: Love for the Imam Part 1
===========================================

Another responsibility that the believers have is to love the Imam since
he is one of the infallible members of the Ahlul Bayt (as) of the
Prophet Muhammad (S).

The consecutively narrated traditions tell us that loving the Ahlul Bayt
(as), and specifically Imam al-Zaman (ajtf), is one of the
responsibilities of the true believers.

As we know, it is obligatory upon every believer to love the family of
the Prophet which is actually the reward he asked for bringing us the
message of Islam. In addition, this act is also regarded as a part of
having true faith and is one of the conditions for our actions to be
accepted in the presence of Allah.

All of the permitted, pure blessings of Allah and the various pleasures
which the believers have been granted are due to the presence of the
Imam and the blessings he brings with him and it stands to reason that a
person must love the one who is the reason for all of the blessings
which he has been granted. Indeed, the Islamic traditions tell us that
the presence of the twelfth Imam is the reason that we are blessed.

Thus, our intelligence commands us to love him and in principle, human
nature commands people to this truth we must love the one who has given
us blessings and bounties and has done good to us.

In addition, there are numerous traditions that speak directly about the
need to have love for our living Imam.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ اللٌّهُ تَعَالـى: يَا مُحَمَّدُ أَحِبَّهُ فَإِنِّي أُحِبُّهُ وَ
أُحِبُّ مَنْ يُحِبُّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah has said in a Sacred Tradition (Hadith al-Qudsi): “O’ Muhammad!
Have love for him (al-Mahdi) since surely I love him and I love anyone
who loves him.”[^1]

The Messenger of Allah (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ أَحَبَّ أَنْ يَلْقَـى اللٌّهَ وَ قَدْ كَمُلَ إِيْمَانُهُ وَ
حَسُنَ إِسْلاَمُهُ فَلْيَتَوَلَّ الْحُجَّةَ صَاحِبَ الزَّمَانِ
الْمُنْتَظَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person who would like to meet Allah in a state of perfect faith and
in the best form of submission should love al-Hujjah Sahib al-Zaman
al-Muntadhar (ajtf).”[^2]

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 36, pg. 223, sec. 40, no. 21

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 36, pg. 296, sec. 41, no. 125


