Responsibility 40: A Desire to Meet the Imam Part 2
===================================================

Another responsibility of a believer is to ask Allah for the ability to
meet Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf). We must pray to Allah that the Imam permits
us to see him, but of course we should ask to see him while we are in a
state of true faith and performing good deeds.

Therefore, we should be blessed to meet him having full faith in Islam
so that we do not cause any spiritual harm to the Imam and such that we
are not among those whose his anger is taken out upon.

This type of meeting with Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf) is possible both during
his advent and during his occultation. Therefore, it is possible for the
believers to see and meet him during his occultation, just as it is
possible to see and meet him during his advent. Thus, just because he is
currently hidden from the eyes of the people, we must not deny the fact
that it is possible to see him.

To see the Imam during his advent or during the period of occultation
while awake or asleep is something that everyone aspires towards and
this must be the wish of all true believers. They must sincerely ask
Allah for this honor and the best way to achieve this is to supplicate
to Allah to be granted the opportunity to meet the Imam upon his advent.

In the Du’a of ‘Ahd (The Supplication of the Pact to the Imam)[^1] which
has been narrated by Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as), we pray the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰهُمَّ أَرِنِي الطَّلْعَةَ الرَّشِيدَةَ وَ الْغُرَّةَ
الْـحَمِيدَةَ وَاكْحُلْ نَاظِرِي بِنَظْرَةٍ مِنِّي إِلَيْهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O’Allah! Show me the appearance of the one who is rightly guided and
the finest of those deserving praise; and beautify my sight with the
ability to look upon him...”[^2]

Later on in this same supplication we appeal to Allah  and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْئَلُكَ أَنْ تُرِيَنِي وَلِيَّ أَمْرِكَ ظَاهِراً
نَافِذَ الأَمْرِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah I ask that you show me the authority of your affairs manifestly
as he carries out your orders...”[^3]

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا تَـمَنَّـى أَحَدُكُمُ الْقَائِمَ فَلْيَتَمَنَّهُ فِي عَافِيَةٍ
فَإِنَّ اللٌّهَ بَعَثَ مُحَمَّداً رَحْمَةً وَ يَبْعَثُ الْقَائِمَ
نَقِمَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Anytime one of you has the desire (to see) al-Qa\`im (ajtf), then you
should desire that (you see him while) you are in a good (spiritual)
state since surely Allah had sent Muhammad (S) as a mercy but will send
al-Qa\`im (ajtf) as an avenger.”[^4]

In addition, it has been mentioned in Du’a al-Nudbah[^5]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَرِهِ سَيِدَّهُ يَا شَدِيدَ الْقُوىٰ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And allow him (Imam al-Mahdi) to see his Master, O’ the
Almighty...”[^6]

In another supplication[^7], it has been mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْنَا مِمَّنْ تَقَرُّ عَيْنُهُ بِرُؤْيِتَهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And make us of those whose eyes are delighted by seeing.”[^8]

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ قَرَأَ سُورَةَ بَنِـي إِسْرَائِيلَ فِي كُلِّ لَيْلَةِ جُمْعَةٍ
لَمْ يَمُتْ حَـتَّى يُدْرِكَ الْقَائِمَ فَيَكُونَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person who recites Surah Bani Isra\`il (17) every Thursday night will
not die until he sees al-Qa\`im (ajtf) and becomes one of his
companions.”[^9]

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ قَرَأَ بَعْدَ كُلِّ فَرِيضَةٍ هٌذَا الدُّعَاءَ فَإِنَّهُ يَرى
الإِمَامَ م ح م د بْنِ الْحَسَنِ عَلَيْهِ وَ عَلـى أَبَائِهِ
أَلسَّلاَمُ فِي الْيَقْظَةِ أَوْ فِي الْـمَنَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person who recites the following supplication after every obligatory
Salat will definitely see Imam (م ح م د) Ibn al-Hasan, may peace be upon
him and upon his forefathers, (either) while he is awake or in his
dreams.”[^10]

Then the Imam recited the following supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ. أَللّٰهُمَّ بَلِّغْ مَوْلاَنَا
صَاحِبَ الزَّمَانِ أَيْنَمَا كَانَ وَ حَيْثُمَا كَانَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. O’ Allah!
Convey to our Master, Sahib al-Zaman (ajtf), wherever he is and
everywhere he is...”

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 102, pg. 1111, sec. 7, no. 2; MiSbah of
al-Kaf’ami, pg. 550

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 102, pg. 90

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: al-Kafi, vol. 8, pg. 233, no. 306

[^5]: This supplication has been narrated in the reliable books of
supplication such as Mafatih al-Jinan, Mikyal al-Makarim, vol. 2, pg.
93-100; the hand written copy of Mizar al-Kabir of Ibne al-Mashadi, pg.
822; Mizar (the old Version) by Qutb Rawandi; the hand written copy of
Mizar of Sayyid ibne Tawus which is known by the name of MiSbahul Zair,
pg. 334; Biharul Anwar, vol. 102

[^6]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 102, pg. 90

[^7]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 89, pg. 310, sec. 3, no. 14

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 102, pg. 90

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 86, pg. 61, sec. 38, no. 69

[^10]: Ibid.


