Responsibility 41: Visiting the Places the Imam Visits
======================================================

Another responsibility of the believers is to go to those places where
this is a possibility that the Imam visits such as Masjid al-Sahlah (in
‘Iraq), Masjid Jamkaran (in Iran) and other places, especially at the
specific times which have been mentioned that he may be there[^1] the
gatherings in which the greatness and traits of the Imam and the other
infallible A\`immah are mentioned.

Programs to commemorate the marriage of the Sadat and the ‘Ulama and
especially those gatherings in which the Sadat scholars who also possess
the qualities of abstaining from sins and who adhere to piety are
present, gatherings in which the troubles that befell the Ahlul Bayt are
mentioned programs in which the teachings of Allah and in which the
infallible A\`immah are remembered.

Especially the days which are relevant to them such as ‘Ashura, ‘Eid
al-Fitr, Thursday night and other days accompanying the dead bodies of
the scholars and those who love the Imam especially the true Shi’a to
their burial site are all programs and gatherings which a true believer
should be present in.  
 In addition, the joyous occasions which take place during the year such
as ‘Eid al-Ghadir, ‘Eid al-Qurban, the Nights of Qadr in the Month of
Ramaďhan and others, are also times in which Imam al-Hujjah (ajtf) is
present and thus, we should also be sure to take part in programs which
are held around these great days.

[^1]: For example according to the traditions it is stated that Imam
Wali al-’ASr attends the Hajj every year and on the day of ‘Arafat, he
is present on the Plains of ‘Arafat.


