Responsibility 46: Remembering the Imam Frequently Part 1
=========================================================

Another responsibility is to remember Imam al-’Asr (ajtf) at all times
and places as much as possible, especially during the times of the year
related to the Imam such as every Friday; the 15th of Sha’ban, the
Nights of Qadr (in the Month of Ramaďhan) and after each of the daily
prayers.

We must always be in a state of remembering the Imam and must always
keep him in our hearts. If it is possible to remember him with the
tongue (openly and verbally), then this must be done, otherwise if it is
only possible to remember him in the heart (silently), then one must act
in this way, and if it is only possible to remember him in the mind,
then this is how he must be remembered. The point is that we should
never be negligent of him.

When the heart of a true believer is taken over by the remembrance of
Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf), then his entire presence goes into a state of his
remembrance and this is the best state we can find ourselves in.

In order for a believer to be able to always remember the Imam, one need
to be vigilant[^1] and constantly protect his heart and keep away from
everything other than the Imam.

The greater in frequency of the verbal remembrance of the Imam, and the
purer the intention, the more of an effect this will have on a person.
This will also make the remembrance of the Imam stronger in our heart.

In certain instances, the remembrance of the Imam can actually be
obligatory as those who have a deep spiritual insight into this issue
will attest to the remembrance of the Imam in any time and in all forms
is equivalent to remembering and mentioning Allah, and in a tradition
from Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Baqir (as) we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ ذِكْرَنَا مِنْ ذِكْرِ اللٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely our remembrance is from the remembrance of Allah.”[^2]

Here, we refer to some of the specific times and places which we have
been highly recommended to remember Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf):

The night and day of the 15th of Sha’ban.  
 The nights of Qadr (in the Month of Ramaďhan)  
 The night and day of ‘Ashura (the 10th of Muharram)  
 The night and day of Jumu’ah (Friday)  
 The Day of Nuruz (first day of spring)  
 The afternoon of Monday and Thursday since it is these two days when
all of our actions (good and bad) are presented to the Imam  
 Before going to sleep  
 The last one-third of the night when even the Imam is busy in Salatul
Tahajjud (Salatul Lail)  
 Whenever one is reciting Du’a  
 Anytime when a person is crying and asking Allah  for his needs[^3]  
 The initial rising of the sun (Fajr time)  
 After Salatul Fajr  
 The beginning of the afternoon (Zuhr)  
 After Salatul Zuhr

After Salatul ‘Asr  
 At sunset  
 The Day of ‘Arafah (9th of Dhul Hijjah)

1. The Days of ‘Eid such as ‘Eidul Ghadir, ‘Eidul Fitr and ‘Eidul
Qurban, the birth anniversaries of the Infallibles  and their death
anniversaries.

2 .As for the places which are specifically related to the Imam and
should be shown veneration, they include:

Masjid al-Haram  
 Masjid as-Sahlah  
 Masjid al-Kufah  
 Masjid Jamkaran  
 The cellar in Samarrah where his occultation began  
 Masjid Zaid  
 Masjid Sa’Sa’ah  
 The Plains of ‘Arafat[^4]

The burial sites of all of the Infallibles (pubth), especially Karbala.

The gatherings and programs in which Allah is remembered and in which
the greatness, traits and trials and tribulations of the Ahlul Bayt (as)
are recalled.

Indeed, one of the responsibilities of the true followers is to remember
Imam al-Zaman (ajtf) in these times and places by visiting them and
holding them in great esteem and by observing the etiquette and
performing the acts which are related to each of these areas.

If we truly wish to remember the Imam in these places then we must see
what his wish and desire is for us to perform. Through this, we will be
able to perform the deeds which will earn his pleasure and happiness.

Remembering the Imam performing his visitation; sending greetings and
prayers to him praying for him and calling upon Allah for him dedicating
the reward of righteous acts such as the Salat and also the performance
of certain other acts by means of proxy for him within the acts of
worship and servitude to Allah, are some of the ways in which this
responsibility towards the Imam can be carried out.

[^1]: Refer to responsibility Fifty-Six for more information on this
issue.

[^2]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 496, no. 2

[^3]: From some of the narrations we can deduce that the Imam does not
sleep and spends his whole night in the worship and obedience of Allah 
just as his noble fore-fathers before him used to do and it may be for
this reason that when the traditions speak about the colour of his
complexion as being a light yellow/brown colour, it is due to the fact
that the Imam spends this entire night in worship and prayer to Allah .

[^4]: Masjidul Haram is in Makkah and includes the Ka’bah, Maqam of
Ibrahim, and the well of Zamzam; Masjid as-Sahlah is one of the largest
Masajid and is located in Kufah; Masjid al-Kufah is the most sacred
masjid in the city of Kufah and is also one of the oldest Masajid after
Masjidul Haram and was built by Prophet Adam ; Masjid Zaid b. Sawhan
and the Masjid of Sa’Sa’ah b. SawSan are also two important Masajid in
Kufah; Masjid Jamkaran is one of the Masajid of the Shi’a in Iran which
is approximately eight kilometres south-east of the city of Qum; the
Plains of ‘Arafat are approximately twenty-one kilometres from the city
of Makkah just around the mountain known as the Mountain of Rahmah
(Jabal al-Rahmah) and is one of the spots in which those performing the
Hajj visit during the days of the pilgrimage and is one of the pillars
of the hajj rites.


