Responsibility 60: Awaiting the Advent
======================================

Another responsibility is to await the advent of Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf)
every day and night rather we must await his return every single hour of
our life. In essence, the true believer must always be in a state of
anticipation of the return of the Imam.

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوبـى لِشِيعَةِ قَائِمِنَا الْمُنْتَظِرِينَ لِظُهُورِهِ فِي
غَيْبَتِهِ وَ الْمُطِيعِينَ لَهُ فِي ظُهُورِهِ أُوْلٌئِكَ أَوْلِيَاءُ
اللٌّهِ الَّذِينَ لاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَ لاَ هُمُ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Glad tidings (of Paradise) to the Shi’a of our Qa\`im (ajtf) those who
are awaiting his advent during his occultation and those who are
obedient to him during his advent. Surely these are the close, intimate
friends of Allah for whom [There shall be no grief, nor shall they have
any sorrow.]”[^1]

Imam ‘Ali b. Husain as-Sajjad (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَهْلَ زَمَانِ غَيْبَتِهِ وَ الْقَائِلِينَ بِإِمَامَتِهِ وَ
الْمُنْتَظِرِينَ لِظُهُورِهِ أَفْضَلُ مِنْ أَهْلِ كُلِّ زَمَانٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely the people who are living during the period of his occultation
and who believe in his (Divinely appointed) leadership and are awaiting
his advent are the best people of all times.”[^2]

Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Taqi (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَنْتَظِرُ خُرُوجَهُ الْمُخْلِصُونَ وَ يُنْكِرُهُ الْمُرْتَابُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The sincere ones will await his advent, while the doubters shall deny
it.”[^3]

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعِنْدَهَا فَلْيَتَوَقَّعُوا الْفَرَجَ صَبَاحاً وَ مَسَاءً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“During the occultation, they will await his (Imam al-Mahdi’s) advent
every morning and evening.”[^4]

In numerous traditions it has been mentioned that to await the advent of
Imam al-’Asr (ajtf) is actually a part of the religion of Allah and all
people must observe this.

In addition, it has been mentioned that even the Muslims who lived
during the lives of the other infalliable A\`immah (as) awaited and
expected the advent of Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf) as this was also obligatory
upon them. Thus, this is something which is not only limited to the
period of his occultation!

The period of waiting for the Imam’s advent will not earn us a Divine
reward (thawab) unless it coupled with the intention of seeking nearness
to Allah and conforming to His commandments, just as the performance of
prayers, fasting and Hajj all necessitate a Divine reward from Allah
when performed with the intention of seeking nearness to Him.

Of course the intention of seeking nearness to Allah has limits and can
be realized in different forms and be achieved in various ways the best
form being that a believer performs these acts simply to follow the
commandments of Allah and in His obedience.

It goes without saying that He is the most worthy of being worshipped
and obeyed and therefore our worshipping of Him should not be done for
the love which one has for Him, nor for Paradise, nor to earn His
pleasure and definitely not due to the fear of the fire of Hell and the
punishment and chastisement!

All of these are simply forms of seeking nearness to Him and therefore,
it is best that a true believer stays away from these sorts of
intentions (in his acts).

If what we have just stated is correct, then what would be the state of
a person if his intention for the advent of the Imam is his own material
gains and pleasures in this world??

We must also realize that awaiting the advent is not limited to a
particular time or place or only in certain circumstances. Rather, a
true believer must always be in a state of anticipation and awaiting the
Imam.

One must never go into a state of hopelessness or despair since this is
forbidden and most definitely, a person who falls into a state of
despair will never be able to patiently wait for the advent of the Imam.

Having even ‘partial despair’ in his advent is not correct, and this too
is forbidden! By a ‘partial despair’ we mean that one must not lose hope
in the return of Imam al-Hujjah (ajtf), the minor or major occultation,
or other things related to him based on his own feelings and way of
thinking.

For example it should not be said that: “The Imam will not make his
advent for another fifty years” or that “He will not make his advent
today since it is a Saturday” or that “It is such and such time of the
day or night and thus, he will not make his return since the traditions
tell us something different.”

It is clear that no matter what level of despair we fall into, the
spiritual state of anticipation for the advent of the Imam will be taken
away from us in that same amount. In addition, we would have neglected
the performance of an obligatory act legislated by Allah.

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ تَوَقَّعْ أَمْرَ صَاحِبِكَ لَيْلَكَ وَ نَهَارَكَ فَإِنَّ اللٌّهَ
كُلَّ يَوْمٍ هُوَ فِي شَأْنٍ، لاَ يَشْغَلُهُ شَأْنٌ عَنْ شَأْنٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Anticipate the advent of your patron (i.e. the Imam) in your day and
night, for Almighty Allah has a decision every moment and no affair may
distract Him from another.”[^5]

It has been mentioned in the traditions that we must not specify a
specific time or occasion as to when the advent of the Imam will take
shape. Rather, the advent of the Imam can take place at any time.

The period of advent of the Imam is one of those events which are
subject to alteration, and can either be hastened or delayed and is
related to its own causes and conditions which must be realized (before
it can be manifest). Due to this, we are not able to specify a specific
time as to when it will occur.

As well, it has also been mentioned that his advent will occur
unexpectedly, when people are in state of complete hopelessness.

It has been narrated from Imam ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Hadi (as) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَوَقَّعُوا الْفَرَجَ مِنْ تَحْتِ أَقْدَامِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Anticipate the advent from (the land) under your feet (meaning at any
place and time).”[^6]

[^1]: Kamal ad-Din wa Tamam an-Ni’mah, pg. 357, no. 54; Biharul Anwar,
vol. 52, pg. 149; sec. 22, no. 76

[^2]: Kamal ad-Din wa Tamam an-Ni’mah, pg. 320, no. 2

[^3]: Kamal ad-Din wa Tamam an-Ni’mah, pg. 378, sec. 36, no. 3

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 52, pg. 94, sec. 20, no. 9; Kamal ad-Din wa
Tamam an-Ni’mah, pg. 339, no. 17

[^5]: al-Iqbal, pg. 201

[^6]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, pg. 341, sec. ‘The Occcultation,’ no. 24


