Responsibility 62: Preparing for the Advent
===========================================

Another responsibility is to prepare for the advent of the Imam and we
must perform those actions which should be carried out during the period
of awaiting the Imam.

It is clear that if a person is awaiting something to come about or
waiting for a friend to arrive, one will prepare himself accordingly.
Thus, one who is awaiting Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf) must prepare himself to
meet the Imam and be ready to accept the Imam and follow his commands
and this cannot be accomplished except through purification of the soul,
guiding others and following the appropriate people (the scholars of the
faith).

During this period, one must also strive to attain the praiseworthy
ethical traits which cannot be achieved except through piety, reaching
the level of wara’ (a stage even higher than taqwa in which even the
mubah acts are not performed) and in striving to follow all of the
commandments of Allah.[^1]

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ سَرَّهُ أَنْ يَكُونَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ الْقَائِمِ فَلْيَنْتَظِرْ وَ
لْيَعْمَلْ بِالْوَرَعِ وَ مَحَاسِنَ الأَخْلاَقِ وَ هُوَ مُنْتَظِرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person who would like to be among the companions of al-Qa\`im (ajtf)
should be in a state of waiting and perform all of his actions with
piety and with the most beautiful etiquette and only then, will one be
counted as being in a state of waiting.”[^2]

[^1]: Of course there are people who, in regards to this issue, do not
possess the correct understanding and belief and thus have been
misguided from the truth and have not considered that this preparation
and purification of the soul and seeking guidance and enlightenment from
others as being something necessary and some have actually outright
denied this requirement!

[^2]: al-Ghaybah of Nu’mani, pg. 200, no. 16


