Responsibility 67: Not Uprising
===============================

Another responsibility during the period of occultation is that we must
not rise up in revolt or wage war against the people of falsehood,
oppressive governments and super-powers of our time. During this era, we
must seek to safeguard our faith and religion and must work for the
betterment of ourselves in this life and the next and this is something
which has been mentioned in numerous traditions.

This issue has been emphasized many times in the words of the Ahlul Bayt
(as), and from the narrations we can deduce that to rise up and fight
against the governments of our time is not correct and does not lead to
the pleasure of the Ahlul Bayt (as).

In Sahifatul Sajjadiyah, it has been narrated from Imam ‘Ali b.
al-Husain as-Sajjad (as) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا خَرَجَ وَ لاَ يَخْرُجُ مِنَّا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ إِلـى قِيَامِ
قَائِمِنَا أَحَدٌ لِيَدْفَعَ ظُلْماً أَوْ يَنْعَشَ حَقًّا إِلاٌّ
اصْطَلَمَتْهُ الْبَلِيَّةُ وَ كَانَ قِيَامُهُ زِيَادَةً فِي
مَكْرُوهِنَا وَ شِيعَتِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“None of us, the Ahlul Bayt (as), have risen or will rise until the
advent of the Awaited Imam (ajtf), to repel oppression or revive the
truth except that he shall definitely be overcome by misfortunes and his
revolt shall result in more adversity of us and our Shi’ah.”[^1]

However supposing that this tradition or other traditions such as this
(which are many) are all correct, and if we suppose that the chain of
narrators are correct and there is no issue of taqiyyah (dissimulation)
and that there is no other impediment in the traditions (which would
prevent us from understanding them).

Then we understand that what has been prohibited in this and other
traditions is not that we are not permitted to rise up against an
oppressor or oppressive government, rather, it means that we are not
permitted to fight against them with force and weapons and this is what
has been prohibited.

From another point of view, the task of understanding the meaning of
this tradition is not the job of just anyone. Rather, the responsibility
of analyzing this (and other such) traditions and bringing forth its
correct understanding is the duty of the prominent ‘Ulama, Fuqaha and
the learned ones who possess the ability to carry out this task.

In addition, it is possible that after extracting and understanding the
truth of this type of tradition according to his understanding, a
Mujtahid would act according to his grasp of knowledge of such a
statement.

Indeed, we know that those who are not at the level of ijtihad (the
ability to pass legal judgment on the laws of Islam) would be obliged to
follow (perform taqlid of) the Mujtahid who fulfills all of the
conditions of being followed. Thus, the layman’s obligation is merely to
perform taqlid and not to simply follow the Qur’anic verses and
Prophetic traditions.

Thus, if we agree with these types of traditions which tell us that it
is not correct for us to rise up and fight against a government, then we
cannot say that if a Mujtahid who fulfills all of the conditions of
being followed was to rise up and fight against an oppressive government
that we would leave him alone and not support him!

Rather, it is imperative upon the followers (muqallidin) to refer to the
scholar’s fatawa and act according to what he has decreed! They must
work together with him and provide the support needed and thus, they too
must rise up if he says to!

In summary, it is correct to state that: The true believers must not
rise up and fight against the governments of their time except if the
Mujtahid who fulfills all of the conditions[^2] for being followed gives
a hukm (ruling) that it is obligatory to rise up and fight. In this
instance, according to the proofs of the performance of taqlid, this
uprising and revolt would be permissible and correct for the followers
rather, it would be obligatory.

Therefore, from this responsibility, we are better able to understand
that the people must not drift away from the path of taqlid of their
Maraja’ (sources of emulation).

In the traditions, jurisprudential sources and references it has been
mentioned that in certain instances, the act of jihad (fighting) can
become obligatory and the ruling of this is based on the ruling (fatwa)
and injunction (hukm) of a Mujtahid and this information can be seen in
the ‘Section of Jihad’ which is in the books of Islamic jurisprudence
where a complete and detailed discussion has been given.

[^1]: as-Sahifat as-Sajjadiyah (Compiled by Faidhul Islam), pg. 22

[^2]: Refer to the footnote in responsibility Thirteen.


