Responsibility 72: Bearing Difficulties with Patience
=====================================================

Another responsibility is to observe patience in the face of persecution
and harassment and to withstand the hatred of the enemies, hypocrisy of
the hypocrites; and to patiently bear the difficulties, losses,
tribulations, poverty, abjectness and sufferings and all other types of
afflictions which come upon a true believer.

In addition, one must also observe perseverance in relation to the
affairs of the faith and must be firm in regards to the Shari’ah.

One must observe patience in the face of the examinations which come
from Allah  and must be able to bear them and strive to become
victorious during these tests. During this period, one must be patient
with those who deny the Imam and mock the religion and must show
forbearance in the face of those who belie and seek to deny the Imam.

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has quoted the Messenger of Allah
as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَأْتِي عَلـى النَّاسِ زَمَانٌ لاَ يُنَالُ الْمُلْكُ فِيهِ إِلاَّ
بِالْقَتْلِ وَ التَّجَبُّرِ وَ لاَ الْغِنـى إِلاَّ بِالْغَصْبِ وَ
الْبُخْلِ وَ لاَ الْمَحَبَّةُ إِلاَّ بِاسْتِخْرَاجِ الدِّينِ وَ
اتِّبَاعِ الْهَوى، فَمَنْ أَدْرَكَ ذٌلِكَ الزَّمَانَ فَصَبَرَ عَلـى
الْفَقْرِ وَ هُوَ يَقْدِرُ عَلـى الْغِنـى وَ صَبَرَ عَلـى الْبِغْضَةِ
وَ هُوَ يَقْدِرُ عَلـى الْمَحَبَّةِ وَ صَبَرَ عَلـى الْذُّلِّ وَ هُوَ
يَقْدِرُ عَلـى الْعِزِّ آتَاهُ اللٌّهُ ثَوَابَ خَمْسِينَ صِدِّيقاً
مِمَنْ صَدَّقَ بِـي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A time will come upon the people when they will not acquire power
except by means of murder and tyranny; they will not gain riches except
by means of usurpation and stinginess and they will not gain love (and
respect from the people) except by abandoning the religion and pursuit
of lowly desires.

So whoever lives in such a period and endures poverty although he can
acquire riches; endures hate (and enemity of the people) even though he
can acquire their love; and endures humility even though he is able to
acquire honour then the Almighty Allah shall grant him the reward of
fifty entirely truthful individuals who believed in me.”[^1]  
 In another tradition, Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has stated
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ تَعْلَمُ أَنَّ مَنِ انْتَظَرَ أَمْرَنَا وَ صَبَرَ عَلـى مَا يَرى
مِنَ الأَذى وَ الْخَوْفِ هُوَ غَداً فِي زُمْرَتِـنَا؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do you not know that a person who waits for our command to come and is
patient upon that which he sees from the difficulties and the fear will,
tomorrow, be (with us) in our company?”[^2]

As well, Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكَ بِالصَّبْرِ فِي جَمِيعِ أُمُورِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I advise you to observe patience in all of your affairs.”[^3]

Of course, the meaning of patience and withstanding difficulties does
not go against the principle of supplicating and taking legitimate steps
to remove any difficulties or obstacles; nor does it go against the
principle of the right of a person to defend himself.

Without doubt, a true believer must struggle to ensure that all of the
difficulties, challenges and problems are kept far away from him and of
course, this must be done through the legitimate means.

[^1]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 91, sec. ‘Patience,’ no. 12

[^2]: al-Kafi, vol. 8, pg. 37, no. 7

[^3]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 88, sec. ‘Patience,’ no. 3


