Responsibility 78: Offering a Gift to the Imam
==============================================

Another responsibility is to give a gift[^1] to the Imam through our
wealth or whatever we possess from the material world. It goes without
saying that this must be done according to one’s own ability without
going to extravagance and that this should be carried out every year,
month, week and every day if possible!

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دِرْهَمٌ يُوْصَلُ بِهِ الإِمَامُ أَفْضَلُ مِنْ أَلْفَيْ أَلْفِ
دِرْهَمٍ فِيمَا سِوٌاهُ مِنْ وُجُوهِ الْبِرِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“One dirham which reaches the Imam is better than two million dirham’s
(spent) in all other good deeds.”[^2]

During the advent of the Imam, this wealth will be given directly to the
Imam, however during the time of the occultation of the Imam the wealth
or whatever we have from this world which we wish to offer to him can be
spent in ways which would earn his pleasure. Of course the intention for
this act would be to offer the gift to the Imam (directly).

Our money can be used to print much needed books to uphold the faith; or
the money can be spent in holding gatherings (majalis) and programs in
which the Imam or his close friends are remembered.

In addition, the fellow Shi’a can be given this money so that they are
able to fulfill their own needs and material requirements especially if
they are the children and offspring of the Noble Prophet, or are
scholars, propagators and missionaries of the faith!

Imam Musa b. Ja’far al-Kadhim (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ لَمْ يَقْدِرْ عَلـى صِلَتِنَا فَلْيَصِلْ عَلـى صَالِحِي
مَوَالِينَا يُكْتَبُ لَهُ ثَوَابُ صِلَتِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person who is not able to present us with a gift should give it to
the righteous ones from among our followers and through this, a reward
will be written for him as if he had given this gift to us.”[^3]

[^1]: The meaning of gift in this responsibility is any present or
offering which a person would give for the Imam to gain his spiritual
attention; in other words, it is those gifts and presents which would
lead to our Imam (peace be upon him) being pleased and happy with us
which are offered to him.

[^2]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, pg. 538, sec. ‘Offering a Gift to the Imam,’ no.
65

[^3]: Kamil al-Ziyarat, pg. 319, no. 1


