Responsibility 81: Giving Precedence to the Imam Part 1
=======================================================

The next responsibility is to give precedence to the Imam and to give
him priority at all times.

How can we distinguish this important act and employ it in our daily
lives? This is up to the believer himself to realize. For example, if we
are able to supplicate for only two people, then we must first make
supplication for the Imam, if one wants to make tawassul to one of two
people, then the Imam must be the one whom we make tawassul to if the
people are called to have a better understanding of something and to
perform good deeds.

Then after the call and invitation to Tawhid, before anything else, one
should invite others to the Imam and his wilayah if a person decides to
give a gift, then the first person one should give this gift to is the
Imam and if a person wants to perform the Ziyarat or send salutations
upon another infallible, then one must start by sending greetings and
salutations to the Imam and send prayers upon him first.

And if it is decided that one will perform a task and send the reward of
this task to a person for example if one was to perform Salat or hajj
and give the reward to someone, then it should be first given to the
Imam (the Imam should be kept in mind when this act is being performed
so that the reward is given to him).

If a person is able to perform the various prayers and supplications
after every obligatory Salat, then one must perform those which are
related to the Imam as this will establish a closer relationship with
him.


