Responsibility 82: Giving Precedence to the Imam Part 2
=======================================================

The true believers must place the Imam first when performing any
supplication.

Before one remembers himself, he must first remember the Imam and pray
for him. After this, one may pray for himself and other people and this
becomes a manifestation of the love a true believer has for the Imam.

Without doubt, every supplication which a true believer makes for the
Imam will earn him many things one will obtain the Divine reward from
Allah, gain the specific benefits related to that particular
supplication and in addition, the contents of the supplication and what
was prayed for will be accepted and fulfilled both for the Imam and the
believer.

It has been mentioned in the traditions that whenever a person
supplicates for another person, whatever he prayed for will also be
applicable to him and his pleas will be accepted. In this regards, Imam
Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Baqir (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الْمُؤْمِنُ يَدْعُو لِأَخِيهِ بِظَهْرِ الْغَيْبِ فَيَقُولُ لَهُ
الْمَلَكُ: آمِينَ وَ يَقُولُ اللٌّهُ الْعَزِيزُ الْجَبَّارُ: وَ لَكَ
مِثْلاَ مَا سَأَلْتَ وَ قَدْ أُعْطِيتَ مَا سَأَلْتَ بِحُبِّكَ إِيَّاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He is a believer who prayers for his brother (in faith) in his absence,
to which the Angel says: ‘Ameen (May Allah accept your prayer).’ At this
time, Allah, the Noble and Grand says: ‘And for you is granted twice of
that which you have asked (for your brother in faith) due to your love
for him.’”[^1]

Imam Musa b. Ja’far al-Kadhim (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ مَنْ دَعَا لِأَخِيهِ بِظَهْرِ الْغَيْبِ نُودِيَ مِنَ الْعَرْشِ:
وَ لَكَ مِائَةُ أَلْفِ ضِعْفٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily when one supplicates for his (believing) brother in his absence,
a sound is heard from the Noble Throne: ‘For you is one hundred thousand
times (the reward for what you supplicated for him).’”[^2]

[^1]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, The Book of Du’a, sec. ‘Making supplication for
one’s brother while he is not there’; pg. 507, no. 3; Biharul Anwar,
vol. 93, pg. 388, sec. 26, no. 19

[^2]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, The Book of Du’a, sec. ‘Making supplicaiton for
one’s brother when he is not there’; pg. 508, no. 6; Biharul Anwar, vol.
93, pg. 384, sec. 26, no. 8


