Responsibility 84: Respecting Those Close To the Imam
=====================================================

Another responsibility is to show respect to those who are related to
and are close to Imam al-Zaman (ajtf).

The higher a person’s (spiritual) status is, the closer that person is
to Imam al-Zaman (ajtf) and the more important it is for the true
believers to show respect and honor to such a person.

Those who are related to the Imam include the noble family of the Sadat,
especially the children of the twelfth Imam the scholars who act
according to the Islamic injunctions, and the true believers who possess
taqwa. The final categories of those who must be respected include all
of the true believers and lovers of Imam al-Mahdi (ajtf) no matter what
level or societal class they belong to.

The most deserving of people who should be shown respect and those who
are the closest to the Imam compared to all others are the scholars who
act according to the Islamic teachings. More than all others, these are
the people of taqwa and wara’ and from among these, the closest are the
great scholars and those who make up the chain of the mujtahidin
(Jurists) from among the Maraja’ Taqlid (sources of emulation). In any
case, the true believer must love all of the friends of the Imam and
respect them.

The Noble Prophet has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوْبـى لِمَنْ أَدْرَكَ قَائِمَ أَهْلِ بَيْتِي وَ هُوَ يَأْتَمُّ بِهِ
فِي غَيْبَتِهِ قَبْلَ قِيَامِهِ وَ يَتَوَلَّـى أَوْلِيَآءَهُ وَ
يُعَادِي أَعْدَاءَهُ، ذٌلِكَ مِنْ رُفَقَائِـي وَ ذَوِي مَوَدَّتِي وَ
أَكْرَمِ أُمَّتِـي عَلَـيَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Glad tidings to the one who meets the Qa\`im (ajtf) of my Ahlul Bayt
(as) while he has followed him during his occultation before his advent
and has been an ally to those who are his allies and an enemy to those
who are an enemy to him. These people are my friends and those who have
my love, and are the noblest of my nation to me on the Day of
Judgement.”[^1]

[^1]: Kamal ad-Din wa Tamam an-Ni’mah, vol. 1, pg. 286, sec. 25, no. 2


