Responsibility 87: Visiting Masjid Jamkaran
===========================================

Another responsibility is to visit Masjid Jamkaran and to perform the
recommended actions in that sacred masjid. Masjid Jamkaran was built
under the direct order of Imam Waliul ‘Asr (ajtf) and has specific acts
of worship which are recommended to be performed in it.

In addition, it is one of the places which the Imam frequents and where
the legitimate requests of the people are fulfilled and the Imam himself
has ordered the people to visit this sacred site!

In regards to the construction of this masjid, the following has been
narrated by Hasan Muthallah Jamkarani: “I was sleeping in my home in the
village of Jamkaran on Tuesday night, the 17th of the month of Ramaďan
in the year 313 ah. It was just after midnight that out of nowhere, a
group of people came to my house, woke me up and said: ‘Wake up and
answer the call of your Master, Imam Mahdi Sahib al-Zaman (ajtf) who has
summoned you!’”

Hasan continued: “I woke up, collected myself and prepared to get
dressed and said to the people: ‘Just let me put my shirt on.’

At that time, I heard a voice saying: ‘That is not your shirt!’

After removing the shirt, I reached for my pants, and again I heard a
voice say: ‘Those are not your pants! Do not put them on!’

I removed them too and was able to find my own shirt and pants. I got
dressed and then started to look for the key to unlock the door when a
voice said: ‘The door is already unlocked and open!’  
 I went towards the door, opened it, and saw a group of pious, noble
people. I offered them my greetings, to which they replied accordingly.

They took me to a place where the present location of Masjid Jamkaran is
located and as I was looking around, I saw a couch surrounded by fine
carpets and pillows. A young man, who looked to be around 30 years old,
was reclining on the couch, resting against the pillows. An old man was
sitting beside him reading a book out loud while more than 60 men were
around them some of them dressed in white and others in green offering
their Salat.

The old man, whom I later found out was Prophet Khiďr asked me to be
seated. At that time, the Imam, who was sitting next to Prophet Khiďr,
called me by name and said: “You must go to Hasan Muslim and give him
the following message.

Tell him that for the past five years, you have been farming on this
land, planting and growing many things, but whatever you grow is being
destroyed. This land is sacred, and Allah the Almighty has chosen this
land above all others and bestowed distinction and honor to it.

Even this year, you have intended to plough and cultivate this land,
though you do not have the authorization to do so! Thus, whatever
financial earnings you have earned from this land must be returned so
that a Masjid can be built on this spot.

Since you have taken this land which does not belong to you, Allah the
Glorious and Powerful, has taken two of your young children away from
you, but still you have not realized the wrong you are doing! If you
continue in this way, the punishment of Allah which is beyond your
imagination, will strike you.’’

I said: “O’ my Master, I must have some convincing signs, since without
this, the people will not believe me.”

The Imam said: “I will show you the signs at this spot so that your
statement will prove to be truthful. You simply go and convey the
message to the people. Go and see Sayyid Abul Hasan in Qum and tell him
to come with you to visit Hasan Muslim and collect from him the earnings
of the farm land for the past few years, and with this money, lay the
foundation for the Masjid.

For the remaining expenditure, you may collect it from the village of
Rihaq, in the Ardhal region (near Kashan) which belongs to me, to
complete the building of the Masjid. Also, half of the estate of the
village of Rihaq has been given as Waqf (endowment) for the maintenance
of the Masjid. Tell the people to visit this place, and to respect and
honor it by offering four Rak’at of Salat as follows:

The first Salat of two Rak’at should be prayed with the intention of
‘Salutation to the Masjid’ (تحية المسجد) where in each Rak’at, Suratul
Fatiha is recited once, followed by Suratul IkhlaS seven times. In every
Rak’at, the dhikr:

> in Ruku’: سُبْحَانَ رَبِّيَ الْعَظِيمِ وَ بِحَمْدِهِ

> and in Sajdah: سُبْحَانَ رَبِّيَ الأَعْـلىٰ وَ بِحَمْدِهِ

Should be recited seven times, the second Rak’at should be recited
exactly as the first one.

The second Salat is also two Rak’at and it should be prayed with the
intention of ‘Salat for Imam al-Zaman’(ajtf) in which Suratul Fatiha is
recited once, and the line:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 إِيَّاكَ نَــعْبُدُ وَ إِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

is recited one hundred times. The surah should then be completed,
followed by the recitation of Suratul IkhlaS once.

In every Rak’at, the dhikr:

> in Ruku’: سُبْحَانَ رَبِّيَ الْعَظِيمِ وَ بِحَمْدِهِ

> and in Sajdah: سُبْحَانَ رَبِّيَ الأَعْـلىٰ وَ بِحَمْدِهِ

Should also be recited seven times each. The second Rak’at is to be
recited exactly like the first one.

Once both of the Salat are finished, the following line should be said
once:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلٰـهَ إِلاَّ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Followed by the Tasbih of Fatimah az-Zahra (sa):

34 times:أَللهُ أَكْبَرُ  
 33 times:أَلْـحَمْدُ لِلّٰهِ  
 33 times: سُبْحَانَ اللهِ

After this, you should go into sajdah and recite Salawat on Prophet
Muhammad (S) and his family (as) one hundred times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّٰهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Imam then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ صَلاَّهاَ فَكَأَنَّـمَا صَلَّى فِي الْبَيْتِ العَتِيقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Whoever performs this Salat (will receive the same reward) as the one
who prays inside the ‘Ancient House’ (the Holy Ka’bah).’”[^1]

[^1]: Najm al-Thaqib (al-Tabrisi), sec. 7, story 1


