Responsibility 89: Respecting Things Related to the Imam Part 4
===============================================================

The next responsibility is to show honour to the night and day of the
15th of Sha’ban with extra emphasis on the night of the 15th. In
addition, one must perform the specific acts which have been recommended
to be performed on this night.[^1]

The 15th of Sha’ban is equal in greatness to the night of Qadr (in the
month of Ramaďhan), is very important and is one of the time periods
related directly to the Imam.

In regards to the greatness of this night, Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali
al-Baqir (as) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هِيَ أَفْضَلُ لَيْلَةٍ بَعْدَ لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ فِيهَا يَمْنَحُ
اللٌّهُ تَعَالَى الْعِبَادَ فَضْلَهُ وَ يَغْفِرُ لَهُمْ بِمَنِّهِ
فَاجْتَهِدُوا فِي الْقُرْبَةِ إِلـى اللٌّهِ فِيهَا فَإِنَّهَا لَيْلَةٌ
آلَى اللٌّهُ عَلى نَفْسِهِ أَنْ لاَ يَرُدَّ سَائِلاً لَهُ فِيهَا مَا
لَمْ يَسْأَلْ مَعْصِيَةً وَ إِنَّهَا اللَّيْلَةُ الَّتِي جَعَلَهَا
اللٌّهُ لَنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ بِإِزَاءِ مَا جَعَلَ لَيْلَةَ الْقَدْرِ
لِنَبِيِّنَا فَاجْتَهِدُوا فِي الدُّعَاءِ وَ الثَّنَاءِ عَلى اللٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It (the 15th of Sha’ban) is the best of nights after the night of Qadr.
In it Allah grants His blessings to His servants and through His
generosity and nobility, He forgives them. So strive and struggle to
seek closeness to Allah, the Most High, in it.

For it is a night in which Allah has ordained upon Himself not to turn
away anyone who comes to Him asking for something as long as the request
is not something impermissible. It is the night which Allah the High,
has placed for us (the Ahlul Bayt) just as the Night of Qadr (in the
month of Ramaďhan) was placed for our Prophet.

Thus, strive to perform the supplications and praise Allah, the High (in
it).”[^2]  
 The reason for the greatness of this night over all the other nights
and times is the felicitous birth of Imam Waliul ‘Asr (ajtf) during the
early morning period.

[^1]: These acts are mentioned in Mafatih al-Jinan, sec. 2: “The
greatness and actions of the Month of Sha’ban.’

[^2]: Iqbal al-A’mal, pg. 695; MiSbah al-Mutahajjid, pg. 831


