Responsibility 93: Donating the Reward of Good Deeds
====================================================

Another responsibility is to donate the reward of acts of worship to the
Imam whether obligatory or recommended acts.

For example, after a person has finished performing his Salat, he can
donate the reward of that prayer to the Imam one can perform the Hajj
and give the rewards of the Hajj to the Imam.

A companion once said to Imam Hasan b. ‘Ali al-’Askari (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي زُرْتُ أَبَاكَ وَ جَعَلْتُ ذٌلِكَ لَكَ فَقَالَ : لَكَ بِذٌلِكَ
مِنَ اللٌّهِ ثَوَابٌ وَ أَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ وَ مِنَّا الْمَحْمَدَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I visited your father and gave the reward of this act to you.” The Imam
replied: “Due to this act of yours, there is a great reward and
recompense for you from Allah and a commendation from us.”[^1]

One of the Imams said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ جَعَلَ ثَوَابَ صَلاَتِهِ لِرَسُولِ اللٌّهِ وَ أَمِيرِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَ الأَوْصِيَاءِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ صَلَوَاتُ اللٌّهِ
عَلَيْهِمْ أَجْمَعِينَ وَ سَلَّمَ أَضْعَفَ اللٌّهُ لَهُ ثَوَابَ
صَلاَتِهِ أَضْعَافاً مُضَاعَفَةً حَـتَّـى يَنْقَطِعَ النَّفْسَ وَ
يُقَالُ لَهُ قَبْلَ أَنْ تَخْرُجَ رُوحُهُ مِنْ جَسَدِهِ: يَا فُلاَنُ
هَدِيَّتُكَ إِلَيْهَا وَ نَفْعَتُكَ وَ أَلْطَافُكَ لَنَا فَهٌذَا
يَوْمُ مُجَازَاتِكَ وَ مُكَافَاتِكَ فَطِبْ نَفْساً وَ قَرَّ عَيْناً
بِمَا أَعَدَّ اللٌّهُ لَكَ وَ هَنِيئاً لَكَ بِمَا صِرْتَ إِلَيْهِ.
قَالَ: قُلْتُ وَ كَيْفَ يُهْدِي صَلاَتَهُ وَ يَقُولُ؟ قَالَ : يَنْوِي
ثَوَابَ صَلاَتِهِ لِرَسُولِ اللٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person who offers the reward of his Salat to the Messenger of Allah,
the Commander of the Faithful and the successors who come after him, may
the blessings of Allah be upon all of them Allah will increase the
reward of his Salat, a multi-fold increase, until his soul departs and
before his soul leaves his body, it will be said to him: “O’ so-and-so!

Your gift, goodness and kindness has reached us therefore, today is the
day for your reward and repayment of your goodness. Thus, may your soul
be pleased and may your eyes be brightened due to that which Allah has
prepared for you and glad tidings to you for what you have reached.’

The narrator of the tradition then asked them Imam: “How does one send
the reward of his Salat, and what does he say?’

The Imam replied: “one makes the intention that the reward of the Salat
be given to the Messenger of Allah.’”[^2]

[^1]: Wasa\`il ash-Shi’a, vol. 10, pg. 464, sec. 103, no. 1

[^2]: Jamal al-Usbu’, pg. 15; Biharul Anwar, vol. 91, pg. 215, sec. 3,
no. 1


