Supplement 1
============

15 On thrones decorated,

16 Reclining on them, facing one another.

The root of surur (thrones) is sarra, which is to make happy, to
confide a secret, to hide something. From it come many words that form
an interesting pattern of meanings. Surer is joy, implying that the
source of joy is a secret that can only be whispered to oneself. It is
the secret of secrets and cannot be divulged. If one is happy, happiness
is itself the explanation of that state, .but one cannot give the source
of that state to someone else. It relates to another level of
consciousness.

A pleasure is something one can share, something one can buy. It is
related to attachments and is a worldly thing while surer, joy, is for
its own sake. The bird sings because its nature is to sing, irrespective
of whether the hunter is hunting it or the neighborhood is giving it
extra food. A pleasure is the result of something that has occurred. A
person is lonely, then he meets a companion who echoes much of what he
believes in - that is a pleasure. Someone was hungry, there was
empti足ness in his stomach and it was filled by food - that is a
pleasure. Pleasure is like neutralization: the negative and the positive
meet and are neutralized.

Joy is something else; it is the negation of the negative. joy occurs
when what was considered to be desirable has been recognized as being
wahm, illusion. Negation of the negative is positive and that is the
normal state of man. It is for this reason that man inherently seeks
joy. He knows pleasure, he knows it is purchasable, but he does not
readily know the way to joy. Man seeks happiness because it is his real
nature. He is unhappy because he has been telling himself that he needs
a certain something to be happy. He constantly runs after it, but as
soon as he gets it, he desires something else.

The door to the abode of joy is the recognition of how to unknot what
one has knotted. That is why it is said that the source is a secret
within a secret. A desirable thing is in itself a wahm. The recognition
of the wahm is the negation of it. And if that negation is genuine, then
the root of joy is being nourished from within. That is the soil in
which the tree of contentment will grow. Contentment is a tree that
nobody can transplant into anybody else. One has to, through one's own
labor, nurture it and make it grow.

There is inherent contentment in a created being such as a bird, but
man has the consciousness of contentment. Furthermore, he has the light
of consciousness of consciousness. This establishes man as the highest
of creation. Man is conscious of the consciousness of happiness. He is
conscious of the consciousness of unhappiness.

Surur cannot be passed on, it has to be earned. If one has grasped the
way to its attainment one will constantly seek after it in one's life.
It has nothing to do with time or place. Often, an ignorant man returns
to the lake or the mountain top where he had spent a holiday or had had
a good time, thinking that he can reproduce the inner state of a
momentary opening of the heart. He yearns for the upliftment of
joyfulness.

This perverted seeking is found among the inspired souls of people such
as artists and composers. In the biographies of these madmen, one will
find that they often go back to the same mountain spot or shack, to live
for the rest of their lives in a romantic illusion so that they can
reproduce their creative moments. But creative moments are moments of
detachment from this world.

It simply happened that he was there in that chalet on that mountain
top. He yearns for the moment of joy he experienced but cannot retrieve
it. He thinks joy is prescribable or describable but it is not. "The
path of those upon whom Thou hast bestowed favors. Not (the path) of
those upon whom Thy wrath is brought down, nor of those who go astray."
(al-Fatiha: 7) Look at what has caused you trouble and kept you from
joy: attach足ments, expectations, desires and fears - guard against these
and you are already in the garden.

The root of the word surur is also connected with the word mean足ing the
cutting of the umbilical cord of a newborn baby. It is a joy ; because
the child is no longer dependent on a thing called 'womb.' The cutting
heralds his outer independence and leads him to the possi足bility of
understanding that he is dependent only upon Allah. It is the beginning
of a journey of joyfulness during which the child may begin to recognize
that he is a child of Truth and Reality and that he is born by the grace
of Allah, while the mother was the instrument within whom he had dwelt
before birth. The potentiality of his existence before conception was in
the knowledge of Allah and became an expression, a manifestation.

Sarir ( thrones, bed, singular of surer) is a symbol of relief from
outer troubles and a means of joy. It allows one to relax and
establishes a mood of happiness, a state of restfulness. "Reclining on
them, facing one another." Reclining upon the couches, the near ones are
not troubled, they are relaxed. Mutaqabilin (facing one another) is from
taqabala to meet, to be face to face. They see their reflection in each
other. They see others who are like them. They see repeat performances,
holograms. Its root is qabala to receive; qibla, from the same root, is
that to which one turns; qabila is a midwife, the one who faces and
receives the baby.

17 Round about them shall go youths never altering in age,

18 With goblets and ewers and a cup of pure drink;

19 They shall not be affected with headache thereby, nor shall they get
exhausted;

20 And fruits such as they choose,

21 And the flesh of fowl such as they desire.

This realm of experience, the janna (garden) is timeless. Man can only
understand it from the reference point of his present existence which is
based on existential needs, one person serving another. The mithal
(metaphor) of the eternally youthful servants implies that in the
non-time zone of the next life that state is no longer subject to
decay.

The mentioning of meat in the garden is significant. It has been given
its prominent position in this life because it is regarded as an
important aspect of diet. It contains much of what man needs in terms of
amino acids, minerals and vitamins. Traditionally, the practices of
Islam encouraged the Muslims to eat it once or twice a week. Today,
modern dieticians recommend that meat should only be eaten twice and
fish once a week, the rest of the diet being composed of grains and
vegetables.

Traditionally, people ate animals that could be caught locally within
the appropriate season. Today one finds people eating large quantities
of meat and fat in places such as the Arabian peninsula where the
temperature is exceedingly hot. Eating foods out of location and season
only causes sickness. The aya describing the availability of meat in the
garden is a mithal and does not mean that there are hunting parties in
the garden. The indication is that the nourishment is of the highest and
subtlest values.

22 And pure, beautiful ones,

23 The like of the hidden pearls:

24 A reward for what they used to do.

The hur (virgins of paradise) are described as pearls, maknun, hidden,
kept, highly treasured; from the word kanna, to conceal, shelter. They
are forever preserved in that translucency and purity.

The state of the garden is the mirror image, the reflection, of the
quality of one's actions in this world. "A reward for what they used to
do": one's reward is the action itself. It does not come later in time
because in Reality there is no time. Action has its own reward within
itself in this time zone. In the next life, where there is no time, it
manifests again in meaning, in a state in which the soul sees itself.

Man perceives that having done a good turn for someone, he is paid back
years later. Those with inner sight derive joy at the time of the action
itself. They do not care for the visible outcome, which is completely
secondary. It is like an expert gardener who, when he sees the plant
nourished, visualizes the entire cycle of growth and decay. It is only
the greedy and hungry fellow who simply waits for the fruit. The
gardener who is totally in the joy of the process of gardening has
already envisioned the fruit and has gone beyond it. Only the animal
waits for the thing to manifest in order to eat it.

From the point of view of the man of knowledge, the man who has
abandoned himself, his action instantly contains the reward. And yet,
there are also fruits that materially appear, but their unfoldment is in
time and the seeker wants to know the non-time. It is the subtle being
who recognizes that his action is its own reward. The quality of his
reward is according to the source of his action, which is his intention.
The being who has complete presence and awareness sees how the rewards
and the actions are not separate.

25 They shall not hear therein vain or sinful discourse,

26 Except the word peace, peace.

Laghw (foolish talk) is that which is empty of meaning. The root of the
word is lagha to talk nonsense, to make mistakes; in another form, it
means to invalidate, nullify, eliminate. From lagha comes the word
lugha, language. Lughawi means an expert in language and laghwi means
someone who talks both a great deal and a lot of nonsense. Notice that
an expert in language and one who talks nonsense are almost the same
word.

"They shall not hear therein vain or sinful discourse." There is no
ta'thim, offense or sin. There is complete equity there, no injustice.
justice of the next world will be witnessed by all because there will be
no interference with it. In this world one may see many outward
aberrations in justice. Looking with an inner eye one sees nothing other
than justice. As an outward being, having an outward orientation, one
has to constantly do one's best to bring about outer justice, although
inwardly one may see by the eye of abandonment that everything is
perfect. Because there is no human interference, the next life will be
completely meaningful and just. In this life, because man acts
inadvertently or erroneously and transgresses, he recognizes what
appears to be unjust. Looking through the eye of Reality, even what
appears to be unjust is just.

Man is given a choice of acting or not acting. Acting wrongly results
in an undesirable situation and therefore he makes claims of injustice.
He has been acting incongruously with the governing laws. Outwardly, one
strives to bring about outer justice; inwardly, one accepts whatever is
decreed as being a part of the tarbiya (upbringing), of the rububiyya
(lordship). Outwardly, one acts as the hand of Allah, as the leg of
Allah, as the eye of Allah, because man is the khalifa (deputy) of
Allah. That is tawhid.

Man, being confused, usually acts in opposition to this because he is
afraid of being tested.

If, in upholding justice, a man finds that he is swamped by a
situa足tion of injustice, he still does his best though it may engulf
him. He realizes that the situation has been caused by the
transgressions of others, but that he still must pay the price along
with the others. Imam Husayn, alayhi-s-salam, did not escape the
injustice that had been going on for twenty years. It cost his blood and
that of seventy-two members of his family. He was not above it. The wave
of tyranny will eat the good and the bad in its wake. But if a man is a
true man of abandon足ment, he recognizes that this is the justice of
Allah. He does not recog足nize his own he-ness. He too is part of the
fodder.

Imam Hasan's fight was, in contrast, making a peace treaty. He knew
that the forty thousand soldiers who were promised to him would turn
against him on the day of battle, and he saw that there was no reason to
shed blood. When he signed the treaty some people still turned against
him. Whichever way one acts one cannot win with man's justice. Man's
justice has flaws, while Allah's justice is perfect. Allah's justice is
to give one the opportunity to know the meaning of blissful abandonment
into Allah. By suffering the closing of all doors except one, man is
guided to Allah's door.

"Except the word peace, peace." Peace is where there is no action,
stillness beyond which there is no stillness, the eye of the storm where
all is quiet. One minute in a hurricane seems like a year, whereas its
eye appears to be in timeless peace. Its outer perimeter is in maximum
agitation. The men of the state of the hurricane's eye, the people of
the garden, do not hear any nonsense. There is no movement or anything
other than recognizable, cognizable peace. It is not the peace of a dead
stone but of pure awareness, a state of bliss which man can taste here
and now if he keeps to the path of Allah, if he keeps to the path of the
Qur'an and the sunna of the Prophet without hypocrisy. It is the higher
state of the garden that men of Allah - who have taken the message and
who have invested rightly, correctly and fully - can attain.

27 And the companions of the right hand; how happy are the companions
of the right hand!

28 Amid thornless lote-trees,

For the "companions of the right hand," the state of joy that they had
in this world is mirrored in the next. The sidr is the lote足tree of the
next world. It has no thorns because everything in the next experience
is in its purest form. Women are forever virginal, forever translucent,
forever alive. Everything is in its ultimate, highest, purest,
non-agitated form. Thorns are undesirable, and therefore do not exist in
the garden of the next world. There is nothing that will afflict its
inhabitants.

29 And banana-trees (with fruits), one above another.

Talhin mandud is the description of the banana tree in the early stages
of its development, when its clusters of fruit are bunched together.
This is a reference to the fruits of dif足ferent shapes and descriptions
that may not have been known amongst people of the day. Arabia was
limited in what it had of these items. It is an allusion to the fact
that there are so many things which one does not know of in the next
life, so many other aspects of taste or of realizations.

30 And extended shade,

31 And water flowing constantly,

32 And abundant fruit,

33 Neither intercepted nor forbidden,

34 And exalted thrones.

"And extended shade." In the desert culture of Arabia the sun, though a
giver of life, is also a destroyer of life, so therefore shade is a
great mercy. The bigger the shade of something the greater is the object
itself, and what is greater than Allah, al-Azim? If you are with Allah
you have maximum shade. Zillin mamdudin is literally a long or extended
shadow. In Islamic culture one used to show respect to a revered person
or saint by saying: "May Allah in足crease your shadow."

In the final abode one witnesses maximum shade. Everything is in the
shade of the Creator. There are no individuals who can cast a shadow or
darken anything. Zillin mamdudin is the shadow which protects one and
which, by inference, causes one to recognize Allah, because direct
witnessing is not possible; one cannot see Reality, only its effects.
The knowledge of Allah is by inference. One infers His existence. If
anyone were to say that he has seen Allah, it would mean that he is
either mad or a liar.

If someone were to say that he has seen Allah at a given time and
place, then where would He be the rest of the time? Allah is
Ever-Present, All-Encompassing - beyond time, beyond comprehension,
beyond sight. The faculties of sight and comprehension exist by the life
which Allah has placed in people. How can these faculties perceive what
makes them function? It is not possible. One infers there is Allah by
reason, by heart, and by one's fitra (innate character). Within everyone
is the seed that recognizes the perfect Creator. The imperfection in His
creation that one sees is from the imperfect purification of one's own
heart.

35 Surely We have made them to grow into a (new) growth,

The garden is the new creation where there are no desires, whims,
troubles or attachments. Nasha'a is to grow, to rise up, to come into
existence. Allah says: "Surely We have made them to grow into a (new)
growth." It is of another foundation, one that is not physical. It is
based upon light. The world of light is only accessible to man in
moments of deep meditation and reflection.

Then We have made them virgins,

37 Loving, equals in age,

38 For the companions of the right hand.

39 A numerous company from among the first,

40 And a numerous company from among the last. Stretching man's
imagination, Allah describes the physical satis足faction of man-woman
companionship. "Then We have made them virgins." The women there, in the
next experience, are in perpetual virginity. We understand that in this
realm it is not possible. One of the Imams was asked how a woman could
remain a virgin. He replied that it was not a question of virginity in
the physical sense. The descriptions of women and drink are not what can
be experienced or understood. They are a mithil. They belong to another
insha', another con足struction in the world of lights and
consciousness.

41 And those of the left hand, how wretched are those of the left
hand!

42 In hot wind and boiling water,

43 And the shade of black smoke,

44 Neither cool nor honorable.

Those at a loss in this world are grouped together and cast aside for
their crimes. The beings that have not evolved and polished them足selves
in this existence are left to be recycled, fired and finished. They
experience hot wind and boiling water, the opposites of tranquility,
joy, stability and ease.

Allah's judgement is the perfect judgement. He is the All-Forgiving. He
knows how to find and segregate those who are the doubtful cases. Some
of the great seers, such as Mulla Sadra and Ibn al-\`Arabi, often
describe the situation of the \`in-between.' Although the zone of the
\`in-between' begins in the next life, in the zone of non-time, its
enact足ment can be imagined to be in time because it is the interspace,
the \`in-between' of this life and the next, after the segregation.

Some of these seers talk about the purification of people by fire.

Ibn al-\`Arabi gives the fire seven different categories. A person may
be put to fire in order to experience it, in order to give him a final
chance to ask for forgiveness. Knowledge of the categories of fire may
be of use, but may also result in unnecessary speculation. Being brought
up in such a materialistic world, man immediately wants to
subcate足gorize and contain everything, like the so-called scientists who
run around the world collecting beautiful birds and butterflies to fill
yet another biological museum. This is not the way to the attainment of
inner knowledge. It is not by accumulation.

Traditions have reported that there are people who may be judged by men
to be evil but by Allah's judgement are good. We cannot overlook
someone's crime within shari\`a (outward path); judgement in this zone
of life can only be according to shari\`a, not beyond it. Allah will
have His own judgement on the subtler, hidden aspects of transgression,
but shat is not our domain.


