Sura 4 : Surat Ul-mulk (the Kingdom)
====================================

**Introduction**

This Meccan sura illustrates and proves the comprehensive totality of
lordship. Creation appears to be made of different systems, each moving
towards the fulfillment of its potential, and these systems, seen or
unseen, are interlinked.

The Controller of all these systems is one Creator Who is beyond time
and encompasses all of creation. All bounties and mercies are for the
purpose of recognizing His unbounded mercy, the mercy of this beneficent
Creator to Whom all creation will return, and by Whose grace creation
has come about.

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

1 Blessed is He in Whose hand is the kingdom, and He has power over all
things,

2 Who created death and life that He may try you-which of you is best
in deeds; and He is the Mighty, the Forgiving,

The creation is based on the Creator's love for what He created. And
what He created was from Him, sustained by Him, supported by Him, to
Him. When that love is made manifest to the created, he tastes joy and
blessedness.

The source and transmission of that joy and blessedness exist at all
times. It is only the created who inadver­tently block it. The entire
creation is a result of the blessedness of He Whose creation is His
kingdom. Everything in it is in His hand and comes from His power. Every
creational entity, therefore, derives its power directly from the
Creator.

Allah created the experiences of life and death. In this life, man is
put into situations in order to be purified of any additions which are
perversely taken on. The bala (affliction) is a necessary test which
moves him, with knowledge, into higher degrees of purity. Affliction
(balwa) is his means of eliminating the barrier of desires and
expectations existing between himself and the Crea­tor.

Affliction teaches the created being to live freely, acknowledg­ing the
gift of life given to him. The best of actions are those which are done
with no expectations. They are purely and simply fi sablli-llah (for the
sake of Allah).

The first manifestation of creation is life. The experience of life is
meaningful only if there exists its opposite, the experience of death.
These experiences are such that everyone goes through them. Just as
there is outer life and death, so is there inner life and death. When
the heart is hardened it is as if dead. When it is flowing and turning,
it is alive. Life and death exist in both the sensory and in the
meaning.

"And He is the Mighty, the Forgiving." Whether or not man is content
with his life does not change Allah's station with him. Through
afflictions, growth of wisdom blossoms in him. Man learns to solicit
forgiveness from the Ghafur (the Forgiving). The recogni­tion of one's
transgressions and mistakes is in itself a door to for­giveness. If one
knows one's faults, if one has seen them and experi­enced them, then one
is on the way to being forgiven. It follows that if one is in awareness,
one will be unlikely to repeat past mistakes.

3 Who created the seven heavens one above another; you see no
'incongruity in the creation of the Beneficent God; then look again, can
you see any disorder?

4 Then turn back the eye again and again; your look shall come back to
you confused while it is fatigued.

The kingdom of Allah is manifest in seven layers, seven different
phases or modes of heaven. Each layer is placed upon another, in­
visibly connected yet retaining its own characteristics. It is also
found amongst the ahadith (prophetic traditions) and the sayings of the
Imams that the earth has seven layers. In fact, there is a common
supplication in which it is said: Rabbu-s-samawati-s-sab\`i wa rabbu-l­
aradini-s-sab'i, the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the seven
earths.

"You see no incongruity in the creation of the Beneficent God." Futur
is from fatara, to cleave, split open. Fitra is the original crack-the
origin of man's rise to life. The Rahman (the Merciful) encompasses
everything under His rahma (compassion). Allah's rahma is upon all
creation, while His rahm is upon the mu'min (believer). Under the
Rahman, the Merciful, there is nothing in creation that cannot be
placed.

There is no disjointedness within it. Everything makes sense to man if
he develops the right sight and abandons clumsy judgement. Allah says
"Then turn back the eye again and again," because though man looks
often, he does so without insight. The Qur'an challenges man to look
again in order to see if he can find any fault. The more one looks, the
more one discovers the perfection of what appears to be layer upon layer
of the laws and sensory connec­tions which hold the cosmos together.

Doubt arises in man when he begins to reflect. At first, his
reflec­tions are unclear and do not connect with his core. But the more
he reflects, the more likely it becomes that he will see the pure mercy
that will bring him realization and understanding. Sight will come back
to him and he will be unable to find fault.

"Your sight shall come back to you spurned while it is fatigued."
Khasi' means spurned, base, vulgar, rejected. Hash means exhausted,
desperate or fatigued. If he reflects, man will not be able to see
fault. His sight will show nothing other than the Rahman Whose
manifestation is in the complete perfection of His creation. There will
be nothing out of place. Creational entities will interconnect in the
most precise manner. It will confirm that the All-Pervading manifests
His rahma. In other words, man's faculty of reason and insight will come
to see the perfection of creation.

5 And certainly We have adorned this lower heaven with lamps and We
have made these missiles for the Shaytans, and We have prepared for them
the chastisement of burning.

6 And for those who disbelieve in their Lord is the punishment of hell,
and evil is the 'resort.

7 When they shall be cast herein, they shall hear a loud moaning of it
as it heaves,

8 Almost bursting for fury. Whenever a group is cast into it, its
keeper shall ask them: Did there not come to you a warner?

9 They shall say: Yea! indeed there came to us a warner, but we
rejected (him) and said: Allah has not revealed anything; you are only
in a great error.

10 And they shall say: Had we but listened or pondered, we should not
have been among the inmates of the blazing fire.

The lower heaven is that heaven which is perceivable by man. The other
heavens, it is implied, are beyond visible recognition. They are based
on energies or subtle forces that hold the cosmos together. The stars
decorate the lower heaven, which displays myriads of dynamic exchanges,
whether seen or inferred by observation.

"And certainly we have adorned this lower heaven with lamps and we have
made these missiles for the shaytans. " Rajama the root of the word for
missiles, is to stone, curse. There are several meanings that can be
given to this phrase. One is that the evil unseen forces of shaytan
(satan) cannot penetrate beyond the lower heaven. Another meaning is
that it indicates that those people who use supernatural powers and
magic are afflicted and are unable to penetrate beyond a limit.

All forms of shaytan or deviation lead one to the adhabu-s-sa\`ir, the
chastisement of the blazing fire. Those who are in the state of
shaytan - denying the Lordship, covering up, dis­believing in the fact
that there is a Sustainer by whom we are guided to our fullest
possibilities - will earn the state of eternal fire, than which there is
nothing worse. Masir, a place of arrival or final destiny, comes from
sara, which means to become, im­plying \`timeness.'

The sighing or moaning that is uttered when a being enters jahannam
(hell) is a final expression called shahiq (sighing, sobbing). Shahaqa
means to inhale, sigh deeply, gulp, moan. When in the final abode,
beings emit the sound of mourning in an environment which is forever
changing, never sustaining or stabilizing -the reverse of janna
(paradise).
In the ever effulgent fire, churning and turning with its anger,
increasing as it is fed, a voice reflects or a memory comes forth to
ask: Were you not informed about this state? Were you not warned that
you were preparing yourself for this dreadful end? The questioners are
the keepers of the fire, its permanent angels or guardians.

Those who are questioned answer: We did not hear. We denied the
existence of Reality. We denied Allah. We ascertained that there was no
Reality and assumed those who were reflecting the voice of Truth to be
in error.

There is nothing other than justice in this world and the next. If man
does not hear the voice of wisdom which will guide him in this world and
show him how to live in a manner that will keep him from harm - if he
does not heed that wisdom, he will be afflicted in this life. But there
is a higher state, one in which there is belief in and recogni­tion of
Allah. If that state does not come about, the punishment will be both in
this world and the next - when relative time stops and absolute
timelessness begins.

This is not theatrical language. There is instantaneous, out-of­ time
communication between entities. In this life the deniers put up a
barrier between the faculty of hearing and that of understanding what
can be heard. They block the exercise of the natural faculty of reason,
that innate sense with which everyone is endowed. They misinterpret for
the sake of convenience, sentimental attachment, or emotion­alism, or
for the love of the dunya (world in a negative material sense).


