Sura 4 : Surat Ul-mulk (the Kingdom) Supplement 1
=================================================

11 So they shall acknowledge their sins, but far will be (forgiveness)
from the inmates of the blazing fire.

"So they shall acknowledge their sins." L'tarafu, de­rives from
\`arafa, to know; i\`tarafa is to admit, confess or acknowledge. At the
time of the punishment, there is a nat­ural confession. Those who are to
be punished will admit that they have hidden themselves from the
messages brought to mankind by the prophets, their followers and the
Imams (leaders). Everyone has the ability to discern the truth and is
therefore able to acknowledge that he has original knowledge. But man
hides and denies it through his igno­rance, which is built upon
arrogance, fear, anxiety and attachment.

Bali-l- insanu ala nafsihi basira: "Nay, man is evidence against
himself." (al-Qiyama:14) Everyone has within himself a higher aware­ness
which can shed light on his consciousness. If his consciousness is
impure, then his higher awareness is able to discern that his
conscious­ness is dwelling upon something unbecoming. Even so, man can
still deny the reflection of his higher awareness. At the point of
death, when the ability to interfere with one's destiny stops, all
instantaneously becomes clear because time stops.

"But far will be (forgiveness) from the inmates of the burning fire."
Sahaqa means to crush, annihilate, pulverize. The people of the fire are
those who are obliterated by not having acknowl­edged the one and only
Entity - Allah. How can they remain whole? If one does not admit the
power of an ordinary king, he will be crushed. How much more important
is it then to accept the One and All-Power­ful, Whose kingdom is
pervaded by Him. Because of His mercy He gives man countless chances
throughout his life to help save him­self from the fire.

12 (As for) those who fear their Lord in secret, they shall surely have
forgiveness and a great reward.

"(As for) those who fear their Lord in secret, they shall surely have
forgiveness and a great reward." The ghayb is the Unseen. Those who have
accepted the fact that there is a Creator, a Reality, without direct
personalized evidence - without witnessing it - have taken it on by the
inference that there cannot be an effect without a cause.

They have directly experienced that there are laws that govern this
existence and that the cosmos is not in chaos. They want to know the
laws - they fear their Lord and they fear transgressing His laws, His
bounds. It is for them that there is forgiveness and a great reward, a
continuing reward that begins here in this world and continues
unin­terruptedly into the next.

13 And conceal your word or manifest it; surely He is Cognizant of what
is in the hearts.

Asirru is from asarra, meaning to keep secret, to conceal or disguise
something. Whether one speaks of it or not, whether one hides it or not,
whether one reveals what is inside oneself or not, Allah is aware of
what goes on within the heart. Sadr means chest, heart or front. Reality
knows what man has put in front of himself, what he has put foremost in
his heart. Already, even in this life, there is no hiding place; man is
exposed.

The creator of a thing knows its attributes. The creator of a house
knows its strengths and weaknesses. He knows the materials he used to
build it, what appears on the walls and what is behind the walls. The
merciful Perfect-Builder has built with perfection. He has not placed
poor quality material behind the walls. Behind the wall of the chest of
man He has placed a heart. It is in the hearts of men that He dwells.

14 Does He not know, Who created? And He is the Knower of the
subtleties, the Aware.

"And He is the Knower of the Subtleties, the Aware." Subtlety is
all-pervading. All entities are plugged into life through the subtle
forces of the Creator. The ordinary electrical machine must be plugged
into a physical outlet, but Allah's outlet is the entirety of space on
earth. As man moves he is spontaneously plugged into the Source. How can
one deny the existence of the Creator and that everyone is under His
mercy? Allah holds the knowledge and the power of deciding who will
remain plugged into the life-support system and whose body is to go back
to the worms.

This life is like a laboratory in which the Creator tests the fidelity
of His creations. He experiments with them, allowing them to
trans­gress, and gives them the chance to correct themselves. Having
made a mess of their lives, they are allowed to wash themselves
completely clear of their actions.

Many ahadith (plural of hadith, tradition) refer to certain acts of
worship, such as ,hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca), which, if performed
correctly, are like a rebirth. The prayers of the Muslim, if done
correctly, make the worshipper emerge refreshed and renewed. None of the
negativeness of his past affects him, and all his experiences, the
wisdom of a lifetime, are at his disposal.

15 He it is Who made the earth smooth for you; therefore go about in
the spacious sides thereof, and eat of His sustenance, and to Him is the
return after death.

16 Are you secure of those in the heaven that He should not make the
earth to swallow you up? Then lo! it shall be in a state of com­
motion.

17 Or are you secure of those in the heaven that He should not send
down upon you a punishment? Then shall you know how was My warning.

18 And certainly those before them rejected (the truth), then how was
My disapproval.

In order for man to have the opportunity to express and experi­ence his
faith and sincerity, the earth has been made dhalul (smooth, gentle,
easy); upon it he seeks wisdom and rizq (provision, sustenance, divine
blessing).

"To Him is the return after death." Nushur (Resurrec­tion) comes from
nashara, to announce, spread out, make known and to resurrect, return
from the death. Nashur is a publisher. Allah is the supreme publisher,
making known His creation. The earth, with its massive mountains, has
been made low and submis­sive.

Allah has made the earth smooth so as to be accessible for man to tread
upon, indicating the ease that may come from what appears to be
difficulty. Manakib are the shoulders, flanks or highlands; they are
what are difficult to tread upon. But Allah has made man able to travel
upon the earth's \`shoulders.' It is an encouragement for man to seek
the means to glorify Allah, seeking provision wherever it may easily
come forth in this spacious and varied land.

How can one be secure from He Who is in the heavens and is the King of
all? There is no certainty that the earth will remain still and not
suffer an earthquake. Can one be certain of the earth's solidity? The
mu'min is in perpetual awareness, knowing that if he allows himself to
think that he is secure from change, he is lost. He trusts that Allah
will guide him through the approaching changes and afflictions. Allah
says elsewhere in the Qur'an: fa-la ya'manu makra-llahi
illa-l-qawmu­l-khasirun: "But none of those feels secure from Allah's
plan except the people who shall perish." (al- A raf::99).

The earth is Allah's laboratory, in which man's attainment is meas­ured
according to his commitment to service. It would be unfair if man were
suddenly exposed to knowledges that he was not ready to receive. It
would be shattering and unnatural. Therefore, there is greater
responsibility with additional knowledge.

The relationship of knowledge, responsibility, and Allah, the Giver of
knowledge, may be likened to the relationship of the father to his son.
The father out of love for his son, measures the degree of his
willingness to take on responsibility by testing him. He does not wish
to afflict the boy, but recognizes that the more one knows the more one
is burdened.

For example, being aware of the afflictions of others calls for one to
help alleviate them. If, while being tested, one stands one's ground
with faith and trust, one will be given additional faith, trust, and
freedom. A bird tests its young to see whether or not it can fly from
its nest. The mother does not immediately push the chick over the edge,
but nudges it, encouraging it to use its wings until they grow in
strength. The young bird realizes that it is free as it leaps out of the
nest and into the air.

Man is, in reality, free of other than Allah. Allah is unlimited, so
man is free beyond limit, but he does not know this because he has not
used the wings of iman (faith, trust) and complete depend­ence upon
Allah.

The uncertainty of events stimulates us to reflect in order to be in
true abandonment - aware and alive in the now, second by second. In His
love for man, Allah tightens His rope upon him for a moment. The rope
reminds him of Allah at that instant, but Allah is present all the time.
If man is a deserving slave, if he admits to the nobility of his
Creator, then he is a noble creation.

A noble horse does not have to constantly be pulled and hit on the
head, it spontaneously knows that it has a master. Likewise, if man is
jolted every now and then it is because he has gone off course - that is
the proof of the love of the One Who holds the reins.

One can never be sure to which network of laws one is subjecting
oneself. It is man, by his actions and intentions, who unifies himself
with a certain set of laws. If his actions are honest and sincere,
emanat­ing from a pure source, then he is in a river whose end product
and destiny is quite clear. On the other hand, because of man's
situation and the degree of his kufr (denial) and unconnected ness, he
will be brought into a stream in which he will see an increasing amount
of disjointedness and be subjected to an increasing amount of
shattering.

The individual's journey in this life is like being in a hovercraft
that is skimming across hundreds of different rivers, which are the laws
of destiny. The passenger, according to his intention, puts his foot
into one river or another. The choice is his. If out of ignorance he
puts his foot into a river of filth and danger, then all that he can do
is to pull it out, climb back into his vehicle, and move on to the next
river. These laws, these rivers, govern destiny. It is up to the
individual to end up in the river that gives him smooth passage and
genuinely reflects the truth of the Merciful behind it.

19 Have they not seen the birds above them expanding (their wings) and
contracting (them)? What is it that withholds them save the Beneficent
God? Surely He sees everything.

20 Or who is it that will be a host for you to assist you besides the
Beneficent God? The unbelievers are only in deception.

21 Or who is it that will give you sustenance if He should withhold His
sustenance? Nay! they persist in disdain and aversion.

Reflect upon what is above us in the form of birds. Nothing holds them
up. The explanations given for this natural phenomenon are simply that,
explanations; they are not the truth. Man tries to explain the flight of
bird and airplane with a narrow band of counter-balanced mathematical
forces. Tons of steel are in the airplane - how does it fly?

How does it hang in the air? A steel ship floats upon water - what do
these phenomena mean? Allah manifests Reality in this existence in
wondrous ways. Nothing holds the bird up except the mercy of Allah. The
mercy of Allah allows us to see all these strange events.

All help comes from the one stream of Mercy. If man imagines that it
comes from other than Him it is because he sees himself. It is ghurur
(deception), arrogance which leads to deception, self-conceit and being
cut off from tawhid (divine unity). The kafir (denier) who denies
Allah's mercy is cut off from seeing the manifestation of tawhid in the
perfection of the laws that govern existence.

From where does man's rizq, his provision, come? How is the recycling
ecological continuum maintained? Because man is not in submission, his
knowledge of creation is perverted. He only has limited knowledge which
can only bring about momentary relief; this is arrogance. It cannot
provide the fundamentally sound, inner understanding which can connect
to the outer understanding. The knowledge of the One comes from within;
it is the knowledge of the entire system.


