Supplement 2
============

22 What! is he who goes prone upon his face better guided or he who
walks upright upon a straight path?

Mukibb (prostrated, dedicated) is from kabba, to prostrate. Imam. Rida,
\`alayhi-s-salam, upon him be peace, when asked who were the people who
had fallen flat on their faces, replied that they were those who did not
obey the Prophet's injuction to follow 'Ali, \`alayhi-s-salam. Those who
refused to follow 'Ali, \`alayhi-s-saham, started to interpret for
themselves. They assumed the belief that no wasiy (successor, deputy)
had been nominated by the Prophet, salla-llahu 'alayhi wa alihi wa
sallam.

How could such a wise being as the Prophet, salla-llahu 'alayhi wa
alihi wa sallam, leave his people without appointing an appropriate man,
who would bring about the full fruition of the gifts of Qur'an? No
Muslim denies what the Prophet, salla-llahu 'alayhi wa alihi wa sallam,
said about the Ahl al-Bayt (family of the Prophet).

Why do they not follow what is in the Qur'an and the sunny (sayings and
doings of the Prophet)? Human beings wish to bring something of
themselves into whatever they are given. When one is given a perfect
recipe, there is the arrogance in one that desires to add some other
ingredient. Unknowingly it may be poisonous to the liver.

There must be no interpretations; any interpretation will be a
misinterpretation. The true slave is he who follows blindly and through
his blindfold visualizes the light of his guidance. This is what gives
yaqin, certainty. Otherwise, it is the fear of discovering that gives
apparent strength.

The simple darkness of the blindfold makes some people ada­mant; that
is not certainty. It may appear that they are very sure, but it is like
the certainty of a despot compared to the certainty of the man of true
iman and abandonment. The despot is sure of himself, but there is a
point at which he cracks. The mu'min (believer) never cracks; if the
afflictions increase he is increased in strength.

When people turn away from him, he turns to Allah - that is from where
real strength is derived. He who has abandoned into the true message and
follows it diligently is on the clear path. He who has not is like one
who has fallen upon his face.

There are degrees of iman. The ultimate iman is abandonment into
Reality with knowledge - that is perfect harmony. As for those who have
fallen upon themselves, they are Muslims who are misguided, muininun
whose iman is incomplete or kuffar (plural of kafir, denier) who are in
utter denial. These constitute fodder for the fire.

23 Say: He it is Who brought you into being and made for you the ears
and the eyes and the hearts: little is it that you give thanks.

Qul, say, implies to witness, recognize and see the Creator. See how
you have come about from the best of sources, the highest Source. See
yourself, see how you hear and see. Reflect upon your heart, reflect
upon your own situation. Then you will profess, confess and know that
you have been created in the best form, in the highest form.

It will bring gratitude, which will bring contentment, which in turn
will bring greater sight and insight. Qul huwa-llahu ahad, "Say that
Allah is One." (al- ikhlas:1). What is said often enough becomes what is
meant and what is meant becomes what is said; then the created being
sees only the One. By saying it he embraces tawhid.

"Little is it that you give thanks." Diving into the depths of the aya
yields greater comprehension of its inner meanings. By increasing one's
contentment and gratitude, one is able to gain insight into one's
creation and therefore into the Creator, Whose attributes are contained
in His creation.

24 Say: He it is Who scattered you on the earth and to Him you shall be
gathered.

25 And they say: When shall this threat be (executed) if you are
truthful?

26 Say: The knowledge (thereof) is only with Allah and 1 am only a
plain warner.

27 But when they shall see it nigh, the faces of those who disbelieve
shall be sorry, and it shall be said: This is that which you used to
call for.

Dhara means to scatter, disperse. Its related root of Dharra yields the
Arabic words for atom (the smallest unit of anything) and offspring. For
every action there is a reaction, for every scattering there is a
gathering. Man has been scattered here in order to see the meaning of
his existence, his reality, and his Source, to Which he will be gathered
again.

Those who are not in the state of submission - who are not in an inner
state of contentment, gratitude and therefore tawhid, and who do not see
themselves as inseparable from Reality - see nothing other than discord;
they are in kufr. They ask when the promise of oneness will come to
pass. If you are truthful, when will the promise of akhira (hereafter)
be fulfilled? A man in doubt is constantly searching and asking for
proof. The answer to the people of doubt emanates from the iman in one's
heart - the heart has seen what is not and therefore dwells upon that
which is.

The knowledge of the Unseen -the next world and the day of reckoning -
is with Allah. Only a warning can be given to those who deny. The aya
explains to those who ask about time that Allah is beyond time. Time
exists so that man may take notice, pause, and reflect on what is behind
it.

Warn them that to persist in questioning only increases doubt. It will
sink them deeper into the quicksand which they believe to be the solid
ground upon which they rely. The system of kufr perpetuates the illusion
of its own firmness. In reality it has no foundation; it follows its
wahm (fancy, delusion), causing the seeker to seek in the wrong
direction. His search leads him away from answers towards false hopes
and despair. Man takes refuge in the bubble of kufr. One strategic prick
will burst it and cause both his own collapse and that of the system of
kufr.

When the next life comes, those who formerly were in denial will wear
an expression of contrition upon their faces. They will be in a dreadful
state, having come face to face with that which they denied. They are
told that this is what you were promised - you will be what you have
earned. They have earned this state through their actions, which are
backed by their intentions.

In a tradition of the Ahl ul-Bayt, it is said that this aya refers to
some of the companions of the Prophet, salla-llahu \`alayhi wa alihi wa
sallam, who, upon seeing that 'Ali, \`alayhi­s-salam, was so close to
the Prophet, were exceedingly jealous.

28 Say: Have you considered if Allah should destroy me and those with
me - rather He will have mercy on us; yet who will protect the
unbelievers from a painful punishment?

Reality will cause everyone to perish. One must see that Allah's mercy
and protection fall over everyone, whether mu'min or kafir. "Who will
protect the unbelievers?" Yujiru is from ajara , which means to
protector to aid someone. Jar means neighbor; the word implies mercy and
compassion. The rahma of Allah covers even he who denies at the moment
of his denial. But whatever has a beginning has an end. A father's love
for his son continues until he dies.

The father has a contract with his son to be patient with him in every
situation. But after the father dies, an uncle may take his place and
treat the son roughly and impatiently. Everyone is given constant
protection until he is woken up, whereupon there is regret for having
left behind the remains of nothing but a misurable and misguided life.
Allah has given everyone a respite, ila ajalan musamma, until an
appointed time.

The Rahmin covers all beings with His beneficence and mercy.
Understanding the rahma of Allah is attained by experiencing it whilst
depending upon it.

29 Say: He is the Beneficent God, we believe in Him and on Him do we
rely, so you shall come to know who it is that is in clear error.

30 Say: have you considered if your water should go down, who is it
then that will bring you flowing water?

"So you shall come to know who it is that is in clear error." A time
comes to the Prophet, salla-llahu alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, and to men
of knowledge when there is nothing left to say. Having used \`aql and
heart in every way possible to cause an awaken­ing to occur, he can only
say: You shall come to know.

Ghawr is a depression in the ground, from ghara, to sink in, become
hollow, seep away. If your water is lost, there can be no sustenance.
All beings depend upon water for their lives. The Qur'an says that all
life is based upon water and that the throne - the \`arsh, the
foundation of creation - is afloat upon water.

If there were no rock under the soil, only sand descending for miles,
water would enter the earth and disappear. If all water is lost who will
bring the flowing water? From where will it come? One's inner life is
such that whenever there is arrogance, knowledge enters the question­ing
being like water and permeates down through an endlessly deep hole.

The state of being at a loss does not allow one to begin to reflect.
Self-knowledge, the water that springs from the well of knowledge, does
not stay; it passes on through and disappears into one's cave. The
ghawr, the depression, is related in meaning to nafaq, under­ground
tunnel. No matter how much knowledge you pour on the mun­afiq, the
hypocrite, it will never take root because he always shakes it off, like
a person who repeatedly escapes through tunnels. It is Allah's business
to give water, to give sustenance, love, mercy; if there is reflection,
then knowledge will remain.

The entire creation is the kingdom of the one and only King Whose
attributes are known, Whose love is all-encompassing, Whose presence is
beyond time, before time, in time and after time. One is able to
initiate the growth of knowledge by momentarily stopping one's
hypo­crisy and lack of confidence and by admitting that one has nothing.
If you have anything, it is by permission of He Who has created you.

Allah has placed man on earth as a guardian, and that guardianship
comes with responsibility, the responsibility of acknowledging his debt
at all times to the merciful King of creation.


