Sura 1 : Surat Ul-ankabut (the Spider)
======================================

**Introduction**

Whoever professes, confesses, or witnesses the one Creator of creation
in all its diversity will undergo the strengthening process of
affliction. Duality and association with the one Creator will gradually
be worn away from him. In Arabic, the verb to afflict also means to
become old and worn.

Some of the early Muslims in Mecca could not withstand the pressure
exerted upon them to return to the convenience of old habits. This sura
historically reflects that situation in Mecca. The name of the sura
refers to the flimsy, insecure home or structure on which we tend to
depend, like the spider's web. The only structure which is
inde­structible is based on the knowledge of God and His laws that
govern existence.

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

1 Alif Lam Mim.

2 Do men think that they will be left alone on saying, we believe, and
not be tried?

3 And certainly We tried those before them, so Allah will certainly
know those who are true and He will certainly know the liars.

There is a purpose in creation, a visible, subtle, and deep purpose,
which is to discover the meaning of existence. However, man must trust
in Allah in order to fully commit himself to the quest. No matter how
hard man may try to reckon and calculate the purpose of this existence,
he will not succeed without iman (trust); which has its root in the
heart. Deflection from this ultimate source will only result in fitna,
which is trial, affliction and discord.

Fitna implies superficial trial or affliction. It is a plot, that seems
charming and captivating; but a plot can be easily discovered - it is
not substantial. A fatin is a woman who decorates herself to attract a
man, hiding what may be a most dreadful character. No matter how man
reckons or calculates, he will be afflicted in a superficial way so that
his Imam his trust, becomes more real and certain of the absolute and
not of the relative.

Trust begins in the outward and existential but leads to the inward.
There is no separation of the deep inner reality and the outer reality
because they are a continuum. There is no end to Reality. It is only for
the sake of illustration that we talk about the outer and the inner.

Fitna is derived from the verb fatana which amongst other things, means
to prove. Dinar maftun is a gold coin that has been tested and proven to
be true gold. Imam Has­san, \`alayhi-s-salam ( upon him be peace),
defined fitna as that which proves man's reality, his divine origin, by
what appears to be affliction, turmoil and trouble. Divine mercy puts
man through processes that appear to be undesirable and troublesome,
showing man that he has no power over anything. Man has, in fact, no
claim over anything except the witnessing and the recognition of the one
and Only - La ilaha illa-llah

4 Or do they who work evil think that they will escape Us? Evil is it
that they judge!

5 Whoever hopes to meet Allah, the term of Allah will then most surely
come; and He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

6 And whoever strives hard, he strives only for himself; most surely
Allah is Self-sufficient, above (need of) the worlds.

7 And (as for) those who believe and do good, We will most certainly do
away with their evil deeds and We will most certainly reward them the
best of what they did.

Man in his arrogance and cleverness thinks that he can escape from the
prescribed laws governing existence. He thinks he can cheat Allah and
imagines himself as a separate entity, which is shirk (associating
other-than-Allah with Allah). The nature of he who has complete and
utter trust is that he does not see himself; he sees only one higher
Self.

He sees himself and his actions only as an outer mani­festation of
oneness. He has absolute security, certainty, serenity and independence
by having discovered dependence on Allah. The opposite of this tawhid
(divine unity) is man's imagination that he exists alongside Allah. Full
dependence on Allah brings about inde­pendence because man becomes
independent of other-than-Allah.

Love of Reality guides and draws man towards tawhid. If he claims trust
in Reality, that claim will be put to the test. It is Allah's mercy by
which He helps man to recognize the degree of his sincerity and honesty.
The iman of the early followers of the Prophet Muham­mad, salla-llahu
alayhi wa alihi wa sallam was tested; pressure was exerted upon them by
the pre­vailing system which saw this revolutionary message as a threat
to its own survival.

Many families urged their relatives who followed Muhammad,
salla-lla\`hu alayhi wa alihi wa sallam (peace and blessings be upon him
and his family), to return to the traditional, inherited and ignorant
ways. Some had one or both of their parents threaten to take their lives
and the lives of their offspring in order to deflect them from diving
deeper into their belief.

For those who remain in iman is the promise that they will come to know
Allah and the truth of the Resurrection. The more they exert themselves
in this life, the closer they will get to this state of knowl­edge. The
mu'minun (believers) are given a clear code of conduct. By righteously
doing their utmost they will be amply re­warded.

8 And We have enjoined on man goodness to his parents, and if they
contend with you that you should associate (others) with Me, of which
you have no knowledge, do not obey them; to Me is your return, so I will
inform you of what you did.

9 And (as for) those who believe and do good, We will most surely cause
them to enter among the good.

The first thing a child witnesses is his parents. If he does not show
loyalty towards them, he cannot show loyalty in a subtler way towards
Allah. A child's rebellion against his parents is a rebellion against
all those who have physical power over him and sustain him. If a child
is rebellious against his parents, he is likely to be rebellious against
anything.

The parents may be, from a spiritual point of view, mis­guided, but the
child can only be qualified to reflect upon or witness that when his own
self-guidance begins to emerge. Irrespective of anything, the child
should have compassion for them.

Under all circumstances, a person is advised to be respectful to his
parents. It does not mean he is to be under their domination, but when
their names are mentioned, he should ask for their forgiveness. After
all, they were the means by which he had come about. Regardless of
whether one is good or bad one still has the mercy of the Creator upon
him. Allah is the invisible origin from which man has come forth through
his parents.

There are various degrees of iman. A true mu'min regards every­thing
that happens to him as his destiny. It must be, for it has occurred and
is itself the proof of its truth and reality. It has occurred not out of
a whim but from Reality. A mu'min takes knowledge from everything,
whether it appears to be good or bad. If he has not identified himself
with a specific, fixed viewpoint, he will derive knowledge and benefit
from affliction.

10 And among men is he who says: We believe in Allah; but when he is
persecuted in (the way of) Allah he thinks the persecution of men to be
as the chastisement of Allah; and if there come assistance from your
lord, they would most certainly say: Surely we were with you. What! is
not Allah the best knower of what is in the breasts of mankind.

11 And most certainly Allah will know those who believe, and most
certainly He will know the hypocrites.

The aspect most difficult for the nafs (lower self) to witness is
hypocrisy. Most actions are justified in a hypocritical way. A man may
say he is working fi sabili-llah (in the way of Allah), but may actually
want to gain a high reputation, or become the imam of a community or the
leader of a country. If his actions are for Allah's sake the
afflic­tions from people will drive him more towards the source, into
his innermost, into dependence upon Reality. The people themselves are
not in awareness but they are nonetheless a reflection of Reality to the
mu'min.

Because that reflection may not be seen clearly, those who are weak in
their trust and do not derive wisdom and spiritual growth from events,
may read afflictions brought about by the wrongdoings of man as being
signs that Allah is punishing them, that Allah is not rewarding them for
being on the path of iman. The weak at heart look for signs in order to
weaken themselves further.

The man of discrimination simply dismisses such occurrences as men's
injustices. It is an imposition, a natural occurrence which strengthens
those who are strong at heart, strong in iman, and weakens those who are
weak at heart. It is nature's way of sifting out those without wisdom.

12 And those who disbelieve say to those who believe: Follow our path
and we will bear your wrongs. And never shall they be the bearers of any
of their wrongs; most surely they are liars.

13 And most certainly they shall carry their own burdens, and other
burdens with their own burdens, and most certainly they shall be
questioned on the resurrection day as to what they forged.

The early people, when their iman was weak, when other people were
causing them trouble, wanted to give up their belief in the Prophet
Muhammad, salla-llahu alayhi wa alihi wa sallam. They claimed that Allah
was sending them messages in the form of afflictions, indicating that
they should take the path of least resistance.

But it was the path of expediency that they wanted to follow, and
therefore, in time would become the more difficult path. Afflictions are
the test of nature upon man. Those who turned away from the right path
lacked discrimination and 'iman. They read into the signs the most
obvious meanings, without considering the direction in which they were
being led.

What occurred at the dawn of Islam is repeated- at all times. It is man
who reads loss into afflictions. This has nothing to do with Real­ity. A
sign is sent by Allah in order that the mu'min recognizes that the
others are wrongly guided. Man reads into signs what he wishes according
to the strength of his iman and the purity of his intention.

Allah says: "My mercy encompasses everything." Man must try to see it.
The law is there, written; it is up to him to penetrate into the
sub­tleties of how that law operates at all times, under all
circumstances, everywhere and for everyone. Allah's mercy is
instantaneous and the degree of its being seen, felt and tasted is the
degree of the sincerity of one's iman.

14 And certainly We sent N'uh to his people, so he remained among them
a thousand years save fifty years. And the deluge overtook them, while
they were unjust.

15 So We delivered him and the inmates of the ark, and made it a sign
to the nations.

The Prophet, salla-llahu alayhi wa blihi wa sallam, said: "My ex­ample
and the example of the close and selected members of my family is like
the ship of Nuh (Noah): he who rides in it will be safe, but he who does
not will flounder."

If man takes on the conduct of the Prophet and his family, car­rying a
passport issued from their way, he will move safely from one port to
another. He will pass from the port of mortality to the port of
immortality. If he does not, he will flounder and at best be confused.
That is the state of the majority of people whether or not they call
themselves Muslims.

They do not hold to His rope. The Qur'an says very clearly: Those of
you that want to follow Allah and know Him, follow the Prophet, follow
what he stood for and what he reflected. Follow in the footsteps of
those who came after him. A hadith (tradition, saying) says: "Men of
knowledge are the heirs of the prophets." What is there to inherit from
a prophet but his knowledge and its application in one's life?

In existence everything we witness is based on duality, such as life
and death, guidance and misguidance, leading and being led. Man
experiences opposites simultaneously. He loves and hates simultaneously.
If a man loves truth, justice compassion and generosity, then he is
bound to hate injustice, tyranny and meanness.

By understanding and actually experiencing this concept man can guide
his actions toward the higher opposites so that they emanate from the
opposites that are closer to the attributes of Reality. He recognizes
that he has travelled a great distance from the lower tendencies toward
the higher tendencies. He has left fear and insecurity and approaches
positiveness, secure in the knowledge that he will come to know and be
able to improve the quality of life around him.

16 And (We sent) Ibrahim, when he said to his people: Serve Allah and
be careful of (your duty to) Him; this is best for you, if you did but
know.

17 You only worship idols besides Allah and you create a lie; surely
they whom you serve besides Allah do not control for you any sustenance,
therefore seek the sustenance from Allah and serve Him and be grateful
to Him; to Him you shall be brought back.

18 And if you reject (the truth), nations before you did indeed reject
(the truth); and nothing is incumbent on the apostle but a clear
delivering (of the message).

Follow those who possess 'ulu ul- amr, those who possess that command
by idhn (permission), hold the order in their hands and can interpret
it. The order of Allah is the way of Allah, which is the recognition of
the truth and reality that comes by abandonment and submission into the
one and only Reality. Outer order and command brings about physical
order. The order of Allah is in the purpose of His creation which is
that His highest creation, man, should come to know His will as it
manifests in His laws which govern existence.

Man stumbles on in his life with the purpose of knowing the laws that
govern right and wrong action. Affliction and turmoil are only the
natural means for man to come to know the boundaries so that he does not
transgress them, so that he knows .at what point he is be­ginning to
cause himself harm. The ulu ul amr are the people who know the order of
affairs, who have wisdom and the innate, innermost knowledge that there
is only Reality and that It manifests in every man and form. Taking on
their knowledge is bound to lead one to suc­cess and not to self-harm.

Man has no control over what he may inherit. It may be that a people
must pay back a debt accumulated by those who came earlier. If a man has
abused his land, his children will start off with a handi­cap which they
can do nothing about except seek to overcome it over a period of time.
That again is the Reality. If they had knowledge, they would recognize
their difficult situation and make allowances for it and not be
disappointed.

Ulu' ul- amr is often misunderstood. Tyrants throughout the history of
Islam, acting selfishly and despotically, simply interpreted it as
\`those who are in power'. It is generally recognized that those who are
in power do not deserve to be. They do not represent the highest in
man.

According to the true followers of the Muhammadi light, as exemplified
by the holy Ahl ul-Bayt ( the Prophet's family) and illustrated amply by
Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, alayhi-s-salam, the ulu ul amr are those who
deserve to be leading us to the knowl­edge of Allah. They have gained
authority first and foremost over their lower tendencies and have
knowledge that can lead others to ultimate bliss, in this life, by
correct conduct, working and living in a manner that befits man, the
highest of creation.

People who have often strayed off the true path use taqiyya
(dissimulation of one's religion) to excuse themselves from jihad
(utmost exertion in the cause of righteousness) or from exercising
energy and doing their utmost as part of the will of Reality. Everything
is evolving towards the higher. Man must also reflect that by doing his
utmost to change circumstances that are wrong and cast dark shadows of
ignorance.

Life is based upon dynamic movement. It echoes the meaning of
samadiyya, foreverness. Perpetuity manifests from within us. Often man
is fearful of dynamic movement, but he is much better off guard­ing
against downward movement within himself and his conscience. A man of
taqwa (fearful awareness) fears only Allah while showing complete
fearlessness in his actions. Yet he is not disrespectful nor does he
promote chaos. Everything has its boundary and its adab ( courtesy).

19 Do they not see how Allah originates the creation, then reproduces
it? Surely that is easy to Allah.

Creation follows the cycle of beginning, maturing, ending and then
recreating. Recreation is the reflection of creation in the timeless
zone. The brief flicker of creation is a hint of the state of being
frozen in absolute non-time in the next life.

Man loves the \`beyond time.' He cannot do without sleep which is the
nearest he can taste of timelessness in this life. Some people have had
the opportunity of a near fatal accident and have experienced a
similitude of death. Also, in the state of dhikr (remembrance), in what
the sufis call fana' (self-obliteration), there is a death of meaning.

Life is a cycle of creation and recreation. As this creation came and
went, so will another creation begin with a resurrection (ba'th). As man
rose into wakefulness, so will another form of rising occur in a purer
energy form without the physical matter which belongs to this little
speck called earth.


