Supplement 2
============

43 And (as for) these parables, We set them forth for men, and none
understand them but the learned.

The further one moves along the path, the greater are the afflic­tions
that come from the outside. It is the sunna (way) of Allah. The purpose
of afflictions is to make man dependent only on Allah and to thereby
increase his knowledge. In a sense, Allah is the most jealous. He does
not want man, even occasionally, to think that he is benefitting or
depending upon anybody else. Yet the courtesy is to thank one who is the
vehicle of help, knowing that at any moment he may become his enemy.

This is the state of the arif (one who knows Allah). This is the true
inner meaning of one's din. All the outer practices are a preparation
for inner sight. When the inner sight is correctly set, the outer
practices become the reflection of correctness. If the inner is right
then the outer is right. If the outer is right then the inner is
right.

"And these parables . . . none understand them but the learned." They
seek to see Allah behind everything. Whenever something mani­fests they
want to know its root, they want to see its cause and not to be taken by
its effect. For example, if a dear friend turns out to be your enemy,
can you be immediately grateful or not?

Think of how merciful Allah is that He has caused you to discover this
new enemy now, rather than ten years from now. But if you have
considered the friendship as a house of \`ankabut (spider), as an abode
of safety, then the discovery tears you. As a positive human being you
admit your error, otherwise the ankabut is better than you, because it
goes on without looking back and builds another place of safety while
you continue to establish friendships with wounds and negative
mem­ories.

The laws of Reality are to be lived by and made into a life pattern,
not simply to be talked or written about. Submission is only meaning­ful
for the people of submission, not for those who talk about it. Islam is
for those who are in the dar (house) of Islam, not for those who study
it. If he allows himself - if he is alim (knowing, wise), if he is
acquiring knowledge, man can fit into the pattern of submission because
its essence is within him.

44 Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth; most surely
there is a sign in this for the believers.

"Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth." There is a sign
in every creational entity. Every breath is a stepping stone along the
path of knowledge. Everywhere one looks there is a sign from which to
learn.

45 Recite that which has been revealed to you of the Book and keep up
prayer; surely prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and evil, and
certainly the remembrance of Allah is the greatest, and Allah knows what
you do.

"Recite (read) that which has been revealed to you of the Book."

The command applies to all who follow in the Prophet's footsteps; take
what comes to you of knowledge and apply it so that it becomes
internalized, then move towards Allah. If one tries to take more than
one step at a time one is likely to fall. Missing a step on the path is
always a weakness. The seeker should move with what is in front of him
in the belief that it is the best for him. Then he will benefit from the
step or the state and his movement will be as fast as his sureness and
absorption. Prayers are a proof and an acknowledgement of glorifi­cation
and gratitude to this magnificent gift from the Creator.

"And certainly the remembrance of Allah is the greatest." What­ever
state man is in, he punctuates it with Allahu akbar (God is most great).
He may be in absolute exultation of Reality when he is in ruku\` bowing
in prostration) saying, subhana rabbi-l-\`azimi Wa bihamdih, seeing
beyond his frailty and forgetfulness the magnificence of the Creator
through His creation; but when he stands up he says, Allahu akbar.

There is always Allahu akbar. No matter what openings man has, Allahu
akbar. Allah is greater than what you imagine. No matter what knowledges
come to man, Allahu akbar, because it is still only within Allah's ocean
of knowledge. Allah's remembrance of man is greater than man's
remembrance of Him and Allah's remembrance of the believer is greater
than the believer's remembrance of Allah - Allahu akbor.

46 And do not dispute with the followers of the Book except by what is
best except those of them who act unjustly. And say: We believe in that
which has been revealed to us and revealed to you, and our God and your
God is One, and to Him do we submit.

This is enjoined upon the Muslims not to argue or discuss with the
people who have had a book revealed to them, such as the Christians or
the Jews. The Prophet, salla-llahu 'alayhi wa alihi wa sallam,
recommended that his followers neither confirm nor deny what they say
be­ cause his message, the Qur'an, would eventually become evident and
supercede the knowledge of the Christians and Jews.

An example of this is the simple case of the stoning of the
adultererwhich was enjoined by the Prophet lbrahim, \`alayhi-s-salam,
and recon­firmed by the Prophet Musa, \`alayhi-s-salam, and then by the
Prophet \`Isa, alayhi-s-salam. But in the traditions of questionable
authenticity that have been handed down to the Christians, the Prophet
\`Tsa, alayhi­-solam, dismissed the adulteress who was brought to him by
witnesses. He asked them: Which one of you is righteous and has no sin?
When none of them could answer, he dismissed the woman. \`Isa's
criterion for freeing the woman was not complete.

The Prophet, salla-llahu 'alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, clearly
estab­lished the law that there is a need for four sinless, righteous
men to have actually observed the act. Recognizing the law transmitted
by Muhammad, salla-llahu 'alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, as the perfect law,
there is no question of discussion or argument. The Muslim follows what
he regards to be the ultimate and perfect law. All that he can do is to
say that his Lord and their Lord are one. Diving into the ocean of
tawhid, he hopes that they will recognize the perfection of the path of
submission.

A book is not necessarily contained within pages. Muslims and seekers
must not judge against other paths which do not have one visible book or
one visible prophet. A book means a way of conduct.

From this point of view the Buddhists may be considered people of the
book, (ahl al-kitab). A book reveals the nature of Reality and indicates
the way towards understanding it. Many cultures of the world have a
book, such as the people of China and India. The Christians and Jews are
mentioned in the Qur'an while the Buddhists and Taoists are not, because
the former were there at the time and in the region in which the Qur'an
was revealed.

The correct behavior towards the people who believe or have had a
message from a Prophet is that one should discuss things with them in
the best possible way. There are no differences in what the Prophet
Muhammad, salla-llahu 'alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, brought and what the
other Prophets brought before him. The message is one but it may be
distorted or ignored.

The Qur'an says to tell the people who follow other religions, other
books, that all the paths are but one path. There has been only one path
and that is the path of Islam, which is unquestioning sub­mission. By
questioning, one cannot get to the source of the question; one remains
at the level of hearing the question and decoding its outer
manifestation.

47 And thus have We revealed the Book to you. So those whom We have
given the Book believe in it, and of these there are those who believe
in it, and none deny Our communications except the unbelievers.

The first stage of getting the book is physically receiving the message
through the ears. Today getting the book is taking out some thing called
a book from a library, getting an outer appearance, an outward message.
Man will not get it unless its seed or essence is within him. He will
acknowledge an outer experience only if he has the faculty and the
ability to comprehend it inwardly. If the ability is not there, no
matter what sound is made outside, it will not make an impact on him. If
the essence is not within his conscious faculties, the Book or any book
for that matter, will not make sense to him. He must unify with the
message.

Those who have been given the book are those who have received the
message and understood it. They have unified the outward message or
teaching with their inner reflection and awakening. Their belief cannot
be taken away from them. An outer sound has connected to an inner
resonance. An outer message has connected with an inner call that had
been dormant. The outer message activated the inner light and made it
obvious to them. It was Allah's gift to their fitra (innate nature); it
was in their genes.

Once man comprehends the message of tawhid, he sees the one connecting
factor in everything and it ends his confusion. Thereafter he will
always connect the cause and the effect of events. He will have
contentment because he perceives meaning in events. The seeker who has
had a taste or a glimpse of the fact that that which he sees outside of
him is also inside him, is helped until he discovers this phenomenon in
every aspect of existence. He becomes more confirmed in the science of
tawhid and thereby moves closer to the real awakening in his heart.

The majority of people who say that they believe in Allah and the
Prophet Muhammad, salla-llahu \`alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, are hopeful
believers. They have consciously put themselves in a situation where
real belief is likely to occur. They say: ashhadu an la ilaha illa-llah
wa ashhadu anna Muhammadan rasalu-llah.

They have accepted the hypothesis. The proof of it will only come when
belief is actually experienced. The path is about Allah and nothing
changes this. The purpose of creation is to enter into belief. Nothing
is wrong with action in the world provided it does not cause harm, but
rather leads one closer to higher knowledge.

Once one comes to know the laws that govern creation, nothing comes as
a surprise. No event is bewildering anymore because the essence of
\`peace of mind', that is already ingrained in man, has been brought to
consciousness. Man does not like to be disturbed unneces­sarily or
unjustly. The natural laws themselves are, in fact, a continuum 'of
action and reaction. They are one ripple after another, one cause
leading to another effect.

The nature of this world is to be in upheaval, and if you do not
recognize the basis upon which the final revelation to mankind
de­scended in its complete form, you will be in continual upheaval. The
nature of Reality that is beaming within man makes him desire to be
timeless, eternal, forever-living, ever-sustaining, ever-independent.

These are attributes of God. If he acts according to his capacity, why
should he be afflicted with upheaval? The nature of dunya (world in a
negative material sense) is to repeatedly be torn like the house of the
spider. There is no end to the dynamic rise and fall of the move­ment of
events. No bird has ever gone up but that it has come down. No one gains
affection but that soon he gains hatred. No one builds a house and
family but that he loses them. If he does not lose them during his life,
he will lose them at his death - this is the cycle. Man has come to die.
Experiencing death in the now is the final and absolute confirmation of
the message of submission. If man submits to it totally, he finds
nothing wrong with the secondary reality or that which has come from
Reality.

If man does not submit, he finds anger and disappointment within
himself. It is an expression of ignorance of existence. He wants to make
the rules of this world, but because he is not God, he cannot. The din
tells him to stop his anger now because its nature is fire. One does not
simply suppress anger allowing it to manifest later. Anger is
sup­pressed in the hope that the reason for the anger will be reflected
upon.

48 And you did not recite before it any book, nor did you transcribe
one with your right hand, for then could those who say un­true things
have doubted.

The Prophet, salla-llahu \`alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, did not copy
anything. He could not physically read that which came before through
other prophets. He was an orphaned desert boy who, early on in his life,
had cared for his own existential needs. But he was endowed with
discrimination and soon realized that the ways to knowledge existing
around him were actually ways of transgression and loss, so he avoided
them. Then, through the purest of hearts, the tree of knowledge bore
fruit within him and gave provision to everyone around him. Out­wardly,
he did not have access to historical information and knowledge that came
before him, but in his breast he had the heart of a man of knowledge
able to contain the final glorious message to mankind.

Following the Prophet, salla-llahu alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, is the
path of Islam. It is a pure, easy and direct path, if one does not
complicate it by intellectualizing. If one claims to follow in the
Prophet's footsteps then it is up to him to cleanse his breast of debris
and make it available to receive that which it is fit for, the root of
which is al­ready there in its fitra.

Guidance does not come from outside. Allah permeates everything: He is
Muhit (the All-Encompassing). Anything in man's breast which he
considers important, is an idol, and clearing it from the heart
facilitates the growth of original, innate knowledge.

49 Nay! these are clear communications in the breasts of those who are
granted knowledge; and none deny Our communications except the unjust.

50 And they say: Why are not signs sent down upon him from his Lord?
Say: The signs are only with Allah, and I am only a plain warner.

The message of Reality is clear in the heart of those who are granted
knowledge. Everyone has the potential of being granted this knowledge.
But the potential has to be cultivated like a seed. The seed of
ignorance is easily nourished because the lower nature of man is to be
at a loss - inna-l-insana lafi khusr "surely man is at a loss." To know
how to nourish the seed of knowl­edge so that it grows is the purpose of
existence. And it comes to man spontaneously by his willingness to
dissociate from other-than­ Allah.

51 Is it not enough for them that We have revealed to you the Book
which is recited to them? Most surely there is mercy in this and a
reminder for a people who believe.

"Is it not enough for them that We have revealed to you the Book?" It
is as though man has evolved to such a point that he does not need
miraculous outer events to shake him out of his lethargy in order to
listen to the one and only message. The Prophet had one tool, one
miracle. He could talk of Reality and be understood by everyone. Other
prophets came with visible openings to jolt men out of their lethargy.
It was relatively clumsy but easily understood.

The miracle of Islam was that the Prophet could talk about the nature
of Reality in all its aspects through his own voice which was like that
of other men, bringing about a measure of familiarity and contentment to
those around him. Merely seeing somebody like them­selves living
according to the revelation gave them great encouragement.

That is the supreme miracle of Islam. The Prophet, salla-llahu \`alayhi
wa alihi wa sallam, some of the sahaba and the Ahl ul-Bayt had the power
to perform miracles, but this was not emphasized. It was not what the
Prophet came with. The message of tawhid was used as the spearhead of
attack against the nafs and ignorance.

The one who has knowledge of the message of the Qur'an uses it like a
doctor uses his knowledge, giving it to everyone who needs a cure or who
is able to take it to another village to cure other people. There is
also specialized knowledge for individualized treatment. When the doctor
sees that a patient's heart is jammed and unable to move, he must, by
the grace of Allah, produce a miracle.

The miracle of miracles is to demonstrate to the patient tawhid, the
oneness behind multiplicity. The followers in the footsteps of the
Prophet, the Imams, awliya, and salihun (doers of good), may have
appeared to perform miracles, but it was for their patients. These
manifestations were odd phenomena and are not to be dwelled upon.

52 Say: Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you; He knows
what is in the heavens and the earth. And (as for) those who believe in
the falsehood and disbe­lieve in Allah, these it is that are the
losers.


