Supplement 3
============

For the Prophet, salla-llahu alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, and those who
believe in his message, it is enough that Allah is a witness between
them. They believe with certainty in their hearts in the
all-encompass­ing mercy of Allah and have abandoned themselves into its
ever-flowing river of light. That certainty brings about, enough joy and
contentment to suffice them.

They do not care for the doubts nor for the afflictions of others.
Those who are at a loss, who have not found the subtle way of tuning
themselves into the right path, are following a way that can only lead
to a dead end. The believer looks forward to the ultimate freedom from
the chains of this dunya. He is looking forward to the final call that
is signified by the experience of death. The person who does not have
enough certainty in his heart, clings onto what he has invested in and
what he knows of this world.

53 And they ask you to hasten on the chastise­ment; and had not a term
been appointed, the chastisement would certainly have come to them; and
most certainly it will come to them all of a sudden while they perceive
not.

54 They ask you to hasten on the chastisement, and most surely hell
encompasses the unbelievers;

55 On the day when the chastisement shall cover them from above them,
and from beneath their feet; and He will say: Taste what you did.

The ignorant ones whose hearts are set and almost dead, ask: Where are
the miracles? If bad deeds have destructive effects, where is the
chastisement? Why does it not happen now? Reward or punishment is not
necessarily immediately noticed. There could be a subtle time­ delay
factor. A man who is given to a great deal of anger and agitation may
not feel the reaction of his behavior for a few days, but eventually it
will manifest in the form of an ulcer or some other illness. It takes
time for it to set.

An example in the political arena is the faded economic glory of the
British Empire which was built upon the colonial subjugation of millions
upon millions of people. Now the effects of what they did are rebounding
on them. The reaction to the unjust and selfish treatment of their
subjects has taken decades if not centuries to show its direct effect
upon them, economically and morally.

Jahannam, the big fire, the eternal state of affliction; is already
surrounding those who are not tuning themselves to the state of imin.
One does not readily notice the fire one kindles by incorrect actions
because of one's limited perception and understanding. How­ever, on the
day of resurrection, on the day of reckoning where there is no
possibility of personal interpretations or excuses, the fire that man
has invested in during this life is so all-encompassing, that the man of
denial sees nothing other than it surrounding him on every side. In this
life man thinks he can escape it through one channel or another. On the
next level of consciousness there is absolutely no escape.

56 O My servants who believe! surely My earth is vast, therefore Me
alone should you serve.

57 Every soul must taste of death, then to Us you will be returned.

Existentially, the believer in Allah is afflicted, tested and often
opposed by his own people, as were the early adherents to the Muhammadi
message. If effectively overcoming this opposition in his homeland is
not possible, the way out of the affliction is to leave. A point is
reached in his life where he cannot bear the extent and depth of
opposition surrounding him; he reaches his limit. Then a new energy sets
in as he moves in a direction toward more conducive grounds. The whole
creation belongs to Allah.

If there is tyranny in a situation where one is not given the
oppor­tunity to live according to the path of truth and iman, then one
should search for another place of dwelling. This applies to one's
family, community and nation. It has been the practice of all the
prophets and those who follow them: seeking until one can strengthen
one's under­standing and knowledge of Reality and discovering where one
can benefit others who are striving towards the same goal.

The meaning of death is in every heart. If man were to truly,
absolutely and fearlessly submit, then it would be very easy to
experi­ence. In this creation man experiences the good and the bad, the
sour and the sweet, health and illness, and in the same way he will
experi­ence the opposite to the life-line upon which he is hanging. He
will experience death which at this moment in life is only a concept.

A similarity may be recognized in the mini-death of sleep. Final and
absolute separation of ruh (spirit) from the body will take place, and
there will be no possibility of return to the body. At the point of
death man will know that he has returned to the ultimate foundation. In
other words, he will know the meaning of thumma ilayna turjaun, "then to
us you return." He is already in Allah by Allah, but he may not
recognize it fully; he may not always spontaneously be aware of it.
Everyone will come to know that he has returned to Allah, that he is not
separate from Allah. This is an all-encompassing law, governing all
mankind. At the point of death, he will suddenly realize that he has
fallen into Allah's web, which encompasses all other webs of experiences
and creations.

For the mu'min, his return, his death, is a continuation of his life.
He has already recognized in this life that he is acting by Allah. But
the raja (return) that Allah refers to is an absolute and final one. The
man of iman takes this aya as his ultimate security when afflicted by
the wind of opposition and doubt. The mu'min's death is the beginning of
the next awakening. His capital and strength at the point of death is
what he will have invested in life, according to the purity of his
actions based on his intentions. Allah says: "Everyone will rr\*et the
face of Allah." The mu'min wants to see it now. His desire for this goal
is measured by the extent of his abandonment of actions emanating from
his selfish and lower motives.

If a man's actions in this life are not motivated by fear, anxiety,
disappointment, love or hate, then his actions are purely and simply
inspired. The reactions to those actions are not going to afflict him.

He is closer to the knowledge of Allah here and now. Ultimately, a
point comes when he experiences life and death simultaneously. From then
on, the physical death is for him, only a natural phenomenon which is
hardly of any consequence. This is what the sufis call fana' fi-llah
(obliteration of the self in Allah). It is a state of awareness that
keeps one constantly in remembrance that at any moment he may die.

Thus death and life become familiar to the one who has experi­enced
fana' fi llah. He recognizes that both emanate from one source and that
source is Allah. He goes beyond the opposites. The ordinary man who has
not tasted his death has to wait. He will also come to know that behind
the opposites is Allah and his return is to Allah - inna li-llahi wa
inna ilayhi raji\`un: "We are by Allah and to Allah we return". Man is
supported by Allah, sustained by the one and only Reality which
manifests mercy in the form of outward sustenance.

Fana is a phenomenon that is within duality. Man talks in a
discriminating capacity about something that is connected with oneness.
In oneness there is no discrimination. In the garden, Sayyidna Adam,
\`alayhi-s-salam, did not know the meaning of a lie so he did not
discern who shaytan (satan) was. He had not experienced lies because he
was the first of human creation. When shaytan spoke to him he believed
that what he heard was the truth. He did not know the opposite of truth
just as we do not know death.

The taste of fana' is ingrained in man's genes. It is not some­thing
that he will attain but something he will gain by ridding himself of
everything that is other than Allah, by dislodging himself from what he
considers to be real or solid. He will attain it by extracting himself
from the spider's web he has woven of habits and patterns: the way he
reacts, the way he sits, the way he eats. To taste annihilation the
seeker must be willing to let go of what he has.

Correcting oneself is by knowing the bounds and knowing how one has
arrived at where one is. Observing oneself objectively will immediately
liberate one's next actions. They will be neutral actions which will
move from bitterness to sweetness. The process is natural. The change
does not occur immediately. The human being first has to stop his wrong
actions and then enter into a condition of neutrality. Only then can the
next stage develop naturally.

58 And (as for) those who believe and do good, We will certainly give
them abode in the high places in gardens beneath which rivers flow,
abiding therein; how good the reward of the workers.

The more man acts fi sabili-llah, the more he ceases to act for
himself; thus, he is freer of the fire of disappointments and is more
apt to be in the garden. Man is in either one of two states: happiness
or sadness, contentment or discontentment, relaxation or tension,
security or insecurity, love or hate. As an active being he has to be in
one or more of these states according to various degrees. The less there
is of hate in his heart the more there is of love. The more he is
fulfilled, the less empty he is.

Ramadan,( month of fasting) is clothed by physical emptiness, leading
to inward cleansing. One starts by physically limit­ing oneself in order
to achieve inner freedom. Outer purification will lead to inner
purification. For the common Muslim, Ramadan is lim­iting the intake of
food and drink. For the discriminating Muslim, it is prohibiting the
senses from anything that is undesirable. For the true mu'min, it is
focusing the heart upon Allah and nothing else but Him. Acting in
goodness for the purpose of purification will give the believer a taste
of the garden. The breadth of that taste will be according to the purity
of his intention. The rivers that nourish the trees of the garden are
not visible.

They are underground and hidden. The state of the garden receives
nourishment invisibly from the rivers of haqiaa. The rivers of sharia
are clear. Knowing how to make a garden blossom in this life in all its
aspects, in all its dynamic interconnectedness, can be applied to the
inward. There is a gardener in everyone. If man knows how the ecology of
the garden works, it is more likely that he will see the overall ecology
that sustains him. This is the original motive for scientific
research.

59 Those who are patient, and on their Lord do they rely.

60 And how many a living creature that does not carry its sustenance:
Allah sustains it and yourselves; and He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

61 And if you ask them, Who created the hea­vens and the earth and made
the sun and the moon subservient, they will certainly say, Allah. Whence
are they then turned away?

When one does not immediately see the benefit of one's work, one must
trust that the time needed for inner growth is not the same as that for
outer growth. One may not recognize any inner openings for a long time
and then suddenly perceive a quantum movement forward. Patience, as far
as spiritual progress is concerned, is a necessary condition. It is the
foundation upon which everything is built.

Outwardly, there is a limit to patience. Having planted a plant in the
ground, one may find that it does not grow, and after six months the
growing season has come and gone. The gardener who knows would pull it
to examine the roots, and might find them rotten. He was impatient for
the plant to grow, but because he acted from knowledge his judgement was
correct.

One cannot accurately judge inner progress in relation to physical
time. The effects of previous actions might take twenty years to
neu­tralize. It is like a well that is being dug, and there is no sign
of water and no encouragement that there might be a real spring beneath
the ground until perhaps the last two centimeters when the water
suddenly appears.

That is the meaning of patience; perseverance is necessary until water
is struck. Through the intensity of one's devotion and abandon­ment,
under the guidance of a true teacher, one may be able to over­come one's
past more quickly. Successfully doing this will be according to the
degree of one's true submission.

"And how many a living creature that does not carry its sustenance."
Man, the highest of creation, need not have anxiety about his provision.
Animals do not, nor do they carry their provisions on their backs. They
move from one pasture to another, roam and are nourished and sus­tained
as they grow. They move, act and do their best, and the generous Reality
provides.

But creation is of a dual nature and an effort must be made, the palm
tree must be shaken. For man, however, the more he accumulates, the more
he uses a backup in the form of wealth and possessions, the greater is
the possibility of his forgetting his true security and dependence upon
Allah. He arrogantly depends on some­thing else.

Everything has come from Allah. There is nothing wrong with gold and
money, but accumulating them requires an investment of time and heart.
Investing in them makes man dependent on them. The fault is not in the
gold itself, for by it the quality of human life may be enhanced, but in
the attachment to it.

The promise of the Creator regarding spiritual evolution is that
everyone will evolve into a state of absolute dependence on Reality and
complete efficiency in his functionings in this life. That depend­ence,
that tawakkul, expressed by hasbun Allahu wa ni ma-l-wakil (Allah is
sufficient and the best of Guardians), and la hawla wa la'quwata illa
billah (no power and no strength except in Allah), will bring about a
situation in which an individual spontaneously knows how to obtain
whatever he wants. He will then be free to perceive meanings.

The strong mu'min is better than the weak mu'min. The mu'min who has
access to wealth is more useful to his neighbors and society than the
mu'min who does not, and who only sits with a tasbih (prayer beads) in
the corner of a mosque. That man has saved himself but he has done
nothing for others.

Man can conceptually understand that there is one source from which
everything emanates, one cause from which all effects arise. The fear of
provision, the fear of not living well, the fear of not having a
positive outer environment, are very critical in man's progress toward
submission, and his spiritual evolution. Man generally has fear of
provision.

What matters is the degree to which that fear enslaves him. If he
allows it to justify his actions then it is in control. But the fact
that it can be talked about means that the fear is understood.

Seeking provision may be positive in that it tests man, spurring him on
to positive actions. He obtains the true means of sustenance when he has
turned away from the world, genuinely, in his heart and not simply by
his actions. Man is accountable for whatever comes into his hands. He
should not throw things away. 'Ali, alayhi-s-salam, said: What is halal
(lawful) you are accountable for and what is haram (forbidden) you are
punished for.

62Allah makes abundant the means of subsis­tence for whom He pleases of
His ser­vants, and straitens them for whom (He pleases) surely Allah is
Cognizant of all things.

63 And if you ask them Who is it that sends down water from the clouds,
then gives life to the earth with it after its death, they will
certainly say, Allah. Say: All praise is due to Allah. Nay, most of them
do not understand.

Fear of provision is very deep and everyone is tested by it. Those who
are involved in business will often find that eighty percent of their
income comes from twenty percent of their activity. Often pro­vision
comes from where one is not looking. This is true for material wealth as
well as spiritual wealth. It is proof of how clumsy man is and how
subtle Reality is. Opening up one's heart to the wonderment of this
existence, wandering in the garden of this creation in complete trust,
utter submission and humility brings joy as a by product.

There are many traditions describing how Allah's love for His creation
manifests by withholding as well as by giving. Allah gives and then
withholds in order to see whether the slave will continue to be in
praise. Allah says: "You plot and I plot and I am the best of
plot­ters." Allah's plot is to enable man to break through the plot that
he has woven around himself, thinking that he has made a safe abode.
Allah's plot is to purify the degree of man's iman and trust. The more
man moves on the path, the subtler are the tests so that the individual
may see the real extent of his trust.

When man thinks he is safe, that safety will be shattered if Allah
loves him. Trust in Allah can develop after only a few days, or because
he thinks His love is remote it could develop only after years. It is
nothing other than the love of Allah that withholds his provision from
him in order that he can see himself frightened, jolted and disturbed.
It is then that he has to be steadfast, doing his utmost at all times.
If in discussions you were always right then you would learn nothing. It
is at the moment when one realizes that one is wrong that one learns. It
is the love of Allah if there is provision, and it is the love of Allah
if there is no provision. Allah's perfect love manifests in His laws
that govern this existence. His consistent love manifests in these
unchanging laws.

64 And this life of the world is nothing but a sport and a play; and as
for the next abode, that most surely is the life - did they but know!

65 So when they ride in the ships they call upon Allah, being sincerely
obedient to Him, but when He brings them safe to the land, then they
associate others (with Him);

66 Thus they become ungrateful for what We have given them, so that
they may enjoy; but they shall soon know.

67 Do they not see that We have made a sacred territory secure, while
men are carried off by force from around them? Will they still believe
in the falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of Allah?

68 And who is more unjust than one who forges a lie against Allah, or
gives the lie to the truth when it has come to him? Will not in hell be
the abode of the unbelievers?

Life on earth is like a mirage or a play that does not last. It is not
dependable nor is it built upon a firm foundation. Life is flimsy like
the house of the spider, perishing and then being recreated. Man's abode
of worth is that state or situation which allows him to sit-quietly -
aqil (in full possession of one's mental capabilities) - his thoughts
being tied, reflecting on the fact that what is beyond time is within
him. Once a momentary glimpse of this is captured through the experience
of momentary death, his boat begins to sail on the ocean of knowledge.

"So when they ride in the ships they call upon Allah." Whenever man is
disturbed, he has to physically abandon into the disturbance. When he is
on a ship or in a hurricane, when everything is shattered, when all his
relationships have been broken, when he has no home or country, when
nobody wants him, he will quite naturally call upon the power of the
invisible. But once some sort of tangible help appears, once an anchor
has been dropped, then the self arises and man forgets.

When man has nothing or is in trouble it is much easier for him to
depend upon Allah. Even if he only has a small possession it is much
more difficult to remember. It is for that reason that the sufi says the
path is much easier for those who have everything and do not care for
it, who have access to everything and do not find it interesting or
satisfactory.

The path of truth is very difficult for those who have little and
desire more. These people invest most of their lives to pay for their
little houses, their monuments. When their houses get scratched, their
hearts are scratched. But a person who could have owned the whole world
finds no use for it. He is not interested because he knows that he can
only digest one or two meals a day and that he can only sleep on one bed
at a time.

Those in the middle are at a loss and they are the majority -
aktharahum la ya qilun (most of them do not understand). This is why the
majority of the people of heart resent the bourgeois existence. It is
not a political doctrine, it is a spiritual one.

Muhammad, salla-llahu alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, had been promised all
kinds of material gifts by his tribe if, in return, he would abandon the
message. The social structure of Mecca was threatened because it was
based on superstition, tyranny and accumulating wealth, like the
banking-financial system of today (it is the real government). If one
turns away from it, not wanting a loan or a bank account, then one
becomes the biggest threat to the system.

The rebel protesting in the street is no threat. On the contrary, he is
caught in the system itself. So long as the system is there and so long
as he cannot have it, he will want to destroy it. The way to be free of
it is to get it out of the heart. In recognizing its evil man can turn
away, in a positive manner, to build a system that will enable him, his
off­spring and his friends, to taste joy.

If one first collapses the tent of materialism in one's heart then one
will find that the kufr (de­nial) system is also on its way towards
collapse. Energy will be saved and one's actions will bring about
positiveness. One also will find more people who are awake.

69 And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways; and Allah is most surely with the doers of
good.

The way to polish the nafs, the way to drop off the layers of arrogance
and self-importance, is through jihad, striving at all times. When the
nafs is first revealed to the seeker, the struggle is very tiring
because the nafs is rebellious. Later on he finds that he thrives on
exposing the nafs because it polishes the mirror.

At first, the mirror has many layers of dust on it. Scraping it is hard
work. Later on, polishing it is as easy as lightly passing a cloth over
it. The seeker desires the light because he sees the benefit of it.
Suddenly he is the reflector of Reality. His heart reflects the truth.

Striving at all times is unavoidable. No one is spared struggle because
life is based entirely upon movement and dynamism -that is how time is
experienced. At all times one strives more and more, harder and harder,
and as a result, one finds that the afflictions become subtler and
subtler. Everyone is completely caught in a web which manifests in time
because man is a creature suspended in time whose essence is beyond
time. He has come from a Reality which encompasses here and beyond,
beginning and end, manifestation and non-mani­festation, life and
death.

In order to resonate and vibrate that knowledge, in order to reflect
that knowledge in his own small reflector, man must abandon into the
complete solid web in which he is caught and from which there is no
escape. If he has completely and utterly abandoned into it then that web
itself will resonate him; then he is the hand of Allah, the eye of
Allah, the tongue of Allah, and then he moves by the mercy and grace of
Allah. He has unified. He has directly, experientially abandoned into
tawhid.


