Sura 2 : Surat Ur-rahman (the Beneficent)
=========================================

**Introduction**

This sura is attributed to the early Meccan period. There is a
tradition related to the Prophet, salla-llahu alayhi wa alihi wa sallam,
in which he says: "For everything there is a bride, and the bride of the
Qur'an is surat ur-Rahman." It is the only sura which begins with a
divine name. It contains aspects and contrasting parts of creation in
pairs: visible man and invisible jinn; heaven and earth; land and sea;
happiness and wretchedness. All are signs and effects emanating from the
one Cause.

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

1 The Beneficent God,

2 Taught the Qur'an.

3 He created man,

4 Taught him the clear evidence.

Ar-Rahman (the Merciful) is one of the key attri­butes of Allah. Every
attribute is an aya a sign indicating the oneness of Allah. Everything
in creation is permeated with and connected to Him.

In order for the rahma (mercy) of the Rahman to be understood,
appreciated and experienced, knowledge has been given to man. One cannot
understand something unless it is experienced. The most valuable
knowledge in life's journey is the knowledge of the Qur'an. Man's link
to God is through the Qur'an, through the Book, through the knowledge
that will enable him to see the all-encompassing mercy.

The meaning of the hadith (tradition) that Muhammad, salla-llahu alayhi
wa alihi wa sallam (peace and blessings be upon him and his family), was
created before the creation of Adam, is that the light of the path
existed before Adam. After the Qur'an, man, bani Adam was created. So
knowledge - the light of Islam, the light of the Qur'an - existed before
khalaqa-i- insan (He created man).

The Creator contains the knowledge of what He will create. The highest
creation is the Muhammadi being, the perfect being. The knowl­edge of
this final product, the ultimate being, the khalifa (deputy) of Allah,
was with the one and only Knower, with the Alim. The light of Muhammad
was there when Adam was still between water and clay. The purpose of
creation was to create the per­fect man, the last of the prophets, the
one after whom nothing new could be added.

Every aspect of the Creation has the label of the Creator on it.
Creation is in His name. By His decree His rahma is manifested as the
knowledge of the Qur'an. His rahma then becomes the creational act -
khalaqa-l- insan - making wider ripples through the \`evidence'. Bayan
is the clear evidence which emanates from what is most subtle,
penetrating the gross physical manifestations towards which rnan orients
his perception. This is the knowledge of witnessing. Every­thing that is
seen bears witness to the cause of its creation and to its being subject
to the decree of the Beneficent.

The knowledge of the Qur'an is the knowledge of tawhid (divine unity),
In this instance, rahma may also mean the tawhid of the Wahid, the One.
Access to Him is through the knowledge of His decree, which is the Book.
Creation took place according to the decree. The bayan is an outcome of
the nature of that creation.

Man seeks evidence for everything. He is always seeking knowledge. He
seeks to know the cause, effect and proof of things. Nothing is
haphazard, everything- leaves its trace. Man is the trace of the
Creator; he is His evidence. Everything in His existence is an
ayatu-llah (sign of Allah). If man knows himself, then he has known the
meaning of guardianship or lordship, rububiyya. Man arafa nafsahu fa-qad
arafa rabbahu. "He who knows himself has known his Lord" (hadith)

5 The sun and the moon follow a reckoning.

6 And the herbs and the trees adore (Him).

The physical vehicle of man depends upon the mixture of minerals,
proteins and all other elements subtly interconnected with the entire
cosmic balance. Life cannot exist without the sun. When the sun begins
to disappear, life will begin to cease in its different forms, and after
a short period of time will end totally. The sun is self-effulgent while
the moon is a faithful reflector, though it too has its influence over
life.

As Reality is self-evident, so is Allah self-evident. Reality's
reflector is the Prophet, salla-llahu \`alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, Both
the sun and the moon have a beginning and an end, like the two sides of
a coin. The cosmic journey had its start and will have its end. But
beginning and ending have one nature - the coin is one coin. The subject
is one subject but there are two aspects to it, facing each other. This
is the condition of the journey in this universe; it is also the
condition of the self-generating light and its reflection.

"And the herbs and the trees adore (Him)." Najm means herbs or grasses,
and also means a star. Najama is to appear, to become clear, evident.
\`Ilmu-n-nujim is the science of astrology, of predicting the future.
Najjam is an astrologer, Shajar is a plant that has a saq, a trunk or
stem. The plants themselves do sajda ( prostration).

All of creation does sajda - those that have a visible body supporting
them and those that are creeper-like; those that have the characteristic
of uprightness and those that do not; those who do iqama, who stand up
acknowledging their Creator, and those who crawl from one misery to
another. Whether an entity looks dependent and is striving upwards like
the shajar (tree), or is afloat like the najm (star), appearing
independent, it is in prostration.

Sajada also means to adore. Entities adore, prostrate, and are under
the control of the one Reality. It makes no difference whether they are
celestial entities or terrestrial entities, they are all under the
haymana of Allah (guardianship or control). They are under the control
of the one and only Controller - they have no option but to be in sujud
(prostration).

7 And the heaven, He raised it high, and He set up the balance,

As part of creation the heavens are uplifted. The cosmos is expanded
and the balance of its destiny has been set by al-mizan (the balance).
The entire cosmic creation is based on the balancing forces that hold it
together, keeping it, as well as one's inner loftiness and spirit, in
dynamic flux.

Imam Husayn, alayhi-s-salam, was asked about ar-Rahman in the first aya
of this sura , He said, "The Giver of the ruh ( soul, spirit) will also
give the raha (rest and comfort)." One will be given according to the
extent to which he lifts him­ self up through the balance of shari\`a
and haqiqa, the outward path and the inner truth. Everything is in
balance. Balance does not only mean justice, it also means that every
aspect of this creation, heavenly or otherwise, affects its opposite.

Transgression is against both oneself and everyone else, because there
is no otherness. If someone unjustly destroys another human being, he
symbolically destroys the entire creation, which includes himself. Every
human being contains the meaning of everything. To reestablish the
balance, the killer himself has to be destroyed. From the point of view
of haqiqa, killing one thing is killing everything. As upholders of
shari'a, men must act accordingly: the killer's punishment is the same
as his crime.

Because he has destroyed himself in the mean­ing sense, so too must he
be destroyed in the physical sense.

If love is destroyed in the meaning sense, then one had better destroy
it in the physical sense and part company. If there is no love or
respect between two people, it will be reflected: the inner will emerge
in the outer.

Man cannot take something from one side of a balance without the other
side being imbalanced. It may be so subtle that he does not see it, but
nothing goes unheeded by Allah. Smallness, as far as the balancing act
in creation is concerned, is as significant as bigness. Look at the size
of the atom bomb compared to the destruction that it does. What is the
size of love? Man is not the judge or the balancer, Allah is. He
measures everything in His judgement. What is the quality of a ruh? Is
someone's ruh better than someone else's?

Man expects equity which means that, potentially, everyone has the same
base. He does not accept someone being placed higher than himself. There
is equity but there is no equality. One fellow spends his life polishing
his heart, doing good deeds, while another does not. In using his aql
(faculty of reason) man can understand that equality does not exist.

For example, every finger is different from every other finger. They
are not equal, but there is equity among them in that they can perform
similar functions. Each finger can potentially have the same effect,
though each is unique. If someone builds a house while you spend your
time listening to the birds, in the end you will not have a house and he
will not be an expert in bird calls. Having a house is not equal to
being able to distinguish bird calls, they are different. But you will
accept this inequality because you have enjoyed listening to the birds.
There is no equality here, but there is equity.

Spiritually, everyone has the same possibility of dying into Reality,
of knowing Allah. How can anyone say that his heart is better than
someone else's? There is no equality because not every potential will be
realized. Not everyone will be in complete abandonment; not every­one
will be pure of heart.

Man's potential is restricted within the bounds of certain
circum­stances. For example, a person may have only one leg as the
result of an accident or birth defect. Within these bounds, however,
there is no restriction in the degree to which one may abandon, the
degree to which one may believe, the degree to which one may live in
ihsan (state of doing good deeds). During life's journey one's
intentions may be increasingly purified. If this were not the case where
would the rahma of Allah be? If there is jabr (predestined, inescapable
decree of fate), there is no rahma. The rahma of Allah is the freedom of
man's spiritual progress by his abandonment.

In this life people are either on higher or lower spiritual and
material planes. This is the outcome of the interaction of man's will
with the creational laws and realities, some of which he may never
overcome. Someone who has lost a leg cannot grow another one. It is a
limitation, but which is more important, a physical limitation or a
spiritual limitation?

Through knowledge of the Book of creation, through the Qur'an, the
Rahman has given man the possibility of rising towards Allah to the
ultimate degree. Reaching this goal is by means of avoiding other-than­
Allah. That is the freedom man has, otherwise he is limited. Everyone
has a limitation, every prophet has a limitation, every seeker has a
limitation. Where man is not limited is in the degree to which he can
depend on Allah, abandon into Allah, and have no thought except of Allah
and no expectation than of Allah. To unify one's destiny with Allah's
will - that is freedom.

Man will sometimes accept situations that do not allow him the
possibility of absolute taqwa (fearful awareness), of being a true
khalifa (representative) of Allah, because that is the mark of his
humanity. It is the Creator's mark upon man. He therefore has to strive.
The path is clear. It is the path of Islam based on the knowledge of the
Qur'an, which is the manifestation of Allah's rahma.

8 That you may not exceed in the measure.

9 And keep up the balance with equity and do not make the measure
deficient.

Tagha is to overflow, to go beyond bounds. Taghiya is a despot or
tyrant. Tyranny is gross. There are many subtler forms of transgression
which are more difficult to discern and which one must get rid of so
that one does not cut across the laws of Reality. Allah's way is the
perfect mizan (balance), free of transgression.

Aqimu is from aqama, to establish, keep in order, make right. Wazn is
weight or the importance given to things. Qist is allotment, a portion
of what is due, justice, equity. Allah says that He has established the
balance. As the representative of Reality, man has to be faithful to
Allah, Who has established the perfect balance.

"And do not make the measure deficient." Khasara is to lose. If man
loses the balance he has lost himself because he has allowed the lower
self to act according to its orientation of imbalance and kufr (denial).
It is denial of the Rahman. Suddenly he finds that creation has toppled
him over, leaving him no access to the purpose of creation, which is the
knowledge of Qur'an.

One of the Imams said: "When a man is in darkness, the Qur'an becomes
to him like a dark tomb or derelict house: it gives him no nourishment
or support." This is the case with the majority of mankind; they have
lost the mizan. Al-Mizan is also the name of the Qur'an.

If man insures that he does not upset what is already in balance, then
he is unlikely to do himself injustice. He is then closer to being a
living Qur'an. Allah is telling man to give value to balance. Man should
be concerned, conscientious, aware and in dhikr (remembrance). Does he
know what he is doing and why? Does he know his own inten­tion? Are his
intention and action unified? Man should question and follow his heart
and \`aql as one path.

The Prophet, salla-llahu \`alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, said: "Anger
corrupts iman (trust, faith) as vinegar corrupts honey." Man builds
things, but corrupts them because he does not give priority and
impor­tance to patience. What weight does man give to the meaning of
"and do not make the measure deficient?" The balance is that which is
absolutely right.

Man is moving along the path from the womb to the tomb. Balance is
about recognizing that one is the barzakh (interspace). One is in this
world but not of this world. Man has come only to go. The balance is
being both here and with Allah, alive and yet, with every closing of the
eye, willing to be under six feet of dust.


