Supplement 1
============

10 And the earth, He has set it for living creatures;

11 Therein are fruit and palms having sheathed clusters,

Allah set up the earth in order that man, who is in continuous flux and
disturbance, should come to recognize his origin, to recog­nize how he
has fallen from before time into fitra (innate character), and to
recognize how he has come into being from non­being. As part of His
mercy, he has been dropped into janna (the garden) in the same way as
his forefathers were.

When Adam came out from the crack of non-time, Allah told him that this
garden had been given to him so that he could have maqarr ( a place of
stability, such as a house). Qarra the root of maqarr, means to settle.
He who has settled admits to the mercy of the Creator. Everything points
to the Rahman.

Life is characterized by motion and can only be experienced in time.
When time stops, life stops. That is al-qiyamatu-s-saghira (the small
Day of Reckoning). On that day there is no time left to change the
balance of the accumulated good and bad actions. People who have come
close to death through accidents and have returned, say that on the Day
of Reckoning a film of one's life is played to them in a split second.

If man is to qualify for knowledge of Allah, it will be by his
knowledge of the Rahman, which is attained by upholding the mizan -the
Qur'an. Man's qualification for admittance to the rahma of the knowledge
of the Qur'an is dependent upon his leaving himself behind when he
enters the Qur'an, because the Qur'an is like the room of Allah:

it is where Allah's laws and knowledge are kept. Man can only come to
Allah with taqwa. He can only approach Him with abandon­ment and the
right attitude, waiting to see the mercy, trusting that there is nothing
other than the mercy of Allah, praying that he will see it manifest to
him in the form of knowledge which can be transferred into behavior.
That is the qualification; otherwise the study of the Qur'an remains
"Islamic Studies." Everything goes back to Allah. Every knowledge takes
man back to where it emanated from, its root and source.

Al- ard (the earth) is necessary for man and is part of the garden.
Ardiyya, which means foundation or ground floor, provides man - who is
in continuous turmoil biologically, physiologically, mentally and
spiritually - the possibility of remem­bering the beyond-time. In the
Qur'an Allah says: Alastu birabbikum; "Am I not your Lord?" By
forgetting everything else, the innate, fitra, remembrance that there is
only Allah will come to man. On the and man is able to recognize that
all the creatures fulfill their natures and have come from One
Creator.

Fakiha is fruit. Fukaha is something that is pleasant or gives
amusement. Pleasures are diversions from the unde­sirable, bringing man
tranquility and balance. The normal state of a person of abandonment is
joy. But if a person has not totally abandoned into Allah, experiencing
joy, then he seeks pleasures. They are things that make man less
mentally agitated and fulfill his physical desires so that he begins to
pay attention to his inner fulfillment.

The physical description of the garden is a mithal (metaphor):
metaphor): the Qur'an indicates to man the meaning of the end by
describing its pleasures. Man seeks fruit not because there is something
spiritual about the fruit itself, but because he is made more spiritual
after he has satisfied his appetite by it. His origin is spiritual, but
he has exaggerated his physical and mental needs.

When they are removed, he finds himself to be well. It is the state
that the garden brings about that is important, not the detailed
description of it; but there are details for every person's needs. ". .
. and palms having sheathed clusters." The creation manifests in
clusters. From the one branch come the many. Allah's mercy is abundant
in every form.

Life is transient and in perpetual change and therefore unstable. How
can one take man's changing moods and desires seriously? What man
desires now has nothing to do with what he desired fifteen years ago.
Yet he has the audacity to claim he is the same person that he was
fifteen years ago. After many years his knowledge, his experiences,
habits and attitudes, are all different.

On the other hand, how can anyone say that he has changed if he does
not recognize and admit that there is something within him that never
changes? How can man get up in the morning and say that he has slept
well or badly unless there is something within him that never sleeps?
"Slumber does not overtake Him nor sleep."

(suratu-l-Baqara: 255) How can man say he has been very angry unless
there is something within him that is most compas­sionate? What man
wants most earnestly is that which is forever, a!-Baqi (the
Everlasting). Everyone is on that path whether he likes it or not,
whether he sees it now or later.

Man has been brought to this earth to be tested as part of his tarbiya
(upbringing). He is being brought up to recognize what is transient and
what is not, what is permanent and what is not, what is meaningful and
what is not. Whatever is of change is from his nafs (lower self). The
reason man does not see the hand of Allah behind everything is that he
interferes and interjects the projec­tions of his self. If he were to
put himself aside, there would only be the one and only Reality.

The fall from the state of the garden came about because of the rise of
consciousness - because Adam questioned. If man desires to be in the
garden he should not question, but he should make use of his \`aql. As a
result, he will receive answers to his questions. When man enters the
garden in this life he does not care for the garden of the next because
he has tasted it already. The desire for the garden falls from his
heart. Then there is no desire except the desire to see the face of
Allah in every direction towards which he turns.

12 And the grain with (its) husk and fragrance.

13 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

Big things come from little things. Habb is a seed. The literal meaning
of habb is the seed that comes from grasses. There are many different
types of vegetation and their meanings are linked to the nourishment
which they provide. The living, sentient creatures and the vegetable
kingdom are interdependent. The highest creature, man, depends on those
that are lower because he originates from dust. Yet, he loves the higher
because of its subtlety. There is something in him that always makes him
love subtler meaning.

The Prophet, salla-llahu alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, loved prayer,
perfume and women. He loved what is most subtle, the prayer, as well as
what is more gross and phys­ical, the companionship of women. Once man's
physical needs are fulfilled, he seeks higher satisfaction in meanings.
If man is fortunate, he reaches physical fulfillment, which then leads
him to question mean­ings. Most people at the point of death have only
achieved small, short-term, physical goals which are empty of
meanings.

Wherever man looks there is the sign of the Rahman, even in what man
considers to be an affliction. All events occur according to the laws
that govern existence which are from the Law-Giver. Man may not like an
event, but that is because of himself. What man wants will not
necessarily happen, but what Allah wants will happen. If what man wants
is what Allah wants, then there is perfect harmony; then he is saved. If
there is disharmony, then all that man can do is to be in istighfar (
asking for forgiveness), because he has acted incongruously with Allah's
laws.

Everything man considers to be a sign is actually a double sign. The
fact that it was there and yet remained undiscerned by him is a sign
that he was asleep. Whatever a man experiences that leads him to a new
understanding that was already within him but not perceived, is because
he did not have the requisite knowledge and wisdom to per­ceive it.
Suppose someone did not know the meaning of fear until he was
twenty-three, when he fell down a crevice.

The meaning of fear was in his being, but he had not yet experienced
it. You may not have experienced injustice, but the injustice of man has
existed since the creation of Adam. With man came his injustice, which
the mala'ika (angels) were afraid would corrupt the earth. Whatever you
experience, feel or think, that is your biography; it is of no interest
to anybody else because it is common to all of mankind. The seeker is
only interested in Allah, the Real.

Whatever a man now understands, other people have understood before
him. Whatever he now perceives has been perceived by others before him,
though every man will contend that he is the first to have perceived it.
He follows what Iblis ( satan) said: "I am better than them." It is the
rise of the ego and the fall of man.

14 He created man from dry clay like earthen vessels,

15 And He created the jinn of a flame of smokeless fire.

16 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

Man is created from hard clay, salsal. His existential situation is
based on a firm structure. Man's firmness is an echo of his subtlety.
His real nourishment is of a most subtle nature. The subtlest of
nourishments turns the heart when it is open, and not in desire or
depression. The more open man's heart is, the more it can express that
openness - as long as it is in a firm and solid container. The greater
the value of a thing, the harder and the more secure its shell.

The double meaning of the signs denotes duality. Everything in
existence has its mirror image. For ins (, man) there is jinn ( unseen
beings). Man is the visible creature of the two, Uns means intimacy,
solace, companionship. Nasiya is also related to ins, and means to
forget. Nisa' (women) from the same root, are those who make men forget
Allah. The meaning of nisa' is related to uns, because women do give
solace.

Jinn are entities which do not manifest in a physically solid state.
They are created from smokeless fire because smoke is a condensation of
matter and as such has density. Jinn have their bounds in the same way
as ins have theirs. Thus, there is an interface between jinn and man.

The jinn are hidden, invisible. The word jinn is related to janna, that
which is hidden, the garden whose foliage is so dense that one cannot
see the ground. jinn are created of smokeless fire, The subtle source of
both jinn and ins is light, nur "Allah is the light of the heavens and
earth," (suratu-n-Nur: 35). As light descends, as it becomes
physicalized or as it becomes possible for it to be manifest or
reflected, it takes the form of jinn and ins.

Whatever one looks at is a sign, whether jinn or ins, How can man deny
these bounties? Every sign is a bounty, every sign is a provision. What
man now seeks is the confidence of knowing that at all times the Rahm6n
is behind each reflection in creation. It is said that if a Muslim reads
suratu-r-Rahman every day at fajr (daybreak), he will never be afflicted
or, if he is afflicted in the eyes of others, he himself will only see
the rahma of the Rahman, The reader becomes what is read: if he truly
reads then he will have recognized what he has read.

Wherever one turns, there is the generosity and ni'ma (blessing) of
Allah. But man takes it for granted and does not recognize that all is
from Allah. He forgets and becomes distracted because he connects to
what is in front of him.

Because man is the highest of all creations, he has in himself the
ability to tune in to different wavebands, He can tune in to jinn but
that is a transgression and is not allowed, It is like spying on
someone. If a person wants to be known, he presents himself openly. Why
tune to his transmitter when his house is shut to you?

A man of submission and reality, being given this gift, should use it
entirely to serve Allah. Nabiyyu-llah (Prophet of Allah) Sulayman,
\`alayhi-s ­salam, had the power to connect with animals. When
travelling with his army he could hear the ants talking of his
approach.

Man cannot tolerate what goes on in his mind or in the minds of others.
If he were to hear of what was going to happen to him in the future, he
might wish to shoot himself. Every system has its limitations, which are
at the same time its constriction and its bounty. The fact that there is
the visible and the invisible is a bounty. Everything within its
container is a reflection of perfection. If man accepts the limitations
he can begin to reflect perfection.

17 Lord of the two risings and Lord of the two settings.

18 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

"Lord of the two risings and Lord of the two settings." Gharaba, the
root of maghribayn, means to go away. One of the meanings that
Amiru-l-Mu'minin 'Ali gave for this aya was concerning duality, such as
that of the seasons. He said: "The shuruq (sunrise) of winter is
different from the shuruq of summer, and the ghurub (sunset) of summer
is different from the ghurub of winter."

There is a summer and there is a winter; they both have meaning. In
winter everything is dormant, while in summer life is in full bloom. The
sun of winter is different from the sun of summer. 'Ali, alayhi-s­salam,
also said: "Every day has its burj (its sign of the zodiac), and there
are three hundred and sixty buruj (plural of burj)." For every day there
is a new shuruq and a new ghurub. The sun has its circuit. The rising of
the sun on this life brings light, and light is only meaning­ful if it
gives man knowledge. If there is light outside and the eyes are closed,
the light is of no use.

There is a rise of consciousness both for this life and for the next.
For each there is one shuruq, there is a coming out. This is, of course,
also true of ghurub. The people of irfan ( gnosis) and tasawwuf (sufism)
often refer to the two risings as the risings of knowledge in the heart
and aql, and the two settings as the settings of the nafs As there comes
the rising of the \`aql, reason, there is disappearance of
association.

There are also risings for different creatures, the ins and the jinn,
each seeing a different sun rising and setting. There can be no rising
without a setting. Whatever manifests, whatever one can discern, is one
side of a two-sided coin. Once there is a creational situation there are
two aspects to it. At the beginning there is one, at the end there is
one, and in between there are two.

19 He has made the two seas to flow freely - they meet:

20 Between them is a barrier which they cannot pass.

21 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

The two seas have met before creation and they will meet again after
creation. They are two seas, one of pure water, the other of im­pure,
salty water. The sweet water that comes from the mountains and rivers
does not mix with the salt water.

The seas here are like two states that meet, the two states of
wake­fulness and sleep, the two seas of shari\`a and haqiqa, the two
seas of meaning and sensory. Both the physical and non-physical parts of
man's life have their laws. The law of haqiqa hinges on the loyalty of
aban­donment, iman, which takes man to \`the station of haqqu-l-yaqin (
truth of certainty). The law of shari'a holds man to the five pillars of
Islam, so necessary because he is in the tempestuous sea of the
sensory.

How can man deny the bounties of the two seas of the inner and the
outer? They will meet as they have met before. At the point of creation
they were one and at the point of death they will merge once again. In
this reality, what is holding them apart is the double mercy of Allah.

For the duration of this life there is an invisible barrier, an
inter­space between an apparent duality that does not allow the seas to
connect. In the same way, the sun and the moon follow a reckoning -
bihusban. They came from one source and then were catapulted into space
as two. Moving according to a certain complex pattern, they will
eventually come together again. There is an interspace between them that
holds them apart as a man's body seems to be separate from his ruh.

There is the qalb (heart, from the root qalaba, to turn), and there is
the ruh. The ruh, being disconnected from the world, is connected to the
precreational state and can therefore give man com­fort. Unlike the ruh,
the galb may be seized by dunya ( world in a negative material sense).
The heart may be damaged by the world's salty sea, and if it is, then
therin in turn can no longer provide comfort. If the nafs is purified
then the heart can freely turn. It is no longer caught in the see-saw of
the dunya which continues; taking breath in and letting breath out, the
inhaled breath being pure air, the exhaled impure. Neither of them mix
with the other. These are the bahrayn the two seas.

Everywhere one looks there are the two seas, separated by a subtle
barrier. The seas of knowledge and ignorance do not mix. Life and death
do not mix. Whatever man looks at, creation appears in one form or
another. It is agreeable or disagreeable. A creational entity is
con­sidered to be usable or unusable. Nothing transgresses the bounds
because of the mizan, the balance. Creation is not chaos, it is
cosmos.

22 There come forth from them pearls and coral.

23 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

From the seas come the pearl and the coral. If one dives into the seas,
these amazing jewels may be seen. Jawhar is jewel; it also means
intrinsic nature or essence. If one wants the essence of these seas,
then one must get their jawahir, their jewels, but diving for these
jewels is dangerous, for one risks sustaining bruises and cuts from the
reef.

The formation of the pearl is an act of rejection. The material of the
pearl is the secretion of the oyster used to isolate and discharge the
grain of sand that has entered its body. It is the material used to
disconnect, dislodge and discharge it.

Marjan, coral, is formed by the reverse process and is the substance
within which the animal dwells. It is the structure in which the animal
houses and shelters itself, and later it is left behind. So one
structure is formed by repulsion, the other by attraction.

The thought process operates either by repulsion or attraction.
Whatever comes to man's thoughts is either something he wants to
dissociate from and forget, or something he wants to hear again and
again and to which he wants to connect. Man oscillates between the two
sides of the mizan, the pearl and the coral.

Every man is continuously turning between something he wants and
something he does not want. The seeker loves the men of tawhid, he loves
the people who want to see Allah, and he runs from the people of kufr
(denial). He wants the good news that Islam is pre­vailing in the world.
He wants to hear the good news that his children are growing up
decently - and not the bad news that they have been mischievous. The
human being is constantly oscillating between wanting to surround
himself with what he likes, and repulsing and dissoci­ating himself,
like the oyster, from what he dislikes. The opposites grow from the same
root; they are two distinct entities that have the same origin to which
they will ultimately revert.

24 And His are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains.

25 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

Both alama, meaning sign, and \`alam, meaning flag, are from the same
root as 'ilm (knowledge); they imply something being known. The
munsha'at , the root of which is nasha'a (to create, to loom up)
announce themselves; they are highly evident. Whatever is afloat belongs
to Allah. The phenomenon of floating, as well as the entire
interactional balancing scene that brings about desirable situations,
such as ships on the sea, belongs to Allah.

Reflect upon how certain situations are the opposite of what some­one
might expect; for instance, how steel ships float upon water. The ships
float because of verifiable laws easily demonstrated by scientists, but
still, it is very odd. All that one sees, all of these projections of
Reality, all that flickers of knowledge or experience, will ultimately
disappear because they are in time.


