Supplement 2
============

24 And His are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains.

25 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

Both alama, meaning sign, and \`alam, meaning flag, are from the same
root as 'ilm (knowledge); they imply something being known. The
munsha'at , the root of which is nasha'a (to create, to loom up)
announce themselves; they are highly evident. Whatever is afloat belongs
to Allah. The phenomenon of floating, as well as the entire
interactional balancing scene that brings about desirable situations,
such as ships on the sea, belongs to Allah.

Reflect upon how certain situations are the opposite of what some­one
might expect; for instance, how steel ships float upon water. The ships
float because of verifiable laws easily demonstrated by scientists, but
still, it is very odd. All that one sees, all of these projections of
Reality, all that flickers of knowledge or experience, will ultimately
disappear because they are in time.

26 Everyone on it must pass away.

27 And there endures forever the face of your Lord, the Lord of glory
and honor.

28 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

Whatever is on this ard, whatever is physicalized, solidified, or
appears to have an identity, has no identity other than Allah - La ilaha
illa-llah, there is no God but Allah. Everything announces its
perishability. If it is solid -a plant or a creature - it proves its
destiny. What remains is the fount of creation, wajhu rabbika ( the face
of your Lord).

Wajh is a direction or face, the outer visible front. In his formal
worship the Muslim must have tawajjuh (attention), and point his wajh
towards the formal, ancient abode of safety that came about through the
inspiration of Sayyidna Ibrahim, alayhi-s-salam, in Mecca. Whoever does
salat (prayer) positions himself towards that.

All of creation honors its covenant; every creational entity honors the
Most Honorable - "the Lord of glory and honor" is an attribute of Allah,
the Glorious, the Most Honorable, the One Who bestows honor. Man is an
honorable creature, if only he would realize it; if only he could unify
his physical reality with his innate reality. Man honors his contract by
physiologically perishing. Everyone honors his destiny, knowingly or
not.

Man sees, contained in the facade of creation, the af'al, the
manifestation of actions. In the case of humans, they are a result of
the interactions of his heart and his lower nafs. The less involved is
his nafs, the more involved is his heart. Looking further inward, there
is the ruh. If one's nafs has been burnt away, then his heart is active
and pulsating; it is then fed by the spring of comfort - the ruh, the
spirit.

Those who are not in submission rebel against the fact that they are
perishing. If you tell someone that he is aging and that his teeth are
falling out, he will say that he is not yet old or ready to die.
Everyone considers his age as the average. When you were twelve years
old, you thought fifty was ancient. You could not communicate with fifty
­year-olds, they were funny people. But when you became fifty, you
thought fifty was quite young. This is because there is in man an echo
of the Everlasting.

But there is also in man an echo of the nafs of rebellion. He assumes
that the nafs lasts forever, and does not remember death. The seeker is
repeatedly given the advice by his masters that the most potent
medi­cine for ailments of the spirit is the remembrance of death. It is
not used to paralyze man or to make him inactive and negative but, on
the contrary, it is used to make him successful in his actions by making
him more efficient. If he constantly remembers death, his actions will
be pure, untarnished by his personal greed, arrogance, vanity, revenge
and whatever other attributes are characteristic of the lower self.

The face of the Lord is, at first, an existential connection between
man and Reality. Man wants to be healthy, he wants to be in the com­pany
of fine men, he wants to be in an environment that will help him get
deeper into the knowledge of Reality, of which there is no end. The more
one knows Allah, the greater is the desire to know more of Allah. One
should not assume that once somebody knows Allah that is the end of it.
There is no beginning or end to Reality. An arif bi-llah is one who has
had a window open onto Reality. The more he is able to look out from
that window, the more he will see of Reality.

Just as each human has a physical birth, so too does each one have a
spiritual awakening, which takes place parallel in time. Just as man was
physically once a child, so too was he a child in knowledge of Allah..
There is no end to Reality, because It encompasses before and after
creation.

"And there endures forever the face of your Lord." The Qur'an says that
the Lord's day is like a thousand years of man's time; and this
reckoning is only made in relationship to the time-frame of this world.
As far as its relationship to beyond this world, it is fifty thousand
years. So each day is the equivalent of fifty thousand years. Time is
obviously relative. A day is a period of time, and not necessarily the
twenty-four hour span that is measured by the odd machine called a
clock.

29 All those who are in the heavens and the earth ask of Him; every
moment He is upon some affair.

30 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

Allah is man's Lord. Lordship is the source of the emanation of action.
It is sustainership. The lord of a house has to attend to every aspect
of the house, every sha'n, every business and affair. The lord of a
house looks after its hardware - its maintenance and so on - as well as
all the aspects of its software: the people, children and food, in the
same way as the Lord of lords looks after creation. In every instant,
every affair comes to Him. Lordship is attending to every affair;
otherwise, there would be no tawhid. Tawhid is the one core from which
all networks emanate, superimpose on each other and connect.

31 Soon will We apply Ourselves to you, O you two armies.

32 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

Thaqula means to be weighty. Thaqalan means two entities or realities,
seen or unseen. It can also mean two armies. Faragha means to be empty,
to finish off, and here means to apply or occupy. Every jinn and ins,
whether mu'min (be­liever) or kafir (denier), having either attained
knowledge or remained in ignorance, will come to know the day of
reckoning. Every­ one knows that whatever affair he is handling will
come to an end. If it does not come to an end in this world while he is
still alive, it will come to an end at his personal qiyama, at the hour
of his death. Man is completely and totally cornered. He has no way to
escape from the prison of time. If man dies into his situation, he is
enlivened by the non-time Reality which encompasses the yard of this
prison. If you die into the clock, you will not hear it anymore - it
will be as if gone. As far as you are concerned, there will no longer be
a clock; you will have transcended it.

33 O assembly of jinn and men! If you are able to pass through the
regions of the heavens and the earth, then pass through; you cannot pass
through but with authority.

34 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

Qutr (plural is aqtar) is a diameter, region, zone, or something which
is encompassed - a dominion. If one uses a compass one creates a circle
that encompasses a space. "If you are able to pas through the regions of
the heavens and the earth, then pass through." Allah encourages man to
explore, but he cannot unless he attains the power, unless he obtains
the sultan (authority). It is a posi­tive challenge to man.

Every sphere or zone has an energy. If man wants to go beyond a zone he
must be able to pierce its limit. To escape the gravitational pull of
earth a missile needs to obtain the speed of 17,000 miles per hour. Man
needs sultan to overcome gravity. All of the powers are part of the one
and only all-encompassing Power, which is an inter­zonal power.

35 The flames of fire and smoke will be sent on you two, then you will
not be able to defend yourselves.

36 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

Within the boundaries of the heavens and earth a point comes when the
penetrations cease. There is a limit to every system and every
creational situation. Jinn and ins can penetrate into the heavens, as
man has done in the last few decades. But there will be zones in the
heavens through which man will not be able to pass because of the great
activity of meteorites or because of the presence of radiation or some
other factors.

As there are limits established in man's outward travel, so are there
limits to which he may travel inwardly. The Prophet, salla-llahu
\`alayhi wa alihi wa sallam, said: "I was not given of inner knowledge
but little." These are the laws of Reality. How can man deny the mercies
of Allah? Even the limitations and their meanings -the fact that man is
imprisoned in time and space - are great bounties.

37 So when the heaven is rent asunder, and then becomes red like
hide,

38 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

The time will come when the heavens-which are impenetrable, lim­ited,
and built as though firm - will break apart. Shaqqa means to split. As
creation is fragmented, another state will take hold of it, one in which
heat dominates. At present, the heat of the planets and stars is in
equilibrium. In our planetary system, an example of dis-equi­librium is
found in the form of sunspots.

Whenever they occur on the sun there are disturbances in the planetary
system, though none are great enough to throw it out of balance. The
system of counter­balanced forces will break when this journey in the
cosmos reaches its point of maturity.

The same shattering occurs to man. While he lives, his spiritual and
physical bodies hold together. Man contains an echo or an image of the
entire cosmos. All of the functions in man's body are in equilibrium -
his faculties, all of the electrical charges that run through his brain,
the miles of nerves. This amazing entity will fall apart when the soul
leaves. It then immediately will start to decay. That is what will
happen to the heavens: the laws that hold them together will break and
they will just disintegrate.

39 So on that day neither man nor jinn shall be asked about his sin.

40 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

While the previous group of ayat spoke of the outer heavens, this group
speaks of the inner space of the individual. Every ruh will
spon­taneously transmit what it has gathered in the tuning period of
life in this world. There will be nothing to ask, because the question
will already have been answered.

Man in this life may be in nifaq (hypocrisy). He may hide his fears,
anxieties and suspicions. Nafaq related to nifaq, means a tunnel. Man
enters one hole .to come out from another. He is forever tunneling,
trying to escape. The end to his efforts to escape comes when
questioning ceases and he becomes an \`answer'. Then he will beam and
transmit the state in which he had left this world.

If he has been transmitting the Qur'an, then he will be close to the
main transmitter, Allah; he will be one of the ashabu-l-yami'n (the
companions of the right). If he has been trans­mitting his own song
which has his desires, expectations and self­-righteousness mixed into
it, then his transmission will be as good as that mixture.

41 The guilty will be recognized by their marks, so they will be seized
by the forelocks and the feet.

42 Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?

Everyone is caught by what he has put forth in his movements and his
actions. Those who have not let their hearts be gulub (plural of qalb),
have committed crimes against themselves. They will not have seen the
husn ( perfection) in this world nor will they have known tawhid. Those
who have been deprived of tawhid and the knowledge of the One are known
bisimahum, by their face, their marks, their scars.

Those who have allowed their hearts to be turned have set their hearts
free. Only then can man see the truth of every situation. In the next
life, however, there is an immediate recognition. Here one recognizes
the outer folds of the face, the wrinkles, or the coloration, but there
one sees Oneness because there is no longer any duality: there is only
One.

Nawasi are foreheads. The forehead of the upright hu­man projects out.
It is as though man wants to connect to something in front of him. Allah
says that man is caught by his highest point, which is his forehead, and
his lowest, which is his feet. There is no escape for him now, so how
can he still deny the Truth? He is the outcome of what he has put forth,
of where his feet have taken him and to what his forehead has made
sajda.


