Introduction
============

"Sauti Ya Bilal" a Swahili periodical of Bilal Muslim Mission of
Tanzania, has been generally acknowledged as one of the most informative
and comprehensive religious periodicals in East Africa. In 1968, the
Mission gave a detailed treatment to the subject of *'Khatm*
*an-Nubuwwah'* (Finality of Prophethood), in the form of three articles
which appeared in three consecutive issues. No wonder the series was
well-received by .the readers - learned and laymen alike.

That Muhammad (S), the Holy Prophet of Islam, was the last Prophet, and
that nobody was to get Prophethood after him, is a simple yet cardinal
belief of every Muslim. The Mission had explained that Islamic belief in
those Swahili articles, quoting verses from Qur'an, and traditions from
various traditionalists in corroboration.

A Qadiani missionary wrote a long letter in Swahili, making a frustrated
attempt to object to the contents of those articles. This letter was
answered by Sayyid Saâ€™eed Akhtar Rizvi, Chief Missionary. As there was
no reply forthcoming from the said missionary, silence prevailed.
However, a Shia African student later on wrote to Mr. Rizvi seeking
clarifications over the belief of *Khatm* *an-Nubuwwah;* and in that
letter certain passages were found to bear great similarity to the
previous letter from the Qadiani missionary.

Obviously, the Qadianis were circulating their letter or perhaps
propagating its contents, despite the refutation by Mr. Rizvi. Thus, the
Mission was left with no alternative but to circulate Mr. Rizvi's reply,
which assumed form of 24 foolscap cyclostyled pages. A copy was sent to
the said Shia student, who later on expressed his complete satisfaction.

These events were reported in the Bilal News as usual, and Haji Hasanaly
P. Ebrahim (Karachi) requested for a few copies. As the articles were in
Swahili, Mr. Rizvi very kindly agreed and promised to translate them
into English for the benefit of a wider public. In the meantime, I
requested Mr. Rizvi to add and argument certain relevant topics so as to
make the endeavor complete.

I am grateful to Mr. Rizvi for having conceded to my request. This
booklet is the result of Mr. Rizvi's laudable endeavor, and various
topics relevant to the subject of *Khatm* *an-Nubuwwah* are amply dealt
with. It also gives us an insight into the thinking ways of the
distracted, among them the Qadianis. May Allah Accept this, and shower
His Blessings upon Mr. Rizvi.

*Asgherali M. M. Jaffer*

June, 1971


