History of Religions
====================

The Qadiani Missionary wrote: If you have any doubt about Mirza Ghulam
Ahmad Qadianis claim, then show us a single example, since Prophet Adam
up to the death of the Holy Prophet of Islam, of such' a man who claimed
wrongly to be a prophet and whose claim had been successful. If wrong
claimants .of prophethood may succeed then what is the difference
between a, genuine prophet and an impostor?  
 Qur'an says in chapter al-Haqqah , 69, verses 45 to 47:

**  
**

أَخَذْنَا مِنْهُ بِالْيَمِينِ

**  
**
{45}

**  
**
ثُمَّ لَقَطَعْنَا مِنْهُ الْوَتِينَ

**  
**
{46}

**  
**
فَمَا مِنْكُمْ مِنْ أَحَدٍ عَنْهُ حَاجِزِينَ

**  
**
{47}

***"If*** ***(our Apostle Muhammad S.) had fabricated against us any of
the sayings certainly would we have seized him by the right hand; then
certainly would we have cut off his aorta".***

My Reply: This verse means that those who have been commissioned by God
cannot but deliver whatever they are charged with, and God never allows
them to forge anything of their own on His behalf.

But it does not mean that the impostors or the self-appointed prophets
who falsely claim to have been sent by God must perish because there is
no need to expose them. Their ridiculous claims, like those of
Bahaullah, or their lack of miracles are enough to expose their falsity.

Perhaps you do not know, but it is the accepted belief of all the sects
Sunni and Shia alike, that the only distinctions between true and false
prophets are:

l. The standard of their teachings - true prophets taught high morals
while false ones gave latitude to their followers;

2. Miracles - which appeared on the hands of the true prophets and not
on those of false ones;

3. the Ismat (sinlessness infallibility).

And the Holy Qur’an itself shows in various verses that those who
fabricate lies against Allah may get some enjoyment in this world; and
that their punishment 'is in Qiyamah. See for example:

***"Say, those who invent a lie against Allah will not prosper; some
enjoyment in this world; and then to Us will be their return. Then shall
We make them taste the severest penalty for their blasphemies".
(Qur’an,*** ***10:69·70)***

There never was any standard of the length of life or the success or
failure of his mission. It is just an arbitrary standard invented by
your Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani who wrote that:

"Since the beginning of the world there never was any example of even a
single person who got, '23 years like our chief the Holy Prophet (S) and
who was wrong in his claim of getting revelation from God…. If you find
a person, who claims, to be sent by God and if it is proved that 23
years had passed since the claim of receiving the revelation from
God.......... then you should believe that he is from God".

This self-invented standard of the truth or falsity of the claim of
prophethood is very amusing. Let us suppose, a man heard our Holy
Prophet (S) proclaiming his prophethood in the beginning and said that
he would wait 23 years to see whether Muhammad survived that period or
not, do you think he would have been excused and pardoned by God? And
what if he himself died during the life-time of the Holy Prophet without
accepting Islam? What a rubbish!

And remember that many true prophets had been 'killed within one, two or
three years of their prophethood. What would have been the position if
someone, during the prophethood of Prophet Yahya (John), refused to
believe in him, saying that as he did not live 23 years he was, God
forbid, a liar".

And also some impostors have lived more than 23 years after their
claims. Why make a condition from Adam' up to the Holy Prophet"? If it
is a Divine criterion, It would remain true ever after the Holy Prophet
of Islam. In fact, "after the Holy Prophet" would have been more
appropriate, and a better period for checking, because now we know that
no other religion is to come from God.

Still we see that many religions having no connection with Islam have
appeared after the Holy Prophet and have prospered. For example, Sikh
and Bahai religions. They themselves do not claim any affinity towards
Islam and still they have prospered though the Muslims and Qadianis both
agree that these religions are wrong.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Later Day Saints (Commonly known as Mormon
Church) was founded by Joseph Smith in 1820 A.D., when he claimed to
have received divine call for prophecy in the name of the Most High. He
claimed to receive divine revelation written upon golden plates which he
was able to translate. The first edition of the book of his revelation
was printed in 1830.

His associate, Oliver Cowdery, also claimed to be ordained by angelic
visitants. Smith was killed in 1844, i.e., 24 years after his claim; but
his murder did not stop his Mission. His followers flourished in Utah
and three adjoining states and the whole state of Utah is populated by
them, and one of them was considered as a candidate for U.S.A.
presidency in 1968.

They believe in the 'Book of Mormons' to be the 'Word of God', together
with the Bible, just as the (Qadianis believe in Barahin-e-Ahmadiya and
many other books of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani as the 'Word of God
together with the Qur'an.

Thus Joseph Smith claimed to be a prophet, as Mirza Qadiani did; he
published his revelation, as Mirza Qadiani did; he established a line of
prophets as Mirza Qadiani established a line of Caliphs; and his sect is
flourishing to such an extent that is beyond the dreams of the Qadianis
till this day; and what is more, he was given more than 23 years to live
after that claim, which Mirza Saheb was not given.

Now, I wonder what new excuses the Qadianis will invent to overcome this
insurmountable difficulty. Will they say that Mormon Church is from God,
so as to maintain the accuracy of the self-invented standard of Mirza
Qadiani?

It would be Interesting to you that your Mirza Qadiani had declared in
Arbain (No. 3) in two places (p.9; pp.29-30) that God had promised him
that he would live 80 years or 2 or 4 years more or less. It means that
he was promised to live not less than 76 years and not more than 84
years.

And also he wrote in the same book that God had promised to him to
protect him from every 'Khabith' (Dirty) disease. (Arbain No.3, p,9)

The book quoted above is in my library and you are welcome to see it any
time.  
 Well, now let us look at the facts and compare them with these claims:

(1) Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani was born in 1339 or 1840 A.D. and died on
26th May, 1908 A.D. 'It means that his claim of God's promise (80 years
or 2 or 4 years more or less) was wrong. As he had made this age of 76
to 84 years as a sign of his truth, his death at the age of 68 years
proves him an imposter by his own words."

(2) Up to 1901 A.D. many times he declared that his claim by the word
'prophethood' was not the 'prophethood' as 'understood by the Muslim);
but that it's real meaning was 'Muhaddath':

"In the books of this humble man (i.e., Mirza Qadiani himself), -
Fat'hul-Islam, Tawzihul-Maram, and Izala-e·Awham - all such words
"Muhaddath is a Nabi in one meaning", or " Muhaddathiyyat is a partial
Nubuwwah" or " Muhaddathiyyat is an imperfect Nubuwwah" are not used in
its true meaning. In my simplicity, I have used them in their literal
meaning. Never do I claim the real, Nubuwwah……. Therefore, I want to
explain to my Muslim brothers that if they are angry because of these
words they should treat them as amended and should read them as '
Muhaddath'……

"My intention, from the beginning as God knows very well, with this word
'Nabi' was not the real 'Nubuwwah', but only ' Muhaddath' which has
been· interpreted by the Holy Prophet as 'Mukallam' (with whom angels
talk) as he said about Muhaddath: 'There were before you in Bani Israel
men who were talked to (by the angels) without them being prophets".

(Ishtihar of Mirza Qadiani, given in Tabligh-e-Risalat, Vol.2, p.95, as
quoted in 'Qadiani Mazhab ka Ilmi Muhasiba of Ilyas Barni).

This advertisement was published by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani on 3rd
February, 1892, when he was defeated in a 3-day religious discussion
(Munazirah) with Muslim scholars.

In the long history of religions, he finds only two claimants of divine
revelations who wrote such confessions (or 'resignation') declaring that
their claims stood amended -- in other words the original claims were
wrong: First, Mirza Ali Mohammad, the founder of Babi; second, Mirza
Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani, founder of .the Qadiani religion.

Now, the Qadianis say that Mirza Ghulam Ahmad never said that he was not
a Nabi (Prophet). Mr. Abul-Ata Jalandhari, late principal of
Jameatul-Mubashslmin, Rabwa, writes in his book 'Tafheemat-e-Rabbaniyya'
(pp.44-45; 2nd edition, 1964).

"Yes, he (i.e., Mirza Ghulam Ahmad) did claim to be a 'Nabi' (Prophet)
without new Shari'ah; and he never denied this claim, neither before
1901 nor after 1901. As he (Mirza Ghulam Ahmad) has written:

"Wherever I have denied to be a prophet or apostle, it is only with this
meaning that I am not a bringer of a new shari'ah independently, nor I
am an independent 'Nabi'. But I have never denied prophethood in the
meaning that, getting spiritual benefits' from my leader apostle, and
being given his name for me, I have been given by Allah, through him,
the knowledge of unseen, (and) am an apostle and prophet, but without
any new Shari'ah. I have never denied to be called such a prophet; but
Allah has called me prophet and apostle in this very meaning. (Ek
Ghalati Ka Izala)"

First, read again his clear declaration that he was only a 'Muhaddath',
and his explanation (in the words of the Holy Prophet of Islam) that
'Muhaddath' means "men who were talked to by the angels without them
being 'Nabi' (prophet)".

Then look at this shameless assertion that "I have never denied
prophethood in the meaning that …….. I am an apostle and prophet, but
without a new Shari'ah."

Compare these two statements and there will be no need of any comment.
There is Persian proverb: A liar has no memory.

He writes in his hook "Haqiqatun-Nubuwwah" (page 148-150): .  
 "The writings of Hudhur (a.s.) (i.e., Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani) of
earlier times show that he is not a claimant of prophethood; but the
writings and talks of later period prove that he was claiming
prophethood.... ........ ........ Our research is that Prophet Masih
Maw'ud (a.s.) changed his belief about the question of Nubuwwah about
1901 A.D."  
 It means that he was not claiming to be prophet till 1901.

Also, he has written that "the question of Nubuwwah became clear on him
(Mirza Qadiani) in 1900 or 1901. He changed his belief in 1901.
Therefore, all the references of before 1901 in which he had denied his
prophethood are now abrogated (cancelled)".  
 Now, I would like to point out another 3 matters:

**First,** Allah says in the Qur'an:

***"The Messenger (of Allah) believed in what was revealed*** ***to***
***him from his Lord and the believers (also believed)". (Qur'an:
2:285)***

What kind of the prophet was Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani who according to
his later claims was given prophethood since 1887 or near that time, and
still he continued to disbelieve his own Nubuwwah for 14 years up to
1901? Have you heard anything like this in history or religions?

**Second:** Anyhow, he began his firm belief in his Nubuwwah in 1901.
And he died in 1908. It means that, according to his own standard he was
not given 23 years to live after the declaration of his claim, because
he was a liar.

**Third:** He had claimed that God had promised to him to protect him
from every Khabith (dirty) disease. But, the disease by which Mirza
Qadiani died was cholera according to his own declaration.

This last declaration is found in the writing of Mir Nasir Saheb,
father-in-law of Mirza Qadiani and one of his staunch followers. He
writes:  
 "The night when Hadhrat sahib (i.e., Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani) fell
ill, I had gone to sleep at my place. When the 'Takleef' (discomfort)
increased on him, I was awakened. When I reached Hadhrat Saheb and saw
his condition, he said addressing me: 'Mir Saheb, 'I have got epidemic
cholera'. Then, so far as I know, he never talked so clearly till he
died next day after 10 a.m.'"

(Hayat-e-Nasir, p.14; edited by Sheikh Yaqub Ali Irfani, Qadiani; as
quoted in 'Qadiani Mazhab Ka Ilmi Muhasiba' of Professor Ilyas Berni).

Now, according to his own standard Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadianis claim of
prophethood proves to be a lie, because God did not protect him from the
'Khabith" (dirty) disease.


