Conclusion from these Traditions
================================

All these traditions in very clear words are "foretelling the advent of
Prophet Jesus" son of Mary (a.s.) who was born from the womb of Mary
without any father, some 2000 years ago.

As I told earlier, it serves no purpose to argue whether he is dead or
alive. Even if he is dead, when Allah wants to bring him down at the
time of the appearance of Imam Mahdi *Akheruz-zaman* (a.j.). He is
powerful enough to bring him back to life.

The second thing which should be clear even to a blind is that Imam
Mahdi (a.j.) and Prophet Jesus (a.s.) are two persons not one. But Mirza
Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani claimed to be Imam Mahdi (a.j.) and Jesus, son of
Mary, both together.

They always proclaim a supposed tradition that 'There is no Mahdi (a.j.)
except Jesus'  
 But those very authors who have recorded it have declared it to be a
forgery, Sheikh Suleiman Barahi Qanduzi quotes in his book
"Yanabi-ul-Mawaddah", from Jawahir-ul-Iqdain of Samhudi:

'Samhudi writes:  
 "And the tradition of Hasan Basri from Anas bin Malik: The condition
will get from bad to worse; the world will be in the worst state,
miserliness will be most prevalent among the, people; Q*iyamah* will
occur when the worst of the people will be existing. Mahdi (a.j.) is no
other (person) but Jesus son of Mary has been narrated by Shafei and by
Ibn Majah in his Sunan and by Hakim in his Mustadrak; and, he (Hakim)
has said: "l have narrated this tradition thinking it ridiculous, not
that I think it authentic".

"And Baihaqi has said that: 'This tradition is narrated only by Muhammad
bin Khalid; and Hakim said that he was unknown and Nasai has clearly
said that he was unacceptable; and Ibn Majah said that nobody has
narrated it from Muhammad bin Khalid except Shafei".

Then the author of Yanabi-ul-Mawaddah has given three clear proofs
showing that this tradition is nothing but forgery.

Now, the attempts of Mirza Qadiani and his followers to make Mahdi
(a.j.) and Jesus one and the same person on the strength of this forged
tradition is just pathetic. Those who wrote it in their books refuted it
as being unauthentic, forged and based on the authority of someone who
is either non-entity or unacceptable.

And compare it with hundreds of traditions which clearly show that Imam
Mahdi (a.j.) and Jesus son of Mary are two separate identities. Can
anyone in his right senses say that all those hundreds of authentic
tradition should be discarded for one forged tradition just to prove
that Mirza Ghulam Ahmad was Mahdi (a.j.) and Messiah both in one
Christians 3-in-l god?

The third thing which is clear to the same degree from these traditions
is that Prophet Jesus son of Mary will come in the second appearance as
a Nabi. There will not be any revelation to him; he will not bring any
new message; nor a new Shariah; he will not add or subtract anything
from the Shariah of Muhammad; he will not renew the Shariah of Muhammad
in this world; he will not call people to believe in him; he will not
make a separate ummah of his followers.

He will be sent down just one special duty; that will be to annihilate
the Fitna (sedition) of Dajjal. He will come down for this purpose, in
such a manner that the Muslims amongst whom he will come down, will have
no doubt that he is the Jesus, son of Mary whose advent was foretold by
Prophet Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S).

He will mingle in the *Jama'at* of the Muslims, and will follow Imam of
the Muslims and will keep forward the same Imam Mahdi (a.j.) who will be
the Imam of the Muslims at that time, so that nobody may entertain the
idea that he has come back in his previous position of an *Ulul-Azm*
Prophet.

When he will come and join the *Jama'at* of the Muslims as a common
Muslim he will automatically demonstrate that he has not come as a
prophet to call the people to believe in him. And it was for this reason
that all the Muslim authors have expressly said that the second advent
of Prophet Jesus, son of Mary is not against the belief in the Finality
of the Prophethood of Prophet Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S).

His second coming will be just like the presence of a previous president
of a country in the country during the tenure of the office of the
ruling president. If he helps the present president on the order of the
latter, nobody will say that the previous president is acting in the
capacity of the president of the country. If a previous president helps
the ruling president, it is not deemed as challenging the validity of
the presidency of the present president.

Of course, if that previous president were to try to usurp the office of
the present president, or if somebody was to reject even the previous
presidency of the ex-president, it would be tantamount to treason. But
if nobody rejects or refutes the previous validity of the ex-president,
and if that ex-president is not calling people to swear their allegiance
now to him, nobody can say that just by helping the present president,
the ex-president is breaking the tenure of the office of the ruling
president.

Thus, if Prophet Jesus (a.s.) during his second advent were to call
people to believe in him or if somebody was to reject even his previous
prophethood, it will be against the Islamic belief. But as Prophet Jesus
(a.s.) at that time will not call people to believe in him, the Muslims
will not be required to believe in a new *Nubuwwah* (Prophethood).

They will be required to keep the same belief in his previous *Nubuwwah*
(Prophethood) which they do have even today and which even Prophet
Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S) had had. Thus his second coming will not affect
the *Khatm* *an-Nubuwwah* (Finality of the Prophethood) neither today
nor in the days to come.

The fourth thing which is clear from these traditions and other numerous
similar traditions is that *Dajjal,* who will be annihilated during the
second advent of Prophet Jesus (a.s.), will be from among the Jews, and
will present himself as Messiah.

It is necessary to mention that after the death of Prophet Solomon, Bani
Israel's history goes from one fiasco to another. At last, after the
captivity in Babylonia and Syria, they were scattered everywhere; and
their prophets gave them good tidings that a Messiah was to come from
God who would save them from dishonor and disgrace.

So, they were awaiting a Messiah who according to their thinking was to
be a king, who was to fight wars, conquering countries, gathering
Israelites from all over the world, and bringing them within Palestine,
establishing a very great, strong and powerful kingdom of the Jews.
Against their expectations, Prophet Jesus, son of Mary, came from God;
they did not accept him as Messiah as he was not a king, he did not
establish any kingdom neither strong nor weak so they refuted his claim
and tried to kill him.

Thenceforth, all the Jews in the world are awaiting the expected
Messiah, hoping that he would be a martial and political leader who will
establish a Jewish Kingdom from *Nile* to Euphrates and will collect all
the Jews in that land which they believe is theirs by inheritance. Now
if somebody looks at the condition of Middle East today and studies the
above-mentioned prophecies of the Holy Prophet of Islam, he will feel
that the stage is well prepared for the appearance of that *Dajjal* who
would claim to be the promised Messiah of the Jews.

Muslims have already been turned out of a bigger part of Palestine and a
Jewish state has been established in the name of Israel. The world's
Jews are coming to reside in that state and thanks to the Western
powers, it is now a power to reckon with. The Zionists have declared
openly that they want to reclaim the lands of their inheritance and the
maps which they have published of the future Jewish state encircle the
whole of Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, almost whole of Iraq and some parts of
Turkey, Egypt, the delta of *Nile* and the parts of Saudi Arabia
including Khaiber and Medina.

It does not require great intelligence to realize that if in future a
world war is started, the Jews will try to capture these lands. At that
time *Dajjal* will appear claiming to be that promised Messiah; and as
the Holy Prophet (S) said, at that time Muslims will undergo such
hardships and disasters that one day will appear like one year.

For this reason he told his *Ummah* to seek the refuge with God from
this *Fitna* of *Dajjal.* And to fight against that impostor Messiah,
Allah will not send any likeness of Messiah but the same original
Messiah who two thousand years ago was rejected by the same Jews and
whom they, according to their thinking he crucified and destroyed; the
place of coming down of that original Messiah will not be India, Africa
or Pakistan; but Damascus, because it will be at that place that
fighting will be going on at that time. And that impostor Messiah will
enter Syria with an army of 70,000 Jews, and will reach near Damascus.

Exactly at that crucial time, Prophet Jesus, son of Mary will come down
on the eastern part of Damascus near the white minaret. And after the
morning prayer, will lead the Muslims to fight against *Dajjal* and
*Dajjal* will flee away from his attack and at last Prophet Jesus will
catch him near the gate of Ludd (Lod) and he will be killed.

Then the Jews will be killed and Judaism will vanish. Likewise the
present-day Christianity will come to an end by the declaration of
Prophet Jesus (a.s.). All religions will merge into Islam.

So it is clear from all these traditions that the prophecies of the Holy
Prophet (S) do not entertain the idea of any likeness of Messiah or the
appearance of Messiah; but the same Messiah who was rejected by the Jews
and who will bring the Jews as well the Christians to the right path by
helping Imam Mahdi (a.j.) *Akheruz-zaman*; and thus the whole world will
gather under the banner of Islam and will recite one Kalema "La Ilaha
Illallah Muhammadun Rasulallah".

A Comparison Again
------------------

Apart from that general review, let us compare some of the particulars
of Prophet Jesus, son of Mary with those of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani
to see what justification he had in claiming to be the 'promised
Messiah':

**1. Genealogy:** Prophet Jesus always been mentioned in these
traditions (some of which begin with the oath in the name of Allah) as
'Jesus, son of Mary'. According to Mirza Qadiani himself, "the oath
proves that the news is to be taken at its apparent meaning and there is
no interpretation or exception". (Vide Hamamat-ul-Bushra, p.14).

It means that these traditions are to be taken at their face-value. When
they say Jesus son of Mary they do mean Jesus, son of Mary; they cannot
refer to Ghulam Ahmad son of Ghulam Murtaza and Chiragh Bibi.

**2. Minaret of Damascus:** Prophet Jesus (a.s.) will come down at the
eastern minaret Damascus mosque, Mirza Qadiani was born in Qadian, and
never set his foot in Damascus[^1].

**3. Following the Imam of** **the Muslims:** Prophet Jesus (a.s.) will
not call people to follow him and will not establish any new *Ummah.*
Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani called the people to believe in him and established
a separate *Ummah* of his followers.

**4. Killing of Dajjal:** Prophet Jesus (a.s.) will kill the *Dajjal,*
at the gate of Ludd (Lod), which is situated in present day's Israel.
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani said that *Dajjal* means the British nation.
And then, instead of destroying the British, he made the obedience to
their tyrannical rule and integral part of his religion.

**5. Hajj and/or Umrah:** Prophet Jesus (a.s.) will perform Hajj or
Umrah or will combine both. Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani did not even see
the Kaba, let alone the Hajj or Umrah.

**6.** **Death:** Prophet Jesus (a.s.) will die between Mecca and
Medina. Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani did not even enter the land of Hejaz.
He died at Lahore.

**7. Burial:** Prophet Jesus (a.s.) will be buried in the room in which
is buried the Holy Prophet of Islam (S). Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani is
buried in Qadian.

**8. Two Yellow Robes:** Prophet Jesus (a.s.) at the time of his coming
down will be wearing two yellow robes. Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani says
in this connection: "(The Holy Prophet of Islam) had said that Messiah
(The word used in the tradition is 'Jesus, son of Mary not Messiah'), at
the time of his coming down from sky will be wearing two yellow robes.
'Thus, I have two diseases: one of the upper part of the body;
i*.e.'Miraq*', and another of lower part, i.e., diabetes (Dairy. of
Mirza Qadiani; Akhbar Badr, Vol. 2; No; 23, dated· 7/6/1906).

*'Miraq'* is a type of *'Malikhulia'* (Melancholia) which is a type of
insanity; and Mirza Qadiani in various places has declared himself
*Miraq'.* It was not an acquisition laid against him by his enemies. It
was a fact accepted by Mirza himself. Now let us see what are the
symptoms of *Malikhulia:*

"In some patients this abnormality reaches a stage where he thinks
himself to be knowing the future events and unseen things, and many
times prophesies of future happenings, and some patients think that they
are angels". (Sharh-ul-Asbab wal 'amat by Burhanuddin Nafis).

"Most of the fancies of the patient concern that field of work in which
he was engaged during his health. For example, if the patient is a
learned man he claims to be a prophet and claims to show miracles, talks
of divinity and preaches accordingly. (Iksir-e-A'zam, Vol. 1 p.l88; by
Hakim Muhammad Azad Khan).

Dr. Shah Nawaz (one of' the followers of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani)
wrote in Review of Religions (August, 1926):

"If it is proved about a claimant of revelation that he was suffering
from Hysteria or *Maliklhulia* (Melancholia) or Epilepsy, then no other
blow is needed to refute his claim; because it is such a blow which
knocks out the building of his truth from its foundation". (The
reference is taken from Muhammadiyya Pocket Book).

Anyhow, apart from the fact that a person suffering from *Miraq* or
melancholia cannot be a prophet, let us see what other 'likeness to
Jesus, son of Mary' this comparison shows:

Prophet Jesus (a.s.) cured the sick people. And that was his miracle.
Here Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadian claims to be Jesus, son of Mary by
showing that he is suffering from *Miraq* and Diabetes!

And according to Qadiani interpretation, coming down of Prophet Jesus
(a.s.) means the birth of a 'likeness to Messiah'. Well, Mirza Ghulam
Ahmad was not wearing two yellow robes (or, for that matter, any robe)
at the time of his birth.

All these comparisons, explanations and admissions show that Mirza
Ghulam Ahmad Qadianis particulars do not fit the particulars of Prophet
Jesus, son of Mary (a.s.) which have been mentioned in the traditions of
the Holy Prophet.

Thus his claim to be a likeness of Jesus, son of Mary (a.s.) is proved
to be as baseless as was his claim to be the Imam Mahdi (a.j.), or a
prophet.

[^1]: A Qadiani chief missionary once wrote: “In Damascus, at a place
called Karbala, Seyyidina Hussein was wartyred by so-called Muslims.
Kadian is exactly on the east of Damascus and at the same latitude-
Kadian is given the name of a place where an innocent Imam was
martyred.” (A Lively Discussion). This “highly qualified” chief
missionary of Qadians thinks that Karbala is “ a place in Damascus”. I
think this revelation is beyond any comment, If Karbala’ is in Damascus,
then Tokyo is in London, and Dar-es-Salaam is in Cairo!


