Finality of Prophethood, Khatm an-Nubuwwah
==========================================

(A) Continuity of Religious Leadership
--------------------------------------

God, in His grace, never left mankind without a religious guide. That
guide may be a prophet; a *'Rasul'* or an *'Imam* '. The first man,
Prophet Adam (a.s.), was made a vicegerent of Allah on this earth, so
that he might lead his children on the right path.  
 Since then, prophets and messengers were sent to all the regions and
all the peoples. Allah says in the Qur'an:

***"And there never was a people without a warner having lived among
them". (Qur'an, 35:24)***

In all, there came 124,000 prophets from God. Many of the prophets were
sent to one or two villages, some even to one family or one man. Others
were sent to a bigger area; still others to a whole tribe. But none of
them, before our Holy Prophet, was sent to the whole mankind.

Our Holy Prophet was sent to the whole mankind for up to the end of the
world. No other prophet is to come after him. He was, and is, the Last
Prophet.

(B) Evolution of Religious Guidance
-----------------------------------

It appears from the history of divine religions that God sent from time
to time many *'Shari'ahs'* (Divine Laws) which were suitable to that
particular era. Prophet Noah (a.s.) brought a *Shari'ah* which was
simple to a great extent. And that *Shari'ah* was followed by other
prophets up to the advent of Prophet Abraham (a.s.). Prophet Abraham
(a.s.) was given a *Shari'ah* which was more elaborate and more
comprehensive than the previous one.

The *Shari'ah* of Prophet Abraham remained in force for the children of
Israel up to the time of Prophet Moses (a.s.). When Prophet Moses (p.u
h.*)* was given Torah (Law), it was a really comprehensive and fully
detailed *Shari'ah,* which was followed by all the prophets of Bani
Israel till Prophet Jesus (a.s.) came. Prophet Jesus (a.s.) perfected
the *Shari'ah* of Prophet Moses (a.s.) and made adjustments according to
the time. The*,* *Shari'ah* of Prophet Jesus (a.s.) remained valid till
the arrival of the Holy Prophet of Islam (S).

Coming to the other branch of the family of Prophet Abraham (a.s.) we
find that the children of Ismael were expected to follow the *Shari'ah*
of Prophet Abraham (a.s.) up to the time of the Holy Prophet of Islam,
Prophet Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S). When he came, he abrogated and
cancelled all the previous *Shari'ahs,* and brought the final, most
comprehensive and most suitable and moderate *Shari'ah* of all, which
can meet the challenge of the changing trines without any difficulty up
to the Day of *'Qiyamah* (the Day of Resurrection).

(C) Why 'Shari'ahs' were Changed?
---------------------------------

It may be asked: Why the changes in *Shari'ahs?* Why the gradual
revelation? And why the separate *'Ulul-Azm'* (Prominent) prophets
coming one after another? Well, when a child is born, the parents make
some garments for him. And as the child continues to grow, the old
clothes are discarded, and new ones made according to the growth of the
body of the child, this continuous during his childhood, during his
adolescence, during his teenage, till a time comes after 25 or 30 years,
when the body reaches its maximum height and attains its full growth.

After that, the size which fits him at that time continues to fit him up
to the end of his life. Nobody will suggest that as the child at the age
of 25 years is expected to be 5 ft. 6 in. tall, he should be given the
clothes of that size on the day of his birth. Nor will anybody think
that a young man of 30 years should wear the same clothes which he used
to wear when he was 10 years old. Likewise, we may suppose that the
humanity was a child in the days of Prophet Adam (a.s.) and Noah (a.s.),
which reached its adolescence in the days of Prophet Abraham (a.s.) and
continued to grow (mentally, socially and spiritually). Accordingly,
Allah continued discarding and abrogating old *Shari'ahs* and sending
new ones according to the social, intellectual and spiritual needs of
the times.

This continued up to the time of Prophet Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S). This
time may be compared as the age of 25 or 30 years of a man when he
reaches the full height and the highest peak of his strength. Now there
is no chance that he will outgrow his clothes, and the size of what age
remains in force till his last day. When humanity reached that stage,
*Allah* sent the final *Shari'ah* which was to serve the mankind to the
last day of the world. After Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S) there was no need
for any *Shari'ah*; there was no need for any new Prophet or messenger
from God. And it was for this reason that he was declared by Allah to be
the last of the prophets.

**Question:** Admitted that the body does not grow in height after about
25 years; but still there appear changes in the body. A person may gain
or lose considerable weight, necessitating some changes in the
measurement of his clothes. Therefore, now can you say that there will
never be any need for a new *Shari'ah* after Islam?

**Answer:** Clothes usually do not adjust themselves according to the
build of a body. But Islam has a built-in capacity to cover all the
possible situations which a man faces during his life-time. In this
respect, we may compare it with those sophisticated electronic devices
which automatically adjust to the temperature, light, humidity and other
relevant factors of the operating time. If you take a good camera, you
will find that its lens makes all the necessary adjustments according to
the distance and light without any need for you to make those
adjustments manually.

Likewise, Islam has all the rules for all the possible situations, and
as soon as a given situation changes, the *Shari'ah'* automatically
recognizes the change and another set of rules applicable to the new
situation comes into force immediately and automatically.  
 This flexibility is the unique feature of Islam which is not found in
any other religion. And this feature eliminates the need of a new
*Shari'ah.*

Of course, the need for an interpreter of the Qur'an and protector of
the *Shari'ah* will remain forever. But Allah appointed *Imams* for this
purpose, after the Last Prophet. The chain of the Prophethood came to an
end and a new system of religious leadership, known as *'Imamat'* was
introduced. The Holy Prophet said "Bani Israel, prophets were leading
them; when a prophet died another prophet succeeded him. But after me
there is no prophet, and surely there will be Caliphs".


