'Khatam un-Nabiyyin' in Tradition
=================================

One often hears Qadiani missionaries asserting that the phrase *"*
*Khatam* *un-Nabiyyin* *"m* has not been interpreted as "the Last
Prophet" by the Holy Prophet himself. The fact is that the Holy Prophet
himself has explained this phrase in these words.

The First Tradition
-------------------

And I am *Khatam* *un-Nabiyyin,* there is no prophet after myself. The
Tradition (Hadith) is this:  
 "Thauban said that the Holy Prophet said: (in a long tradition part of
which is that) "there will appear in my *Ummah* thirty imposters each of
them will claim to be a prophet while I am Khatam un-Nabiyyin*,* there
is no prophet after me.

This tradition is found in Abu Dawood Kitabul-Fitan; and another
tradition of the same meaning from Abu Huraira in Kitab-ul-Malahim. Both
traditions are narrated by Tirmizi also.

The Second Tradition
--------------------

The Holy Prophet said: "The simile of myself and the other prophets is
the simile of a well-built palace in which the place of a brick was left
vacant; the sight-seers were roaming around that palace expressing their
wonder on its fine construction except the place of that missing brick.
Thus, I am that brick and I closed the gap of that place. The
construction was completed by me and the messengers of God: were
completed by me. So, I am that brick and I am *'Khatam* *un-Nabiyyin'*
(the last Prophet)."

This tradition has been recorded in Saheeh Bukhari (Kitab-ul’Manaqib;
Bab Khatamun-Nabiyyin) with minor variations in wordings.

It means that after the advent of the Holy Prophet of Islam, the
building of Prophethood was complete; there is no vacant place left, so
that another *Nabi* be expected to come and fill that place.

There are four traditions like this one in Saheeh Muslim
(Kitabul-Fadhail, Bab Khatamun Nabiyyin) and the last of those
traditions has these extra words: "Then I came and I closed the
prophets".

The same tradition in the same words is found in Saheeh Tirmizi
(Kitab-ul-Manaqib, Bab Fazlin Nabi; and Kitab-ul-Adab, Bab-ul-Amthal).

In Musnad of Abu Dawood Tayalisi this tradition has been narrated by
Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari, and its last words are: "The Prophets have
been closed by me".

And these traditions with minor differences in the wordings are found in
Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal narrated by Ubai bin Ka'ab, Abu Said Khudri and
Abu Huraira.

The Third Tradition
-------------------

The Holy Prophet said: *"Qiyamah* will not come till many groups from my
*Ummah* follow the idol-worshippers (commit capital sins like the idol
worshippers) and till they worship idols; and surely there will be in my
*Ummah* 30 impostors, every one of them will suppose himself to be a
prophet; while I am *'Khatam* *un-Nabiyyin'* (last prophet), there is no
prophet after me."

Tirmizi has narrated these traditions from Thauban and Abu Huraira, and
the second tradition says:  
 "Till there will be about thirty imposters each of them would claim to
be a messenger of Allah".

Qadianis' Excuse
----------------

A. Qadiani missionary wrote to me about this tradition but this prophecy
was already fulfilled before Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani. The book
*'Al-Bakara'* p. 15. says that "If we count all those who claimed
Prophethood after the Holy Prophet up to our time, this number has been
completed. And it is known to all those who know the history." The
writer of this book died in 828 Hijri. Up to this year (i.e., 1390) 562
years have passed since that writing. Do you think that writer was
wrong'?"

I wrote to him: "Well, what book is this 'Al Bakara''? Who was its
author? This clutching to straws shows how poor your arguments are. Of
course, he was wrong, because centuries after him, Nawwab Siddiq Hassan
Khan of Bhopal (who died in 1889 A. D.), wrote in his book
'Hujajul-Karamah'.

The prophecy of the Holy Prophet - that there would come 30 *Dajjals* in
this *Ummah* - is proving correct; and 27 of those *Dajjals* have
already appeared." (page 540).

Remember that this count of 27 was before the claim of Mirza Ghulam
Ahmad Qadiani.

Sometimes, some writers have committed the mistake of counting everyone
who claimed prophethood after the Holy Prophet as one of those 30
promised *Dajjals.* But it is wrong, because in this way we will find
hundreds of *Dajjal* and the number 30 would be exceeded by far.

That is why Imam Ibn Hajar Asqalani has written in 'Fat'h-ul·Bari Sharh
Saheeh Bukhari (Vol. VI, p455): "It is not the meaning of this tradition
to count every person who claimed to be prophet after Muhammad (S);
because there were so many of them that they cannot be counted; as
mostly such claimants suffer from insanity and*·'Sawda.".*[^1] But this
tradition means only those who get some strength i.e., whose religion
becomes accepted and who gets sufficient followers".

Therefore, if we add one more after 1889, the total comes to 28. There
are still two more to come.  
 Then we come to the public declaration of Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Imam Ali
ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), which is given in Al-Iqd-ul-Farid, Vol. IV, p. 75.
In this lecture, Imam Ali (a.s.) said about the Holy Prophet Muhammad
(S):

Until Allah honored him (Muhammad) by Ruh-ul-Amin (i.e., Angel Gabriel)
and the Bright Light (i.e., Qur'an or Islam) and completed with him the
prophets and completed with him the number of the Messengers."

See how the word "completed with him the prophets" has been explained by
"completed with him the number of the Messengers".

It should be noted that in the whole Qur'an, the word *'Khatam'* has
been used only once and that is in this phrase. Also, this phrase;
"*Khatam* *un*-*Nabiyyin"* was never used in Arabic language before this
verse. It was a new phrase which was used for the first time in the
Qur'an in this verse.

And, therefore the only correct way of knowing its real significance is
to see how this phrase was interpreted by the Holy Prophet of Islam,
because it was revealed to him, and as such no other person can know its
meaning better than he. And he himself interpreted in these words:  
 "And I am *Khatam un-Nabiyyin* there is no prophet after me".

The saying of the Holy Prophet (S) is a proof in itself. But when that
saying is the interpretation of the wording of the Holy Qur'an, then it
becomes double proof. The question is: Who has more right to understand
Qur'an and to interpret the Qur’an than Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S)? Who can
explain the meaning of *Khatam* *un-Nabiyyin* better than Muhammad (S)?

And who has any right that we should listen to his claims leaving the
wording of the Holy Prophet of Islam aside, the Holy Prophet on whom the
Qur'an 'was revealed? Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani himself has said:
"Nobody can explain the meaning of *Ilham* (Revelation) better than the
person on whom that *Ilham* was, sent".[^2]

[^1]: Sawda: in ancient and medieval physiology, four chief fluids of
the body (which are called four humours or four cardinals) were blood,
phlegm, choler and melancholia or black choler. These four cardinals by
their relative proportions were supposed to determine a person’s
physical and mental qualities. Melancholia or black choler is called in
Arabic Sawda, litterally black substance. Excess of Sawda was supposed
to cause mental ailments like melancholia (insanity and mania) besides
many ailments of blood etc… and gradually, the word came to be used in
common language for insanity, mania and melancholia.

[^2]: Ishtihar of Mirza Qadiani, 7/8/1887, recorded in
Tabligh-e-Risalat, Vol. 1, p. 121


