Other Traditions
================

Now we give here some of the other traditions of the Holy Prophet which
show that he himself did claim to be the Last Of The Prophets, using
other phrases:

The Fourth Tradition
--------------------

The Holy Prophet said, "Bani Israel, prophets were leading them; when a
prophet died another prophet succeeded him. But after me there will be
no prophet; there will be Caliphs." (Saheeh Bukhari Kitab-ul-Manaqib).

The Fifth Tradition
-------------------

The Holy Prophet said: "Verily, the Messengership and the Prophet hood
have (now) ended; so there is no messenger after me and no prophet,"
(Tirmizi Kitab al-:R'u'uya, Babu Dhihab al-Nubuwwah; Musnad Ahmad bin
Hanbal from Anas bin Malik).

The Sixth Tradition
-------------------

This tradition is found in Saheeh Bukhari; Saheeh Muslim,
(Kitab-ul-Fadhail; Bab Asmain-Nabi); Saheeh Tirmizi, (Kitab-ul-Adab, Bab
Asmain·Nabi); Muwatta (Kitab-ul-Asmain-Nabi); Mustadrak of Al-Hakim,
(Kitab-al-Tarikh Bab Asmain-Nabi):

The Holy Prophet said: "I am Muhammad; and I am Ahmad; and I am *Mahi,*
the *Kufr* will be erased by me; and I am *Hashir,* i.e., after me
people will be gathered in *Hashr* (i.e., after me there will be no
prophet; after me there will be only *Qiyamah;* and I am *Aqib* after
whom there will be no prophet."

The Seventh Tradition
---------------------

The Holy Prophet said: "God did not send any prophet but He warned His
*Ummah* about *Dajjal* (But he did not appear among them). And I am the
last of the prophets and you are the last of the *Ummahs,* and he will
appear among you anyhow.  
 (Sunan Ibn Majah, Kitab-ul-Fitan, Bab-u1-Dajjal).

The Eighth Tradition
--------------------

There is another tradition in Saheeh Muslim, Saheeh Tirmizi and Sunan
Ibn Majah which says:

The Holy Prophet said: "I have been given superiority over other
prophets by six distinctions- (1) I have been given the ability to utter
short sentences covering wide range of meanings; (2) I was helped by
fear; (3) The booty of war was made lawful for me; (4) The earth has
been made for me *Masjid* .and a means to c1eanliness; (5.)I have been
sent as the Messenger of Allah to the whole world; (6) And the chain of
the Prophets was finished by me,"

The Ninth Tradition
-------------------

Abdur-Rahman bin Jubair said that he heard Abdullah bin Amr bin ‘As
saying that one day the Holy Prophet(S) came out of his house in such a
manner as he was taking our leave; and he said three times; "I am
Muhammad the unlettered prophet." Then he said, "and there is no prophet
after me."

The Tenth Tradition
-------------------

This tradition is found in Musnad Ahmad Bin Hanbal, Nasai and Abu
Dawood. The Holy Prophet said: "There is no prophethood after me, except
the good tidings."

He was asked: "And what are the good tidings, O' Messenger of Allah?" He
said "Good dreams", or he said "true dreams". It means that there was no
possibility of revelation after the Holy Prophet. The utmost that
anybody will be given as a sign from Allah will be through the true
dreams.

The Eleventh Tradition
----------------------

Baihaqi in his Saheeh (Kitab-al-Ru'uya) and Tabarani have narrated that
the Holy Prophet said:  
 "There is no *Nabi* after me and there is no *Ummah* after my *Ummah.*"

The Twelfth Tradition
---------------------

The tradition is found in Saheeh Muslim (Kitab-ul-Hajj). The Holy
Prophet said "And I am the last of the Prophets and my *Masjid* is the
last of the mosques."

It should be mentioned here that the Qadianis claim that the Holy
Prophet said that his Masjid was "the Last Masjid"; while in fact it is
not the last of the mosques, because after that millions of mosques been
built and are being built every day in the world; likewise when the Holy
Prophet said that he was the "the Last Masjid", he meant that there
would be prophets coming after him; though according to the *Fadhilah*
he was the Supreme Most Prophet as his *Masjid* is Superior to all other
mosques.

But these people have lost the ability to understand the words of Allah
and his Prophet. This tradition has been narrated in Saheeh Muslim, in
the chapter where Prophet Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S) has said that there
are only three mosques in the world which has superiority over other
mosques and the prayers in which is thousand times more rewarding than
in other mosques; and it is for this reason that travelling for the
purpose of prayers is allowed and lawful to these three mosques only.

Other mosques have no right that a man should travel to pray there
leaving the other mosques. First of those mosques is Masjid-ul-Haram,
which was built by Prophet Abraham and Prophet Ismael (a.s.); the second
mosque is the Masjid-ul-Aqsa which was built by prophet David and
Prophet Solomon (a.s.); and the third Mosque is the Masjid of Madina
built by the Holy Prophet (S).

The Holy meant that as there is no prophet coming after him there will
be no mosque in the world after his mosque which would have more
*thawab* (spiritual reward) and superiority over other mosques. Thus it
is the last of the mosques of the prophets and the last mosque to which
a man is allowed to travel for the purpose of prayer in it.

This meaning is clear from another tradition where the wording is:  
 "I am the last of the prophets and my mosques are the last of the
mosques of the prophets." This Tradition is narrated Daylami ibn Najjar
and Bazzar and is recorded in Kanz-ul Ummal.

The Thirteenth Tradition
------------------------

*'Hadith-ul-Manzila'* is the saying of the Holy Prophet (S), which he
said at the time of his journey to Tabuk. This tradition is correct
without any doubt from any quarter, and innumerable traditionalist and
historians have recorded it. Some of them are:

• Saheeh Bukhari, Vol 3. p.58

• Saheeh Muslim, Vol 2, p.323

• Sunan Ibn Majah, Vol 1, p.28

• Mustadrak, Vol 3, p.109

• Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, Vol 1, p.173-182

At the time of that journey, the Holy Prophet (S) has left Imam Ali
(a.s.), as his successor in Madina. Imam Ali (a.s.) said "You are
leaving me behind among women and children." The Holy Prophet (S)
replied: "Are you not pleased that you have the same position with me as
Aaroon had with Moses, except that there is no prophet after me."

This also is a great proof from the tradition of the Holy Prophet (S)
that there would be no prophet after him.

These and other traditions have been narrated by numerous companions of
the Holy Prophet and it proves that the Holy Prophet of Islam on
different occasions, in different ways and in different words has made
it crystal clear that he was the last of the prophets, and there was no
*Nabi* coming after him, that the chain of *Nubuwwah* (Prophethood) has
been completed, that anybody who claimed to be a *Rasul* or *Nabi* after
him would be *Dajjal* and *Kazzab* (liar).

Can there be any other interpretation or meaning of the words of Qur'an
*''Khatam un-Nabiyyin'* than this?

Also there is the Declaration of *Sahaba* just after the death of Holy
Prophet that from then on there was no *Nabi* to come.

The famous collection of the lectures, etc. of Imam Ali (a.s.) known as
'Nahj-ul-Balagha' (which has been published in Egypt with foot notes and
explanations of Sheikh Muhammad Abduh) reveals on page 269:

Imam Ali (a.s.) said when he was washing the body of Holy Prophet (S):
"My father. and mother be your ransom, such a thing has been
discontinued with your death which was never discontinued with the death
of any other person, (and that thing is) Prophethood, announcement (of
*Ghaib)* and the news of heaven."


