Nubuwwah without new Shari’ah
=============================

Concerning the last tradition mentioned in the previous chapter, the
Qadiani missionary had written to me:  
 "Imam Muhammad Tahir Gujrati has written in his Takmila Majma-ul-Bihar
(p.85) that meaning of is that no such prophet will come after me who
will abrogate my *Shari'ah"*

I wrote in reply:  
 "First of all, all such writers refer to the second coming of Prophet
Jesus; son of Mary (a.s.) who's *Nubuwwah* (Prophethood) was some 600
years before the advent of our Holy Prophet. They mean that if a
previous prophet re-appears after the Holy Prophet it is not against the
'Finality of Prophethood', because even when he will come he will follow
the *Shari'ah* of our Holy Prophet.

Not only this; he will refrain even from leading the prayers, and will
pray behind the Imam of the Muslims, Thus he will live just like other
Muslims - he will not call people to believe in his own *Nubuwwah;* he
will not bring any revelation; he will not establish any new community,
separate from all the Muslims. *'Khatam un-Nabiyyin'* has closed the
door of prophet hood so far as the newcomers are concerned.

But it has not stripped the previous Prophets of their prophethood, this
meaning has clearly been written in 'Mishkat-ul-Masabih' in a note under
the wording of the Holy Prophet "and the prophets were ended with me"
which says "i.e. creation of the prophets; **thus no prophet will be
created after me.** This edition of Mishkat was printed in 1307 A.H.,
long before the claim of prophethood by Mirza Qadiani.

So you must understand that the Muslim writers do not say that a new
prophet can come after the Holy Prophet, calling the people to believe
in himself. When they say Isa bin Mariam they do mean Isa bin Mariam;
they do not even dream of any *Masil* (likeness) of Masih or any Ghulam
Ahmad bin Ghulam Murtaza of Qadian.

"If, as you believe, Prophet Isa bin Mariam has died and is not to come
again, then all the writings of Muslim scholars in this respect would be
worthless: you cannot fasten them on Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani who
surely was not born before the Holy Prophet, and who was not born
without father and whose mother was Chiragh bibi and, not Mariam bint
Imran.

Look at in this way. Either the writings of these scholars about
re-coming of Prophet Isa (a.s.) are correct or are wrong. If they are
correct, then they refer to Isa bin Mariam, not to Ghulam Ahmad bin
Ghulam Murtaza. And if these writings are wrong, then how can you prove
your ideas with a wrong assertion? Frankly speaking, this twisting of
the writings of scholars cannot do you any good.

Why Not Perfect Prophethood?
----------------------------

"Moreover, why do you say that no *Sahib ash-Shari’ah* prophet can come
after the Holy Prophet of Islam?" According to your interpretations,
there is nothing in the Qur'an to prove that the Holy Prophet of Islam
was the Last Prophet; *Khatam* *un-Nabiyyin* means just a "seal of the
Prophets" or "the supreme most prophet", and shows just the supremacy of
the Holy Prophet over all the other prophets, *Sahib ash-Shari’ah* and
non *Sahib ash-Shari’ah* alike; *La Nabiyya Ba'adi* means only that no
*Sahib ash-Shari’ah* prophet will come afterwards.

Alright, what is the trouble if a *Sahib ash-Shari’ah Nabi,* like
Prophet Moses (a.s.), comes after the Holy Prophet and whose grade is
below that of the Holy Prophet?

Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani wrote in several places that "is it not
ridiculous to think that in this *Ummah* Siddiqs, Martyrs, and Pious
people will come but no prophet will come? Well, is not prophethood a
grace of Allah? Why this grace should be withdrawn from this *Ummah*
which was to be the best of all *Ummahs?*"

Well, now tell me: Why a *Sahib ash-Shari’ah* prophet should not come
into this *Ummah? Is* not *Sahib ash-Shari’ah* prophethood more perfect
than the prophethood without a new *Shari'ah?* Why this superior grace
of Allah' has been withheld from this *Ummah?*"

Once you say that Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S) was not the Last Prophet, you
cannot say that a *Sahib ash-Shari’ah* prophet cannot come into this
*Ummah*."

And following your trend of thinking, the idol-worshippers may easily
say: *'La* *Illah IllAllah',* does not mean that there is no other god.
It just means that there are many other gods, but they're under Allah,
their god ship is inferior to Allah; and their inferior god ship is not
against the belief in the Unity of God, because these gods are only His
followers."

Ibn al-‘Arabi’s Views
---------------------

Qadiani also claim that Sheikh Muhyiddin Ibn al-‘Arabi of Spain has said
that 'it is possible for a Muslim saint *(Wali)* to attain in his
spiritual evolution prophetic revelations.' Before going further it's
necessary to remind the Qadianis that Sheikh Muhyiddin Ibn al-‘Arabi was
a believer in *'Wahdat-ul-wujud'* (The Unity of Being): he believed that
everything is He (i.e., God).

This belief has been termed by Muslim theologians as the biggest
paganism, which turns even a dog and pig into a deity. And the second
Caliph of the Qadianis, Mirza Mahmud Ahmad, said in his *Khutba*
(sermon) of Friday, printed in the Al-Fazl, dated 20th October,1925
(Vo1.13, No.46) about Ibn al-‘Arabi that 'his knowledge was not
complete; therefore, Ibn al-‘Arabi went out to the (belief of)
*Wahdat-ul-wujud.'*

Now, is it not astonishing that they want to base their faith on the
alleged views of a man whose knowledge was not complete!

Coming to the views of the said Sheikh Muhyiddin Ibn al-‘Arabi, we may
quote from 'Islam and Ahmadism' of Dr. Iqbal. It .should he noted
that*;* *Tasawwuf'* (Mysticism) was the special subject of Dr. Iqbal.

He writes:"I personally believe this view of the Sheikh Muhyiddin Ibn
al-‘Arabi to be psychologically unsound; but assuming it to be correct
to Qadiani argument is based on a complete misunderstanding of his
position. The Sheikh regards it as a purely private achievement which
does not, and in the nature of things cannot, entitle such a saint to
declare that all those who do not believe in him are outside the pale of
Islam. Indeed, from the Sheikh's point of view there may be more than
one saint, living in the same age or country, who may attain to
prophetic consciousness.

"The point to be realized is that while it is psychologically possible
for a saint to attain to prophetic experience his experience will have
no social-political significance making him the center of a new
organization and entitling him to declare this organization to be the
criterion of the faith or disbelief of the followers of Muhammad.

"Leaving his mystical psychology aside, I am convinced from a careful
study of the relevant passages of the *Futuhat* that the great Spanish
mystic is as firm a believer in the Finality of Muhammad as any orthodox
Muslim. And if he had seen in his mystical vision that one day in the
East some Indian amateur in Sufism would seek to destroy the Holy
Prophet's Finality under cover of his mystical psychology, he would have
certainly anticipated the Indian *Ulema* (Muslim scholars) in warning
the Muslims of the world against such traitors to Islam."

To make Dr. Iqbal's meaning clear, here are some quotations from the
Sufis' books. Sheikh Abdul-Wahhab Sha'arani writes in his 'Al-Yawaqit
wal-Jawahir' (p.25 ):

"The difference between them (i.e., *Nabi* and *Rasul)* is that the
*Nabi,* when the Spirit (i.e., angel) reveals to him anything, the
*Nabi* keeps that revelation to himself reservedly and he is forbidden
to convey that (revelation) to another person." And if he is told to
"convey what is sent to you" [either to a special group, as was the case
with all the prophets; or to one and all - and this universal
prophethood was not given to anyone except Muhammad (S)]. He is called
*Rusul.*

*"* So if he is not given any such order which is to his own self only
(not meant for the *Ummah)* he is called *"Rasul"* not *"Nabi".* And
that is the*"Tashree'i"* prophethood which is not for the *"Walis"*
(saints)."

Thus it is clear that in the language of the Sufis even a *Wali* is
supposed to receive the revelations from God and he is called *'Nabi';*
but he is absolutely forbidden to convey that revelation to others.
Also, it is clear that all the prophets whom the Muslims call *"Nabi",*
irrespective of whether they brought any new *Shari'ah* or not (i.e.,
*Sahib ash-Shari’ah* and *Ghair* *Sahib ash-Shari’ah* both), are called
*"Rasul"* in Sufi terminology, because those prophets were told by Allah
to convey the revelations to their *Ummah.*

It is because of this terminology, which gathers all the prophets under
the heading *"Rasul"* and all the *Awliya* under the heading "Nabi" that
the Sufis of Islam said that the Holy Prophet of Islam closed *'Sahib
ash-Shari’ah'* prophethood (which term includes all the "prophets" of
common Muslim terminology).

But as Dr. Iqbal points out, the "*Wali*" who according to the Sufis
claim, receives revelation is expressly forbidden to call anyone to his
fold or to start any new religious group.

How can this fit on Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani who surely called people
to believe in him and started a new *Ummah?*

Sheikh Muhyiddin Ibn al-‘Arabi al-Andalusi has clearly written in
Al-Futuhat-ul-Makkiya, using the common terminology:  
 "The specialty which is found in a *Nabi,* and not in a *Wali* is the
revelation bringing a new *Shari'ah,* Because the revelation of
*Shari'ah* is not, but for the *Nabi* and *Rasul."*

Thus he claims the revelations for the *Awliya’* (saints) after the Holy
Prophet of Islam, but that revelation does not entitle that *Wali* to
call people to himself, or to convey that revelation to others.

Also, as there may be hundreds of *Wali" (Awliya’* in one time, the
Sufis writings cannot fit on Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani who claimed that
no one but he himself can become a prophet after Muhammad.

New 'Nubuwwah': Not a Grace, But a Curse
----------------------------------------

Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani thought that a new *Nubuwwah* (Prophethood)
would be a Grace of Allah for this *Ummah.* But in fact such a
*Nubuwwah* would be opposite of Grace; it would be a Curse. How?

Whenever a *Nabi* would come in an *Ummah,* there would automatically
argue the question of '*Kufr'* (blasphemy) and *Iman* (faith). Those who
will believe in him will become the *Ummah;* those who will reject his
claim will be counted another *Ummah.*

And the difference between these two *Ummahs* will not be of an
unimportant 'branch' of religion. It will be such a basic difference
which will not allow them to unite until one of them leaves its faith
and accepts the faith of the other *Ummah.* Further, the sources of
guidance and the references of *Shari'ah,* for all practical purposes
will be quite separate for each of these two *Ummahs.*

Because one group will take its *Shari'ah* from the revelation and
tradition of the new *Nabi;* and the other group will totally refute the
validity and, authenticity of that supposed revelation and tradition,
and will not accept them as the source of *Shari'ah.* Thus practically,
it will be impossible for these two groups to unite in one society.

If we look from this angle, it will be clear that the 'Finality' of the
prophethood is one of the greatest mercies of Allah upon this *Ummah.*
Because of this Finality of the prophethood, this *Ummah* has remained
an eternal and universal brotherhood which is unparalleled in the annals
of religion and civilizations. This Finality of Prophethood has
protected the Muslims from every such basic difference which creates a
permanent rift amongst them.

Anybody who believes in Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S) becomes a member of the
brotherhood. This unity could never be achieved if the door of
*Nubuwwah* was not closed, because on the arrival of every new *Nabi,*
this unity would have been shattered to the pieces.

If a man thinks with clear mind he will have to accept that when a
*Nabi* has already been, sent for the' whole world, and when through
that *Nabi* the religion is completed perfectly, and when the directions
of that *Nabi* are preserved, protected completely, then the door of the
*Nubuwwah* must be closed, so that the whole world can unite together by
following that prophet and can become one *Ummah* of the believer which
is not to be interfered every now and then with the advent of new
prophets.

This interference in the unity was understandable when there was really
a need to send a prophet, then it is against the wisdom and mercy of
Allah to create unnecessary friction amongst the *Ummah* of Islam.

Thus it is clear that the Seal of the Prophethood which is proved from
the Qur'an, is proved from the traditions of the Holy Prophet, is proved
from the unanimity of the whole *Ummah,* is also proved by the intellect
and wisdom.

Thus, Qur'an, *Sunah,* *Ijma'a,* and *Aql;* all four basic foundations
of *Shari'ah* and *Iman* demand that the door of *Nubuwwah* must remain
closed for ever after the advent of the Holy Prophet of Islam.

There is a very simple and interesting question which the Qadianis
should ponder upon. Everybody accepts that the question of prophethood
is a very serious question. According to the Qur'an, it is in those
basic tenets of Islam upon which depends the true belief or the *Kufr*
of a man. If a certain man is a true prophet and one does not accept him
one becomes *Kafir.* On the other hand, if that claimant is not a
prophet and someone accepts him as a true prophet he becomes *Kafir.*

Nobody can think that Allah *Ta’ala* would behave carelessly and
off-handedly in such a serious matter. If there was a *Nabi* to come
after Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S) Allah should nay must, have made the Holy
Prophet announce it very clearly in his sayings; and the Holy Prophet of
Islam (S) could not have left this world without warning his *Ummah* in
unambiguous terms that there was a prophet to come after him and the
*Ummah* of Islam must accept him.

Naturally Allah and His Prophet had no enmity against the followers of
Islam, against us and against our faith; that though the door of
*Nubuwwah* was to remain open after Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S), though
there was a *Nabi* to come after him, still we were kept unaware of that
event and that advent. On the contrary; Allah and His Prophet both
uttered such sayings which led the whole *Ummah,* without any sectarian
difference and without any exception, to the belief, for fourteen
hundred years, that there was no *Nabi* to come after Muhammad
Al-Mustafa (S).

If the door of *Nubuwwah* is really open, and if a *Nabi* comes truly
from God, still we will refute his claim, we will reject his prophethood
without any hesitation, without any fear of reprisal Allah.

When Allah, on the Day of Judgment, will take our account and will ask
us why we rejected the prophet sent after Muhammad, we will put the
whole record of Qur'an and traditions before Him, and we will say that
if we went astray it was because of the book of Allah and traditions of
His *Rasul.* And after the presentation of these records, we are sure
Allah cannot mete any punishment to us, because of rejecting a new
prophet.

But if the door of *Nubuwwah* is in fact closed after Muhammad
Al-Mustafa (S) and still some one, believes in the claim of a claimant
of a new *Nubuwwah*, he should think beforehand what record will he put
in the court of Allah on the Day of Judgment when he will be asked as
why did he believe in an imposter when Allah in the Qur'an and *Rasul*
in His traditions had clearly declared several times in different
wordings that there was no *Nabi* to come after Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S).


