'Khatam' in Dictionaries and Usage
==================================

We have just seen that in the context of the Qur'an and according to
traditions, according to *Ijma'a* and according to Reason, the only
meaning of *"Khatamun-Nabiyyin"* which is relevant is 'The Last of The
Prophets', 'One who closed the prophethood. Now let us see what the
dictionaries say about *'Khatam'* or. *'Khatm*'.

**ختم العمل** = *(Khatam al-amal)* = He finished the, work given to him.

**ختم الاناء** = *(Khatam al-ina'a)* = He sealed the mouth of pot (so
that nothing comes out of it and nothing enters into it).

**ختم الكتاب** = *(Khatam al-Kitab) =* Closed the envelope and sealed it
(so that nothing is added into the letter or put into the envelope).

It must be mentioned here that 'seal' in Arabic does not mean the
cancellation stamp of post offices which are put on the postal articles
before sending them onward. It means the seal of wax which is put on the
envelopes to protect it from forgery or additions.

**ختم** **على** **القلب** = *(Khatama alal qalb) =* He put a seal on the
heart (so that no new idea enters into it and no old prejudice is
removed from it).  
**ختام كل مشروب** = *(Khitamu kulle mashrub) =* The last taste felt at
the end of a drink.  
**ختامة** **كل شيء** = *(Khatematu kulle shay)* = End of *everyt*hing;
and its finish.  
**ختم الشيء** = *(Khatamash shay)* = To *'khatm'* a thing means to come
at the end of that thing. And it is in this sense that we use the word
*'Khatm ul-Qur'an',* i.e., to read the Qur'an up to its end. Also it is
for this reason that the last verses of each *Sura* are called
**(خواتيم)** '*Khawateem*'.

**ختم القوم** = *Khatam ul- Qawm* = The last man of the tribe or nation.

These meanings are given in all the authentic dictionaries of Arabic
language.

The Qadianis say that if someone is said to be *'Khatam* *ush-Shu'ara'*
or *'Khatam* *ul-Mufassireen'* or *'Khatam* *ul-Fuqaha',* nobody thinks
that after that person no other poet or *Faqeeh* (religious
jurisprudent) or *Mufassir* (commentator) was born. Everybody thinks
that it means that the said person was the most expert in that field of
knowledge.

These people forget that if a word is sometimes used metaphorically (in
fill allegorical sense) that metaphorical use does not deprive it of its
real meaning. If, for example, the word 'Lion' is sometimes used for a
brave man, it does not mean that this word cannot be used for the
animal, for which it was coined.

Such arguments show the hollowness of their minds and bankruptcy of
their thinking. Even if one thousand persons are called *'Khatam*
*ul-Mufassireen'* (in the sense of 'the most perfect *Mufassir')* the
real meaning of the word *'Khatam'* would remain the same i.e., The
Last.

A sample of Qadianis miscomprehension of subject matter may be seen in
the following sentence of their Chief Missionary in Tanzania, Sheikh
Muhammad Munawwar H.A.

It should be borne in mind that being 'last' of a group of people is no
distinction in itself. Sir Richard Turnbull was the last governor of
Tanganyika. Does this add to his status as a governor or indicates his
superiority over the late Twining?" (A lively Discussion).

He does not pause to think that the *Nubuwwah* of Prophet Muhammad
Al-Mustafa (S) is not like governorship of Sir Richard Turnbull. Sir
Richard Tumbull was the last governor because the British rule came to
an end with him. And a national government ousted him and his masters
from the soil of Tanganyika. Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S) is the Last Prophet
because his prophethood is not to be usurped by any impostor; he is the
last prophet because his 'rule' will continue up to *Qiyamah;* and no
one coming after him can use his title and name for himself.

To talk in Sheikh Muhammad Munawwar's language, if Sir Richard
Turnbull's governorship were to continue up to the last day of the
world, and all representatives of the British crown coming after him
were obliged to keep his 'Chair' vacant for him, and not to use the
Title of Governor for the themselves but just to sign as the 'Leader of
the government', would it not have been a tremendous tribute to Sir
Richard Turnbull?

The Qadiani Missionary had written to me:  
 "Imam Suyuti and Imam Ibn Athil' Al-Jazari were given the title of
*'Khatam ul-Huffuz'* (The Last of those who remembered traditions);
likewise, Abu Tammam at-Tai has been described as *'* *Khatam*
*ush-Shu'ara'* (The Last Poet). Can it be said that there was no
*'Hafiz'* after Imam Suyuti or Imam Jazari, or no poet after Abu Tammam
at Tai?"

I asked him: First of all have those phrases been used in the Qur'an or
tradition? As I told you earlier, the phrase *'Khatam* *un-Nabiyyin'*
was never used in Arabic before Qur'an; and that the Qur'an has used it
for the first time. Thus, the meaning given to this phrase by the Holy
Prophet is its real meaning.

If someone else uses such phrases in some other allegorical sense, it
does not make that allegory its real meaning. For example, "moon" has a
real meaning which all of us know. If someone uses the word 'moon' for
the face of a beautiful person it does not mean that 'beautiful face' is
the real meaning of 'moon' or that it cannot be used for the terrestrial
object for which it was made.

Thirdly, these references, in fact, show the writer's thought (though
wrong) that Imam Suyuti (for example) was the last *Hafiz.* It was their
mistaken idea, which has been proved wrong. And no wonder. Those writers
did not know what was in future. But can you suppose that Allah also did
not know the future when He said that Muhammad (S) was the Last of the
Prophets? How can you compare the words of Allah with the writings of
some mortals?

At the most you can say that those writers were wrong in believing that
the person concerned was the last *Hafiz* or the last poet. But you
cannot change the real meaning of *'Khatam* *un-Nabiyyin'* to make their
writings correct.

If you tell an Arab *'Ja'a Khatam* *ul-Qawm* " he will never understand
that the most learned man of the tribe has reached; he will always think
that the whole tribe has arrived, till the last man.

It is because of this that every writer of the dictionary; and every
commentator of the Qur'an, without any exception has written that
*'Khatam* *un-Nabiyyin'* means *'Akhir* *un-Nabiyyin',* the Last of the
Prophets.

If you look impartially at these proofs from the Qur'an, tradition,
dictionary and language, you will have to agree that the Holy Prophet of
Islam was the Last Prophet and prophethood ended with him. No prophet
will ever come after him up to the day of *Qiyamah;* and anybody
claiming to be a prophet would be an impostor.

Khatam ul-Awliya’?
------------------

The Qadiani missionary had written to me; "There is a tradition in
Tafseer Safi (Sura *Al* Ahzab, Ruku 2) that the Holy Prophet said to
Imam Ali: "O Ali, I am Khatam ul-Anbiya’ and you are Khatam ul-Awliya’".
Now can anybody say that Imam Ali was the last Wali and no other Wali
can come after him?"

I wrote to him: This supposed tradition quoted from Tafseer Safi is not
only without any Sanad (chain of narrators) but also it cannot be found
in any other book of tradition.

On the other hand, there are some traditions in the books written by the
Sunnis as well as the Shias which describe Imam Ali (a.s.) as "*Khatam*
*ul-Ausiya’*" or "*Khatam* *ul-Wasiyyin*" (The Last of the successors of
the Prophets). Here are two of the said traditions:

1. Sheikh Suleman al-Balakhi al-Qanduzi, al-Hanafi wrote his book
'Yanabi-ul-Mawaddah' by order of Sultan Abdul-Aziz, the Turkish Caliph
of the Sunnis; the book was published under the authority of the Turkish
Caliphate in Istanbul, in 1301 Hijra. He quotes in the said book:

"Likewise, Al-Hamwaini has narrated the tradition from Abu Dhar that he
said that the Holy Prophet (S) said, 'I am *Khatam* *un-Nabiyyin* and
you, O Ali, are *Khatam* *ul-Wasiyyin* up to the day of Judgment".

2. Ubaidullah Amritsari quotes in his hook, Arjahul-Matalib[^1], a long
tradition from Anas, in which the Holy Prophet (S) described Imam Ali
(a.s.) as "*Amir-ul-Mu'mineen* *wa Sayyid* *ul-Muslimeen wa Khatam*
*ul-Wasiyyin wa* *Imam* *ul-Ghurril-Muhajjaleen*".

This tradition has been quoted from Ibn Mardwaih. It shows that Imam Ali
(a.s.) was "The Commander of the Faithful, Chief of the Muslims; and the
Last of Successors (of the Prophets) and the Leader of those who will
come on the Day of Judgment with shining faces and illuminated hands and
feet".

In fact, these traditions are one more proof of the Finality of the
Prophethood. Imam Ali (a.s.) was "the Last of the Successors of the
Prophets", because there was no other prophet to come after the Last of
the Prophets Muhammad Al-Mustafa (S) up to the Day of Qiyamah
(Resurrection). Had there been any other awaited prophet, Ali (a.s.)
could not have been described as the Last or the Successors of the
Prophets.

So you see, the correct tradition is not for you; it is against your
belief. Now it appears that some scribes made a mistake in copying
Manaqib (from where this tradition has been taken in Safi) and wrote
*Khatam* *ul-Awliya’* in place of *Khatam* *ul-Awsiya’*. That is why you
cannot find this tradition in any other book of traditions, except
Manaqib or where it has been quoted from Manaqib. It is one more sign of
the weakness of your cause that you have to clutch to such misquoted or
wrong traditions!

Abbas: "Khatam ul- Muhajireen"
------------------------------

Qadianis say: "In the book "Kanz ul-Ummal", Vol. 6, p.178, Seyyidana
Abbas (uncle of the Holy Prophet (S) has been called *"Khatam*
*ul-Muhajireen".* Does it mean that he was the Last *Muhajir*
(emigrant)?"

**Fact**: Yes. He was in fact the Last *Muhajir.* You must understand
that *Al-Muhajireen* and *Al* *Ansar* mentioned in the Qur'an and
tradition have **a special** meaning. In other words, they are special
terms. The word *'* *Al-Muhajireen* *'* is used only for those who in
the earlier days of hardship of Islam left their towns and migrated
either to Ethiopia or Medina. And *'Ansar'* is used only for those
inhabitants of Medina who helped the Holy Prophet (S) and the
*Al-Muhajireen* in those days.

*Hijrat* (emigration) was discontinued after Holy Prophet entered Mecca
in the year 8 of Hijra. Before surrender of Mecca the Muslims of Mecca
and other places were required to do *Bay'at* (allegiance) on Islam and
*Hijrat.* After the surrender of Mecca, Mujalid bin Mas'ud accepted
Islam and wanted to do *Bay'at* on Islam and *Hijrat,* as was the
system.

But the Holy Prophet (S) said: "There is no *Hijrat* after the capture
of Mecca", and Mujalid did *Bay'at* on Islam only. (See Bukhari Vol. 4,
p.92).  
 Therefore; Abbas was in fact the Last of *Al-Muhajireen* who left their
town for Medina as the word is used in the Qur'an.

Hafiz Ibn Hajar writes about Abbas in his book Al-Isaba Fi Ma'arifatis
sahaba (Vol. 3, p.668): "He did *Hijrat* shortly before capture of Mecca
and participated in that capture."

History says that Abbas together with his family left Mecca for Medina;
but met the Holy Prophet (S) in the way at Juhfa or Rabigh (who was
going to capture Mecca with his army). There upon. Abbas sent his family
to Medina and accompanied the Holy Prophet to Mecca.

Naturally when heard the Holy Prophet (S) saying that "there was no
*Hijrat* after capture of Mecca", he was perturbed that perhaps he would
not be counted among the *Muhajireen.* You see *Hijrat* was being
abolished just alter his migration from Mecca, and he had not yet
reached Medina before that declaration. When the Holy Prophet (S) came
to know of his anxiety he told him not to worry, because he was "the
Last *Muhajir*".  
 "Do not worry, O uncle, because thou art the last of the *Muhajireen".*

I know that, according to the dictionary, anybody migrating from one
place and going to another may be called *'Muhajir?* But he will not be
among the *'Al-Muhajireen'* of the Qur'an. Likewise anybody conveying
the message of one man to another may be called *'Rasul'.* But he will
not be the *'Rasul'* of Allah according to the Qur'an. And anybody
bringing a news can be called *'Nabi',* but he will not be the *'Nabi'*
of Qur'an.

Just to show how your argument has no leg to stand, I would like you to
tell me how will you interpret the phrase *'Khatam ul-* *Muhajireen?*

Does it mean "Superior to all the *Muhajirs"?* Impossible, because Abbas
was never considered superior to Ali (a.s.), Hamza and many other
*Muhajirs.*

Or does it mean "Seal of the *Muhajirs?"* If so then does it mean that
other people became *Muhajir* by the seal of Abbas? Or does it mean that
he was confirming the *Hijrat* of other *Muhajirs?*

Surely, none of these meaning can fit here, except the "Last *Muhajir".
'*Thus, it is clear that Abbas was called *"Khatam ul-Muhajireen"*
because he was "The Last *Muhajir".*

[^1]: printed at Nawal Kishore Press, Lahore, 2nd Edition, p. 25.


