Foreword
========

***In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful***

Due to lack of want, outgiving and generosity, He has willed to shower
His blessings unto the descendants of Adam with generosity, blessing
them first with the bliss of existence and getting them out of the
sphere of void. Then He put everything on earth at their disposal,
making them the masters of this planet, faring with its soil, water and
atmosphere as they wish. He has subjected to them its animals, plants,
minerals and all other treasures.

Then He bestowed upon them guidance by sending them messengers and
divine books which secure for them the pleasure of their Lord, their own
happiness, sustenance and goodly return if they obey Him.

After all these generous blessings and clear guidance comes testing and
examining, and these cannot take place without affliction of the
decrease of a blessing or an affliction in self and in wealth, and it is
here when a steadfast person who seeks rewards is distinguished from
that who is impatient, fretful.

The most Praised One has promised to give them generous rewards, to pay
them their dues without count, informing them that He, the most Exalted
One, supports them if they persevere.

Imam al-Baqir (ع) has said, "A believer is tested in the life of this
world according to the extent of his faith" or he said "according to the
extent of his belief"[^1].

Imam al-Sadiq (ع) has said, "If Allah loves one of His servants, He
exposes him to trials, one after the other."[^2]

He (ع) also said, "Great rewards accompany great trials."[^3] This is
why among people, according to traditions, there are those who are most
severely tested, and these are the prophets, then the *walis* or
guardians, then the most pious, and so on.[^4]

Then the Prophet (ص) said, "We, prophets, are tried the most, and we are
followed in this regard by the believers, the most pious then the less
pious, and so on. One who tastes the sweet taste of trial, under a
protective covering from Allah, finds it tastier than a bliss."[^5]

He (ص) has equaled obedience to Allah through patience to half one's
*iman* (conviction), regarding it as one of the keys to achieving
rewards and determining patience as occupying a position in *iman* equal
to that of the head to the body; there is no body without a head;
therefore, one without patience is without *iman*, and one who is
patient will receive rewards equal to those due to one thousand martyrs.

It is for the above reason that Imam Ali (ع) has said, "If you are
patient, destiny will be affected in your regard and you will receive
your rewards, but if you fret, destiny will be affected in your regard
as you bear the burden of your sins."[^6]

Imam al-Kazim, peace be with him, has said, "If one beats on his thigh
when afflicted by a calamity, he voids his rewards."[^7]

Calamities differ one from another. They range from a chronic illness to
a demeaning condition, to the loss of wealth..., etc.

One of the important matters is the loss of loved ones and sons. Many
narratives have been transmitted in this regard. One of them is this:
"If one loses three of his sons while maintaining his patience, he will
be sheltered from the fire by permission of Allah,[^8] and this will be
a sure protection for him."

Allah asked Dawood (David) (ع), "What is the equivalent of this son for
you?" Dawood answered, "He was worth the fill of the earth with gold."
Allah said, "Then you will have on the Day of Judgment the fill of the
earth rewards."[^9]

The greatest Prophet went further than that when he said, "… I shall
brag about you to other nations till a stillborn stays at the gate of
Paradise refusing to enter, and it will be told to enter, but it will
say, 'I and my parents?!' The response will be, 'You and your
parents'."[^10]

Many traditions have been transmitted about offering condolences to one
who is afflicted by a calamity in order to lighten it for him. Ibn
Mas\`ūd quotes the Prophet (ص) as saying, "One who offers condolences to
a person who is afflicted by a calamity will receive as many rewards as
those received by the afflicted person."[^11]

Abu Barzah is quoted as saying that the Messenger of Allah (ص) has said,
"If one offers condolences to a mother who lost her child, he will be
outfitted with coats in Paradise."[^12]

Weeping over someone who has died does not decrease rewards, nor does it
harm rewards. The first person who wept over a son whom he lost was our
father Adam who mourned Able and composed famous verses of poetry
recorded in books, grieving over him a great deal. The condition of
Jacob (Ya\`qub) is more famous than needs mentioning, so much so that he
wept so much till he lost his eyesight over Joseph (Yusuf).

As regarding our master, Ali son of al-Hussain, peace be with him, he
wept over his father for forty years, fasting during the day and
spending the night standing for prayers. Whenever it was time for him to
break his fast, his servant would bring him his food and drink, putting
them in front of him: "Eat, master!"

The Imam (ع) would say, "The son of the Messenger of Allah (ص) was
killed as he was hungry; the son of the Messenger of Allah (ص) was
thirsty…," and he would keep repeating these statements and weeping till
his tears would wet his food. He kept doing so till he passed away.[^13]

The Messenger of Allah (ص) for this [same] reason said [when his son
Ibrahim died], "The eyes are tearful, the heart is grieved, and we will
not say anything that incurs the wrath of the Lord."[^14]

Among those who did very well maintaining their patience on the loss of
loved ones and sons is Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, may Allah be pleased with
him, none of whose sons lived long. He used to say, "Praise be to Allah
who takes them away from the transient abode to lodge them into the
abode of eternity."[^15]

These men provide us with the best and greatest moral lessons, and they
are our role models; many are those who are patient and who anticipate
rewards in the cause of Allah.

Among those who were hit by this affliction and lost loved ones and
children is our mentor, the Second Martyr, may Allah sanctify his pure
soul. The author of *Rawdat Al-Jannat*[^16] has recorded his calamity
and loss of children who died young. Sayyid al-Amin says, "His children
did not last long but many of their males passed away before Sheikh
Hassan about whose survival he was not sure either."[^17]

Talking about Sheikh Hassan son of the second Martyr, Sheikh Abbas
al-Qummi says, "He was not expected to live because of the calamities
which had afflicted his father. Many of his siblings, who were born
before him [Sheikh Hassan], had died [young]."[^18]

Reason behind writing This Book
-------------------------------

The writing of *Musakkin al-Fuad* was not the product of a purely
scholarly condition dictated by the reality of class and teaching or due
to the need of debates at the *hawza* as much as it was the outcome of a
conscientious and emotional condition lived by the Second Martyr with
all his senses and faculties with which he interacted positively
throughout his honorable life.

Most references which narrate the biography of the Second Martyr
indicate that he was tried by the death of his sons when they were still
quite young, so much so that he had no hope that any of them would stay
alive. None of them was spared death save his son Sheikh Hassan about
whose survival he was not sure at all. He was martyred when his son was
four or seven years old.

The Second Martyr, may he be sanctified, confronted the condition of
family deprivation with the loftiest degrees of patience and
perseverance, so he wrote *Musakkin al-Fuad* (Heart Comforter) while his
heart was dripping with pain and sighs as he watched his sons die as
fresh flowers snapped away before his very eyes.

In the introduction to his afore-mentioned book, he, may Allah be
pleased with him, says, "Since death is the great event, the cause of a
permanent separation from loved ones, and since the separation of a
loved one is considered to be among the greatest calamities, so much so
that the heart of any wise person almost changes its place, the heart of
anyone known for having a sound mind, especially since the most loved
ones are the sons who bring happiness to one's heart…, for this reason,
such separation deserves great rewards, and the parents are promised
intercession on the Day of Judgment on account of their loss.

For this reason, I have gathered in this dissertation some Prophetic
legacies, the conditions of those who achieved supreme perfections, in
addition to brief yet clear hints so, by the will of Allah Almighty,
rust may be removed from the hearts of the deprived and grief may be
removed from those grieved.

Rather, on its account the hearts of those who have knowledge are
elated, those who regard it as a tradition of the unaware may wake up
from their slumber. I have called it *The Comforter of the Heart at the
Time of the Loss of Loved Ones and of Children*, organizing it in an
Introduction, chapters and a conclusion."[^19]

*Musakkin al-Fuad*, though small in size, is distinguished for its
unique subject. This makes it a reliable reference of its kind according
to a group of authors of narrative encyclopedias such as *\`Allama*
al-Majlisi in his *Bihar al-Anwar*, Sheikh al-Hurr in *Al-Jawahir
al-Saniyya*, Sheikh al-Nawari in his *Mustadrak al-Wasa'il*, and others.

*\`Allama* al-Majlisi says the following in his *Bihar al-Anwar* to
explain his sources: "… and *Musakkin al-Fuad*… by the Second Martyr,
may Allah elevate his status."[^20]

In his Introduction to *Al-Jawahir al-Saniyya*, Sheikh al-Hurr says, "I
have quoted the traditions in it from authentic and respected books as
well as edited and reliable references", and our book is one of these
respected authentic books.

Sayid Khonsari, in the process of talking about the book *Musakkin
al-Fuad*, says, "His book has great benefits, rare traditions and
spiritual niceties the like of which are seldom found in a book."[^21]

Sayyid Muhsin al-Ameen, in his biography of the second martyr, says, "He
distinguished himself for writing about subjects about which others did
not write or wrote but did not say enough such as patience at the loss
of loved ones and sons."[^22] Recounting his works, he said, "His book
titled *Musakkin al-Fuad* is one the subject of which was never
discussed by anyone before him."[^23]

Sheikh Tahrani mentions it in his *Dhari\`a* saying, "*Musakkin al-Fuad*
by the happy Sheikh Zain ad-Din ibn Ahmad al-\`Amili, the martyr, is
arranged in an introduction, chapters and a conclusion. The first
chapter deals with heavenly rewards for losing children, the second with
patience, the third with acceptance [of destiny] and the fourth with
weeping."[^24]

Isma\`eel Pasha, in his work *Idah al-Maknoon*, says, "*Musakkin
al-Fuad* was written by Zain ad-Din bin Ali bin Ahmad al-\`Amili, the
Shiite."[^25] Ibn al-\`Awwadi, in his book *Bughyat al-Mureed fil Kashf
an Ahwal* *al-Sheikh Zain ad-Din al-Shaheed*, while stating the latter's
works, says, "… and one of them is the book *Musakin al-Fuad inda Faqd
al-Ahibba wal Awlad*."[^26]

In the work *Amal al-Amil*, he is said as having written a list of books
which includes "... the book *Musakin al-Fuad inda Faqd al-Ahibba wal
Awlad*."[^27] Sheikh Yousuf al-Bahrani says the following in his book
*Lu'lu'at al-Bahrain*: "… and he, may he be sanctified, wrote a number
of books one of which is *Musakin al-Fuad inda Faqd al-Ahibba wal
Awlad*."[^28]

One of the indications of the interest of the biographer, may he be
sanctified, in our book, this one, is that he abridged it in another
book, calling it *Mubarrid al-Akbad: Mukhtasar Musakkin al-Fuad* which
is mentioned by Sheikh Ali, grandson of the Second Martyr[^29], by
Sheikh al-Hurr al- \`Amili[^30], Sheikh Yousuf al-Bahrani[^31], Sayyid
Khonsari[^32], Sayyid Muhsin al-Ameen[^33] and Sheikh Aqa Buzurg
Tehrani[^34].

It is translated into Persian by Isma\`eel Khan who named it *Tasliyat
al-\`Ibad*. In his *Dhari\`a*, Sheikh Tehrani says, "It is called
*Tasliyat al-\`Ibad* *fi Tarjamat Musakkin al-Fuad* by the martyred
Sheikh and is translated into Persian by Isma\`eel Khan Dabeer
al-Sultanah who is nicknamed "glory of the men of letters", the
contemporary scholar who neighbors the Shrine of Imam al-Rida and who
died in 1321 A.H. (1903 A.D.) following the completion of the
translation."[^35]

Brief Biography of the Author
-----------------------------

He is Sheikh (mentor) Noor ad-Din Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn
Jamal ad-Din ibn Taqi ibn Salih ibn Musharraf, of \`Amil, Syria, of
Toos, al-Jab\`i, famous as the "Second Martyr".

He was born on the 13th of Shawwal of 911 A.H. (March 19, 1506 according
to the Gregorian Western calendar). His father was one of the most
prominent personalities of his time, and so were his forefathers up to
Salih. The same applies to the sons of his uncles, his brother
Abdul-Nabi and his nephew. Knowledge serialized in his home for a long
period of time, so much so that his lineage is called "the golden
chain". His son, Sheikh Hassan, is a scholarly investigator.

He, may Allah have mercy on his soul, studied the sciences known during
his time, and examined the work of the Shiite as well as Sunni scholars.
He, may Allah be merciful to him, excelled and surpassed his peers
despite his extreme poverty and hardship of living conditions. He used
to guard his vineyard during the night and sometimes worked in trade
while taking care of the needs of his family.

He traveled to Istanbul, then the capital of the Ottoman State, and in
18 days he wrote a dissertation in solving ten problems in sciences. He,
therefore, was assigned to teach at the Nawari School in Baalbek, one of
the greatest schools, where he stayed for five years teaching according
to the five schools of Islamic thought, a great feat for him and an
indication of vast knowledge which cannot be surpassed. He wrote about
eight books the most famous of which is *Al-Rawda al-Bahiyya fi Sharh
al-Lam'a al-Dimashqiyya*, a book regarded as a major reference for
*fiqh* studies at Shiite *hawzas*.

The sectarian fanaticism, however, a disease which has afflicted the
Muslims, did not leave this brilliant scholar to be of benefit for
people with his knowledge and demeanor: The fire of envy burnt in the
hearts of those who let the Islamic nation reach its present condition
of weakness and backwardness. They schemed plots against him, instigated
rulers against him till he was arrested during the pilgrimage season
inside the holy precincts of Venerable Mecca. He was taken in custody to
Istanbul.

The hoodlums who arrested him were concerned about his arrival at
Istanbul where he would be able to prove his innocence from the charges
against him, against his pure and innocent soul; so, Satan ordered them
to speed up the implementation of their scheme: They killed him on the
way and carried his severed head to the capital.

His martyrdom, may he be sanctified, took place in 965 A.H. (1558 A.D.)
when he was 55.

One of his students, Ibn al-Awwadi, wrote his biography in an
independent dissertation which he titled *Bughyat al-Mureed fil Kashf an
Ahwal al Sheikh Zayn* *ad-Din* *al-Shaheed*. Look into the following
references for his biography: *Al-Durr al-Manthur*, Vol. 2, p. 149 where
*Bughyat al-Mureed fil Kashf an Ahwal al Sheikh Zayn* *ad-Din*
*al-Shaheed* is cited; *Amal al-Amil*, Vol. 1, p. 85; *Riyadh al-Ulema*,
Vol. 2, p. 365.

*Lu'lu'at al-Bahrain*, p. 28; *Naqd al-Rijal*, p. 145; *Muntaha
al-Maqal*, p. 141; *Bahjat al-Amal*, Vol. 4, p. 254; *Rawdat al-Jannat*,
Vol. 3, p. 352; *Tanqeeh al-Maqal*, Vol. 1, pp. 472, 4517; *Safeenat
al-Bihar*, Vol. 1, p. 723; *Al-Kuna wal Alqab*, Vol. 2, p. 344;
*Hadiyyat al-Ahbab*, p. 167; *Al-Fawa'id al-Radawiyya*, p. 186; *A\`yan
al-Shii\`a*, Vol. 7, p. 143; al-Zarkali's *Al-A\`lam*, Vol. 3, p. 64;
*Mu\`jam Rijal al-Hadith*, Vol. 7, p. 372 and *Mu\`jam al-Mu'allifeen*,
Vol. 4, p. 193.

Method of Critique
------------------

We have relied in critiquing this book on three editions:

The first is the handwritten copy at the public library of Ayatollah
al-Mar\`ashi, the third volume included in the group numbered 444, from
p. 186 to p. 249, written by Safar al-Karmani in the clear Naskh
calligraphic type on a Monday, the 27th of Dhul-Qa\`da of 1087 A.H.,
based on a copy taken from Sheikh Muhammad al-\`Amili in Syria.

At the end of the book, there is a statement which concludes it by
saying "Comparing this text has been done through help from Allah
Almighty". Sheikh Yousuf al-Najafi, a student of the Second Martyr, has
written on the last page of the said group saying that he compared the
copy and completed his comparison on a Wednesday the 9th of Rabi\`
al-Awwal of 1088 A.H. The group contains 320 pages, the book with which
we are dealing falls in 63 pages. In each page there are 16 lines size
20.5 x 10.5 cm and we have used the symbol "Sh" [for "*Sh*aheed II"] on
the book's margin.

The second is the one kept at the Tehran University Library under No.
1017. It was written in the Naskh type by Hussain ibn Muslim ibn Husain
ibn Muhammad who is famous as Ibn Sha\`eer al-\`Amili, a student of the
Second Martyr, in around the year 954 A.H. The copy contains the book's
Introduction and some of Chapters Two, Three and Four.

There is on p. 73-B a statement saying "Completed 954" in another type
of handwriting. On p. 69-A, there is a statement saying "He completed
its reading, may Allah grant him success" in the handwriting of the
Second Martyr. This copy is owned by Ali ibn Muhammad Husain al-Mousawi
al-Shushtari on the 15th of Jumada II of the year 1268 A.H., Ali ibn
Husain ibn Muhammad-Ali ibn Zayn ad-Din al-Mousawi and Ali Muhammad
al-Mousawi.

The version printed on stone in Iran was written in Tehran by the son of
Ali Akbar al-Gailani on a Monday, the 26th of Safar of 1310 A.H. for
which we use the symbol "H ح" on the book's margin.

Based on the style followed by the Ahl al-Bayt Foundation for Revival of
Legacy, the book has gone through several editing phases as follows:

1. comparison committee: Its task is to compare the handwritten copies
and identify their differences,

2. *hadith* extraction committee: Its task is to extract the texts cited
in the book and render them to their sources

3. committee for verifying differences about traditionists: Its task is
to confirm the results of comparing the copies with regard to
differences about major narrators of *hadith* and refer them to the
sources that discuss *hadith* transmitters.

4. committee for correcting text: Its task is to show a verified and
correct book text closer to what the author had left us. Copies have
been compared so the authenticity of texts may be marked whereas others
are referred to in footnotes.

5. footnotes: All the above was utilized to arrange and coordinate the
footnotes.

6. final review: In it, the book in its entirety, including footnotes,
is examined to detect and correct what may have been overlooked.

In conclusion, we express our sincere appreciation and regards to the
honorable brothers who participated in producing this book in such a
good outfit.

**Ahl al-Bayt Foundation for Revival of Legacy**  
**Qum on the 21st** **of Shawwal of 1407 A.H.**

[^1]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, p. 197; Mishkat Al-Anwar, p. 298.

[^2]: Ibid., Vol. 2, pp 6, 197.

[^3]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 3

[^4]: This is narrated by al-Kulaini in his book Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp.
11, 196, by Ibn Majah in his Sunan, Vol. 2, pp. 1334, 4023, by
al-Tirmidhi in his Sunan, Vol. 4, pp. 28, 2509, by Ahmad in his Musnad,
Vol. 1, pp. 172, 180, 185, by al-Darmi in his Sunan, Vol. 2, p. 320 and
by al-Hakim al-Naishapuri in his Mustadrak, Vol. 1, p. 41 with some
minor variation in wording.

[^5]: Musbah al-Shari'a, p. 487.

[^6]: Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 3, pp. 224, 291.

[^7]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 9, 225.

[^8]: Al-Jami\` Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 817.

[^9]: Sheikh Waram has narrated it in his book titled Tanbih
Al-Khawatir, Vol. 1, p. 287 and by al-Sayyuti in his book Al-Durr
Al-Manthur, Vol. 5, p. 306 with some variations in its wording.

[^10]: This has been narrated by al-Sayyuti in his book
Al-Jami\`Al-Saghir, Vol. 2, pp. 55, 4724 and by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in
Muntakhab Kanz Al-Ummal, Vol. 6, p. 390, both quoting Ibn Abbas.

[^11]: Al-Jami\` Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 801.

[^12]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sunan, Vol. 2, pp. 269, 1082.

[^13]: Al-Luhoof fi Qatla Al-Tufoof, p. 87.

[^14]: Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 1, pp. 506, 1589 and Muntakhab Kanz
Al-Ummal, Vol. 6, p. 265.

[^15]: This tradition has been narrated by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in his
book Muntakhab Kanz Al-Ummal, Vol. 1, p. 212 and is cited by Al-Majlisi
in his work Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 142.

[^16]: Rawdat Al-Jannat, Vol. 3, p. 379.

[^17]: A\`yan Al-Shi\`a, Vol. 7, p. 144.

[^18]: Al-Kuna wal Alqab, Vol. 2, p. 349.

[^19]: Musakkin Al-Fuad, p. 17.

[^20]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 1, p. 19.

[^21]: Rawdat Al-Jannat, Vol. 3, p. 379.

[^22]: A\`yan Al-Shi\`a, Vol. 7, p. 145.

[^23]: Ibid., Vol. 7, p. 156.

[^24]: Al-Dhari\`a, Vol. 21, pp. 20, 3747.

[^25]: Idah Al-Maknoon, Vol. 4, p. 479.

[^26]: Bughyat Al-Mureed as quoted in the book Al-Durr Al-Manthoor, Vol.
2, p. 187.

[^27]: Amal Al-Amil, Vol. 1, p. 87.

[^28]: Lu'lu'at Al-Bahrain, p. 35.

[^29]: Ad-Durr Al-Manthūr, Vol. 2, p. 189.

[^30]: Amal Al-Amil, Vol. 1, p. 87.

[^31]: Lu'lu'at Al-Bahrain, p. 35.

[^32]: Rawdat Al-Jannat, Vol. 3, p. 379.

[^33]: A\`yan Al-Shi\`a, Vol. 7, p. 145.

[^34]: Al-Dhari\`a, Vol. 20, pp. 209, 2613.

[^35]: Ibid., Vol. 4, pp. 179, 882.


