Preface
=======

***In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful***

All Praise is due to Allah Who has decreed the extinction and
disappearance of all His servants. He affected His command on them
according to His wisdom and will. He promised those who persevere with
regard to His destiny beautiful rewards and happiness, and He forewarned
those who fret about it with plenty of His retribution and severe
penalty upon their return to Him.

He has pleased the hearts of the men of knowledge through His
management, so this knowledge is the pleasure of their souls when
submitted to His lead, this is so despite the inability of each one of
them to avoid His affecting His judgment even if an ignorant person goes
to extremes in his stubbornness.

I testify that there is no god except Allah, the only One; there is no
partner with Him, a testimony through which I avoid the horrors in the
narrowness of the Gathering and its ravines. And I testify that
Muhammad, Allah's peace and blessings be with him and his progeny, is
His servant and messenger, the very best of those who brought glad
tidings and who warned, the greatest of all those who accepted destiny
and persevered about it, peace and blessing of Allah be with him and his
progeny who are the best of the best, the greatest of creation in
action, the ones who suffered the most, who submitted and accepted His
decrees, peace and blessing that will reach each and every one of them
individually.

Since death is the greatest of all events, the matter that forever
separates the loved ones from each other. Separation from the loved ones
is regarded as one of the greatest calamities, so much so that the heart
of even a wise person almost fails, the heart of one known for sagacity,
for being terse, particularly when we know that the greatest of those
whom we love are our children who are the pleasure of the hearts. It is
for this reason that generous rewards are in store for those who suffer
such separation, and the parents are promised intercession on the Day of
the Return in lieu of such loss.

For this reason, I have gathered in this dissertation a group of
Prophetic legacies, the conditions of those who earned sublime
perfections, in addition to brief yet clear admonitions which, if Allah
Almighty so pleases, should remove the rust from the hearts of those
aggrieved and the grief of those aggrieved is removed; rather, the
hearts of the men of knowledge are even elated by it, those who regard
such grief as a tradition of the indifferent ones will wake up through
it, naming it "comforter of the heart upon the loss of loved ones and
children", organizing it in an Introduction, Chapters and a Conclusion.


