Rewards for the Loss of Children
================================

Be informed that Allah, Praise to Him, is Just, Generous, Absolutely
Independent. It does not befit His perfection and the beauty of His
attributes that He afflicts one of His servants in the life of this
world with any affliction, no matter how small, without rewarding him
for it many times more: Had He not given him anything, He would have
been unjust; and had He compensated him only by the same measure, He
would have been sporting, and Allah is greatly above doing so. Many
prophetic reports have supported each other in this regard; the
following are only some of them:

"Had a believer known what rewards Allah has prepared for him on account
of his affliction, he would have wished he had been cut in the life of
this world with scissors."[^1]

Let us quote only what supports our topic, for such traditions have been
narrated about the Prophet (ص) by more than thirty of his companions.

As-Saduq, may Allah have mercy on him, has narrated it through *isnad*
to Amr ibn Absah al-Salami who said, "I heard the Messenger of Allah (ص)
saying, 'Any man offers three sons who did not yet reach maturity, or if
a woman offers three of her sons, they will be a veil protecting him/her
from the fire."[^2]

Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, may Allah be pleased with him, has said, "There
are no two Muslims [parents] who offer three sons who are yet to reach
maturity except that Allah permits them to enter Paradise through His
mercy."[^3]

Through *isnad* (narration) by Jabir, traced back to Imam Abu Ja\`far
ibn Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir, peace be with them both, the Imam (ع)
said, "One who offers sons hoping for rewards from Allah Almighty will
be protected from the Fire by the will of Allah, the most Exalted, the
most Great."

Through *isnad* by Ali ibn Maysarah[^4], Imam Abu Abdullah (ع) says,
"One son offered by a man is better than seventy who survive him, all
having mounted over horses and fought in the Way of Allah."[^5]

He (ع) is also cited as having said, "A believer's reward from his sons
is Paradise, whether he was patient [at their demise] or not."[^6] He
(ع) has also said, "If one is afflicted by a calamity, and if he fretted
because of it or did not, whether he was patient about it or not, his
reward from Allah for it will be Paradise."[^7] He (ع) has also said,
"One son offered by a man is better for him than seventy who survive him
and who live to meet al-Qa’im, peace be with him."[^8]

Al-Tirmidhi tracks his *isnad* the Prophet (ص) saying, "A believer who
is afflicted by a calamity in himself, his sons or wealth will meet
Allah, the most Exalted, the most Great, having committed no sin at
all."[^9]

Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Salami, who cites his father quoting his
grandfather, who used to keep the Prophet (ص) company, said, "I heard
the Messenger of Allah (ص) saying, 'If a servant of Allah had a status
with Allah which he did not achieve through a good deed, Allah afflicts
him in his body, or in his wealth, or in the most dutiful of his sons,
then He enables him to be patient on its account till he reaches the
status which Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great, had already
decreed for him.'"[^10]

Thawban, a servant-slave of the Messenger of Allah (ص), has said,
"Congratulations! Congratulations! Five things there are: How heavy they
are in the scales! They are: *La Ilaha illa Allah* [there is no god
except Allah], *Subhan-Allah* (Glorified is Allah), *Alhamdu-Lillah*
(Praise be to Allah), *Allahu Akbar* (Allah is Greatest), and the
righteous son of a Muslim: He dies, so his father seeks compensation
from Allah."[^11]

Abdul-Rahman ibn Samrah quotes the Messenger of Allah (ص) as saying, "I
saw yesterday something amazing," stating a lengthy tradition which
includes this: "I saw a man from my nation whose scales were light, so
his sons came and caused his scales to weigh down heavily."[^12]

Sahl ibn Haneef, may Allah be pleased with him, has said that the
Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "Get married, for I shall brag about your
numbers before the nations on the Judgment Day, so much so that the
stillborn remains procrastinating at the gate of Paradise, so it is said
to him to enter, but he says, 'Not before my parents enter.'"[^13]

Mu\`awiyah ibn Haidah al-Qushairi quotes the Prophet (ص) as saying, "A
slave woman who gives birth is better than a beautiful [free] woman who
does not. I shall brag about your numbers before the nations, so much so
that the stillborn will remain procrastinating at the gate of Paradise;
therefore, it is said to him to enter Paradise, whereupon he would say,
'I and my parents?' and it will be said to him, 'You and your
parents.'"[^14]

Abdul-Malik ibn Omayr quotes narrators telling him that a man once went
to the Prophet (ص) and said, "O Messenger of Allah! Shall I marry
so-and-so?" The Messenger of Allah (ص) prohibited him from marrying her.
He went to him a second time and said, "O Messenger of Allah! Shall I
marry so-and-so?" The Messenger of Allah (ص) prohibited him from
marrying her, too.

Then the man went to the Prophet (ص) a third time, whereupon he (ص) this
time said to him, "A slave woman who gives birth is dearer to my heart
than a beautiful [free] but sterile woman." Then he (ص) added saying,
"Do you not know that I shall brag about your numbers to the other
nations? I shall do so till a stillborn remains at the gate of Paradise
refusing to enter, so he is told to enter, but he says, 'No, not till my
parents enter.' He thus seeks intercession for them, whereupon they
shall all enter Paradise."

Sahl son of the Hanzali woman, who was childless and one of those who
had sworn allegiance to the Prophet (ص) under the tree, is quoted as
having said, "If a son is born for me in Islam [who dies a stillborn],
so I hope for compensation from Allah, is dearer to my heart than I have
as my possession the whole world and everything in it."[^15]

Ubadah ibn al-Samit is quoted as having said that the Messenger of Allah
(ص) had said, "A childbed woman is dragged by her son on the Judgment
Day with his own naval cords into Paradise [the child died before
getting the chance to cut the naval cord]."[^16]

Amr ibn Shu\`ayb quotes his father quoting his grandfather saying that
the Messenger of Allah (ص) had said, "Whoever offers one son from his
loins, who is yet to reach adolescence, it will be better for him than a
hundred sons who survive him, all performing *jihad* in the cause of
Allah who never are calmed till Judgment Day."

Al-Hassan has said that the Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "If I offer a
stillborn, it is better for me than leaving behind a hundred knights,
all fighting in the cause of Allah."[^17]

The Prophet (ص) is also quoted as having said, "Stillborns will be told
on the Judgment Day to enter Paradise, whereupon they will say, 'Lord!
Not till our parents enter!' They will thus refuse to enter. It is then
that the Almighty, Exalted and Great is He, shall say, 'Why do I see you
hesitating? Enter Paradise.' They will say, 'Lord! Our parents!' The
Almighty will then say, 'Enter Paradise, you and your parents.'"[^18]

Ubaid ibn Umayr al-Laithi is quoted as having said, "On the Judgment
Day, the sons of the Muslims will come out of Paradise holding drinks in
their hands. People will beg them to give them of it to drink, but they
will shout out: 'Our parents! [Where are] our parents?!' so much so that
even the stillborn will remain at the gate of Paradise too reluctant to
enter saying, 'I shall not enter till my parents enter.'"[^19]

Anas ibn Malik is quoted as having cited the Messenger of Allah (ص)
saying, "When it is Judgment Day, the believers' children are called
upon to get out of their graves. They will come out. They will then be
told to go to Paradise in hordes, but they will say, 'Lord! Shall our
parents accompany us?' They will be called upon a second time to go to
Paradise in hordes, but they will again say, 'Lord! Shall our parents
accompany us?'

They will then be called upon for the third time to go to Paradise in
hordes, but they will once more say, 'Lord! What about our parents?' It
will be said to them on the fourth time, 'Your parents shall be with
you, too,' whereupon each child will leap to its parents. They will take
their hands and all will enter Paradise, for they best know their
fathers and mothers on that Day than your own sons who now are in your
homes."[^20]

Anas ibn Malik is quoted as having said that a man used to bring his son
together with him whenever he used to see the Messenger of Allah (ص).
The son died, so his father stopped going to visit the Prophet (ص) who
inquired about him. People said to the Prophet (ص), "O Messenger of
Allah! His son, whom you had seen in his company, has died."

The Prophet (ص) said, "Why did you not tell me? Stand and let us go to
our brother to console him." When the Prophet (ص) entered the man's
place, he found him very sad and forlorn, so he offered his condolences
to him. The man said, "O Messenger of Allah! I used to treasure him for
my old age and feebleness."

The Messenger of Allah (ص) said to him, "Does it not please you that on
the Day of Judgment, he will be beside you? He will be told to enter
Paradise, whereupon he will say, 'Lord! What about my parents?' He will
keep pleading till Allah, the most Exalted, the most Great, accepts his
intercession and permits you all to enter Paradise."[^21]

Anas is also quoted as having said that ‘Uthman ibn Maz\`un, may Allah
be pleased with him, lost a son; therefore, his grief was intense, so
much so that he took for himself a niche in his house where he
worshipped. The Prophet (ص) came to know about it, whereupon he said, "O
‘Uthman! Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great, did not obligate
us to live like monks. Rather, asceticism of my nation is *jihad* (holy
war) in the way of Allah.

O ‘Uthman son of Maz\`un! Paradise has eight gates and Hell has seven;
does it not please you that whenever you come to any gate of Paradise,
you will find your son standing at it, holding your robe (pleading to
the Almighty to let you in)?"

It was said to the Messenger of Allah (ص), "O Messenger of Allah! Shall
we get with regard to our sons what ‘Uthman will be getting?" The
Prophet (ص) said, "Yes, for all those among you who are patient and who
rest their hope on Allah's rewards."[^22]

Qurrah ibn Iyas is quoted as having said that the Prophet (ص) used to be
visited by a man from the Ansar with his son. The Prophet (ص) once asked
him, "O so-and-so! Do you love him?" The man said, "Yes, O Messenger of
Allah, I love him just as I love you." The Prophet (ص) missed seeing
him, so he asked about him.

It was said to him, "O Messenger of Allah! He lost his son." When the
Prophet (ص) saw that man again, he said to him, "Are you not pleased
that on the Judgment Day, whenever you come to one of the gates of
Paradise, your son will try to open it for you?" The man said, "O
Messenger of Allah! Will the gate be opened only for him or for all of
us [our family]?" The Prophet (ص) said, "Rather, for all of you."[^23]

Al-Bayhaqi has reported that whenever the Prophet (ص) sat, a number of
his companions would sit around him, and among them was a father who had
with him a small boy who used to come to him from behind, so he would
seat him in front of him, till the child died, whereupon the man stopped
going to the circle which he used to attend due to his sadness and
grief.

He was missed by the Prophet (ص) who said, "Why do I not see so-and-so?"
They said, "O Messenger of Allah! His son whom you had seen has died, so
he now is too grieving over him to attend."

The Prophet (ص) met him and asked him about his son. He told the Prophet
(ص) about his son's demise, so the Prophet (ص) offered his condolences
to him then said, "O so-and-so! Which is dearer to you: That you enjoy
him during your life or you come tomorrow to one of the gates of
Paradise where you will find him there ready to open it for you?"

The man said, "O Prophet of Allah! No, indeed, I prefer he beats me to
the gate of Paradise which is dearer to me." The Prophet (ص) said, "You
shall have that."[^24]

A man from among the Ansar stood up and said, "Is this [reward] only for
this man or is it for anyone from among the Muslims who has a child [who
passes away]?" The Prophet (ص) said, "Rather, it is for anyone among the
Muslims who has a child [who passes away]; he shall have the same
[rewards]."

Zurarah ibn Awfa is quoted as having said that the Messenger of Allah
(ص) consoled a man on the loss of his son. He said to him, "Allah will
reward you, and great will be His reward." The man said, "O Messenger of
Allah! I am an old man, and my son had tended to me very well."

The Prophet (ص) said to him, "Does it not please you that he will meet
you at one of the gates of Paradise with a drink in his hand for you?"
The man asked, "How can I get such a reward, O Messenger of Allah?!" The
Prophet (ص) said, "Allah will take care of it and will do the same to
every Muslim whose son dies in Islam."

Abdullah ibn Qays quotes the Messenger of Allah (ص) saying, "If the son
of a servant of Allah dies, Allah Almighty says this to His angels:
'Have you taken away the son of My servant?' He will receive the answer
in the affirmative, whereupon He will repeat the question thus: 'Have
you taken away the fruit of his heart?'

The angels will again answer in the affirmative, whereupon He will ask
them—and He knows in advance what their answer will be—this: 'What did
My servant say?' They will answer saying, 'He praised You and rendered
his final affair to You.' Allah Almighty will then say, 'Build a house
for My servant in Paradise and name it the House of Praise.'"[^25]

It has also been narrated that a woman came once to see the Prophet (ص)
in the company of her sick son. She said, "O Messenger of Allah! Pray
Allah Almighty to heal my son!" The Messenger of Allah (ص) said to her,
"Did you have [other] children?" She said, "Yes". He asked her, "Were
they born during the *jahiliyya* or in Islam?" She said, "During Islam."
The Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "[Such is] a fortified protection [from
the fire of hell]! A fortified protection!"[^26]

Jabir ibn Samrah is quoted as having said that the Messenger of Allah
(ص) had said, "One who buries three of his sons and is patient about his
loss and rests his hope on being compensated for his loss by Allah
Almighty, it will be incumbent that he should be lodged in Paradise."
Umm Ayman asked, "What if he buries two?"

The Prophet (ص) said, "It is so if he buries two and is patient about
his loss and rests his hope on being compensated for his loss by Allah
Almighty, it will be incumbent that he should be lodged in Paradise."

Umm Ayman asked again, "What about burying only one son?" The Prophet
took to silence. After a short while he said, "O Umm Ayman! If someone
buries one son and is patient about his loss and rests his hope on being
compensated for his loss by Allah Almighty, it will be incumbent that he
should be lodged in Paradise."[^27]

Abdullah ibn Mas\`ood, may Allah be pleased with him, is quoted as
having said that the Messenger of Allah (ص) had said, "If one offers
three sons who were yet to reach adolescence, they will be his fortified
protection [against the flames of the Fire]." Abu Dharr said, "I have
already offered two." The Prophet (ص) said, "Even if they were two."
Ubayy ibn Ka\`b then said, "I have offered one," whereupon the Prophet
(ص) said, "Even if it were one son, but this will be at the first
shock."[^28]

Abu Sa\`eed al-Khudri is quoted as having said that women once said this
to the Prophet (ص): "Schedule one day to preach to us." He did. He said,
"Any woman who loses three of her children, they will all form a barrier
for her to protect her from the fire." One woman asked him, "What about
a woman who loses two?" The Prophet (ص) said, "It is so even if she
loses two."[^29]

In another tradition, he (ص) said to her, "Do you not like to see him at
the gate of Paradise calling upon you to join us?" She answered in the
affirmative, so he (ص) said to her, "So shall it be."[^30]

Ubayy ibn al-Nadar al-Salami is quoted as having said that the Messenger
of Allah (ص) had said, "If one of the Muslims loses three of his
children and he rests his hope on compensations from Allah, they will be
protection for him against the fire." A woman asked, "What if two die?"
The Prophet (ص) said, "Even if he/she loses two."

He (ص) is also quoted as having said, "One who offers three of his
children while being patient and seeks compensations from Allah, he will
be protected from the Fire by the will of Allah, the most Exalted One,
the most Great."[^31]

In another wording of this tradition, the Prophet (ص) says, "One who
loses some of his sons and remains patient, seeking compensations from
Allah, they will protect him, by the will of Allah, from the Fire."[^32]

The mother of Mubashshir, who belongs to the Ansars, is quoted as saying
that the Messenger of Allah (ص) entered her house as she was cooking
rice. He said to her, "One who loses three children who are yet to reach
adolescence will be protected through them from the Fire." She said to
him, "O Messenger of Allah! What about one who loses only two?" He said
to her, "It shall be so even if he loses two children, O mother of
Mubashshir!"[^33]

Qabeesah ibn Barmah has said, "I was once sitting in the company of the
Prophet (ص) when a woman came to him and said, 'O Messenger of Allah!
Pray to Allah! Pray to Allah for my sake, for no son lives for me.' The
Prophet (ص) asked her, 'How many sons have you lost?' She said, 'Three'.
He said, 'Surely you have been protected from the Fire with a strong
protection.'"[^34]

Ubayy ibn Ka\`b is quoted as having said that the Prophet (ص) once asked
a woman if she had children. "Three", she said. The Prophet (ص) said,
"This is a fortified protection for you."

The Prophet (ص) is also quoted as having said, "Whenever two Muslims
[husband and wife] offer three [children] who are yet to reach
adolescence, Allah will lodge them in Paradise through His mercy."
People said to him, "O Messenger of Allah! What if only two are
offered?" He said, "Even if they offer two; there are some people in my
nation who enter Paradise through his intercession more than [the tribe
of] Mudar's count, and there are others who work so hard for Hell till
they become one of its corners."[^35] A group of narrators have reported
this tradition, labeling it as authentic.

He (ص) has also said, "Allah Almighty has said, 'My Love is deserved by
those who befriend each other for My sake, and my Love is due to those
who help each other for My sake."[^36] Then he said, "A believing man or
woman who loses [to death] three children from his loins who did not yet
reach adolescence [and who rests his hope on rewards from Allah] will be
lodged into Paradise through Allah's mercy for those whom he
loses."[^37]

The Prophet (ص) is also quoted as having said, "One who buries three of
his children, Allah will prohibit the Fire from reaching him."[^38]

Sa\`sa\`ah ibn Mu\`awiyah is quoted as having said, "I met Abu Dharr
al-Ghifari, may Allah be pleased with him, in the Rabadha with a camel
on which he had loaded two bags, and on the camel's neck he was hanging
a water bag. I said to him, 'O Abu Dharr! What is wrong?!' He said, 'I
am just working.' I said to him, 'Narrate a tradition for me, may Allah
have mercy on you.' He said, 'I heard the Messenger of Allah (ص) say
that any Muslim couple whose three children die before reaching the age
of maturity will be forgiven by Allah through the favor of His mercy on
account of those whom they lose.'"

He went on to ask Abu Dharr to tell him another tradition, whereupon Abu
Dharr al-Ghifari said, "I heard the Messenger of Allah (ص) say, 'If a
Muslim spends in the way of Allah a couple of items, the caretakers of
Paradise will all call upon him to take what belongs to him.' I asked
him, 'How so?' He (ص) said, 'If he had offered men, they will be doubled
for him, if camels, cattle, etc., these will be doubled for him, too,'
counting all species of sacrificial animals."[^39] This tradition is
mentioned by a group of narrators.

Anas ibn Malik has said that the Messenger of Allah (ص) stood in a
congregation of Banu Salamah and said, "O sons of Salamah! How would you
describe a childless person among you?" They said, "He [or she] is one
who does not have children." He (ص) said, "Rather, he is one for whom no
children are born." He (ص) asked them again, "How would you describe a
destitute among you?" They said, "He is one who has no wealth." The
Prophet (ص) said, "No, he is one who meets his Maker having done nothing
good for His sake."[^40]

Ibn Mas\`ūd is quoted as having said that the Messenger of Allah (ص)
visited a woman once to offer his condolences. He said to her, "It has
come to my knowledge that you became very grieved." She said, "What
would prevent me, O Messenger of Allah, from it since he [son who died]
has left me a childless old woman?" The Messenger of Allah (ص) said to
her, "You are not childless. A childless woman is one who dies without
having begotten sons and people cannot get their sons to help her; such
is the childless woman."

All these traditions are excerpted from reliable sources. We have left
out their *isnad* and sources for the sake of brevity, and due to the
fact that Allah, the most Praised One, through His favor and mercy, has
promised rewards for those who do their best to achieve something even
if they do not actually achieve it. The same is recorded by books of
traditions from our [Shiite] sources and from those of the majority of
Muslims [Jama’a].

Rewards When Badly Needed:On Judgment Day
-----------------------------------------

Zaid ibn Aslam is quoted as having said that Prophet David, peace be
with him, lost a son, so he grieved a great deal for him. Allah,
therefore, inspired this to him: "O David! What was the worth of this
son for you?" He said, "Lord! He was equal to the fill of the earth with
gold." The Almighty said, "Then you will have from Me on the Day of
Judgment as many rewards as would fill this earth."[^41]

Dawood ibn Abu Hind is quoted as having said that he saw in a vision
once as if it was Doomsday and people were called upon for reckoning. He
said, "I was brought closer to the scales: My good deeds were placed on
one scale and my sins were put on the other. The scale of sins weighed
heavier than that of the good deeds.

As I stood very upset about it, I was brought a white handkerchief or
rag on which I placed my good deeds, thus the scale of my good deeds
weighed heavier. I was asked, 'Do you know what this [rag] is?' I
answered in the negative. It was said to me, 'This was a stillborn
begotten for you.' I said, 'I had a daughter.' It was said to me, 'Such
was not your daughter because you wished she would die.'"

Abu Shawdhab has said that a man had a son who was yet to reach the age
of adolescence. He sent a message to his folks that he needed something.
When asked about it, he said, "I want to implore Allah Almighty to take
away the life of this son of mine, and I want you to say 'Amen' to it."
They asked him why he wanted to do that.

He told them that he had seen in a vision as though people were gathered
for the Judgment Day, and they were very thirsty. Boys came out of
Paradise carrying water jugs, and among them one of his nephews was.

He asked his nephew to give him a drink, but he refused and said, 'O
uncle! We give only our fathers to drink.' I, therefore, liked Allah to
count my son among them." He supplicated, and they kept saying "Amen"
till the boy died. This is recorded by al-Bayhaqi in *Al-Shu\`ab*.

Muhammad ibn Khalaf is quoted as having said, "Ibrahim al-Harbi had a
son who was eleven years old and who had learned the text of the Holy
Qur'an by heart. His father had taught him a good deal of *fiqh* and
*hadith*. His son died, so I went to offer my condolences.

He said to me, 'I was hoping he would die.' I said to him, 'O father of
Ishaq! You are the world's scholar, why do you still talk like that
about a son whom you begot then taught *hadith* and *fiqh*?!'

He said, 'Yes, even so. I saw in a vision as though it was Doomsday.
Young boys were carrying water jars and were serving people water, and
the day was terribly hot. I asked one of them to give me of that water.

He looked at me and said that I was not his father. I asked him who they
all were, and he said that they were children who died during the past
life, leaving their parents behind, and that they now were receiving
them and serving them water. This is why I wished that he would
die.'"[^42]

In his book titled *Al-Ihyaa*, al-Ghazali narrates saying that there was
a particular righteous man to whom marriage was suggested a number of
times, but he always refused. One day he woke up from his sleep and
asked others to help him get married. He was asked about his sudden
change of heart, so he said, "I hope perhaps the Almighty will grant me
a son then take him away so he will be in the Hereafter in the
forefront."

Then he said, "I saw in my vision as if the Day of Judgment had
approached. It was as though I was among the crowds in that situation
suffering from thirst that would tear my heart apart, and so were the
rest of beings because of thirst and hardship. As we were thus, boys
made their way in the midst of people carrying lanterns of *noor*
(celestial light) and also carrying water jars made of silver and cups
made of gold.

They gave water to one person after the other. They were going through
the crowds, bypassing most of them by. I stretched my hand to one of
them and said to him, "Give me a drink for thirst has worn me out.' He
said, 'You have no son among us; we only give drink to our parents.' I
asked him, 'Who are you?' He said, 'We are children of Muslim parents
who died.'"[^43]

Sheikh Abu Abdullah ibn al-Nu\`man, in his book *Musbah al-Zalam*,
quotes some trustworthy persons saying that a man asked a friend of his
who was going to perform the pilgrimage to convey his greetings to the
Messenger of Allah (ص) and to bury a sealed tablet which he gave him at
his sacred head. The man did so. When the friend returned, the man was
generous to him and said, "May Allah reward you with goodness! You have
conveyed the message!"

The pilgrim was surprised at how his friend came to know about what he
had done, so he asked his friend, "How did you know that I had conveyed
the message before I even opened my mouth to talk to you about it?!" He
started explaining to him by saying, "I had a brother who died, leaving
a small son whom I brought up well, then he, too, died before reaching
adolescence.

One night, I saw in a vision that Judgment Day had come and the
Gathering had taken place. People were extremely thirsty on account of
their exertion. My nephew had water in his hand, so I begged him to give
me of it, but he refused and said, 'My father deserves it more than
you.' This hit me hard, so I woke up terrified. In the morning, I paid
some dinars by way of charity and prayed Allah to grant me a son, and He
did.

Your trip came, so I wrote that sheet which contained a plea to the
Prophet (ص) to accept my son in the hope I will find him on the Day of
the Great Fright. He had a fever which ended his life, and this took
place on the day of your arrival; therefore, I knew that you had
conveyed the message."

In the book titled *Al-Nawm wal Ru'ya*, Abu al-Saqr al-Musilli says,
"Ali son of al-Hussain son of Ja\`far says that his father has been told
by some of our fellows, those whose creed and comprehension he trusts,
that he came to Medina once in the evening and slept in the Baqee\`
between four graves where there was a freshly dug up grave. I saw in my
vision four children coming out of those graves reciting these verses of
poetry:

'Allah has blessed us with seeing the Loved One,  
 With your own coming, O Umaim, to us!  
 Never did I wonder about the grave's pressure  
 And about your coming, O Umaim, to us together!'

So, I told myself that these verses must surely have some meaning. I
stayed there till sunrise. It was then that a coffin was brought. I
asked whose coffin it was, and I was told that it belonged to a female
resident of Medina. I said, 'Is her name Umaima?' They said, 'Yes'. I
said, 'Has she lost [to death] some of her sons?' They said, 'Four
sons,' whereupon I told them about what I knew, and this only increased
their puzzlement."[^44]

How good are these verses by some men of virtue:

I give him, when he gives me, pleasure,  
 And if He takes away what He gives me He rewards:  
 Which of these blessings shall I regard to be better,  
 And for which shall I count as the most rewarding upon the Return?

[^1]: This tradition is recorded by Al-Kulaini in his book Al-Kafi, Vol.
2, pp. 15, 198, by Al-Hussain ibn Sa\`eed in his book Al-Mu'min, pp. 3,
15, by Sheikh Waram in Tanbih Al-Khawatir, Vol. 2, p. 204 and by
Muhammad ibn Human in Al-Tamhees, pp. 13, 32, with variation in wording.

[^2]: Thawab Al-A\`mal, pp. 2, 233.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: His name is Ali ibn Maysrah ibn Abdullah Al- Nakh’i. He and his
father were companions of Imam as-Sadiq (ع).

[^5]: This tradition is narrated by As-Saduq who accepts it in his [Man
la Yahduruhu Al-] Faqih, Vol. 1, pp. 112, 519 with variation in wording.
It is also narrated by Al-Kulaini through his isnad to Isma\`eel
Al-Sarraj in Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 1, 218. It is also narrated by
Al-Tibrisi's grandson in Mishkat Al-Anwar, p. 23, accepting its chain of
narratives. It is also recorded by Al-Majlisi in his Bihar Al-Anwar,
Vol. 82, pp. 8, 116, where Musakkin Al-Fuad is quoted.

[^6]: This is narrated by As-Saduq in his Faqih, Vol. 1, pp. 112, 518,
by Al-Kulaini in his Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 8, 219 and by Bihar Al-Anwar,
Vol. 82, pp. 8, 116 from Musakkin Al-Fuad.

[^7]: [Man la Yahduruhu Al-] Faqih, Vol. 1, pp. 111, 517, Bihar
Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, pp. 8, 116.

[^8]: Thawab Al-A\`mal, pp. 4, 233.

[^9]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sunan, Vol. 4, pp. 28, 2510.

[^10]: This tradition has been narrated by Abu Dawud in his Sunan, Vol.
3, pp. 183, 3090, by Ahmad in his Musnad, Vol. 5, p. 272, by Zaki
ad-Deen in his book Al-Targhib wal Tarhib, Vol. 4, pp. 30, 283 and by
Al-Sayyuti in his book Al-Jami\` Al-Saghir, Vol. 1, pp. 103, 669.

[^11]: As-Saduq narrates it in his book Al-Khisal, Ahmad in his
Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p. 443 and Vol. 4, pp. 5, 237 and Vol. 5, p. 366,
Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, Vol. 1, p. 511, Al-Sayyuti in his Al-Jami\`
Al-Saghir, Vol. 1, pp. 483, 4129; and it is recorded by Al-Majlisi in
his Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, pp. 9, 117 from Musakkin Al-Fuad.

[^12]: This is narrated by Al-Sayyuti in Al-Jami\` Al-Saghir, Vol. 1,
pp. 406, 2652, and it is recorded by Al-Majlisi in his Bihar Al-Anwar,
Vol. 82, 0. 117.

[^13]: This is narrated by As-Saduq from Muhammad ibn Muslim from [Imam]
Abu Abdullah (ع) in Al-Faqih, Vol. 3, pp. 242, 1144, in Ma\`ani
Al-Akhbar, pp. 1, 291, and it is narrated by Al-Tibrisi in Makarim
Al-Akhlaq, p. 196, taking it for granted. It is also recorded by
Al-Majlisi in his Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, pp. 9, 117 from Musakkin
Al-Fuad.

[^14]: This is narrated by Al-Sayyuti in his book Al-Jami\` Al-Saghir,
Vol. 2, pp. 55, 4724 where he takes its authenticity for granted, and by
Al-Muttaqi Al-Hindi who quotes Ibn Abbas in Muntakhab Al-Kanz, Vol. 6,
p. 390.

[^15]: This is narrated by Ibn Al-Atheer in Usd Al-Ghaba, Vol. 2, p. 364
and by Al-Muttaqi Al-Hindi in Muntakhab Al-Kanz, Vol. 6, p. 392 with
minor wording variation.

[^16]: This tradition is narrated by Ahmad in his Musnad, Vol. 3, p. 489
and Vol. 5, p. 329. It is narrated by Muhammad ibn Ali Al-Alawi through
another isnad on pp. 25, 53 of Al-Ta\`azi and by Al-Majlisi in Bihar
Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, pp. 10, 117 from Musakkin Al-Fuad.

[^17]: Tanbih Al-Khawatir, Vol. 1, p. 287; Al-Mahajja Al-Baydaa, Vol. 8,
p. 287.

[^18]: This is narrated by Ahmad in his Musnad, Vol. 4, p. 105.

[^19]: This is recorded by Al-Majlisi in his book Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol.
82, pp. 11, 118 where he cites Musakkin Al-Fuad.

[^20]: Ibid., Vol. 82, p. 118 from Musakkin Al-Fuad where Anas ibn Malik
is quoted.

[^21]: This is recorded by Al-Majlisi in his book Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol.
82, p. 118 from Musakkin Al-Fuad.

[^22]: This is reported by As-Saduq's book Al-Amali, by Muhammad ibn Ali
Al-Alawi in his Al-Ta\`azi, pp. 16, 28, and it is reported by Ibn
Al-Fattal, the Persian, in Rawdat Al-Wa\`izeen, p. 422, with minor
difference in wording.

[^23]: This is reported by Muhammad ibn Ali in his book Al-Ta\`azi, pp.
14, 24, by Ahmad in his Musnad, by Al-Nisa'i in his Sunan, Vol. 4, p.
23, by Al-Hakim Al-Naisaburi in his Mustadrak, Vol. 1, p. 384, by
Al-Sayyuti in Al-Durr Al-Manthur, Vol. 1, p. 158, and by Zaki ad-Deen in
Al-Targheeb wal Tarheeb, Vol. 3, pp. 16, 79.

[^24]: It is narrated by Nisa'i in his Sunan, Vol. 4, p. 118 with minor
wording difference.

[^25]: This is narrated by Al-Kulaini the isnad of which he refers to
Al-Sikooni from Imam Abu Abdullah (ع) from the Prophet (ص), and it is
also narrated in Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 4, 218, by As-Saduq in Vol. 1, pp.
112, 523 of Al-Faqih with a variation in its wording. It is also
narrated from Abu Mousa Al-Ash\`ari by Ahmad in his Musnad, Vol. 4, p.
415 and by Al-Sayyuti in his Al-Jami\` Al-Sagheer, Vol. 1, pp. 131, 854.
It is also recorded by Al-Majlisi in his Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 119
from Musakkin Al-Fuad.

[^26]: This is recorded by Al-Majlisi on pp. 12, 119 of Vol. 82 from
Musakkin Al-Fuad.

[^27]: This tradition is narrated by Al-Sayyuti in Al-Durr Al-Manthur,
Vol. 1, p. 159, and in Al-Jami\` Al-Kabeer, Vol. 1, p. 777 with a
difference in wording. It is also recorded by Al-Majlisi in his Bihar
Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, pp. 12, 119 from Musakkin Al-Fuad.

[^28]: Ahmad has narrated this tradition in his Musnad, Vol. 1, p. 429,
and so has Al-Tirmidhi in his Sunan, Vol. 2, pp. 262, 1067, Ibn Majah in
his Sunan, Vol. 1, pp. 512, 1066 and Al-Sayyuti in Al-Durr Al-Manthur,
Vol. 1, p. 158.

[^29]: This tradition is narrated by Muhammad ibn Ali in Al-Ta\`azi,
Vol. 13, p. 21 with a wording variation. It is also narrated by Ahmad in
his Musnad, Vol. 3, p. 34, by Al-Bukhari in his Sahih, Vol. 1, pp. 2, 9,
36, 124 with some wording variation. It is also narrated by Muslim in
his Sahih, Vol. 4, pp. 2028, 2632 from Abu Hurayra and by Zaki ad-Deen
in Al-Targheeb wal Tarheeb, Vol. 3, p. 76 with a wording variation.

[^30]: This is narrated by Al-Muttaqi Al-Hindi in Muntakhab
Kanzul-\`Ummal, Vol. 1, p. 212 with some wording variation and by
Al-Majlisi in his Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 120 from Musakkin Al-Fuad.

[^31]: This is narrated by Sheikh Waram in Tanbih Al-Khawatir, Vol. 1,
p. 287 where its authenticity is taken for granted. It is also narrated
from Abu Al-Nadar by Malik ibn Anas in his Muwatta', Vol. 1, p. 235, and
by Al-Sayyuti in Al-Durr Al-Manthur, Vol. 1, p. 158.

[^32]: Al-Jami\` Al-Kabeer, Vol. 1, p. 817.

[^33]: This is narrated by Al-Sayyuti in Al-Jami\` Al-Kabeer, Vol. 1, p.
949 with a wording variation.

[^34]: This tradition has been reported by Ibn Al-Atheer in Usd
Al-Ghaba, Vol. 4, p. 191, and it is transmitted from Abu Hurayra with
variation in its wording by Ahmad in his Musnad, Vol. 2, p. 419 and by
Muslim in his Sahih, Vol. 4, p. 2030.

[^35]: This is narrated by Al-Hakim Al-Naisaburi in Al-Mustadrak, Vol.
1, p. 71 and by Zaki ad-Deen in Al-Targheeb wal Tarheeb, Vol. 3, pp. 12,
78. It is narrated by Ahmad in his Musnad in different wording in Vol.
4, p. 212 and Vol. 5, 312.

[^36]: Ahmad has narrated it in his Musnad, Vol. 4, p. 386 and Zaki
ad-Deen in Al-Targheeb wal Tarheeb, Vol. 4, pp. 16, 19 with minor
wording variation.

[^37]: This is narrated by Al-Nisa'i in his Sunan, Vol. 4, p. 34 with
minor wording difference and by Al-Muttaqi Al-Hindi in Muntakhab
Al-Kanz, Vol. 1, p. 210 with different wording.

[^38]: This is narrated by Al-Sayyuti in Al-Jami\` Al-Sagheer, Vol. 2,
pp. 600, 8669 and by Al-Muttaqi Al-Hindi in Muntakhab Al-Kanz, Vol. 1,
p. 210.

[^39]: This is narrated by Ahmad in his Musnad, Vol. 5, pp. 151, 153,
159, 164 with minor wording difference.

[^40]: This is narrated by Al-Sayyuti in Al-Jami\` Al-Kabeer, Vol. 1, p.
959 with minor wording variation.

[^41]: This is narrated by Sheikh Waram in Tanbih Al-Khawatir, Vol. 1,
p. 287 and by Al-Sayyuti in Al-Durr Al-Manthur, Vol. 5, p. 306 in
different wording.

[^42]: Rijal Al-Hadith, Vol. 16, p. 74; Khulasat Al-\`Alama, Vol. 1, pp.
154, 161.

[^43]: Ihyaa Uloom ad-Deen, Vol. 2, p. 27.

[^44]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 122.


