Weeping
=======

Be informed that weeping by itself does not clash with perseverance or
with accepting destiny; rather, it is a human norm of behavior, an
indication of one's humanity, an expression of affection towards
kinsfolk or a loved one; so, there is no harm in demonstrating it, nor
is there any harm in getting out to the open as long as it does not
contain conditions which bring about Wrath or show alarm and thus take
away rewards, such as one tearing his garment or beating his face or
beating on the thigh, etc.

It has been reported about the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be
with him and his progeny, weeping during tragic times, and before him
about Adam, peace be with him, and after him about his progeny and
companions despite their acceptance, perseverance and firmness.

The first to weep was Adam, peace be with him, over his son Able whom he
eulogized in well known verses of poetry, grieving for him a great deal.
If anything is hidden, there is nothing hidden about Jacob (Ya'qoub),
peace be with him, who wept over Joseph (Yousuf) till his eyes turned
white out of grief for Yousuf, Joseph, peace be with him.

Among famous narratives are those quoting Imam al-Sadiq, peace be with
him, as saying, "[Imam] Zainul-Aabidin, peace be with him, wept over his
father for forty years, fasting during the day and standing for prayers
during the night. When it was time for him to break his fast, his
servant would bring him food and drink, placing it in front of him as he
would say, 'Eat, Master.'

He (ع) would say, 'The [grand]son of the Messenger of Allah (ص) was
hungry when he was killed. The [grand]son of the Messenger of Allah (ص)
was thirsty when he was killed.' He would keep repeating these
statements and weeps till his food becomes wet from his tears. He
continued to do so till he joined Allah, the most Exalted One, the most
Great."[^1]

One of his slaves reported saying, "He [Imam Zainul-Aabidin] went out to
the desert, so I followed him. I found him prostrating on a rough rock.

I stood as I kept hearing his inhalation and weeping. I counted one
thousand times his repeating this statement: ' لا اله الا الله حقا حقا،
لا اله الا الله تعبدا و رقا، لا اله الا الله ايمانا و صدقا There is no
god save Allah, truly it is true; There is no god save Allah, I worship
Him and I am His slave; There is no god save Allah, I believe in it and
it is true.'

Then he raised his head from his prostration; his beard and face were
awash by his tears. I, therefore, said, 'Master! Is it not time yet for
your grief to come to an end and to your weeping to be less?' He said to
me, 'Woe on you! Jacob son of Isaac son of Abraham, peace be with them,
was a prophet the son of a prophet and the grandson of a prophet.

He had twelve sons. Allah kept one of them away from him, so he grew
grey hair on account of his grief, his back was bent due to his sadness
and his eyesight was gone because of his weeping even while his son was
alive in the life of this world. And I saw my father, brother and
seventeen of my family members slain; so, how can my grief come to an
end, and how can my weeping decrease?!"[^2]

Anas ibn Malik said once, "I went in the company of the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be with him and his progeny, to
visit Abu Saif al-Qayn who was foster-father of Ibrahim [Abraham, son of
the Prophet by his wife Mary the Copt]. The Messenger of Allah (ص) took
Ibrahim and kept kissing and smelling him.

Then he went after that to visit him [Abu Saif al-Qayn] when Ibrahim,
peace be with him, was drawing his last breath. The eyes of the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be with him and his
progeny, kept shedding tears. Abdul-Rahman ibn Awf said to him, 'Even
you, O Messenger of Allah [cry]?!'

He (ص) said, 'O son of Awf! It is mercy,' repeating his statement. Then
the Messenger of Allah (ص) said, 'The eye is tearful, the heart grieves,
and we do not say anything but whatever pleases our Lord. We, on account
of your parting, O Ibrahim, are grieved."[^3]

Asmaa daughter of Zaid is quoted as having said that when the son of the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be with him and his
progeny, namely Ibrahim, peace be with him, passed away, the Messenger
of Allah (ص) wept. Someone consoling him said to him, "You are the
greatest in magnifying Allah's right, the most Exalted One, the most
Great."

The Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "The eye sheds its tears, the heart
grieves, and we do not say anything that brings the Wrath of the Lord.
Had it not been a just destined promise, one that includes everyone
[death], and the last one will follow the very first, we would have
grieved for you in a way better than we already have and we, O Ibrahim,
are grieved because of you."[^4]

Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari, may Allah be pleased with him, has said
that the Messenger of Allah (ص) took the hand of Abdul-Rahman ibn Awf
and went to see Ibrahim as the latter was drawing his last breath. He
placed Ibrahim in his lap and said to him, "O son! I cannot help you
against the will of Allah in anything at all," shedding his tears.

Abdul-Rahman said to him, "O Messenger of Allah! Do you weep?! Did you
not prohibit weeping?" He (ص) said, "I prohibited lamenting in two
foolish and licentious sounds: the sound made on hearing a sporting
tone, merry-making and Satan's windpipes, and the sound made on a
calamity befalling: the scratching of cheeks, the tearing asunder of
shirts, and the tone of Satan.

But this [weeping is a sign of] mercy: One who is not merciful to others
will not receive mercy [from the Almighty]. Had it not been a just
matter, a true promise, a path which we all tread upon, our last will
catch up with our first, we would have grieved more intensely than this;
we are on your account [O Ibrahim] grieved; the eye is tearful, the
heart is sad, and we do not say what angers the Lord, the most Exalted
One, the most Great."[^5]

Abu Umamah is quoted as having said that a man visited the Prophet (ص)
when his son [Ibrahim] had died and saw his eyes filled with tears, so
he said, "O Prophet of Allah! Do you shed tears for this child?! I swear
by the One Who sent you with the truth, I buried twelve sons during the
time of Jahiliyya each and every one of them was younger than him. I
tossed each one in the ground."

The Prophet (ص) said, "So what if mercy departed from you?! The heart is
grieved, the eye is tearful, and we do not say anything that angers the
Lord; we are over Ibrahim grieved."

Mahmoud ibn Labeed has said that an eclipse of the sun took place when
Ibrahim son of the Messenger of Allah (ص) died, so people said, "The sun
has eclipsed for Ibrahim's death." The Messenger of Allah (ص), he went
on, came out when he heard about it.

He praised Allah and lauded him then said, "O people! The sun and the
moon are two of the signs of Allah, the most Exalted One, the most
Great, and they do not eclipse for the death or the life of anyone. If
you see them eclipse, you must rush to the mosques to pray."

Then his eyes were filled with tears. People said, "O Messenger of
Allah! Do you weep while you are the Messenger of Allah?!" He (ص) said,
"I am only human; the eye sheds its tears; the heart senses the tragedy,
and we do not say anything that angers the Lord. By Allah, O Ibrahim, we
are grieved on your account."[^6]

Khalid ibn Ma'dan is quoted as having said that when Ibrahim son of the
Prophet (ص) died, the Prophet (ص) wept, so it was said to him, "O
Messenger of Allah! Do you weep?!" He (ص) said, "A fragrant flower which
Allah gifted to me, and I used to smell it."

On the day when Ibrahim died, he (ص) said, "Any grief in the heart or in
the eye is mercy; grieving with the tongue or hand is an act of
Satan."[^7]

Al-Zubayr ibn Bakkar narrated saying that the Prophet (ص) went out to
bury [his son] Ibrahim. Then he sat on his grave. When he was taken down
into the grave, the Messenger of Allah (ص) saw him, so he wept. When the
*sahaba* (companions) saw that, they, too, wept, so much so that their
voices rose.

Abu Bakr went to him and said, "O Messenger of Allah! Do you weep while
prohibiting us from weeping?!" The Prophet (ص) said, "The Prophet (ص)
said, "The eye sheds its tears, the heart is in pain, and we do not say
anything that angers the Lord, the most Exalted One, the most Great."

Al-Saaib ibn Yazid is quoted as having said that when al-Tahir son of
the Prophet (ص) passed away, the Prophet (ص) wept, so it was said to
him, "O Messenger of Allah! Have you really wept?!" He (ص) said, "The
eye purs, the tear subdues, and the heart grieves; we do not disobey
Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great."[^8]

In his *Sahih*, Muslim narrates saying that the Prophet (ص) visited his
mother's grave, so he wept and all those around him wept, too.[^9]

It has also been narrated that when ‘Uthman ibn Maz'un died, the Prophet
(ص) uncovered the sheet to see his face; he kissed him on the forehead
then wept for a long time. When the coffin was raised, he (ص) said,
"Congratulations to you, O ‘Uthman! The world did not confuse you, nor
did you confuse it."[^10]

Sa\`d ibn Abadah complained once [about being sick], so the Messenger of
Allah (ص) went to visit him. When he entered his room, he saw him in a
coma. He (ص) asked, "Has he died?" They said, "No, O Messenger of
Allah." The Messenger of Allah (ص) wept. When people saw how he wept,
they, too, wept. He (ص) said, "Do you not hear [me say this]? Allah does
not torment one because of his eyes' tears, nor because his heart
grieves. Rather, He torments because of this—pointing to his tongue—or
He may show mercy."[^11]

It has been narrated that the Messenger of Allah (ص) received a message
once about his granddaughter being sick. He (ص) said, "To Allah belongs
whatever He takes, and to Allah belongs whatever He gives." He (ص) went
to see her accompanied by some of his companions.

The mother took out a little girl to him whose breath was irregular, so
he (ص) felt pity for her and his eyes poured down their tears. His
companions looked at him [critically], so he (ص) said, "What is wrong
with you so you look at me like that? This is mercy [feeling of pity]
which Allah places wherever He wills; Allah is merciful to those among
His servants who are merciful to others."[^12]

Usamah ibn Zaid is quoted as having said that Umama daughter of Zainab
[daughter of Jahsh, cousin of the Prophet and later his wife] was
brought to the Prophet (ص) as her breath was quite irregular. He (ص)
said, "Whatever Allah takes belongs to Him, and whatever Allah gives is
His; everyone is destined to see his day," then he wept. Sa\`d ibn
Abadah said, "Do you weep while you prohibited weeping?!" The Messenger
of Allah (ص) said, "It is mercy which Allah places in the heart of His
servants; Allah is merciful unto those from among His servants who are
merciful to each other."[^13]

When Ja\`far ibn Abu Talib, may Allah be pleased with him, was martyred,
the Messenger of Allah (ص) went to see Asmaa, may Allah be pleased with
her. He said to her, "Get the children of Ja\`far out for me." They came
out, whereupon he (ص) hugged and smelled them then shed tears. Asmaa
asked him, "O Messenger of Allah! Has Ja\`far been killed?" He (ص) said,
"Yes, he has been martyred today."[^14]

Abdullah ibn Ja\`far has said, "I recollect how the Messenger of Allah
(ص) visited my mother and eulogized to her the death of my father. She
looked at him as he kept rubbing on my head and on that of my brother
while his eyes were shedding their tears, so much so that his beard
started dripping.

Then he said, 'Lord! Ja\`far went to receive the best reward; so, bestow
Your blessing on his sons in the very best way in which You have done
for any of Your servants.' Then he (ص) said, 'O Asmaa! Shall I give you
some glad tiding?" She said, "Yes, please, may both my parents be
sacrificed for your sake!' He said, 'Allah Almighty has made two wings
for Ja\`far whereby he flies in Paradise.'"

Abi-Abdillah (The father of Abdullah: Imam Hussein), peace be with him,
quotes his father who quotes the Prophet (ص) saying that when he came to
know that Ja\`far ibn Abu Talib, may Allah be pleased with him, and Zaid
ibn Harithah were martyred, he mourned them both whenever he entered his
home. He said, "They both used to talk to me and entertain me, then
death took them away."[^15]

Khalid ibn Salamah has said that when the Prophet (ص) came to know about
the death of Zaid ibn Harithah, he went to Zaid's house where a small
daughter of Zaid came out to him. When she saw the Messenger of Allah
(ص), she scratched her face [in grief], whereupon the Messenger of Allah
(ص) wept and sobbed, so he was asked, "What is this [that you are
doing], O Messenger of Allah?!" He said, "It is the [crying of a] lover
feeling anxious about the one he loves."[^16]

When Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh, may Allah be pleased with him, died, the
Messenger of Allah (ص) wept a great deal.

He (ص) once said the following to the mother of Sa\`d ibn Mu'adh: "Will
your tears dry and your grief subside, for the Arsh (Allah’s throne) has
shaken on account of your son?"

It is said that the Messenger of Allah (ص) would weep, and he would wipe
his face but no sound would come out of him."[^17]

Al-Baraa ibn \`Azib is quoted as having said, "While we were in the
company of the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah with him
and his progeny, he saw a group of people, so he said, 'Why have these
folks gathered together like that?' He was told that they were digging a
grave.

The Messenger of Allah (ص) immediately went out from among his
companions in a hurry and knelt down on the grave. I faced him in order
to see what he would do. He wept till the ground became wet from his
tears, then he addressed us saying, 'Brothers! It is for the like of
this that you should be prepared.'"[^18]

He (ص) has also said, "Nobody has control over his grief; it is an
expression of affection for one's brother."[^19]

When the Prophet (ص) returned from Uhud to Medina, he was met by Hamna
daughter of Jahsh. People offered condolences to her on the occasion of
the martyrdom of her brother Abdullah ibn Jahsh. She said, "*Inna
Lillahi wa Inna Ilayhi Raji'oon* (We belong to Allah, and to Him shall
we return)."

She prayed the Almighty to forgive him. Then people consoled her on the
martyrdom of her uncle Hamzah, so she said, "*Inna Lillahi wa Inna
Ilayhi Raji'oon* (We belong to Allah, and to Him shall we return)." She
prayed the Almighty to forgive him, too. Then she was consoled on the
martyrdom of her husband Mus\`ab ibn \`Umayr, whereupon she cried and
wailed; therefore, the Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "A woman's husband
surely has a special status with her" due to his having witnessed how
she persevered about the death of her brother and uncle and how she
cried over her husband.[^20]

Then the Messenger of Allah (ص) passed by the homes of the Ansar from
among Banu Abd al-Ashhal. He heard weeping and wailing over those who
had been killed [during the battle of Uhud], so his eyes were
immediately tearful, and he wept. Then he said, "But Hamzah has none to
weep over him…"

When Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh and Aseed ibn Hudair returned to the homes of
Banu al-Ashhal, they both ordered their women to go and mourn the uncle
of the Prophet (ص) [Hamzah]. When the Prophet (ص) heard their weeping
over Hamzah, he came out to them as they were at the mosque's gate
crying. He (ص) said to them, "Go back, may Allah have mercy on you; you
have indeed consoled in person."

The mentor narrates in his *Tahdhib*, through *isnad* traced back to
Imam al-Sadiq, peace be with him, saying that "Ibrahim (Abraham), Friend
of the most Merciful One, pleaded to his Lord to grant him a daughter
who would mourn him after his death."[^21]

Ibn Mas\`ūd is quoted as having said that the Messenger of Allah (ص)
said, "One who slaps cheeks and tears garments does not belong to
us."[^22]

Abu Umamah has said that the Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "May the
Almighty curse one who scratches her face, who tears her garment, who
wails and laments."[^23]

He (ص) is quoted as having prohibited people from walking behind a
coffin while wailing and weeping.[^24]

Amr ibn Shu'ayb quotes his father quoting his grandfather saying that it
is very much held in contempt by the Almighty when one eats while not
being hungry, sleeps without having stayed late at night, laughs without
having seen something unusual, makes a noise of wailing when calamity
falls, and blows a windpipe when prosperous."[^25]

Yahya ibn Khalid has said that a man went to see the Prophet (ص). He
asked him, "What voids rewards at the time when calamity befalls
someone?" The Prophet (ص) said, "It is when someone slaps one hand with
the other; when one is first afflicted, if he accepts it, he, too, will
be accepted [by the Almighty], and if he is wrathful, wrath shall fall
upon him."[^26]

Umm Salamah, may Allah be pleased with her, has said, "When Abu Salamah,
may Allah be pleased with him, died a stranger in a strange land, I said
that I would cry over him in a way which people will talk about. I was
about to cry when a woman came with the intention to entertain me, so
the Messenger of Allah (ص) welcomed her and said, 'Do you want to permit
Satan to enter a house from which Allah kicked him out?' I, therefore,
did not proceed with crying."

Imam al-Baqir (ع) is quoted as having said, "The severest form of one's
alarm status is screaming while weeping and wailing, slapping the face
and chest, pulling the hair. When one resorts to wailing, he abandons
patience; one who demonstrates patience, says *'Inna Lillahi wa Inna
Ilayhi Raji'oon*' (We belong to Allah, and to Him is our return),
praising Allah, Great is His Mention and accepts what Allah does, his
rewards will be with Allah, the most Exalted, the most Great One. One
who does not do that will be subjected to destiny while being held in
contempt, and Allah, the most Exalted, the most Great, will void his
rewards."[^27]

Imam al-Sadiq (ع) has said that the Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "If one
beats with his hand his thigh, he voids his rewards."[^28]

Significance of saying "Inna Lillahi wa Inna Ilayhi Raji'oon”
-------------------------------------------------------------

It is recommended, when calamity befalls someone, that the latter should
say: *Inna Lillahi wa Inna Ilayhi Raji'oon* (We belong to Allah, and to
Him shall we return).

Allah Almighty has said:

*"…* ***[Those] who say, when afflicted with calamity, 'To Allah do we
belong, and to Him do we return' are the ones on whom God's blessings
and mercy (descend), and they are the ones who receive guidance"
(Qur'an, 2:156-7).***

The Prophet (ص) has said, "If one has four merits, the greatest *noor*
of Allah will be in him: one who sets his reliance on his testimony that
There is no god save Allah and that I am the Messenger of Allah, one
who, when afflicted with a calamity, says *Inna Lillahi wa Inna Ilayhi
Raji'oon* (We belong to Allah, and to Him shall we return), one who,
when he earns something good, says *Alhamdu-Lillah* (Praise belongs to
Allah), and one who, on committing a sin, says *Astaghfirullaha* *wa
Atoobo Ilayh* (I seek Allah's forgiveness, and I repent to Him)."[^29]

Imam al-Baqir (ع) is quoted as having said, "Whenever a believer is
afflicted with a calamity in the life of this world and says *Inna
Lillahi wa Inna Ilayhi Raji'oon* (We belong to Allah, and to Him shall
we return) when overwhelmed by the calamity, if he perseveres upon being
hit by the calamity…, Allah will forgive his past sins except major ones
for which Allah Almighty mandated the penalty of the fire.

Whenever in the future he remembers a calamity that had befallen him and
he says *Inna Lillahi wa Inna Ilayhi Raji'oon* (We belong to Allah, and
to Him shall we return) at that time, praises Allah, the most Exalted
and the most Great, Allah will forgive every sin which he had committed
between the first time and the latter time of saying the mentioned
supplication, except major sins."[^30]

Both these traditions have been narrated by al-Sadūq. Al-Kulaini II has
rendered their *isnad* to Ma\`ruf ibn Kharbudh citing Imam al-Baqir (ع)
without mentioning the exception referred to above with regard to major
sins.[^31]

Al-Kulaini, through his *isnad* to Dawud ibn Zirbi cites al-Sadiq (ع) as
saying, "If one remembers his sin, even after a long while, and says
*Inna Lillahi wa Inna Ilayhi Raji'oon, Alhamdu-Lillahi Rabbil \`Aalamin,
Allahomma Ajirni ala Musibati wa Akhlif Alayya Afdala Minha* (We belong
to Allah, and to Him shall we return, praise belongs to Allah, Lord of
the Worlds; Lord! Grant me rewards for my calamity and compensate me
with something better than it), he will have the same reward which he
had received when he was first afflicted."[^32]

Muslim has quoted Umm Salamah, may Allah be pleased with her, saying
that the Messenger of Allah (ص) enjoined saying, "Any Muslim who is
afflicted by a calamity and who says as he has been commanded by Allah:

*Inna Lillahi wa Inna Ilayhi Raji'oon, Alhamdu-Lillahi Rabbil \`Aalamin,
Allahomma Ajirni ala Musibati wa Akhlif Alayya Afdala Minha* (We belong
to Allah, and to Him shall we return, praise belongs to Allah, Lord of
the Worlds; Lord! Grant me rewards for my calamity and compensate me
with something better than it), Allah will surely compensate me for that
calamity with something good.

When Abu Salamah died, I said, 'Who among the Muslims is better than Abu
Salamah?! His was the first family that migrated to the Messenger of
Allah; I made the statement, so Allah compensated me with the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be with him and his
progeny."[^33]

Al-Tirmidhi has narrated through his *isnad* to the Messenger of Allah
(ص) saying, "When the son of a servant of Allah dies, Allah Almighty
would say to His angels, 'Have you taken the soul away of the son of My
servant?' They would answer in the affirmative. He would say, 'Have you
taken away the fruit of his heart?'

They would again answer in the affirmative. He would then say, 'What did
My servant say?' They would answer by saying, 'He praised You, said
*Inna Lillahi wa Inna Ilayhi Raji'oon* (We belong to Allah, and to Him
is our return).' The Almighty would then say, 'Build My servant a home
in Paradise and call it بيت الحمد *Bayt al-Hamd*, Home of the
Praise."[^34]

A similar tradition is narrated by al-Kulaini from Imam al-Sadiq (ع) who
quotes the Prophet (ص).[^35]

On Mourning
-----------

Mourning is permissible with good praise, the enumeration of one's
virtues while employing truthfulness because Fatima al-Zahra, peace be
with her, did so when she said, "O father! How close he is to his Lord!
O father! To Gabriel do I mourn him. O father! One who responded when
his Lord called on him."[^36]

It is narrated that she took a handful of the dust of his grave, peace
and blessings of Allah with him and his progeny, and placed it on her
eyes then composed this poetry:

*What harm is there if one sniffs Ahmad's soil*  
*That he forever never smells dear ones at all?*  
*Calamities were poured on me had they been*  
*Poured on days, they would have been turned into nights*.[^37]

It has already been stated how the Prophet (ص) ordered [his uncle]
Hamzah to be eulogized.

Abu Hamzah quotes Imam al-Baqir (ع) saying, "The son of al-Mughirah
died, so Umm Salamah asked the Prophet (ص) to permit her to go to mourn
him, and he (ص) did so; he was her cousin. She said these lines:

*I mourn the son of his father, the father of his son, the youth of the
tribe,*  
*Protector of the truth, glorious, one who aspires to reach the peak.*  
*He was the relief during bad years, the brimful river, the rations.*

The narrative continues to say that the Messenger of Allah (ص) did not
find anything wrong with what she did, nor did he make any comment.[^38]

Ibn Babawayh has narrated saying that Imam al-Baqir (ع) stated in his
will that he should be mourned during the pilgrimage season for ten
years.[^39]

Younus ibn Ya\`qub quotes Imam al-Sadiq (ع) as saying, "[Imam] Abu
Ja\`far, peace be with him, has said to me, 'Take out of my wealth
such-and-such for female mourners who should mourn me for ten years at
Mina during the time when pilgrims stay there.'"[^40]

The companions said, the reason is to attract people's attention to the
Imam’s merits and raise the status of such merits so that people may
emulate them and so people may know the status of the members of this
Household, peace and blessings be with them, in order to follow in their
footsteps especially since *taqiyyah* (hiding beliefs in fear) is
removed after death…, mourning someone by attributing what is wrong is
prohibitive. Such mourning will be counting merits which do not exist.

Also prohibitive is stranger men hearing the voice of women mourning,
and so is slapping and scratching the cheeks, hair pulling and such
behavior. It is on this premise that wailing is prohibited.

The Prophet (ص) has said, "I dissociate myself from anyone who shaves
[his moustache and beard] and who pulls his/her hair and raises his/her
voice (during mourning)."[^41]

Speaking to Fatima, peace be with her, when [her cousin] Ja\`far ibn Abu
Talib was killed, he (ص) said, "Do not wail or lament, and whatever I
have said, I have articulated nothing but the truth."[^42]

Abu Malik al-Ash\`ari quotes the Prophet (ص) as saying, "If the wailing
woman does not repent, she will be resurrected on the Judgment Day
wearing a shawl of tar."[^43]

Abu Sa'eed al-Khudri is quoted as having said that the Messenger of
Allah (ص) condemned the wailing woman and the one who listens to
her."[^44]

He (ص) is also quoted as having said, "One who slaps the cheeks [in
agony] and tears clothes is none of us."[^45]

This prohibition is understood to apply to what is regarded as
wrongdoing, and this is the common denominator between it and the
previous reports.

As regarding how to conclude such a loss, there are useful benefits in
it which include the following:

It is highly commendable to offer condolences to the family of the
deceased, actually it is for certain commendable. It is offering a
consolation and an advice to take to patience when afflicted by
calamities. It is meant to distract one's attention from the calamity
and persevere rather than surrender to grief and depression.

The way to do that is to surrender to the command of Allah, the most
Sublime, the most Great, and to attribute what has happened to His
justice and wisdom. And it is by remembering the rewards which Allah has
promised those who persevere and praying for the deceased person and
consoling the grieved person by taking his mind away from his calamity.
There are many traditions about recommending it and urging the believers
to do it:

Amr ibn Shu'ayb quotes his father quoting his grandfather saying that
the Messenger of Allah (ص) said once, "Do you know what rights a
neighbor has on his neighbor? It is taking to assist him when he seeks
help, to loan him when he asks for a loan, to visit him when
impoverished, to console him when afflicted by a calamity, to
congratulate him when something good happens to him, to visit him when
he falls sick, to walk behind his coffin when he dies, not to build the
house higher than his and thus block the movement of wind except with
his permission, to give him a gift when you buy fruits, and if you do
not do so, let it reach him discreetly. Do not let your children show it
off to his children and thus cause them to be angry. Do not let him envy
you for wealth coming your way except that you take a measure of it and
give it to him."[^46]

Bahz ibn Hakim ibn Mu'awiyah ibn Jidah al-Qushayri quotes his father
quoting his grandfather saying, "I said [to the Messenger of Allah (ص)],
'O Messenger of Allah, what rights does my neighbor have on me?' He (ص)
said, 'When he falls sick, you should visit him…,' and he kept counting
the same as above."[^47]

As the rewards for it, Ibn Mas\`ūd quotes the Prophet (ص) as saying,
"One who consoles someone afflicted by a calamity will receive the same
rewards which the first receives."[^48]

Jabir ibn Abdullah [al-Ansari], may Allah be pleased with him, has said
that the Messenger of Allah (ص) said:

"***One who consoles someone who has been afflicted with a calamity will
receive the same rewards which he receives without diminishing any of
his rewards;*** [^49] ***one who shrouds a Muslim will be outfitted by
Allah with*** ***bracelets of gold, green garments of fine silk and
heavy brocade (Qur'an, 18:31)*****;**

Allah will build a house in Paradise for one who digs a grave for a
Muslim, and when one brings about ease to one suffering from a hardship
will be shaded by Allah on a Day when there will be no shade save His."

Jabir also quotes the Prophet (ص) as saying, "One who offers condolences
to a bereaved person will be outfitted by Allah, the most Exalted One,
the most Great, with outfits of piety, and He will bless his soul among
the souls He blesses."[^50]

The Prophet (ص) was asked about handshaking during offering condolences.
He said, "It brings comfort to the believer; one who consoles an
afflicted person will receive rewards equal to that of the afflicted
person."

Abdullah ibn Abu Bakr ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Umar ibn Hazm quotes his father
quoting his grandfather saying that he heard the Messenger of Allah (ص)
saying, "One who visits a sick person remains in mercy, and when he sits
by his side, he will be drenched into it.

When he stands up to return, he keeps wading in it till he reaches the
place from which he had come out. If one consoles his believing brother
on account of a calamity, Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great,
will outfit him of the outfits of dignity on the Judgment Day."[^51]

Abu Barzah has said that the Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "One who
consoles a widow will be outfitted with the outfits of Paradise."[^52]

Anas [ibn Malik] has said that the Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "One who
consoles his believing brother on a calamity will be outfitted by Allah,
the most Exalted One, the most Great, with green outfits for which he
will be envied on the Judgment Day."[^53]

It has been narrated that Prophet Dawud (David), peace be with him,
said, "Lord! What is the reward of one who consoles the grieved, the one
who has been afflicted, seeking to please You?" He said, "His reward is
that I outfit him with one of the outfits of *iman*(faith) with which I
shield him from the Fire and get him to enter Paradise."

He said, "Lord! What then is the reward of one who walks behind coffins
seeking Your pleasure?" He said, "His reward is that the angels will
escort him on the day he dies to his grave, and I shall bless his soul
among the souls I bless."[^54]

It has been narrated that Prophet Musa (Moses), peace be with him, asked
his Lord once, "What reward shall one who visits a sick person receive?"
He said, "I shall send at the time of his death angels who escort him to
his grave who entertain him till the Gathering Day."

He said, "Lord! What rewards does a person who consoles a woman who has
lost her son receive?" He said, "I shall shade him with My shade—i.e.
the shade of His Arsh—on the Day when there is no shade but Mine."[^55]

It has also been reported that Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham) asked his Lord
once, "Lord! What is the reward of one who wets his face with the tears
of fearing You?" He said, "My blessings and Pleasure will be with him."
He said, "Then what is the reward of one who commends a grieved person
to take to patience seeking Your Pleasure?" He said, "I shall outfit him
with the outfits of *iman*(faith) in which he enters Paradise and shuns
the Fire." He said, "What then is the reward of one who supports a widow
seeking Your Pleasure?" He said, "I shall keep him in My shade and lodge
him in My Paradise." He said, "What is the reward of one who walks
behind a coffin seeking to please You?" He said, "My angels shall bless
his body and escort his soul."

How to Console
--------------

Reports about handshaking in this regard have already been stated above.

As regarding what is agreed about in reference to the statements made
and the reports dealing with offering consolations, there is nothing
better in this dissertation to state more than what is recorded here,
for in the following there is healing for what is in the hearts and
sufficient wisdom in achieving these matters:

Imam Ali, peace be with him, has said, "Whenever the Messenger of Allah
(ص) wanted to offer condolences to someone, he would say, 'May Allah
reward and have mercy on you.' And whenever he wanted to congratulate
someone, he would say, 'بارك الله لكم، و بارك عليكم May Allah bless it
for you, and may He shower His blessings on you.'"

It has been narrated that when a son was lost to Mu\`adh, the latter's
grief intensified, so much so that the Prophet (ص) came to hear about
it, so he wrote him saying, "In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious,
the most Merciful. This is from Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, to
Mu'adh.

Peace be with you. I praise Allah, the One and only God; may Allah
magnify your rewards, instill in you patience and bless us and yourself
with thanking Him, for our lives, those of our families and masters, in
addition to those of our sons…, are all among Allah's enjoyable gifts,
the most Exalted One, the most Great, the treasured trusts which we
enjoy for a known term, and they are taken away at a certain time.

He has enjoined us to thank Him when He grants us, to be patient when He
tries us. Your son was one of the enjoyable gifts of Allah and treasured
trusts. Allah permitted you to enjoy him gladly and happily, and He took
him away from you in return for a great deal of rewards: prayers, mercy
and guidance if you persevere and place your trust in Him; so, do not
combine two calamities lest your reward will be voided and you will then
regret what you have missed.

If you see the rewards for your calamity, you will come to know that the
calamity dwarfs besides Allah's rewards; therefore, rest your hope on
Allah fulfilling His promise [of rewarding you], and let your sorrow for
what has afflicted you be gone, as if there was no affliction at all,
and peace [be with you]."[^56]

Abu Abdullah, Imam Ja\`far son of Imam Muhammad al-Sadiq, peace be with
them both, quotes his father quoting his grandfather saying, "When the
Messenger of Allah (ص) died, Gabriel, peace be with him, came to him as
the Prophet (ص) was lying in state on the ground. Ali, Fatima, al-Hassan
and al-Hussain were in the house. Gabriel said to them: '*Assalamu
Alaikum*, Household of the Prophet;

***Every soul shall have a taste of death: And only on the Day of
Judgment shall you be paid your full recompense (Qur'an, 3:185).***

Indeed, there is in Allah a solace from every calamity; everyone who
dies shall be succeeded; everything that passes by shall be retracted;
so, seek strength from Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great; rest
your hope on Him, for the true calamity is when one is deprived of the
reward; this is the last time Gabriel descends to earth'."[^57]

Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari, Allah be pleased with him, has said, "When
the Messenger of Allah (ص) passed away, the angels offered them
[Prophet's family] condolences; they heard voices but could not see who
were behind them.

They said, '*Assalamo Alaikom, O Ahl al-Bayt, wa Rahmatullahi wa
Barakatuh*; indeed there is in Allah, the most Exalted One, the most
Great, solace from every calamity and compensation for whatever is
missed; so, seek strength from Allah, on Him should you rest your hope,
for the depraved one is that who is deprived of the rewards, *Wassalamo
Alaikom wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatuh*.'"[^58]

Al-Bayhaqi, in *Al-Dalaa'il*, has said that when the Messenger of Allah
(ص) passed away, his companions looked at him and wept, having assembled
around him. A man whose beard had more grey hair than black came in, and
his bodily form was large and was good looking. He passed by them and
wept.

Then he turned to the companions of the Messenger of Allah (ص) and said,
"In Allah there is, indeed, consolation from every calamity and a
recompense for whatever is left behind, and He succeeds whoever
perishes; so, return to Allah, desire Him, for He looks at you when you
are afflicted; therefore, you, too, look up to Him, for the true
calamity is when one is not rewarded."

Then he went away. Companions asked each other if they knew who the man
was. Imam Ali, peace be with him, said, "Yes; he is the Brother of the
Messenger of Allah (ص), al-Khidhr, peace be with him."[^59]

The Calamity of the Loss of our Prophet
---------------------------------------

Ibn Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, is quoted as having said that
the Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "If any of you is afflicted by a
calamity, let him remember the calamity that afflicted me, for it is the
most serious of all calamities."[^60]

He (ص) has also said, "One who sees his calamity as being great should
remember his calamity in my regard, for his will then seem tolerable."

He (ص) has also said during his sickness which eventually led to his
demise, "O people! Any servant of Allah who is afflicted after my death
with a calamity, let him seek solace in my regard [with my own death] to
divert himself from any other calamity, for no member of my nation will
ever be afflicted with a calamity more hard on him than my own."[^61]

Abdullah son of al-Walid, through his own *isnad*, says that "When Ali,
peace be with him, was wounded, al-Hassan (ع) dispatched me to
al-Hussain (ع), peace be with them, when al-Hussain (ع) was in the
Madaain [as its provincial governor].

When al-Hussain (ع) read the letter [sent to him by his revered wounded
father (ع)], he said, 'What a calamity! How serious this calamity is!
Yet the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be with him and
his progeny, had said, 'If one of you is afflicted by a calamity, let
him remember my calamity, for he shall never be afflicted with a
calamity greater than it.'"[^62]

Ishaq ibn Ammar quotes Imam al-Sadiq (ع) as saying to him, "O Ishaq! Do
not count a calamity for which you are granted patience and deserved
rewards from Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great, as a calamity;
rather, a true calamity is one the person afflicted by it is deprived of
its rewards because he did not take to patience when it descended on
him."[^63]

Abu Maysarah (or al-Fudail ibn Maysar, according to *Al-Kafi*) has said,
"We were in the company of [Imam al-Sadiq] Abu Abdullah, peace be with
him, when a man came to him and complained about his calamity. The Imam
(ع) said to him, "You have the option to either take to patience, so you
will be rewarded, or you do not, so the decree of Allah, the most
Exalted One, the most Great, affects you (while you are held in
contempt)."[^64]

Jabir [ibn Abdullah al-Ansari], may Allah be pleased with him, has said
that the Messenger of Allah (ص) said once, "Gabriel, peace be with him,
has said to me, 'O Muhammad! Live as long as you like, for you shall
die. Love whomsoever you wish, for you shall part with him. And do
whatever you wish, for you shall meet your deeds.'"[^65]

It has been narrated that there was a man among the Children of Israel
who was a scholar, an adorer of his Lord, a man of knowledge who reached
the degree of *ijtihad*(ability to extract law), and he had a wife of
whom he was very fond. She died, so he grieved for her immensely, so
much so that he took to seclusion at his house without leaving it,
closing his door to the public and staying away from them; nobody could
enter.

A woman from among the Children of Israel heard about what had happened
to him, so she came and said that she needed to hear his judgment about
a matter wherein direct communication is required. People went away as
she remained at the door. He was told about her, so he permitted her to
enter. She said, "Shall I ask you to issue a verdict about an issue?"

He said, "What is it?" She said, "I borrowed some pieces of jewelry from
one of my neighbors and kept wearing them for quite some time, then the
owners sent me a message asking for them back. Should I give them back?"
He said, "Yes." She said, "But the jewelry has been with me for such a
long period of time."

He said, "This is another reason why you should return it." It is then
that she said to him, "May Allah have mercy on you! Do you feel
sorrowful about what Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great, had
lent you then took it away from you, while He has more right to it than
yourself?!" It was then that he saw the wisdom in what she said, and
Allah made him benefit by it.[^66]

Abu al-Dardaa' is quoted as having said that Prophet Sulayman (Solomon)
son of Dawud (David), peace be with them both, had a son whom he used to
love very much and who died, so he grieved immensely for him. Allah
Almighty sent him two angels in human form. He asked them, "Who are
you?" "Two opponents."

He said, "Sit as opponents sit." One of them said, "I planted something,
then this person came and ruined it." Sulayman (ع) asked the other man,
"What is this man talking about?" He said, "May Allah reform you; he
planted it in the road; I passed by it and looked right and left and saw
nothing but plants. I took the side of the road and this was the reason
it was ruined."

Sulayman (ع) asked the other man, "What made you plant something in
people's way? Did you not know that the way is a passage for people and
people have to pass?" One of those two angels said to him, "Did you, O
Sulayman, not know that death is people's passage and they have to go on
their way?" It was as though the veil was removed for Sulayman (ع);
therefore, he no longer grieved for his son. This has been narrated by
Ibn Abu al-Dunya.[^67]

It has also been reported that a judge from among the Children of Israel
lost a son, so he grieved for him a great deal and went out aimlessly.
Two men intercepted his way and asked him to judge in their dispute. He
said to them, "It is from this that I fled away!"

One of them said, "This man brought his flock and passed over my plants,
ruining them completely." The other said, "This man planted between the
mountain and the river, and there was no other path besides it." The
judge said, "When you planted between the mountain and the river, did
you not know that it is people's passage?"

The man said to him, "What about yourself? When a son was born to you,
did you not know that he will [eventually] die? Go back to your seat of
judging between people." They ascended their way; they both were
angels.[^68]

It has also been narrated that there was a couple, both handicapped, in
Mecca who had a young son. In the morning, their son would carry them to
the Mosque, spending his day looking after them. In the evening, he
would carry them back home. Once, the Prophet (ص) missed seeing them, so
he asked about them. He was told that their son had died. The Messenger
of Allah (ص) said, "Had anyone been left for anyone, the son of those
two handicapped persons would have been left for them."[^69]

The above has been narrated by al-Tabrani.

It is narrated that the son of Abu al-Dunya has said [quoting the
Prophet (ص) commenting about the above incident], "Had anything been
left because it is needed or to avoid want, that youth would have been
left for his parents."

It has been reported about some ascetic woman that she said, "Whenever a
calamity is mentioned to me, I remember the Fire [of hell]; so it
becomes smaller in my eyes than the particles of dust."

The Faithful Tested with Calamities
-----------------------------------

One who is afflicted by a calamity should remember that calamities,
trials and tribulations are all sent by Allah to those about whom He
cares, those whom He likes and towards whom He directs His attention.
Before one confirms this reality by looking into the Qur'an and Sunnah,
he must observe those who are afflicted in this temporal abode: He will
then find out that the most afflicted of all people are those of
goodness and righteousness after the prophets and messengers of Allah.
Sacred Qur'anic verses inform you of the same:

Allah Almighty has said:

***"And were it not that (all) men might become of one (evil) way of
life, We would provide, for everyone who blasphemes against (Allah),
Most Gracious, silver roofs for their houses and (silver) stairways on
which they ascend" (Qur'an, 43:33);***

***" Do not let the unbelievers think that Our respite to them is good
for them: We grant them respite so they may grow in their iniquity, but
they will have a shameful punishment" (Qur'an, 3:178);***

***"When Our clear Signs are recited to them, the unbelievers say to
those who believe, 'Which of*** ***the two sides is best in position?
Which makes the best show in council?' But how many (countless)
generations before them have We destroyed who were even better in
equipment and in glitter to the eye?***

***Say: “If any men go astray, (Allah) Most Gracious extends (the rope)
to them, until, when they see God's warning (being fulfilled, either in
punishment or in (the approach of) the Hour, they will at length realize
who is in the worst position, and (who is the) weakest in strength! And
Allah advances in guidance those who seek guidance, and the things that
endure, the good deeds, are best as rewards in your Lord's sight and
best in respect of (their) eventual returns.” (Qur'an, 19:73-75).***

Abdul-Rahman son of al-Hajjaj has narrated saying that affliction was
mentioned to Imam Abu Abdullah [al-Sadiq], peace be with him, and what
Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great, has in store for a
believer, so he said that people once asked the Prophet (ص) about who in
the life of this world is the most afflicted, tried and tested. The
Prophet (ص) said, "They are the prophets then people whose conduct is
the very best. A believer is tested according to the measure of his
*iman* (conviction) and good deeds. One whose conviction is sound and
action is good will have intensified afflictions, whereas one whose
conviction is weak and so is his knowledge, his affliction will be
little."[^70]

Zayd, the oil seller, has quoted Imam Abu Abdullah Hussein (ع) as
saying, "Great rewards follow great calamities. Whenever Allah, the most
Exalted One, the most Great, loves some people, He tries and tests
them."[^71]

Abu Busayr quotes Imam Abu Abdullah Hussein (ع), peace be with him, as
saying, "There are on earth elite worshippers of Allah; whenever
something precious descends from the heavens to earth, Allah diverts it
from them to others; and whenever a calamity descends, He sends it their
way."[^72]

Al-Husain ibn Alwan quotes the Imam Hussein (ع), too, as saying, "If
Allah Almighty loves one of His servants, he pours calamities on him,
drowning him in them; I and you welcome the morning then the evening in
such condition."[^73]

Imam Abu Ja\`far al-Baqir, peace be with him, has said, "Whenever Allah,
the most Blessed, the most Exalted One, loves a servant, he immerses him
in affliction. When he calls on Him, He would say, 'Here I am, O My
servant! If you wish I speed up fulfilling your desire, I can do it; but
if I treasure it [for you], it is better for you."[^74]

Abu Abdullah, peace be with him, has said that the Messenger of Allah
(ص) said, "A great tribulation is rewarded with a great reward. If Allah
loves one of His servants, He tests him with a great calamity. Whoever
accepts it will have won the pleasure of Allah, and whoever is angered
by the calamity will earn Allah's wrath."[^75]

Imam Abu Ja\`far, peace be with him, has said, "Allah tries the believer
in this life according to [the degree of conviction in] his faith."[^76]

Najiyah has said, "I said to Abu Ja\`far, peace be with him,
'Al-Mughirah says that Allah does not afflict a believer with leprosy or
leukemia or… anything else.' He said, 'He is unaware of the believer in
Al-Yasin who is referred to in Surat Ya-Sin (Chapter 36 of the Holy
Qur'an); his fingers were dried; then they were healed. He warned the
disbelievers and returned to them the next day, but they killed him… A
believer is afflicted with every calamity, and he dies in every way, but
he does not kill himself."[^77]

Abdullah ibn Ya\`fur has said, "I complained to Abu Abdullah Hussein,
peace be with him, about the pain from which I was suffering—and I was
quite often sick—so he said to me, 'O father of Abdullah! Had a believer
come to know what rewards he earns during times of calamities, he would
have wished to be cut to pieces with scissors.'"[^78]

Abu Abdullah (Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq [ع]) has said, "People of
righteousness will always remain in a hardship; but it is for a short
period and will lead to a very, very long period of felicity."[^79]

Hamdan quotes Abu Ja\`far (Imam Muhammad al-Baqir father of Imam Ja\`far
al-Sadiq [ع]) saying, "Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great,
tries to get closer to a believer through affliction like a man trying
to get closer to his wife by giving her a present; He protects him in
the life of this world like a doctor protecting his patient."[^80]

Abu Abdullah (ع) has said that the Prophet (ص) was invited once to a
meal. When he entered the host's house, he saw that a hen had laid an
egg on a fencing wall. The egg fell on a wedge in the wall and stayed on
it without falling and breaking. The Prophet (ص) was surprised, so the
man said to him, "Are you surprised about this egg (which did not
break)? By the One Who sent you with the truth, I have never been
afflicted with a loss [as small as losing an egg]," whereupon the
Messenger of Allah (ص) stood up and did not partake of that man's food
at all. He (ص) said, "Allah has nothing to do with one who never suffers
a loss."[^81]

Reports similar to these are numerous, so let us be satisfied with this
much.

[^1]: Al-Luhuf fi Qata Al-Tufuf, p. 87.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 88.

[^3]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 2, p. 105.

[^4]: Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 1, pp. 1506, 1589; Muntakhab Kanzul-Ummal,
Vol. 6, p. 265.

[^5]: Al-Taazi, pp. 8-9 with a minor wording variation. It has been
narrated in different wording in Al-Tirmidhi's Sunan, Vol. 2, pp. 1011,
1237; and in Al-Jaami' Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 290. Something similar to it
is narrated in Muntakhab Kanzul-Ummal, Vol. 6, p. 265 from Abd ibn
Hameed.

[^6]: Something similar to it is narrated in Al-Kulaini's Al-Kafi, Vol.
3, pp. 7, 208 from Ali ibn Abdullah ibn Abul-Hassan Mousa, peace e with
him. It is also narrated in some variation in its wording by Al-Mughirah
ibn Shu'bah as recorded in Al-Bukhari's Sahih, Vol. 2, pp. 42, 48 and by
Muslim in his Sahih, Vol. 2, pp. 628, 630.

[^7]: Al-Jaami' Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 709 with minor wording difference.

[^8]: This tradition is cited in Al-Jami' Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 207.

[^9]: Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 2, p. 671; Al-Nisaa'i, Sunan, Vol. 4, p. 90;
Abu Dawud, Sunan, Vol. 3, pp. 218, 3234.

[^10]: This tradition is cited in Al-Jami' Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 568.

[^11]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 2, p. 106. Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 2, pp.
636, 924 with minor wording difference.

[^12]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 2, p. 100, Vol. 7, p. 151, Vol. 8, p. 166
and Vol. 9, pp. 141, 164; Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 2, pp. 635, 923;
Al-Ta\`azi, p. 10; Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 1, pp. 506, 1588; Abu Dawud,
Sunan, Vol. 3, pp. 193, 3125 and Al-Nisaa'i, Sunan, Vol. 4, p. 22 with a
difference in its wording.

[^13]: Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 5, pp. 204, 207 with a minor wording
difference.

[^14]: Al-Waqidi, Al-Maghazi, Vol. 2, p. 766 with a minor wording
variation.

[^15]: Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, pp. 113, 527 with a minor wording difference.

[^16]: Makarim Al-Akhlaq, p. 22.

[^17]: Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 4, p. 456; Al-Mustadrak ala Al-Sahihain, Vol.
3, p. 206; Al-Jami' Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 360.

[^18]: Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 4, p. 294. Something like it is narrated in
Ibn Majah's Musnad, Vol. 3, pp. 1403, 4195.

[^19]: Al-Jami' Al-Saghir, Vol. 2, pp. 113, 5135. It is narrated with
minor wording variation in Al-Durr Al-Manthur, Vol. 1, p. 158.

[^20]: Ibn Hisham, Seera, Vol. 3, p. 104.

[^21]: Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 1, pp. 465, 1524.

[^22]: Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 1, p. 386; Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 2, p. 104;
Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 1, pp. 99, 165; Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 1, pp. 504,
1584; Al-Nisaa'i, Sunan, Vol. 4, pp. 20, 21; Al-Majlisi, Bihar Al-Anwar,
Vol. 82, pp. 93, 45.

[^23]: Al-Jami' Al-Saghir, Vol. 2, pp. 405, 7252; Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol.
1, pp. 505, 1585; Al-Majlisi, Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 83, p. 93.

[^24]: Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 1, pp. 504, 1583.

[^25]: Al-Jami' Al-Saghir, Vol. 2, pp. 268, 6216.

[^26]: Bihar Al-Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 93.

[^27]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 1, 222.

[^28]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 4, 224 with a minor wording variation.

[^29]: Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, pp. 514, 111; Al-Khisal, pp. 49, 222.

[^30]: Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, pp. 111, 515.

[^31]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 5, 224.

[^32]: Ibid., Vol. 3, pp. 6, 224.

[^33]: Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 2, pp. 631, 918.

[^34]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sunan, Vol. 2, pp. 243, 1026.

[^35]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 4, 218.

[^36]: Dhikra Al-Shi'a, p. 72; I\`lam Al-Wara, p. 143; Muntaha
Al-Matlab, Vol. 1, p. 466; Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 6, p. 18;
Al-Mustadrak ala Al-Sahihain, Vol. 1, p. 382; Al-Nisaai, Sunan, Vol. 4,
p. 13; Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 1, pp. 30, 522.

[^37]: Dhikra Al-Shi'a, p. 72; Al-Mu'tabar, Vol. 1, p. 344; Muntaha
Al-Matlab, Vol. 1, p. 466.

[^38]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 5, pp. 2, 117; Al-Tahdhib, pp. 358, 1027 with minor
wording variation.

[^39]: Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, pp. 116, 547.

[^40]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 5, pp. 1, 117; Al-Tahdhib, Vol. 6, pp. 358, 1025.

[^41]: Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 1, p. 100; Al-Nisaai, Sunan, Vol. 4, p. 20;
Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 1, p. 505; Al-Jami\` Al-Saghir, Vol. 1, pp. 415,
2709.

[^42]: Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, pp. 116, 547.

[^43]: Al-Khisal, p. 226; Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 5, p. 342; Muslim, Sahih,
Vol. 2, pp. 644, 934; Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 1, pp. 504, 1582;
Al-Mustadrak, Vol. 1, p. 383; Al-Targhib wal Tarhib, Vol. 4, pp. 12,
351.

[^44]: Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 3, p. 65; Abu Dawud, Sunan, Vol. 3, pp. 194,
3128; Al-Jami\` Al-Saghir, Vol. 2, pp. 408, 7271; Al-Targhib wal Tarhib,
Vol. 4, pp. 13, 351; Al-Futuhat Al-Rabbaniyya, Vol. 4, p. 129.

[^45]: Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 1, pp. 504, 1584.

[^46]: Al-Targhib wal Tarhib, Vol. 3, pp. 20, 357.

[^47]: Al-Targhib wal Tarhib, Vol. 3, p. 357, in the footnote to
Tradition No. 20.

[^48]: Al-Jami' Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 801.

[^49]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 4, 227 from Abu Abdullah, peace be with him
who cites the Messenger of Allah (ص).

[^50]: Al-Jami\` Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 801.

[^51]: Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 800.

[^52]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sunan, Vol. 2, pp. 269, 1082.

[^53]: Al-Jami\` Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 801.

[^54]: Al-Durr Al-Manthur, Vol. 5, p. 308. It is also narrated by
Al-Muttaqi Al-Hindi in Kanzul-Ummal, Vol. 6, p. 355 with a difference in
wording it.

[^55]: It is narrated by Al-Kulaini in the second section of the hadith
in Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 1, 226 with minor variation.

[^56]: This tradition is narrated in different wordings in Al-Taazi, pp.
12, 14; Muntakhab Kanzul-Ummal, Vol. 6, p. 277 and in Al-Mustadrak ala
Al-Sahihain, Vol. 3, p. 273.

[^57]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 5, 221; Al-Majlisi, Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82,
pp. 47, 96.

[^58]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 6, 221 with a variation in its wording
citing Imam Abu Abdullah, peace be with him; Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p.
96.

[^59]: Dalaa'il Al-Nubuwwah, Vol. 7, p. 269; it is also narrated by
Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p. 58, and by Al-Majlisi in his Bihar
Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 97.

[^60]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 1, 220 with a variation of its wording from
Imam Abu Abdullah [Al-Sadiq], peace be with him; Al-Jami' Al-Kabir, Vol.
1, p. 41; Al-Jami\` Al-Saghir, Vol. 1, p. 72.

[^61]: Al-Jami\` Al-Kabir, Vol. 1, p. 372 with a difference in its
wording; Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 143.

[^62]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 1, 220 with a minor difference in its
wording; Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 143.

[^63]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, p. 224; Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 144.

[^64]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 3, pp. 10, 225 with a minor wording variation;
Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 142.

[^65]: [Man la Yahduruhu] Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, pp. 298, 1363, taken for
granted; Al-Jami\` Al-Saghir, Vol. 2, pp. 248, 6077; Bihar Al-Anwar,
Vol. 82, p. 144.

[^66]: Malik, Al-Muwatta', Vol. 1, p. 237 with minor wording variation;
Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 154.

[^67]: Al-Majlisi, in his Bihar Al-Anwar, records the same incident on
p. 154, Vol. 82.

[^68]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 155.

[^69]: This incident is recorded by Al-Majlisi in Vol. 2, p. 155 of his
Bihar Al-Anwar, and it has been narrated by Al-Bayhaqi in his Sunan,
Vol. 4, p. 66 but worded differently.

[^70]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp. 2, 196.

[^71]: Ibid., Vol. 2, pp. 3, 196.

[^72]: Ibid., Vol. 2, pp. 5, 196; Tanbih Al-Khawatir, Vol. 2, p. 204;
with some variation in Al-Tamhis, pp. 26, 35.

[^73]: Ibid., Vol. 2, pp. 6, 197.

[^74]: Ibid., Vol. 2, pp. 7, 197; Al-Tamhis, pp. 25, 34 with minor
wording variation.

[^75]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp. 8, 197. It is also narrated on pp. 20, 33 of
Al-Tamhis by [Imam] Abdu Abdullah [Al-Sadiq].

[^76]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp. 9, 197; Mishkat Al-Anwar, p. 298.

[^77]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp. 12, 197; Tanbih Al-Khawatir, Vol. 2, p. 204
with a minor wording difference between both texts.

[^78]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp. 15, 198; Tanbih Al-Khawatir, Vol. 2, p. 204.
It is also narrated with a minor wording difference in Al-Mu'min, pp. 3,
15 and in Al-Tamhis, pp. 13, 32.

[^79]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp. 16, 198.

[^80]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp. 17, 198; Tanbih Al-Khawatir, Vol. 2, p. 204.
It is also narrated with a wording difference on pp. 50, 91 in
Al-Tamhis.

[^81]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp. 20, 198.


