PREFACE
=======

The Qur’an is a book which emphasizes ‘deed’ rather than ‘idea’. There
are, however, men to whom it is not possible organically to assimilate
an alien universe by re-living, as a vital process, that special type of
inner experience on which religious faith ultimately rests. Moreover,
the modern man, by developing habits of concrete thought - habits which
Islam itself fostered at least in the earlier stages of its cultural
career - has rendered himself less capable of that experience which he
further suspects because of its liability to illusion. The more genuine
schools of Sufism have, no doubt, done good work in shaping and
directing the evolution of religious experience in Islam; but their
latter-day representatives, owing to their ignorance of the modern mind,
have become absolutely incapable of receiving any fresh inspiration from
modern thought and experience. They are perpetuating methods which were
created for generations possessing a cultural outlook differing, in
important respects, from our own. ‘Your creation and resurrection,’ says
the Qur’an, ‘are like the creation and resurrection of a single soul.’ A
living experience of the kind of biological unity, embodied in this
verse, requires today a method physiologically less violent and
psychologically more suitable to a concrete type of mind. In the absence
of such a method the demand for a scientific form of religious knowledge
is only natural. In these Lectures, which were undertaken at the request
of the Madras Muslim Association and delivered at Madras, Hyderabad, and
Aligarh, I have tried to meet, even though partially, this urgent demand
by attempting to reconstruct Muslim religious philosophy with due regard
to the philosophical traditions of Islam and the more recent
developments in the various domains of human knowledge. And the present
moment is quite favourable for such an undertaking. Classical Physics
has learned to criticize its own foundations. As a result of this
criticism the kind of materialism, which it originally necessitated, is
rapidly disappearing; and the day is not far off when Religion and
Science may discover hitherto unsuspected mutual harmonies. It must,
however, be remembered that there is no such thing as finality in
philosophical thinking. As knowledge advances and fresh avenues of
thought are opened, other views, and probably sounder views than those
set forth in these Lectures, are possible. Our duty is carefully to
watch the progress of human thought, and to maintain an independent
critical attitude towards it.

M.I


