Lecture I: Knowledge and Religious Experience
=============================================

What is the character and general structure of the universe in which we
live? Is there a permanent element in the constitution of this universe?
How are we related to it? What place do we occupy in it, and what is the
kind of conduct that befits the place we occupy? These questions are
common to religion, philosophy, and higher poetry. But the kind of
knowledge that poetic inspiration brings is essentially individual in
its character; it is figurative, vague, and indefinite. Religion, in its
more advanced forms, rises higher than poetry. It moves from individual
to society. In its attitude towards the Ultimate Reality it is opposed
to the limitations of man; it enlarges his claims and holds out the
prospect of nothing less than a direct vision of Reality. Is it then
possible to apply the purely rational method of philosophy to religion?
The spirit of philosophy is one of free inquiry. It suspects all
authority. Its function is to trace the uncritical assumptions of human
thought to their hiding places, and in this pursuit it may finally end
in denial or a frank admission of the incapacity of pure reason to reach
the Ultimate Reality. The essence of religion, on the other hand, is
faith; and faith, like the bird, sees its ‘trackless way’ unattended by
intellect which, in the words of the great mystic poet of Islam, ‘only
waylays the living heart of man and robs it of the invisible wealth of
life that lies within’.1 Yet it cannot be denied that faith is more than
mere feeling. It has something like a cognitive content, and the
existence of rival parties— scholastics and mystics— in the history of
religion shows that idea is a vital element in religion. Apart from
this, religion on its doctrinal side, as defined by Professor Whitehead,
is ‘a system of general truths which have the effect of transforming
character when they are sincerely held and vividly apprehended’.2 Now,
since the transformation and guidance of man’s inner and outer life is
the essential aim of religion, it is obvious that the general truths
which it embodies must not remain unsettled. No one would hazard action
on the basis of a doubtful principle of conduct. Indeed, in view of its
function, religion stands in greater need of a rational foundation of
its ultimate principles than even the dogmas of science. Science may
ignore a rational metaphysics; indeed, it has ignored it so far.
Religion can hardly afford to ignore the search for a reconciliation of
the oppositions of experience and a justification of the environment in
which humanity finds itself. That is why Professor Whitehead has acutely
remarked that ‘the ages of faith are the ages of rationalism’.3 But to
rationalize faith is not to admit the superiority of philosophy over
religion. Philosophy, no doubt, has jurisdiction to judge religion, but
what is to be judged is of such a nature that it will not submit to the
jurisdiction of philosophy except on its own terms. While sitting in
judgement on religion, philosophy cannot give religion an inferior place
among its data. Religion is not a departmental affair; it is neither
mere thought, nor mere feeling, nor mere action; it is an expression of
the whole man. Thus, in the evaluation of religion, philosophy must
recognize the central position of religion and has no other alternative
but to admit it as something focal in the process of reflective
synthesis. Nor is there any reason to suppose that thought and intuition
are essentially opposed to each other. They spring up from the same root
and complement each other. The one grasps Reality piecemeal, the other
grasps it in its wholeness. The one fixes its gaze on the eternal, the
other on the temporal aspect of Reality. The one is present enjoyment of
the whole of Reality; the other aims at traversing the whole by slowly
specifying and closing up the various regions of the whole for exclusive
observation. Both are in need of each other for mutual rejuvenation.
Both seek visions of the same Reality which reveals itself to them in
accordance with their function in life. In fact, intuition, as Bergson
rightly says, is only a higher kind of intellect.4

The search for rational foundations in Islam may be regarded to have
begun with the Prophet himself. His constant prayer was: ‘God! grant me
knowledge of the ultimate nature of things!’5 The work of later mystics
and non-mystic rationalists forms an exceedingly instructive chapter in
the history of our culture, inasmuch as it reveals a longing for a
coherent system of ideas, a spirit of whole-hearted devotion to truth,
as well as the limitations of the age, which rendered the various
theological movements in Islam less fruitful than they might have been
in a different age. As we all know, Greek philosophy has been a great
cultural force in the history of Islam. Yet a careful study of the
Qur’an and the various schools of scholastic theology that arose under
the inspiration of Greek thought disclose the remarkable fact that while
Greek philosophy very much broadened the outlook of Muslim thinkers, it,
on the whole, obscured their vision of the Qur’an. Socrates concentrated
his attention on the human world alone. To him the proper study of man
was man and not the world of plants, insects, and stars. How unlike the
spirit of the Qur’an, which sees in the humble bee a recipient of Divine
inspiration6 and constantly calls upon the reader to observe the
perpetual change of the winds, the alternation of day and night, the
clouds,7 the starry heavens,8 and the planets swimming through infinite
space!9 As a true disciple of Socrates, Plato despised sense- perception
which, in his view, yielded mere opinion and no real knowledge.10 How
unlike the Qur’an, which regards ‘hearing’ and ‘sight’ as the most
valuable Divine gifts11 and declares them to be accountable to God for
their activity in this world.12 This is what the earlier Muslim students
of the Qur’an completely missed under the spell of classical
speculation. They read the Qur’an in the light of Greek thought. It took
them over two hundred years to perceive - though not quite clearly -
that the spirit of the Qur’an was essentially anti-classical,13 and the
result of this perception was a kind of intellectual revolt, the full
significance of which has not been realized even up to the present day.
It was partly owing to this revolt and partly to his personal history
that Ghaz«lâ based religion on philosophical scepticism - a rather
unsafe basis for religion and not wholly justified by the spirit of the
Qur’an. Ghaz«lâ’s chief opponent, Ibn Rushd, who defended Greek
philosophy against the rebels, was led, through Aristotle, to what is
known as the doctrine of Immortality of Active Intellect,14 a doctrine
which once wielded enormous influence on the intellectual life of France
and Italy,15 but which, to my mind, is entirely opposed to the view that
the Qur’an takes of the value and destiny of the human ego.16 Thus Ibn
Rushd lost sight of a great and fruitful idea in Islam and unwittingly
helped the growth of that enervating philosophy of life which obscures
man’s vision of himself, his God, and his world. The more constructive
among the Ash‘arite thinkers were no doubt on the right path and
anticipated some of the more modern forms of Idealism; yet, on the
whole, the object of the Ash‘arite movement was simply to defend
orthodox opinion with the weapons of Greek dialectic. The Mu‘tazilah,
conceiving religion merely as a body of doctrines and ignoring it as a
vital fact, took no notice of non-conceptual modes of approaching
Reality and reduced religion to a mere system of logical concepts ending
in a purely negative attitude. They failed to see that in the domain of
knowledge - scientific or religious - complete independence of thought
from concrete experience is not possible.

It cannot, however, be denied that Ghaz«lâ’s mission was almost
apostolic like that of Kant in Germany of the eighteenth century. In
Germany rationalism appeared as an ally of religion, but she soon
realized that the dogmatic side of religion was incapable of
demonstration. The only course open to her was to eliminate dogma from
the sacred record. With the elimination of dogma came the utilitarian
view of morality, and thus rationalism completed the reign of unbelief.
Such was the state of theological thought in Germany when Kant appeared.
His*Critique of Pure Reason* revealed the limitations of human reason
and reduced the whole work of the rationalists to a heap of ruins. And
justly has he been described as God’s greatest gift to his country.
Ghaz«lâ’s philosophical scepticism which, however, went a little too
far, virtually did the same kind of work in the world of Islam in
breaking the back of that proud but shallow rationalism which moved in
the same direction as pre-Kantian rationalism in Germany. There is,
however, one important difference between Ghaz«lâ’s and Kant. Kant,
consistently with his principles, could not affirm the possibility of a
knowledge of God. Ghaz«lâ’s, finding no hope in analytic thought, moved
to mystic experience, and there found an independent content for
religion. In this way he succeeded in securing for religion the right to
exist independently of science and metaphysics. But the revelation of
the total Infinite in mystic experience convinced him of the finitude
and inconclusiveness of thought and drove him to draw a line of cleavage
between thought and intuition. He failed to see that thought and
intuition are organically related and that thought must necessarily
simulate finitude and inconclusiveness because of its alliance with
serial time. The idea that thought is essentially finite, and for this
reason unable to capture the Infinite, is based on a mistaken notion of
the movement of thought in knowledge. It is the inadequacy of the
logical understanding which finds a multiplicity of mutually repellent
individualities with no prospect of their ultimate reduction to a unity
that makes us sceptical about the conclusiveness of thought. In fact,
the logical understanding is incapable of seeing this multiplicity as a
coherent universe. Its only method is generalization based on
resemblances, but its generalizations are only fictitious unities which
do not affect the reality of concrete things. In its deeper movement,
however, thought is capable of reaching an immanent Infinite in whose
self-unfolding movement the various finite concepts are merely moments.
In its essential nature, then, thought is not static; it is dynamic and
unfolds its internal infinitude in time like the seed which, from the
very beginning, carries within itself the organic unity of the tree as a
present fact. Thought is, therefore, the whole in its dynamic
self-expression, appearing to the temporal vision as a series of
definite specifications which cannot be understood except by a
reciprocal reference. Their meaning lies not in their self-identity, but
in the larger whole of which they are the specific aspects. This larger
whole is to use a Qur’anic metaphor, a kind of ‘Preserved Tablet’,17
which holds up the entire undetermined possibilities of knowledge as a
present reality, revealing itself in serial time as a succession of
finite concepts appearing to reach a unity which is already present in
them. It is in fact the presence of the total Infinite in the movement
of knowledge that makes finite thinking possible. Both Kant and
Ghaz«lâ’s failed to see that thought, in the very act of knowledge,
passes beyond its own finitude. The finitudes of Nature are reciprocally
exclusive. Not so the finitudes of thought which is, in its essential
nature, incapable of limitation and cannot remain imprisoned in the
narrow circuit of its own individuality. In the wide world beyond itself
nothing is alien to it. It is in its progressive participation in the
life of the apparently alien that thought demolishes the walls of its
finitude and enjoys its potential infinitude. Its movement becomes
possible only because of the implicit presence in its finite
individuality of the infinite, which keeps alive within it the flame of
aspiration and sustains it in its endless pursuit. It is a mistake to
regard thought as inconclusive, for it too, in its own way, is a
greeting of the finite with the infinite.

During the last five hundred years religious thought in Islam has been
practically stationary. There was a time when European thought received
inspiration from the world of Islam. The most remarkable phenomenon of
modern history, however, is the enormous rapidity with which the world
of Islam is spiritually moving towards the West. There is nothing wrong
in this movement, for European culture, on its intellectual side, is
only a further development of some of the most important phases of the
culture of Islam. Our only fear is that the dazzling exterior of
European culture may arrest our movement and we may fail to reach the
true inwardness of that culture. During all the centuries of our
intellectual stupor Europe has been seriously thinking on the great
problems in which the philosophers and scientists of Islam were so
keenly interested. Since the Middle Ages, when the schools of Muslim
theology were completed, infinite advance has taken place in the domain
of human thought and experience. The extension of man’s power over
Nature has given him a new faith and a fresh sense of superiority over
the forces that constitute his environment. New points of view have been
suggested, old problems have been re-stated in the light of fresh
experience, and new problems have arisen. It seems as if the intellect
of man is outgrowing its own most fundamental categories - time, space,
and causality. With the advance of scientific thought even our concept
of intelligibility is undergoing a change.18 The theory of Einstein has
brought a new vision of the universe and suggests new ways of looking at
the problems common to both religion and philosophy. No wonder then that
the younger generation of Islam in Asia and Africa demand a fresh
orientation of their faith. With the reawakening of Islam, therefore, it
is necessary to examine, in an independent spirit, what Europe has
thought and how far the conclusions reached by her can help us in the
revision and, if necessary, reconstruction, of theological thought in
Islam. Besides this it is not possible to ignore generally
anti-religious and especially anti-Islamic propaganda in Central Asia
which has already crossed the Indian frontier. Some of the apostles of
this movement are born Muslims, and one of them, Tewfâk Fikret, the
Turkish poet, who died only a short time ago,19 has gone to the extent
of using our great poet-thinker, Mirz« ‘Abd al-Q«dir Bedil of Akbar«b«d,
for the purposes of this movement. Surely, it is high time to look to
the essentials of Islam. In these lectures I propose to undertake a
philosophical discussion of some of the basic of ideas of Islam, in the
hope that this may, at least, be helpful towards a proper understanding
of the meaning of Islam as a message to humanity. Also with a view to
give a kind of ground-outline for further discussion, I propose, in this
preliminary lecture, to consider the character of knowledge and
religious experience.

The main purpose of the Qur’an is to awaken in man the higher
consciousness of his manifold relations with God and the universe. It is
in view of this essential aspect of the Quranic teaching that Goethe,
while making a general review of Islam as an educational force, said to
Eckermann: ‘You see this teaching never fails; with all our systems, we
cannot go, and generally speaking no man can go, farther than that.’20
The problem of Islam was really suggested by the mutual conflict, and at
the same time mutual attraction, presented by the two forces of religion
and civilization. The same problem confronted early Christianity. The
great point in Christianity is the search for an independent content for
spiritual life which, according to the insight of its founder, could be
elevated, not by the forces of a world external to the soul of man, but
by the revelation of a new world within his soul. Islam fully agrees
with this insight and supplements it by the further insight that the
illumination of the new world thus revealed is not something foreign to
the world of matter but permeates it through and through.

Thus the affirmation of spirit sought by Christianity would come not by
the renunciation of external forces which are already permeated by the
illumination of spirit, but by a proper adjustment of man’s relation to
these forces in view of the light received from the world within. It is
the mysterious touch of the ideal that animates and sustains the real,
and through it alone we can discover and affirm the ideal. With Islam
the ideal and the real are not two opposing forces which cannot be
reconciled. The life of the ideal consists, not in a total breach with
the real which would tend to shatter the organic wholeness of life into
painful oppositions, but in the perpetual endeavour of the ideal to
appropriate the real with a view eventually to absorb it, to convert it
into itself and illuminate its whole being. It is the sharp opposition
between the subject and the object, the mathematical without and the
biological within, that impressed Christianity. Islam, however, faces
the opposition with a view to overcome it. This essential difference in
looking at a fundamental relation determines the respective attitudes of
these great religions towards the problem of human life in its present
surroundings. Both demand the affirmation of the spiritual self in man,
with this difference only that Islam, recognizing the contact of the
ideal with the real, says ‘yes’ to the world of matter21 and points the
way to master it with a view to discover a basis for a realistic
regulation of life.

What, then, according to the Qur’an, is the character of the universe
which we inhabit? In the first place, it is not the result of a mere
creative sport:

‘We have not created the Heavens and the earth and whatever is between
them in sport. We have not created them but for a serious end: but the
greater part of them understand it not’ (44:38-39).22

It is a reality to be reckoned with:

‘Verily in the creation of the Heavens and of the earth, and in the
succession of the night and of the day, are signs for men of
understanding; who, standing and sitting and reclining, bear God in mind
and reflect on the creation of the Heavens and of the earth, and say:
"Oh, our Lord! Thou hast not created this in vain" (3:190-91).

Again the universe is so constituted that it is capable of extension:

‘He (God) adds to His creation what He wills’ (35:1).23

It is not a block universe, a finished product, immobile and incapable
of change. Deep in its inner being lies, perhaps, the dream of a new
birth:

‘Say - go through the earth and see how God hath brought forth all
creation; hereafter will He give it another birth’ (29:20).

In fact, this mysterious swing and impulse of the universe, this
noiseless swim of time which appears to us, human beings, as the
movement of day and night, is regarded by the Qur’an as one of the
greatest signs of God:

‘God causeth the day and the night to take their turn. Verily in this is
teaching for men of insight’ (24:44).

This is why the Prophet said: ‘Do not vilify time, for time is God.’24
And this immensity of time and space carries in it the promise of a
complete subjugation by man whose duty is to reflect on the signs of
God, and thus discover the means of realizing his conquest of Nature as
an actual fact:

‘See ye not how God hath put under you all that is in the Heavens, and
all that is on the earth, and hath been bounteous to you of His favours
both in relation to the seen and the unseen?’ (31:20).

‘And He hath subjected to you the night and the day, the sun and the
moon, and the stars too are subject to you by His behest; verily in this
are signs for those who understand’ (16:12).

Such being the nature and promise of the universe, what is the nature of
man whom it confronts on all sides? Endowed with a most suitable mutual
adjustment of faculties he discovers himself down below in the scale of
life, surrounded on all sides by the forces of obstruction:

‘That of goodliest fabric We created man, then brought him down to the
lowest of the low’ (95:4-5).

And how do we find him in this environment? A ‘restless’25 being
engrossed in his ideals to the point of forgetting everything else,
capable of inflicting pain on himself in his ceaseless quest after fresh
scopes for self-expression. With all his failings he is superior to
Nature, inasmuch as he carries within him a great trust which, in the
words of the Qur’an, the heavens and the earth and the mountains refused
to carry:

‘Verily We proposed to the Heavens and to the earth and to the mountains
to receive the trust (of personality), but they refused the burden and
they feared to receive it. Man alone undertook to bear it, but hath
proved unjust, senseless!’ (33:72).

His career, no doubt, has a beginning, but he is destined, perhaps, to
become a permanent element in the constitution of being.

‘Thinketh man that he shall be thrown away as an object of no use? Was
he not a mere embryo? Then he became thick blood of which God formed him
and fashioned him, and made him twain, male and female. Is not He
powerful enough to quicken the dead?’ (75:36-40).

When attracted by the forces around him, man has the power to shape and
direct them; when thwarted by them, he has the capacity to build a much
vaster world in the depths of his own inner being, wherein he discovers
sources of infinite joy and inspiration. Hard his lot and frail his
being, like a rose-leaf, yet no form of reality is so powerful, so
inspiring, and so beautiful as the spirit of man! Thus in his inmost
being man, as conceived by the Qur’an, is a creative activity, an
ascending spirit who, in his onward march, rises from one state of being
to another:

‘But Nay! I swear by the sunset’s redness and by the night and its
gatherings and by the moon when at her full, that from state to state
shall ye be surely carried onward’ (84:16-19).

It is the lot of man to share in the deeper aspirations of the universe
around him and to shape his own destiny as well as that of the universe,
now by adjusting himself to its forces, now by putting the whole of his
energy to mould its forces to his own ends and purposes. And in this
process of progressive change God becomes a co-worker with him, provided
man takes the initiative:

‘Verily God will not change the condition of men, till they change what
is in themselves’ (13:11).

If he does not take the initiative, if he does not evolve the inner
richness of his being, if he ceases to feel the inward push of advancing
life, then the spirit within him hardens into stone and he is reduced to
the level of dead matter. But his life and the onward march of his
spirit depend on the establishment of connexions with the reality that
confronts him.26 It is knowledge that establishes these connexions, and
knowledge is sense-perception elaborated by understanding.

‘When thy Lord said to the Angels, "Verily I am about to place one in my
stead on earth," they said, "Wilt Thou place there one who will do ill
and shed blood, when we celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy holiness?"
God said, "Verily I know what ye know not!" And He taught Adam the names
of all things, and then set them before the Angels, and said, "Tell me
the names of these if ye are endowed with wisdom." They said, "Praise be
to Thee! We have no knowledge but what Thou hast given us to know. Thou
art the Knowing, the Wise". He said, "O Adam, inform them of the names."
And when he had informed them of the names, God said, "Did I not say to
you that I know the hidden things of the Heavens and of the earth, and
that I know what ye bring to light and what ye hide?" (2:30-33).

The point of these verses is that man is endowed with the faculty of
naming things, that is to say, forming concepts of them, and forming
concepts of them is capturing them. Thus the character of man’s
knowledge is conceptual, and it is with the weapon of this conceptual
knowledge that man approaches the observable aspect of Reality. The one
noteworthy feature of the Qur’an is the emphasis that it lays on this
observable aspect of Reality. Let me quote here a few verses:

‘Assuredly, in the creation of the Heavens and of the earth; and in the
alternation of night and day; and in the ships which pass through the
sea with what is useful to man; and in the rain which God sendeth down
from Heaven, giving life to the earth after its death, and scattering
over it all kinds of cattle; and in the change of the winds, and in the
clouds that are made to do service between the Heavens and the earth -
are signs for those who understand’ (2:164).

‘And it is He Who hath ordained for you that ye may be guided thereby in
the darkness of the land and of the sea! Clear have We made Our signs to
men of knowledge. And it is He Who hath created you of one breath, and
hath provided you an abode and resting place (in the womb). Clear have
We made Our signs for men of insight! And it is He Who sendeth down rain
from Heaven: and We bring forth by it the buds of all the plants and
from them bring We forth the green foliage, and the close-growing grain,
and palm trees with sheaths of clustering dates, and gardens of grapes,
and the olive, and the pomegranate, like and unlike. Look you on their
fruits when they ripen. Truly herein are signs unto people who believe’
(6:97-99).

‘Hast thou not seen how thy Lord lengthens out the shadow? Had He
pleased He had made it motionless. But We made the sun to be its guide;
then draw it in unto Us with easy in drawing’ (25:45-46).

‘Can they not look up to the clouds, how they are created; and to the
Heaven how it is upraised; and to the mountains how they are rooted, and
to the earth how it is outspread?’ (88:17-20).

‘And among His signs are the creation of the Heavens and of the earth,
and your variety of tongues and colours. Herein truly are signs for all
men’ (30:22).

No doubt, the immediate purpose of the Qur’an in this reflective
observation of Nature is to awaken in man the consciousness of that of
which Nature is regarded a symbol. But the point to note is the general
empirical attitude of the Qur’an which engendered in its followers a
feeling of reverence for the actual and ultimately made them the
founders of modern science. It was a great point to awaken the empirical
spirit in an age which renounced the visible as of no value in men’s
search after God. According to the Qur’an, as we have seen before, the
universe has a serious end. Its shifting actualities force our being
into fresh formations. The intellectual effort to overcome the
obstruction offered by it, besides enriching and amplifying our life,
sharpens our insight, and thus prepares us for a more masterful
insertion into subtler aspects of human experience. It is our reflective
contact with the temporal flux of things which trains us for an
intellectual vision of the non-temporal. Reality lives in its own
appearances; and such a being as man, who has to maintain his life in an
obstructing environment, cannot afford to ignore the visible. The Qur’an
opens our eyes to the great fact of change, through the appreciation and
control of which alone it is possible to build a durable civilization.
The cultures of Asia and, in fact, of the whole ancient world failed,
because they approached Reality exclusively from within and moved from
within outwards. This procedure gave them theory without power, and on
mere theory no durable civilization can be based.

There is no doubt that the treatment of religious experience, as a
source of Divine knowledge, is historically prior to the treatment of
other regions of human experience for the same purpose. The Qur’an,
recognizing that the empirical attitude is an indispensable stage in the
spiritual life of humanity, attaches equal importance to all the regions
of human experience as yielding knowledge of the Ultimate Reality which
reveals its symbols both within and without.27 One indirect way of
establishing connexions with the reality that confronts us is reflective
observation and control of its symbols as they reveal themselves to
sense-perception; the other way is direct association with that reality
as it reveals itself within. The naturalism of the Qur’an is only a
recognition of the fact that man is related to nature, and this
relation, in view of its possibility as a means of controlling her
forces, must be exploited not in the interest of unrighteous desire for
domination, but in the nobler interest of a free upward movement of
spiritual life. In the interests of securing a complete vision of
Reality, therefore, sense-perception must be supplemented by the
perception of what the Qur’an describes as*Fu’«d* or*Qalb* , i.e. heart:

‘God hath made everything which He hath created most good; and began the
creation of man with clay; then ordained his progeny from germs of life,
from sorry water; then shaped him, and breathed of His spirit unto him,
and gave you hearing and seeing and heart: what little thanks do ye
return?’ (32:7-9).

The ‘heart’ is a kind of inner intuition or insight which, in the
beautiful words of Rëmâ, feeds on the rays of the sun and brings us into
contact with aspects of Reality other than those open to
sense-perception.28 It is, according to the Qur’an, something which
‘sees’, and its reports, if properly interpreted, are never false.29 We
must not, however, regard it as a mysterious special faculty; it is
rather a mode of dealing with Reality in which sensation, in the
physiological sense of the word, does not play any part.30 Yet the vista
of experience thus opened to us is as real and concrete as any other
experience. To describe it as psychic, mystical, or super-natural does
not detract from its value as experience. To the primitive man all
experience was super-natural. Prompted by the immediate necessities of
life he was driven to interpret his experience, and out of this
interpretation gradually emerged ‘Nature’ in our sense of the word. The
total-Reality, which enters our awareness and appears on interpretation
as an empirical fact, has other ways of invading our consciousness and
offers further opportunities of interpretation. The revealed and mystic
literature of mankind bears ample testimony to the fact that religious
experience has been too enduring and dominant in the history of mankind
to be rejected as mere illusion. There seems to be no reason, then, to
accept the normal level of human experience as fact and reject its other
levels as mystical and emotional. The fact of religious experience are
facts among other facts of human experience and, in the capacity of
yielding knowledge by interpretation, one fact is as good as another.
Nor is there anything irreverent in critically examining this region of
human experience. The Prophet of Islam was the first critical observer
of psychic phenomena. Bukha\`ri\`and other traditionists have given us a
full account of his observation of the psychic Jewish youth, Ibn Sayy«d,
whose ecstatic moods attracted the Prophet’s notice.31 He tested him,
questioned him, and examined him in his various moods. Once he hid
himself behind the stem of a tree to listen to his mutterings. The boy’s
mother, however, warned him of the approach of the Prophet. Thereupon
the boy immediately shook off his mood and the Prophet remarked: ‘If she
had let him alone the thing would have been cleared up.’32 The Prophet’s
companions, some of whom were present during the course of this first
psychological observation in the history of Islam, and even later
traditionists, who took good care to record this important fact,
entirely misunderstood the significance of his attitude and interpreted
it in their own innocent manner. Professor Macdonald, who seems to have
no idea of the fundamental psychological difference between the mystic
and the prophetic consciousness, finds ‘humour enough in this picture of
one prophet trying to investigate another after the method of the
Society for Psychical Research.33 A better appreciation of the spirit of
the Qur’an which, as I will show in a subsequent lecture,34 initiated
the cultural movement terminating in the birth of the modern empirical
attitude, would have led the Professor to see something remarkably
suggestive in the Prophet’s observation of the psychic Jew. However, the
first Muslim to see the meaning and value of the Prophet’s attitude was
Ibn Khaldën, who approached the contents of mystic consciousness in a
more critical spirit and very nearly reached the modern hypothesis of
subliminal selves.35 As Professor Macdonald says, Ibn Khaldën ‘had some
most interesting psychological ideas, and that he would probably have
been in close sympathy with Mr. William James's*Varieties of Religious
Experience’* .36 Modern psychology has only recently begun to realize
the importance of a careful study of the contents of mystic
consciousness, and we are not yet in possession of a really effective
scientific method to analyse the contents of non-rational modes of
consciousness. With the time at my disposal it is not possible to
undertake an extensive inquiry into the history and the various degrees
of mystic consciousness in point of richness and vividness. All that I
can do is to offer a few general observations only on the main
characteristics of mystic experience.

1. The first point to note is the immediacy of this experience. In this
respect it does not differ from other levels of human experience which
supply data for knowledge. All experience is immediate. As regions of
normal experience are subject to interpretation of sense-data for our
knowledge of the external world, so the region of mystic experience is
subject to interpretation for our knowledge of God. The immediacy of
mystic experience simply means that we know God just as we know other
objects. God is not a mathematical entity or a system of concepts
mutually related to one another and having no reference to experience.37

2. The second point is the unanalysable wholeness of mystic experience.
When I experience the table before me, innumerable data of experience
merge into the single experience of the table. Out of this wealth of
data I select those that fall into a certain order of space and time and
round them off in reference to the table. In the mystic state, however,
vivid and rich it may be, thought is reduced to a minimum and such an
analysis is not possible. But this difference of the mystic state from
the ordinary rational consciousness does not mean discontinuance with
the normal consciousness, as Professor William James erroneously
thought. In either case it is the same Reality which is operating on us.
The ordinary rational consciousness, in view of our practical need of
adaptation to our environment, takes that Reality piecemeal, selecting
successively isolated sets of stimuli for response. The mystic state
brings us into contact with the total passage of Reality in which all
the diverse stimuli merge into one another and form a single
unanalysable unity in which the ordinary distinction of subject and
object does not exist.

3. The third point to note is that to the mystic the mystic state is a
moment of intimate association with a Unique Other Self, transcending,
encompassing, and momentarily suppressing the private personality of the
subject of experience. Considering its content the mystic state is
highly objective and cannot be regarded as a mere retirement into the
mists of pure subjectivity. But you will ask me how immediate experience
of God, as an Independent Other Self, is at all possible. The mere fact
that the mystic state is passive does not finally prove the veritable
‘otherness’ of the Self experienced. This question arises in the mind
because we assume, without criticism, that our knowledge of the external
world through sense-perception is the type of all knowledge. If this
were so, we could never be sure of the reality of our own self. However,
in reply to it I suggest the analogy of our daily social experience. How
do we know other minds in our social intercourse? It is obvious that we
know our own self and Nature by inner reflection and sense-perception
respectively. We possess no sense for the experience of other minds. The
only ground of my knowledge of a conscious being before me is the
physical movements similar to my own from which I infer the presence of
another conscious being. Or we may say, after Professor Royce, that our
fellows are known to be real because they respond to our signals and
thus constantly supply the necessary supplement to our own fragmentary
meanings. Response, no doubt, is the test of the presence of a conscious
self, and the Qur’an also takes the same view:

‘And your Lord saith, call Me and I respond to your call’ (40:60).

‘And when My servants ask thee concerning Me, then I am nigh unto them
and answer the cry of him that crieth unto Me’ (2:186).

It is clear that whether we apply the physical criterion or the
non-physical and more adequate criterion of Royce, in either case our
knowledge of other minds remains something like inferential only. Yet we
feel that our experience of other minds is immediate and never entertain
any doubt as to the reality of our social experience. I do not, however,
mean, at the present stage of our inquiry, to build on the implications
of our knowledge of other minds, an idealistic argument in favour of the
reality of a Comprehensive Self. All that I mean to suggest is that the
immediacy of our experience in the mystic state is not without a
parallel. It has some sort of resemblance to our normal experience and
probably belongs to the same category.

4. Since the quality of mystic experience is to be directly experienced,
it is obvious that it cannot be communicated.38 Mystic states are more
like feeling than thought. The interpretation which the mystic or the
prophet puts on the content of his religious consciousness can be
conveyed to others in the form of propositions, but the content itself
cannot be so transmitted. Thus in the following verses of the Qur’an it
is the psychology and not the content of the experience that is given:

‘It is not for man that God should speak to him, but by vision or from
behind a veil; or He sendeth a messenger to reveal by His permission
what He will: for He is Exalted, Wise’ (42:51).

‘By the star when it setteth,

Your compatriot erreth not, nor is he led astray.

Neither speaketh he from mere impulse.

The Qur’an is no other than the revelation revealed to him:

One strong in power taught it him,

Endowed with wisdom with even balance stood he

In the highest part of the horizon:

Then came he nearer and approached,

And was at the distance of two bows or even closer -

And he revealed to the servant of God what he revealed:

His heart falsified not what he saw:

What! will ye then dispute with him as to what he saw?

He had seen him also another time

Near the*Sidrah* tree which marks the boundary:

Near which is the garden of repose:

When the*Sidrah* tree was covered with what covered it:

His eye turned not aside, nor did it wander:

For he saw the greatest of the signs of the Lord’ (53:1-18).

The incommunicability of mystic experience is due to the fact that it is
essentially a matter of inarticulate feeling, untouched by discursive
intellect. It must, however, be noted that mystic feeling, like all
feeling, has a cognitive element also; and it is, I believe, because of
this cognitive element that it lends itself to the form of idea. In
fact, it is the nature of feeling to seek expression in thought. It
would seem that the two - feeling and idea - are the non-temporal and
temporal aspects of the same unit of inner experience. But on this point
I cannot do better than quote Professor Hocking who has made a
remarkably keen study of feeling in justification of an intellectual
view of the content of religious consciousness:

‘What is that other-than-feeling in which feeling may end? I answer,
consciousness of an object. Feeling is instability of an entire
conscious self: and that which will restore the stability of this self
lies not within its own border but beyond it. Feeling is
outward-pushing, as idea is outward-reporting: and no feeling is so
blind as to have no idea of its own object. As a feeling possesses the
mind, there also possesses the mind, as an integral part of that
feeling, some idea of the kind of thing which will bring it to rest. A
feeling without a direction is as impossible as an activity without a
direction: and a direction implies some objective. There are vague
states of consciousness in which we seem to be wholly without direction;
but in such cases it is remarkable that feeling is likewise in abeyance.
For example, I may be dazed by a blow, neither realizing what has
happened nor suffering any pain, and yet quite conscious that something
has occurred: the experience waits an instant in the vestibule of
consciousness, not as feeling but purely as fact, until idea has touched
it and defined a course of response. At that same moment, it is felt as
painful. If we are right, feeling is quite as much an objective
consciousness as is idea: it refers always to something beyond the
present self and has no existence save in directing the self toward that
object in whose presence its own career must end!’39

Thus you will see that it is because of this essential nature of feeling
that while religion starts with feeling, it has never, in its history,
taken itself as a matter of feeling alone and has constantly striven
after metaphysics. The mystic’s condemnation of intellect as an organ of
knowledge does not really find any justification in the history of
religion. But Professor Hocking’s passage just quoted has a wider scope
than mere justification of idea in religion. The organic relation of
feeling and idea throws light on the old theological controversy about
verbal revelation which once gave so much trouble to Muslim religious
thinkers.40 Inarticulate feeling seeks to fulfil its destiny in idea
which, in its turn, tends to develop out of itself its own visible
garment. It is no mere metaphor to say that idea and word both
simultaneously emerge out of the womb of feeling, though logical
understanding cannot but take them in a temporal order and thus create
its own difficulty by regarding them as mutually isolated. There is a
sense in which the word is also revealed.

5. The mystic’s intimate association with the eternal which gives him a
sense of the unreality of serial time does not mean a complete break
with serial time. The mystic state in respect of its uniqueness remains
in some way related to common experience. This is clear from the fact
that the mystic state soon fades away, though it leaves a deep sense of
authority after it has passed away. Both the mystic and the prophet
return to the normal levels of experience, but with this difference that
the return of the prophet, as I will show later, may be fraught with
infinite meaning for mankind.

For the purposes of knowledge, then, the region of mystic experience is
as real as any other region of human experience and cannot be ignored
merely because it cannot be traced back to sense-perception. Nor is it
possible to undo the spiritual value of the mystic state by specifying
the organic conditions which appear to determine it. Even if the
postulate of modern psychology as to the interrelation of body and mind
is assumed to be true, it is illogical to discredit the value of the
mystic state as a revelation of truth. Psychologically speaking, all
states, whether their content is religious or non-religious, are
organically determined.41 The scientific form of mind is as much
organically determined as the religious. Our judgement as to the
creations of genius is not at all determined or even remotely affected
by what our psychologists may say regarding its organic conditions. A
certain kind of temperament may be a necessary condition for a certain
kind of receptivity; but the antecedent condition cannot be regarded as
the whole truth about the character of what is received. The truth is
that the organic causation of our mental states has nothing to do with
the criteria by which we judge them to be superior or inferior in point
of value. ‘Among the visions and messages’, says Professor William
James,

‘some have always been too patently silly, among the trances and
convulsive seizures some have been too fruitless for conduct and
character, to pass themselves off as significant, still less as divine.
In the history of Christian mysticism the problem how to discriminate
between such messages and experiences as were really divine miracles,
and such others as the demon in his malice was able to counterfeit, thus
making the religious person twofold more the child of hell he was
before, has always been a difficult one to solve, needing all the
sagacity and experience of the best directors of conscience. In the end
it had come to our empiricist criterion: By their fruits ye shall know
them, not by their roots’.42

The problem of Christian mysticism alluded to by Professor James has
been in fact the problem of all mysticism. The demon in his malice does
counterfeit experiences which creep into the circuit of the mystic
state. As we read in the Qur’an:

‘We have not sent any Apostle or Prophet43 before thee among whose
desires Satan injected not some wrong desire, but God shall bring to
nought that which Satan had suggested. Thus shall God affirm His
revelations, for God is Knowing and Wise’ (22:52).

And it is in the elimination of the satanic from the Divine that the
followers of Freud have done inestimable service to religion; though I
cannot help saying that the main theory of this newer psychology does
not appear to me to be supported by any adequate evidence. If our
vagrant impulses assert themselves in our dreams, or at other times we
are not strictly ourselves, it does not follow that they remain
imprisoned in a kind of lumber room behind the normal self. The
occasional invasion of these suppressed impulses on the region of our
normal self tends more to show the temporary disruption of our habitual
system of responses rather than their perpetual presence in some dark
corner of the mind. However, the theory is briefly this. During the
process of our adjustment to our environment we are exposed to all sorts
of stimuli. Our habitual responses to these stimuli gradually fall into
a relatively fixed system, constantly growing in complexity by absorbing
some and rejecting other impulses which do not fit in with our permanent
system of responses. The rejected impulses recede into what is called
the ‘unconscious region’ of the mind, and there wait for a suitable
opportunity to assert themselves and take their revenge on the focal
self. They may disturb our plans of action, distort our thought, build
our dreams and phantasies, or carry us back to forms of primitive
behaviour which the evolutionary process has left far behind. Religion,
it is said, is a pure fiction created by these repudiated impulses of
mankind with a view to find a kind of fairyland for free unobstructed
movement. Religious*beliefs* and dogmas, according to the theory, are no
more than merely primitive theories of Nature, whereby mankind has tried
to redeem Reality from its elemental ugliness and to show it off as
something nearer to the heart’s desire than the facts of life would
warrant. That there are religions and forms of art, which provide a kind
of cowardly escape from the facts of life, I do not deny. All that I
contend is that this is not true of all religions. No doubt, religious
beliefs and dogmas have a metaphysical significance; but it is obvious
that they are not interpretations of those data of experience which are
the subject of the science of Nature. Religion is not physics or
chemistry seeking an explanation of Nature in terms of causation; it
really aims at interpreting a totally different region of human
experience - religious experience - the data of which cannot be reduced
to the data of any other science. In fact, it must be said in justice to
religion that it insisted on the necessity of concrete experience in
religious life long before science learnt to do so.44 The conflict
between the two is due not to the fact that the one is, and the other is
not, based on concrete experience. Both seek concrete experience as a
point of departure. Their conflict is due to the misapprehension that
both interpret the same data of experience. We forget that religion aims
at reaching the real significance of a special variety of human
experience.

Nor is it possible to explain away the content of religious
consciousness by attributing the whole thing to the working of the
sex-impulse. The two forms of consciousness - sexual and religious - are
often hostile or, at any rate, completely different to each other in
point of their character, their aim, and the kind of conduct they
generate. The truth is that in a state of religious passion we know a
factual reality in some sense outside the narrow circuit of our
personality. To the psychologist religious passion necessarily appears
as the work of the subconscious because of the intensity with which it
shakes up the depths of our being. In all knowledge there is an element
of passion, and the object of knowledge gains or loses in objectivity
with the rise and fall in the intensity of passion. That is most real to
us which stirs up the entire fabric of our personality. As Professor
Hocking pointedly puts it:

‘If ever upon the stupid day-length time-span of any self or saint
either, some vision breaks to roll his life and ours into new channels,
it can only be because that vision admits into his soul some trooping
invasion of the concrete fullness of eternity. Such vision doubtless
means subconscious readiness and subconscious resonance too, - but the
expansion of the unused air-cells does not argue that we have ceased to
breathe the outer air: - the very opposite!’45

A purely psychological method, therefore, cannot explain religious
passion as a form of knowledge. It is bound to fail in the case of our
newer psychologists as it did fail in the case of Locke and Hume.

The foregoing discussion, however, is sure to raise an important
question in your mind. Religious experience, I have tried to maintain,
is essentially a state of feeling with a cognitive aspect, the content
of which cannot be communicated to others, except in the form of a
judgement. Now when a judgement which claims to be the interpretation of
a certain region of human experience, not accessible to me, is placed
before me for my assent, I am entitled to ask, what is the guarantee of
its truth? Are we in possession of a test which would reveal its
validity? If personal experience had been the only ground for acceptance
of a judgement of this kind, religion would have been the possession of
a few individuals only. Happily we are in possession of tests which do
not differ from those applicable to other forms of knowledge. These I
call the intellectual test and the pragmatic test. By the intellectual
test I mean critical interpretation, without any presuppositions of
human experience, generally with a view to discover whether our
interpretation leads us ultimately to a reality of the same character as
is revealed by religious experience. The pragmatic test judges it by its
fruits. The former is applied by the philosopher, the latter by the
prophet. In the lecture that follows, I will apply the intellectual
test.


