Lecture II: The Philosophical Test of the Revelations of Religious Experience
=============================================================================

Scholastic philosophy has put forward three arguments for the existence
of God. These arguments, known as the Cosmological, the Teleological,
and the Ontological, embody a real movement of thought in its quest
after the Absolute. But regarded as logical proofs, I am afraid, they
are open to serious criticism and further betray a rather superficial
interpretation of experience.

The cosmological argument views the world as a finite effect, and
passing through a series of dependent sequences, related as causes and
effects, stops at an uncaused first cause, because of the unthinkability
of an infinite regress. It is, however, obvious that a finite effect can
give only a finite cause, or at most an infinite series of such causes.
To finish the series at a certain point, and to elevate one member of
the series to the dignity of an uncaused first cause, is to set at
naught the very law of causation on which the whole argument proceeds.
Further, the first cause reached by the argument necessarily excludes
its effect. And this means that the effect, constituting a limit to its
own cause, reduces it to something finite. Again, the cause reached by
the argument cannot be regarded as a necessary being for the obvious
reason that in the relation of cause and effect the two terms of the
relation are equally necessary to each other. Nor is the necessity of
existence identical with the conceptual necessity of causation which is
the utmost that this argument can prove. The argument really tries to
reach the infinite by merely negating the finite. But the infinite
reached by contradicting the finite is a false infinite, which neither
explains itself nor the finite which is thus made to stand in opposition
to the infinite. The true infinite does not exclude the finite; it
embraces the finite without effacing its finitude, and explains and
justifies its being. Logically speaking, then, the movement from the
finite to the infinite as embodied in the cosmological argument is quite
illegitimate; and the argument fails in toto. The teleological argument
is no better. It scrutinizes the effect with a view to discover the
character of its cause. From the traces of foresight, purpose, and
adaptation in nature, it infers the existence of a self-conscious being
of infinite intelligence and power. At best, it gives us a skilful
external contriver working on a pre-existing dead and intractable
material the elements of which are, by their own nature, incapable of
orderly structures and combinations. The argument gives us a contriver
only and not a creator; and even if we suppose him to be also the
creator of his material, it does no credit to his wisdom to create his
own difficulties by first creating intractable material, and then
overcoming its resistance by the application of methods alien to its
original nature. The designer regarded as external to his material must
always remain limited by his material, and hence a finite designer whose
limited resources compel him to overcome his difficulties after the
fashion of a human mechanician. The truth is that the analogy on which
the argument proceeds is of no value at all. There is really no analogy
between the work of the human artificer and the phenomena of Nature. The
human artificer cannot work out his plan except by selecting and
isolating his materials from their natural relations and situations.
Nature, however, constitutes a system of wholly interdependent members;
her processes present no analogy to the architect’s work which,
depending on a progressive isolation and integration of its material,
can offer no resemblance to the evolution of organic wholes in Nature.
The ontological argument which has been presented in various forms by
various thinkers has always appealed most to the speculative mind. The
Cartesian form of the argument runs thus:

‘To say that an attribute is contained in the nature or in the concept
of a thing is the same as to say that the attribute is true of this
thing and that it may be affirmed to be in it. But necessary existence
is contained in the nature or the concept of God. Hence it may be with
truth affirmed that necessary existence is in God, or that God exists.’1

Descartes supplements this argument by another. We have the idea of a
perfect being in our mind. What is the source of the idea? It cannot
come from Nature, for Nature exhibits nothing but change. It cannot
create the idea of a perfect being. Therefore corresponding to the idea
in our mind there must be an objective counterpart which is the cause of
the idea of a perfect being in our mind. This argument is somewhat of
the nature of the cosmological argument which I have already criticized.
But whatever may be the form of the argument, it is clear that the
conception of existence is no proof of objective existence. As in Kant’s
criticism of this argument the notion of three hundred dollars in my
mind cannot prove that I have them in my pocket.2 All that the argument
proves is that the idea of a perfect being includes the idea of his
existence. Between the idea of a perfect being in my mind and the
objective reality of that being there is a gulf which cannot be bridged
over by a transcendental act of thought. The argument, as stated, is in
fact a petitio principii:3 for it takes for granted the very point in
question, i.e. the transition from the logical to the real. I hope I
have made it clear to you that the ontological and the teleological
arguments, as ordinarily stated, carry us nowhere. And the reason of
their failure is that they look upon ‘thought’ as an agency working on
things from without. This view of thought gives us a mere mechanician in
the one case, and creates an unbridgeable gulf between the ideal and the
real in the other. It is, however, possible to take thought not as a
principle which organizes and integrates its material from the outside,
but as a potency which is formative of the very being of its material.
Thus regarded thought or idea is not alien to the original nature of
things; it is their ultimate ground and constitutes the very essence of
their being, infusing itself in them from the very beginning of their
career and inspiring their onward march to a self-determined end. But
our present situation necessitates the dualism of thought and being.
Every act of human knowledge bifurcates what might on proper inquiry
turn out to be a unity into a self that knows and a confronting ‘other’
that is known. That is why we are forced to regard the object that
confronts the self as something existing in its own right, external to
and independent of the self whose act of knowledge makes no difference
to the object known. The true significance of the ontological and the
teleological arguments will appear only if we are able to show that the
human situation is not final and that thought and being are ultimately
one. This is possible only if we carefully examine and interpret
experience, following the clue furnished by the Qur’an which regards
experience within and without as symbolic of a reality described by it,4
as ‘the First and the Last, the Visible and the Invisible’.5 This I
propose to do in the present lecture.

Now experience, as unfolding itself in time, presents three main
levels - the level of matter, the level of life, and the level of mind
and consciousness - the subject-matter of physics, biology, and
psychology, respectively. Let us first turn our attention to matter. In
order exactly to appreciate the position of modern physics it is
necessary to understand clearly what we mean by matter. Physics, as an
empirical science, deals with the facts of experience, i.e.
sense-experience. The physicist begins and ends with sensible phenomena,
without which it is impossible for him to verify his theories. He may
postulate imperceptible entities, such as atoms; but he does so because
he cannot otherwise explain his sense-experience. Thus physics studies
the material world, that is to say, the world revealed by the senses.
The mental processes involved in this study, and similarly religious and
aesthetic experience, though part of the total range of experience, are
excluded from the scope of physics for the obvious reason that physics
is restricted to the study of the material world, by which we mean the
world of things we perceive. But when I ask you what are the things you
perceive in the material world, you will, of course, mention the
familiar things around you, e.g. earth, sky, mountains, chairs, tables,
etc. When I further ask you what exactly you perceive of these things,
you will answer - their qualities. It is clear that in answering such a
question we are really putting an interpretation on the evidence of our
senses. The interpretation consists in making a distinction between the
thing and its qualities. This really amounts to a theory of matter, i.e.
of the nature of sense-data, their relation to the perceiving mind and
their ultimate causes. The substance of this theory is as follows:

‘The sense objects (colours, sounds, etc.) are states of the perceiver’s
mind, and as such excluded from nature regarded as something objective.
For this reason they cannot be in any proper sense qualities of physical
things. When I say "The sky is blue," it can only mean that the sky
produces a blue sensation in my mind, and not that the colour blue is a
quality found in the sky. As mental states they are impressions, that is
to say, they are effects produced in us. The cause of these effects is
matter, or material things acting through our sense organs, nerves, and
brain on our mind. This physical cause acts by contact or impact; hence
it must possess the qualities of shape, size, solidity and resistance.’6

It was the philosopher Berkeley who first undertook to refute the theory
of matter as the unknown cause of our sensations.7 In our own times
Professor Whitehead - an eminent mathematician and scientist - has
conclusively shown that the traditional theory of materialism is wholly
untenable. It is obvious that, on the theory, colours, sounds, etc., are
subjective states only, and form no part of Nature. What enters the eye
and the ear is not colour or sound, but invisible ether waves and
inaudible air waves. Nature is not what we know her to be; our
perceptions are illusions and cannot be regarded as genuine disclosures
of Nature, which, according to the theory, is bifurcated into mental
impressions, on the one hand, and the unverifiable, imperceptible
entities producing these impressions, on the other. If physics
constitutes a really coherent and genuine knowledge of perceptively
known objects, the traditional theory of matter must be rejected for the
obvious reason that it reduces the evidence of our senses, on which
alone the physicist, as observer and experimenter, must rely, to the
mere impressions of the observer’s mind. Between Nature and the observer
of Nature, the theory creates a gulf which he is compelled to bridge
over by resorting to the doubtful hypothesis of an imperceptible
something, occupying an absolute space like a thing in a receptacle and
causing our sensation by some kind of impact. In the words of Professor
Whitehead, the theory reduces one-half of Nature to a ‘dream’ and the
other half to a ‘conjecture’.8 Thus physics, finding it necessary to
criticize its own foundations, has eventually found reason to break its
own idol, and the empirical attitude which appeared to necessitate
scientific materialism has finally ended in a revolt against matter.
Since objects, then, are not subjective states caused by something
imperceptible called matter, they are genuine phenomena which constitute
the very substance of Nature and which we know as they are in Nature.
But the concept of matter has received the greatest blow from the hand
of Einstein - another eminent physicist, whose discoveries have laid the
foundation of a far-reaching revolution in the entire domain of human
thought. ‘The theory of Relativity by merging time into spacetime’, says
Mr. Russell,

‘has damaged the traditional notion of substance more than all the
arguments of the philosophers. Matter, for common sense, is something
which persists in time and moves in space. But for modern
relativity-physics this view is no longer tenable. A piece of matter has
become not a persistent thing with varying states, but a system of
inter-related events. The old solidity is gone, and with it the
characteristics that to the materialist made matter seem more real than
fleeting thoughts.’

According to Professor Whitehead, therefore, Nature is not a static fact
situated in an a-dynamic void, but a structure of events possessing the
character of a continuous creative flow which thought cuts up into
isolated immobilities out of whose mutual relations arise the concepts
of space and time. Thus we see how modern science utters its agreement
with Berkeley’s criticism which it once regarded as an attack on its
very foundation. The scientific view of Nature as pure materiality is
associated with the Newtonian view of space as an absolute void in which
things are situated. This attitude of science has, no doubt, ensured its
speedy progress; but the bifurcation of a total experience into two
opposite domains of mind and matter has today forced it, in view of its
own domestic difficulties, to consider the problems which, in the
beginning of its career, it completely ignored. The criticism of the
foundations of the mathematical sciences has fully disclosed that the
hypothesis of a pure materiality, an enduring stuff situated in an
absolute space, is unworkable. Is space an independent void in which
things are situated and which would remain intact if all things were
withdrawn? The ancient Greek philosopher Zeno approached the problem of
space through the question of movement in space. His arguments for the
unreality of movement are well known to the students of philosophy, and
ever since his days the problem has persisted in the history of thought
and received the keenest attention from successive generations of
thinkers. Two of these arguments may be noted here.9 Zeno, who took
space to be infinitely divisible, argued that movement in space is
impossible. Before the moving body can reach the point of its
destination it must pass through half the space intervening between the
point of start and the point of destination; and before it can pass
through that half it must travel through the half of the half, and so on
to infinity. We cannot move from one point of space to another without
passing through an infinite number of points in the intervening space.
But it is impossible to pass through an infinity of points in a finite
time. He further argued that the flying arrow does not move, because at
any time during the course of its flight it is at rest in some point of
space. Thus Zeno held that movement is only a deceptive appearance and
that Reality is one and immutable. The unreality of movement means the
unreality of an independent space. Muslim thinkers of the school of
al-Ash‘arâdid not believe in the infinite divisibility of space and
time. With them space, time, and motion are made up of points and
instants which cannot be further subdivided. Thus they proved the
possibility of movement on the assumption that infinitesimals do exist;
for if there is a limit to the divisibility of space and time, movement
from one point of space to another point is possible in a finite time.10
Ibn Àazm, however, rejected the Ash‘arite notion of infinitesimals,11
and modern mathematics has confirmed his view. The Ash‘arite argument,
therefore, cannot logically resolve the paradox of Zeno. Of modern
thinkers the French philosopher Bergson and the British mathematician
Bertrand Russell have tried to refute Zeno’s arguments from their
respective standpoints. To Bergson movement, as true change, is the
fundamental Reality. The paradox of Zeno is due to a wrong apprehension
of space and time which are regarded by Bergson only as intellectual
views of movement. It is not possible to develop here the argument of
Bergson without a fuller treatment of the metaphysical concept of life
on which the whole argument is based.12 Bertrand Russell’s argument
proceeds on Cantor’s theory of mathematical continuity13 which he looks
upon as one of the most important discoveries of modern mathematics.14
Zeno’s argument is obviously based on the assumption that space and time
consist of infinite number of points and instants. On this assumption it
is easy to argue that since between two points the moving body will be
out of place, motion is impossible, for there is no place for it to take
place. Cantor’s discovery shows that space and time are continuous.
Between any two points in space there is an infinite number of points,
and in an infinite series no two points are next to each other. The
infinite divisibility of space and time means the compactness of the
points in the series; it does not mean that points are mutually isolated
in the sense of having a gap between one another. Russell’s answer to
Zeno, then, is as follows:

‘Zeno asks how can you go from one position at one moment to the next
position at the next moment without in the transition being at no
position at no moment? The answer is that there is no next position to
any position, no next moment to any moment because between any two there
is always another. If there were infinitesimals movement would be
impossible, but there are none. Zeno therefore is right in saying that
the arrow is at rest at every moment of its flight, wrong in inferring
that therefore it does not move, for there is a one-one correspondence
in a movement between the infinite series of positions and the infinite
series of instants. According to this doctrine, then it is possible to
affirm the reality of space, time, and movement, and yet avoid the
paradox in Zeno’s arguments.’15

Thus Bertrand Russell proves the reality of movement on the basis of
Cantor’s theory of continuity. The reality of movement means the
independent reality of space and the objectivity of Nature. But the
identity of continuity and the infinite divisibility of space is no
solution of the difficulty. Assuming that there is a one-one
correspondence between the infinite multiplicity of instants in a finite
interval of time and an infinite multiplicity of points in a finite
portion of space, the difficulty arising from the divisibility remains
the same. The mathematical conception of continuity as infinite series
applies not to movement regarded as an act, but rather to the picture of
movement as viewed from the outside. The act of movement, i.e. movement
as lived and not as thought, does not admit of any divisibility. The
flight of the arrow observed as a passage in space is divisible, but its
flight regarded as an act, apart from its realization in space, is one
and incapable of partition into a multiplicity. In partition lies its
destruction.

With Einstein space is real, but relative to the observer. He rejects
the Newtonian concept of an absolute space. The object observed is
variable; it is relative to the observer; its mass, shape, and size
change as the observer’s position and speed change. Movement and rest,
too, are relative to the observer. There is, therefore, no such thing as
a self-subsistent materiality of classical physics. It is, however,
necessary here to guard against a misunderstanding. The use of the word
‘observer’ in this connexion has misled Wildon Carr into the view that
the theory of Relativity inevitably leads to Monadistic Idealism. It is
true that according to the theory the shapes, sizes, and durations of
phenomena are not absolute. But as Professor Nunn points out, the
space-time frame does not depend on the observer’s mind; it depends on
the point of the material universe to which his body is attached. In
fact, the ‘observer’ can be easily replaced by a recording apparatus.16
Personally, I believe that the ultimate character of Reality is
spiritual: but in order to avoid a widespread misunderstanding it is
necessary to point out that Einstein’s theory, which, as a scientific
theory, deals only with the structure of things, throws no light on the
ultimate nature of things which possess that structure. The
philosophical value of the theory is twofold. First, it destroys, not
the objectivity of Nature, but the view of substance as simple location
in space - a view which led to materialism in Classical Physics.
‘Substance’ for modern Relativity-Physics is not a persistent thing with
variable states, but a system of interrelated events. In Whitehead’s
presentation of the theory the notion of ‘matter’ is entirely replaced
by the notion of ‘organism’. Secondly, the theory makes space dependent
on matter. The universe, according to Einstein, is not a kind of island
in an infinite space; it is finite but boundless; beyond it there is no
empty space. In the absence of matter the universe would shrink to a
point. Looking, however, at the theory from the standpoint that I have
taken in these lectures, Einstein’s Relativity presents one great
difficulty, i.e. the unreality of time. A theory which takes time to be
a kind of fourth dimension of space must, it seems, regard the future as
something already given, as indubitably fixed as the past.17 Time as a
free creative movement has no meaning for the theory. It does not pass.
Events do not happen; we simply meet them. It must not, however, be
forgotten that the theory neglects certain characteristics of time as
experienced by us; and it is not possible to say that the nature of time
is exhausted by the characteristics which the theory does note in the
interests of a systematic account of those aspects of Nature which can
be mathematically treated. Nor is it possible for us laymen to
understand what the real nature of Einstein’s time is. It is obvious
that Einstein’s time is not Bergson’s pure duration. Nor can we regard
it as serial time. Serial time is the essence of causality as defined by
Kant. The cause and its effect are mutually so related that the former
is chronologically prior to the latter, so that if the former is not,
the latter cannot be. If mathematical time is serial time, then on the
basis of the theory it is possible, by a careful choice of the
velocities of the observer and the system in which a given set of events
is happening, to make the effect precede its cause.18 It appears to me
that time regarded as a fourth dimension of space really ceases to be
time. A modern Russian writer, Ouspensky, in his book called Tertium
Organum, conceives the fourth dimension to be the movement of a
three-dimensional figure in a direction not contained in itself.19 Just
as the movement of the point, the line and the surface in a direction
not contained in them gives us the ordinary three dimensions of space,
in the same way the movement of the three-dimensional figure in a
direction not contained in itself must give us the fourth dimension of
space. And since time is the distance separating events in order of
succession and binding them in different wholes, it is obviously a
distance lying in a direction not contained in the three-dimensional
space. As a new dimension this distance, separating events in the order
of succession, is incommensurable with the dimensions of
three-dimensional space, as a year is incommensurable with St.
Petersburg. It is perpendicular to all directions of three-dimensional
space, and is not parallel to any of them. Elsewhere in the same book
Ouspensky describes our time-sense as a misty space-sense and argues, on
the basis of our psychic constitution, that to one-, two- or
three-dimensional beings the higher dimension must always appear as
succession in time. This obviously means that what appears to us
three-dimensional beings as time is in reality an imperfectly sensed
space-dimension which in its own nature does not differ from the
perfectly sensed dimensions of Euclidean space. In other words, time is
not a genuine creative movement; and that what we call future events are
not fresh happenings, but things already given and located in an unknown
space. Yet in his search for a fresh direction, other than the three
Euclidean dimensions, Ouspensky needs a real serial time, i.e. a
distance separating events in the order of succession. Thus time which
was needed and consequently viewed as succession for the purposes of one
stage of the argument is quietly divested, at a later stage, of its
serial character and reduced to what does not differ in anything from
the other lines and dimensions of space. It is because of the serial
character of time that Ouspensky was able to regard it as a genuinely
new direction in space. If this characteristic is in reality an
illusion, how can it fulfil Ouspensky’s requirements of an original
dimension?

Passing now to other levels of experience - life and consciousness.
Consciousness may be imagined as a deflection from life. Its function is
to provide a luminous point in order to enlighten the forward rush of
life.20 It is a case of tension, a state of self-concentration, by means
of which life manages to shut out all memories and associations which
have no bearing on a present action. It has no well-defined fringes; it
shrinks and expands as the occasion demands. To describe it as an
epiphenomenon of the processes of matter is to deny it as an independent
activity, and to deny it as an independent activity is to deny the
validity of all knowledge which is only a systematized expression of
consciousness. Thus consciousness is a variety of the purely spiritual
principle of life which is not a substance, but an organizing principle,
a specific mode of behaviour essentially different to the behaviour of
an externally worked machine. Since, however, we cannot conceive of a
purely spiritual energy, except in association with a definite
combination of sensible elements through which it reveals itself, we are
apt to take this combination as the ultimate ground of spiritual energy.
The discoveries of Newton in the sphere of matter and those of Darwin in
the sphere of Natural History reveal a mechanism. All problems, it was
believed, were really the problems of physics. Energy and atoms, with
the properties self-existing in them, could explain everything including
life, thought, will, and feeling. The concept of mechanism - a purely
physical concept - claimed to be the all-embracing explanation of
Nature. And the battle for and against mechanism is still being fiercely
fought in the domain of Biology. The question, then, is whether the
passage to Reality through the revelations of sense-perception
necessarily leads to a view of Reality essentially opposed to the view
that religion takes of its ultimate character. Is Natural Science
finally committed to materialism? There is no doubt that the theories of
science constitute trustworthy knowledge, because they are verifiable
and enable us to predict and control the events of Nature. But we must
not forget that what is called science is not a single systematic view
of Reality. It is a mass of sectional views of Reality - fragments of a
total experience which do not seem to fit together. Natural Science
deals with matter, with life, and with mind; but the moment you ask the
question how matter, life, and mind are mutually related, you begin to
see the sectional character of the various sciences that deal with them
and the inability of these sciences, taken singly, to furnish a complete
answer to your question. In fact, the various natural sciences are like
so many vultures falling on the dead body of Nature, and each running
away with a piece of its flesh. Nature as the subject of science is a
highly artificial affair, and this artificiality is the result of that
selective process to which science must subject her in the interests of
precision. The moment you put the subject of science in the total of
human experience it begins to disclose a different character. Thus
religion, which demands the whole of Reality and for this reason must
occupy a central place in any synthesis of all the data of human
experience, has no reason to be afraid of any sectional views of
Reality. Natural Science is by nature sectional; it cannot, if it is
true to its own nature and function, set up its theory as a complete
view of Reality. The concepts we use in the organization of knowledge
are, therefore, sectional in character, and their application is
relative to the level of experience to which they are applied. The
concept of ‘cause’, for instance, the essential feature of which is
priority to the effect, is relative to the subject-matter of physical
science which studies one special kind of activity to the exclusion of
other forms of activity observed by others. When we rise to the level of
life and mind the concept of cause fails us, and we stand in need of
concepts of a different order of thought. The action of living
organisms, initiated and planned in view of an end, is totally different
to causal action. The subject-matter of our inquiry, therefore, demands
the concepts of ‘end’ and ‘purpose’, which act from within unlike the
concept of cause which is external to the effect and acts from without.
No doubt, there are aspects of the activity of a living organism which
it shares with other objects of Nature. In the observation of these
aspects the concepts of physics and chemistry would be needed; but the
behaviour of the organism is essentially a matter of inheritance and
incapable of sufficient explanation in terms of molecular physics.
However, the concept of mechanism has been applied to life and we have
to see how far the attempt has succeeded. Unfortunately, I am not a
biologist and must turn to biologists themselves for support. After
telling us that the main difference between a living organism and a
machine is that the former is self-maintaining and self-reproducing,
J.S. Haldane says:

‘It is thus evident that although we find within the living body many
phenomena which, so long as we do not look closely, can be interpreted
satisfactorily as physical and chemical mechanism, there are side by
side other phenomena [i.e. self-maintenance and reproduction] for which
the possibility of such interpretation seems to be absent. The
mechanists assume that the bodily mechanisms are so constructed as to
maintain, repair, and reproduce themselves. In the long process of
natural selection, mechanisms of this sort have, they suggest, been
evolved gradually.

‘Let us examine this hypothesis. When we state an event in mechanical
terms we state it as a necessary result of certain simple properties of
separate parts which interact in the event. . The essence of the
explanation or re-statement of the event is that after due investigation
we have assumed that the parts interacting in the event have certain
simple and definite properties, so that they always react in the same
way under the same conditions. For a mechanical explanation the reacting
parts must first be given. Unless an arrangement of parts with definite
properties is given, it is meaningless to speak of mechanical
explanation.

‘To postulate the existence of a self-producing or self-maintaining
mechanism is, thus, to postulate something to which no meaning can be
attached. Meaningless terms are sometimes used by physiologists; but
there is none so absolutely meaningless as the expression "mechanism of
reproduction". Any mechanism there may be in the parent organism is
absent in the process of reproduction, and must reconstitute itself at
each generation, since the parent organism is reproduced from a mere
tiny speck of its own body. There can be no mechanism of reproduction.
The idea of a mechanism which is constantly maintaining or reproducing
its own structure is self-contradictory. A mechanism which reproduced
itself would be a mechanism without parts, and, therefore, not a
mechanism.’21

Life is, then, a unique phenomenon and the concept of mechanism is
inadequate for its analysis. Its ‘factual wholeness’, to use an
expression of Driesch - another notable biologist - is a kind of unity
which, looked at from another point of view, is also a plurality. In all
the purposive processes of growth and adaptation to its environment,
whether this adaptation is secured by the formation of fresh or the
modification of old habits, it possesses a career which is unthinkable
in the case of a machine. And the possession of a career means that the
sources of its activity cannot be explained except in reference to a
remote past, the origin of which, therefore, must be sought in a
spiritual reality revealable in, but non-discoverable by, any analysis
of spatial experience. It would, therefore, seem that life is
foundational and anterior to the routine of physical and chemical
processes which must be regarded as a kind of fixed behaviour formed
during a long course of evolution. Further, the application of the
mechanistic concepts to life, necessitating the view that the intellect
itself is a product of evolution, brings science into conflict with its
own objective principle of investigation. On this point I will quote a
passage from Wildon Carr, who has given a very pointed expression to
this conflict:

‘If intellect is a product of evolution the whole mechanistic concept of
the nature and origin of life is absurd, and the principle which science
has adopted must clearly be revised. We have only to state it to see the
self-contradiction. How can the intellect, a mode of apprehending
reality, be itself an evolution of something which only exists as an
abstraction of that mode of apprehending, which is the intellect? If
intellect is an evolution of life, then the concept of the life which
can evolve intellect as a particular mode of apprehending reality must
be the concept of a more concrete activity than that of any abstract
mechanical movement which the intellect can present to itself by
analysing its apprehended content. And yet further, if the intellect be
a product of the evolution of life, it is not absolute but relative to
the activity of the life which has evolved it; how then, in such case,
can science exclude the subjective aspect of the knowing and build on
the objective presentation as an absolute? Clearly the biological
sciences necessitate a reconsideration of the scientific principle.’22

I will now try to reach the primacy of life and thought by another
route, and carry you a step farther in our examination of experience.
This will throw some further light on the primacy of life and will also
give us an insight into the nature of life as a psychic activity. We
have seen that Professor Whitehead describes the universe, not as
something static, but as a structure of events possessing the character
of a continuous creative flow. This quality of Nature’s passage in time
is perhaps the most significant aspect of experience which the Qur’an
especially emphasizes and which, as I hope to be able to show in the
sequel, offers the best clue to the ultimate nature of Reality. To some
of the verses (3:190-91; 2:164; 24:44)23 bearing on the point I have
already drawn your attention. In view of the great importance of the
subject I will add here a few more:

‘Verily, in the alternations of night and of day and in all that God
hath created in the Heavens and in the earth are signs to those who fear
Him’ (10:6).

‘And it is He Who hath ordained the night and the day to succeed one
another for those who desire to think on God or desire to be thankful’
(25:62).

‘Seest though not that God causeth the night to come in upon the day,
and the day to come in upon the night; and that He hath subjected the
sun and the moon to laws by which each speedeth along to an appointed
goal?’ (31:29).

‘It is of Him that the night returneth on the day, and that the day
returneth on the night’ (39:5).

‘And of Him is the change of the night and of the day’ (23:80).

There is another set of verses which, indicating the relativity of our
reckoning of time, suggests the possibility of unknown levels of
consciousness;24 but I will content myself with a discussion of the
familiar, yet deeply significant, aspect of experience alluded to in the
verses quoted above. Among the representatives of contemporary thought
Bergson is the only thinker who has made a keen study of the phenomenon
of duration in time. I will first briefly explain to you his view of
duration and then point out the inadequacy of his analysis in order
fully to bring out the implications of a completer view of the temporal
aspect of existence. The ontological problem before us is how to define
the ultimate nature of existence. That the universe persists in time is
not open to doubt. Yet, since it is external to us, it is possible to be
sceptical about its existence. In order completely to grasp the meaning
of this persistence in time we must be in a position to study some
privileged case of existence which is absolutely unquestionable and
gives us the further assurance of a direct vision of duration. Now my
perception of things that confront me is superficial and external; but
my perception of my own self is internal, intimate, and profound. It
follows, therefore, that conscious experience is that privileged case of
existence in which we are in absolute contact with Reality, and an
analysis of this privileged case is likely to throw a flood of light on
the ultimate meaning of existence. What do I find when I fix my gaze on
my own conscious experience? In the words of Bergson:

‘I pass from state to state. I am warm or cold. I am merry or sad, I
work or I do nothing, I look at what is around me or I think of
something else. Sensations, feelings, volitions, ideas - such are the
changes into which my existence is divided and which colour it in turns.
I change then, without ceasing.’25

Thus, there is nothing static in my inner life; all is a constant
mobility, an unceasing flux of states, a perpetual flow in which there
is no halt or resting place. Constant change, however, is unthinkable
without time. On the analogy of our inner experience, then, conscious
existence means life in time. A keener insight into the nature of
conscious experience, however, reveals that the self in its inner life
moves from the centre outwards. It has, so to speak, two sides which may
be described as appreciative and efficient. On its efficient side it
enters into relation with what we call the world of space. The efficient
self is the subject of associationist psychology - the practical self of
daily life in its dealing with the external order of things which
determine our passing states of consciousness and stamp on these states
their own spatial feature of mutual isolation. The self here lives
outside itself as it were, and, while retaining its unity as a totality,
discloses itself as nothing more than a series of specific and
consequently numberable states. The time in which the efficient self
lives is, therefore, the time of which we predicate long and short. It
is hardly distinguishable from space. We can conceive it only as a
straight line composed of spatial points which are external to one
another like so many stages in a journey. But time thus regarded is not
true time, according to Bergson. Existence in spatialized time is
spurious existence. A deeper analysis of conscious experience reveals to
us what I have called the appreciative side of the self. With our
absorption in the external order of things, necessitated by our present
situation, it is extremely difficult to catch a glimpse of the
appreciative self. In our constant pursuit after external things we
weave a kind of veil round the appreciative self which thus becomes
completely alien to us. It is only in the moments of profound
meditation, when the efficient self is in abeyance, that we sink into
our deeper self and reach the inner centre of experience. In the
life-process of this deeper ego the states of consciousness melt into
each other. The unity of the appreciative ego is like the unity of the
germ in which the experiences of its individual ancestors exist, not as
a plurality, but as a unity in which every experience permeates the
whole. There is no numerical distinctness of states in the totality of
the ego, the multiplicity of whose elements is, unlike that of the
efficient self, wholly qualitative. There is change and movement, but
change and movement are indivisible; their elements interpenetrate and
are wholly non-serial in character. It appears that the time of the
appreciative-self is a single ‘now’ which the efficient self, in its
traffic with the world of space, pulverizes into a series of ‘nows’ like
pearl beads in a thread. Here is, then, pure duration unadulterated by
space. The Qur’an with its characteristic simplicity alludes to the
serial and non-serial aspects of duration in the following verses:

‘And put thou thy trust in Him that liveth and dieth not, and celebrate
His praise Who in six days created the Heavens and the earth, and what
is between them, then mounted His Throne; the God of mercy’ (25:58-59).

‘All things We have created with a fixed destiny: Our command was but
one, swift as the twinkling of an eye’ (54:49-50).

If we look at the movement embodied in creation from the outside, that
is to say, if we apprehend it intellectually, it is a process lasting
through thousands of years; for one Divine day, in the terminology of
the Qur’an, as of the Old Testament, is equal to one thousand years.26
From another point of view, the process of creation, lasting through
thousands of years, is a single indivisible act, ‘swift as the twinkling
of an eye’. It is, however, impossible to express this inner experience
of pure duration in words, for language is shaped on the serial time of
our daily efficient self. Perhaps an illustration will further elucidate
the point. According to physical science, the cause of your sensation of
red is the rapidity of wave motion the frequency of which is 400
billions per second. If you could observe this tremendous frequency from
the outside, and count it at the rate of 2,000 per second, which is
supposed to be the limit of the perceptibility of light, it will take
you more than six thousand years to finish the enumeration.27 Yet in the
single momentary mental act of perception you hold together a frequency
of wave motion which is practically incalculable. That is how the mental
act transforms succession into duration. The appreciative self, then, is
more or less corrective of the efficient self, inasmuch as it
synthesizes all the ‘heres’ and ‘nows’ - the small changes of space and
time, indispensable to the efficient self - into the coherent wholeness
of personality. Pure time, then, as revealed by a deeper analysis of our
conscious experience, is not a string of separate, reversible instants;
it is an organic whole in which the past is not left behind, but is
moving along with, and operating in, the present. And the future is
given to it not as lying before, yet to be traversed; it is given only
in the sense that it is present in its nature as an open possibility.28
It is time regarded as an organic whole that the Qur’an describes
as*Taqdâr* or the destiny - a word which has been so much misunderstood
both in and outside the world of Islam. Destiny is time regarded as
prior to the disclosure of its possibilities. It is time freed from the
net of causal sequence - the diagrammatic character which the logical
understanding imposes on it. In one word, it is time as felt and not as
thought and calculated. If you ask me why the Emperor Huma«yën and Sh«h
Tahm«sp of Persia were contemporaries, I can give you no causal
explanation. The only answer that can possibly be given is that the
nature of Reality is such that among its infinite possibilities of
becoming, the two possibilities known as the lives of Hum«yën and Sh«h
Tahm«sp should realize themselves together. Time regarded as destiny
forms the very essence of things. As the Qur’an says: ‘God created all
things and assigned to each its destiny.’29 The destiny of a thing then
is not an unrelenting fate working from without like a task master; it
is the inward reach of a thing, its realizable possibilities which lie
within the depths of its nature, and serially actualize themselves
without any feeling of external compulsion. Thus the organic wholeness
of duration does not mean that full-fledged events are lying, as it
were, in the womb of Reality, and drop one by one like the grains of
sand from the hour-glass. If time is real, and not a mere repetition of
homogeneous moments which make conscious experience a delusion, then
every moment in the life of Reality is original, giving birth to what is
absolutely novel and unforeseeable. ‘Everyday doth some new work employ
Him’,30 says the Qur’an. To exist in real time is not to be bound by the
fetters of serial time, but to create it from moment to moment and to be
absolutely free and original in creation. In fact, all creative activity
is free activity. Creation is opposed to repetition which is a
characteristic of mechanical action. That is why it is impossible to
explain the creative activity of life in terms of mechanism. Science
seeks to establish uniformities of experience, i.e. the laws of
mechanical repetition. Life with its intense feeling of spontaneity
constitutes a centre of indetermination, and thus falls outside the
domain of necessity. Hence science cannot comprehend life. The biologist
who seeks a mechanical explanation of life is led to do so because he
confines his study to the lower forms of life whose behaviour discloses
resemblances to mechanical action. If he studies life as manifested in
himself, i.e. his own mind freely choosing, rejecting, reflecting,
surveying the past and the present, and dynamically imagining the
future, he is sure to be convinced of the inadequacy of his mechanical
concepts.

On the analogy of our conscious experience, then, the universe is a free
creative movement. But how can we conceive a movement independent of a
concrete thing that moves? The answer is that the notion of ‘things’ is
derivative. We can derive ‘things’ from movement; we cannot derive
movement from immobile things. If, for instance, we suppose material
atoms, such as the atoms of Democritus, to be the original Reality, we
must import movement into them from the outside as something alien to
their nature. Whereas if we take movement as original, static things may
be derived from it. In fact, physical science has reduced all things to
movement. The essential nature of the atom in modern science is
electricity and not something electrified. Apart from this, things are
not given in immediate experience as things already possessing definite
contours, for immediate experience is a continuity without any
distinctions in it. What we call things are events in the continuity of
Nature which thought spatializes and thus regards as mutually isolated
for purposes of action. The universe which seems to us to be a
collection of things is not a solid stuff occupying a void. It is not a
thing but an act. The nature of thought according to Bergson is serial;
it cannot deal with movement, except by viewing it as a series of
stationary points. It is, therefore, the operation of thought, working
with static concepts, that gives the appearance of a series of
immobilities to what is essentially dynamic in its nature. The
co-existence and succession of these immobilities is the source of what
we call space and time.

According to Bergson, then, Reality is a free unpredictable, creative,
vital impetus of the nature of volition which thought spatializes and
views as a plurality of ‘things’. A full criticism of this view cannot
be undertaken here. Suffice it to say that the vitalism of Bergson ends
in an insurmountable dualism of will and thought. This is really due to
the partial view of intelligence that he takes. Intelligence, according
to him, is a spatializing activity; it is shaped on matter alone, and
has only mechanical categories at its disposal. But, as I pointed out in
my first lecture, thought has a deeper movement also.31 While it appears
to break up Reality into static fragments, its real function is to
synthesize the elements of experience by employing categories suitable
to the various levels which experience presents. It is as much organic
as life. The movement of life, as an organic growth, involves a
progressive synthesis of its various stages. Without this synthesis it
will cease to be organic growth. It is determined by ends, and the
presence of ends means that it is permeated by intelligence. Nor is the
activity of intelligence possible without the presence of ends. In
conscious experience life and thought permeate each other. They form a
unity. Thought, therefore, in its true nature, is identical with life.
Again, in Bergson’s view the forward rush of the vital impulse in its
creative freedom is unilluminated by the light of an immediate or a
remote purpose. It is not aiming at a result; it is wholly arbitrary,
undirected, chaotic, and unforeseeable in its behaviour. It is mainly
here that Bergson’s analysis of our conscious experience reveals its
inadequacy. He regards conscious experience as the past moving along
with and operating in the present. He ignores that the unity of
consciousness has a forward looking aspect also. Life is only a series
of acts of attention, and an act of attention is inexplicable without
reference to a purpose, conscious or unconscious. Even our acts of
perception are determined by our immediate interests and purposes. The
Persian poet ‘urfâ’ has given a beautiful expression to this aspect of
human perception. He says:32

‘If your heart is not deceived by the mirage, be not proud of the
sharpness of your understanding;

for your freedom from this optical illusion is due to your imperfect
thirst.’

The poet means to say that if you had a vehement desire for drink, the
sands of the desert would have given you the impression of a lake. Your
freedom from the illusion is due to the absence of a keen desire for
water. You have perceived the thing as it is because you were not
interested in perceiving it as it is not. Thus ends and purposes,
whether they exist as conscious or subconscious tendencies, form the
warp and woof of our conscious experience. And the notion of purpose
cannot be understood except in reference to the future. The past, no
doubt, abides and operates in the present; but this operation of the
past in the present is not the whole of consciousness. The element of
purpose discloses a kind of forward look in consciousness. Purposes not
only colour our present states of consciousness, but also reveal its
future direction. In fact, they constitute the forward push of our life,
and thus in a way anticipate and influence the states that are yet to
be. To be determined by an end is to be determined by what ought to be.
Thus past and future both operate in the present state of consciousness,
and the future is not wholly undetermined as Bergson’s analysis of our
conscious experience shows. A state of attentive consciousness involves
both memory and imagination as operating factors. On the analogy of our
conscious experience, therefore, Reality is not a blind vital impulse
wholly unilluminated by idea. Its nature is through and through
teleological.

Bergson, however, denies the teleological character of Reality on the
ground that teleology makes time unreal. According to him ‘the portals
of the future must remain wide open to Reality’. Otherwise, it will not
be free and creative. No doubt, if teleology means the working out of a
plan in view of a predetermined end or goal, it does make time unreal.
It reduces the universe to a mere temporal reproduction of a
pre-existing eternal scheme or structure in which individual events have
already found their proper places, waiting, as it were, for their
respective turns to enter into the temporal sweep of history. All is
already given somewhere in eternity; the temporal order of events is
nothing more than a mere imitation of the eternal mould. Such a view is
hardly distinguishable from mechanism which we have already rejected.33
In fact, it is a kind of veiled materialism in which fate or destiny
takes the place of rigid determinism, leaving no scope for human or even
Divine freedom. The world regarded as a process realizing a preordained
goal is not a world of free, responsible moral agents; it is only a
stage on which puppets are made to move by a kind of pull from behind.
There is, however, another sense of teleology. From our conscious
experience we have seen that to live is to shape and change ends and
purposes and to be governed by them. Mental life is teleological in the
sense that, while there is no far-off distant goal towards which we are
moving, there is a progressive formation of fresh ends, purposes, and
ideal scales of value as the process of life grows and expands. We
become by ceasing to be what we are. Life is a passage through a series
of deaths. But there is a system in the continuity of this passage. Its
various stages, in spite of the apparently abrupt changes in our
evaluation of things, are organically related to one another. The
life-history of the individual is, on the whole, a unity and not a mere
series of mutually ill-adapted events. The world-process, or the
movement of the universe in time, is certainly devoid of purpose, if by
purpose we mean a foreseen end - a far-off fixed destination to which
the whole creation moves. To endow the world-process with purpose in
this sense is to rob it of its originality and its creative character.
Its ends are terminations of a career; they are ends to come and not
necessarily premeditated. A time-process cannot be conceived as a line
already drawn. It is a line in the drawing - an actualization of open
possibilities. It is purposive only in this sense that it is selective
in character, and brings itself to some sort of a present fulfilment by
actively preserving and supplementing the past. To my mind nothing is
more alien to the Quranic outlook than the idea that the universe is the
temporal working out of a preconceived plan. As I have already pointed
out, the universe, according to the Qur’an, is liable to increase.34 It
is a growing universe and not an already completed product which left
the hand of its maker ages ago, and is now lying stretched in space as a
dead mass of matter to which time does nothing, and consequently is
nothing.

We are now, I hope, in a position to see the meaning of the verse - ‘And
it is He Who hath ordained the night and the day to succeed one another
for those who desire to think on God or desire to be thankful.’35 A
critical interpretation of the sequence of time as revealed in ourselves
has led us to a notion of the Ultimate Reality as pure duration in which
thought, life, and purpose interpenetrate to form an organic unity. We
cannot conceive this unity except as the unity of a self - an
all-embracing concrete self - the ultimate source of all individual life
and thought. I venture to think that the error of Bergson consists in
regarding pure time as prior to self, to which alone pure duration is
predicable. Neither pure space nor pure time can hold together the
multiplicity of objects and events. It is the appreciative act of an
enduring self only which can seize the multiplicity of duration - broken
up into an infinity of instants - and transform it to the organic
wholeness of a synthesis. To exist in pure duration is to be a self, and
to be a self is to be able to say ‘I am’. Only that truly exists which
can say ‘I am’. It is the degree of the intuition of ‘I-amness’ that
determines the place of a thing in the scale of being. We too say ‘I
am’. But our ‘I-amness’ is dependent and arises out of the distinction
between the self and the not-self. The Ultimate Self, in the words of
the Qur’an, ‘can afford to dispense with all the worlds’.36 To Him the
not-self does not present itself as a confronting ‘other’, or else it
would have to be, like our finite self, in spatial relation with the
confronting ‘other’. What we call Nature or the not-self is only a
fleeting moment in the life of God. His ‘I-amness’ is independent,
elemental, absolute.37 Of such a self it is impossible for us to form an
adequate conception. As the Qur’an says, ‘Naught’ is like Him; yet ‘He
hears and sees’.38 Now a self is unthinkable without a character, i.e. a
uniform mode of behaviour. Nature, as we have seen, is not a mass of
pure materiality occupying a void. It is a structure of events, a
systematic mode of behaviour, and as such organic to the Ultimate Self.
Nature is to the Divine Self as character is to the human self. In the
picturesque phrase of the Qur’an it is the habit of Allah.39 From the
human point of view it is an interpretation which, in our present
situation, we put on the creative activity of the Absolute Ego. At a
particular moment in its forward movement it is finite; but since the
self to which it is organic is creative, it is liable to increase, and
is consequently boundless in the sense that no limit to its extension is
final. Its boundlessness is potential, not actual. Nature, then, must be
understood as a living, ever-growing organism whose growth has no final
external limits. Its only limit is internal, i.e. the immanent self
which animates and sustains the whole. As the Qur’an says: ‘And verily
unto thy Lord is the limit’ (53:42). Thus the view that we have taken
gives a fresh spiritual meaning to physical science. The knowledge of
Nature is the knowledge of God’s behaviour. In our observation of Nature
we are virtually seeking a kind of intimacy with the Absolute Ego; and
this is only another form of worship.40

The above discussion takes time as an essential element in the Ultimate
Reality. The next point before us, therefore, is to consider the late
Doctor McTaggart’s argument relating to the unreality of time.41 Time,
according to Doctor McTaggart, is unreal because every event is past,
present, and future. Queen Anne’s death, for instance, is past to us; it
was present to her contemporaries and future to William III. Thus the
event of Anne’s death combines characteristics which are incompatible
with each other. It is obvious that the argument proceeds on the
assumption that the serial nature of time is final. If we regard past,
present, and future as essential to time, then we picture time as a
straight line, part of which we have travelled and left behind, and part
lies yet untravelled before us. This is taking time, not as a living
creative moment, but as a static absolute, holding the ordered
multiplicity of fully-shaped cosmic events, revealed serially, like the
pictures of a film, to the outside observer. We can indeed say that
Queen Anne’s death was future to William III, if this event is regarded
as already fully shaped, and lying in the future, waiting for its
happening. But a future event, as Broad justly points out, cannot be
characterized as an event.42 Before the death of Anne the event of her
death did not exist at all. During Anne’s life the event of her death
existed only as an unrealized possibility in the nature of Reality which
included it as an event only when, in the course of its becoming, it
reached the point of the actual happening of that event. The answer to
Doctor McTaggart’s argument is that the future exists only as an open
possibility, and not as a reality. Nor can it be said that an event
combines incompatible characteristics when it is described both as past
and present. When an event X does happen it enters into an unalterable
relation with all the events that have happened before it. These
relations are not at all affected by the relations of X with other
events which happen after X by the further becoming of Reality. No true
or false proposition about these relations will ever become false or
true. Hence there is no logical difficulty in regarding an event as both
past and present. It must be confessed, however, that the point is not
free from difficulty and requires much further thinking. It is not easy
to solve the mystery of time.43 Augustine’s profound words are as true
today as they were when they were uttered: ‘If no one questions me of
time, I know it: if I would explain to a questioner I know it not.’44
Personally, I am inclined to think that time is an essential element in
Reality. But real time is not serial time to which the distinction of
past, present, and future is essential; it is pure duration, i.e. change
without succession, which McTaggart’s argument does not touch. Serial
time is pure duration pulverized by thought - a kind of device by which
Reality exposes its ceaseless creative activity to quantitative
measurement. It is in this sense that the Qur’an says: ‘And of Him is
the change of the night and of the day.’45

But the question you are likely to ask is - ‘Can change be predicated of
the Ultimate Ego?’ We, as human beings, are functionally related to an
independent world-process. The conditions of our life are mainly
external to us. The only kind of life known to us is desire, pursuit,
failure, or attainment - a continuous change from one situation to
another. From our point of view life is change, and change is
essentially imperfection. At the same time, since our conscious
experience is the only point of departure for all knowledge, we cannot
avoid the limitation of interpreting facts in the light of our own inner
experience. An anthropomorphic conception is especially unavoidable in
the apprehension of life; for life can be apprehended from within only.
As the poet N«sir ‘Alâ of Sirhind imagines the idol saying to the
Brahmin:

‘Thou hast made me after Thine own image! After all what hast Thou seen
beyond Thyself?’ 46

It was the fear of conceiving Divine life after the image of human life
that the Spanish Muslim theologian Ibn Àazm hesitated to predicate life
of God, and ingeniously suggested that God should be described as
living, not because He is living in the sense of our experience of life,
but only because He is so described in the Qur’an.47 Confining himself
to the surface of our conscious experience and ignoring its deeper
phases, Ibn Àazm must have taken life as a serial change, a succession
of attitudes towards an obstructing environment. Serial change is
obviously a mark of imperfection; and, if we confine ourselves to this
view of change, the difficulty of reconciling Divine perfection with
Divine life becomes insuperable. Ibn Àazm must have felt that the
perfection of God can be retained only at the cost of His life. There
is, however, a way out of the difficulty. The Absolute Ego, as we have
seen, is the whole of Reality. He is not so situated as to take a
perspective view of an alien universe; consequently, the phases of His
life are wholly determined from within. Change, therefore, in the sense
of a movement from an imperfect to a relatively perfect state, or vice
versa, is obviously inapplicable to His life. But change in this sense
is not the only possible form of life. A deeper insight into our
conscious experience shows that beneath the appearance of serial
duration there is true duration. The Ultimate Ego exists in pure
duration wherein change ceases to be a succession of varying attitudes,
and reveals its true character as continuous creation, ‘untouched by
weariness’48 and unseizable ‘by slumber or sleep’.49 To conceive the
Ultimate Ego as changeless in this sense of change is to conceive Him as
utter inaction, a motiveless, stagnant neutrality, an absolute nothing.
To the Creative Self change cannot mean imperfection. The perfection of
the Creative Self consists, not in a mechanistically conceived
immobility, as Aristotle might have led Ibn Àazm to think. It consists
in the vaster basis of His creative activity and the infinite scope of
His creative vision. God’s life is self-revelation, not the pursuit of
an ideal to be reached. The ‘not-yet’ of man does mean pursuit and may
mean failure; the ‘not-yet’ of God means unfailing realization of the
infinite creative possibilities of His being which retains its wholeness
throughout the entire process.

In the Endless, self-repeating

flows for evermore The Same.

Myriad arches, springing, meeting,

hold at rest the mighty frame.

Streams from all things love of living,

grandest star and humblest clod.

All the straining, all the striving

is eternal peace in God.50 (GOETHE)

Thus a comprehensive philosophical criticism of all the facts of
experience on its efficient as well as appreciative side brings us to
the conclusion that the Ultimate Reality is a rationally directed
creative life. To interpret this life as an ego is not to fashion God
after the image of man. It is only to accept the simple fact of
experience that life is not a formless fluid, but an organizing
principle of unity, a synthetic activity which holds together and
focalizes the dispersing dispositions of the living organism for a
constructive purpose. The operation of thought which is essentially
symbolic in character veils the true nature of life, and can picture it
only as a kind of universal current flowing through all things. The
result of an intellectual view of life, therefore, is necessarily
pantheistic. But we have a first-hand knowledge of the appreciative
aspect of life from within. Intuition reveals life as a centralizing
ego. This knowledge, however imperfect as giving us only a point of
departure, is a direct revelation of the ultimate nature of Reality.
Thus the facts of experience justify the inference that the ultimate
nature of Reality is spiritual, and must be conceived as an ego. But the
aspiration of religion soars higher than that of philosophy. Philosophy
is an intellectual view of things; and, as such, does not care to go
beyond a concept which can reduce all the rich variety of experience to
a system. It sees Reality from a distance as it were. Religion seeks a
closer contact with Reality. The one is theory; the other is living
experience, association, intimacy. In order to achieve this intimacy
thought must rise higher than itself, and find its fulfilment in an
attitude of mind which religion describes as prayer - one of the last
words on the lips of the Prophet of Islam.51


