Lecture III: The Conception of God and the Meaning of Prayer
============================================================

We have seen that the judgement based upon religious experience fully
satisfies the intellectual test. The more important regions of
experience, examined with an eye on a synthetic view, reveal, as the
ultimate ground of all experience, a rationally directed creative will
which we have found reasons to describe as an ego. In order to emphasize
the individuality of the Ultimate Ego the Qur’an gives Him the proper
name of Allah, and further defines Him as follows:

***‘Say: Allah is One:***

***All things depend on Him;***

***He begetteth not, and He is not begotten;***

***And there is none like unto Him’ (112:1-4).***

But it is hard to understand what exactly is an individual. As Bergson
has taught us in his Creative Evolution, individuality is a matter of
degrees and is not fully realized even in the case of the apparently
closed off unity of the human being.1 ‘In particular, it may be said of
individuality’, says Bergson:

‘that while the tendency to individuate is everywhere present in the
organized world, it is everywhere opposed by the tendency towards
reproduction. For the individuality to be perfect, it would be necessary
that no detached part of the organism could live separately. But then
reproduction would be impossible. For what is reproduction but the
building up of a new organism with a detached fragment of the old?
Individuality, therefore, harbours its own enemy at home.’2

In the light of this passage it is clear that the perfect individual,
closed off as an ego, peerless and unique, cannot be conceived as
harbouring its own enemy at home. It must be conceived as superior to
the antagonistic tendency of reproduction. This characteristic of the
perfect ego is one of the most essential elements in the Quranic
conception of God; and the Qur’an mentions it over and over again, not
so much with a view to attack the current Christian conception as to
accentuate its own view of a perfect individual.3 It may, however, be
said that the history of religious thought discloses various ways of
escape from an individualistic conception of the Ultimate Reality which
is conceived as some vague, vast, and pervasive cosmic element,4 such as
light. This is the view that Farnell has taken in his Gifford Lectures
on the Attributes of God. I agree that the history of religion reveals
modes of thought that tend towards pantheism; but I venture to think
that in so far as the Quranic identification of God with light is
concerned Farnell’s view is incorrect. The full text of the verse of
which he quotes a portion only is as follows:

‘God is the light of the Heavens and of the earth. His light is like a
niche in which is a lamp - the encased in a glass, - the glass, as it
were, a star’5 (24:35).

No doubt, the opening sentence of the verse gives the impression of an
escape from an individualistic conception of God. But when we follow the
metaphor of light in the rest of the verse, it gives just the opposite
impression. The development of the metaphor is meant rather to exclude
the suggestion of a formless cosmic element by centralizing the light in
a flame which is further individualized by its encasement in a glass
likened unto a well-defined star. Personally, I think the description of
God as light, in the revealed literature of Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam, must now be interpreted differently. The teaching of modern
physics is that the velocity of light cannot be exceeded and is the same
for all observers whatever their own system of movement. Thus, in the
world of change, light is the nearest approach to the Absolute. The
metaphor of light as applied to God, therefore, must, in view of modern
knowledge, be taken to suggest the Absoluteness of God and not His
Omnipresence which easily lends itself to a pantheistic interpretation.

There is, however, one question which will be raised in this connexion.
Does not individuality imply finitude? If God is an ego and as such an
individual, how can we conceive Him as infinite? The answer to this
question is that God cannot be conceived as infinite in the sense of
spatial infinity. In matters of spiritual valuation mere immensity
counts for nothing. Moreover, as we have seen before, temporal and
spatial infinities are not absolute. Modern science regards Nature not
as something static, situated in an infinite void, but a structure of
interrelated events out of whose mutual relations arise the concepts of
space and time. And this is only another way of saying that space and
time are interpretations which thought puts upon the creative activity
of the Ultimate Ego. Space and time are possibilities of the Ego, only
partially realized in the shape of our mathematical space and time.
Beyond Him and apart from His creative activity, there is neither time
nor space to close Him off in reference to other egos. The Ultimate Ego
is, therefore, neither infinite in the sense of spatial infinity nor
finite in the sense of the space-bound human ego whose body closes him
off in reference to other egos. The infinity of the Ultimate Ego
consists in the infinite inner possibilities of His creative activity of
which the universe, as known to us, is only a partial expression. In one
word God’s infinity is intensive, not extensive.6 It involves an
infinite series, but is not that series.

The other important elements in the Quranic conception of God, from a
purely intellectual point of view, are Creativeness, Knowledge,
Omnipotence, and Eternity. I shall deal with them serially.

Finite minds regard nature as a confronting ‘other’ existing*per se* ,
which the mind knows but does not make. We are thus apt to regard the
act of creation as a specific past event, and the universe appears to us
as a manufactured article which has no organic relation to the life of
its maker, and of which the maker is nothing more than a mere spectator.
All the meaningless theological controversies about the idea of creation
arise from this narrow vision of the finite mind.7 Thus regarded the
universe is a mere accident in the life of God and might not have been
created. The real question which we are called upon to answer is this:
Does the universe confront God as His ‘other’, with space intervening
between Him and it? The answer is that, from the Divine point of view,
there is no creation in the sense of a specific event having a ‘before’
and an ‘after’. The universe cannot be regarded as an independent
reality standing in opposition to Him. This view of the matter will
reduce both God and the world to two separate entities confronting each
other in the empty receptacle of an infinite space. We have seen before
that space, time, and matter are interpretations which thought puts on
the free creative energy of God.8 They are not independent realities
existing per se, but only intellectual modes of apprehending the life of
God. The question of creation once arose among the disciples of the
well-known saint B«Yazâd of Bist«m. One of the disciples very pointedly
put the common-sense view saying: ‘There was a moment of time when God
existed and nothing else existed beside Him.’ The saint’s reply was
equally pointed. ‘It is just the same now’, said he, ‘as it was then.’
The world of matter, therefore, is not a stuff co-eternal with God,
operated upon by Him from a distance as it were. It is, in its real
nature, one continuous act which thought breaks up into a plurality of
mutually exclusive things. Professor Eddington has thrown further light
on this important point, and I take the liberty to quote from his book,
Space, Time and Gravitation:

‘We have a world of point-events with their primary interval-relations.
Out of these an unlimited number of more complicated relations and
qualities can be built up mathematically, describing various features of
the state of the world. These exist in nature in the same sense as an
unlimited number of walks exist on an open moor. But the existence is,
as it were, latent unless some one gives a significance to the walk by
following it; and in the same way the existence of any one of these
qualities of the world only acquires significance above its fellows if a
mind singles it out for recognition. Mind filters out matter from the
meaningless jumble of qualities, as the prism filters out the colours of
the rainbow from the chaotic pulsations of white light. Mind exalts the
permanent and ignores the transitory; and it appears from the
mathematical study of relations that the only way in which mind can
achieve her object is by picking out one particular quality as the
permanent substance of the perceptual world, partitioning a perceptual
time and space for it to be permanent in, and, as a necessary
consequence of this Hobson’s choice, the laws of gravitation and
mechanics and geometry have to be obeyed. Is it too much to say that the
mind’s search for permanence has created the world of physics?’9

The last sentence in this passage is one of the deepest things in
Professor Eddington’s book. The physicist has yet to discover by his own
methods that the passing show of the apparently permanent world of
physics which the mind has created in its search for permanence is
rooted in something more permanent, conceivable only as a self which
alone combines the opposite attributes of change and permanence, and can
thus be regarded as both constant and variable.

There is, however, one question which we must answer before we proceed
further. In what manner does the creative activity of God proceed to the
work of creation? The most orthodox and still popular school of Muslim
theology, I mean the Ash‘arite, hold that the creative method of Divine
energy is atomic; and they appear to have based their doctrine on the
following verse of the Qur’an:

‘And no one thing is here, but with Us are its store-houses; and We send
it not down but in fixed quantities’ (15:21).

The rise and growth of atomism in Islam - the first important indication
of an intellectual revolt against the Aristotelian idea of a fixed
universe - forms one of the most interesting chapters in the history of
Muslim thought. The views of the school of BaÄrah were first shaped by
AbëH«shim10 (A.D. 933) and those of the school of Baghdad by that most
exact and daring theological thinker, AbëBakr B«qil«nâ11 (A.D.1013).
Later in the beginning of the thirteenth century we find a thoroughly
systematic description in a book called the Guide of the Perplexed by
Moses Maimonides- a Jewish theologian who was educated in the Muslim
universities of Spain.12 A French translation of this book was made by
Munk in 1866, and recently Professor Macdonald of America has given an
excellent account of its contents in the*Isis* from which Dr. Zwemer has
reprinted it in*The Moslem World* of January 1928.13 Professor
Macdonald, however, has made no attempt to discover the psychological
forces that determined the growth of atomistic kal«m in Islam. He admits
that there is nothing like the atomism of Islam in Greek thought, but,
unwilling as he is to give any credit for original thought to Muslim
thinkers,14 and finding a surface resemblance between the Islamic theory
and the views of a certain sect of Buddhism, he jumps to the conclusion
that the origin of the theory is due to Buddhistic influences on the
thought of Islam.15 Unfortunately, a full discussion of the sources of
this purely speculative theory is not possible in this lecture. I
propose only to give you some of its more salient features, indicating
at the same time the lines on which the work of reconstruction in the
light of modern physics ought, in my opinion, to proceed.

According to the Ash‘arite school of thinkers, then, the world is
compounded of what they call*jaw«hir-* infinitely small parts or atoms
which cannot be further divided. Since the creative activity of God is
ceaseless the number of the atoms cannot be finite. Fresh atoms are
coming into being every moment, and the universe is therefore constantly
growing. As the Qur’an says: ‘God adds to His creation what He wills.’16
The essence of the atom is independent of its existence. This means that
existence is a quality imposed on the atom by God. Before receiving this
quality the atom lies dormant, as it were, in the creative energy of
God, and its existence means nothing more than Divine energy become
visible. The atom in its essence, therefore, has no magnitude; it has
its position which does not involve space. It is by their aggregation
that atoms become extended and generate space.17 Ibn Àazm, the critic of
atomism, acutely remarks that the language of the Qur’an makes no
difference in the act of creation and the thing created. What we call a
thing, then, is in its essential nature an aggregation of atomic acts.
Of the concept of ‘atomic act’, however, it is difficult to form a
mental picture. Modern physics too conceives as action the actual atom
of a certain physical quantity. But, as Professor Eddington has pointed
out, the precise formulation of the Theory of Quanta of action has not
been possible so far; though it is vaguely believed that the atomicity
of action is the general law and that the appearance of electrons is in
some way dependent on it.18

Again we have seen that each atom occupies a position which does not
involve space. That being so, what is the nature of motion which we
cannot conceive except as the atom’s passage through space? Since the
Ash‘arite regarded space as generated by the aggregation of atoms, they
could not explain movement as a body’s passage through all the points of
space intervening between the point of its start and destination. Such
an explanation must necessarily assume the existence of void as an
independent reality. In order, therefore, to get over the difficulty of
empty space, Naïï«m resorted to the notion of*ñafrah* or jump; and
imagined the moving body, not as passing through all the discrete
positions in space, but as jumping over the void between one position
and another. Thus, according to him, a quick motion and a slow motion
possess the same speed; but the latter has more points of rest.19 I
confess I do not quite understand this solution of the difficulty. It
may, however, be pointed out that modern atomism has found a similar
difficulty and a similar solution has been suggested. In view of the
experiments relating to Planck’s Theory of Quanta, we cannot imagine the
moving atom as continuously traversing its path in space. ‘One of the
most hopeful lines of explanation’, says Professor Whitehead in
his*Science and the Modern World* ,

‘is to assume that an electron does not continuously traverse its path
in space. The alternative notion as to its mode of existence is that it
appears at a series of discrete positions in space which it occupies for
successive durations of time. It is as though an automobile, moving at
the average rate of thirty miles an hour along a road, did not traverse
the road continuously, but appeared successively at the successive
milestones’ remaining for two minutes at each milestone.’20

Another feature of this theory of creation is the doctrine of accident,
on the perpetual creation of which depends the continuity of the atom as
an existent. If God ceases to create the accidents, the atom ceases to
exist as an atom.21 The atom possesses inseparable positive or negative
qualities. These exist in opposed couples, as life and death, motion and
rest, and possess practically no duration. Two propositions follow from
this: (i) Nothing has a stable nature. (ii) There is a single order of
atoms, i.e. what we call the soul is either a finer kind of matter, or
only an accident.

I am inclined to think that in view of the idea of continuous creation
which the Ash‘arite intended to establish there is an element of truth
in the first proposition. I have said before that in my opinion the
spirit of the Qur’an is on the whole anti-classical.22 I regard the
Ash‘arite thought on this point as a genuine effort to develop on the
basis of an Ultimate Will or Energy a theory of creation which, with all
its shortcomings, is far more true to the spirit of the Qur’an than the
Aristotelian idea of a fixed universe.23 The duty of the future
theologians of Islam is to reconstruct this purely speculative theory,
and to bring it into closer contact with modern science which appears to
be moving in the same direction.

The second proposition looks like pure materialism. It is my belief that
the Ash‘arite view that the*Nafs* is an accident is opposed to the real
trend of their own theory which makes the continuous existence of the
atom dependent on the continuous creation of accidents in it. It is
obvious that motion is inconceivable without time. And since time comes
from psychic life, the latter is more fundamental than motion. No
psychic life, no time: no time, no motion. Thus it is really what the
Ash‘arites call the accident which is responsible for the continuity of
the atom as such. The atom becomes or rather looks spatialized when it
receives the quality of existence. Regarded as a phase of Divine energy,
it is essentially spiritual. The*Nafs* is the pure act; the body is only
the act become visible and hence measurable. In fact the Ash‘arite
vaguely anticipated the modern notion of point-instant; but they failed
rightly to see the nature of the mutual relation between the point and
the instant. The instant is the more fundamental of the two; but the
point is inseparable from the instant as being a necessary mode of its
manifestation. The point is not a thing, it is only a sort of looking at
the instant. Rëmâ is far more true to the spirit of Islam than Ghaz«lâ
when he says:24

Reality is, therefore, essentially spirit. But, of course, there are
degrees of spirit. In the history of Muslim thought the idea of degrees
of Reality appears in the writings of Shih«buddân Suhrawardâ Maqtël. In
modern times we find it worked out on a much larger scale in Hegel and,
more recently, in the late Lord Haldane’s*Reign of Relativity* , which
he published shortly before his death.25 I have conceived the Ultimate
Reality as an Ego; and I must add now that from the Ultimate Ego only
egos proceed. The creative energy of the Ultimate Ego, in whom deed and
thought are identical, functions as ego-unities. The world, in all its
details, from the mechanical movement of what we call the atom of matter
to the free movement of thought in the human ego, is the self-revelation
of the ‘Great I am’.26 Every atom of Divine energy, however low in the
scale of existence, is an ego. But there are degrees in the expression
of egohood. Throughout the entire gamut of being runs the gradually
rising note of egohood until it reaches its perfection in man. That is
why the Qur’an declares the Ultimate Ego to be nearer to man than his
own neck-vein.27 Like pearls do we live and move and have our being in
the perpetual flow of Divine life.

Thus a criticism, inspired by the best traditions of Muslim thought,
tends to turn the Ash‘arite scheme of atomism into a spiritual
pluralism, the details of which will have to be worked out by the future
theologians of Islam. It may, however, be asked whether atomicity has a
real seat in the creative energy of God, or presents itself to us as
such only because of our finite mode of apprehension. From a purely
scientific point of view I cannot say what the final answer to this
question will be. From the psychological point of view one thing appears
to me to be certain. Only that is, strictly speaking, real which is
directly conscious of its own reality. The degree of reality varies with
the degree of the feeling of egohood. The nature of the ego is such
that, in spite of its capacity to respond to other egos, it is
self-centred and possesses a private circuit of individuality excluding
all egos other than itself.28 In this alone consists its reality as an
ego. Man, therefore, in whom egohood has reached its relative
perfection, occupies a genuine place in the heart of Divine creative
energy, and thus possesses a much higher degree of reality than things
around him. Of all the creations of God he alone is capable of
consciously participating in the creative life of his Maker.29 Endowed
with the power to imagine a better world, and to mould what is into what
ought to be, the ego in him, aspires, in the interests of an
increasingly unique and comprehensive individuality, to exploit all the
various environments on which he may be called upon to operate during
the course of an endless career. But I would ask you to wait for a
fuller treatment of this point till my lecture on the Immortality and
Freedom of the Ego. In the meantime, I want to say a few words about the
doctrine of atomic time which I think is the weakest part of the
Ash‘arite theory of creation. It is necessary to do so for a reasonable
view of the Divine attribute of Eternity.

The problem of time has always drawn the attention of Muslim thinkers
and mystics. This seems to be due partly to the fact that, according to
the Qur’an, the alternation of day and night is one of the greatest
signs of God, and partly to the Prophet’s identification of God
with*Dahr* (time) in a well-known tradition referred to before.30
Indeed, some of the greatest Muslim Sufis believed in the mystic
properties of the word*Dahr* . According to MuÁyuddân Ibn
al-‘Arabâ,*Dahr* is one of the beautiful names of God, and R«zâ tells us
in his commentary on the Qur’an that some of the Muslim saints had
taught him to repeat the word*Dahr, Daihur* , or*Daihar* . The Ash‘arite
theory of time is perhaps the first attempt in the history of Muslim
thought to understand it philosophically. Time, according to the
Ash‘arite, is a succession of individual ‘nows’. From this view it
obviously follows that between every two individual ‘nows’ or moments of
time, there is an unoccupied moment of time, that is to say, a void of
time. The absurdity of this conclusion is due to the fact that they
looked at the subject of their inquiry from a wholly objective point of
view. They took no lesson from the history of Greek thought, which had
adopted the same point of view and had reached no results. In our own
time Newton described time as ‘something which in itself and from its
own nature flows equally.’31 The metaphor of stream implied in this
description suggests serious objections to Newton’s equally objective
view of time. We cannot understand how a thing is affected on its
immersion in this stream, and how it differs from things that do not
participate in its flow. Nor can we form any idea of the beginning, the
end, and the boundaries of time if we try to understand it on the
analogy of a stream. Moreover, if flow, movement, or ‘passage’ is the
last word as to the nature of time, there must be another time to time
the movement of the first time, and another which times the second time,
and so on to infinity. Thus the notion of time as something wholly
objective is beset with difficulties. It must, however, be admitted that
the practical Arab mind could not regard time as something unreal like
the Greeks. Nor can it be denied that, even though we possess no
sense-organ to perceive time, it is a kind of flow and has, as such, a
genuine objective, that is to say, atomic aspect. In fact, the verdict
of modern science is exactly the same as that of the Ash‘arite; for
recent discoveries in physics regarding the nature of time assume the
discontinuity of matter. The following passage from Professor
Rougier’s*Philosophy and* *New Physics* is noteworthy in this connexion:

‘Contrary to the ancient adage, natura non facit saltus, it becomes
apparent that the universe varies by sudden jumps and not by
imperceptible degrees. A physical system is capable of only a finite
number of distinct states . . Since between two different and
immediately consecutive states the world remains motionless, time is
suspended, so that time itself is discontinuous: there is an atom of
time.’32

The point, however, is that the constructive endeavour of the Ash‘arite,
as of the moderns, was wholly lacking in psychological analysis, and the
result of this shortcoming was that they altogether failed to perceive
the subjective aspect of time. It is due to this failure that in their
theory the systems of material atoms and time-atoms lie apart, with no
organic relation between them. It is clear that if we look at time from
a purely objective point of view serious difficulties arise; for we
cannot apply atomic time to God and conceive Him as a life in the
making, as Professor Alexander appears to have done in his Lectures on
Space, Time, and Deity.33 Later Muslim theologians fully realized these
difficulties. Mull« Jal«luddân Daw«nâ in a passage of his*Zaur«* ’,
which reminds the modern student of Professor Royce’s view of time,
tells us that if we take time to be a kind of span which makes possible
the appearance of events as a moving procession and conceive this span
to be a unity, then we cannot but describe it as an original state of
Divine activity, encompassing all the succeeding states of that
activity. But the Mull« takes good care to add that a deeper insight
into the nature of succession reveals its relativity, so that it
disappears in the case of God to Whom all events are present in a single
act of perception. The Sufi poet ‘Ir«qâ34 has a similar way of looking
at the matter. He conceives infinite varieties of time, relative to the
varying grades of being, intervening between materiality and pure
spirituality. The time of gross bodies which arises from the revolution
of the heavens is divisible into past, present, and future; and its
nature is such that as long as one day does not pass away the succeeding
day does not come. The time of immaterial beings is also serial in
character, but its passage is such that a whole year in the time of
gross bodies is not more than a day in the time of an immaterial being.
Rising higher and higher in the scale of immaterial beings we reach
Divine time - time which is absolutely free from the quality of passage,
and consequently does not admit of divisibility, sequence, and change.
It is above eternity; it has neither beginning nor end. The eye of God
sees all the visibles, and His ear hears all the audibles in one
indivisible act of perception. The priority of God is not due to the
priority of time; on the other hand, the priority of time is due to
God’s priority.35 Thus Divine time is what the Qur’an describes as the
‘Mother of Books’36 in which the whole of history, freed from the net of
causal sequence, is gathered up in a single super-eternal ‘now’. Of all
the Muslim theologians, however, it is Fakhruddân R«zâ who appears to
have given his most serious attention to the problem of time. In his
"Eastern Discussions," R«zâ subjects to a searching examination all the
contemporary theories of time. He too is, in the main, objective in his
method and finds himself unable to reach any definite conclusions.
‘Until now,’ he says,

‘I have not been able to discover anything really true with regard to
the nature of time; and the main purpose of my book is to explain what
can possibly be said for or against each theory without any spirit of
partisanship, which I generally avoid, especially in connexion with the
problem of time.’37

The above discussion makes it perfectly clear that a purely objective
point of view is only partially helpful in our understanding of the
nature of time. The right course is a careful psychological analysis of
our conscious experience which alone reveals the true nature of time. I
suppose you remember the distinction that I drew in the two aspects of
the self, appreciative and efficient. The appreciative self lives in
pure duration, i.e. change without succession. The life of the self
consists in its movement from appreciation to efficiency, from intuition
to intellect, and atomic time is born out of this movement. Thus the
character of our conscious experience - our point of departure in all
knowledge - gives us a clue to the concept which reconciles the
opposition of permanence and change, of time regarded as an organic
whole or eternity, and time regarded as atomic. If then we accept the
guidance of our conscious experience, and conceive the life of the
all-inclusive Ego on the analogy of the finite ego, the time of the
Ultimate Ego is revealed as change without succession, i.e. an organic
whole which appears atomic because of the creative movement of the ego.
This is what Mâr D«m«d and Mull«B«qir mean when they say that time is
born with the act of creation by which the Ultimate Ego realizes and
measures, so to speak, the infinite wealth of His own undetermined
creative possibilities. On the one hand, therefore, the ego lives in
eternity, by which term I mean non-successional change; on the other, it
lives in serial time, which I conceive as organically related to
eternity in the sense that it is a measure of non-successional change.
In this sense alone it is possible to understand the Quranic verse: ‘To
God belongs the alternation of day and night.’38 But on this difficult
side of the problem I have said enough in my preceding lecture. It is
now time to pass on to the Divine attributes of Knowledge and
Omnipotence.

The word ‘knowledge’, as applied to the finite ego, always means
discursive knowledge - a temporal process which moves round a veritable
‘other’, supposed to exist*per se* and confronting the knowing ego. In
this sense knowledge, even if we extend it to the point of omniscience,
must always remain relative to its confronting ‘other’, and cannot,
therefore, be predicated of the Ultimate Ego who, being all-inclusive,
cannot be conceived as having a perspective like the finite ego. The
universe, as we have seen before, is not an ‘other’ existing*per se* in
opposition to God. It is only when we look at the act of creation as a
specific event in the life-history of God that the universe appears as
an independent ‘other’. From the standpoint of the all-inclusive Ego
there is no ‘other’. In Him thought and deed, the act of knowing and the
act of creating, are identical. It may be argued that the ego, whether
finite or infinite, is inconceivable without a confronting non-ego, and
if there is nothing outside the Ultimate Ego, the Ultimate Ego cannot be
conceived as an ego. The answer to this argument is that logical
negations are of no use in forming a positive concept which must be
based on the character of Reality as revealed in experience. Our
criticism of experience reveals the Ultimate Reality to be a rationally
directed life which, in view of our experience of life, cannot be
conceived except as an organic whole, a something closely knit together
and possessing a central point of reference.39 This being the character
of life, the ultimate life can be conceived only as an ego. Knowledge,
in the sense of discursive knowledge, however infinite, cannot,
therefore, be predicated of an ego who knows, and, at the same time,
forms the ground of the object known. Unfortunately, language does not
help us here. We possess no word to express the kind of knowledge which
is also creative of its object. The alternative concept of Divine
knowledge is omniscience in the sense of a single indivisible act of
perception which makes God immediately aware of the entire sweep of
history, regarded as an order of specific events, in an eternal ‘now’.
This is how Jal«luddân Daw«nâ, ‘Ir«qâ, and Professor Royce in our own
times conceived God’s knowledge.40 There is an element of truth in this
conception. But it suggests a closed universe, a fixed futurity, a
predetermined, unalterable order of specific events which, like a
superior fate, has once for all determined the directions of God’s
creative activity. In fact, Divine knowledge regarded as a kind of
passive omniscience is nothing more than the inert void of
pre-Einsteinian physics, which confers a semblance of unity on things by
holding them together, a sort of mirror passively reflecting the details
of an already finished structure of things which the finite
consciousness reflects in fragments only. Divine knowledge must be
conceived as a living creative activity to which the objects that appear
to exist in their own right are organically related. By conceiving God’s
knowledge as a kind of reflecting mirror, we no doubt save His
fore-knowledge of future events; but it is obvious that we do so at the
expense of His freedom. The future certainly pre-exists in the organic
whole of God’s creative life, but it pre-exists as an open possibility,
not as a fixed order of events with definite outlines. An illustration
will perhaps help us in understanding what I mean. Suppose, as sometimes
happens in the history of human thought, a fruitful idea with a great
inner wealth of applications emerges into the light of your
consciousness. You are immediately aware of the idea as a complex whole;
but the intellectual working out of its numerous bearings is a matter of
time. Intuitively all the possibilities of the idea are present in your
mind. If a specific possibility, as such, is not intellectually known to
you at a certain moment of time, it is not because your knowledge is
defective, but because there is yet no possibility to become known. The
idea reveals the possibilities of its application with advancing
experience, and sometimes it takes more than one generation of thinkers
before these possibilities are exhausted. Nor is it possible, on the
view of Divine knowledge as a kind of passive omniscience, to reach the
idea of a creator. If history is regarded merely as a gradually revealed
photo of a predetermined order of events, then there is no room in it
for novelty and initiation. Consequently, we can attach no meaning to
the word ‘creation’, which has a meaning for us only in view of our own
capacity for original action. The truth is that the whole theological
controversy relating to predestination is due to pure speculation with
no eye on the spontaneity of life, which is a fact of actual experience.
No doubt, the emergence of egos endowed with the power of spontaneous
and hence unforeseeable action is, in a sense, a limitation on the
freedom of the all-inclusive Ego. But this limitation is not externally
imposed. It is born out of His own creative freedom whereby He has
chosen finite egos to be participators of His life, power, and freedom.

But how, it may be asked, is it possible to reconcile limitation with
Omnipotence? The word ‘limitation’ need not frighten us. The Qur’an has
no liking for abstract universals. It always fixes its gaze on the
concrete which the theory of Relativity has only recently taught modern
philosophy to see. All activity, creational or otherwise, is a kind of
limitation without which it is impossible to conceive God as a concrete
operative Ego. Omnipotence, abstractly conceived, is merely a blind,
capricious power without limits. The Qur’an has a clear and definite
conception of Nature as a cosmos of mutually related forces.41 It,
therefore, views Divine omnipotence as intimately related to Divine
wisdom, and finds the infinite power of God revealed, not in the
arbitrary and the capricious, but in the recurrent, the regular, and the
orderly. At the same time, the Qur’an conceives God as ‘holding all
goodness in His hands’.42 If, then, the rationally directed Divine will
is good, a very serious problem arises. The course of evolution, as
revealed by modern science, involves almost universal suffering and
wrongdoing. No doubt, wrongdoing is confined to man only. But the fact
of pain is almost universal, thought it is equally true that men can
suffer and have suffered the most excruciating pain for the sake of what
they have believed to be good. Thus the two facts of moral and physical
evil stand out prominent in the life of Nature. Nor can the relativity
of evil and the presence of forces that tend to transmute it be a source
of consolation to us; for, in spite of all this relativity and
transmutation, there is something terribly positive about it. How is it,
then, possible to reconcile the goodness and omnipotence of God with the
immense volume of evil in His creation? This painful problem is really
the crux of Theism. No modern writer has put it more accurately than
Naumann in his*Briefe Ü ber Religion* . ‘We possess’, he says:

‘a knowledge of the world which teaches us a God of power and strength,
who sends out life and death as simultaneously as shadow and light, and
a revelation, a faith as to salvation which declares the same God to be
father. The following of the world-God produces the morality of the
struggle for existence, and the service of the Father of Jesus Christ
produces the morality of compassion. And yet they are not two gods, but
one God. Somehow or other, their arms intertwine. Only no mortal can say
where and how this occurs.’43

To the optimist Browning all is well with the world;44 to the pessimist
Schopenhauer the world is one perpetual winter wherein a blind will
expresses itself in an infinite variety of living things which bemoan
their emergence for a moment and then disappear for ever.45 The issue
thus raised between optimism and pessimism cannot be finally decided at
the present stage of our knowledge of the universe. Our intellectual
constitution is such that we can take only a piecemeal view of things.
We cannot understand the full import of the great cosmic forces which
work havoc, and at the same time sustain and amplify life. The teaching
of the Qur’an, which believes in the possibility of improvement in the
behaviour of man and his control over natural forces, is neither
optimism nor pessimism. It is meliorism, which recognizes a growing
universe and is animated by the hope of man’s eventual victory over
evil.

But the clue to a better understanding of our difficulty is given in the
legend relating to what is called the Fall of Man. In this legend the
Qur’an partly retains the ancient symbols, but the legend is materially
transformed with a view to put an entirely fresh meaning into it. The
Quranic method of complete or partial transformation of legends in order
to besoul them with new ideas, and thus to adapt them to the advancing
spirit of time, is an important point which has nearly always been
overlooked both by Muslim and non-Muslim students of Islam. The object
of the Qur’an in dealing with these legends is seldom historical; it
nearly always aims at giving them a universal moral or philosophical
import. And it achieves this object by omitting the names of persons and
localities which tend to limit the meaning of a legend by giving it the
colour of a specific historical event, and also by deleting details
which appear to belong to a different order of feeling. This is not an
uncommon method of dealing with legends. It is common in non-religious
literature. An instance in point is the legend of*Faust* ,46 to which
the touch of Goethe’s genius has given a wholly new meaning.

Turning to the legend of the Fall we find it in a variety of forms in
the literatures of the ancient world. It is, indeed, impossible to
demarcate the stages of its growth, and to set out clearly the various
human motives which must have worked in its slow transformation. But
confining ourselves to the Semitic form of the myth, it is highly
probable that it arose out of the primitive man’s desire to explain to
himself the infinite misery of his plight in an uncongenial environment,
which abounded in disease and death and obstructed him on all sides in
his endeavour to maintain himself. Having no control over the forces of
Nature, a pessimistic view of life was perfectly natural to him. Thus,
in an old Babylonian inscription, we find the serpent (phallic symbol),
the tree, and the woman offering an apple (symbol of virginity) to the
man. The meaning of the myth is clear - the fall of man from a supposed
state of bliss was due to the original sexual act of the human pair. The
way in which the Qur’an handles this legend becomes clear when we
compare it with the narration of the Book of Genesis.47 The remarkable
points of difference between the Quranic and the Biblical narrations
suggest unmistakably the purpose of the Quranic narration.

1. The Qur’an omits the serpent and the rib-story altogether. The former
omission is obviously meant to free the story from its phallic setting
and its original suggestion of a pessimistic view of life. The latter
omission is meant to suggest that the purpose of the Quranic narration
is not historical, as in the case of the Old Testament, which gives us
an account of the origin of the first human pair by way of a prelude to
the history of Israel. Indeed, in the verses which deal with the origin
of man as a living being, the Qur’an uses the words*Bashar* or*Ins«n* ,
not ÿdam, which it reserves for man in his capacity of God’s vicegerent
on earth.48 The purpose of the Qur’an is further secured by the omission
of proper names mentioned in the Biblical narration - Adam and Eve.49
The word Adam is retained and used more as a concept than as the name of
a concrete human individual. This use of the word is not without
authority in the Qur’an itself. The following verse is clear on the
point:

‘We created you; then fashioned you; then said We to the angels,
"prostrate yourself unto Adam" (7:11).

2. The Qur’an splits up the legend into two distinct episodes- the one
relating to what it describes simply as ‘the tree’50 and the other
relating to the ‘tree of eternity’ and the ‘kingdom that faileth not’.51
The first episode is mentioned in the 7th and the second in the 20th
Sërah of the Qur’an. According to the Qur’an, Adam and his wife, led
astray by Satan whose function is to create doubts in the minds of men,
tasted the fruit of both the trees, whereas according to the Old
Testament man was driven out of the Garden of Eden immediately after his
first act of disobedience, and God placed, at the eastern side of the
garden, angels and a flaming sword, turning on all sides, to keep the
way to the tree of life.52

3. The Old Testament curses the earth for Adam’s act of disobedience;53
the Qur’an declares the earth to be the ‘dwelling place’ of man and a
‘source of profit’ to him54 for the possession of which he ought to be
grateful to God. ‘And We have established you on the earth and given you
therein the supports of life. How little do ye give thanks!’ (7:10).55
Nor is there any reason to suppose that the word*Jannat* (Garden) as
used here means the supersensual paradise from which man is supposed to
have fallen on this earth. According to the Qur’an, man is not a
stranger on this earth. ‘And We have caused you to grow from the earth’,
says the Qur’an.56 The*Jannat* , mentioned in the legend, cannot mean
the eternal abode of the righteous. In the sense of the eternal abode of
the righteous,*Jannat* is described by the Qur’an to be the place
‘wherein the righteous will pass to one another the cup which shall
engender no light discourse, no motive to sin’.57 It is further
described to be the place ‘wherein no weariness shall reach the
righteous, nor forth from it shall they be cast’.58 In the*Jannat*
mentioned in the legend, however, the very first event that took place
was man’s sin of disobedience followed by his expulsion. In fact, the
Qur’an itself explains the meaning of the word as used in its own
narration. In the second episode of the legend the garden is described
as a place ‘where there is neither hunger, nor thirst, neither heat nor
nakedness’.59 I am, therefore, inclined to think that the*Jannat* in the
Quranic narration is the conception of a primitive state in which man is
practically unrelated to his environment and consequently does not feel
the sting of human wants the birth of which alone marks the beginning of
human culture.

Thus we see that the Quranic legend of the Fall has nothing to do with
the first appearance of man on this planet. Its purpose is rather to
indicate man’s rise from a primitive state of instinctive appetite to
the conscious possession of a free self, capable of doubt and
disobedience. The Fall does not mean any moral depravity; it is man’s
transition from simple consciousness to the first flash of
self-consciousness, a kind of waking from the dream of nature with a
throb of personal causality in one’s own being. Nor does the Qur’an
regard the earth as a torture-hall where an elementally wicked humanity
is imprisoned for an original act of sin. Man’s first act of
disobedience was also his first act of free choice; and that is why,
according to the Quranic narration, Adam’s first transgression was
forgiven.60 Now goodness is not a matter of compulsion; it is the self’s
free surrender to the moral ideal and arises out of a willing
co-operation of free egos. A being whose movements are wholly determined
like a machine cannot produce goodness. Freedom is thus a condition of
goodness. But to permit the emergence of a finite ego who has the power
to choose, after considering the relative values of several courses of
action open to him, is really to take a great risk; for the freedom to
choose good involves also the freedom to choose what is the opposite of
good. That God has taken this risk shows His immense faith in man; it is
for man now to justify this faith. Perhaps such a risk alone makes it
possible to test and develop the potentialities of a being who was
created of the ‘goodliest fabric’ and then ‘brought down to be the
lowest of the low’.61 As the Qur’an says: ‘And for trial will We test
you with evil and with good’ (21:35).62 Good and evil, therefore, though
opposites, must fall within the same whole. There is no such thing as an
isolated fact; for facts are systematic wholes the elements of which
must be understood by mutual reference. Logical judgement separates the
elements of a fact only to reveal their interdependence.

Further, it is the nature of the self to maintain itself as a self. For
this purpose it seeks knowledge, self-multiplication, and power, or, in
the words of the Qur’an, ‘the kingdom that never faileth’. The first
episode in the Quranic legend relates to man’s desire for knowledge, the
second to his desire for self-multiplication and power. In connexion
with the first episode it is necessary to point out two things. Firstly,
the episode is mentioned immediately after the verses describing Adam’s
superiority over the angels in remembering and reproducing the names of
things.63 The purpose of these verses, as I have shown before, is to
bring out the conceptual character of human knowledge.64 Secondly,
Madame Blavatsky65 who possessed a remarkable knowledge of ancient
symbolism, tells us in her book, called*Secret Doctrine* , that with the
ancients the tree was a cryptic symbol for occult knowledge. Adam was
forbidden to taste the fruit of this tree obviously because his finitude
as a self, his sense-equipment, and his intellectual faculties were, on
the whole, attuned to a different type of knowledge, i.e. the type of
knowledge which necessitates the toil of patient observation and admits
only of slow accumulation. Satan, however, persuaded him to eat the
forbidden fruit of occult knowledge and Adam yielded, not because he was
elementally wicked, but because being ‘hasty’ (‘ajël)66 by nature he
sought a short cut to knowledge. The only way to correct this tendency
was to place him in an environment which, however painful, was better
suited to the unfolding of his intellectual faculties. Thus Adam’s
insertion into a painful physical environment was not meant as a
punishment; it was meant rather to defeat the object of Satan who, as an
enemy of man, diplomatically tried to keep him ignorant of the joy of
perpetual growth and expansion. But the life of a finite ego in an
obstructing environment depends on the perpetual expansion of knowledge
based on actual experience. And the experience of a finite ego to whom
several possibilities are open expands only by method of trial and
error. Therefore, error which may be described as a kind of intellectual
evil is an indispensable factor in the building up of experience.

The second episode of the Quranic legend is as follows:

‘But Satan whispered him (Adam): said he, O Adam! shall I show thee the
tree of Eternity and the Kingdom that faileth not? And they both ate
thereof, and their nakedness appeared to them, and they began to sew of
the leaves of the garden to cover them, and Adam disobeyed his Lord, and
went astray. Afterwards his Lord chose him for Himself, and was turned
towards him, and guided him.’ (20:120-22).

The central idea here is to suggest life’s irresistible desire for a
lasting dominion, an infinite career as a concrete individual. As a
temporal being, fearing the termination of its career by death, the only
course open to it is to achieve a kind of collective immortality by
self-multiplication. The eating of the forbidden fruit of the tree of
eternity is life’s resort to sex-differentiation by which it multiplies
itself with a view to circumvent total extinction. It is as if life says
to death: ‘If you sweep away one generation of living things, I will
produce another’. The Qur’an rejects the phallic symbolism of ancient
art, but suggests the original sexual act by the birth of the sense of
shame disclosed in Adam’s anxiety to cover the nakedness of his body.
Now to live is to possess a definite outline, a concrete individuality.
It is in the concrete individuality, manifested in the countless
varieties of living forms that the Ultimate Ego reveals the infinite
wealth of His Being. Yet the emergence and multiplication of
individualities, each fixing its gaze on the revelation of its own
possibilities and seeking its own dominion, inevitably brings in its
wake the awful struggle of ages. ‘Descend ye as enemies of one another’,
says the Qur’an.67 This mutual conflict of opposing individualities is
the world-pain which both illuminates and darkens the temporal career of
life. In the case of man in whom individuality deepens into personality,
opening up possibilities of wrongdoing, the sense of the tragedy of life
becomes much more acute. But the acceptance of selfhood as a form of
life involves the acceptance of all the imperfections that flow from the
finitude of selfhood. The Qur’an represents man as having accepted at
his peril the trust of personality which the heavens, the earth, and the
mountains refused to bear:

‘Verily We proposed to the heavens and to the earth and to the mountains
to receive the "trust" but they refused the burden and they feared to
receive it. Man undertook to bear it, but hath proved unjust,
senseless!’ (33:72).

Shall we, then, say no or yes to the trust of personality with all its
attendant ills? True manhood, according to the Qur’an, consists in
‘patience under ills and hardships’.68 At the present stage of the
evolution of selfhood, however, we cannot understand the full import of
the discipline which the driving power of pain brings. Perhaps it
hardens the self against a possible dissolution. But in asking the above
question we are passing the boundaries of pure thought. This is the
point where faith in the eventual triumph of goodness emerges as a
religious doctrine. ‘God is equal to His purpose, but most men know it
not’ (12:21).

I have now explained to you how it is possible philosophically to
justify the Islamic conception of God. But as I have said before,
religious ambition soars higher than the ambition of philosophy.69
Religion is not satisfied with mere conception; it seeks a more intimate
knowledge of and association with the object of its pursuit. The agency
through which this association is achieved is the act of worship or
prayer ending in spiritual illumination. The act of worship, however,
affects different varieties of consciousness differently. In the case of
the prophetic consciousness it is in the main creative, i.e. it tends to
create a fresh ethical world wherein the Prophet, so to speak, applies
the pragmatic test to his revelations. I shall further develop this
point in my lecture on the meaning of Muslim Culture.70 In the case of
the mystic consciousness it is in the main cognitive. It is from this
cognitive point of view that I will try to discover the meaning of
prayer. And this point of view is perfectly justifiable in view of the
ultimate motive of prayer. I would draw your attention to the following
passage from the great American psychologist, Professor William James:

‘It seems to probable that in spite of all that "science" may do to the
contrary, men will continue to pray to the end of time, unless their
mental nature changes in a manner which nothing we know should lead us
to expect. The impulse to pray is a necessary consequence of the fact
that whilst the innermost of the empirical selves of a man is a Self of
the social sort, it yet can find its only adequate Socius [its "great
companion"] in an ideal world.

‘. . most men, either continually or occasionally, carry a reference to
it in their breast. The humblest outcast on this earth can feel himself
to be real and valid by means of this higher recognition. And, on the
other hand, for most of us, a world with no such inner refuge when the
outer social self failed and dropped from us would be the abyss of
horror. I say "for most of us", because it is probable that individuals
differ a good deal in the degree in which they are haunted by this sense
of an ideal spectator. It is a much more essential part of the
consciousness of some men than of others. Those who have the most of it
are possibly the most religious men. But I am sure that even those who
say they are altogether without it deceive themselves, and really have
it in some degree.’71

Thus you will see that, psychologically speaking, prayer is instinctive
in its origin. The act of prayer as aiming at knowledge resembles
reflection. Yet prayer at its highest is much more than abstract
reflection. Like reflection it too is a process of assimilation, but the
assimilative process in the case of prayer draws itself closely together
and thereby acquires a power unknown to pure thought. In thought the
mind observes and follows the working of Reality; in the act of prayer
it gives up its career as a seeker of slow-footed universality and rises
higher than thought to capture Reality itself with a view to become a
conscious participator in its life. There is nothing mystical about it.
Prayer as a means of spiritual illumination is a normal vital act by
which the little island of our personality suddenly discovers its
situation in a larger whole of life. Do not think I am talking of
auto-suggestion. Auto-suggestion has nothing to do with the opening up
of the sources of life that lie in the depths of the human ego. Unlike
spiritual illumination which brings fresh power by shaping human
personality, it leaves no permanent life-effects behind. Nor am I
speaking of some occult and special way of knowledge. All that I mean is
to fix your attention on a real human experience which has a history
behind it and a future before it. Mysticism has, no doubt, revealed
fresh regions of the self by making a special study of this experience.
Its literature is illuminating; yet its set phraseology shaped by the
thought-forms of a worn-out metaphysics has rather a deadening effect on
the modern mind. The quest after a nameless nothing, as disclosed in
Neo-Platonic mysticism - be it Christian or Muslim - cannot satisfy the
modern mind which, with its habits of concrete thinking, demands a
concrete living experience of God. And the history of the race shows
that the attitude of the mind embodied in the act of worship is a
condition for such an experience. In fact, prayer must be regarded as a
necessary complement to the intellectual activity of the observer of
Nature. The scientific observation of Nature keeps us in close contact
with the behaviour of Reality, and thus sharpens our inner perception
for a deeper vision of it. I cannot help quoting here a beautiful
passage from the mystic poet Rëmâ in which he describes the mystic quest
after Reality:72

The Sëfi’s book is not composed of ink and letters: it is not but a
heart white as snow.

The scholar’s possession is pen-marks. What is the Sëfi’s possession? -
foot-marks.

The Sëfi stalks the game like a hunter: he sees the musk-deer’s track
and follows the footprints.

For some while the track of the deer is the proper clue for him, but
afterwards it is the musk-gland of the deer that is his guide.

To go one stage guided by the scent of the musk-gland is better than a
hundred stages of following the track and roaming about. 73

The truth is that all search for knowledge is essentially a form of
prayer. The scientific observer of Nature is a kind of mystic seeker in
the act of prayer. Although at present he follows only the footprints of
the musk-deer, and thus modestly limits the method of his quest, his
thirst for knowledge is eventually sure to lead him to the point where
the scent of the musk-gland is a better guide than the footprints of the
deer. This alone will add to his power over Nature and give him that
vision of the total-infinite which philosophy seeks but cannot find.
Vision without power does bring moral elevation but cannot give a
lasting culture. Power without vision tends to become destructive and
inhuman. Both must combine for the spiritual expansion of humanity.

The real object of prayer, however, is better achieved when the act of
prayer becomes congregational. The spirit of all true prayer is social.
Even the hermit abandons the society of men in the hope of finding, in a
solitary abode, the fellowship of God. A congregation is an association
of men who, animated by the same aspiration, concentrate themselves on a
single object and open up their inner selves to the working of a single
impulse. It is a psychological truth that association multiplies the
normal man’s power of perception, deepens his emotion, and dynamizes his
will to a degree unknown to him in the privacy of his individuality.
Indeed, regarded as a psychological phenomenon, prayer is still a
mystery; for psychology has not yet discovered the laws relating to the
enhancement of human sensibility in a state of association. With Islam,
however, this socialization of spiritual illumination through
associative prayer is a special point of interest. As we pass from the
daily congregational prayer to the annual ceremony round the central
mosque of Mecca, you can easily see how the Islamic institution of
worship gradually enlarges the sphere of human association.

Prayer, then, whether individual or associative, is an expression of
man’s inner yearning for a response in the awful silence of the
universe. It is a unique process of discovery whereby the searching ego
affirms itself in the very moment of self-negation, and thus discovers
its own worth and justification as a dynamic factor in the life of the
universe. True to the psychology of mental attitude in prayer, the form
of worship in Islam symbolizes both affirmation and negation. Yet, in
view of the fact borne out by the experience of the race that prayer, as
an inner act, has found expression in a variety of forms, the Qur’an
says:

‘To every people have We appointed ways of worship which they observe.
Therefore let them not dispute this matter with thee, but bid them to
thy Lord for thou art on the right way: but if they debate with thee,
then say: God best knoweth what ye do! He will judge between

you on the Day of Resurrection, as to the matters wherein ye differ’
(22:67-69).

The form of prayer ought not to become a matter of dispute.74 Which side
you turn your face is certainly not essential to the spirit of prayer.
The Qur’an is perfectly clear on this point:

‘The East and West is God’s: therefore whichever way ye turn, there is
the face of God’ (2:115).

‘There is no piety in turning your faces towards the East or the West,
but he is pious who believeth in God, and the Last Day, and the angels,
and the scriptures, and the prophets; who for the love of God disburseth
his wealth to his kindred, and to the orphans, and the needy, and the
wayfarer, and those who ask, and for ransoming; who observeth prayer,
and payeth the legal alms, and who is of those who are faithful to their
engagements when they have engaged in them; and patient under ills and
hardships, in time of trouble: those are they who are just, and those
are they who fear the Lord’ (2:177).

Yet we cannot ignore the important consideration that the posture of the
body is a real factor in determining the attitude of the mind. The
choice of one particular direction in Islamic worship is meant to secure
the unity of feeling in the congregation, and its form in general
creates and fosters the sense of social equality inasmuch as it tends to
destroy the feeling of rank or race superiority in the worshippers. What
a tremendous spiritual revolution will take place, practically in no
time, if the proud aristocratic Brahmin of South India is daily made to
stand shoulder to shoulder with the untouchable! From the unity of the
all-inclusive Ego who creates and sustains all egos follows the
essential unity of all mankind.75 The division of mankind into races,
nations, and tribes, according to the Qur’an, is for purposes of
identification only.76 The Islamic form of association in prayer,
therefore, besides its cognitive value, is further indicative of the
aspiration to realize this essential unity of mankind as a fact in life
by demolishing all barriers which stand between man and man.


