Lecture V: The Spirit of Muslim Culture
=======================================

‘Muhammad of Arabia ascended the highest Heaven and returned. I swear
by God that if I had reached that point, I should never have returned.’1
These are the words of a great Muslim saint, ‘AbdulQuddës of Gangoh. In
the whole range of Sufi literature it will be probably difficult to find
words which, in a single sentence, disclose such an acute perception of
the psychological difference between the prophetic and the mystic types
of consciousness. The mystic does not wish to return from the repose of
‘unitary experience’; and even when he does return, as he must, his
return does not mean much for mankind at large. The prophet’s return is
creative. He returns to insert himself into the sweep of time with a
view to control the forces of history, and thereby to create a fresh
world of ideals. For the mystic the repose of ‘unitary experience’ is
something final; for the prophet it is the awakening, within him, of
world-shaking psychological forces, calculated to completely transform
the human world. The desire to see his religious experience transformed
into a living world-force is supreme in the prophet. Thus his return
amounts to a kind of pragmatic test of the value of his religious
experience. In its creative act the prophet’s will judges both itself
and the world of concrete fact in which it endeavours to objectify
itself. In penetrating the impervious material before him the prophet
discovers himself for himself, and unveils himself to the eye of
history. Another way of judging the value of a prophet’s religious
experience, therefore, would be to examine the type of manhood that he
has created, and the cultural world that has sprung out of the spirit of
his message. In this lecture I want to confine myself to the latter
alone. The idea is not to give you a description of the achievements of
Islam in the domain of knowledge. I want rather to fix your gaze on some
of the ruling concepts of the culture of Islam in order to gain an
insight into the process of ideation that underlies them, and thus to
catch a glimpse of the soul that found expression through them. Before,
however, I proceed to do so it is necessary to understand the cultural
value of a great idea in Islam - I mean the finality of the institution
of prophethood.2

A prophet may be defined as a type of mystic consciousness in which
‘unitary experience’ tends to overflow its boundaries, and seeks
opportunities of redirecting or refashioning the forces of collective
life. In his personality the finite centre of life sinks into his own
infinite depths only to spring up again, with fresh vigour, to destroy
the old, and to disclose the new directions of life. This contact with
the root of his own being is by no means peculiar to man. Indeed the way
in which the word WaÁâ (inspiration) is used in the Qur’an shows that
the Qur’an regards it as a universal property of life;3 though its
nature and character are different at different stages of the evolution
of life. The plant growing freely in space, the animal developing a new
organ to suit a new environment, and a human being receiving light from
the inner depths of life, are all cases of inspiration varying in
character according to the needs of the recipient, or the needs of the
species to which the recipient belongs. Now during the minority of
mankind psychic energy develops what I call prophetic consciousness - a
mode of economizing individual thought and choice by providing
ready-made judgements, choices, and ways of action. With the birth of
reason and critical faculty, however, life, in its own interest,
inhibits the formation and growth of non-rational modes of consciousness
through which psychic energy flowed at an earlier stage of human
evolution. Man is primarily governed by passion and instinct. Inductive
reason, which alone makes man master of his environment, is an
achievement; and when once born it must be reinforced by inhibiting the
growth of other modes of knowledge. There is no doubt that the ancient
world produced some great systems of philosophy at a time when man was
comparatively primitive and governed more or less by suggestion. But we
must not forget that this system-building in the ancient world was the
work of abstract thought which cannot go beyond the systematization of
vague religious beliefs and traditions, and gives us no hold on the
concrete situations of life.

Looking at the matter from this point of view, then, the Prophet of
Islam seems to stand between the ancient and the modern world. In so far
as the source of his revelation is concerned he belongs to the ancient
world; in so far as the spirit of his revelation is concerned he belongs
to the modern world. In him life discovers other sources of knowledge
suitable to its new direction. The birth of Islam, as I hope to be able
presently to prove to your satisfaction, is the birth of inductive
intellect. In Islam prophecy reaches its perfection in discovering the
need of its own abolition.4 This involves the keen perception that life
cannot for ever be kept in leading strings; that, in order to achieve
full self-consciousness, man must finally be thrown back on his own
resources. The abolition of priesthood and hereditary kingship in Islam,
the constant appeal to reason and experience in the Qur’an, and the
emphasis that it lays on Nature and History as sources of human
knowledge, are all different aspects of the same idea of finality. The
idea, however, does not mean that mystic experience, which qualitatively
does not differ from the experience of the prophet, has now ceased to
exist as a vital fact. Indeed the Qur’an regards both*Anfus* (self)
and*ÿf«q* (world) as sources of knowledge.5 God reveals His signs in
inner as well as outer experience, and it is the duty of man to judge
the knowledge-yielding capacity of all aspects of experience. The idea
of finality, therefore, should not be taken to suggest that the ultimate
fate of life is complete displacement of emotion by reason. Such a thing
is neither possible nor desirable. The intellectual value of the idea is
that it tends to create an independent critical attitude towards mystic
experience by generating the belief that all personal authority,
claiming a supernatural origin, has come to an end in the history of
man. This kind of belief is a psychological force which inhibits the
growth of such authority. The function of the idea is to open up fresh
vistas of knowledge in the domain of man’s inner experience. Just as the
first half of the formula of Islam6 has created and fostered the spirit
of a critical observation of man’s outer experience by divesting the
forces of nature of that Divine character with which earlier cultures
had clothed them. Mystic experience, then, however unusual and abnormal,
must now be regarded by a Muslim as a perfectly natural experience, open
to critical scrutiny like other aspects of human experience. This is
clear from the Prophet’s own attitude towards Ibn Âayy«d’s psychic
experiences.7 The function of Sufism in Islam has been to systematize
mystic experience; though it must be admitted that Ibn Khaldën was the
only Muslim who approached it in a thoroughly scientific spirit.8

But inner experience is only one source of human knowledge. According to
the Qur’an, there are two other sources of knowledge - Nature and
History; and it is in tapping these sources of knowledge that the spirit
of Islam is seen at its best. The Qur’an sees signs of the Ultimate
Reality in the ‘sun’, the ‘moon’, ‘the lengthening out of shadows’, ‘the
alternation of day and night’, ‘the variety of human colours and
tongues’,10 ‘the alternation of the days of success and reverse among
peoples’ - in fact in the whole of Nature as revealed to the
sense-perception of man. And the Muslim’s duty is to reflect on these
signs and not to pass by them ‘as if he is dead and blind’, for he ‘who
does not see these signs in this life will remain blind to the realities
of the life to come’.9 This appeal to the concrete combined with the
slow realization that, according to the teachings of the Qur’an, the
universe is dynamic in its origin, finite and capable of increase,
eventually brought Muslim thinkers into conflict with Greek thought
which, in the beginning of their intellectual career, they had studied
with so much enthusiasm. Not realizing that the spirit of the Qur’an was
essentially anti-classical, and putting full confidence in Greek
thinkers, their first impulse was to understand the Qur’an in the light
of Greek philosophy. In view of the concrete spirit of the Qur’an, and
the speculative nature of Greek philosophy which enjoyed theory and was
neglectful of fact, this attempt was foredoomed to failure. And it is
what follows their failure that brings out the real spirit of the
culture of Islam, and lays the foundation of modern culture in some of
its most important aspects.

This intellectual revolt against Greek philosophy manifests itself in
all departments of thought. I am afraid I am not competent enough to
deal with it as it discloses itself in Mathematics, Astronomy, and
Medicine. It is clearly visible in the metaphysical thought of the
Ash‘arite, but appears as a most well-defined phenomenon in the Muslim
criticism of Greek Logic. This was only natural; for dissatisfaction
with purely speculative philosophy means the search for a surer method
of knowledge. It was, I think, Naïï«m who first formulated the principle
of ‘doubt’ as the beginning of all knowledge. Ghazz«lâ further amplified
it in his ‘Revivification of the Sciences of Religion’,10 and prepared
the way for ‘Descartes’ Method’. But Ghazz«lâ remained on the whole a
follower of Aristotle in Logic. In his*Qist«s* he puts some of the
Quranic arguments in the form of Aristotelian figures,11 but forgets the
Quranic*Sërah* known as*Shu’ar«* ’ where the proposition that
retribution follows the gainsaying of prophets is established by the
method of simple enumeration of historical instances. It was Ishr«qâand
Ibn Taimâyyah who undertook a systematic refutation of Greek Logic.12
Abë Bakr R«zâ was perhaps the first to criticize Aristotle’s first
figure,13 and in our own times his objection, conceived in a thoroughly
inductive spirit, has been reformulated by John Stuart Mill. Ibn Àazm,
in his ‘Scope of Logic’,14 emphasizes sense-perception as a source of
knowledge; and Ibn Taimâyyah in his ‘Refutation of Logic’, shows that
induction is the only form of reliable argument. Thus arose the method
of observation and experiment. It was not a merely theoretical affair.
Al-Bârënâ’s discovery of what we call reaction-time and al-Kindâ’s
discovery that sensation is proportionate to the stimulus, are instances
of its application in psychology.15 It is a mistake to suppose that the
experimental method is a European discovery. Dü hring tells us that
Roger Bacon’s conceptions of science are more just and clear than those
of his celebrated namesake. And where did Roger Bacon receive his
scientific training? - In the Muslim universities of Spain. Indeed Part
V of his*Opus Majus* which is devoted to ‘Perspective’ is practically a
copy of Ibn Haitham’s*Optics* .16 Nor is the book, as a whole, lacking
in evidences of Ibn Hazm’s influence on its author.17 Europe has been
rather slow to recognize the Islamic origin of her scientific method.
But full recognition of the fact has at last come. Let me quote one or
two passages from Briffault’s*Making of Humanity* ,

‘. . it was under their successors at that Oxford school that Roger
Bacon learned Arabic and Arabic science. Neither Roger Bacon nor his
later namesake has any title to be credited with having introduced the
experimental method. Roger Bacon was no more than one of the apostles of
Muslim science and method to Christian Europe; and he never wearied of
declaring that a knowledge of Arabic and Arabian science was for his
contemporaries the only way to true knowledge. Discussions as to who was
the originator of the experimental method . are part of the colossal
misrepresentation of the origins of European civilization. The
experimental method of the Arabs was by Bacon’s time widespread and
eagerly cultivated throughout Europe’ (pp. 200-01). . .

‘Science is the most momentous contribution of Arab civilization to the
modern world, but its fruits were slow in ripening. Not until long after
Moorish culture had sunk back into darkness did the giant to which it
had given birth rise in his might. It was not science which brought
Europe back to life. Other and manifold influences from the civilization
of Islam communicated its first glow to European life’ (p. 202).

‘For although there is not a single aspect of European growth in which
the decisive influence of Islamic culture is not traceable, nowhere is
it so clear and momentous as in the genesis of that power which
constitutes the paramount distinctive force of the modern world, and the
supreme source of its victory - natural science and the scientific
spirit’ (p. 190).

‘The debt of our science to that of the Arabs does not consist in
startling discoveries or revolutionary theories; science owes a great
deal more to Arab culture, it owes its existence. The ancient world was,
as we saw, pre-scientific. The astronomy and mathematics of the Greek
were a foreign importation never thoroughly acclimatized in Greek
culture. The Greeks systematized, generalized, and theorized, but the
patient ways of investigation, the accumulation of positive knowledge,
the minute methods of science, detailed and prolonged observation,
experimental inquiry, were altogether alien to the Greek temperament.
Only in Hellenistic Alexandria was any approach to scientific work
conducted in the ancient classical world. What we call science arose in
Europe as a result of a new spirit of inquiry, of new methods of
investigation, of the method of experiment, observation, measurement, of
the development of mathematics in a form unknown to the Greeks. That
spirit and those methods were introduced into the European world by the
Arabs’ (p. 191).

The first important point to note about the spirit of Muslim culture
then is that, for purposes of knowledge, it fixes its gaze on the
concrete, the finite. It is further clear that the birth of the method
of observation and experiment in Islam was due not to a compromise with
Greek thought but to a prolonged intellectual warfare with it. In fact,
the influence of the Greeks who, as Briffault says, were interested
chiefly in theory, not in fact, tended rather to obscure the Muslims’
vision of the Qur’an, and for at least two centuries kept the practical
Arab temperament from asserting itself and coming to its own. I want,
therefore, definitely to eradicate the misunderstanding that Greek
thought, in any way, determined the character of Muslim culture. Part of
my argument you have seen; part you will see presently.

Knowledge must begin with the concrete. It is the intellectual capture
of and power over the concrete that makes it possible for the intellect
of man to pass beyond the concrete. As the Qur’an says:

‘O company of djinn and men, if you can overpass the bounds of the
heaven and the earth, then overpass them. But by power alone shall ye
overpass them’ (55:33).

But the universe, as a collection of finite things, presents itself as a
kind of island situated in a pure vacuity to which time, regarded as a
series of mutually exclusive moments, is nothing and does nothing. Such
a vision of the universe leads the reflecting mind nowhere. The thought
of a limit to perceptual space and time staggers the mind. The finite,
as such, is an idol obstructing the movement of the mind; or, in order
to overpass its bounds, the mind must overcome serial time and the pure
vacuity of perceptual space. ‘And verily towards thy God is the limit’,
says the Qur’an.18 This verse embodies one of the deepest thoughts in
the Qur’an; for it definitely suggests that the ultimate limit is to be
sought not in the direction of stars, but in an infinite cosmic life and
spirituality. Now the intellectual journey towards this ultimate limit
is long and arduous; and in this effort, too, the thought of Islam
appears to have moved in a direction entirely different to the Greeks.
The ideal of the Greeks, as Spengler tells us, was proportion, not
infinity. The physical presentness of the finite with its well-defined
limits alone absorbed the mind of the Greeks. In the history of Muslim
culture, on the other hand, we find that both in the realms of pure
intellect and religious psychology, by which term I mean higher Sufism,
the ideal revealed is the possession and enjoyment of the Infinite. In a
culture, with such an attitude, the problem of space and time becomes a
question of life and death. In one of these lectures I have already
given you some idea of the way in which the problem of time and space
presented itself to Muslim thinkers, especially the Ash‘arite. One
reason why the atomism of Democritus never became popular in the world
of Islam is that it involves the assumption of an absolute space. The
Ash‘arite were, therefore, driven to develop a different kind of
atomism, and tried to overcome the difficulties of perceptual space in a
manner similar to modern atomism. On the side of Mathematics it must be
remembered that since the days of Ptolemy (A.D. 87-165) till the time of
NaÄâr ñësâ (A.D. 120-74)nobody gave serious thought to the difficulties
of demonstrating the certitude of Euclid’s parallel postulate on the
basis of perceptual space.19 It was ñësâ who first disturbed the calm
which had prevailed in the world of Mathematics for a thousand years;
and in his effort to improve the postulate realized the necessity of
abandoning perceptual space. He thus furnished a basis, however slight,
for the hyperspace movement of our time.20 It was, however, al-Bârënâ
who, in his approach to the modern mathematical idea of function saw,
from a purely scientific point of view, the insufficiency of a static
view of the universe. This again is a clear departure from the Greek
view. The function-idea introduces the element of time in our
world-picture. It turns the fixed into the variable, and sees the
universe not as being but as becoming. Spengler thinks that the
mathematical idea of function is the symbol of the West of which ‘no
other culture gives even a hint’.21 In view of al-Bârënâ, generalizing
Newton’s formula of interpolation from trignometrical function to any
function whatever.22 Spengler’s claim has no foundation in fact. The
transformation of the Greek concept of number from pure magnitude to
pure relation really began with Khw«rizmâs movement from Arithmetic to
Algebra.23 al-Bârënâ took a definite step forward towards what Spengler
describes as chronological number which signifies the mind’s passage
from being to becoming. Indeed, more recent developments in European
mathematics tend rather to deprive time of its living historical
character, and to reduce it to a mere representation of space. That is
why Whitehead’s view of Relativity is likely to appeal to Muslim
students more than that of Einstein in whose theory time loses its
character of passage and mysteriously translates itself into utter
space.24a

Side by side with the progress of mathematical thought in Islam we find
the idea of evolution gradually shaping itself. It was Ja\`hiz who was
the first to note the changes in bird-life caused by migrations. Later
Ibn Maskawaih who was a contemporary of al-Bârënâ gave it the shape of a
more definite theory, and adopted it in his theological work -*al-Fauz
al-Asghar* . I reproduce here the substance of his evolutionary
hypothesis, not because of its scientific value, but because of the
light which it throws on the direction in which Muslim thought was
moving.

According to Ibn Maskawaih plant-life at the lowest stage of evolution
does not need any seed for its birth and growth. Nor does it perpetuate
its species by means of the seed. This kind of plant-life differs from
minerals only in some little power of movement which grows in higher
forms, and reveals itself further in that the plant spreads out its
branches, and perpetuates its species by means of the seed. The power of
movement gradually grows farther until we reach trees which possess a
trunk, leaves, and fruit. At a higher stage of evolution stand forms of
plant-life which need better soil and climate for their growth. The last
stage of development is reached in vine and date-palm which stand, as it
were, on the threshold of animal life. In the date-palm a clear
sex-distinction appears. Besides roots and fibres it develops something
which functions like the animal brain, on the integrity of which depends
the life of the date-palm. This is the highest stage in the development
of plant-life, and a prelude to animal life. The first forward step
towards animal life is freedom from earth-rootedness which is the germ
of conscious movement. This is the initial state of animality in which
the sense of touch is the first, and the sense of sight is the last to
appear. With the development of the senses of animal acquires freedom of
movement, as in the case of worms, reptiles, ants, and bees. Animality
reaches its perfection in the horse among quadrupeds and the falcon
among birds, and finally arrives at the frontier of humanity in the ape
which is just a degree below man in the scale of evolution. Further
evolution brings physiological changes with a growing power of
discrimination and spirituality until humanity passes from barbarism to
civilization.24b

But it is really religious psychology, as in ‘Ir«qâand Khw«jah Muhammad
P«rs«,25 which brings us much nearer to our modern ways of looking at
the problem of space and time. ‘Ir«qâ’s view of time-stratifications I
have given you before.26 I will now give you the substance of his view
of space.

According to ‘Ir«qâ the existence of some kind of space in relation to
God is clear from the following verses of the Qur’an:

‘Dost thou not see that God knoweth all that is in the heavens and all
that is in the earth? Three persons speak not privately together, but He
is their fourth; nor five, but He is their sixth; nor fewer nor more,
but wherever they be He is with them’ (58:7).

‘Ye shall not be employed in affairs, nor shall ye read a text out of
the Qur’an, nor shall ye do any work, but We will be witness over you
when you are engaged therein; and the weight of an atom on earth or in
heaven escapeth not thy Lord; nor is there aught27 that is less than
this or greater, but it is in the Perspicuous Book’ (10:61).

‘We created man, and We know what his soul whispereth to him, and We are
closer to him than his neck-vein’ (50:16).

But we must not forget that the words proximity, contact, and mutual
separation which apply to material bodies do not apply to God. Divine
life is in touch with the whole universe on the analogy of the soul’s
contact with the body.28 The soul is neither inside nor outside the
body; neither proximate to nor separate from it. Yet its contact with
every atom of the body is real, and it is impossible to conceive this
contact except by positing some kind of space which befits the
subtleness of the soul. The existence of space in relation to the life
of God, therefore, cannot be denied;29 only we should carefully define
the kind of space which may be predicated of the Absoluteness of God.
Now, there are three kinds of space - the space of material bodies, the
space of immaterial beings, and the space of God.30 The space of
material bodies is further divided into three kinds. First, the space of
gross bodies of which we predicate roominess. In this space movement
takes time, bodies occupy their respective places and resist
displacement. Secondly, the space of subtle bodies, e.g. air and sound.
In this space too bodies resist each other, and their movement is
measurable in terms of time which, however, appears to be different to
the time of gross bodies. The air in a tube must be displaced before
other air can enter into it; and the time of sound-waves is practically
nothing compared to the time of gross bodies. Thirdly, we have the space
of light. The light of the sun instantly reaches the remotest limits of
the earth. Thus in the velocity of light and sound time is reduced
almost to zero. It is, therefore, clear that the space of light is
different to the space of air and sound. There is, however, a more
effective argument than this. The light of a candle spreads in all
directions in a room without displacing the air in the room; and this
shows that the space of light is more subtle than the space of air which
has no entry into the space of light.31 In view of the close proximity
of these spaces, however, it is not possible to distinguish the one from
the other except by purely intellectual analysis and spiritual
experience. Again, in the hot water the two opposites - fire and water -
which appear to interpenetrate each other cannot, in view of their
respective natures, exist in the same space.32 The fact cannot be
explained except on the supposition that the spaces of the two
substances, though closely proximate to each other, are nevertheless
distinct. But while the element of distance is not entirely absent,
there is no possibility of mutual resistance in the space of light. The
light of a candle reaches up to a certain point only, and the lights of
a hundred candles intermingle in the same room without displacing one
another.

Having thus described the spaces of physical bodies possessing various
degrees of subtleness ‘Ir«qâ proceeds briefly to describe the main
varieties of space operated upon by the various classes of immaterial
beings, e.g. angels. The element of distance is not entirely absent from
these spaces; for immaterial beings, while they can easily pass through
stone walls, cannot altogether dispense with motion which, according to
‘Ir«qâ, is evidence of imperfection in spirituality.33 The highest point
in the scale of spatial freedom is reached by the human soul which, in
its unique essence, is neither at rest nor in motion.34 Thus passing
through the infinite varieties of space we reach the Divine space which
is absolutely free from all dimensions and constitutes the meeting point
of all infinities.35

From this summary of ‘Ir«qâ’s view you will see how a cultured Muslim
Sufi\`intellectually interpreted his spiritual experience of time and
space in an age which had no idea of the theories and concepts of modern
Mathematics and Physics. ‘Ir«qâ is really trying to reach the concept of
space as a dynamic appearance. His mind seems to be vaguely struggling
with the concept of space as an infinite continuum; yet he was unable to
see the full implications of his thought partly because he was not a
mathematician and partly because of his natural prejudice in favour of
the traditional Aristotelian idea of a fixed universe. Again, the
interpenetration of the super-spatial ‘here’ and super-eternal ‘now’ in
the Ultimate Reality suggests the modern notion of space-time which
Professor Alexander, in his lectures on ‘Space, Time, and Deity’,
regards as the matrix of all things.36 A keener insight into the nature
of time would have led ‘Ir«qâ to see that time is more fundamental of
the two; and that it is not a mere metaphor to say, as Professor
Alexander does say, that time is the mind of space.37 ‘Ir«qâ conceives
God’s relation to the universe on the analogy of the relation of the
human soul to the body;38 but, instead of philosophically reaching this
position through a criticism of the spatial and temporal aspects of
experience, he simply postulates it on the basis of his spiritual
experience. It is not sufficient merely to reduce space and time to a
vanishing point-instant. The philosophical path that leads to God as the
omnipsyche of the universe lies through the discovery of living thought
as the ultimate principle of space-time. ‘Ir«qâ’s mind, no doubt, moved
in the right direction, but his Aristotelian prejudices, coupled with a
lack of psychological analysis, blocked his progress. With his view that
Divine Time is utterly devoid of change39 - a view obviously based on an
inadequate analysis of conscious experience - it was not possible for
him to discover the relation between Divine Time and serial time, and to
reach, through this discovery, the essentially Islamic idea of
continuous creation which means a growing universe.

Thus all lines of Muslim thought converge on a dynamic conception of the
universe. This view is further reinforced by Ibn Maskawaih’s theory of
life as an evolutionary movement, and Ibn Khaldën’s view of history.
History or, in the language of the Qur’an, ‘the days of God’, is the
third source of human knowledge according to the Qur’an. It is one of
the most essential teachings of the Qur’an that nations are collectively
judged, and suffer for their misdeeds here and now.40 In order to
establish this proposition, the Qur’an constantly cites historical
instances, and urges upon the reader to reflect on the past and present
experience of mankind.

"Of old did We send Moses with Our signs, and said to him: ‘Bring forth
thy people from the darkness into the light, and remind them of the days
of God." Verily, in this are signs for every patient, grateful person’
(14:5).

‘And among those whom We had created are a people who guide others with
truth, and in accordance therewith act justly. But as for those who
treat Our signs as lies, We gradually ring them down by means of which
they know not; and though I lengthen their days, verily, My stratagem is
effectual’ (7:181-83).

‘Already, before your time, have precedents been made. Traverse the
Earth then, and see what hath been the end of those who falsify the
signs of God!’ (3:137).

‘If a wound hath befallen you, a wound like it hath already befallen
others; We alternate the days of successes and reverses among peoples’
(3:140).

‘Every nation hath its fixed period’ (7:34).41

The last verse is rather an instance of a more specific historical
generalization which, in its epigrammatic formulation, suggests the
possibility of a scientific treatment of the life of human societies
regarded as organisms. It is, therefore, a gross error to think that the
Qur’an has no germs of a historical doctrine. The truth is that the
whole spirit of the ‘Prolegomena’ of Ibn Khaldën appears to have been
mainly due to the inspiration which the author must have received from
the Qur’an. Even in his judgements of character he is, in no small
degree, indebted to the Qur’an. An instance in point is his long
paragraph devoted to an estimate of the character of the Arabs as a
people. The whole paragraph is a mere amplification of the following
verses of the Qur’an:

‘The Arabs of the desert are most stout in unbelief and dissimulation;
and likelier it is that they should be unaware of the laws which God
hath sent down to His Apostle; and God is Knowing, Wise.

‘Of the Arabs of the desert there are some who reckon what they expend
in the cause of God as tribute, and wait for some change of fortune to
befall you: a change for evil shall befall them! God is the Hearer, the
Knower’ (9:97-98).

However, the interest of the Qur’an in history, regarded as a source of
human knowledge, extends farther than mere indications of historical
generalizations. It has given us one of the most fundamental principles
of historical criticism: Since accuracy in recording facts which
constitute the material of history is an indispensable condition of
history as a science, and an accurate knowledge of facts ultimately
depends on those who report them, the very first principle of historical
criticism is that the reporter’s personal character is an important
factor in judging his testimony. The Qur’an says:

‘O believers! if any bad man comes to you with a report, clear it up at
once’ (49:6).

It is the application of the principle embodied in this verse to the
reporters of the Prophet’s traditions out of which were gradually
evolved the canons of historical criticism. The growth of historical
sense in Islam is a fascinating subject.42 The Quranic appeal to
experience, the necessity to ascertain the exact sayings of the Prophet,
and the desire to furnish permanent sources of inspiration to
posterity - all these forces contributed to produce such men as Ibn
Ish«q,43 ñabarâ,44 and Mas‘ëdâ.45 But history, as an art of firing the
reader’s imagination, is only a stage in the development of history as a
genuine science. The possibility of a scientific treatment of history
means a wider experience, a greater maturity of practical reason, and
finally a fuller realization of certain basic ideas regarding the nature
of life and time. These ideas are in the main two; and both form the
foundation of the Quranic teaching.

1. The Unity of Human Origin. ‘And We have created you all from one
breath of life’, says the Qur’an.46 But the perception of life as an
organic unity is a slow achievement, and depends for its growth on a
people’s entry into the main current of world-events. This opportunity
was brought to Islam by the rapid development of a vast empire. No
doubt, Christianity, long before Islam, brought the message of equality
to mankind; but Christian Rome did not rise to the full apprehension of
the idea of humanity as a single organism. As Flint rightly says, ‘No
Christian writer and still less, of course, any other in the Roman
Empire, can be credited with having had more than a general and abstract
conception of human unity.’ And since the days of Rome the idea does not
seem to have gained much in depth and rootage in Europe. On the other
hand, the growth of territorial nationalism, with its emphasis on what
is called national characteristics, has tended rather to kill the broad
human element in the art and literature of Europe. It was quite
otherwise with Islam. Here the idea was neither a concept of philosophy
nor a dream of poetry. As a social movement the aim of Islam was to make
the idea a living factor in the Muslim’s daily life, and thus silently
and imperceptibly to carry it towards fuller fruition.

2.*A* *Keen Sense of the Reality of Time, and the Concept of Life as a
Continuous Movement in Time* . It is this conception of life and time
which is the main point of interest in Ibn Khaldën’s view of history,
and which justifies Flint’s eulogy that ‘Plato, Aristotle, and Augustine
were not his peers, and all others were unworthy of being even mentioned
along with him’.47 From the remarks that I have made above I do not mean
to throw doubt on the originality of Ibn Khaldën. All that I mean to say
is that, considering the direction in which the culture of Islam had
unfolded itself, only a Muslim could have viewed history as a
continuous, collective movement, a real inevitable development in time.
The point of interest in this view of history is the way in which Ibn
Khaldën conceives the process of change. His conception is of infinite
importance because of the implication that history, as a continuous
movement in time, is a genuinely creative movement and not a movement
whose path is already determined. Ibn Khaldën was not a metaphysician.
Indeed he was hostile to Metaphysics.48 But in view of the nature of his
conception of time he may fairly be regarded as a forerunner of Bergson.
I have already discussed the intellectual antecedents of this conception
in the cultural history of Islam. The Quranic view of the ‘alternation
of day and night’49 as a symbol of the Ultimate Reality which ‘appears
in a fresh glory every moment’,50 the tendency in Muslim Metaphysics to
regard time as objective, Ibn Maskawaih’s view of life as an
evolutionary movement,51 and lastly al-Bârënâ’s definite approach to the
conception of Nature as a process of becoming52 - all this constituted
the intellectual inheritance of Ibn Khaldën. His chief merit lies in his
acute perception of, and systematic expression to, the spirit of the
cultural movement of which he was a most brilliant product. In the work
of this genius the anti-classical spirit of the Qur’an scores its final
victory over Greek thought; for with the Greeks time was either unreal,
as in Plato and Zeno, or moved in a circle, as in Heraclitus and the
Stoics.53 Whatever may be the criterion by which to judge the forward
steps of a creative movement, the movement itself, if conceived as
cyclic, ceases to be creative. Eternal recurrence is not eternal
creation; it is eternal repetition.

We are now in a position to see the true significance of the
intellectual revolt of Islam against Greek philosophy. The fact that
this revolt originated in a purely theological interest shows that the
anti-classical spirit of the Qur’an asserted itself in spite of those
who began with a desire to interpret Islam in the light of Greek
thought.

It now remains to eradicate a grave misunderstanding created by
Spengler’s widely read book,*The Decline of the West* . His two chapters
devoted to the problem of Arabian culture54 constitute a most important
contribution to the cultural history of Asia. They are, however, based
on a complete misconception of the nature of Islam as a religious
movement, and of the cultural activity which it initiated. Spengler’s
main thesis is that each culture is a specific organism, having no point
of contact with cultures that historically precede or follow it. Indeed,
according to him, each culture has its own peculiar way of looking at
things which is entirely inaccessible to men belonging to a different
culture. In his anxiety to prove this thesis he marshals an overwhelming
array of facts and interpretations to show that the spirit of European
culture is through and through anti-classical. And this anti-classical
spirit of European culture is entirely due to the specific genius of
Europe, and not to any inspiration she may have received from the
culture of Islam which, according to Spengler, is thoroughly ‘Magian’ in
spirit and character. Spengler’s view of the spirit of modern culture
is, in my opinion, perfectly correct. I have, however, tried to show in
these lectures that the anti-classical spirit of the modern world has
really arisen out of the revolt of Islam against Greek thought.55 It is
obvious that such a view cannot be acceptable to Spengler; for, if it is
possible to show that the anti-classical spirit of modern culture is due
to the inspiration which it received from the culture immediately
preceding it, the whole argument of Spengler regarding the complete
mutual independence of cultural growths would collapse. I am afraid
Spengler’s anxiety to establish this thesis has completely perverted his
vision of Islam as a cultural movement.

By the expression ‘Magian culture’ Spengler means the common culture
associated with what he calls ‘Magian group of religions’,56 i.e.
Judaism, ancient Chaldean religion, early Christianity, Zoroastrianism,
and Islam. That a Magian crust has grown over Islam, I do not deny.
Indeed my main purpose in these lectures has been to secure a vision of
the spirit of Islam as emancipated from its Magian overlayings which, in
my opinion, have misled Spengler. His ignorance of Muslim thought on the
problem of time, as well as of the way in which the ‘I’, as a free
centre of experience, has found expression in the religious experience
of Islam, is simply appalling.57 Instead of seeking light from the
history of Muslim thought and experience, he prefers to base his
judgement on vulgar beliefs as to the beginning and end of time. Just
imagine a man of overwhelming learning finding support for the supposed
fatalism of Islam in such Eastern expressions and proverbs as the ‘vault
of time’,58 and ‘everything has a time!’59 However, on the origin and
growth of the concept of time in Islam, and on the human ego as a free
power, I have said enough in these lectures. It is obvious that a full
examination of Spengler’s view of Islam, and of the culture that grew
out of it, will require a whole volume. In addition to what I have said
before, I shall offer here one more observation of a general nature.

‘The kernel of the prophetic teaching,’ says Spengler, ‘is already
Magian. There is one God - be He called*Yahweh* ,60 *Ahuramazda* ,
or*Marduk-Baal* - who is the principle of good, and all other deities
are either impotent or evil. To this doctrine there attached itself the
hope of a Messiah, very clear in Isaiah, but also bursting out
everywhere during the next centuries, under pressure of an inner
necessity. It is the basic idea of Magian religion, for it contains
implicitly the conception of the world-historical struggle between Good
and Evil, with the power of Evil prevailing in the middle period, and
the Good finally triumphant on the Day of Judgement.’60 If this view of
the prophetic teaching is meant to apply to Islam it is obviously a
misrepresentation. The point to note is that the Magian admitted the
existence of false gods; only they did not turn to worship them. Islam
denies the very existence of false gods. In this connexion Spengler
fails to appreciate the cultural value of the idea of the finality of
prophethood in Islam. No doubt, one important feature of Magian culture
is a perpetual attitude of expectation, a constant looking forward to
the coming of Zoroaster’s unborn sons, the Messiah, or the Paraclete of
the fourth gospel. I have already indicated the direction in which the
student of Islam should seek the cultural meaning of the doctrine of
finality in Islam. It may further be regarded as a psychological cure
for the Magian attitude of constant expectation which tends to give a
false view of history. Ibn Khaldën, seeing the spirit of his own view of
history, has fully criticized and, I believe, finally demolished the
alleged revelational basis in Islam of an idea similar, at least in its
psychological effects, to the original Magian idea which had reappeared
in Islam under the pressure of Magian thought.61


