Lecture VI: The Principle of Movement in the Structure of Islam
===============================================================

As a cultural movement Islam rejects the old static view of the
universe, and reaches a dynamic view. As an emotional system of
unification it recognizes the worth of the individual as such, and
rejects blood-relationship as a basis of human unity. Blood-relationship
is earth-rootedness. The search for a purely psychological foundation of
human unity becomes possible only with the perception that all human
life is spiritual in its origin.1 Such a perception is creative of fresh
loyalties without any ceremonial to keep them alive, and makes it
possible for man to emancipate himself from the earth. Christianity
which had originally appeared as a monastic order was tried by
Constantine as a system of unification.2 Its failure to work as such a
system drove the Emperor Julian3 to return to the old gods of Rome on
which he attempted to put philosophical interpretations. A modern
historian of civilization has thus depicted the state of the civilized
world about the time when Islam appeared on the stage of History:

It seemed then that the great civilization that it had taken four
thousand years to construct was on the verge of disintegration, and that
mankind was likely to return to that condition of barbarism where every
tribe and sect was against the next, and law and order were unknown .
The old tribal sanctions had lost their power. Hence the old imperial
methods would no longer operate. The new sanctions created by
Christianity were working division and destruction instead of unity and
order. It was a time fraught with tragedy. Civilization, like a gigantic
tree whose foliage had overarched the world and whose branches had borne
the golden fruits of art and science and literature, stood tottering,
its trunk no longer alive with the flowing sap of devotion and
reverence, but rotted to the core, riven by the storms of war, and held
together only by the cords of ancient customs and laws, that might snap
at any moment. Was there any emotional culture that could be brought in,
to gather mankind once more into unity and to save civilization? This
culture must be something of a new type, for the old sanctions and
ceremonials were dead, and to build up others of the same kind would be
the work of centuries.’4

The writer then proceeds to tell us that the world stood in need of a
new culture to take the place of the culture of the throne, and the
systems of unification which were based on blood-relationship. It is
amazing, he adds, that such a culture should have arisen from Arabia
just at the time when it was most needed. There is, however, nothing
amazing in the phenomenon. The world-life intuitively sees its own
needs, and at critical moments defines its own direction. This is what,
in the language of religion, we call prophetic revelation. It is only
natural that Islam should have flashed across the consciousness of a
simple people untouched by any of the ancient cultures, and occupying a
geographical position where three continents meet together. The new
culture finds the foundation of world-unity in the principle of
Tauhâd.’5 Islam, as a polity, is only a practical means of making this
principle a living factor in the intellectual and emotional life of
mankind. It demands loyalty to God, not to thrones. And since God is the
ultimate spiritual basis of all life, loyalty to God virtually amounts
to man’s loyalty to his own ideal nature. The ultimate spiritual basis
of all life, as conceived by Islam, is eternal and reveals itself in
variety and change. A society based on such a conception of Reality must
reconcile, in its life, the categories of permanence and change. It must
possess eternal principles to regulate its collective life, for the
eternal gives us a foothold in the world of perpetual change. But
eternal principles when they are understood to exclude all possibilities
of change which, according to the Qur’an, is one of the greatest ‘signs’
of God, tend to immobilize what is essentially mobile in its nature. The
failure of the Europe in political and social sciences illustrates the
former principle, the immobility of Islam during the last five hundred
years illustrates the latter. What then is the principle of movement in
the structure of Islam? This is known as*Ijtih«d* .

The word literally means to exert. In the terminology of Islamic law it
means to exert with a view to form an independent judgement on a legal
question. The idea, I believe, has its origin in a well-known verse of
the Qur’an - ‘And to those who exert We show Our path’.6 We find it more
definitely adumbrated in a tradition of the Holy Prophet. When Mu‘«dh
was appointed ruler of Yemen, the Prophet is reported to have asked him
as to how he would decide matters coming up before him. ‘I will judge
matters according to the Book of God,’ said Mu‘«dh. ‘But if the Book of
God contains nothing to guide you?’ ‘Then I will act on the precedents
of the Prophet of God.’ ‘But if the precedents fail?’ ‘Then I will exert
to form my own judgement.’7 The student of the history of Islam,
however, is well aware that with the political expansion of Islam
systematic legal thought became an absolute necessity, and our early
doctors of law, both of Arabian and non-Arabian descent, worked
ceaselessly until all the accumulated wealth of legal thought found a
final expression in our recognized schools of Law. These schools of Law
recognize three degrees of*Ijtih«d* : (1) complete authority in
legislation which is practically confined to be founders of the schools,
(2) relative authority which is to be exercised within the limits of a
particular school, and (3) special authority which relates to the
determining of the law applicable to a particular case left undetermined
by the founders.8 In this paper I am concerned with the first degree
of*Ijtih«d* only, i.e. complete authority in legislation. The
theoretical possibility of this degree of*Ijtih«d* is admitted by the
Sunni\`s, but in practice it has always been denied ever since the
establishment of the schools, inasmuch as the idea of complete*Ijtih«d*
is hedged round by conditions which are well-nigh impossible of
realization in a single individual. Such an attitude seems exceedingly
strange in a system of law based mainly on the groundwork provided by
the Qur’an which embodies an essentially dynamic outlook on life. It is,
therefore, necessary, before we proceed farther, to discover the cause
of this intellectual attitude which has reduced the Law of Islam
practically to a state of immobility. Some European writers think that
the stationary character of the Law of Islam is due to the influence of
the Turks. This is an entirely superficial view, for the legal schools
of Islam had been finally established long before the Turkish influence
began to work in the history of Islam. The real causes are, in my
opinion, as follows:

1. We are all familiar with the Rationalist movement which appeared in
the church of Islam during the early days of the Abbasids and the bitter
controversies which it raised. Take for instance the one important point
of controversy between the two camps - the conservative dogma of the
eternity of the Qur’an. The Rationalists denied it because they thought
that this was only another form of the Christian dogma of the eternity
of the word; on the other hand, the conservative thinkers whom the later
Abbasids, fearing the political implications of Rationalism, gave their
full support, thought that by denying the eternity of the Qur’an the
Rationalists were undermining the very foundations of Muslim society.9
Naïï«m, for instance, practically rejected the traditions, and openly
declared Abë Hurairah to be an untrustworthy reporter.10 Thus, partly
owing to a misunderstanding of the ultimate motives of Rationalism, and
partly owing to the unrestrained thought of particular Rationalists,
conservative thinkers regarded this movement as a force of
disintegration, and considered it a danger to the stability of Islam as
a social polity.11 Their main purpose, therefore, was to preserve the
social integrity of Islam, and to realize this the only course open to
them was to utilize the binding force of Sharâ‘ah, and to make the
structure of their legal system as rigorous as possible.

2. The rise and growth of ascetic Sufism, which gradually developed
under influences of a non-Islamic character, a purely speculative side,
is to a large extent responsible for this attitude. On its purely
religious side Sufism fostered a kind of revolt against the verbal
quibbles of our early doctors. The case of Sufy«n Thaurâ is an instance
in point. He was one of the acutest legal minds of his time, and was
nearly the founder of a school of law,12 but being also intensely
spiritual, the dry-as-dust subtleties of contemporary legists drove him
to ascetic Sufism. On its speculative side which developed later, Sufism
is a form of freethought and in alliance with Rationalism. The emphasis
that it laid on the distinction of*ï«hir* and*b«Çin* (Appearance and
Reality) created an attitude of indifference to all that applies to
Appearance and not to Reality.13

This spirit of total other-wordliness in later Sufism obscured men’s
vision of a very important aspect of Islam as a social polity, and,
offering the prospect of unrestrained thought on its speculative side,
it attracted and finally absorbed the best minds in Islam. The Muslim
state was thus left generally in the hands of intellectual mediocrities,
and the unthinking masses of Islam, having no personalities of a higher
calibre to guide them, found their security only in blindly following
the schools.

3. On the top of all this came the destruction of Baghdad - the centre
of Muslim intellectual life - in the middle of the thirteenth century.
This was indeed a great blow, and all the contemporary historians of the
invasion of Tartars describe the havoc of Baghdad with a half-suppressed
pessimism about the future of Islam. For fear of further disintegration,
which is only natural in such a period of political decay, the
conservative thinkers of Islam focused all their efforts on the one
point of preserving a uniform social life for the people by a jealous
exclusion of all innovations in the law of Sharâ‘ah as expounded by the
early doctors of Islam. Their leading idea was social order, and there
is no doubt that they were partly right, because organization does to a
certain extent counteract the forces of decay. But they did not see, and
our modern ‘Ulem« do not see, that the ultimate fate of a people does
not depend so much on organization as on the worth and power of
individual men. In an over-organized society the individual is
altogether crushed out of existence. He gains the whole wealth of social
thought around him and loses his own soul. Thus a false reverence for
past history and its artificial resurrection constitute no remedy for a
people’s decay. ‘The verdict of history’, as a modern writer has happily
put it, ‘is that worn-out ideas have never risen to power among a people
who have worn them out.’ The only effective power, therefore, that
counteracts the forces of decay in a people is the rearing of
self-concentrated individuals. Such individuals alone reveal the depth
of life. They disclose new standards in the light of which we begin to
see that our environment is not wholly inviolable and requires revision.
The tendency to over-organization by a false reverence of the past, as
manifested in the legists of Islam in the thirteenth century and later,
was contrary to the inner impulse of Islam, and consequently invoked the
powerful reaction of Ibn Taimâyyah, one of the most indefatigable
writers and preachers of Islam, who was born in 1263, five years after
the destruction of Baghdad.

Ibn Taimâyyah was brought up in Hanbalite tradition. Claiming freedom
of*Ijtih«d* for himself he rose in revolt against the finality of the
schools, and went back to first principles in order to make a fresh
start. Like Ibn Àazm - the founder of Ê«hirâschool of law14 - he
rejected the Hanafite principle of reasoning by analogy and*Ijm«* ’ as
understood by older legists;15 for he thought agreement was the basis of
all superstition.16 And there is no doubt that, considering the moral
and intellectual decrepitude of his times, he was right in doing so. In
the sixteenth century Suyëtâ claimed the same privilege of*Ijtih«d* to
which he added the idea of a renovator at the beginning of each
century.17 But the spirit of Ibn Taimâyyah’s teaching found a fuller
expression in a movement of immense potentialities which arose in the
eighteenth century, from the sands of Nejd, described by Macdonald as
the ‘cleanest spot in the decadent world of Islam’. It is really the
first throb of life in modern Islam. To the inspiration of this movement
are traceable, directly or indirectly, nearly all the great modern
movements of Muslim Asia and Africa, e.g. the Sanâsâ movement, the
Pan-Islamic movement,18 and the B«bâ movement, which is only a Persian
reflex of Arabian Protestantism. The great puritan reformer, Muhammad
Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahh«h, who was born in 1700,19 studied in Medina, travelled
in Persia, and finally succeeded in spreading the fire of his restless
soul throughout the whole world of Islam. He was similar in spirit to
Ghazz«lâ’s disciple, Muhammad Ibn Tëmart20 - the Berber puritan reformer
of Islam who appeared amidst the decay of Muslim Spain, and gave her a
fresh inspiration. We are, however, not concerned with the political
career of this movement which was terminated by the armies of Muhammad
‘Alâ P«sh«. The essential thing to note is the spirit of freedom
manifested in it, though inwardly this movement, too, is conservative in
its own fashion. While it rises in revolt against the finality of the
schools, and vigorously asserts the right of private judgement, its
vision of the past is wholly uncritical, and in matters of law it mainly
falls back on the traditions of the Prophet.

Passing on to Turkey, we find that the idea of*Ijtih«d* , reinforced and
broadened by modern philosophical ideas, has long been working in the
religious and political thought of the Turkish nation. This is clear
from Àalim S«bit’s new theory of Muhammadan Law, grounded on modern
sociological concepts. If the renaissance of Islam is a fact, and I
believe it is a fact, we too one day, like the Turks, will have to
re-evaluate our intellectual inheritance. And if we cannot make any
original contribution to the general thought of Islam, we may, by
healthy conservative criticism, serve at least as a check on the rapid
movement of liberalism in the world of Islam.

I now proceed to give you some idea of religio-political thought in
Turkey which will indicate to you how the power of*Ijtih«d* is
manifested in recent thought and activity in that country. There were, a
short time ago, two main lines of thought in Turkey represented by the
Nationalist Party and the Party of Religious Reform. The point of
supreme interest with the Nationalist Party is above all the State and
not Religion. With these thinkers religion as such has no independent
function. The state is the essential factor in national life which
determines the character and function of all other factors. They,
therefore, reject old ideas about the function of State and Religion,
and accentuate the separation of Church and State. Now the structure of
Islam as a religio-political system, no doubt, does permit such a view,
though personally I think it is a mistake to suppose that the idea of
state is more dominant and rules all other ideas embodied in the system
of Islam. In Islam the spiritual and the temporal are not two distinct
domains, and the nature of an act, however secular in its import, is
determined by the attitude of mind with which the agent does it. It is
the invisible mental background of the act which ultimately determines
its character.21 An act is temporal or profane if it is done in a spirit
of detachment from the infinite complexity of life behind it; it is
spiritual if it is inspired by that complexity. In Islam it is the same
reality which appears as Church looked at from one point of view and
State from another. It is not true to say that Church and State are two
sides or facets of the same thing. Islam is a single unanalysable
reality which is one or the other as your point of view varies. The
point is extremely far-reaching and a full elucidation of it will
involve us in a highly philosophical discussion. Suffice it to say that
this ancient mistake arose out of the bifurcation of the unity of man
into two distinct and separate realities which somehow have a point of
contact, but which are in essence opposed to each other. The truth,
however, is that matter is spirit in space-time reference. The unity
called man is body when you look at it as acting in regard to what we
call the external world; it is mind or soul when you look at it as
acting in regard to the ultimate aim and ideal of such acting. The
essence of Tauhâd, as a working idea, is equality, solidarity, and
freedom. The state, from the Islamic standpoint, is an endeavour to
transform these ideal principles into space-time forces, an aspiration
to realize them in a definite human organization. It is in this sense
alone that the state in Islam is a theocracy, not in the sense that it
is headed by a representative of God on earth who can always screen his
despotic will behind his supposed infallibility. The critics of Islam
have lost sight of this important consideration. The Ultimate Reality,
according to the Qur’an, is spiritual, and its life consists in its
temporal activity. The spirit finds its opportunities in the natural,
the material, the secular. All that is secular is, therefore, sacred in
the roots of its being. The greatest service that modern thought has
rendered to Islam, and as a matter of fact to all religion, consists in
its criticism of what we call material or natural - a criticism which
discloses that the merely material has no substance until we discover it
rooted in the spiritual. There is no such thing as a profane world. All
this immensity of matter constitutes a scope for the self-realization of
spirit. All is holy ground. As the Prophet so beautifully puts it: ‘The
whole of this earth is a mosque.’22 The state, according to Islam, is
only an effort to realize the spiritual in a human organization. But in
this sense all state, not based on mere domination and aiming at the
realization of ideal principles, is theocratic.

The truth is that the Turkish Nationalists assimilated the idea of the
separation of Church and State from the history of European political
ideas. Primitive Christianity was founded, not as a political or civil
unit, but as a monastic order in a profane world, having nothing to do
with civil affairs, and obeying the Roman authority practically in all
matters. The result of this was that when the State became Christian,
State and Church confronted each other as distinct powers with
interminable boundary disputes between them. Such a thing could never
happen in Islam; for Islam was from the very beginning a civil society,
having received from the Qur’an a set of simple legal principles which,
like the twelve tables of the Romans, carried, as experience
subsequently proved, great potentialities of expansion and development
by interpretation. The Nationalist theory of state, therefore, is
misleading inasmuch as it suggests a dualism which does not exist in
Islam.

The Religious Reform Party, on the other hand, led by Sa‘âd Àalâm P«sh«,
insisted on the fundamental fact that Islam is a harmony of idealism and
positivism; and, as a unity of the eternal verities of freedom,
equality, and solidarity, has no fatherland. ‘As there is no English
Mathematics, German Astronomy or French Chemistry,’ says the Grand
Vizier, ‘so there is no Turkish, Arabian, Persian or Indian Islam. Just
as the universal character of scientific truths engenders varieties of
scientific national cultures which in their totality represent human
knowledge, much in the same way the universal character of Islamic
verities creates varieties of national, moral and social ideals.’ Modern
culture based as it is on national egoism is, according to this
keen-sighted writer, only another form of barbarism. It is the result of
an over-developed industrialism through which men satisfy their
primitive instincts and inclinations. He, however, deplores that during
the course of history the moral and social ideals of Islam have been
gradually deislamized through the influence of local character, and
pre-Islamic superstitions of Muslim nations. These ideals today are more
Iranian, Turkish, or Arabian than Islamic. The pure brow of the
principle of Tauhâd has received more or less an impress of heathenism,
and the universal and impersonal character of the ethical ideals of
Islam has been lost through a process of localization. The only
alternative open to us, then, is to tear off from Islam the hard crust
which has immobilized an essentially dynamic outlook on life, and to
rediscover the original verities of freedom, equality, and solidarity
with a view to rebuild our moral, social, and political ideals out of
their original simplicity and universality. Such are the views of the
Grand Vizier of Turkey. You will see that following a line of thought
more in tune with the spirit of Islam, he reaches practically the same
conclusion as the Nationalist Party, that is to say, the freedom
of*Ijtih«d* with a view to rebuild the laws of Sharâ‘ah in the light of
modern thought and experience.

Let us now see how the Grand National Assembly has exercised this power
of*Ijtih«d* in regard to the institution of Khil«fat. According to Sunni
Law, the appointment of an Imam or Khalâfah is absolutely indispensable.
The first question that arises in this connexion is this - Should the
Caliphate be vested in a single person? Turkey’s*Ijtih«d* is that
according to the spirit of Islam the Caliphate or Imamate can be vested
in a body of persons, or an elected Assembly. The religious doctors of
Islam in Egypt and India, as far as I know, have not yet expressed
themselves on this point. Personally, I believe the Turkish view is
perfectly sound. It is hardly necessary to argue this point. The
republican form of government is not only thoroughly consistent with the
spirit of Islam, but has also become a necessity in view of the new
forces that are set free in the world of Islam.

In order to understand the Turkish view let us seek the guidance of Ibn
Khaldën - the first philosophical historian of Islam. Ibn Khaldën, in
his famous ‘Prolegomena’, mentions three distinct views of the idea of
Universal Caliphate in Islam23 : (1) That Universal Imamate is a Divine
institution, and is consequently indispensable. (2) That it is merely a
matter of expediency. (3) That there is no need of such an institution.
The last view was taken by the Khaw«rij.24 It seems that modern Turkey
has shifted from the first to the second view, i.e. to the view of the
Mu’tazilah who regarded Universal Imamate as a matter of expediency
only. The Turks argue that in our political thinking we must be guided
by our past political experience which points unmistakably to the fact
that the idea of Universal Imamate has failed in practice. It was a
workable idea when the Empire of Islam was intact. Since the break-up of
this Empire independent political units have arisen. The idea has ceased
to be operative and cannot work as a living factor in the organization
of modern Islam. Far from serving any useful purpose it has really stood
in the way of a reunion of independent Muslim States. Persia has stood
aloof from the Turks in view of her doctrinal differences regarding the
Khil«fat; Morocco has always looked askance at them, and Arabia has
cherished private ambition. And all these ruptures in Islam for the sake
of a mere symbol of a power which departed long ago. Why should we not,
they can further argue, learn from experience in our political thinking?
Did not Q«dâ Abë Bakr B«qil«nâ drop the condition of Qarshâyat in
the*Khalâfah* in view of the facts of experience, i.e. the political
fall of the Quraish and their consequent inability to rule the world of
Islam? Centuries ago Ibn Khaldën, who personally believed in the
condition of Qarshâyat in the*Khali\`fah* , argued much in the same way.
Since the power of the Quraish, he says, has gone, there is no
alternative but to accept the most powerful man as Ima\`m in the country
where he happens to be powerful. Thus Ibn Khaldën, realizing the hard
logic of facts, suggests a view which may be regarded as the first dim
vision of an International Islam fairly in sight today. Such is the
attitude of the modern Turk, inspired as he is by the realities of
experience, and not by the scholastic reasoning of jurists who lived and
thought under different conditions of life.

To my mind these arguments, if rightly appreciated, indicate the birth
of an International ideal which, though forming the very essence of
Islam, has been hitherto over-shadowed or rather displaced by Arabian
Imperialism of the earlier centuries of Islam. This new ideal is clearly
reflected in the work of the great nationalist poet Êiy« whose songs,
inspired by the philosophy of Auguste Comte, have done a great deal in
shaping the present thought of Turkey. I reproduce the substance of one
of his poems from Professor Fischer’s German translation:

In order to create a really effective political unity of Islam, all
Muslim countries must first become independent: and then in their
totality they should range themselves under one Caliph. Is such a thing
possible at the present moment? If not today, one must wait. In the
meantime the Caliph must reduce his own house to order and lay the
foundations of a workable modern State.

‘In the International world the weak find no sympathy; power alone
deserves respect.’25

These lines clearly indicate the trend of modern Islam. For the present
every Muslim nation must sink into her own deeper self, temporarily
focus her vision on herself alone, until all are strong and powerful to
form a living family of republics. A true and living unity, according to
the nationalist thinkers, is not so easy as to be achieved by a merely
symbolical overlordship. It is truly manifested in a multiplicity of
free independent units whose racial rivalries are adjusted and
harmonized by the unifying bond of a common spiritual aspiration. It
seems to me that God is slowly bringing home to us the truth that Islam
is neither Nationalism nor Imperialism but a League of Nations which
recognizes artificial boundaries and racial distinctions for facility of
reference only,26 and not for restricting the social horizon of its
members.

From the same poet the following passage from a poem called ‘Religion
and Science’ will throw some further light on the general religious
outlook which is being gradually shaped in the world of Islam today:

"Who were the first spiritual leaders of mankind? Without doubt the
prophets and holy men. In every period religion has led philosophy; From
it alone morality and art receive light. But then religion grows weak,
and loses her original ardour! Holy men disappear, and spiritual
leadership becomes, in name, the heritage of the Doctors of Law! The
leading star of the Doctors of Law is tradition; They drag religion with
force on this track; but philosophy says: ‘My leading star is reason:
you go right, I go left."

‘Both religion and philosophy claim the soul of man and draw it on
either side!’

‘When this struggle is going on pregnant experience delivers up positive
science, and this young leader of thought says, "Tradition is history
and Reason is the method of history! Both interpret and desire to reach
the same indefinable something!"

‘But what is this something?’

‘Is it a spiritualized heart?’

‘If so, then take my last word - Religion is positive science, the
purpose of which is to spiritualize the heart of man!’27

It is clear from these lines how beautifully the poet has adopted the
Comtian idea of the three stages of man’s intellectual development, i.e.
theological, metaphysical and scientific - to the religious outlook of
Islam. And the view of religion embodied in these lines determines the
poet’s attitude towards the position of Arabic in the educational system
of Turkey. He says:

‘The land where the call to prayer resounds in Turkish; where those who
pray understand the meaning of their religion; the land where the Qur’an
is learnt in Turkish; where every man, big or small, knows full well the
command of God; O! Son of Turkey! that land is thy fatherland!’28

If the aim of religion is the spiritualization of the heart, then it
must penetrate the soul of man, and it can best penetrate the inner man,
according to the poet, only if its spiritualizing ideas are clothed in
his mother tongue. Most people in India will condemn this displacement
of Arabic by Turkish. For reasons which will appear later the
poet’s*Ijtih«d* is open to grave objections, but it must be admitted
that the reform suggested by him is not without a parallel in the past
history of Islam. We find that when Muhammad Ibn Tëmart - the Mahdi of
Muslim Spain - who was Berber by nationality, came to power, and
established the pontifical rule of the MuwaÁÁidën, he ordered for the
sake of the illiterate Berbers, that the Qur’an should be translated and
read in the Berber language; that the call to prayer should be given in
Berber;29 and that all the functionaries of the Church must know the
Berber language.

In another passage the poet gives his ideal of womanhood. In his zeal
for the equality of man and woman he wishes to see radical changes in
the family law of Islam as it is understood and practised today:

‘There is the woman, my mother, my sister, or my daughter; it is she who
calls up the most sacred emotions from the depths of my life! There is
my beloved, my sun, my moon and my star; it is she who makes me
understand the poetry of life! How could the Holy Law of God regard
these beautiful creatures as despicable beings? Surely there is an error
in the interpretation of the Qur’an by the learned?30

‘The foundation of the nation and the state is the family!’

‘As long as the full worth of the woman is not realized, national life
remains incomplete.’

‘The upbringing of the family must correspond with justice;’

‘Therefore equality is necessary in three things - in divorce, in
separation, and in inheritance.’

‘As long as the woman is counted half the man as regards inheritance and
one-fourth of man in matrimony, neither the family nor the country will
be elevated. For other rights we have opened national courts of
justice;’

‘he family, on the other hand, we have left in the hands of schools.’

I do not know why we have left the woman in the lurch?

Does she not work for the land? Or, will she turn her needle into a
sharp bayonet to tear off her rights from our hands through a
revolution? 31

The truth is that among the Muslim nations of today, Turkey alone has
shaken off its dogmatic slumber, and attained to self-consciousness. She
alone has claimed her right of intellectual freedom; she alone has
passed from the ideal to the real - a transition which entails keen
intellectual and moral struggle. To her the growing complexities of a
mobile and broadening life are sure to bring new situations suggesting
new points of view, and necessitating fresh interpretations of
principles which are only of an academic interest to a people who have
never experienced the joy of spiritual expansion. It is, I think, the
English thinker Hobbes who makes this acute observation that to have a
succession of identical thoughts and feelings is to have no thoughts and
feelings at all. Such is the lot of most Muslim countries today. They
are mechanically repeating old values, whereas the Turk is on the way to
creating new values. He has passed through great experiences which have
revealed his deeper self to him. In him life has begun to move, change,
and amplify, giving birth to new desires, bringing new difficulties and
suggesting new interpretations. The question which confronts him today,
and which is likely to confront other Muslim countries in the near
future is whether the Law of Islam is capable of evolution - a question
which will require great intellectual effort, and is sure to be answered
in the affirmative, provided the world of Islam approaches it in the
spirit of ‘Umar - the first critical and independent mind in Islam who,
at the last moments of the Prophet, had the moral courage to utter these
remarkable words: ‘The Book of God is sufficient for us.’32

We heartily welcome the liberal movement in modern Islam, but it must
also be admitted that the appearance of liberal ideas in Islam
constitutes also the most critical moment in the history of Islam.
Liberalism has a tendency to act as a force of disintegration, and the
race-idea which appears to be working in modern Islam with greater force
than ever may ultimately wipe off the broad human outlook which Muslim
people have imbibed from their religion. Further, our religious and
political reformers in their zeal for liberalism may overstep the proper
limits of reform in the absence of check on their youthful fervour. We
are today passing through a period similar to that of the Protestant
revolution in Europe, and the lesson which the rise and outcome of
Luther’s movement teaches should not be lost on us. A careful reading of
history shows that the Reformation was essentially a political movement,
and the net result of it in Europe was a gradual displacement of the
universal ethics of Christianity by systems of national ethics.33 The
result of this tendency we have seen with our own eyes in the Great
European War which, far from bringing any workable synthesis of the two
opposing systems of ethics, has made the European situation still more
intolerable. It is the duty of the leaders of the world of Islam today
to understand the real meaning of what has happened in Europe, and then
to move forward with self-control and a clear insight into the ultimate
aims of Islam as a social polity.

I have given you some idea of the history and working of*Ijtih«d* in
modern Islam. I now proceed to see whether the history and structure of
the Law of Islam indicate the possibility of any fresh interpretation of
its principles. In other words, the question that I want to raise is -
Is the Law of Islam capable of evolution? Horten, Professor of Semitic
Philology at the University of Bonn, raises the same question in
connexion with the Philosophy and Theology of Islam. Reviewing the work
of Muslim thinkers in the sphere of purely religious thought he points
out that the history of Islam may aptly be described as a gradual
interaction, harmony, and mutual deepening of two distinct forces, i.e.
the element of Aryan culture and knowledge on the one hand, and a
Semitic religion on the other. The Muslim has always adjusted his
religious outlook to the elements of culture which he assimilated from
the peoples that surrounded him. From 800 to 1100, says Horten, not less
than one hundred systems of theology appeared in Islam, a fact which
bears ample testimony to the elasticity of Islamic thought as well as to
the ceaseless activity of our early thinkers. Thus, in view of the
revelations of a deeper study of Muslim literature and thought, this
living European Orientalist has been driven to the following conclusion:

The spirit of Islam is so broad that it is practically boundless. With
the exception of atheistic ideas alone it has assimilated all the
attainable ideas of surrounding peoples, and given them its own peculiar
direction of development.’

The assimilative spirit of Islam is even more manifest in the sphere of
law. Says Professor Hurgronje - the Dutch critic of Islam:

When we read the history of the development of Mohammadan Law we find
that, on the one hand, the doctors of every age, on the slightest
stimulus, condemn one another to the point of mutual accusations of
heresy; and, on the other hand, the very same people, with greater and
greater unity of purpose, try to reconcile the similar quarrels of their
predecessors.’

These views of modern European critics of Islam make it perfectly clear
that, with the return of new life, the inner catholicity of the spirit
of Islam is bound to work itself out in spite of the rigorous
conservatism of our doctors. And I have no doubt that a deeper study of
the enormous legal literature of Islam is sure to rid the modern critic
of the superficial opinion that the Law of Islam is stationary and
incapable of development. Unfortunately, the conservative Muslim public
of this country is not yet quite ready for a critical discussion
of*Fiqh* , which, if undertaken, is likely to displease most people, and
raise sectarian controversies; yet I venture to offer a few remarks on
the point before us.

1. In the first place, we should bear in mind that from the earliest
times practically up to the rise of the Abbasids, there was no written
law of Islam apart from the Qur’an.

2. Secondly, it is worthy of note that from about the middle of the
first century up to the beginning of the fourth not less than nineteen
schools of law and legal opinion appeared in Islam.34 This fact alone is
sufficient to show how incessantly our early doctors of law worked in
order to meet the necessities of a growing civilization. With the
expansion of conquest and the consequent widening of the outlook of
Islam these early legists had to take a wider view of things, and to
study local conditions of life and habits of new peoples that came
within the fold of Islam. A careful study of the various schools of
legal opinion, in the light of contemporary social and political
history, reveals that they gradually passed from the deductive to the
inductive attitude in their efforts at interpretation.35

3. Thirdly, when we study the four accepted sources of Muhammadan Law
and the controversies which they invoked, the supposed rigidity of our
recognized schools evaporates and the possibility of a further evolution
becomes perfectly clear. Let us briefly discuss these sources.

(a) The Qur’an. The primary source of the Law of Islam is the Qur’an.
The Qur’an, however, is not a legal code. Its main purpose, as I have
said before, is to awaken in man the higher consciousness of his
relation with God and the universe.36 No doubt, the Qur’an does lay down
a few general principles and rules of a legal nature, especially
relating to the family37 - the ultimate basis of social life. But why
are these rules made part of a revelation the ultimate aim of which is
man’s higher life? The answer to this question is furnished by the
history of Christianity which appeared as a powerful reaction against
the spirit of legality manifested in Judaism. By setting up an ideal of
otherworldliness it no doubt did succeed in spiritualizing life, but its
individualism could see no spiritual value in the complexity of human
social relations. ‘Primitive Christianity’, says Naumann in his*Briefe Ü
ber Religion* , ‘attached no value to the preservation of the State,
law, organization, production. It simply does not reflect on the
conditions of human society.’ And Naumann concludes: ‘Hence we either
dare to aim at being without a state, and thus throwing ourselves
deliberately into the arms of anarchy, or we decide to possess,
alongside of our religious creed, a political creed as well.’38 Thus the
Qur’an considers it necessary to unite religion and state, ethics and
politics in a single revelation much in the same way as Plato does in
his Republic.

The important point to note in this connexion, however, is the dynamic
outlook of the Qur’an. I have fully discussed its origin and history. It
is obvious that with such an outlook the Holy Book of Islam cannot be
inimical to the idea of evolution. Only we should not forget that life
is not change, pure and simple. It has within it elements of
conservation also. While enjoying his creative activity, and always
focusing his energies of the discovery of new vistas of life, man has a
feeling of uneasiness in the presence of his own unfoldment. In his
forward movement he cannot help looking back to his past, and faces his
own inward expansion with a certain amount of fear. The spirit of man in
its forward movement is restrained by forces which seem to be working in
the opposite direction. This is only another way of saying that life
moves with the weight of its own past on its back, and that in any view
of social change the value and function of the forces of conservatism
cannot be lost sight of. It is with this organic insight into the
essential teaching of the Qur’an that to approach our existing
institutions. No people can afford to reject their past entirely, for it
is their past that has made their personal identity. And in a society
like Islam the problem of a revision of old institutions becomes still
more delicate, and the responsibility of the reformer assumes a far more
serious aspect. Islam is non-territorial in its character, and its aim
is to furnish a model for the final combination of humanity by drawing
its adherents from a variety of mutually repellent races, and then
transforming this atomic aggregate into a people possessing a
self-consciousness of their own. This was not an easy task to
accomplish. Yet Islam, by means of its well-conceived institutions, has
succeeded to a very great extent in creating something like a collective
will and conscience in this heterogeneous mass. In the evolution of such
a society even the immutability of socially harmless rules relating to
eating and drinking, purity or impurity, has a life-value of its own,
inasmuch as it tends to give such society a specific inwardness, and
further secures that external and internal uniformity which counteracts
the forces of heterogeneity always latent in a society of a composite
character. The critic of these institutions must, therefore, try to
secure, before he undertakes to handle them, a clear insight into the
ultimate significance of the social experiment embodied in Islam. He
must look at their structure, not from the standpoint of social
advantage or disadvantage to this or that country, but from the point of
view of the larger purpose which is being gradually worked out in the
life of mankind as a whole.

Turning now to the groundwork of legal principles in the Qur’an, it is
perfectly clear that far from leaving no scope for human thought and
legislative activity the intensive breadth of these principles virtually
acts as an awakener of human thought. Our early doctors of law taking
their clue mainly from this groundwork evolved a number of legal
systems; and the student of Muhammadan history knows very well that
nearly half the triumphs of Islam as a social and political power were
due to the legal acuteness of these doctors. ‘Next to the Romans’, says
von Kremer, ‘there is no other nation besides the Arabs which could call
its own a system of law so carefully worked out.’ But with all their
comprehensiveness these systems are after all individual
interpretations, and as such cannot claim any finality. I know the
‘*Ulem«* of Islam claim finality for the popular schools of Muhammadan
Law, though they never found it possible to deny the theoretical
possibility of a complete*Ijtih«d* . I have tried to explain the causes
which, in my opinion, determined this attitude of the ‘*Ulem«* ; but
since things have changed and the world of Islam is confronted and
affected today by new forces set free by the extraordinary development
of human thought in all its directions, I see no reason why this
attitude should be maintained any longer. Did the founders of our
schools ever claim finality for their reasonings and interpretations?
Never. The claim of the present generation of Muslim liberals to
reinterpret the foundational legal principles, in the light of their own
experience and the altered conditions of modern life is, in my opinion,
perfectly justified. The teaching of the Qur’an that life is a process
of progressive creation necessitates that each generation, guided but
unhampered by the work of its predecessors, should be permitted to solve
its own problems.

You will, I think, remind me here of the Turkish poet Êiy« whom I quoted
a moment ago, and ask whether the equality of man and woman demanded by
him, equality, that is to say, in point of divorce, separation, and
inheritance, is possible according to Muhammadan Law. I do not know
whether the awakening of women in Turkey has created demands which
cannot be met with without a fresh interpretation of foundational
principles. In the Punjab, as everybody knows, there have been cases in
which Muslim women wishing to get rid of undesirable husbands have been
driven to apostasy.39 Nothing could be more distant from the aims of a
missionary religion. The Law of Islam, says the great Spanish jurist
Im«m Sh«tibâin his al-Muwafiq«t, aims at protecting five things -*Dân,
Nafs* , ‘*Aql, M«l* , and*Nasl* .40 Applying this test I venture to ask:
‘Does the working of the rule relating to apostasy, as laid down in
the*Hed«yah* tend to protect the interests of the Faith in this
country?’41 In view of the intense conservatism of the Muslims of India,
Indian judges cannot but stick to what are called standard works. The
result is that while the peoples are moving the law remains stationary.

With regard to the Turkish poet’s demand, I am afraid he does not seem
to know much about the family law of Islam. Nor does he seem to
understand the economic significance of the Quranic rule of
inheritance.42 Marriage, according to Muhammadan Law, is a civil
contract.43 The wife at the time of marriage is at liberty to get the
husband’s power of divorce delegated to her on stated conditions, and
thus secure equality of divorce with her husband. The reform suggested
by the poet relating to the rule of inheritance is based on a
misunderstanding. From the inequality of their legal shares it must not
be supposed that the rule assumes the superiority of males over females.
Such an assumption would be contrary to the spirit of Islam. The Qur’an
says:

And for women are rights over men similar to those for men over women’
(2:228).

The share of the daughter is determined not by any inferiority inherent
in her, but in view of her economic opportunities, and the place she
occupies in the social structure of which she is a part and parcel.
Further, according to the poet’s own theory of society, the rule of
inheritance must be regarded not as an isolated factor in the
distribution of wealth, but as one factor among others working together
for the same end. While the daughter, according to Muhammadan Law, is
held to be full owner of the property given to her by both the father
and the husband at the time of her marriage; while, further, she
absolutely owns her dower-money which may be prompt or deferred
according to her own choice, and in lieu of which she can hold
possession of the whole of her husband’s property till payment, the
responsibility of maintaining her throughout her life is wholly thrown
on the husband. If you judge the working of the rule of inheritance from
this point of view, you will find that there is no material difference
between the economic position of sons and daughters, and it is really by
this apparent inequality of their legal shares that the law secures the
equality demanded by the Turkish poet. The truth is that the principles
underlying the Quranic law of inheritance - this supremely original
branch of Muhammadan Law as von Kremer describes it - have not yet
received from Muslim lawyers the attention they deserve.44 Modern
society with its bitter class-struggles ought to set us thinking; and if
we study our laws in reference to the impending revolution in modern
economic life, we are likely to discover, in the foundational
principles, hitherto unrevealed aspects which we can work out with a
renewed faith in the wisdom of these principles.

(b) The Àadâth. The second great source of Muhammadan Law is the
traditions of the Holy Prophet. These have been the subject of great
discussion both in ancient and modern times. Among their modern critics
Professor Goldziher has subjected them to a searching examination in the
light of modern canons of historical criticism, and arrives at the
conclusion that they are, on the whole, untrustworthy.45 Another
European writer, after examining the Muslim methods of determining the
genuineness of a tradition, and pointing out the theoretical
possibilities of error, arrives at the following conclusion:

‘It must be said in conclusion that the preceding considerations
represent only theoretical possibilities and that the question whether
and how far these possibilities have become actualities is largely a
matter of how far the actual circumstances offered inducements for
making use of the possibilities. Doubtless, the latter, relatively
speaking, were few and affected only a small proportion of the entire
Sunnah. It may therefore be said that . for the most part the
collections of Sunnah considered by the Moslems as canonical are genuine
records of the rise and early growth of Islam’ (*Mohammedan Theories of
Finance* ).46

For our present purposes, however, we must distinguish traditions of a
purely legal import from those which are of a non-legal character. With
regard to the former, there arises a very important question as to how
far they embody the pre-Islamic usages of Arabia which were in some
cases left intact, and in others modified by the Prophet. It is
difficult to make this discovery, for our early writers do not always
refer to pre-Islamic usages. Nor is it possible to discover that usages,
left intact by express or tacit approval of the Prophet, were intended
to be universal in their application. Sh«h WalâAll«h has a very
illuminating discussion on the point. I reproduce here the substance of
his view. The prophetic method of teaching, according to Sh«h WalâAll«h,
is that, generally speaking, the law revealed by a prophet takes
especial notice of the habits, ways, and peculiarities of the people to
whom he is specifically sent. The prophet who aims at all-embracing
principles, however, can neither reveal different principles for
different peoples, nor leaves them to work out their own rules of
conduct. His method is to train one particular people, and to use them
as a nucleus for the building up of a universal Sharâ‘ah. In doing so he
accentuates the principles underlying the social life of all mankind,
and applies them to concrete cases in the light of the specific habits
of the people immediately before him. The Sharâ‘ah values (AÁk«m)
resulting from this application (e.g. rules relating to penalties for
crimes) are in a sense specific to that people; and since their
observance is not an end in itself they cannot be strictly enforced in
the case of future generations.47 It was perhaps in view of this that
Abë Àanâfah, who had, a keen insight into the universal character of
Islam, made practically no use of these traditions. The fact that he
introduced the principle of IstiÁs«n, i.e. juristic preference, which
necessitates a careful study of actual conditions in legal thinking,
throws further light on the motives which determined his attitude
towards this source of Muhammadan Law. It is said that Abë Àanâfah made
no use of traditions because there were no regular collections in his
day. In the first place, it is not true to say that there were no
collections in his day, as the collections of ‘Abd al-M«lik and Zuhrâ
were made not less than thirty years before the death of Abë Àanâfah.
But even if we suppose that these collections never reached him, or that
they did not contain traditions of a legal import, Abë Àanâfah, like
M«lik and AÁmad Ibn Àanbal after him, could have easily made his own
collection if he had deemed such a thing necessary. On the whole, then,
the attitude of Abë Àanâfah towards the traditions of a purely legal
import is to my mind perfectly sound; and if modern Liberalism considers
it safer not to make any indiscriminate use of them as a source of law,
it will be only following one of the greatest exponents of Muhammadan
Law in Sunni Islam. It is, however, impossible to deny the fact that the
traditionists, by insisting on the value of the concrete case as against
the tendency to abstract thinking in law, have done the greatest service
to the Law of Islam. And a further intelligent study of the literature
of traditions, if used as indicative of the spirit in which the Prophet
himself interpreted his Revelation, may still be of great help in
understanding the life-value of the legal principles enunciated in the
Qur’an. A complete grasp of their life-value alone can equip us in our
endeavour to reinterpret the foundational principles.

(c) The*Ijm«* \`’. The third source of Muhammadan Law is*Ijm«* ’ which
is, in my opinion, perhaps the most important legal notion in Islam. It
is, however, strange that this important notion, while invoking great
academic discussions in early Islam, remained practically a mere idea,
and rarely assumed the form of a permanent institution in any Muhammadan
country. Possibly its transformation into a permanent legislative
institution was contrary to the political interests of the kind of
absolute monarchy that grew up in Islam immediately after the fourth
Caliph. It was, I think, favourable to the interest of the Umayyad and
the Abbasid Caliphs to leave the power of*Ijtih«d* to
individual*Mujtahids* rather than encourage the formation of a permanent
assembly which might become too powerful for them. It is, however,
extremely satisfactory to note that the pressure of new world-forces and
the political experience of European nations are impressing on the mind
of modern Islam the value and possibilities of the idea of*Ijm«* ’. The
growth of republican spirit and the gradual formation of legislative
assemblies in Muslim lands constitute a great step in advance. The
transfer of the power of*Ijtih«d* from individual representatives of
schools to a Muslim legislative assembly which, in view of the growth of
opposing sects, is the only possible form*Ijm«* ’ can take in modern
times, will secure contributions to legal discussion from laymen who
happen to possess a keen insight into affairs. In this way alone can we
stir into activity the dormant spirit of life in our legal system, and
give it an evolutionary outlook. In India, however, difficulties are
likely to arise for it is doubtful whether a non-Muslim legislative
assembly can exercise the power of*Ijtih«d* .

But there are one or two questions which must be raised and answered in
regard to the*Ijm«* ’. Can the*Ijm«* ’ repeal the Qur’an? It is
unnecessary to raise this question before a Muslim audience, but I
consider it necessary to do so in view of a very misleading statement by
a European critic in a book called*Mohammedan Theories of Finance* -
published by the Columbia University. The author of this book says,
without citing any authority, that according to some Hanafâ and
Mu‘tazilah writers the*Ijm«* ’ can repeal the Qur’an.48 There is not the
slightest justification for such a statement in the legal literature of
Islam. Not even a tradition of the Prophet can have any such effect. It
seems to me that the author is misled by the word Naskh in the writings
of our early doctors to whom, as Im«m Sh«Çibâë points out in
al-Muwaffiq«t, vol. iii, p. 65, this word, when used in discussions
relating to the*Ijm«* ’ of the companions, meant only the power to
extend or limit the application of a Quranic rule of law, and not the
power to repeal or supersede it by another rule of law. And even in the
exercise of this power the legal theory, as ‘Amâdâ- a Sh«fi‘â doctor of
law who died about the middle of the seventh century, and whose work is
recently published in Egypt - tells us, is that the companions must have
been in possession of a Sharâ‘ah value (*Àukm* ) entitling them to such
a limitation or extension.49

But supposing the companions have unanimously decided a certain point,
the further question is whether later generations are bound by their
decision. Shauk«nâ has fully discussed this point, and cited the views
held by writers belonging to different schools.50 I think it is
necessary in this connexion to discriminate between a decision relating
to a question of fact and the one relating to a question of law. In the
former case, as for instance, when the question arose whether the two
small*Sërahs* known as*Mu‘awwidhat«n* 51 formed part of the Qur’an or
not, and the companions unanimously decided that they did, we are bound
by their decision, obviously because the companions alone were in a
position to know the fact. In the latter case the question is one of
interpretation only, and I venture to think, on the authority of Karkhâ,
that later generations are not bound by the decision of the companions.
Says Karkhâ: ‘The Sunnah of the companions is binding in matters which
cannot be cleared up by Qiy«s, but it is not so in matters which can be
established by Qiy«s.’52

One more question may be asked as to the legislative activity of a
modern Muslim assembly which must consist, at least for the present,
mostly of men possessing no knowledge of the subtleties of Muhammadan
Law. Such an assembly may make grave mistakes in their interpretation of
law. How can we exclude or at least reduce the possibilities of
erroneous interpretation? The Persian constitution of 1906 provided a
separate ecclesiastical committee of ‘*Ulem«* - ‘conversant with the
affairs of the world’ - having power to supervise the legislative
activity of the*Mejlis* . This, in my opinion, dangerous arrangement is
probably necessary in view of the Persian constitutional theory.
According to that theory, I believe, the king is a mere custodian of the
realm which really belongs to the Absent*Im«m* . The ‘*Ulem«* , as
representatives of the*Im«m* , consider themselves entitled to supervise
the whole life of the community, though I fail to understand how, in the
absence of an apostolic succession, they establish their claim to
represent the*Im«m* . But whatever may be the Persian constitutional
theory, the arrangement is not free from danger, and may be tried, if at
all, only as a temporary measure in Sunnâ countries.53 The ‘*Ulem«*
should form a vital part of a Muslim legislative assembly helping and
guiding free discussion on questions relating to law. The only effective
remedy for the possibilities of erroneous interpretations is to reform
the present system of legal education in Muhammadan countries, to extend
its sphere, and to combine it with an intelligent study of modern
jurisprudence.54

(d) The*Qiy«s* . The fourth basis of*Fiqh* is*Qiy«s* , i.e. the use of
analogical reasoning in legislation. In view of different social and
agricultural conditions prevailing in the countries conquered by Islam,
the school of Abë Àanâfah seem to have found, on the whole, little or no
guidance from the precedents recorded in the literature of traditions.
The only alternative open to them was to resort to speculative reason in
their interpretations. The application of Aristotelian logic, however,
though suggested by the discovery of new conditions in Iraq, was likely
to prove exceedingly harmful in the preliminary stages of legal
development. The intricate behaviour of life cannot be subjected to hard
and fast rules logically deducible from certain general notions. Yet,
looked at through the spectacles of Aristotle’s logic, it appears to be
a mechanism pure and simple with no internal principle of movement.
Thus, the school of Abë Àanâfah tended to ignore the creative freedom
and arbitrariness of life, and hoped to build a logically perfect legal
system on the lines of pure reason. The legists of Àij«z, however, true
to the practical genius of their race, raised strong protests against
the scholastic subtleties of the legalists of Iraq, and their tendency
to imagine unreal cases which they rightly thought would turn the Law of
Islam into a kind of lifeless mechanism. These bitter controversies
among the early doctors of Islam led to a critical definition of the
limitations, conditions, and correctives of*Qiy«s* which, though
originally appeared as a mere disguise for*Mujtahid’s* personal opinion,
eventually became a source of life and movement in the Law of Islam. The
spirit of the acute criticism of M«lik and Sh«fi‘â on Abë Àanâfah’s
principle of*Qiy«s* , as a source of law, constitutes really an
effective Semitic restraint on the Aryan tendency to seize the abstract
in preference to the concrete, to enjoy the idea rather than the event.
This was really a controversy between the advocates of deductive and
inductive methods in legal research. The legists of Iraq originally
emphasized the eternal aspect of the ‘notion’, while those of Àij«z laid
stress on its temporal aspect. The latter, however, did not see the full
significance of their own position, and their instinctive partiality to
the legal tradition of Àij«z narrowed their vision to the ‘precedents’
that had actually happened in the days of the Prophet and his
companions. No doubt they recognized the value of the concrete, but at
the same time they eternalized it, rarely resorting to*Qiy«s* based on
the study of the concrete as such. Their criticism of Abë Àanâfah and
his school, however, emancipated the concrete as it were, and brought
out the necessity of observing the actual movement and variety of life
in the interpretation of juristic principles. Thus the school of Abë
Àanâfah which fully assimilated the results of this controversy is
absolutely free in its essential principle and possesses much greater
power of creative adaptation than any other school of Muhammadan Law.
But, contrary to the spirit of his own school, the modern Hanafâ legist
has eternalized the interpretations of the founder or his immediate
followers much in the same way as the early critics of Abë Àanâfah
eternalized the decisions given on concrete cases. Properly understood
and applied, the essential principle of this school, i.e.*Qiy«s* , as
Sh«fi‘â rightly says, is only another name for*Ijtih«d* 55 which, within
the limits of the revealed texts, is absolutely free; and its importance
as a principle can be seen from the fact that, according to most of the
doctors, as Q«dâ Shauk«nâ tells us, it was permitted even in the
lifetime of the Holy Prophet.56 The closing of the door of*Ijtih«d* is
pure fiction suggested partly by the crystallization of legal thought in
Islam, and partly by that intellectual laziness which, especially in the
period of spiritual decay, turns great thinkers into idols. If some of
the later doctors have upheld this fiction, modern Islam is not bound by
this voluntary surrender of intellectual independence. Zarkashâ writing
in the eighth century of the Hijrah rightly observes:

‘If the upholders of this fiction mean that the previous writers had
more facilities, while the later writers had more difficulties, in their
way, it is, nonsense; for it does not require much understanding to see
that*Ijtih«d* for later doctors is easier than for the earlier doctors.
Indeed the commentaries on the Kor«n and*sunnah* have been compiled and
multiplied to such an extent that the mujtahid of today has more
material for interpretation than he needs’.57

This brief discussion, I hope, will make it clear to you that neither in
the foundational principles nor in the structure of our systems, as we
find them today, is there anything to justify the present attitude.
Equipped with penetrative thought and fresh experience the world of
Islam should courageously proceed to the work of reconstruction before
them. This work of reconstruction, however, has a far more serious
aspect than mere adjustment to modern conditions of life. The Great
European War bringing in its wake the awakening on Turkey - the element
of stability in the world of Islam - as a French writer has recently
described her, and the new economic experiment tried in the
neighbourhood of Muslim Asia, must open our eyes to the inner meaning
and destiny of Islam.58 Humanity needs three things today - a spiritual
interpretation of the universe, spiritual emancipation of the
individual, and basic principles of a universal import directing the
evolution of human society on a spiritual basis. Modern Europe has, no
doubt, built idealistic systems on these lines, but experience shows
that truth revealed through pure reason is incapable of bringing that
fire of living conviction which personal revelation alone can bring.
This is the reason why pure thought has so little influenced men, while
religion has always elevated individuals, and transformed whole
societies. The idealism of Europe never became a living factor in her
life, and the result is a perverted ego seeking itself through mutually
intolerant democracies whose sole function is to exploit the poor in the
interest of the rich. Believe me, Europe today is the greatest hindrance
in the way of man’s ethical advancement. The Muslim, on the other hand,
is in possession of these ultimate ideas of the basis of a revelation,
which, speaking from the inmost depths of life, internalizes its own
apparent externality. With him the spiritual basis of life is a matter
of conviction for which even the least enlightened man among us can
easily lay down his life; and in view of the basic idea of Islam that
there can be no further revelation binding on man, we ought to be
spiritually one of the most emancipated peoples on earth. Early Muslims
emerging out of the spiritual slavery of pre-Islamic Asia were not in a
position to realize the true significance of this basic idea. Let the
Muslim of today appreciate his position, reconstruct his social life in
the light of ultimate principles, and evolve, out of the hitherto
partially revealed purpose of Islam, that spiritual democracy which is
the ultimate aim of Islam.59


