Lecture VII: Is Religion Possible?
==================================

Broadly speaking religious life may be divided into three periods. These
may be described as the periods of ‘Faith’, ‘Thought’, and ‘Discovery.’
In the first period religious life appears as a form of discipline which
the individual or a whole people must accept as an unconditional command
without any rational understanding of the ultimate meaning and purpose
of that command. This attitude may be of great consequence in the social
and political history of a people, but is not of much consequence in so
far as the individual’s inner growth and expansion are concerned.
Perfect submission to discipline is followed by a rational understanding
of the discipline and the ultimate source of its authority. In this
period religious life seeks its foundation in a kind of metaphysics - a
logically consistent view of the world with God as a part of that view.
In the third period metaphysics is displaced by psychology, and
religious life develops the ambition to come into direct contact with
the Ultimate Reality. It is here that religion becomes a matter of
personal assimilation of life and power; and the individual achieves a
free personality, not by releasing himself from the fetters of the law,
but by discovering the ultimate source of the law within the depths of
his own consciousness. As in the words of a Muslim Sufi - ‘no
understanding of the Holy Book is possible until it is actually revealed
to the believer just as it was revealed to the Prophet.’1 It is, then,
in the sense of this last phase in the development of religious life
that I use the word religion in the question that I now propose to
raise. Religion in this sense is known by the unfortunate name of
Mysticism, which is supposed to be a life-denying, fact-avoiding
attitude of mind directly opposed to the radically empirical outlook of
our times. Yet higher religion, which is only a search for a larger
life, is essentially experience and recognized the necessity of
experience as its foundation long before science learnt to do so. It is
a genuine effort to clarify human consciousness, and is, as such, as
critical of its level of experience as Naturalism is of its own level.

As we all know, it was Kant who first raised the question: ‘Is
metaphysics possible?’2 He answered this question in the negative; and
his argument applies with equal force to the realities in which religion
is especially interested. The manifold of sense, according to him, must
fulfil certain formal conditions in order to constitute knowledge. The
thing-in-itself is only a limiting idea. Its function is merely
regulative. If there is some actuality corresponding to the idea, it
falls outside the boundaries of experience, and consequently its
existence cannot be rationally demonstrated. This verdict of Kant cannot
be easily accepted. It may fairly be argued that in view of the more
recent developments of science, such as the nature of matter as
‘bottled-up light waves’, the idea of the universe as an act of thought,
finiteness of space and time and Heisenberg’s principle of
indeterminacy3 in Nature, the case for a system of rational theology is
not so bad as Kant was led to think. But for our present purposes it is
unnecessary to consider this point in detail. As to the thing-in-itself,
which is inaccessible to pure reason because of its falling beyond the
boundaries of experience, Kant’s verdict can be accepted only if we
start with the assumption that all experience other than the normal
level of experience is impossible. The only question, therefore, is
whether the normal level is the only level of knowledge-yielding
experience. Kant’s view of the thing-in-itself and the thing as it
appears to us very much determined the character of his question
regarding the possibility of metaphysics. But what if the position, as
understood by him, is reversed? The great Muslim Sufi philosopher,
Muhyaddin Ibn al-‘Arabâ of Spain, has made the acute observation that
God is a percept; the world is a concept.4 Another Muslim Sufi thinker
and poet, ‘Ir«qâ, insists on the plurality of space-orders and
time-orders and speaks of a Divine Time and a Divine Space.5 It may be
that what we call the external world is only an intellectual
construction, and that there are other levels of human experience
capable of being systematized by other orders of space and time - levels
in which concept and analysis do not play the same role as they do in
the case of our normal experience. It may, however, be said that the
level of experience to which concepts are inapplicable cannot yield any
knowledge of a universal character, for concepts alone are capable of
being socialized. The standpoint of the man who relies on religious
experience for capturing Reality must always remain individual and
incommunicable. This objection has some force if it is meant to
insinuate that the mystic is wholly ruled by his traditional ways,
attitudes, and expectations. Conservatism is as bad in religion as in
any other department of human activity. It destroys the ego’s creative
freedom and closes up the paths of fresh spiritual enterprise. This is
the main reason why our medieval mystic techniques can no longer produce
original discoveries of ancient Truth. The fact, however, that religious
experience is incommunicable does not mean that the religious man’s
pursuit is futile. Indeed, the incommunicability of religious experience
gives us a clue to the ultimate nature of the ego. In our daily social
intercourse we live and move in seclusion, as it were. We do not care to
reach the inmost individuality of men. We treat them as mere functions,
and approach them from those aspects of their identity which are capable
of conceptual treatment. The climax of religious life, however, is the
discovery of the ego as an individual deeper than his conceptually
describable habitual selfhood. It is in contact with the Most Real that
the ego discovers its uniqueness, its metaphysical status, and the
possibility of improvement in that status. Strictly speaking, the
experience which leads to this discovery is not a conceptually
manageable intellectual fact; it is a vital fact, an attitude consequent
on an inner biological transformation which cannot be captured in the
net of logical categories. It can embody itself only in a world-making
or world-shaking act; and in this form alone the content of this
timeless experience can diffuse itself in the time-movement, and make
itself effectively visible to the eye of history. It seems that the
method of dealing with Reality by means of concepts is not at all a
serious way of dealing with it. Science does not care whether its
electron is a real entity or not. It may be a mere symbol, a mere
convention. Religion, which is essentially a mode of actual living, is
the only serious way of handing Reality. As a form of higher experience
it is corrective of our concepts of philosophical theology or at least
makes us suspicious of the purely rational process which forms these
concepts. Science can afford to ignore metaphysics altogether, and may
even believe it to be ‘a justified form of poetry’6 , as Lange defined
it, or ‘a legitimate play of grown-ups’, as Nietzsche described it. But
the religious expert who seeks to discover his personal status in the
constitution of things cannot, in view of the final aim of his struggle,
be satisfied with what science may regard as a vital lie, a mere
‘as-if’7 to regulate thought and conduct. In so far as the ultimate
nature of Reality is concerned, nothing is at stake in the venture of
science; in the religious venture the whole career of the ego as an
assimilative personal centre of life and experience is at stake.
Conduct, which involves a decision of the ultimate fate of the agent
cannot be based on illusions. A wrong concept misleads the
understanding; a wrong deed degrades the whole man, and may eventually
demolish the structure of the human ego. The mere concept affects life
only partially; the deed is dynamically related to Reality and issues
from a generally constant attitude of the whole man towards reality. No
doubt the deed, i.e. the control of psychological and physiological
processes with a view to tune up the ego for an immediate contact with
the Ultimate Reality is, and cannot but be, individual in form and
content; yet the deed, too, is liable to be socialized when others begin
to live though it with a view to discover for themselves its
effectiveness as a method of approaching the Real. The evidence of
religious experts in all ages and countries is that there are potential
types of consciousness lying close to our normal consciousness. If these
types of consciousness open up possibilities of life-giving and
knowledge-yielding experience, the question of the possibility of
religion as a form of higher experience is a perfectly legitimate one
and demands our serious attention.

But, apart from the legitimacy of the question, there are important
reasons why it should be raised at the present moment of the history of
modern culture. In the first place, the scientific interest of the
question. It seems that every culture has a form of Naturalism peculiar
to its own world-feeling; and it further appears that every form of
Naturalism ends in some sort of Atomism. We have Indian Atomism, Greek
Atomism, Muslim Atomism, and Modern Atomism.8 Modern Atomism is,
however, unique. Its amazing mathematics which sees the universe as an
elaborate differential equation; and its physics which, following its
own methods, has been led to smash some of the old gods of its own
temple, have already brought us to the point of asking the question
whether the casualty-bound aspect of Nature is the whole truth about it?
Is not the Ultimate Reality invading our consciousness from some other
direction as well? Is the purely intellectual method of overcoming
Nature the only method? ‘We have acknowledged’, says Professor
Eddington,

‘that the entities of physics can from their very nature form only a
partial aspect of the reality. How are we to deal with the other part?
It cannot be said that other part concerns us less than the physical
entities. Feelings, purpose, values, made up our consciousness as much
as sense-impressions. We follow up the sense-impressions and find that
they lead into an external world discussed by science; we follow up the
other elements of our being and find that they lead - not into a world
of space and time, but surely somewhere.’9

In the second place we have to look to the great practical importance of
the question. The modern man with his philosophies of criticism and
scientific specialism finds himself in a strange predicament. His
Naturalism has given him an unprecedented control over the forces of
Nature, but has robbed him of faith in his own future. It is strange how
the same idea affects different cultures differently. The formulation of
the theory of evolution in the world of Islam brought into being Rëmâ’s
tremendous enthusiasm for the biological future of man. No cultured
Muslim can read such passages as the following without a thrill of joy:

Low in the earth

I lived in realms of ore and stone;

And then I smiled in many-tinted flowers;

Then roving with the wild and wandering hours,

O’er earth and air and ocean’s zone,

In a new birth,

I dived and flew,

And crept and ran,

And all the secret of my essence drew

Within a form that brought them all to view -

And lo, a Man!

And then my goal,

Beyond the clouds, beyond the sky,

In realms where none may change or die -

In angel form; and then away

Beyond the bounds of night and day,

And Life and Death, unseen or seen,

Where all that is hath ever been,

As One and Whole.

(Rëmâ: Thadani’s Translation)10

On the other hand, the formulation of the same view of evolution with
far greater precision in Europe has led to the belief that ‘there now
appears to be no scientific basis for the idea that the present rich
complexity of human endowment will ever be materially exceeded.’ That is
how the modern man’s secret despair hides itself behind the screen of
scientific terminology. Nietzsche, although he thought that the idea of
evolution did not justify the belief that man was unsurpassable, cannot
be regarded as an exception in this respect. His enthusiasm for the
future of man ended in the doctrine of eternal recurrence - perhaps the
most hopeless idea of immortality ever formed by man. This eternal
repetition is not eternal ‘becoming’; it is the same old idea of ‘being’
masquerading as ‘becoming.’

Thus, wholly overshadowed by the results of his intellectual activity,
the modern man has ceased to live soulfully, i.e. from within. In the
domain of thought he is living in open conflict with himself; and in the
domain of economic and political life he is living in open conflict with
others. He finds himself unable to control his ruthless egoism and his
infinite gold-hunger which is gradually killing all higher striving in
him and bringing him nothing but life-weariness. Absorbed in the ‘fact’,
that is to say, the optically present source of sensation, he is
entirely cut off from the unplumbed depths of his own being. In the wake
of his systematic materialism has at last come that paralysis of energy
which Huxley apprehended and deplored. The condition of things in the
East is no better. The technique of medieval mysticism by which
religious life, in its higher manifestations, developed itself both in
the East and in the West has now practically failed. And in the Muslim
East it has, perhaps, done far greater havoc than anywhere else. Far
from reintegrating the forces of the average man’s inner life, and thus
preparing him for participation in the march of history, it has taught
him a false renunciation and made him perfectly contented with his
ignorance and spiritual thraldom. No wonder then that the modern Muslim
in Turkey, Egypt, and Persia is led to seek fresh sources of energy in
the creation of new loyalties, such as patriotism and nationalism which
Nietzsche described as ‘sickness and unreason’, and ‘the strongest force
against culture11 ’. Disappointed of a purely religious method of
spiritual renewal which alone brings us into touch with the everlasting
fountain of life and power by expanding our thought and emotion, the
modern Muslim fondly hopes to unlock fresh sources of energy by
narrowing down his thought and emotion. Modern atheistic socialism,
which possesses all the fervour of a new religion, has a broader
outlook; but having received its philosophical basis from the Hegelians
of the left wing, it rises in revolt against the very source which could
have given it strength and purpose. Both nationalism and atheistic
socialism, at least in the present state of human adjustments, must draw
upon the psychological forces of hate, suspicion, and resentment which
tend to impoverish the soul of man and close up his hidden sources of
spiritual energy. Neither the technique of medieval mysticism, nor
nationalism, nor atheistic socialism can cure the ills of a despairing
humanity. Surely the present moment is one of great crisis in the
history of modern culture. The modern world stands in need of biological
renewal. And religion, which in its higher manifestations is neither
dogma, nor priesthood, nor ritual, can alone ethically prepare the
modern man for the burden of the great responsibility which the
advancement of modern science necessarily involves, and restore to him
that attitude of faith which makes him capable of winning a personality
here and retaining it in hereafter. It is only by rising to a fresh
vision of his origin and future, his whence and whither, that man will
eventually triumph over a society motivated by an inhuman competition,
and a civilization which has lost its spiritual unity by its inner
conflict of religious and political values.

As I have indicated before,12 religion as a deliberate enterprise to
seize the ultimate principle of value and thereby to reintegrate the
forces of one’s own personality, is a fact which cannot be denied. The
whole religious literature of the world, including the records of
specialists’ personal experiences, though perhaps expressed in the
thought-forms of an out-of-date psychology, is a standing testimony to
it. These experiences are perfectly natural, like our normal
experiences. The evidence is that they possess a cognitive value for the
recipient, and, what is much more important, a capacity to centralize
the forces of the ego and thereby to endow him with a new personality.
The view that such experiences are neurotic or mystical will not finally
settle the question of their meaning or value. If an outlook beyond
physics is possible, we must courageously face the possibility, even
though it may disturb or tend to modify our normal ways of life and
thought. The interests of truth require that we must abandon our present
attitude. It does not matter in the least if the religious attitude is
originally determined by some kind of physiological disorder. George Fox
may be a neurotic; but who can deny his purifying power in England’s
religious life of his day? Muhammad, we are told, was a psychopath13 .
Well, if a psychopath has the power to give a fresh direction to the
course of human history, it is a point of the highest psychological
interest to search his original experience which has turned slaves into
leaders of men, and has inspired the conduct and shaped the career of
whole races of mankind. Judging from the various types of activity that
emanated from the movement initiated by the Prophet of Islam, his
spiritual tension and the kind of behaviour which issued from it, cannot
be regarded as a response to a mere fantasy inside his brain. It is
impossible to understand it except as a response to an objective
situation generative of new enthusiasms, new organizations, new
starting-points. If we look at the matter from the standpoint of
anthropology it appears that a psychopath is an important factor in the
economy of humanity’s social organization. His way is not to classify
facts and discover causes: he thinks in terms of life and movement with
a view to create new patterns of behaviour for mankind. No doubt he has
his pitfalls and illusions just as the scientist who relies on
sense-experience has his pitfalls and illusions. A careful study of his
method, however, shows that he is not less alert than the scientist in
the matter of eliminating the alloy of illusion from his experience.

The question for us outsiders is to find out an effective method of
inquiry into the nature and significance of this extraordinary
experience. The Arab historian Ibn Khaldën, who laid the foundations of
modern scientific history, was the first to seriously approach this side
of human psychology and reached what we now call the idea of the
subliminal self. Later, Sir William Hamilton in England and Leibniz in
Germany interested themselves in some of the more unknown phenomena of
the mind. Jung, however, is probably right in thinking that the
essential nature of religion is beyond the province of analytic
psychology. In his discussion of the relation of analytic psychology to
poetic art, he tells us that the process of artistic form alone can be
the object of psychology. The essential nature of art, according to him,
cannot be the object of a psychological method of approach. ‘A
distinction’, says Jung,

‘must also be made in the realm of religion; there also a psychological
consideration is permissible only in respect of the emotional and
symbolical phenomena of a religion, where the essential nature of
religion is in no way involved, as indeed it cannot be. For were this
possible, not religion alone, but art also could be treated as a mere
sub-division of psychology.’14

Yet Jung has violated his own principle more than once in his writings.
The result of this procedure is that, instead of giving us a real
insight into the essential nature of religion and its meaning for human
personality, our modern psychology has given us quite a plethora of new
theories which proceed on a complete misunderstanding of the nature of
religion as revealed in its higher manifestations, and carry us in an
entirely hopeless direction. The implication of these theories, on the
whole, is that religion does not relate the human ego to any objective
reality beyond himself; it is merely a kind of well-meaning biological
device calculated to build barriers of an ethical nature round human
society in order to protect the social fabric against the otherwise
unrestrainable instincts of the ego. That is why, according to this
newer psychology, Christianity has already fulfilled its biological
mission, and it is impossible for the modern man to understand its
original significance. Jung concludes:

‘Most certainly we should still understand it, had our customs even a
breath of ancient brutality, for we can hardly realize in this day the
whirlwinds of the unchained libido which roared through the ancient Rome
of the Caesars. The civilized man of the present day seems very far
removed from that. He has become merely neurotic. So for us the
necessities which brought forth Christianity have actually been lost,
since we no longer understand their meaning. We do not know against what
it had to protect us. For enlightened people, the so-called
religiousness has already approached very close to a neurosis. In the
past two thousand years Christianity has done its work and has erected
barriers of repression, which protect us from the sight of our own
sinfulness.’15

This is missing the whole point of higher religious life. Sexual
self-restraint is only a preliminary stage in the ego’s evolution. The
ultimate purpose of religious life is to make this evolution move in a
direction far more important to the destiny of the ego than the moral
health of the social fabric which forms his present environment. The
basic perception from which religious life moves forward is the present
slender unity of the ego, his liability to dissolution, his amenability
to reformation and the capacity for an ampler freedom to create new
situations in known and unknown environments. In view of this
fundamental perception higher religious life fixes its gaze on
experiences symbolic of those subtle movements of Reality which
seriously affect the destiny of the ego as a possibly permanent element
in the constitution of Reality. If we look at the matter from this point
of view modern psychology has not yet touched even the outer fringe of
religious life, and is still far from the richness and variety of what
is called religious experience. In order to give you an idea of its
richness and variety I quote here the substance of a passage from a
great religious genius of the seventeenth century - Shaikh AÁmad of
Sirhind - whose fearless analytical criticism of contemporary Sufism
resulted in the development of a new technique. All the various system
of Sufi technique in India came from Central Asia and Arabia; his is the
only technique which crossed the Indian border and is still a living
force in the Punjab, Afghanistan, and Asiatic Russia. I am afraid it is
not possible for me to expound the real meaning of this passage in the
language of modern psychology; for such language does not yet exist.
Since, however, my object is simply to give you an idea of the infinite
wealth of experience which the ego in his Divine quest has to sift and
pass through, I do hope you will excuse me for the apparently outlandish
terminology which possesses a real substance of meaning, but which was
formed under the inspiration of a religious psychology developed in the
atmosphere of a different culture. Coming now to the passage. The
experience of one ‘Abd al-Mumin was described to the Shaikh as follows:

‘Heavens and Earth and God’s Throne and Hell and Paradise have all
ceased to exist for me. When I look round I find them nowhere. When I
stand in the presence of somebody I see nobody before me: nay even my
own being is lost to me. God is infinite. Nobody can encompass Him; and
this is the extreme limit of spiritual experience. No saint has been
able to go beyond this’.

On this the Shaikh replied:

‘The experience which is described has its origin in the ever varying
life of the*Qalb* ; and it appears to me that the recipient of its has
not yet passed even one-fourth of the innumerable ‘Stations’ of
the*Qalb* . The remaining three-fourths must be passed through in order
to finish the experiences of this first ‘Station’ of spiritual life.
Beyond this ‘Station’ there are other ‘Stations’ know as*RëÁ,
Sirr-i-Khafâ* , and*Sirr-i-Akhf«* , each of these ‘Stations’ which
together constitute what is technically called ‘*ÿlam-i Amr* has its own
characteristic states and experiences. After having passed through these
‘Stations’ the seeker of truth gradually receives the illuminations of
‘Divine Names’ and ‘Divine Attributes’ and finally the illuminations of
the ‘Divine Essence’.’16

Whatever may be the psychological ground of the distinctions made in
this passage it gives us at least some idea of a whole universe of inner
experience as seen by a great reformer of Islamic Sufâsm. According to
him this ‘*ÿlam-i Amr* , i.e. ‘the world of directive energy’, must be
passed through before one reaches that unique experience which
symbolizes the purely objective. This is the reason why I say that
modern psychology has not yet touched even the outer fringe of the
subject. Personally, I do not at all feel hopeful of the present state
of things in either biology or psychology. Mere analytical criticism
with some understanding of the organic conditions of the imagery in
which religious life has sometimes manifested itself is not likely to
carry us to the living roots of human personality. Assuming that
sex-imagery has played a role in the history of religion, or that
religion has furnished imaginative means of escape from, or adjustment
to, an unpleasant reality - these ways of looking at the matter cannot,
in the least, affect the ultimate aim of religious life, that is to say,
the reconstruction of the finite ego by bringing him into contact with
an eternal life-process, and thus giving him a metaphysical status of
which we can have only a partial understanding in the half-choking
atmosphere of our present environment. If, therefore, the science of
psychology is ever likely to possess a real significance for the life of
mankind, it must develop an independent method calculated to discover a
new technique better suited to the temper of our times. Perhaps a
psychopath endowed with a great intellect - the combination is not an
impossibility - may give us a clue to such a technique. In modern
Europe, Nietzsche, whose life and activity form, at least to us
Easterns, an exceedingly interesting problem in religious psychology,
was endowed with some sort of a constitutional equipment for such an
undertaking. His mental history is not without a parallel in the history
of Eastern Sufâsm. That a really ‘imperative’ vision of the Divine in
man did come to him, cannot be denied. I call his vision ‘imperative’
because it appears to have given him a kind of prophetic mentality
which, by some kind of technique, aims at turning its visions into
permanent life-forces. Yet Nietzsche was a failure; and his failure was
mainly due to his intellectual progenitors such as Schopenhauer, Darwin,
and Lange whose influence completely blinded him to the real
significance of his vision. Instead of looking for a spiritual rule
which would develop the Divine even in a plebeian and thus open up
before him an infinite future, Nietzsche was driven to seek the
realization of his vision in such scheme as aristocratic radicalism.17
As I have said of him elsewhere:

The ‘I am’ which he seeketh,

Lieth beyond philosophy, beyond knowledge.

The plant that groweth only from the invisible soil of the heart of man,

Groweth not from a mere heap of clay! 18

Thus failed a genius whose vision was solely determined by his internal
forces, and remained unproductive for want of expert external guidance
in his spiritual life,19 and the irony of fate is that this man, who
appeared to his friends ‘as if he had come from a country where no man
lived’, was fully conscious of his great spiritual need. ‘I confront
alone’, he says, ‘an immense problem: it is as if I am lost in a forest,
a primeval one. I need help. I need disciples: I need a master.20 It
would be so sweet to obey.’ And again:

‘Why do I not find among the living men who see higher than I do and
have to look down on me? Is it only that I have made a poor search? And
I have so great a longing for such.’

The truth is that the religious and the scientific processes, though
involving different methods, are identical in their final aim. Both aim
at reaching the most real. In fact, religion; for reasons which I have
mentioned before, is far more anxious to reach the ultimately real than
science.21 And to both the way to pure objectivity lies through what may
be called the purification of experience. In order to understand this we
must make a distinction between experience as a natural fact,
significant of the normally observable behaviour of Reality, and
experience as significant of the inner nature of Reality. As a natural
fact it is explained in the light of its antecedents, psychological and
physiological; as significant of the inner nature of Reality we shall
have to apply criteria of a different kind to clarify its meaning. In
the domain of science we try to understand its meaning in reference to
the external behaviour of Reality; in the domain of religion we take it
as representative of some kind of Reality and try to discover its
meanings in reference mainly to the inner nature of that Reality. The
scientific and the religious processes are in a sense parallel to each
other. Both are really descriptions of the same world with this
difference only that in the scientific process the ego’s standpoint is
necessarily exclusive, whereas in the religious process the ego
integrates its competing tendencies and develops a single inclusive
attitude resulting in a kind of synthetic transfiguration of his
experiences. A careful study of the nature and purpose of these really
complementary processes shows that both of them are directed to the
purification of experience in their respective spheres. An illustration
will make my meaning clear. Hume’s criticism of our notion of cause must
be considered as a chapter in the history of science rather than that of
philosophy. True to the spirit of scientific empiricism we are not
entitled to work with any concepts of a subjective nature. The point of
Hume’s criticism is to emancipate empirical science from the concept of
force which, as he urges, has no foundation in sense-experience. This
was the first attempt of the modern mind to purify the scientific
process.

Einstein’s mathematical view of the universe completes the process of
purification started by Hume, and, true to the spirit of Hume’s
criticism, dispenses with the concept of force altogether.22 The passage
I have quoted from the great Indian saint shows that the practical
student of religious psychology has a similar purification in view. His
sense of objectivity is as keen as that of the scientists in his own
sphere of objectivity. He passes from experience to experience, not as a
mere spectator, but as a critical sifter of experience, who by the rules
of a peculiar technique, suited to his sphere of inquiry, endeavours to
eliminate all subjective elements, psychological or physiological, in
the content of his experience with a view finally to reach what is
absolutely objective. This final experience is the revelation of a new
life-process - original, essential, spontaneous. The eternal secret of
the ego is that the moment he reaches this final revelation he
recognizes it as the ultimate root of his being without the slightest
hesitation. Yet in the experience itself there is no mystery. Nor is
there anything emotional in it. Indeed with a view to secure a wholly
non-emotional experience the technique of Islamic Sufâsm at least takes
good care to forbid the use of music in worship, and to emphasize the
necessity of daily congregational prayers in order to counteract the
possible anti-social effects of solitary contemplation. Thus the
experience reached is a perfectly natural experience and possesses a
biological significance of the highest importance to the ego. It is the
human ego rising higher than mere reflection, and mending its transiency
by appropriating the eternal. The only danger to which the ego is
exposed in this Divine quest is the possible relaxation of his activity
caused by his enjoyment of and absorption in the experiences that
precede the final experience. The history of Eastern Sufâsm shows that
this is a real danger. This was the whole point of the reform movement
initiated by the great Indian saint from whose writings I have already
quoted a passage. And the reason is obvious. The ultimate aim of the ego
is not to see something, but to be something. It is in the ego’s effort
to be something that he discovers his final opportunity to sharpen his
objectivity and acquire a more fundamental ‘I am’ which finds evidence
of its reality not in the Cartesian ‘I think’ but in the Kantian ‘I
can.’ The end of the ego’s quest is not emancipation from the
limitations of individuality; it is, on the other hand, a more precise
definition of it. The final act is not an intellectual act, but a vital
act which deepens the whole being of the ego, and sharpens his will with
the creative assurance that the world is not something to be merely seen
or known through concepts, but something to be made and re-made by
continuous action. It is a moment of supreme bliss and also a moment of
the greatest trial for the ego:

Art thou in the stage of ‘life.’ ‘death’, or ‘death-in-life.’ Invoke the
aid of three witnesses to verify thy ‘Station.’

The first witness is thine own consciousness -

See thyself, then, with thine own light.

The second witness is the consciousness of another ego -

See thyself, then, with the light of an ego other than thee.

The third witness is God’s consciousness -

See thyself, then, with God’s light.

If thou standest unshaken in front of this light,

Consider thyself as living and eternal as He!

That man alone is real who dares -

Dares to see God face to face!

What is ‘Ascension’? Only a search for a witness

Who may finally confirm thy reality -

A witness whose confirmation alone makes thee eternal.

No one can stand unshaken in His Presence;

And he who can, verily, he is pure gold.

Art thou a mere particle of dust?

Tighten the knot of thy ego;

And hold fast to thy tiny being!

How glorious to burnish one’s ego.

And to test its lustre in the presence of the Sun!

Re-chisel, then, thine ancient frame; And build up a new being.

Such being is real being;

Or else thy ego is a mere ring of smoke!

Javid Namah


