Real Fast
=========

***“O ye who believe” Fasting is prescribed to you…..that ye may (learn)
self-restraint………….” (Qur’an; chapter-2:verse 183)***

The command for fasting in Ramadhan came in the first year of the Hijra.
The Holy Prophet delivered a lecture on the last Friday of the preceding
month, Sha’ban, in which he said:-

“O people! You are now under the shadow of the month which has a night
(Night of Qadr) which is better than thousand months. It is the month of
Ramadhan in which fasting has been made compulsory by God. It is the
month of patience; and the reward of patience is paradise. It is the
month of mutual sympathy.

“Whoever feeds a fasting brother at the time of breaking the fast God
will be as much pleased with him as though he would have emancipated a
slave, and it means that his sins of past would be forgiven”.

Somebody pleaded that not everybody was affluent enough to feed others.
The Holy Prophet said: “Allah is generous enough to be pleased with you
even if you break the fast of Muslim brother with a morsel of date or a
cup of water if it is the only thing which you can offer”. God does not
see the wealth offered but it is the feeling of the heart only which
counts. Then the Holy Prophet proceeded to say: “Anybody who makes the
burden of his servants lighter in this month Allah will make his sins
lighter for him on the Day of Judgment”.

The word ‘Ramadhan’ is derived from the root ‘R-M-Dh’, which indicate
‘Heat’ and ‘Restlessness’. It is said that the name of the month
indicates the hardships which accompany a fast like thirst and a
comparative restlessness.

But the best explanation was given by the Holy Prophet himself, who was
the final authority on every thing. He said: “Ramadhan burns the sins
and faults as fire burns the wood”.

Imam Muhammad al-Baquir told one of his companions: “O Jabir! Whoever,
during Ramadhan, fasts in days, stands for prayers in parts of nights,
controls his sexual desires and emotions, puts rein on his tongue, keeps
his eyes down, and does not injure the feelings of others, will become
as free from sin as he was the day he was born”. Jabir said: “How tough
are these conditions!”

Have you courage enough to try to fulfill these ‘tough’ conditions in
this Ramadhan and be freed from the chain of past sins?


