Fruit of Fasting
================

“The month of Ramadhan is the month of God, (bringing) His blessing,
mercy and forgiveness”. (Holy Prophet).

The month of Ramadhan gives us a chance to start life afresh. Muslims
should make resolutions during this month, to act upon during the year.
This is the month when emotions remain under the control of reason.
Thoughts, in this month are not wild, feelings not hard. Forgiveness,
generosity and love of God through the love of His creatures are infused
in our soul. Naturally, it is the best time to decide how are we going
to live in the coming year. We should know what do we want to achieve
and how.

Why not start making your program just now? And when you have completed
the list of your ambitions, here is a simple test to see how much have
you benefited from fasts of Ramadhan.

Do your resolutions include such items as helping the needy (not by just
handing out a few shillings, but by helping him to stand on his own
Legs)? Have you thought of showing more respect to the elders, loving
more tenderly those who are younger? Is there anything concerning your
neighbors and friends? Have you any inclination to forgive your enemies?
Have you resolved to live more honestly and more sincerely? And above
all, is there any room for God and His Prophet in your thoughts and
programs?

If the answer is ‘Yes’, accept my congratulations; you are a real
Muslim; you know the meaning of the fast of Ramadhan.

If on the other hand, the answer is in negative, there is some need of
improvement in your faith. And if you really want your faith to be more
perfect time is never lost. Though the month of Ramadhan is coming to
its end very soon, you may still take its advantage. There is no need to
feel sorry for yourself. If you really want the love of God it is yours
for asking. It is the easiest goal to reach and the most difficult. It
all depends, not so much on the path, as on the traveler. If your heart
is pure, it is the easiest thing in the world, if you want to put the
love of God in a corrupted heart, it is just impossible.

As is clear from the tradition of the Holy Prophet quoted above, this
month is the month of blessing, month of mercy and month of forgiveness.
If anybody wants these benefits, he should strive for it, with more zeal
and more sincerity in the remaining few days of this holy month. If we
spend our time in remembering God, praying for His love, repenting for
our sins, we can be sure that God will bless us with His love and His
mercy.


