Introduction
============

Man has been created with an aim; he has been blessed with the power to
act freely; and he has also been shown the way which leads to eternal
prosperity and bliss, and the way which ends in eternal wrath and fire.
Life on this earth is the period in which man, whether he likes or not,
has to follow one of these two paths.

A Muslim is required to follow the right path and to be very careful
from being misled to a wrong direction. For this, he has to be aware of
the pitfalls, dangers and misleading elements which lie in his way. One
of the effective methods to get this awareness is by studying the
socio-ethical problems from Islamic point of view. In studying these
problems he will come to know that pride, envy, jealousy, greed
extravagance, being indifferent to others’ behaviors, forgetting Allah,
idleness, alcohol, gambling, lying and back-biting are the factors which
can change the direction of his path and lead him to the eternal fire of
Hell. Whereas love and remembrance of Allah, hard-working with trust in
God, self-criticism, righteousness, justice, generosity, modesty, being
kind to others, acquiring knowledge, trustworthiness and sincerity are
the deeds which will help him in keeping on the right way. Only then
will he be able to follow this path successfully and live a prosperous
and happy life.

*'Inner Voice'* is a collection of small articles mostly on
socio-ethical problems from the Islamic point of view. These articles
were written by the renowned Muslim scholar, Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi,
the Chief Missionary of Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania. Maulana Sayyid
Saeed Akhtar Rizvi had written the articles for a column “Thought for
the Week” in the ‘Sunday News’ of Dar es Salaam (Tanzania). As we found
these articles interesting in which the writer has been able to explain
the Islamic socio-aspects in a short, attractive and simple manner, we
decided to reprint it for wider circulation….

Dar Rah-e-Huq

Qum-Iran Sha’ban 1400 A.H.  
 June 1980 A.D.


