Spirit of Fast
==============

***“O ye who believe! Fasting is prescribed to you…. That ye may (learn)
self-restraint ……..(Qur’an, 2:183).***

Fast like living things, has a body and a soul. The required abstinence
from food, water, sexual relations etc. Is the body of the fast: “piety”
is its soul. If we are not striving to refine our character by fast, our
will be a body without soul. Fast cleans our body from impurities.
Likewise, it must purify our hearts and minds from all impure thoughts
improper desires and undisciplined sensations.

The Holy Prophet saw a woman, who was fasting on that day (not in
Ramadhan), abusing her girl-servant. The Prophet admonished her and told
her to break her fast. The woman protested: “But I am fasting today”.
The Holy Prophet said: “But was not your fast broken by the abuses you
were hurling upon that poor girl?”

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq has said: “Your fast day should not be like other
ordinary days. When you fast, all your sense – eyes, ears, tongue, hands
and feet – must fast with you.” How?

Eyes: Keep your eyes off unlawful things and objects; spend this most
precious gift of God in good cause and pious acts and read Qur’an and
Do’as.

Ears: Abstain from hearing unlawful gossip, lies, false statements,
music and obscene topics. Pay your attention towards sermons and topics
of learning etc.

Tongue: Do not tell lies or useless tales; do not spread rumors or,
damaging gossips about other persons; keep aloof from falsity. Use the
power of speech in spreading the word of God; in creating goodwill in
the society.

Hand: Do not inflict injury upon others by your actions; instead strive
to help them as far as you can.

Feet: Do not go towards forbidden places, like bars and cinemas. Do not
run between people creating a strife. Go towards those places, where God
is remembered; and your movements should be to bring people together.

And above all, your heart and mind must be with you in fasting. Because
fast in its real sense, will not be complete unless your thoughts, your
emotions, your actions – in short, all aspects of our life – become
pure, clean and free from blemish.


