Eternal Life
============

***“And do not think those who are martyred, in the path of Allah are
dead. Nay! They are alive, in the presence of God”……. (Qur’an,
2:154).***

Value of a sacrifice depends upon the purpose for which that sacrifice
has been offered. If the purpose of the sacrifice is, for instance,
wealth or political power, it is just a waste of life and nothing more.
How can a life be immortal if it is worthless enough to be bartered for
some precious stones or glittering minerals. Gold and Silver are not
immortal; they cannot make a life immortal.  
 A life spent in their pursuit cannot be eternal; it is just one more
tragic death.

But if the purpose of the sacrifice is to please God; the man becomes
immortal. When a person is martyred, witnessing the Glory of God, His
Mercy, His Power and His Unity; when he accepts death to spread the name
of God, then the sacrifice is worthy of its name. It is not death; death
cannot conquer such soul. Here the flame of life cannot be extinguished.

Why is it so? Because, in this case, the ultimate aim of sacrificing the
life was God, God Himself is immortal and Eternal. Thus a life which is
spent in His wav, acquires immortality from Him and the martyr becomes
immortal.

A great majority of Muslims, all over the Islamic world have just been
busy commemorating the tragedy of Karbala, in which Imam Husain, (A.S.)
grandson of the Prophet, was martyred 1325 years ago to save Islam from
the disastrous clutch of Yazid. He did know very well that he would have
to suffer a good deal as a result of his rejecting Yazid. But he was not
after worldly power or material gain which could be abandoned in the
face of danger.

He was following the policy laid down by Islam in the way of Allah. He
and his children were denied water for three days: his companions and
relatives were killed; his six month old child was put to death. At last
his own head was severed and put on a spear; his women-folk were
imprisoned and all kinds of tyrannies were aimed against them. But their
determination, like that of Imam Husain (A.S.) was never weakened.

Some people think that the life, mentioned in this verse of Qur’an,
means that the martyrs will be remembered for ever. If it is so, then it
is very appropriate to commemorate the martyrdom of Imam Husain (A.S.)
and his companions. Their memory has been, and will be, kept alive by
the grace of Allah, in whose name they sacrificed their lives.


