Miracle of Qur’an
=================

***“Do they not then earnestly seek to understand the Qur’an, or are
their hearts locked up by them?” (Qur’an, Chapter-47; verse 24).***

The Qur’an is a miracle given by God to the Holy Prophet of Islam. It is
miracle, both of the style and of the deep knowledge and pure truth
which is being unfolded every day.

The difference between all other miracles and the Qur’an is that the
former were only for those who witnessed them. For us, they are news
which may be believed or suspected according to the trend of mind. But
the Qur’an is in our hands, a book complete in itself; it claims that it
is revealed, and brings the proof within itself.

Arabs in the time of the Prophet were proud of their language. The
Qur’an silenced them with its sublime literature, challenging them to
bring ‘like’ of even one ‘Sura’ (chapter). The Arabs, who called other
nations ‘Alam’ (dumb), became dumb themselves when the Qur’an put its
challenge before them. They resorted to sword; they waged war after war;
they inflicted sufferings and suffered themselves.

Had it been within their power to bring a chapter like the Qur’an, all
this trouble would have been unnecessary. No sane man will choose a
difficult way in preference to the easier one. It was the highest
quality of the Qur’anic language which baffled them and is still
baffling its antagonists. History records that many people tried to meet
the challenge of the Qur’an but had to admit that it is right when it
says that nobody can bring its ‘like’. Also, on the side of knowledge
and truth, its miracles are not exhausted yet. There are many examples
that a verse remained a puzzle for the commentators until the advert of
scientific discoveries which made its meaning clear.

To give a tangible example: In the sura ‘Al-Mumin’, it says:

***“And Pharaoh said, ‘O Haman! Build for me a tower that I may reach
the avenues, the avenues of the heavens, and may mount to God Moses
…….”*** ***(Qur’an, 40:36).***

As it is, there was no mention of Haman in the previous books. People
used to wonder who was that Haman! They may be forgiven, because nobody
knew before recent discoveries that ‘Amon’ was the name of the great
Egyptian deity, the ‘King of gods’, patron of the most powerful
Pharaohs, and pre-eminently the national god. Its high-priest also was
called ‘Amon’ and was responsible for all the religious buildings and
temples. What could have been more natural for Pharaoh, when intending
to build a tower to see God of Moses, than to ask the Amon’s priest,
himself known as ‘Amon’, to arrange it?

These scientific miracles of today are sufficient to make a man believe
that this book is a book of God, containing the eternal truth.


