Achievements of Islam
=====================

This article was published in Rabi-ul-Awwal, 1387 A.H.

***“It is he who has sent among the unlettered an Apostle from among
themselves, to recite to them His signs and verses, to purify them,
Qur’an: and to instruct them in the scripture and wisdom” (Chapter 62;
Verse 2).***

This week Muslims all over the world, are celebrating the birthday of
the Holy Prophet. This year has a special significance; it is the 1400th
year of the declaration of the prophethood and the revelation of the
Holy Book, i.e. the Qur’an.

The achievements of the Holy Prophet, in a short period of 23 years, are
too numerous and far-reaching in their impact to be described here. To
give a glimpse of some of the aspects of Islam, I would like to mention
that it was Islam that re-established the belief in One and Universal
God. It was Islam that recognized the prophets, who had appeared in
other nations before Muhammad, as true Prophets. It was Islam which
freed mankind from the supposed stigma of inherent evil and sin, and
thus bestowed an everlasting dignity to humanity. It was Islam that said
that “no bearer of burdens bears the burden of another” – that is the
children of Adam cannot be condemned for Adam’s supposed sin. It was
Islam that laid no special rituals to accept a man in its fold,
declaring that “every child is born a Muslim; it is his parents who take
him away from Islam and convert him Judaism, Christianity or other
religion” – that is, he does not need any permit to come back to his
original home, Islam.

It was Islam that created a direct relationship between God and
individual man. If he abstains from sins, or if, after committing a sin,
repents sincerely, there would be no need of any intercessor. God
Himself will forgive him. Muslim preachers have no privilege of
forgiving sin on behalf of God, or of granting paradise quarters to
their followers. Thus Islam has made each and every person responsible
for his own actions.

Islam treated man as man, not as God; it recognized the shortcoming of
human beings; and gave them a code of conduct which combines the lofty
ideals of Love with the practical aspects of Justice. It has laid down
clear rules for every aspect of life, which are based on justice and
cannot be violated and after a man has achieved that minimum degree of
piety, he is exhorted and encouraged to reach the higher and higher goal
of moral and spiritual perfection. This combination of minimum
requirements of justice with maximum aspiration of lofty morals is the
most unique aspect of the religion of God which is Islam.


