How Islam was Spread ?
======================

***“And the leaders among them (i.e. the unbelievers) go (saying) “Walk
ye away and remain constant to your gods; for this (Islam) is truly a
thing designed (against you)” (Qur’an 38:6)***

Islam, in its infancy, was a secret mission. After 3 years the Holy
Prophet announced openly his message to the people of Mecca. The news of
new religion traveled far and wide, and the hurling of open denunciation
at the ancestral idols of Arabs by the Holy Prophet set all Arabia
ablaze.

The resentment, at first, led them to approach his uncle and guardian,
Abu Talib, to persuade him to silence his nephew. Abu Talib conveyed
their message to Muhammad. Muhammad replied; “Uncle dear, even if they
place the Sun in my right hand and the Moon in my left hand in order to
turn me away from the work which I have been entrusted by Allah to do, I
will not listen to them”. Saying this he burst into tears. Abu Talib
said “Go in peace, my son! And do what thou wilt, for, by God! I will
not abandon thee”. This decision of Abu-Talib infuriated the Meccans.

As a last attempt they approached Muhammad himself. They told him: “If
your ambition is to acquire wealth, we will amass wealth for you as much
as you may ever desire, and if you are aspiring for power and honor, we
are prepared to accept you as our kind and overlord; and if you have any
fancy for beauty, you shall have the hand of the fairest maiden in the
land”. Muhammad’s reply was short and clear: “Neither I want wealth nor
do I want power or beauty. I have been commissioned by Allah as a warner
to the mankind, I am communicating His message to you. If you accept it,
you shall have facility in this life and the life hereafter, and should
you reject it, verily, God will decide between you and me”.

And God decided in favor of his own religion. In spite of the bitterest
persecution suffered by the Muslims at the hand of the Meccans, Islam
made steady progress. And, in the end, even its erstwhile enemies were
attracted to its fold.


