Mercy For All Worlds
====================

***“And We did not send thee (Muhammad) but for the whole mankind”.
(Qur’an, 34:28)***

Look at the major religions of the world minutely and you will find that
it is only Islam which claimed from the beginning to be the religion for
the whole mankind.

God sent, before Muhammad, thousands of prophets and apostles to
different places and nations to guide their people to the right path. It
should be mentioned here that the word ‘Prophet’, when used by a Muslim,
does not mean ‘one who foretells the events’. Foretelling the events is
not a very important function of a ‘Prophet’. A prophet, according to
Islam, is sent by God to call people to His path. He is the link between
Allah and His creatures, and by following his foot-prints the followers
can be sure of receiving the glory of God.

Anyhow, when as a result of the efforts of those Prophets mankind
reached the stage of maturity, the Holy Prophet of Islam was sent by God
for the whole mankind. He re-affirmed, revived, consolidated and
perfected the teachings of the earlier prophets (which by passage of
time had become distorted and disfigured).

Muhammad come in the world, announcing that, “I have been sent to all
people-red and black and yellow”. Among his early followers were people
from Ethiopia, Iran, Rome and India.

According to the Qur’an, Allah is not a tribal god but the ‘Lord of
Universe’; and the Holy Prophet is ‘The Mercy for the universe’.

By sending his messengers to Asia Minor, Iran, Egypt, Ethiopia, Syria,
Yemen, Bahrain, Oman and many other places, calling those people to
‘come within the fold of Islam, Muhammad left an undeniable proof that
his was the universal religion, unfettered with the shackles of tribe,
religion, color or race.


