Know The Soul
=============

***“Soon will We show them our signs in the (furthest) regions and in
their own souls……..” (Qur’an,41:53).***

There is one tested method of knowing Allah; and that is “through His
creation” – the Worlds and the Man. Let us begin with our self.

We do not know the nature of soul. Still we have to admit that there is
something which is the source of “life” In the same way, though we
cannot ‘know’ the Creator, we have to admit that there is a God who has
created the universe.

We know that the soul is the ruler of our body. If any limb of ours
refuses to obey the commands of the soul, it is not a reflection on the
strength of the soul. It is considered the defect of the limb itself.
Likewise, the God is the master and ruler of the universe; and if
anybody refuses to obey the commandments of Allah, the authority of
Allah can never be doubted. It will be a sign that the disobedient
person is sick spiritually.

We know that soul is connected with our body; but we do not know where
it is. The life is everywhere in our body; but if a limb of a man is
amputated, we cannot say that so much portion of the soul also has been
cut off. Thus, we see, the life everywhere and still we cannot say that
it is here or is there. In the same manner, we know that Allah is
everywhere; but we cannot say. “He is here” or “He is there”. We cannot
point towards Him; we cannot correlate Him with any place.

Whenever we want to do any work, our limbs simply obey the unspoken
command of the soul, without any need to tell them in so many words. In
the same way whenever God wants anything to happen it just happens,
without any need on the part of God to say “Be this” of “Be that”
Therefore, we understand that the words used in scriptures that “God
says and the thing happens” is just a way of expressing the idea that as
soon as Allah wishes something, it happens immediately.

We do not see the soul; still we believe in it. Man believes in such
creation which are beyond his senses. Strangely enough, there are some
people who do not believe in the Creator, just because He is beyond
their senses!

God has shown His signs in our self. Perhaps these points were in the
mind of Amir-ul-mumeneen Ali when he said: “Whoever knew his soul, knew
his Lord”.


