Equality of Man
===============

Thought for the Week:
---------------------

***“O People, verily we created you of a male and a female; and We made
you in clans and tribes so that you may recognize Each other: but the
most honored of you with God is the one Who is the most pious of you”,
(Qur’an, Chapter 49, Verse 13).***

Go deep into the history of last 1400 years and you will find the
imprint of Islam on every right chapter. Take, for example, the idea of
human brotherhood and equality of man with man. This wide-spread belief
of today is the gift of Islam.

Before Islam, people generally believed in tribal gods. In some quarters
there was an idea of a supreme being; but that supreme being was almost
always the god of one’s own tribe; the gods of other tribes were
inferior ones. One was bound to despise those other gods, but the
interesting point is that, anyhow, the other gods were recognized to
exist!

That multitude of gods and semi-gods, was bound to cause conflicts and
disharmonies amongst mankind, and it did cause divisions to an
unbelievable extent. Theories were advanced to legalize the division of
mankind into separate classes – some privileged, other persecuted and
oppressed. Beliefs were fostered condemning certain branches of
humanity, not because they were of bad character but just because they
happened to belong to a certain tribe or clan. Different legal and
social codes were invented for different classes. As there was no
feeling of a Universal God, man did not have a feeling of kinship with
other human beings.

The advent of Islam was the beginning of the end of such tendencies.
Islam, with its emphasis on the Oneness of God, created a belief in the
oneness of His creatures. Gradually the belief influenced the thought of
mankind. Now the principle of equality and human brotherhood is
recognized in the whole world – with certain sad exceptions. When I hear
the leaders of world opinion proclaiming that racial or tribal
discrimination is a sin against God, I feel proud to being to Islam
which proclaimed that principle for the first time in the history of
mankind. Not only proclaimed it, but made it an integral part of the
Muslims’ daily life.

It was Islam which explained in most realistic terms the cause of the
existence of different tribes and clans and asked man to look into the
qualities of soul, not on the color skin.


