Code of Conduct
===============

***“Verily, the religion before God is Islam” (Qur’an, 3 : 19).***

Islam has given mankind a perfect code of conduct. Man from every walk
of life have been clearly instructed how to perform their duties, how to
behave. Islamic law is based on Justice; Islamic ethics, on love and
grace.

The most strict rules have been laid down for those who enter the public
life, like judges, governors etc. The Holy Prophet once sent a man as a
Qadhi to Southern Arabia. When he came back, he brought many gifts given
to him during his stay there. When our Holy Prophet came to know about
it, he demanded that all the gifts be brought to him to be distributed
among poor. The ex-judge protested that it was his personal Property, as
it was given as gifts. The Prophet said: “Had you gone there in your
private capacity without any official credential, these gifts would have
been your private property. But as long as you were my Qadhi, the things
presented to you were not ‘gift’: it was ‘bribe’ to please you so that
they might benefit from you.” The man had to return all his “gift”.

This clear cut rule is worth following by all public leaders. Then they
would not have to worry how much a Member of Parliament may accept from
his “clients”; or how much “expenses” can be spent on pleasure trips.

Hazrat Ali (A.S.) was informed of a dinner attended by the Governor of
Basra. He at once wrote him a long letter, some sentences of which are
sufficient to show how Islam expects its officers to behave.

“I have been told that a young man of Basra invited you to a dinner and
you hurried to it. Fine dishes were brought out for you; luxurious
plates were served. I never thought that you would accept a dinner to
which only rich were invited, and from which poor were
excluded……………..See that I, your Imam, am satisfied from his world with
two old clothes and two daily bread. I know that you cannot do as I am
doing, but at least you should try to help me with your efforts, your
fear of God and your behavior; because, by God, I did not collect from
this world of yours any gold, nor did I amass any riches…………

“Should I remain content that people call me ‘Amir-ul -Mumeneen’ (leader
of the faithful) without sharing with them their hardships, without
setting for them a model to be followed……………..”

Many of his letters to governors and officers show this trend when he
exhorts them to live as ordinary men, without erecting barriers between
them and the people; to behave in such a way “that big people cannot use
you to oppress poor ones, and poor are not discouraged from obtaining
justice even against the richest and biggest man”.


