Self – Criticism
================

In Islamic terminology, one aspect of human soul is called “Lawwamah’
(self-reproaching spirit). It is one of the surest means of perfecting
one’s character and behavior. As Hadhrat Ali (A.S.) said: “Check your
account (of deeds) before you are called to render it (after death, in
presence of God)”. We must check our account and make up the shortcoming
before it is too late.

Realistic self-evaluation and self-criticism are essential for the
development of the soul. Only in this way can we save our self from
being a prey of conceit and pride. Before we go to sleep we must relive
the whole day, seeing whether our behavior was up to the required
standard of spiritual perfection. If we detect any slip, any wrong or
any impurity, we must firmly resolve to amend it at once and repent
sincerely.

If we cultivate this habit of continuous self-criticism, we will
progress, in no time at all, towards that stage of spiritual perfection
which is called in Islam ‘Mutma’innah’ when a soul rest and satisfaction
by grace of Allah. But this self-criticism must begin before our vision
has blurred, before evil makes a slave of our soul. Otherwise, we will
fail to recognize the evil when we see it.

When a murderer justifies (nay, really feels justified in) his crime;
when a robber thinks that, by his action, he is rectifying the
imbalanced of the society, then only a special grace of God can save him
from plunging into the lowest Hell of disgrace.

Unfortunately, modern society is heading blindly towards that same
degradation. Social thinkers spend their whole energy in inventing new
excuses for law-breakers. Stealing is white-washed by the impressive
name of ‘kleptomania’; sex-perversion and dirty habits are explained
away as “just a protest against society”. Criminals are afforded more
protection in law than their helpless victims, under the disguise of
‘liberty of the individual’. And the real tragedy is that all of it is
done in the name of ‘progress’.

Is the ‘conscience’ of modern nations merely stunned?
Or, really dead?


