On Righteousness
================

***“Righteousness is not just to turn your faces towards the East or the
West (in prayers). But the true righteous is he who believes in Allah
and the Last Day and the angels and the Book*** ***(Qur’an) and the
prophets; and gives his wealth, for love of Allah, to the kindred and
the orphan and the poor and the traveler and to those who ask (for
help), and for ransoming the captives;” (Qur’an 2: 178).***

Just to observe some external rites is not Islam. True faith and good
actions are the primary requisite of a Muslim. Faith is the seed which
gives birth to good deeds; and if the faith does not create an urge in
us to perform noble deeds, our faith is dormant, and we must try to
awaken it by conscious efforts.

If a Muslim does not help needy persons, if he does not bestow love and
kindness upon the orphans, if he turns out the people who are in need of
assistance, then his claim of righteousness is just a claim and nothing
more.

Often we have seen our kith and kin in distress; several times we have
been approached by stranded travelers seeking shelter and food; daily we
hear the cries of starving persons in famine-stricken areas; so many
times we have looked upon a child whose very countenance was a monument
of affliction and hardship. What has been our usual reaction in these
circumstances? Have we parted with some of the wealth to help the poor
fellows. And have we done it with kindness and a sense of gratitude? And
above all, have we done it “For love of Allah”? Let us search our soul!

The above-mentioned Ayat of Qur’an exhorts us to have faith, and to
support that faith by charity and good deeds, based upon ‘Love of
Allah’: We should realize that the fellow human-beings are in the eyes
of Islam, dependents of Allah’, and that our wealth is, in fact, a
property of Allah, given to us in trust. When we help our fellow
brethren, we should remember that we are giving the property of God to
the dependents of God. It should be based upon love of Allah, without
any shade of worldly motives. A secret desire to enhance our social
prestige by a charity destroys the fiber of that charity. A help given
with a motive to gain political advantage is a body without soul.

Alas, how many good actions are ruined by unworthy motives!

Have faith, bestow charity; and bestow it ‘For Love of Allah’, That is
the basic teaching of Islam.


