Justice & Generosity
====================

***“Verily, God commands (you) to do justice and be generous…...”
(Qur’an Chapter 16, Verse 90).***

Islamic code of conduct is based on justice and love in every sphere of
life. For example, it commands the trade to “give full measure and
weight”. It is justice. Then it exhorts him to give more than the agreed
quantity while, side by side, the buyer is encouraged to try to take
less than that. It is love. In this atmosphere, friction and litigation
are things unimaginable.

Another example: Islam prohibits hoarding food grain when there is a
shortage in the market. It is justice, and it rules out that possibility
of artificial famine and black market which are the cause of our present
day society. But our religious leaders have gone further, setting the
example of Islamic love and sympathy.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (A.S.) used to purchase his one year’s requirement
of food grains at the beginning of the year. Once there was a danger of
famine in Madina. He asked his men how much grain was left in his store.
They assured him that there was enough to suffice for long time. Hearing
it, he ordered them to take out all that grain and sell it at once at a
much cheaper price. They protested that his family would have to suffer
from the famine if the grain was sold out. Imam replied: “Let us
alleviate the present calamity as much as we can. Afterwards, we will be
just one of the public, sharing with them the hardships of the famine.
We shall eat when they will eat; we will be hungry when they will be
hungry”. This was the love. And what is our behavior these days? Famine
conditions are created artificially to raise the prices. Such people
literally feast on the dead-bodies of the poor. The present day economy
of the world, which is based on un-Islamic principles, encourages human
greed instead of suppressing it. Islamic love and sympathy have no room
in the structure of today’s commerce and industry.

The people are taught from the childhood the God-less theory of the
struggle for self-preservation and the survival of the fittest.
Everybody is made to believe that his survival depends, not on
co-operation with others, but on killing the weaklings. In this
background, the strives and conflicts are inevitable.

This way of life, which denies the authority of God in our daily life,
offers no solution to the sufferings of our times. The only refuge is in
the precincts of Islam which accepts the authority of God in every
Sphere of our life, be it material of spiritual.


