Is God Dead?
============

***“Creation of God, the pattern on which He has made mankind; there is
no change in the work of God. That is the standard religion, but most
among mankind do not understand”.(Qur’an, 30:30)***

They claim that ‘God’ is dead. They should have said that ‘gods’ are
dead. The confusion arises when false ‘gods’ are identified as ‘God’.

An atheist astronaut once glee fully joked that he went high above in
the space but could not see the god. So, here is the confusion: the poor
soul did not know that God is not ‘body’ to be seen or found in a
‘place’. His joke just confirmed the belief of those who had emphasized
from the very beginning that God could not be seen.

Belief in a God is as much natural as any natural instinct can be. This
eternal truth has been explained in the verse of the Holy Qur’an
mentioned above. An atheist asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq how could be
convince him about the existence of God. Coming to know that the man had
gone several times on sea voyages, Imam asked him: “Have you ever been
caught in a fierce storm in middle of nowhere, your rudder gone, your
sails torn away, trying desperately to keep your boat afloat”. The
answer was ‘Yes’. Then Imam asked: “And sometimes, perhaps, even that
leaking boat went down leaving you exhausted and helpless on the mercy
of raging waves?” The answer was again ‘Yes’. Then Imam asked:

“Was not there, in all that black despair, a faint glimmer of hope in
your heart that some unnamed and unknown power could still save you”
When he agreed, Imam said: “That power is God”.

That atheist was intelligent. He knew the truth when he saw it. Today’s
atheists give that place to ‘Nature’. The only snag is that poor
‘Nature’ is senseless and lifeless. How a senseless and lifeless ‘idea’
(because nature is no more than an abstract idea) could create a
universe of such magnitude with such a systematic perfection, uniting
millions and millions of galaxies in a well-knit system? How could
nature give life and sense to creatures when itself it has none?


