Generosity and Miserliness
==========================

***“And spend in the way of Allah and put not yourselves into
destruction by your own hands”. (Qur’an, 2:192).***

Not spending in the way of Allah, i.e., being miser is, according to the
Qur’an, tantamount to self-destruction. There are four types of people
so far as generosity is concerned:-

1. First come those who ignore their own needs and comforts and spend
whatever they have to help others. This is the highest stage of human
generosity, which reflects the divine virtue: God needs nothing and
sustains every creature.

2. Then are those who spend to satisfy their own needs as well as to
help others. They are ‘beloved of Allah’, and may be sure of His Grace
in both worlds.

A Muslim is exhorted to reach at least this standard, if not the first
one.

3. Now we leave the boundary of generosity and come to those whose only
ambition is to satisfy their own desires without caring about the plight
of others. They are ‘enemies of God’; they feel no compassion for
others, how can they expect any mercy on the Day of Judgment!

4. But the worst kind of niggards are those who do not spend even for
their own necessities. Such people neither deserve nor get any love from
anyone. As Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq explained, “such persons practice misery
as a safeguard against some imagined future adversity. It is ironic to
see them inflicting upon themselves by their own hands the same
hardships which they are guarding against. What a fool he is? He
collects the money by hook or crook, lives in a wretched condition,
earns the displeasure of God, is despised by his fellows; and when he
dies, the heirs spend that ill-gotten money extravagantly in pursuit of
their sinful ambitions. The miser does not get any benefit from his
wealth and earns the condemnation of God for his miserliness….and, as if
that was not enough, gets his share in the punishment of the heirs
also”.


