Both Worlds
===========

***“Our Lord! Give us good in this world, and good in the hereafter, and
protect us from the torment of the fire”. (Qur’an 11:20).***

Our life in this world has a direct bearing upon our life hereafter
(Akherat). The Holy Prophet (S.A.) has said: “This world is the farm
field of the life hereafter”. The ultimate purpose of farming is the
harvest. Any nobody can expect any harvest if he has neglected the
farming. Like-wise the main aim of our life in this world is to be
prepared for the blessings, in the life hereafter. There may be toils
and hard times during the period when a farmer is engaged in
cultivation. But, the joyful expectation of the golden harvest overcomes
every sorrow. Likewise, there may be afflictions and hardships in our
life in this world; but the pleasant waiting for the life hereafter
helps a Muslim to bear all difficulties with content.

We are not encouraged to put aside the responsibilities of this world if
we are to obtain the benefits of the life hereafter. It will be just
like neglecting the farm and hoping that the harvests will be good. In
fact, our worth cannot be put to test if we leave this world and its
complications. The Holly Prophet (S.A.) has said: “He is not from me who
leaves this world for Akherat, nor he who leaves Akherat for this
world”. Both should be given due attention. That is why Allah commands
those who seek the blessings of Allah in this world as well as in the
life here after.

Good neighbors, faithful family, obedient children, just livelihood –
these are some examples of the blessings of the God in this world. These
blessings help us to perform our duties towards Allah, towards His
creatures, and towards ourselves. Thus these blessing become
instrumental in seeking the blessing of Allah in Akherat (life
hereafter). Paradise is just one of the blessing of Akherat. The most
important thing, in the eyes of Islam, is ‘the pleasure of God’. Qur’an
says: “

***And the pleasure of Allah is the greatest (bliss)” (Qur’an 9:72).***


