Amr-Bil-Maaroof
===============

***“And from among you there should be a group who invite good and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong; and they only shall be
successful. (Qur’an; 3:103).***

Exhorting others to be virtuous is one of the most important duties of a
Muslim. A society can progress in right direction so long as there are
people in it who know the right path and who are willing to show it to
others. Otherwise, the whole caravan may perish in a beastly jungle of
anarchy and infidelity.

But before enjoining others to do good and resist from evil, one should
himself adhere to the tenets of religion faithfully. Otherwise, the
Qur’an will ask: “Why do you speak of a thing which you yourself do it
not” So this duty of inviting others to righteousness compels a man to
be righteous himself.

And how that exhortation is to be carried out Allah says in the Qur’an:

***“Call unto the way of the Lord with wisdom and kind preaching; and
argue with them in the best manner”. (16:125).***

This was the method used by the Holy Prophet of Islam and his true
followers to spread the message of Islam and to teach people the real
significance of religion.

An interesting story is told of an old man in Medina who was engaged in
ablution (Wudhu) for his prayer. Imam Hasan and Imam Husain (A.S.) (the
grandsons of the Holy Prophet, (S.A) and of tender age at that time)
realized that the man does not know the correct method of ablution. They
wanted to correct him; but at the same time did not like to offend his
feelings. So they approached him and told: “We are two brothers and we
want you to be the judge between us as whose ablution is correct”. When
the old man agreed, the children proceeded to perform their ablution, in
the most perfect way. The old man was watching them intently. He had to:
he was to judge. Soon it dawned upon him that the children, in their
kind and gentle manner, were teaching him. He exclaimed: “You both are
correct. It was I who was wrong”.

The old man learnt his lesson. But this episode will continue to show
the preachers also how to preach.


