Chaos in World
==============

***“Chaos has appeared on land and sea because of what the hands of men
have earned; that God may give them a taste of some of their deeds: in
order that they may turn back (from evil): (Qur’an: Chapter 30, verse
41).***

Chaos in social system, chaos in political life, chaos in law and order,
chaos in the moral and ethical values – in short, there is chaos
everywhere; and God says that it has appeared as a result of man’s own
misbehavior.

This world of ours is full of contradictions. Our actions contradict our
words; our aims are believed by our ways and means; our language says we
are Muslims, our deed shows us to be pagan. We spend countless months
and years in disarmament conferences; and spend countless millions and
billions on armament race. We invent more effective medicines to prolong
the life of man; and then invent more effective bombs to end his life
immediately. We could not make this earth place worth living in, but we
want to reach to moon to make it inhabitable. We send good-will missions
to other countries, for the purpose of spying on hem.

We declare that liquor is the cause of a large proportion of the motor
accidents, yet we have done nothing to confiscate the licenses of the
drinking people. We say that drunkenness is the-enemy of nation, it is a
cause of the wastage of so much money and so much man -power, that it
ruins the health and family life of so many people; therefore, we appeal
to them to refrain from this bad habit; then we allow beverage companies
to function in our land and propagate the so-called ‘virtues” of their
wine among the ignorant people.

Our hypocrisy has brought chaos on this earth; we have been left by God
to taste the fruit of some of our deeds. This chaos is not going to be
removed unless we change our behavior, unless we abide fully with the
code of conduct sent by God for us through his Prophet.


