Decaying Society
================

***“(The hypocrites) enjoin evil and forbid what is good;… They have
forgotten God; so God is punishing them of This forgetfulness”. (Qur’an,
9:67).***

Today, at the risk of being branded as ‘out-of-date’, I want to comment
upon this materially developed and spiritually decayed civilization of
our time. A civilization in course of time reaches its highest peak; and
then its glory turns into vain glory; it becomes drunk of its power and
achievements. And then it goes down the path of decay; and, finally, to
death.

The modern civilization which is continuously ‘enjoining evil’ has,
according to my thinking, long served its usefulness and now it is
heading towards self-destruction – with rocket-speed.

Today the scientists are steadily pushing mankind towards its
extinction. Their energies are enslaved by their bosses to invent more
and more lethal weapons. They are trying to preserve wild-life – and
kill human-beings.

And there is tendency on the part of the ignorant minds to accept every
trash as a God-sent revelation – provided it comes from a man who has a
string of letters after his name.

Result? Every kind of vice has been glorified and accepted into that
society. Adultery is preached to be a healthy thing for a marriage;
persons of same sex enter into ‘matrimony’ with an encouraging nod from
the ‘priest’; pre-marital sexual relation have been accepted as the norm
of the day; gambling is practiced in places of worship: people are led
to believed that drinking liquor is a pre-requisite of ‘being
civilized’. And religion has ceased to lead the people; it is being led
by the masses. All these symptoms point to the advanced stage of
deterioration of our civilization.


