Dignity of Labour
=================

*This article was published on 30.4.1967.*

Tomorrow all nations will be observing Labour Day, to remind them-selves
that a laborer deserves to be respected because he earns his bread by
his sweat. The example set by the religious leaders of Islam have
established the dignity of labor beyond any doubt.

Holy Prophet (S.A.) himself worked for Khadija for years. When the
Prophet’s mosque at Madina was being built, the Holy Prophet
participated fully in every work. He carried the stones, mixed the
mortar, built the walls. In journeys, the Holy Prophet insisted to share
in all the works involved in camping: He pitched the tent, picked wood
for fire, carried water etc. In short he never considered any lawful
work as beneath his dignity.

People often came to Hazrat Ali (A.S.) to solve their religious problems
and found him working as a laborer in farms of other people. He never
felt any embarrassment, because dignity of labor was an established way
of Muslim life.

And here are two episodes from the life of Fatima, (A.S.) the daughter
of the Holy Prophet (S.A.). Once she was given some wool to spin and
some barley as its wages. The work was to be completed in three days; so
she divided the wool and the barley in three parts each. First, she spun
one-third of the wool, and only then used one-third of the barley for
her bread. He same routine was repeated the second and the third days.

The lesson to be learnt here is this Fatima (A.S.) could have reversed
the procedure, using barley first, and spinning the wool afterwards,
because there was no condition attached; but she did not use the wages
before finishing the work of the day. In simple words, looking forward
to the unearned wages is not liked in Islam.

This was Fatima’s (A.S.) way of life as a worker. Now let me describe
her attitude as an employer. Fizza was her servant. When she came to
work for Fatima (A.S.) the Holy Prophet (S.A.) told his daughter:
“Fatima, (A.S.) one day Fizza shall do all the domestic work while you
would rest; next day you will do all the work, while Fizza would rest;
because she is as much a human being as you are”.

This mutual regard between an employer and his employee is a beacon to
guide this troubled world where the employer and the workers both want
to exploit and deceive one another.


