Can ‘Nature’ Replace God?
=========================

“Nature designed this’; Nature adapted that’. These are the phrases
frequently seen nowadays in the text-books and articles.

What is this ‘Nature’, anyway? It is nothing but an abstract idea formed
in human brain after careful study of the behavior of the things. It may
be found (if it is ‘found’ at all) within the things; it has no
independent existence. And, in any case, there is no record of any
conference of the ‘natures’ of various things, held to decide how to
co-ordinate their functions. Flowers never conferred with the bees to
seek the bees’ co-operation in their pollination, offering them, in
exchange, their nectar. But we know that bees could not live a single
day without flowers; and thousands of flowers would long have been
extinct but for the bees.

More puzzling are those phenomena which can not be explained by
‘nature’s planning’. When Moses fled from Pharaoh, the Red Sea parted,
allowing him and his followers to cross to the promised land. Scientists
nowadays try to explain it by natural causes; an earthquake must have
made the water shift at that time. All right. But why did that supposed
earthquake occur at a time when Moses and his followers desperately
wanted to cross the Sea, and why it remained parted till Pharaoh entered
into it? And why the movement of water was reversed at that very moment
when the enemy of God with his people was in midst of the Sea? Was it
all a coincidence?

And was it a coincidence which prompted a spider to weave its cobweb at
the mouth of the cave in which the Holy Prophet Muhammad was hiding from
the pagans of Mecca who wanted to murder him? And more than that, was it
also a coincidence which brought a pair of pigeons to build their nest
at the mouth of that very cave at thick of night and lay the eggs before
morning? It was that cobweb and nest with eggs which led the
blood-thirsty enemies to believe that Muhammad could not be in that
cave, otherwise the cobweb would have been destroyed and the nest and
the eggs broken!

Can that speed and timing of the pigeons and spider be explained by
‘natural causes’?


