On Liquor
=========

***“O’ Ye who believe, intoxicants and gambling and dedication of stones
and divination of arrows are abominations of Satan’s handiwork: keep
away from such abominations”, (Qur’an, 5:90).***

The most precious gift of Allah to mankind is the intellect. It is
because of his reasoning power that man is called the best creation of
God.

Intellect has two very strong enemies: Desire and Anger. These two
rivals of intellect get reinforcement by alcoholic liquor. When
alcoholic liquor enters the human body, the first victim is the highest
cerebral centers which control such factors as judgment, sense of
responsibility and moral integrity. When these higher factors are
depressed, the lower instincts are released from captivity. Moral and
social inhibitions become a dead thing. It is now that the intoxicated
person becomes talkative, excited or even violent and aggressive. On
lookers think that he is stimulated. In fact, it is not stimulation.
What is often referred as alcoholic stimulation is the first sign of
alcoholic depression. No amount of alcohol can stimulate intellectual
functions.

Some people think that a small amount of alcohol can do no harm. But it
is one of the myths which the scientific analysis has already exploded.
Even such a tiny concentration of alcohol in blood as 0.15% (i.e.
one-seventh of one percent) impairs the faculties so much that driving
becomes extremely dangerous. Also, it requires a strong well-power to
restrict a drinking person’s intake of alcohol. As the alcohol destroys
the power of judgment, as it frees man from every inhibition, it is
foolish to believe that once started a man can control his drinking
habits. When the will-power is weakened by the effect of alcohol,
drinking leads to drunkenness and finally to alcoholism. Islam does not
want to tempt a man into this trap. It was for this reason that the Holy
Prophet declared: “Anything which intoxicates when taken excessively,
even a drop of it is forbidden to take”.


