Liquor and ‘Nation-Building’
============================

Liquor is one of the greatest enemies of nation. Every now and then the
leaders appeal to the public to give up this bad habit because it
interferes with the nation-building activities. This week the president
of Kenya threatened to close the bars of a certain area if the people of
that locality did not give up drinking.

The poisonous effects of liquor on the health and family life of an
individual are too obvious to need any description. Also, it is common
knowledge that liquor is one of the main causes of absenteeism in the
factories and offices, resulting in thousands and thousands of lost
man-days. Further, it is admitted that drunk drivers are responsible for
an unbelievable ratio of road accidents, resulting in loss of limbs and
lives. And every social worker and priest knows that this abominable
habit is the direct cause of great many cases of broken-up families,
frustrated children and poverty-ridden homes.

Liquor, thus, has these disturbing effects on the public’s health,
productivity, prosperity and happiness. Yet, one is amazed to see in the
nation’s newspapers advertisements urging people to drink liquor “to
help in the nation-building” But I can not see any connection between
drinking and nation-building.

If ‘nation’ means ‘brewery’, then of course drinking will help it. But I
have not seen ‘nation’ defined as ‘brewery’ in any dictionary. If
‘nation-building’ means ‘being absent on Monday because of Sunday’s
hangover’, then the advertisers are right. But is this definition
correct? If a man ‘builds the nation’ by reaching home after mid-night,
by beating his wife and children, by keeping them hungry, then the
drunkards would be regarded as the great nation-builders, no doubt. But
neither society nor the government would accept this meaning.

Such advertisements and statements grossly mislead the nation. It is
high time that people were protected from such misleading advertisement.


