Love and Fear of Allah
======================

***“All praise is only for God, the Lord of Universe, the Beneficent,
the Merciful, Master of the Day of Judgment” (Qur’an, Chapter 1; Verses
2-4)***

These are the very first verses of the Qur’an. They present in clear
terms the concept of God in Islam: God is Merciful and Just. According
to Islam, the Divine Justice is no separate from His Mercy.

The Divine Justice cannot be compared with the justice meted out by the
judges in the courts. These judges are only the executors of the law,
given to them by others, with little or no authority to condone the
culprits. They are bound by the law. They are helpless against the
strict implications of law when it demands punishment. They cannot
dispense mercy even if the culprit is repenting, even if the
circumstances demand mercy. Petitions for mercy are addressed to the
head of state, who is the supreme promulgator of law.

But God is not a mere judge. He is the Law-giver and the supreme
Authority. Hence an offender can be sure of His merciful pardon if his
repentance be genuine.

Islam puts the Mercy of God before His Justice. The very first verse of
the Qur’an is ***“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful”***. Islam believes that “His Mercy is before His wrath”.

Thus the Muslims have a finely balanced faith, which is inclined neither
to this side nor to that. It does not teach us that God is a high handed
avenger who does not forgive a single sin or mistake; but it does not
present God in the shape of a feeble person who will not punish even the
tyrannies and brutalities of head-hunters. The essence of Islamic faith
is in the above-mentioned verses, where the Mercy of God has been
mentioned side by side with His Justice.

Here we find a real divine religion which encourages man to go nearer to
Allah, attracted by His Mercy and Grace; and warns him against
trespassing the limits of moral and religious laws, by reminding him
that God is just, the Master of the Day of Judgment.

Thus, the two most important instincts of man, i.e., love and fear, are
simultaneously utilized to make man a perfect being, a whole being, not
wanting in any respect.


