Arguments for Atheism
=====================

Though the history of the philosophy of religion has been dominated by
attempts to prove the existence of God, there also exist a number of
arguments that seek to disprove theism. These range from a priori
arguments that the concept of God is logically incoherent, to a
posteriori arguments that the world is not the way that it would be if
God existed. The atheistic proofs section surveys these arguments for
atheism.

Within the Arguments for Atheism section, the arguments are arranged
under the following headings: “The Problem of Evil”, “Problems with
Omnipotence” (including the paradox of the stone), “Problems with
Omniscience”, “Divine Justice” (the injustice of hell), and “The
Argument from Autonomy”.

The Problem of Evil
-------------------

The problem of evil is the problem of reconciling the existence of an
omniscient, omnipotent and benevolent God with the existence of a world
full of evil and suffering. If God is omniscient then he knows how to
bring it about that there is neither evil nor suffering. If God is
omnipotent then he is able to bring it about that there is neither evil
nor suffering. If God is benevolent then he wants to bring it about that
there is neither evil nor suffering. But if God knows how to, is able to
and wants to bring it about that there is neither evil nor suffering,
then why does he not do so? The simplest answer is that God does not do
so because he does not exist. This is by far the most popular argument
for atheism.

Problems With Divine Omnipotence
--------------------------------

The doctrine of divine omnipotence is the doctrine that God is
all-powerful. It is sometimes argued, however, that the concept of
omnipotence is paradoxical, logically incoherent, and so that it is
logically impossible that there be any being that is omnipotent. This
position, if it can be sustained, precludes the existence of God.

Problems with Divine Omniscience
--------------------------------

The doctrine of divine omniscience is the doctrine that God is
all-knowing. The doctrine of divine omniscience, though, faces several
philosophical objections; there are a number of arguments in the
philosophy of religion that purport to demonstrate that God cannot
possibly know everything. These include arguments that the doctrine of
divine omniscience is logically incoherent, that it is inconsistent with
the further Christian doctrine of divine impeccability (i.e. the
doctrine that God cannot sin), and that it is refuted by the fact of
human freedom. If any of these arguments is successful, then there can
be no omniscient God.

Problems with Divine Justice
----------------------------

The doctrine of divine justice is also subject to criticism. First of
all, it appears to conflict with the idea that God is forgiving. A just
God sees that each person gets what he or she deserves; a forgiving God
sees that some people’s sins go unpunished. Second, the Christian view
of heaven and hell appear in many ways to be unjust. Hell, for instance,
appears to inflict an infinitely great punishment upon those who are
sent there. How, though, can any finite sin deserve infinite punishment?
Just punishments and rewards are proportionate to the badness or
goodness of the person that deserves them. Heaven and hell though, are
all or nothing. They therefore cannot be just.

The Argument from Autonomy
--------------------------

The argument from autonomy is the argument that the existence of morally
autonomous agents is inconsistent with the existence of God, and so that
the fact that morally autonomous agents do exist disproves the existence
of God. God, if he exists, is worthy of worship. If a being is truly
worthy of worship, though, then he is entitled to our unconditional
obedience. Moral agents, however, cannot be required to give
unconditional obedience to any agent. Moral agency requires autonomy,
and so the idea of a moral duty to give up one's autonomy is incoherent;
in giving up one's autonomy one would cease to be a moral agent so would
cease to have moral duties at all. We cannot, therefore, have a duty of
unconditional obedience to any agent, and there therefore cannot be any
agent that worthy of worship. There can therefore be no God.


