Problems with Divine Justice
============================

Christianity claims that God is just. Setting universalism (i.e. the
theory that all are ultimately saved, that none go to hell) and
annihilationism (i.e. the theory that those who do not go to heaven do
not go to hell either, but rather are annihilated) aside, Christianity
also claims that at the end of one’s life one either enjoys an eternity
in heaven or suffers an eternity in hell. These claims, it is often
argued, conflict. How can a just God treat human beings in this way?

The argument is most naturally cast as a problem relating to vagueness.
Just rewards and just punishments are proportional to whatever it is
that is being rewarded or punished. The just punishment for murder is
greater than the just punishment for slander because murder is a greater
crime that slander.

Whatever it is that determines whether one is rewarded in heaven or
punished in hell - be it faith, works, or a combination of the two - is
something that comes in degrees. One can have more faith or less faith,
more good works or less good works.

In order for the rewards and punishments for faith or works to just,
then, these rewards and punishments must admit of degrees. One with
greater faith or greater works deserves better than one with lesser
faith or lesser works. Heaven and hell, though, are both all or nothing
affairs; they do not admit of degrees. God’s policy of sending some to
heaven and some to hell, then, seems to be inconsistent with his
treating us justly.


