Arguments for the Existence of God
==================================

Within the Arguments for the Existence of God section, the arguments are
arranged under the following headings: “Pascal’s Wager”, “The
Ontological Argument”, “The Cosmological Argument” (including the first
cause argument), “The Teleological Argument” (i.e. the argument to
design), “The Moral Argument”, “Religious Experience” and “The Argument
from Miracles”.

Pascal’s Wager
--------------

Pascal’s Wager is an argument for belief in God based not on an appeal
to evidence that God exists but rather based on an appeal to
self-interest. It is in our interests to believe in God, the argument
suggests, and it is therefore rational for us to do so. The claim that
it is in our interests to believe in God is supported by a consideration
of the possible consequences of belief and unbelief. If we believe in
God, the argument runs, then if he exists then we will receive an
infinite reward in heaven while if he does not then we have lost little
or nothing. If we do not believe in God, the argument continues, then if
he exists then we will receive an infinite punishment in hell while he
does not then we will have gained little or nothing. Either receiving an
infinite reward in heaven or losing little or nothing is clearly
preferable to either receiving an infinite punishment in hell or gaining
little or nothing. It is therefore in our interests to believe in God.

The Ontological Argument
------------------------

The ontological argument is an argument that attempts to prove the
existence of God through abstract reasoning alone. The argument begins
with an explication of the concept of God. Part of what we mean when we
speak of “God” is “perfect being”; that is what the word “God” means. A
God that exists, of course, is better than a God that doesn’t. To speak
of God as a perfect being is therefore to imply that he exists. If God’s
perfection is a part of the concept of God, though, and if God’s
perfection implies God’s existence, then God’s existence is implied by
the concept of God. When we speak of “God” we cannot but speak of a
being that exists. To say that God does not exist is to contradict
oneself; it is literally to speak nonsense.

The Cosmological Argument
-------------------------

The cosmological argument is the argument from the existence of the
world or universe to the existence of a being that brought it into and
keeps it in existence. The idea that the universe has an infinite past,
stretching back in time into infinity, is both philosophically and
scientifically problematic. All indications are that there is a point in
time at which the universe began to exist. This beginning was either
caused or uncaused. The cosmological argument takes the suggestion that
the beginning of the universe was uncaused to be impossible. The idea of
an uncaused event is absurd; nothing comes from nothing. The universe
was therefore caused by something outside it. The cosmological argument
thus confirms one element of Christianity, the doctrine of Creation.

The Teleological Argument
-------------------------

The teleological argument is the argument from the order in the world to
the existence of a being that created it with a specific purpose in
mind. The universe is a highly complex system. The scale of the universe
alone is astounding, and the natural laws that govern it perplex
scientists still after generations of study. It is also, however, a
highly ordered system; it serves a purpose. The world provides exactly
the right conditions for the development and sustenance of life, and
life is a valuable thing. That this is so is remarkable; there are
numerous ways in which the universe might have been different, and the
vast majority of possible universes would not have supported life. To
say that the universe is so ordered by chance is therefore
unsatisfactory as an explanation of the appearance of design around us.
It is far more plausible, and far more probable, that the universe is
the way it is because it was created by God with life in mind.

The Moral Argument
------------------

The moral argument is the argument from the existence of morality to the
existence of God. The existence of God, it suggests, is a necessary
condition for the existence of morality. Morality consists of a set of
commands, and there cannot be commands unless there is a commander; who,
then, commanded morality? The answer to this question is to be found by
considering the authority of morality. Commands are only as
authoritative as the one that commands them, but moral authority
transcends all human institutions. Morality was therefore commanded by
someone whose authority transcends all human institutions. This can only
be God.

The Argument from Religious Experience
--------------------------------------

The argument from religious experience is the argument that personal
religious experiences can prove God’s existence to those that have them.
One can only perceive that which exists, and so God must exist because
there are those that have experienced him. While religious experiences
themselves can only constitute direct evidence of God’s existence for
those fortunate enough to have them, the fact that there are many people
who testify to having had such experiences constitutes indirect evidence
of God’s existence even to those who have not had such experiences
themselves.

The Argument from Miracles
--------------------------

The argument from miracles is the argument that the occurrence of
miracles demonstrates both the existence of God and the truth of
Christianity. If the Bible is to be believed, then Jesus’ ministry was
accompanied by frequent miraculous signs that his claims and his
teachings were endorsed by God the Father. His resurrection from the
dead was, of course, the greatest of these, and is still taken by many
today to be a solid foundation for their faith. Miracles typically
involve the suspension of the natural operation of the universe as some
supernatural event occurs. That can only happen, of course, given the
existence of some supernatural being.


