The Cosmological Argument
=========================

The cosmological argument is the argument that the existence of the
world or universe is strong evidence for the existence of a God who
created it. The existence of the universe, the argument claims, stands
in need of explanation, and the only adequate explanation of its
existence is that it was created by God.

Like most of the purported proofs of the existence of God, the
cosmological argument exists in several forms. Two forms of the argument
will be discussed here: the temporal, kalam cosmological argument (i.e.
the first cause argument), and the modal “argument from contingency”.

The main distinguishing feature between these two arguments is the way
in which they evade an initial objection to the argument. In order to
explain what this objection is, and how the two arguments evade it, a
simple, generic statement of the cosmological argument will be
necessary. This statement is as follows:

The Simple Cosmological Argument
--------------------------------

(1) Everything that exists has a cause of its existence.

(2) The universe exists.

Therefore:

(3) The universe has a cause of its existence.

(4) If the universe has a cause of its existence, then that cause is
God.

Therefore:

(5) God exists.

This argument is subject to a simple objection, which arises in the form
of the question “Does God have a cause of his existence?”

If, on the one hand, God were thought to have a cause of his existence,
then positing the existence of God in order to explain the existence of
the universe wouldn’t get us anywhere. Without God there would be one
entity the existence of which we could not explain, namely the universe;
with God there would be one entity the existence of which we could not
explain, namely God. Positing the existence of God, then, would raise as
many problems as it solved, and so the cosmological argument would leave
us in no better position than it found us.

If, on the other hand, God were thought not to have a cause of his
existence, i.e. if God were thought to be an uncaused being, then this
too would raise difficulties for the simple cosmological argument. For
if God were an uncaused being then his existence would be a
counterexample to premise (1). If God exists but does not have a cause
of his existence then premise (1) is false, in which case the simple
cosmological argument is unsound. If premise (1) is false, i.e. if some
things that exist do not have a cause, then the cosmological argument
might be resisted on the ground that the universe itself might be such a
thing. The existence of an uncaused God would thus render the simple
cosmological argument unsound, and so useless as a proof of the
existence of God.

Each of the two forms of cosmological argument discussed here is more
sophisticated than the simple cosmological argument presented above.
Each of the two cosmological arguments discussed here draws a
distinction between the type of entity that the universe is and the type
of entity that God is, and in doing so gives a reason why the existence
of the universe stands in a need of an explanation while the existence
of God does not. Each therefore evades the objection outlined above.

In the case of the kalam cosmological argument, the distinction drawn
between the universe and God is that the universe has a beginning in
time. Everything that has a beginning in time, the kalam cosmological
argument claims, has a cause of its existence. The uncaused existence of
God, who does not have a beginning in time, is consistent with this
claim, and so does not present the problem encountered in the discussion
of the simple cosmological argument above.

In the case of the argument from contingency, the distinction drawn
between the universe and God is that the existence of the universe is
contingent, i.e. that the universe could have not existed. Everything
that exists contingently, the argument from contingency claims, has a
cause of its existence. The uncaused existence of God, whose existence
is not contingent but rather is necessary, is consistent with this
claim, and so does not present the problem encountered in the discussion
of the simple cosmological argument above.

Each of these two forms of the cosmological argument, then, evades the
objection introduced above in a distinct way. The two arguments are
therefore distinct, and so warrant individual assessments.

The Kalam Cosmological Argument
-------------------------------

The temporal, kalam cosmological argument, dates back to medieval Muslim
philosophers such as al-Kindi and al-Ghazali. It has recently been
restored to popularity by William Lane Craig.

Like all cosmological arguments, the kalam cosmological argument is an
argument from the existence of the world or universe to the existence of
God. The existence of the universe, such arguments claim, stands in need
of explanation. The only adequate explanation, the arguments suggest, is
that it was created by God.

What distinguishes the kalam cosmological argument from other forms of
cosmological argument is that it rests on the idea that the universe has
a beginning in time. Modal forms of the cosmological argument are
consistent with the universe having an infinite past. With the kalam
cosmological argument, however, it is precisely because the universe is
thought to have a beginning in time that the existence of the universe
is thought to stand in need of explanation.

The argument has the following structure:

(1) Everything that has a beginning of its existence has a cause of its
existence.

(2) The universe has a beginning of its existence.

Therefore:

(3) The universe has a cause of its existence.

(4) If the universe has a cause of its existence then that cause is God.

Therefore:

(5) God exists.

The first premise of the argument is the claim that everything that
begins to exist has a cause of its existence. In order to infer from
this that the universe has a cause of its existence the proponent of the
kalam cosmological argument must prove that the past is finite, that the
universe began to exist at a certain point in time.

The crucial premise of the kalam cosmological argument, then, is the
second: “The universe has a beginning of its existence”. How do we know
that the universe has a beginning of its existence? Might not the
universe stretch back in time into infinity, always having existed? The
proponent of the kalam cosmological argument must show that this cannot
be the case if his argument is to be successful.

Advocates of the kalam cosmological argument claim that it is impossible
that the universe has an infinite past. The existence of an infinite
past, they say, entails all manner of logical absurdities.

If there exists an infinite past, then if we were to assign a number to
each past moment then every real number (i.e. every postive integer)
would be assigned to some moment. There would therefore be no unassigned
number to be assigned to the present moment as it passes into the past.
However, by reassigning the numbers such that moment number one becomes
moment number two, and moment number two becomes moment number three,
and so on, we could free up moment number one to be assigned to the
present. If the past is infinite, therefore, then there both is and is
not a free number to be assigned to the present. That such a paradox
results from the assumption that the past is infinites shows that it is
not possible that that assumption is correct. The past, it seems, cannot
be infinite, because it is not possible that there be an infinite number
of past moments.

The Argument from Contingency
-----------------------------

The modal cosmological argument or “argument from contingency” is the
argument from the contingency of the world or universe to the existence
of God. The argument from contingency is the most prominent form of
cosmological argument historically. The classical statements of the
cosmological argument in the works of Plato, of Aquinas and of Leibniz
are all statements of the modal form of the argument.

What distinguishes the modal cosmological argument from the kalam
cosmological argument is that it is consistent with the idea that the
universe has an infinite past. The kalam cosmological argument rests on
the controversial claim that the universe has a beginning in time. The
argument from contingency, in contrast, is consistent with the universe
having existed from eternity.

The argument from contingency draws on the distinction between things
that exist necessarily and things that exist contingently.

Something is “necessary” if it could not possibly have failed to exist.
The laws of mathematics are often thought to be necessary. It is
plausible to say that mathematical truths such as two and two making
four hold irrespective of the way that the world is. Even if the world
were radically different, it seems, two and two would still make four.
God, too, is often thought to be a necessary being, i.e. a being that
logically could not have failed to exist.

Something is “contingent” if it is not necessary, i.e. if it could have
failed to exist. Most things seem to exist contingently. All of the
human artefacts around us might not have existed; for each one of them,
whoever made it might have decided not to do so. Their existence,
therefore, is contingent. You and I, too, might not have existed; our
respective parents might never have met, or might have decided not to
have children, or might have decided to have children at a different
time. Our existence, therefore, is contingent. Even the world around us
seems to be contingent; the universe might have developed in such a way
that none of the observable stars and planets existed at all.

The argument from contingency rests on the claim that the universe, as a
whole, is contingent. It is not only the case, the argument suggests,
that each of the things around is us contingent; it is also the case
that the whole, all of those things taken together, is contingent. It
might have been the case that nothing existed at all. The state of
affairs in which nothing existed at all is a logically possible state of
affairs, even though it is not the actual state of affairs.

It is this that the argument from contingency takes to be significant.
It is because it is thought that the universe exists contingently that
its existence is thought to require explanation. If the universe might
not have existed, then why does it exist? Proponents of the cosmological
argument suggest that questions like this always have answers. The
existence of things that are necessary does not require explanation;
their non-existence is impossible. The existence of anything contingent,
however, does require explanation. They might not have existed, and so
there must be some reason that they do so.

Critics of the argument from contingency have sometimes questioned
whether the universe is contingent, but it remains at least plausible to
think that it is so.

The only adequate explanation of the existence of the contingent
universe, the argument from contingency suggests, is that there exists a
necessary being on which its existence it rests. For the existence of
the contingent universe must rest on something, and if it rested on some
contingent being then that contingent being too would require some
explanation of its existence. The ultimate explanation of the existence
of all things, therefore, must be the existence of some necessary being.
This necessary being is readily identified by proponents of the
cosmological argument as God.

The argument from contingency, then, can be summarised as follows:

(1) Everything that exists contingently has a reason for its existence.

(2) The universe exists contingently.

Therefore:

(3) The universe has a reason for its existence.

(4) If the universe has a reason for its existence then that reason is
God.

Therefore:

(5) God exists.


