The Teleological Argument
=========================

“The curious adapting of means to ends, throughout all nature, resembles
exactly, though it much exceeds, the productions of human contrivance;
of human design, thought, wisdom, and intelligence. Since therefore the
effects resemble each other, we are led to infer, by all the rules of
analogy, that the causes also resemble; and that the Author of nature is
somewhat similar to the mind of man.” [Spoken by Cleanthes in David
Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, Part II.]

Teleological arguments are arguments from the order in the universe to
the existence of God. Their name is derived from the Greek word,
“telos”, meaning “end” or “purpose”. When such arguments speak of the
universe being ordered, they mean that it is ordered towards some end or
purpose. The suggestion is that it is more plausible to suppose that the
universe is so because it was created by an intelligent being in order
to accomplish that purpose than it is to suppose that it is this way by
chance. The classical statement of the teleological argument is that of
William Paley. Paley likened the universe to a watch, with many ordered
parts working in harmony to further some purpose. The argument as he
constructed it is thus an argument from analogy.

Modern teleological arguments look somewhat different to that
constructed by Paley. Modern teleological arguments focus on the
“fine-tuning” in the universe. Whether they are successful is therefore
a question distinct from the question as to whether Paley’s argument is
successful. The two types of teleological argument therefore require
investigation separately.

Although teleological arguments are often referred to as “arguments from
design”, those who oppose such arguments sometimes take offence at this.
Noted sceptic Anthony Flew, in particular, has criticised this name.

Flew grants that if the universe contains design then there must be some
intelligent agent that designed it. This appears to be a simple
linguistic truth, on a par with the truth that if something is being
carried then there must be something else that is carrying it.

What Flew disputes, and what he takes to be the centre of the discussion
concerning the teleological argument, is whether the universe does
indeed contain design. Paley’s watch analogy, and the evidence of
fine-tuning, are not intended to demonstrate that the design in the
universe is the work of an intelligent agent, but rather are intended to
demonstrate that the order in the universe is indeed design. Flew
therefore suggests that we speak not of “arguments from design” but of
“arguments to design”.

The Argument from Analogy
-------------------------

The classical statement of the teleological argument is that of William
Paley in his Natural Theology. Paley likened the universe to a watch.
Like a watch, he said, the universe consists of many complex parts
functioning in harmony to some useful end. In a watch the various parts
are ordered such that they measure time; in the universe, such that they
support life. The two are, in this respect, similar.

In the case of a watch we take these properties to constitute evidence
of design. If we were to stumble across a watch in a natural
environment, lying on a heath, for example, then we would instantly know
that it was designed because of its order and complexity. If order and
complexity constitute evidence of design in the case of a watch, though,
then they must also constitute evidence of design in the case of the
universe. The case of the watch therefore illustrates the fact that the
order and complexity of the universe is evidence that the universe was
designed.

The inference from the order and complexity of a watch to its being
designed is not dependent on knowledge of how watches are made. If we
were to stumble across a watch in a natural environment, then we would
instantly know that it was designed even without any knowledge of how
watches are made or where watches come from. It is therefore no
objection to Paley’s argument that we know how watches are made but do
not know how universes are made. Order and complexity are together
sufficient to support the inference to a designer even without any
knowledge at all of the origins of universes.

Not only can we infer from the analogy between the order and complexity
of a watch and the order and complexity of the universe that the
universe has a designer, we can also infer something about what this
designer is like. For the universe is not only ordered and complex in
the same way as a watch, but it is so on a much grander scale. The order
and complexity of the universe far exceeds that of a watch, and we may
therefore infer that the designer of the universe is correspondingly
greater than designers of watches.

One objection to this argument is that the analogy between a watch and
the universe is too weak to support the inference to a designer of the
universe. Another objection is that arguments from analogy are too
limited in the kinds of conclusion that they can support, and so force
those who use them into an anthropomorphism that is inconsistent with
theism.

The Argument from Fine-Tuning
-----------------------------

If you and I were each to independently write down a number between one
and a thousand, to compare those numbers, and to find that they were
identical, then this would stand in need of explanation. If we were to
repeat this test ten times, each time finding that the numbers that we
had written down were identical, then this would be strong evidence that
what was happening was more than a mere coincidence.

This is because the theory that there is some connection between my
number and your number explains the succession of agreements between our
numbers in a way that the theory that there isn’t doesn’t. If there were
some connection between the numbers that each of us is writing down,
then we might expect our numbers to be the same. If there were no
connection, then the succession of agreements would be vastly
improbable. The succession of agreements therefore confirms the theory
that there is some causal connection between our respective selections
of our numbers.

The argument from fine-tuning, a form of teleological argument for the
existence of God, is the argument that the state of the universe, like
the succession of agreements in our numbers, stands in need of
explanation. The state of the universe, the argument suggests, confirms
the theory that the universe was created by an intelligent being for the
purpose of supporting life, just as the succession of agreements between
our numbers in the example above confirms the theory that there is some
cause of their agreement.

What is it about the universe, then, that requires explanation? The
argument from fine-tuning suggests that the fitness of the universe for
life either involves a series of staggering coincidences, or is the
result of intelligent design. There are many ways that the universe
might have been, and the overwhelming majority of these would not have
been such as to support the development of life. The expansion of matter
after the Big Bang, for instance, had to occur at the right rate - fast
enough to avoid a Big Crunch but slow enough to allow for the formation
of planets - in order for life to arise; it did. The strengths of the
physical constants (e.g. the strong force and the weak force) had to
fall within certain bounds in order for life to arise; they do. The
greater the number of conditions necessary for life, the less likely it
is that the universe satisfies these conditions by chance. The argument
from fine-tuning has now been developed to include a vast number of such
conditions.

A Weak Analogy
--------------

The argument from analogy is an inductive argument. Inductive arguments
project observed regularities to similar unobserved cases. If every
observed raven to date has been black then we are justified in inferring
that the next observed raven will also be black. We are not, however,
justified in inferring that the next observed bird will be black unless
we have good evidence for believing that the next observed bird will be
a raven.

Paley’s argument from design has the following structure: (1) Ordered
systems a, b and c have designers.

(2) The universe is an ordered system.

Therefore:

(3) The universe has a designer.

Paley’s argument thus projects an observed regularity - the observation
that certain ordered systems have designers - to an unobserved case,
namely that of the universe. Paley’s arguments thus rests on an analogy;
it is only if the universe is relevantly similar to the ordered systems
a, b and c that Paley’s inductive inference will be justified.

Whether the universe is relevantly similar to the ordered systems a, b
and c is debatable. Opponents of Paley’s argument object that only the
observation of various other universes with designers would provide a
pattern of observations that would justify the inference that this
universe has a designer. Defenders of Paley point out that the inference
is from order to design, and that it is irrelevant in what kind of
system that order is found, whether it be a universe or a watch.

Analogy and Anthropomorphism
----------------------------

The argument from analogy is a form of the argument from design. It
takes the analogy between the order of the universe and the order of a
watch to support the inference that the universe, like a watch, has a
designer. One objection to this argument is that the analogy between a
watch and the universe is weak. Another objection is that arguments from
analogy are too limited in the conclusions that they can offer, that
analogies can be pressed too far.

If we are justified in inferring that like cases have like causes, as
the argument from analogy suggests, then we can prove more than that the
universe has a designer. Watches, to remain with Paley’s example, have
corporeal designers. Watches have teams of designers. The designers of
watches are finite, mortal, and flawed. By the principle that like
effects have like causes, then, we can infer not only that the universe,
like a watch, has a designer, but that the universe, like a watch, has
several corporeal, mortal and flawed designers.

The only kind of conclusion that the argument from analogy can yield is
that God, the creator of the universe, resembles man, the creator of
watches. It forces anthropomorphism upon those who use it. This, though,
does not get the theist to the conclusion that he is aiming to prove. To
prove the existence of a community of gods that are like unto men would
be to return to something like the Roman pantheon. If this is the
conclusion that the argument from analogy supports then that argument is
of little use to theism.

In response to this objection, the theist might claim that he can
concede that the argument from analogy pushes him towards
anthropomorphism without either rejecting that argument or holding that
God is exactly like men. The argument from analogy provides evidence, he
might say, but that evidence is defeasible; where opposing evidence is
available the conclusions of the argument from analogy are to be
rejected. There is no counter-evidence in the case of the inference to
an intelligent, powerful designer, he might say, and so these
conclusions are to be accepted. There is, however, counter-evidence in
the case of the inference to, for instance, a corporeal designer. What
this evidence is will be for the theist to specify, but this is one
route that he might go.

Alternatively, the theist might try to rest his case upon Ockham’s
razor. Ockham’s razor states, roughly, that the simplest explanation of
a given set of evidence is to be preferred to more complicated
explanations. The existence of a designer of the universe is required by
the evidence, the theist might suggest, but further details about the
nature of this designer are not. It might be that there is one designer,
it might be that there are several; the designer or designers might be
corporeal, or mortal, or they might not be. The simplest explanation of
the evidence, though, is to postulate one designer, and to leave it at
that. Further details unnecessarily complicate the explanation of the
order in the universe, and so are unwarranted.


