The Argument from Religious Experience
======================================

The argument from religious experience is the argument that God must
exist because he is the object of certain experiences. It is only
possible to experience that which exists, it is argued, and so the
phenomenon of religious experience is taken to demonstrate the existence
of God.

This argument assumes that religious experiences are a type of
perceptual experience, i.e. a type of experience in which something
external is perceived. Some, though, would argue that religious
experiences are more akin to imaginings than they to perception, that
the object of the experience is not something that exists objectively in
the world but rather is something that exists subjectively in the mind
of the person having the experience.

Objections may also be raised along lines suggested by traditional
philosophical scepticism. There exist powerful philosophical arguments
that our experiences of the external world, i.e. of the familiar
everyday objects around us, are insufficient to justify belief in their
existence. Descartesâ€™ argument from dreaming is the best known of these,
though external world scepticism can be traced back at least as far as
ancient Greece and Pyrrho of Elis. If our familiar and lucid experiences
of the external world are insufficient to justify belief in its
existence, though, then how much more uncertain must be the connection
between barely tangible religious experiences and belief in God.


