The Argument from Miracles
==========================

Miracles have traditionally been taken as validations of religious
claims. If the Bible is to be believed, then miraculous signs and
wonders that testified that it was God working through him accompanied
Jesusâ€™ ministry. His resurrection from the dead was the greatest of
these miracles, and is still frequently taken today to be a solid reason
for believing in the existence of God.

Setting aside the question as to just how strong the evidence for the
resurrection, or for any of the other miracles reported in the New
Testament, is, religious sceptics frequently cite Hume as having
undermined any such argument for belief in the existence of God. Hume
noted that there are two factors to assess in deciding whether to
believe any given piece of testimony: the reliability of the witness and
the probability of that to which they testify.

The testimony of a witness that is both honest and a good judge of that
to which they testify is worth much. The testimony of a witness who is
either dishonest or not in a position to know that to which they testify
is worth little. The reliability of the witness is therefore something
that is to be taken into account in deciding whether to believe anything
on the basis of testimony.

The probability of that to which they testify, however, is also
relevant. If a witness testifies to sighting a flying pig then it is
more likely that their testimony is false than that their testimony is
true, even if they are a reliable witness.

The reliability required of a witness in order for his testimony to
justify belief in that to which he testifies increases as the
probability of that to which he testifies decreases. A miracle, however,
is by definition an event that is as unlikely as anything else. It will
always, therefore, be more likely that the testimony of a witness to a
miracle is false than that it is true. So, at least, goes the Humean
argument.


