Chapter 21 : Chapter On the Differences in Al-hadith H 188, Ch. 21, H 1
=======================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hishim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn
'Isa from Ibrahim ibn 'Umar al-Yamani from Aban ibn abu 'Ayyash from
Sulaym ibn Qays al-Hilali who has said the following.

"I said to Imam Ali (a.s.), 'I have heard from Salman, al-Miqdad and
abu Dhar certain matters about the interpretations of t he holy Quran
and certain Ahadith of the holy Prophet (s.a.) which is different from
other have and then have heard from what confirms what I have heard from
Salman and others (his friends).

I have heard a great deal of Hadith and about the interpretations of
the holy Quran. Do you disagree with what have heard from other people
and consider such materials as false?

Do you think people ascribe lies to the holy Prophet (s. a.) purposely
and interpret by their own personal opinions?" The Imam then said, "You
have posed a question now listen carefully.

"What people have consists of the truth, falsehood, lies, what is
abrogating, already abrogated, facts of general nature, of particular
natures, clear texts, unclear texts, facts properly memorized and
matters that are conjecturally preserved. People had forged certain
narration calling them as Hadith of the holy Prophet.

The condition was such that once the holy Prophet addressed the people
from the pulpit saying, "O people a many lies have spread around and
they are considered to be my Hadith. Whoever forges lies and calls them
my Hadith has filled up his seat with fire. After the holy Prophet
(s.a.) there were more of such lies. There are four kinds of Hadith only
and there is no fifth kind.

"One narrator of Hadith is a hypocrite who only pretends to be a
Muslim. He does consider it a son and offense to lie and calls a
narration purposely a Hadith of the holy Prophet while it is not a
Hadith of the holy Prophet in reality. If people know that he is
hypocrite and a liar they will not believe him. The people say, 'He
lived at the time of the holy Prophet, saw him, has heard Hadith from
him and has preserved those Ahadith but they do not know his
condition.

It is certain that Allah has spoken about the hypocrites the way He has
spoken about them and has describe them the way He has describe them.

"Their physical appearance attracts you when you see them and when they
speak, you carefully listen to them . . ." 63:4 They hypocrites then
sought closeness to the misguiding leaders and those calling other to
hell fire with falsehood, lies and false accusations.

The misguiding rulers assigned them for certain offices made them to
dominate people. They with their help devoured the world. People follow
only the kings and the worldly gains except for those that Allah has
protected. This is one of the four kinds.

"The other kind is one who has heard Hadith from the holy Prophet by
the has preserved it the way it should have been preserved but he is
uncertain about it. He has not fabricated anything purposely and has it
with him. He speaks about it, practices accordingly and narrates it
saying; " I heard it from the holy Prophet (s.a.).

If the Muslims would learn that he is uncertain about it they would
accept it from him and if he also would know that there exists
uncertainty in it even he also would reject it.

"The third kind is one who has heard something form the holy Prophet
(s.a.) that contained a command but latter the holy Prophet prohibited
it but the man did not have any knowledge of such prohibition. Or that
he heard a prohibition form the holy Prophet and then the holy Prophet
made it a command but the man did not know of such commandment.

In this way preserved the abrogated but not the abrogating but if he
knew the abrogating thereof he would have rejected it.
If the Muslims knew what they had heard from was abrogated they would
also have rejected it.

"The last and forth kind is one who has not ascribed a lie to the holy
Prophet who hates lies has fear of Allah for respect of the holy Prophet
(s.a.). He has not forgotten anything but that he has preserved it the
way it should have been preserved. He speaks it just the way has heard
with out any addition or omission. He knows which is abrogating and
which is abrogated. He thus has practiced according to the abrogating
and has rejected the abrogated.

There is no doubt that the command so of the holy Prophet (s.a) like
the holy Quran is abrogating and abrogated, of general nature and of
particular nature, clear text and unclear text. Oftentimes the
statements of the holy Prophet may have two aspects: Like a general
statement and a statement of a particular nature just like the holy
Quran as All, Most Majestic, the Most Glorious, has said, " . . .Take
only what the Messenger gives to you and desist from what he forbids you
. . .. (59:7)" It may become confusing for one who does not know what
exactly Allah and His messenger want people to do.

All the companions of the holy Prophet were not as such that would
clearly understand the answer to their questions. There were those who
would ask a question but would not ask for explanations and would rather
love the coming of a Bedouin or a stranger and ask the holy Prophet
questions so that he would also listen. "I would go in the presence of
the holy Prophet once every day and once every night when he would admit
me and we would deal with me the way he wanted.

The Sahabah, companions of the Prophet knew that the holy Prophet would
not deal with others the he dealt with me. Also the Prophet would come
to my house most of the time but when I would go to any one of his
houses he would admit me and would ask his wife to leave us alone and
then we would have been the only ones therein.

When he would come to my house he would ask Fatimah or any of my
children to leave the house then whatever would ask he would answer me
and when I would have exhausted all of my questions he would begin from
his side.

Thus, nothing of the holy Quran has ever been revealed the holy prophet
had made me to read it and dictated me to and I wrote it down with my
own hand writing. He taught me the interpretations of that verse and its
explanations, its abrogating or that which was abrogated, the clear
texts and the unclear statements, the ones of particular general nature.
He would pray to Allah to give me understanding and strong memory.

I never forgot any of the verses of the book of Allah or any of the
knowledge that he had dictated to me which I wrote them down from the
time he prayed to Allah for me.

He did not leave any thing of the lawful and unlawful, commands or
prohibitions that were there or that would come into being in future or
any book that were revealed to anyone before him about the matters of
obedience or disobedience that he had not completely taught me and I had
not memorized them all.

I have not forgotten of them even a single letter. The holy Prophet
once placed his hand on my chest and prayed to Allah to fill my heart,
with knowledge, proper understanding, wisdom and light. I then said, "O
messenger of Allah, may Allah take the soul of my mother and father in
service for your cause, from the time you prayed for me I have not
forgotten a single matter or missed to write down anything.

Do you fear that I might forget them in future? "I do not fear for you
any forgetfulness of ignorance." The holy Prophet (s.a.) replied.'"

H 189, Ch. 21, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
'Uthman ibn 'Isa from abu Ayyub al-Khazzaz from Muhammad ibn Muslim who
has said the following.

"I explained to Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying 'What is the matter
with people who narrate from so and so from the holy Prophet (s.a.) whom
they do not accuse of telling lies and thing and from you facts against
it comes to light? The Imam (a.s.) said, "Hadith becomes abrogated just
as it happens with the holy Quran.'"

H 190, Ch. 21, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu Najran from
'Asim ibn Humayd from Mansur ibn Hazim who has said the following.

"I said to (Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'It is confuses me that when I
ask you a question and you give an answer and then other person comes
and you give a different answer for the same question.'" The Imam
replied, "We answer people in a larger and reduced forms." I then asked,
"Did the Sahabah, companions of the holy Prophet speak the truth or lies
when narrating his Hadith?"

The Imam replied, "They spoke the truth." I then said, "Why then they
have differences?" Have you not considered the fact that a man would
come to the holy Prophet (s.a.) and ask a question and would give him an
answer and then he would answer that would abrogate the previous answer.
Thus, Ahadith abrogated other Ahadith."

H 191, Ch. 21, h 4

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from ibn Mahbub from
Ali ibn Ri'ab from abu 'Ubayda who has said the following.

"Abu Ja'far (a.s.) has said, 'O Ziyad, What would you say if we give a
Fatwa to one of our followers under pressure (and concealed the truth)?"
I said, "You know better, may Allah take my soul in your service.'" The
Imam said, "If would follow such Fatwa it would be better for him and of
a greater rewarding." In another Hadith it says, "If follows it, he will
be rewarded and if he disregarded it he has sinned."

H 192, Ch. 21, h 5

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
al-Hassan ibn Ali from Al-Thaqafi'laba ibn Maymun from Zurara ibn 'A'yan
who has said the following. "I asked Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) a question
and he answered me. Then an other man came and asked the same question
but the Imam gave a different answer.

Then a third man came and asked the same question but the Imam gave him
an answer that was different from both of the previous answers. When the
other two men left I asked the Imam (a.s.), "Two of your followers from
Iraq asked you the same question, how is it that you gave each one a
different answer? The Imam replied, "O Zurarah, it is better for us and
it gives all of us more time.

If you all would say the same thing, people will know that you speak
the truth from us and this will leave all of us with less time. Zurarah
has said, "I then asked Imam abu 'Abdallah, 'Your follows would walk on
spears and fire if you would ask them but they come out of your presence
with different answers for the same question and the same answer as his
father had given."

H 193, Ch. 21, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Muhammad ibn Sinan from Nasr al-Kath'ami who has said the following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said, 'Those who know that we say nothing but
the truth what they know from us should consider it sufficient. If they
would hear from us what is different from what they already know from us
they should note that it is our way of defending them.'"

H 194, Ch. 21, h 7

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from 'Uthman ibn 'Isa and
al-Hassan ibn Mahbub both from Sama' from 'Abdallah who has said the
following.

"I asked (Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about a man who was opposed by two
people of his own faith in an issue that they both narrated. One of them
said it to be obligatory and the other said it was prohibited. How it
can be solved?" The Imam replied, "He must wait until he finds one who
would inform him and until then he is not under any pressure." In
another Hadith it says, "Whichever answer he follows in obedience for
his ease."

H 195, Ch. 21, h 8

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from 'Uthman ibn 'Isa from
al-Husayn ibn al- Mukhtar from certain persons of our people from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"If you would come to me for an answer to a question and I give you an
answer of a general nature and then you come again and I give you an
opposite answer which one would you follow?" I replied, "I would follow
the later." The Imam (a.s.) said, "May Allah grant you blessings."

H 196, Ch. 21, h 9

It is narrated from him from his father from Isma'il ibn Marrar from
Yunus from Dawud ibn Farqad from Mu'alla ibn Khunays who has said the
following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'If we receive a Hadith from first
of you and from the members of your later generation which one should we
follow?" The Imam replied, "Follow it until you receive it from the
living Imam. When it comes from a living Imam follow his words." The
Imam than said, "We by Allah, like you to follow what is easy for you."
In another Hadith it is says, "Follow whichever the newest."'

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Safwan ibn Yahya from Dawud ibn al-Husayn from
'Umar ibn Hanzala who has said the following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the two people with a dispute
between them on the issue of debts or inheritance and they go to the
king or the judges for a decision is it permissible to seek such
decisions?" The Imam replied, "Whoever would go to them for a judgement
in a right or wrongful matter it is like seeking the judgment of the
devil.

Anything received through such judgment would like consuming filth even
if it would one's established right. It is because of receiving through
the judgment of the devil and Allah has commanded to reject the devil,
"yet choose to take their affairs to Satan for judgment even though they
are commanded to deny him. Satan wants to lead them far away from the
right path. (4:60)"

I said, "What should then they do?" The Imam replied, "They must look
for one among you who have narrated our Hadith and have studied what is
lawful and unlawful in our teachings and have learned our laws they must
agree to settle their dispute according to his judgment because I have
made him over you a ruler.

When he may judge according to our commands and then it is not accepted
from him the dissenting this judgment has ignored the commands of Allah
and it is rejection of us. Rejecting us is rejecting Allah and that is
up to the level of paganism and considering things equal to Allah."

I said, "What if each one of such disputing parties would chose a man
from among our people and agree to accept their judgment but these two
man would come up with different judgments and they would have
differences in your Hadith?"

The Imam replied, "The judgment will be the judgment of the one who has
a more just, having more better understanding of the law, Fiqh, the more
truthful in Hadith and the more pious of the two. The judgment of the
other one will be disregarded."

I said, "What if both (of such judges) would be just and accepted among
our people and none of them would have been any preference over the
other?"

The Imam replied, "One must consider and study the hadith that each one
of them would narrate from us as to which has received the acceptance of
all of your people. Such Hadith must be followed and the one, which
rarely accepted and is not popular in your people, must be disregarded
because the one popularly accepted is free of doubts. The nature of
cases are of three kinds: (a) A case that is a well-known and true to
follow.

(b) A case that is well known to be false to stay away from. (c) And a
confusing case the knowledge of which must be left to Allah and His
Prophet for an answer. The holy Prophet has said, 'There is the clearly
lawful and the clearly unlawful and the confusing cases. One who stays
away from the confusing ones he has protected himself against the
unlawful ones.

Those who follow the confusing matters they indulge in unlawful matters
and will be destroyed unexpectedly." I said, "What if both Hadith from
you would be popular and narrated by the trustworthy people from you?"

The Imam replied, "One must study to find out which one agrees with the
laws of the Quran and the Sunnah and it does not agree with the laws of
the those who oppose us. Such Hadith must be accepted and the one that
disagree with the laws of the Quran and the Sunnah and coincides the
masses must be disregarded."

I said, "May Allah take my soul in the service of your cause, What if
both Faqih, scholars of the law would have deduced and learned their
judgment from the book and the Sunnah and found that one of the Hadith
agrees with the masses and the other disagrees with the masses which one
must be followed?"

The Imam replied, "The one which disagrees with the masses must be
followed because in it there is guidance."

I said, "May Allah take my soul in the service of your cause, what if
both Hadith would agree with the masses?"

The Imam replied, "One must study to find out of the two the one that
is more agreeable to their rulers and judges must be disregarded and the
other must be followed." I said, "What if both Hadith would agree with
their rulers?"

The Imam replied, "If such would be the case it must be suspended until
you meet your Imam. Restraint in confusing cases is better than
indulging in destruction."


