Chapter 3 : Chapter On Kinds of People H 53, Ch. 3, H 1
=======================================================

Ali ibn Muhammad from Sahl ibn Ziyad and Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa all from ibn Mahbub from abu 'Usama from Hisham
ibn Salim from abu Hamza from abu Ishaq al-Sabay'i from one who narrated
it from a reliable source from Imam Ali (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"After the holy Prophet people become of three kinds. One group went to
a divinely well guided scholar. Allah had given him such a high degree
of knowledge that made him independent of the knowledge of the others.
The second group was the ignorant group, who claimed to have knowledge
but in fact they had no knowledge. This was an egotist group.

The worldly attractions had made them to lose sight of the truth and to
mislead other people. The third group consisted of those people who
learned from a divinely guided scholar who taught them for the sake of
Allah and for their salvation.

It then was obvious that those who claimed (to be scholars while, in
fact, they were not scholars) and those who forged certain matters
falsely were destroyed."

H 54, Ch. 3, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari has narrated from Mu'alla ibn
Muhammad from al- Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha' from Ahmad ibn 'A'idh from
abu Khadija Salim ibn Mukram from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"People are of three kinds: The scholars, the learning group and the
garbled ones."

H 55, Ch. 3, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from al-'Ala' ibn Razin from Muhammad ibn Muslim from abu
Hamza al-Thumali who has said the following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said this. 'It is narrated from Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said, "Be a scholar or a learning person or
love the scholars. Do not become of the fourth group lest you will be
destroyed by their hatred.'"

H 56, Ch. 3, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from
Jamil who has said the following.

"I heard Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying, 'People become of three
groups: Scholars, those who learn and garbled ones. We are the scholars.
Our followers are the ones who learn. The rest of the people are garbled
ones.'"


**Chapter 4 : Chapter on the reward for the scholars and those who seek
knowledge H 57, Ch. 4, h 1**

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan and Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad and Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad, all from Ja'far
ibn Muhammad al- Ash'ari from 'Abdullah ibn Maymun al-Qaddah and Ali ibn
Ibrahim from his father from Hammad ibn 'Isa from al-Qaddah from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The holy Prophet has said, 'If one sets out on a journey to seek
knowledge Allah will lead him to the way that would take him to
paradise.

The angels will stretch their wings for the pleasure of the seeker of
knowledge and all that is in the heavens and earth even the whales in
the oceans will ask forgiveness for him (from Allah). The excellence of
the scholar over other people is like that of the moon over other stars
during a full-moon night. The scholars are the heirs of the prophets.

The prophets did not leave any Dirham or Dinar (wealth) as their legacy
but they did leave knowledge as their legacy. Whoever acquires a share
from such legacy has gained a very large share.'"

H 58, Ch. 4, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan
ibn Mahbub from Jamil ibn Salih from Muhammad ibn Muslim from Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following.

"Those of you who teach will have the same reward as those who learn in
addition to his higher position over the student. Learn knowledge from
those possess knowledge and teach it to your brethren just as the
scholars have taught you."

H 59, Ch. 4, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi from Ali
ibn al-Hakam from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu Basir from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following.

"Whoever teaches something good he will receive a reward for each time
his student would practice such knowledge." Abu Basir has said, "I asked
the Imam, 'Would this apply to the student if he would teach other
people?'

The Imam (a.s.) replied, "Yes, it will apply to him even if all people
would teach it." I then asked, 'Would it apply to him if he would
already be dead?' The Imam (a.s.) responded, "Yes, even if he would be
dead."'

H 60, Ch. 4, h 4

Through the same chain of narrator it is narrated from Muhammad ibn
'Abd al-Hamid from al-'Ala' ibn Razin from abu 'Ubayda al-Hadhdha' from
abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Whoever teaches a subject of guidance he will receive a reward equal
to the rewards of those who would practice such guidance without any
reduction in the rewards of the later ones.

Whoever would introduce a subject of misguidance he will suffer equal
to the suffering due for each time it is practiced without any reduction
in the suffering of whoever would practice such misguidance."

H 61, Ch. 4, h 5

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Sa'd in a
marfu' manner from abu Hamza from Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) who has said
the following.

"If only people knew how much reward there is for seeking knowledge,
they would have sought it even if they would have had to shed their
blood for it or dive in large waves.

Allah the Blessed and Most High revealed to Daniel saying, 'The most
hated among my creatures are the ignorant ones who disrespect the
scholars and do not follow them. The Most beloved to Me in My servants
are the pious ones who work hard to become entitled for greater rewards,
who always stay close to the scholars, follow the fore-bearing people
and accept (the advise of) people of wisdom."

H 62, Ch. 4, h 6

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad
from Sulayman ibn Dawud al-Minqari from Hafs ibn Ghiyath who has said
that abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said the following.

"Whoever acquires knowledge and practice what he has learned and teach
it to others for the sake of Allah, among the angels of heavens he will
be called a great personality. It will be said there: 'He learned for
the sake of Allah, practiced for the sake of Allah and taught it for the
sake of Allah."


