Chapter 5 : Chapter On the Qualities of the Scholars H 63, Ch. 5, H 1
=====================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya al-'Attar from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
al-Hassan ibn Mahbub from Mu'awiya ibn Wahab who has said the following.
"Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said.

"Seek knowledge and beautify it with forbearance and dignity. Be humble
to your students and to those from whom you learn. Do not be a tyrant
scholar lest your falsehood would destroy the truth in you."

H 64, Ch. 5, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from
Hammad ibn 'Uthman from al-Harith ibn Mughirah al-Nasri from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
gracious.

"Only God's knowledgeable servants fear Him . . ..", (35:28) that
scholars are those whose deeds would testify to the truthfulness of
their words, otherwise, they are not scholars.'"

H 65, Ch. 5, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi
from 'Isma'il ibn Mihran from abu Sa'id al-Qammat from al-Halabi from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Imam Ali (a.s.) said, 'Do you want me to describe to you the true
Faqih, person who truly has a good understanding of religion? A true
Faqih is one who does not cause people to despair from the mercy of
Allah and does not make them to be unconcerned about the punishment of
Allah, who does not allow them to consider disobedience to Allah as
permissible and who doe not abandon the holy Quran because of being
attracted towards other matters.

You must know that there is no goodness in knowledge without good
understand (Fiqh). You must know that there is nothing good in a
recitation without thinking about it.

You must know that there is nothing good in worship without
thoughtfulness. In another Hadith it says, " You must know that there is
nothing good in a knowledge without good understanding. You must know
that there is nothing good in a recitation without thinking about it.

You must know that there is nothing good in worship without having a
good understanding of religion. You must know that there is nothing good
in performing the acts of Hajj etc. without piety.'"

H 66, Ch. 5, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa and
Muhammad ibn 'Ism'il from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan al-Naysaburi, all from
Safwan ibn Yahya from abu al- Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"Of the signs of Fiqh, good understanding of religion is forbearance
and quietness."

H 67, Ch. 5, h 5

Ahmad ibn 'Abdallah from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi from certain
persons of his people in a marfu' manner (rafa'ahu) from Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Foolishness and arrogance are not found in the hearts of the
scholars."

H 68, Ch. 5, h 6

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Muhammad ibn
Khalid from Muhammad ibn Sinan in a marfu' manner (rafa'ahu ) from Jesus
son of Mary who has said the following to his disciples.

"O disciples, I need your help so help me." They replied, "Your request
is granted, O Spirit of God." Jesus then got up and washed their feet.
To this the disciples said, "We were supposed to serve you O Spirit of
God." Jesus then said, "Of the people who must serve others are the
scholars.

I acted in this humble way so that you will act among people in the
humble way I acted before you." Jesus then said, "With humbleness wisdom
is established but not with arrogance. Just as plants grow in plain and
soft grounds but not on the hard grounds and rocks."

H 69, Ch. 5, h 7

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Ali ibn Ma'bad from
the person whom he mentioned from Mu'awiya ibn Wahab from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Imam Ali (a.s.), would often say, 'O
seekers of knowledge, (note that) a scholar has three signs: Knowledge,
forbearance and quietness.

An orator has three signs: He quarrels those higher then him through
disobedience. He does injustice to those lower than him in position
through domination and he becomes a supporter of the unjust.'"


**Chapter 6 : Chapter on the Rights of the scholars H 70, Ch. 6, h
1**

Ali ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad
from Muhammad ibn Khalid from Sulayman ibn Ja'far al-Ja'fari from the
person who he mentioned from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"Imam Ali (a.s.) said, 'One of the rights of a scholar is that one must
not ask him a great many questions and must not hold to his garment
(excessive questioning).

When one would enter in his presence while other people are there one
should offer salutation to all of them and special greetings to the
scholar only. One must sit before him and not behind him.

One must not blink his eyes before him or make hand gestures and must
not speak much in his presence such as so and so said so and so opposite
to what he says.

The length of his meeting must not disappoint one because the case of a
scholar is like a fruit bearing tree in which case one needs to wait
until three lets fruits to fall onto one. The reward for a scholar is
greater than that for one who fasts and prays very often and those who
fight for the cause of Allah.'"


