Chapter 9 : Chapter On Asking the Scholar and Discussing With Him H 82, Ch. 9, H 1
==================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
certain persons of our people from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

It is About a person who had smallpox and needed a formal bath due to
sexual activities. Certain people had washed him and then he died. The
Imam said, "They have killed him.

Why did they not ask about it? The medicine for the illness due to
ignorance, certainly, is to ask."

H 83, Ch. 9, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Hammed ibn 'Isa from Hariz from Zurra, Muhammad ibn Muslim and Burayd
al-'Ijli who has said the following.

"(Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said, 'People are destroyed only
because they do not ask (what they do not know).'"

H 84, Ch. 9, h 3

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Ja'far ibn
Muhammad al-Ash'ari from 'Abdallah ibn Maymun al-Qaddah from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "This knowledge (the
knowledge of the holy Prophet and Ahlul Bayt(a.s.)) is under a lock and
the key to it is asking"

Ali ibn Ibrahim, from his father from al-Nawfali, from al-Sakuni from
Imam abu 'Abdallah has narrated the same Hadith.

H 85, Ch. 9, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn 'Ubayd from
Yunus ibn 'Abd al- Rahman from abu Ja'far al-Awwal from abu 'Abdallahh
(a.s.) who has said the following. "People can do nothing until they
ask, acquire proper understand of religion and know their Imam and then
they can follow what the Imam (a.s.) says even if the he (a.s.) would
say some thing differently under (taqiyah) pressure."

H 86, Ch. 9, h 5

Ali has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus from the person who
he mentioned from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The holy Prophet has said, 'Woe is to a man who does not save a time
every Friday for learning about his religion and make a habit to ask
about his religion." In another Hadith it says, "woe is to every such
Muslim."

H 87, Ch. 9, h 6

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
'Abdallah ibn Sinan from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"The Holy Prophet said, 'Allah, the Majestic, the Glorious says, 'The
discussions of the scholars among My servants are of the matters that
bring the dead hearts to life if they come to and end up to My
commandments.'"

H 88, Ch. 9, h 7

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Muhammad ibn Sinan from abu al-Jarud from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said
the following. "May Allah grant forgiveness to a man who revives
knowledge." Abu al-Jarud has said, "I asked the Imam, 'What is reviving
knowledge?'" The Imam (a.s.) replied, "It is his discussing knowledge
among the religious people and the people of piety."

H 89, Ch. 9, h 8

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from 'Abdallah
ibn Muhammad al-Hajjal from certain persons of our people in a marfu'
manner from the Messenger of Allah who has said the following.

He said addressing the people said, "Discuss facts, meet each other and
speak to each other because speaking is brightness for the hearts.
Hearts become stained just as the swords become stained and speaking
cleanses it up." In some scripts it is 'Iron' instead of 'speaking' at
the end of the sentence."

H 90, Ch. 9, h 9

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from his father from Faddala ibn Ayyub from 'Umar ibn Aban from Mansur
al-Sayqal who has said the following.

"Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) has said, 'Discussing knowledge is study and
study is a good prayer.'"


**Chapter 10 : Chapter on Giving Knowledge as Charity H 91, Ch. 10, h
1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il ibn Bazi' from Mansur ibn Hazim from Talha ibn
Zayd from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"I read in the book of Imam Ali (a.s.) that Allah had no commitment
from and covenant with the ignorant people to seek knowledge before
having a commitment from and covenant with the scholars to give
knowledge as charity to the ignorant ones because knowledge existed
before ignorance."

H 92, Ch. 10, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi
from his father from 'Abdullah ibn Mughirah and Muhammad ibn Sinan from
Talha ibn Zayd from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about this verse.

"Do not scornfully turn your face away from people. . ." (31:18) 'so
that people would all be equal in matters of knowledge.'"

H 93, Ch. 10, h 3

Through the same chain of narrators he has narrated from his father
from Ahmad ibn Nadr from 'Amr and ibn Shimr from Jabir from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Zakat, the tax, on knowledge is
teaching it to the servants of Allah."

H 94, Ch. 10, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn 'Ubayd from
Yunus ibn 'Abd al- Rahman from the person who he mentioned from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Jesus, son of Mary (a.s.) once stood up to speak to the Israelites
saying, 'O Israelites, do not speak the words of wisdom to the ignorant
people because you will be doing injustice to them (words of wisdom). Do
not keep them (words of wisdom) from those who deserve lest you will do
injustice to them (deserving people).'"


