Chapter 13 : Chapter On Utilization of Knowledge H 107, Ch. 13, H 1
===================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Hammed from 'Umar ibn 'Udhayna from Aban ibn abu 'Ayyash from Sulaym ibn
Qays al-Hilali who has said the following.

"I heard Imam Ali (a.s.) narrate from the Holy Prophet (s.a.) who said,
'The scholars are of two kinds: One kind consists of those who uphold
their knowledge and they gain their salvation. The other kind consists
of those who disregard their knowledge and they face their
destruction.

The people of hell will suffer from the bad odor of the scholars who do
not act according to their knowledge. Of the people of hell the one who
will regret most will be a man who teaches someone and shows him the way
of Allah.

The student accepts and acts according to such teachings and
consequently Allah takes him to paradise but the teacher is sent to hell
because of ignoring his knowledge, following his desires and
entertaining long hopes. Following ones' desires bars one from the
truth. And cherishing long hopes causes one to forget the next life.'"

H 108, Ch. 13, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad ibn Sinan from
'Isma'il ibn Jabir from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"Knowledge and work are closely related. One who has knowledge he works
and one who works he learns. Knowledge invites work and if it is not
accepted knowledge departs the deeds."

H 109, Ch. 13, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from Ali ibn Muhammad al-Qasani from one he mentioned from 'Abdallah ibn
Qasim al-Ja'fari from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"If a scholar preaches and does not practice his words bounce away from
the hearts of the audience like rains that bounce away off the rocks."

H 110, Ch. 13, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad
from al-Minqari from Ali ibn Hashim ibn al-Burayd from his father who
has said the following.

"A man came to (Imam) Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) and asked him certain
questions and the Imam answered his questions. The man then wanted to
ask similar questions but the Imam said, "It is written in the Gospel,
'Do not inquire to know what you do not know until you practice what you
know because not practicing what one knows does not increase to one
anything but disbelief and nor it increases anything to one's relation
with Allah but alienation."

H 111, Ch. 13, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Muhammad ibn Sinan from al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has said the
following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'What are the facts that help one
know those who have gained their salvation?' The Imam replied, "One
whose words agree with his deeds you must consider his testimony as
valid and one whose words do not agree with his deeds (if he may have
faith) it is temporarily.'"

H 112, Ch. 13, h 6

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from his father in a marfu' manner (rafa'ahu) from Amir al-Mu'minin Ali
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Once Imam Ali (a.s.) said in one of
his sermons, 'O people, if you learn and gain knowledge you must act
accordingly so that you may have guidance.

A learned person who disregards his knowledge is like a lost and
ignorant person who never comes to the right path due to his ignorance.
In fact, you will find the case against such the learned that disregards
his knowledge more sever and his regret more prolonged, compared to the
ignorant person who wonders about in it. Both people stray and are
devoid of goodness. Do not hesitate lest you will doubt and do not doubt
lest you will disbelieve.

Do not be lenient to your souls to play lazy. Do not trivialize the
truth lest you will lose badly. It is of the truth to learn Fiqh, proper
understanding of religion.

It is of Fiqh, proper understanding of religion not to suffer deceit.
The wisest for ones self among you is the one most obedient to his Lord.
The most deceitful to himself among you is the disobedient one to his
Lord. One who obeys Allah is safe and glad news awaits him but one who
disobeys his Allah he loses and regrets.'"

H 113, Ch. 13, h 7

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from his father from the one mentioned from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rahman
ibn abu Layla from his father who has said the following.

"Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) has said, 'When you hear knowledge you must
utilize it and your hearts must become more open. When knowledge
increases in one's heart it becomes harder to bear and Satan may over
power him.

If Satan would dispute with you move on him with whatever you know. The
plots of Satan are weak." I asked the Imam (a.s.) "What is it that we
know?'" The Imam replied, "Fight him with whatever of the power of
Allah, the Majestic, the Glorious, has come to light before you."


**Chapter 14 : Chapter on Those who use their Knowledge to Fill their
Stomach and are Boastful for it H 114, Ch. 14, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa and
Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father, both of them from Hammad ibn 'Isa from
'Umar ibn 'Udhayna from Aban ibn abu 'Ayyash from Sulaym ibn Qays who
has said the following.

"(Imam) Ali (a.s.) narrated from the holy Prophet who said, 'Two kinds
of people with great appetites do not become satisfied. A person of
great appetite for the worldly gains and a person with great appetite
for knowledge.

In the matters of the worldly gains if one would limit himself to what
Allah has made lawful form him he is saved and if one would accumulate
such gains in unlawful ways he is destroyed unless he repents and
changes his ways. In the matters of knowledge if one would acquire it
from the people of knowledge and practice accordingly he is saved and if
one would use it for the worldly gains then that is what one gets.'"

H 115, Ch. 14, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn 'Amir has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad
from al- Hassan ibn Ali al-Washshi' from Ahmad ibn 'A'idh from abu
Khadija from abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) who has said the following.

"If one would want al-Hadith for the worldly benefits he will have no
share for it in the next life but if one would want al-Hadith for the
good of the next life, Allah will give him the good of both this and the
next life."

H 116, Ch. 14, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad
al-Isbahani from al-Minqari from Hafs ibn Ghiyath from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "Whoever would want al-Hadith for the
worldly gains he will have no share for it in the next life."

H 117, Ch. 14, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Qasim from
al-Minqari from Hafs ibn Ghiyath from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said
the following.

"If you would find a learned person who loves the worldly gains you
must not trust him in the matters of your religion because whoever would
love something it will encompass and entangle him. The holy Prophet has
said, 'Allah sent wahy, revelation to David (a.s.) and told him, "Do not
set between Me and yourself a learned person who loves the worldly gains
lest he will bar you from the way to My love.

Such people are bandits who ambush my servants who want Me. The least
that I will do to such bandits is to take away from them the sweetness
of their private conversations and prayers with Me."

H 118, Ch. 14, h 5

Ali from his father from al-Nawfali from al-Sakuni from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following.

"The holy Prophet has said, Al-Fuqaha, the scholars of the Fiqh,
Islamic laws are the trustees of the prophets until they are not
involved in the worldly matters." People asked, "What is their 'entering
in the worldly matters, O the holy Prophet of Allah?" "Their following
the kings is entering in the worldly matters. When they follow the kings
then you must be very careful in involving them in your religion."
Replied the holy Prophet (s.a.)

H 119, Ch. 14, h 6

Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from Hammed
ibn 'Isa from Ri'ab'i ibn 'Abdallah from one he narrated from abu Ja'far
(a.s.) who has said the following.

"Whoever would seek knowledge to show off to the scholars or to engage
in arguments with fools or to attract people to himself he should know
that in so doing he has prepare his seat in the fire. Leadership does
not suite anyone besides those qualified for it."


