Chapter 15 : Chapter On the Need For the Existence of a Divine Authority in the World and the Seriousness of This Matter H 120, Ch. 15, H 1
===========================================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim has narrated from his father from al-Qasim
ibn Muhammad from al-Minqari from Hafs ibn Ghiyath from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following. "O Hafs, seventy sins of an ignorant
person may be forgiven before only one sin of a learned person is
forgiven."

H 121, Ch. 15, h 2

Through the same chain of narrators it is narrated from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following.

"Jesus son of Mary (s.a.) said, 'Woe to bad scholars! If only they knew
how raging fire will engulf them.'"

H 122, Ch. 15, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father and Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il
from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan, both from ibn abu 'Umayr from Jamil ibn Darraj
who has said the following.

"(Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has said, "When the soul reaches here,
pointing to his throat, there will be no chance for learned persons to
repent. He recited this verse; "God will only accept the repentance of
those who commit evil in ignorance, if they repent immediately. God is
All-knowing and All-wise (4:17)"

H 123, Ch. 15, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from
abu Sa'id al-Mukari from abu Basir from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said
the following.

"Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) has said about the words of Allah in the holy
Quran, 'The idol worshippers, the idols, the rebellious ones, (26:94)
and the army of Satan will all be thrown headlong into hell. (26:95)'
They are the people who speak about justice a great deal but in their
own practice they would disregard it altogether.'"


**Chapter 16 : Chapter on Miscellaneous Issues H 124, Ch. 16, h 1**

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Hafs ibn al-Bakhtari in a marfu' manner from Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.)
who has said the following.

"Relax your souls with new sparks of wisdom, because souls also tire as
bodies do."

H 125, Ch. 16, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Nuh
ibn Shu'ayb al- Naysaburi from 'Ubaydallah ibn 'Abdallah al-Dihqan from
Durust ibn abu Mansur from 'Urwa cousin of Shu'ayb al-'Aqarqi from
Shu'ayb from abu Basir who has said the following. "(Imam) abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said that Imam Ali (a.s.) used to say, "O seekers of
knowledge, knowledge (in a personified form) has a great deal of
virtues.

Humbleness is his head, freedom from jealousy forms his eyes, proper
understanding shapes his ears, truthfulness constitutes his tongue,
research and investigation produce his memory, optimism stands for his
heart, the knowledge of facts and affairs strengthen his intellect.

Intelligence and kindness are his hands, visitation of the scholars
builds his legs, safety and peace emerge from his stamina, chastity
develops his wisdom, salvation is his head quarters, good health and
tranquility are his lead, loyalty will provide him his conveyance,
politeness in communication gives him weapons,

consent frames his sword, yielding to the truth stands for his bow and
arrow, communication with the scholars establishes his army, proper
discipline treasures his wealth, avoiding sins preserves his savings,
uprightness institutes his supplies, amicable dealings supply him water,
guidance determines his direction and love of virtuous people is the
archetype for his friends."

H 126, Ch. 16, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The holy Prophet has said, 'The best minister for faith is knowledge,
the best minister for knowledge is forbearance, the best minister for
forbearance is amicable dealings and the best minister for amicable
dealings is patience.'"

H 127, Ch. 16, h 4

Ali ibn Muhammad from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Ja'far ibn Muhammad
al-Ash'ari from 'Abdallah ibn Maymun al-Qaddah from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
from his ancestors (the Imams (a. s.) who has said the following.

"Once a man came to the holy Prophet (s.a.) and said, 'O messenger of
Allah what is knowledge?'

The holy Prophet replied, "It is silence."

The man then asked, "Then what?"

The holy Prophet said, "It is listening."

The man asked, "Then what?"

The holy Prophet (s.a.) said, "Then it is memorizing."

The man asked, "Then what?"

The holy Prophet said, "Then it is practice accordingly."

The man then asked, "Then what O messenger of Allah?"

The holy Prophet said, "Then it is to propagate what one has
learned."

H 128, Ch. 16, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim in a marfu' manner has narrated from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following.

"The seekers of knowledge are of three kinds. The more noticeable of
them in person or character are: (a) the group who seeks knowledge for
ignorance and quarrel. (b) The group who seeks knowledge to dominate and
cheat others. (c) The group who seeks knowledge for proper
understanding, Fiqh, and power of intelligence.

The group whose purpose of seeking knowledge is ignorance and quarrel
is a harmful and quarrelsome group.

This group interrupts conversations in the gatherings of the people to
speak about knowledge and the description of forbearance. Such people
appear in the garb of the gentle and humble ones but, in fact, are
devoid of all the qualities of the pious people.

Allah has humiliated and has condemned this group. The group that seeks
domination and cheating is a deceitful and flattering group. Such people
try to dominate people of their kind and flatter the wealthy ones who
know less than they do. Such people consume the sweetmeat of the rich
people and destroy their own religion. May Allah banish the news of such
people and cut off their traces from the history of the scholars.

"The group that seeks knowledge for the sake of Fiqh, proper
understanding, and to gain the power of intelligence consists of people
who are deeply concerned and stay awake very often.

They pull their robe on their heads and standup for prayer in the
darkness of nights. They work hard anxiously and fearfully and pray with
deep worries. They are very attentive of their affairs, knowledgeable of
the people of their time and fearful even of their own trusted brothers.
May Allah strengthen the corners of such people and grant them salvation
on the Day of Judgment."

Narrated to me the above hadith Muhammad ibn Mahmud abu 'Abdallah
al-Qazwini from a number of our people of whom is Ja'far in Muhammad
al-Sayqal of Qazwin from Ahmad ibn 'Isa al-'Alawi from 'Abbad ibn Suhayb
al-Basri from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.).

H 129, Ch. 16, h 6

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Muhammad ibn Yahya
from Talha ibn Zayd who has said the following.

"(Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'The narrators of the book are a
great many but those who would follow the proper discipline are very
few. There are many, who are sincere about Hadith but mess up with the
book. Lack of protection and discipline saddens the scholars and the
(zeal) of ignorant ones to protect the (words of) narration (of a false
text in reality) betrays the later group altogether.

One kind of protectionism seeks protection of life and the other leads
to its destruction and in such a situation the two forms of
protectionism become different and the two groups distinct from each
other.'"

H 130, Ch. 16, h 7

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash'ari from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn Jumhur from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn abu Najran from one he
mentioned from abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) who has said the following.

"Whoever would preserve and memorize forty of our Hadith on the Day of
Judgment Allah will raise him as a scholar and Faqih, one with proper
understanding of religion."


H 131, Ch. 16, h 8

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from his father from one he mentioned from Zayd al-Shahham from abu
Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"It is his knowledge that he acquires from whoever he acquires."

This he said in answer to the question 'What is his food' in the words
of Allah, "Let the human being think about (how We produce) his food."
(80:24)?'

H 132, Ch. 16, h 9

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Ali ibn an- Ni'man from 'Abdallah ibn Muskan from Daiwud ibn Farqad from
abu Sa'id al-Zuhri from abu Ja'far (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Holding back in an uncertain conditions is better than indulging in a
destructive case. Your ignoring a Hadith that you do not narrate is
better than your narrating a Hadith that you have not verified."

H 133, Ch. 16, h 10

Muhammad has narrated from Ahmad from ibn Faddal from ibn Bukayr from
Hamza ibn al- Tayyar the following.

"(Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'In the case of what may come to you
and you have no knowledge of its veracity you can do nothing but to hold
and verify and refer it to the Imams of guidance so that he would show
the way of justice in it and enlighten you in the darkness and introduce
to you the truth. Allah, the Most High has said, "Ask those who know
about the heavenly Books if you do not know about this."'' (16:43)

H 134, Ch. 16, h 11

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad
from al-Minqari from Sufyan ibn 'Uyaynah who has said the following.

"(Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who said, 'I have found all the knowledge
of people in four categories: (a) The knowledge that would teach you
about your Lord. (b) The knowledge that would teach you what the Lord
has done for you. (c) The knowledge that would teach you what the Lord
wants from you. (d) The knowledge that would teach you what destroys
your religion.'"

H 135, Ch. 16, h 12

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Hisham ibn Salim who has said the following.

"(Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'People must say only what they know
and hold back from what they do not know. If they would do as such they
have observed the rights of the Lord upon them.'" This he said in answer
to a question from Hisham ibn Salim.

H 136, Ch. 16, h 13

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from Sahl ibn Ziyad from ibn Sinan from Muhammad
ibn Marwan al-'Ijli from Ali ibn Hanzala who has said the following.

"(Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), said, 'Note the position of the people
from the degree of their narration of Hadith from us.'"

H 137, Ch. 16, h 14

Al-Husayn ibn al-Hassan has narrated from Muhammad ibn Zakariyya
al-Ghalibi from ibn 'A'isha al-Basri in a marfu' manner (rafa'ahu) Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) who has said the following.

"In certain parts of his sermons he said, 'O people, know that there is
no man of intelligence who would become disappointed for a lie spoken
about him. There is no man of wisdom who would become pleased with the
praises of ignorant people of him. People are children of what they do
best and the value of a man is what he does best. Speak knowledge it
will manifest your value.'"

H 138, Ch. 16, h 15

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Aban ibn 'Uthman from 'Abdallah ibn Sulayman who has
said the following.

'(Imam) abu Ja'far (a.s.) said to a man from Basra called 'Uthman
al-A'ma who would keep saying, "Al-Hassan al-Basri believes that those
who hide knowledge the bad odor from their stomach will cause suffering
to the people of hell." The Imam said, "The true believer of the people
of Pharaoh is then destroyed. Knowledge from the time of Noah became
veiled (s.a). Let Hassan go left and right. I swear by Allah he will not
find knowledge in no other place but here with us."


