Chapter 17 : Chapter On Narrating Books and Hadith (the Virtue of Writing and Its Preservation) H 139, Ch. 17, H 1
==================================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Mansur ibn Yunus from abu Basir who has said the following.

"(Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said about the words of Allah in the holy
Quran, " . . . Our servants who listen to the words and only follow the
best ones . . .. (39:18)." "He is a man who learns Hadith and reports it
as he has learned without any additions of omissions"

H 140, Ch. 17, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from ibn
abu 'Umayr from ibn 'Udhayna from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the
following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Can I add to or omit from a Hadith that
I hear from you?'" He said, "It is alight, if you would preserve the
meaning,'"

H 140, Ch. 17, h 3

It is narrated from him from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from ibn Sinan from
Dawud ibn Farqad who has said the following.

"I asked (Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'I hear your statement and I want
to narrate to others but it does not come through exactly.'" The Imam
asked, "Do you do it purposely?" He said, "No, I do not do it
purposely." The Imam asked, "Do you keep the meaning?" He said, "Yes, I
keep the meaning." The Imam said, "It then is alright."

H 141, Ch. 17, h 4

It is narrated from him from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn abu Hamza from abu
Basir who has said the following. "Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said to Jamil,
'What you hear from me narrate it from my father.'"

H 142, Ch. 17, h 5

It is narrated from him from Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn
al-Husayn from ibn Mahbub from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan who has said the
following.

"I said to (Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'People come to me and they
listen to the Ahadith that I narrate to them from you. I become tired
and weak.'" The Imam said, "Narrate to them a Hadith from the beginning
and one from the middle and one from the end."

H 143, Ch. 17, h 6

It is narrated from him from Ahmad ibn 'Umar al-Hallal who has said the
following. "I said to (Imam) abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.), 'One of our
people gives me a book but he does not say whether I can narrate any
thing from it or not. Can I narrate from it?'" He has said that the Imam
(a.s.) said, "Yes, you can narrate if you would that the book is his."

H 144, Ch. 17, h 7

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Khalid from al- Nawfali from al-Sakuni from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who
has said the following. "When you would narrate Hadith you must say who
its narrator is. If it would be true it will be for you and if it would
be false it will be his responsibility.

H 145, Ch. 17, h 8

Ali ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad
from abu Ayyub al-Madani from ibn abu 'Umayr from Husayn al-Ahmasi from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The heart relies on writing."

H 146, Ch. 17, h 9

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha' from 'Asim ibn Humayd from abu Basir who
has said the following. "(Imam) abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'You must
write down because you will not memorize until you write down.'"

H 147, Ch. 17, h 10

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Faddal from ibn Bukayr from 'Ubayd ibn Zurara who
has said the following. "Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'You must preserve
your books because you will soon need them.'"

H 148, Ch. 17, h 11

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
al-Barqi from certain persons of his people from abu Sa'id al-Khaybari
from al-Mufaddal ibn 'Umar who has said the following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'You must write down (Hadith) and spread
your knowledge among your brethren. If you will die your children will
inherit your books. A time will come when people will face chaos and
they will find no comfort but with their books.'"

H 149, Ch. 17, h 12

It is narrated through the same chain of narrators from Muhammad ibn
Ali in a marfu' manner from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'Beware of the branched-out lies.' They
asked the Imam, "What is branched-out lies?" The Imam replied, "It is
when a person narrates a Hadith to you and you would ignore him and
narrate it from the person from whom he had narrated the Hadith.'"

H 150, Ch. 17, h 13

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from Jamil ibn Darraj who has said the
following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'Speak our Hadith clearly because we are
eloquent people.'"

H 151, Ch. 17, h 14

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz from Hisham ibn Salim, Hammed ibn
'Uthman and others who have said the following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'My Hadith is the Hadith of my father. The
Hadith of my father is the Hadith of my grandfather. The Hadith of my
grandfather is the Hadith of Imam Husayn.

The Hadith of Imam al-Husayn is the Hadith of Imam al- Hassan. The
Hadith of Imam al- Hassan is the Hadith of Imam Ali (a.s.). The Hadith
of Imam Ali is the Hadith of the holy Prophet (s.a.) and the Hadith of
the holy Prophet is the words of Allah, the Majestic, the Glorious.'"

H 152, Ch. 17, h 15

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn al- Hassan ibn abu Khalid Shaynula who has said the
following.

"I said to abu Ja'far (a.s.), 'May Allah take my soul in your service,
our shaikhs have narrated Hadith from Imam abu Ja'far and from Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) and at that time because of fear Taqiyah, concealment
was sever. They concealed their books and did narrate from them. When
they died their books came to us.'" The Imam said, "You may narrate from
them because they contain the truth."


**Chapter 18 : Chapter on Taqlid, following the opinions of someone H
153, Ch. 18, h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from 'Abdallah ibn Yahya from ibn Muskan from abu Basir who has said the
following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the verse of the holy Quran
that says, 'They (unconditionally) obeyed the rabbis and the monks and
worshipped the Messiah, son of Mary, as they should have obeyed God. . .
. (9:31)'. The Imam replied, "By Allah they did not call people to
worship them. If they had done so people would not have accepted it. The
Rabbis and monks made unlawful things lawful for them and the lawful
things as lawful. And in this way they worshipped them
unintentionally."

H 154, Ch. 18, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al- Hamdani from Muhammad ibn 'Ubayda who has said the
following.

"Abu al-Hassan (a.s.) said, 'O Muhammad, Do you observe Taqlid more
strictly or the group of Murji'a?' Muhammad ibn 'ubaydah has said, "I
replied, 'They observe Taqlid and we observe Taqlid.' The Imam then
said, "I did not ask you about this." I did not have any answer other
than the first one.

The Imam then said, "The group of Murji'a chose a man whose obedience
was not obligatory (in the commands of Allah) but they obeyed and
followed him strictly.

You chose a man and considered obedience to him necessary (in commands
from Allah) and then you did not follow him strictly, therefore, they
are more strict in Taqlid, following than you are."

H 155, Ch. 18, h 3

Muhammad ibn 'Isma'il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from Hammed
ibn 'Isa from Rib'i ibn 'Abdallah from abu Basir from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.) who has said the following.

"They (unconditionally) obeyed the rabbis and the monks and worshipped
the Messiah, son of Mary, as they should have obeyed God . . .. (9:31).'
"By Allah, they (the people) did not pray or fast for them (rabbis and
monks) but they (rabbis and monks) made lawful for the people what was
unlawful and unlawful what was lawful and people followed them
accordingly."


