Introduction of the Second Edition
==================================

**( 9 )**

In The Name Of Allah The Beneficent The Merciful
------------------------------------------------

##### Praised Be Allah Lord of Worlds. Perfect Blessings And Thorough Peace Be Upon Mohammed Our Master And Prophet And His Immaculate Infallible Progeny.

### GRACE OF BROADMINDEDNESS

One of the most remarkable graces of Allah the Elevated to mankind is
broadmindedness and tolerance especially before those who carry
different opinion belief and faith and capability of listening
understanding and consenting to their wrong estimation harm and
injustice.

This grace to great extent is sparse. Seemingly Shias are more
broadminded than others. They may suitably sustain being dissented in
opinion and faith and even persecuted.

This is by reason that Shias were brought up by beliefs of their sect
and principals of broadmindedness and readiness to suffer persecution. A
Shiite is loyal to the Prophet's household who represented values and
idealities of Islam and went on standing injustice till the advent of
their Expected Al-Mahdi (peace be upon him.)

Shias have fully learnt that a garment against misfortunes should be
taken by all of those who claim cherishing the Prophet's household. They
also have learnt that this affair is arduous and intolerable.

For Shias this question is as extensive as this world with its divine
formula and expectation. They conceive others cannot easily perceive
their beliefs and opinions although they are ideologically gentle and
indecently easy for the accompanying psychological difficulty.

**( 10 )**

Due to such instructions a Shitte is seen seek apology for his
dissenters and unjust since he intends to share them in peaceful life
and draws excuses of wronging.

Shias however coincided harm and wrong so naturally that they betook
them as garment and those did wrong to them were surprised of such a
turning the other cheek.

### GRACE OF BROADMINDEDNESS FOR OUR BROTHERS

Shias' rivals enjoyed distinct levels of broadmindedness. Wahabists
apparently are the most narrow-minded. They are the new unjust occupants
of the Islamic house who accused us of polytheism communism and Jewism.

Days turned. They determined that the West and Israel had been bearing
malice against us greater than that born against them. Nevertheless this
made no changes!

Days turned over and over. They perceived that we had suspended
conflicts against any of this nation's groups and took the charge of
conflicting Israel alone. This made no changes too.

The whole world was surprised by the counterattack and resistance showed
by Shias' sons in South Lebanon. The Arab and Muslims took pride in that
struggle. Nevertheless Wahabists our brothers disliked so. They did not
ascribe martyrdom to the killed since they reckoned them with
polytheists whose works and fighting are not purposed for sake of Allah.
They could see an eighteen year old young who was brought up on
godfearing and abstained from mundane cupidity confining himself to
faith mosques Quran enthusiasm to God and obtaining martyrdom for His
sake. They saw such a young push himself courageously in fortresses of
the Jews carrying his soul on the palm and raising his voice with
'Allahu Akbar' with ultimate perseverance and hard strike. They saw him
spatter his limbs as an offering to God the Exalted demolishing legend
of fear carried by Muslims' hearts and leaving his will of urging on
jihad for sake of Allah. All this does neither act upon nor rouse
Wahabists' sense.

Uninfluenced by any Shiite phenomenon Wahabists are only influenced by
describing whomever dissent their conceptions as atheists and
polytheists.

More than five hundred books and booklets were publicized by Wahabists
against Shias in a period of few years. A great deal of fierce verdicts
impolite utterances and scanty knowledge was covering these books.

Hitherto they cannot endure a single positively critical study relating
their ideology of faith and monotheism.

We expect their scholars to enjoy broadmindedness as much as that
enjoyed by scholars of western universities some of whom find an
exultation in

**( 11 )**

ideological criticism or even that enjoyed by scholars of the worthy
ancestors who were listening to sayings for opting for the most
appropriate. Those were guided by Allah and those are the mindful.

### OBJECTIVE OF THE STUDY

As a matter of fact this study was not my intendment. While I was
sinking in another survey I could maintain that Wahabists' complex of
Verses and hadiths\* of the divine attributes is in need for rudimental
cognition. I was highly shocked as I referred to their books.
Immediately I said to myself: Had Wahabists our brothers had knowledge
of reality of monotheism provided by their scholars who settle on their
shoulders the mission of leading Muslims to such a conception they would
have retracted and started a new inceptive in structuring their belief
in Allah the Exalted. They would likewise have decreased their reviling
at us.

Had an educated Wahabist known that his supreme jurisconsult AbdulAzeez
Bin Baz state that "Allah the Elevated is a material corporeality
existing in a form of a human being in a certain place in this universe
having a face hand leg limbs and organs and that His Throne is carried
by animals." Had the welltaught Wahabist known that his scholars claimed
"This (god) shall totally terminate except His face. This fact is
evidenced by His saying (Every thing is perishable but His face).'" They
also assert "Scholars of Wahabism are obligatorily asked to hide Allah's
materiality from ordinary Muslims and rest upon 'principal of
circumspection' in this regard since within Islamic beliefs there are
those peculiar to the first class scholars. Allah's materiality is
dedicate to this class."

Had educated Wahabists experienced such a scholastic impotence and his
scholars' contrast in hypotheses respecting monotheism they would have
been enormously overwhelmed to the degree that they might have
restructed conceptions regarding Allah the Elevated. Besides they would
have found excuses to majority of Muslims who showed abandonment from
Wahabism.

This study is rendered for proving this matter. We hope Wahabists our
brothers would be attracted to understand that their problem of
monotheism is the greatest among the miscellaneous problems of Muslims.
They however may be engaged in finding resolution for this problem so
that they will alleviate their denunciation at us especially in season
of ritual pilgrimage. Owing to verdicts of atheism and polytheism
addressed at followers of other sects by Wahabists who pushed themselves
with no hesitation towards humiliating pilgrims of God's Holy House and
visitators of tombs of the Prophet and his household Muslims regarded
their mental hardship before physical and fiscal ones during such
seasons.

**( 12 )**

Volunteers for serving the Beneficent's guests became numerous
especially during the last few years. They distributed their prizes of
mistreatments unjust verdicts and ill tones equally on pilgrims of the
various countries and nationalities of this world. Hence each pilgrim
returns home carrying a sort of that rudeness in mind. Pilgrims' faults
were not more than seeking God's courtesies by visitating tombs of the
Prophet or one of God's favorite disciples.

Wahabists our brothers should understand that questions of practical
polytheism are totally falling a single step behind question of
hypothetical belief. A Muslim should in the first place improve beliefs
and conceptions regarding the Lord so that he would be able of
possessing criterion of measuring the others' hypothetical and practical
monotheism. Secondly Muslims should discern the major middle and minor
polytheism.

In case a Muslim is living in problems touching the origin of believing
in Allah the Exalted he should decipher such problems and restruct his
own house before if permissible he provides personal inference before
other Muslims. Inference should be rendered by following good wills
positive dialect and impressive words.

#### Ali Al-Kurani Al-Amili

#### Safar,14,1419.
