Chp 9 the Corporalists Are Set Free. Shias Are Under Arrest
===========================================================

**( 169 )**

Waves of persecution Shias have been suffering since the Prophet's
decease up to now are adequately enough to eradicate any nation or sect
other than them. Similarly floods of accusation and mass medial
campaigns consecrated against Shias are commensurate enough to fade out
any nation or sect. Despite the all Shias are still enjoying
considerable fitness and wholeness living in good livelihood and
increasingly forming about quarter of the Islamic nation.

Their habituating themselves to circumstances of persecution in such a
piercing form was the main reason beyond their importunate endurance.
They adjusted themselves to receiving accusals. They are the best
example of encountering cataclysms of iniquitous accusals and insults by
relaxed and calm nerves. "We are the opposition. We do not expect our
Islamic history to consent to us." this is the statement usually said by
Shias when they are wondered about receiving such accusal and insults.
As a matter of fact Shias do recognize history. From historical
occurrences such as the attack on house of Fatima daughter of the
Prophet who departed the life few hours before and whose body had not
been buried yet practiced by the ruling authorities who heaped up
firewood around her house and warned that they would set it on fire
while Ali Al-Hassan and Al-Hussein besides Fatima herself the Prophet's
household had been inside it. Form this occurrence and many others Shias
learned that the Islamic history is too intolerant to treat the
opposition party fairly or even equitably. In a like manner We the Shias
do not expect governments that persecuted chased banished and massacred
us to praise or speak fairly about our beliefs. We anticipate they would
revile at us and accuse us of every unfitting affair. Moreover we did
realize that they would fabricate rumors and vituperation too
constructed to be attained by the most proficient specialists in
profession of fabrication.

**( 170 )**

After all these years we do expect our brothers the fair scholars to
disinherit those styles of accusation and reviling at the Prophet's
progeny and their adherents. We do seek them to acquaint faiths
jurisprudence and beliefs of Shias from their own reference books. We do
hope that our brothers would shun false information inscribed in
reference books of those who persecuted and hated Shias and books of
those yesmen who reviled at Shias just because they heard some people
revile.

### BOOKS OF ISLAMIC SECTS FORGE LIES AGAINST SHIAS AND COVER UP CORPORALISTS

It is quite accurate to describe books dealt with the Islamic sects as
'a group of journalistic politicized and unauthenticated accounts that
are similar to a western journalist's report concerning the group of
bodies associations and trends in a definite Arabic country who writes
down what he hears and some of what he externally sees on bases of his
personal backgrounds and aims.'

Al-Ashari's Maqalatul Islamiyin As-Shehristani's Al-Milelu WenNihel Ibn
Hazm's Al-Faslu Fil Milel and An-Nubekhti's Al-Farqu Beinel Furaq are
examples of such reference books.

We can only cite models of these books so that we may open the door to
fortuitous criticism. Authenticity of accrediting these writing works to
those scholars should be the foremost matter to be discussed since a
number of testimonies suspects for example relating the book of
Maqalatul Islamiyin to Abul-Hassan Al-Ashari.

### EXAMPLES ON COVERING UP CORPORALISTS IN THESE BOOKS

**Maqalatul Islamiyin; Abul-Hassan Al-Ashari part 1 page 211:**

Mutazilites contend that prevalence is the meaning of God's settling.
Some people claim 'settling' stands for sitting and aptitude.

Those 'some people' are majority of Asharites and Hanbalites. What for
then does the writer shun naming them?!

**part 1 page 213:**

They engaged in discrepancy about seeableness of the Excellent Creator.
Some asserted that it is possible to see Allah with eyes in this world
and that they might have met

Those some are the corporalists; the Asharites Hanbalites and
Hashawites. What for then does the writer shun naming them?!

**part 1 page 211:**

People cited different opinions about bearers of the Throne. Some claim
their bearing the Creator that when He is irate it becomes heavy for
them to carry.

**( 171 )**

When he becomes pleasant it becomes light. Others claim bearers of the
Throne are eight angles. Some said eight species

Since his likes and he (AhlusSunna) decide authenticity of hadith of
ibex and its likes Al-Ashari covers up identity of those who claim such
ridiculous statements. He is used to doing so whenever he is unable to
impute such rejected sayings to Shias or Mutazilites. He shelters sayers
of such statements so that Allah may protect him!!

By the way Hanbalites and Asharites have uttered calamitous sayings
about bearers of the Throne. All can be viewed at exegesis of God's
saying (The Beneficent settled on the Throne.) They imitated the Jews
and the pagans when they claimed that bearers of the divine throne are
animals; tame and wild. They rested upon authentic reports. Previously
we have provided examples of these opinions.

**part 1 page 214:**

Some opted for possibility of the Lord's incarnation in corporealities.
They used to revere handsome men expecting that their Lord might have
incarnated in his corporeality. Majority of those who opt for the Lord's
seeableness decide possibility of shaking hands touching and visitating
Him the Lord. They added "The sincere servants shall hang their Lord in
this world as well as in the Hereafter." Others abstained from claiming
God's seeableness in this world They claimed the Lord's seeableness in
the Hereafter.

Those incarnationists who decide possibility of hanging the Lord in the
Hereafter are the Hashawites and groups of Hanbalites and Asharites. The
abstinent are some of Asharites and few of Hanbalites. Other Muslims do
contradict so.

### Ashehristani's Al-Milelu Wen-Nihel volume 1 part 1 page 141:

Anthropomorphists related that the Prophet (peace be upon him) had said
"My Lord shook hands with me when he met meHe put his hands between my
shoulders that I could feel coolness of His forefingers."

This is an indication to the hadith found in reference books of hadiths
compiled by Sunnis our brothers. The Hanbalite corporalists Ibn Teimiya
and their likes ruled the authenticity of this narrative. Imams of the
Prophet's household and their adherents did deny such a false narrative.

### Maqalatul Islamiyin; Abul-Hassan Al-Ashari part 1 page 210:

They dispute whether the Lord occupies a definite space or not Husham
Bin Al-Hakam avers that his lord occupies a specific spatial point. He
referred to that point which is the Throne. He also asserts that his
lord touches the Throne which comprises him alone Some of false
hadithists claim that the

**( 172 )**

Lord shall sit His Apostle (peace be upon him) next to Him on the
Throne. This means that the Throne is not filled up with Him

Narratives of the Throne's cracking creaking and sundering and the four
finger vacant distance of the Throne or the Lord; all these and others
are authentically documented and related by Omar the caliph and Abdullah
the son as well as many others. Whatever is ascribed by Al-Ashari to
Husham the Shiite is faiths of corporalists who are contradictory to the
Prophet's household and progeny (peace be upon them). Nowadays
corporalists are the Hashawites and Wahabists and those who joined them;
the fanatic Asharites and the adorers of Riyal!!

**Maqalatul Islamiyin; Abul-Hassan Al-Ashari part 1 page 211:**

AhlusSunna and hadithists assert that Allah in not a corporeality and He
resembles nothing at all. They also aver that the Lord is settling on
the Throne without a certain condition and that He is illumination He
has a face He has two hands He shall come on Resurrection Day and
descends to the lowest heavens.

As he accredits principals to promoting Allah against unfitting affairs
and denying anthropomorphism Al-Ashari refers to Sunnis by their names.
But when he mentions their beliefs of corporalism and anthropomorphism
he uses some others and the like.

Hanbalite corporalists renounce denying the Lord's corporeity as Bin Baz
asserts and reject denial of anthropomorphism as Ibn Teimiya affirms.
Meanwhile they claim their being the only AhlusSunna (people of the
Prophet's traditions) whose opinions have been already attested by the
worthy ancestors!!

### ENSAMPLES ON CONFUSION AND FALSE IMPUTATION OF BOOKS OF ISLAMIC SECTS

**Ashehristani's Al-Milelu Wen-Nihel volume 1 part 2 page 23:**

Mohammed Bin An-Numan vouches for Husham Bin Al-Hakam's claim that Allah
does not know a matter before its falling. For him God's adaptation is
His will. His will is His deeds. He also claims Allah's being
illumination on the form of a human without being a corporeality. But he
asserts "Through reports it is related that the Prophet contended Adam's
being created on the look of the Lord or as to other narrative the
Beneficent. It is necessary to believe so."

Muqatil Bin Suleiman as it is said adopts the same faith. Dawud
Al-Jawaribi Nueim Bin Hemmad Al-Misri and many other hadithist claim of
Allah's bearing a look and organs

**Ashehristani's Al-Milelu Wen-Nihel volume 1 part 2 page 139:**

**( 173 )**

A group of exaggerative Shias such as Hushamites and Hashawite
hadithists such as Kuhmus and Ahmed Al-Hujeimi declare
anthropomorphizing the Lord. They claim that their god has a certain
look with organs and limbs that are either physical or mental. They also
claim their god's moveableness and descending.

As a matter of fact Muqatil Bin Suleiman is Nasibite notorious foe of
the Prophet's household and their followers. He was died in 150 A. H.

In his Al-Mujruhin part 3 page 14 Ibn Hebban records:

Muqatil Bin Suleiman Al-Khurasani. The bondservant of the Azds He was
wont to receive instructions of Jews and Christians regarding knowledge
of the Holy Quran. He was anthropomorphist. He anthropomorphizes the
Lord to His creatures. Moreover he forges lies against hadiths.

Though Muqatil is a nefarious corporalist the author of Al-Milelu
Wen-Nihel imputes corporalism to this man indirectly. On the other side
he imputes it to a group of Shias so directly and positively.

Mohammed Bin An-Numan to whom corporalism is imputed is the master
scholar and juriscounsult of Shias whom is called Sheik Al-Mufid. He is
one of descendants of Saeed Bin Jubeir and the teacher of Sharif
Al-Murteda and Sharif ArRedi. His death was on 413 A.H.

Despite the fact that written works of Sheik Al-Mufid especially in
fields of beliefs jurisprudence and history are too abundant and famous
to be disregarded author of Al-Milelu Wen-Nihel could not refer to any
text since all these books did not comprise a single letter of what he
claimed.

Husham Bin Al-Hakam was one of disciples of Imam AsSadiq (peace be upon
him). He was such a skillful eloquent and expert arguer in fields of
monotheism prophecy and Shism that reference books of Shias as well as
others refer respectfully to narratives of his discussions and
argumentation. In the year 200 Husham was dead. Opposing
anthropomorphists and corporalists is a doubtless matter for Shism. It
is said that Al-Jahiz was the originator of the false claim of Husham's
opting for corporalism.

Disreputable confusion of author of Al-Milelu Wen-Nihel is so evident.
In addition to lack of documentation the author reckoned Kuhmus and
Al-Juheimi with Shias! He confused Shias with their direct opponents and
made them rest upon beliefs of their foes! He alleges that Shias admit
hadith of 'creating Adam on look of Allah'! While Imams of Shias (peace
be upon them) warn their followers against such hadiths and clarified
their distortion the author of Al-Milelu Wen-Nihel impute corporalism to
Shias because they as he misalleges decide authenticity of the forecited
hadith of the 'look'!!

**( 174 )**

### DIVIDING SHIAS INTO FICTITIOUS GROUPS

**Maqalatul Islamiyin; Abul-Hassan Al-Ashari part 1 page 31:**

Rafidites followers of imamate disputed in their opinions of
corporalism. They are six parties. Hushamites claim that their god is a
corporeality that is a shining illumination. They also state that their
god has been being when there was no space. Spaces were originated owing
to his moving.

We have neither seen such Shias nor did we hear of them in a reliable
book all over history!! Writers of books of Islamic sects in fact level
disastrous charges against Shias without referring to any documentation
or reference.

**part 1 page 31:**

The second party of Rafidites claim their god's being neither an aspect
nor resemblant to corporealities. Depending on their claim of their
god's being a corporeality they prove his existence. They also do not
substantiate that the Creator is compound of parts and fractions.

There is one faith only adopted by Shias since time of Ali (peace be
upon him) up to now. We do never claim God's being a corporeality. We
assert that He the Exalted is a thing unlike other things. By averring
so we are free from the two edges; edge of Tatilism and that of
anthropomorphism. For Shias it is erroneous to express that Allah is a
corporeality unlike other corporealities. Only meaning of this statement
should be correct when the sayer intends to say that the Lord is an
unparalleled thing.

**part 1 page 31:**

The third party of Rafidites are those who claim their god's having a
human's look. They reject regarding him as a corporeality. The fourth
party are Hushamites who claim their god's having a human's look. They
deny his being constituent of flesh and blood but they decide him as a
shining illumination. They assign senses to him.

We have neither seen nor heard or read in a reliable reference book of
existence of such parties among Shias. Likewise there is no single
authentic reference book reveals existence of such individuals. These
rumors are nothing but falsities of books of Islamic sects forged by the
authors or by the agents of the ruling authorities who ascribed such
writings to such authors dishonestly.

**part 1 page 31:**

The fifth party are those who claim their god's being pure light and
sheer illumination. They contradicted the god's having a human's look.

We have neither seen nor heard or read in a reliable reference book of
existence of such parties among Shias if the ordinary illumination and
light is intended. But if the light of the heavens and the earth that is
unexampled is

**( 175 )**

intended the holy Quran proves so obviously and the entire Muslims
believe of its existence.

**part 1 page 31:**

The sixth party are those who deny their god's being a corporeality an
aspect or a thing that has resemblant. They adopted the same ideas of
Mutazilites and Kharijites.

This statement is not different from that cited for the second party
according to his division. It seems that authors of books of Islamic
sects are similar to correspondents who are fond of prolonging their
reports by repeating their words or (adding illusory groups and
parties.)

Everybody confesses that Shism preceded Kharijites and Mutazilites; how
is it then practicable for a foremost sect to cull faiths of a following
one?

**Maqalatul Islamiyin; Abul-Hassan Al-Ashari part 1 page 35:**

Rafidites divided into two groups in respect with question of bearers of
the Throne. Yunisites followers of Younus Bin Abdirrahman Al-Qummi the
servant of Al-Yaqtin claim that bearers of the Throne do carry the
Creator. Another party claim that those bearers carry the Throne since
it is impracticable for Allah to be carried.

Correspondingly Bin Baz who asserts that bearers of the Throne do carry
Entity of Allah the Exalted should answer us clearly whether he has been
Shiite since he carries the same (misalleged) faiths!

**part 1 page 59:**

Rafidites disagree with each other in the topic of the Lord's
corporeality. Some declare that meaning of the tall spacious and deep
corporeality of the Lord is His existence. As long as the Creator is
being an existent thing He should be corporeality. Others say that the
Creator is not a corporeality since corporealities are composite beings.

**Al-Miqrizi's Al-Mawaidu Wel Hikem part 2 page 348**

Jawlaqites are followers of Husham Bin Salim Al-Jawlaqi. They are
Rafidites as well. One of the ugliest claims of that man is his saying
that Allah the Exalted is having a look of humans and that His upper
part is hollow while the lower is full.

It is quite clear for inspectors of reference books of Shias that such
parties and sayings are thoroughly nonexistent in Shiite heritage. They
are sayings of their opposers. Similarly the Prophet's household and
scholars of this sect had led a sweeping campaign against corporalism
and anthropomorphism. Antagonists accused the Prophet's progeny and
their adherents of opinions and deeds they themselves had perpetrated.
Opinions of corporalism were dominantly

**( 176 )**

widespreading among Nasibites; the direct enemies of the Prophet's
household (peace be upon them). Fair researchers can assuredly aver that
corporalism exists wherever there is a Nasibite. However there are
always those against the rule. By the same token Promoting the Lord
against unbecoming affairs exists wherever there is an adherent to the
Prophet's household.

In brief words there are two eminent problems that are unanswerable by
authors of books dealing with the Islamic sects and parties. First those
authors did not refer to reference books form which they quoted these
beliefs sayings and names. Second they rested upon policy of censuring
the opposition parties when they falsely ascribed the strange and
unceremonious beliefs to them by citing fabricated names. On the other
hand they covered up names of the real sayers and embracers of such
beliefs as they were loyal to the ruling authorities or masters of their
sects. These problems are enough to disregard such reference books.

### THE WESTERN IMITATED BOOKS OF ISLAMIC SECT. PROFESSORS IMITATED THEM.

**Dr. Hassan Ibrahim's TarikhulIslam part 2 page 158:**

Shias withdrew into three parties; the exaggerative Rafidite and
Zaidite. The exaggerative Shias are those who overestimate Ali Rafidite
Shias are those who claim Allah's having an altitude and a look and
being a corporeality with organs.

**Dr. Hassan Ibrahim's TarikhulIslam part 2 page 424:**

Rafidites claim Allah's having an altitude and a look and being a
corporeality with organs. Husham Bin Al-Hakam Husham Bin Salim and
Shaitanuttaq are Rafidites.

**Dr. Hassan Ibrahim's Tarikhul-Islam part 2 page 422:**

The Shiite scholars especially specialists of monotheism could employ
beliefs of Mutazilites as pillars for their private beliefs and sects.
This is evidenced by the matter that Shias claim their being people of
justice which is the very name adopted by Mutazilites.

This historian forgot the fact that Shism emerged a century before
Mutazilism and that they preceded them in taking in faiths of promoting
the Lord against unfitting affairs the free will and the intellectual
characterization. As a matter of fact Mutazilites did quote their faiths
from Shias.

### Al-FAKHR AR-RAZI REFUTES CLAIMS IN BOOKS OF ISLAMIC SECTS

**Al-Metalibul Aliya volume 1 part 1 page 10:**

Philosophers affirm existence of beings that are spaceless and occupying
no location such as brains souls and prime matters. Majority of supreme
Muslim

**( 177 )**

scholars such as Muammar Bin Ebbad the Mutazilite and Mohammed Bin
An-Numan the Rafidite take in this faith.

How is it then rightful for authors of books of Islamic sects the
western and Wahabists to impute anthropomorphism and corporalism to
Mohammed Bin An-Numan who refutes the material placement of some
creatures even? How should he then admit this placement for the Lord the
Creator?

### SHEIK Al-GHEZZALI ANALYZES THEIR MOTIVES OF FABRICATION

**Al-Ghezzali's Difaun Enil Aqideti Wesharia page 253:**

Such fabricators publicize that Shias are followers of Ali while Sunnis
are followers of Mohammed. They misallege that Shias believe in Ali's
being more meritorious in the Divine Envoy but he missed it due to a
mistake occurred by the conveyer. This is indeed an offensive nonsense
and scandalous forgery. As a matter of fact those who aim at engaging
this nation in discrepancies are hostile factions. As they lacked
reasonable incentives they originated objectives of discrepancy for
achieving their goals. They were the predominant in field of falsity and
fabrication since they lacked any position in that of honesty.

I could not find a ground on which opponents of Shism depended in
broadcasting such an accusal all over the Islamic regions. Finally I had
to submit to the matter that they might have misinterpreted the
postprayer triple statement of 'Allahu Akbar' Allah is the greatest out
of their desires. Shias believe that the best worshipping and
supplication after ritual prayers are the triple statement of 'Allahu
Akbar' followed by a definite rite the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) had passed to Fatima Az-Zahra (peace be upon her). Usually
ordinary Shias perform these rites without raising their hands to levels
of their faces as it is required; therefore it seems for the ignorant of
such rites if they are striking on their knees or thighs as a sign of
showing sorrow for a definite concern. Intelligence as well as
godfearing of opponents of Shism attained its climax when they could
find a (persuasive) interpretation of this rite. They averred that Shias
show their grief because prophecy had not been given to Ali!! Hence they
say "The Honest betrayed"!!!

They aver such a forgery and insist on it while they do realize that
Shias are the best sect in glorifying the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family). Shias believe of the Prophet's being seal of prophets. They
also believe that Gabriel the angel is sinless. Shias narrate that Ali
(peace be upon him) addressed at a man who praised him exaggeratively
"Woe is you! I am only a slave among Mohammed's slaves." He also said
"Whenever wars were at their most vigorous hours we were wont to seek
the Prophet's protection."

### JURISCOUNSULT OF Al-AZHAR REFUTES THEM ACCEPTABLY

**( 178 )**

**A verdict issued on 17 / Rabi I / 1378 Office of Juriscounsult of
Al-Azhar Mahmud Sheltut:**

Q. Some people believe that it is obligatory to rest upon one of the
four Islamic sect so that ritual and transactional deeds would be legal.
Sects of Imamite and Zaidite Shism are not included within these four
sects. Do your excellence admit this idea and decide illegality of
resting upon rulings of the Imamite Ithnasharite Shism?

A. First Islam do not impose following a certain sect. We do decide that
initially Muslims have the right to refer to any of the sects the
rulings of which are authentically recounted and recorded in identified
books. Besides it is rightful and not illicit for every Muslim
individual to shift to any other sect.

Second like any other Islamic sect it is authoritatively lawful to refer
to sect of Jafarism that is familiarly known as the Imamite Ithnasharite
Shism in practicing worshipping rites and transactions. Muslims ought to
have full acquaintance of such a matter. They are also advised to strip
the unrightful fanaticism to certain sects. Religion and decree of Allah
the Exalted have never been consecrated or dedicated to a certain sect.
The entire scholars are admissible elicitors that are accepted by the
Lord. It is licit for the unauthorized to rest upon verdicts rulings and
jurisprudence of the admissible eliciting scholars whether in ritual or
transactional affairs.

### ASSUYOUTI REFUTES THEM ACCEPTABLY

**AdDurrul Manthour part 6 page 379:**

Exegesis Of God's Saying (Those Who Believe And Do Good Surely They Are
The Best Of Men. 98:7)

Ibn Asakr: Jabir Bin Abdillah:

The Prophet (peace be upon him) came towards us stating "I swear by the
Prevailing of my soul surely this man (Ali) and his adherents (Shia)
shall be triumphing on Resurrection Day." Immediately the Verse (Those
who believe and do good surely they are the best of men.) was revealed.
"Here comes the best of men." the Prophet's companions used to address
at Ali.

Ibn Edi and Ibn Asakir relates the following hadith to Abu Sa'eed: "Ali
is the best of men."

Ibn Edi: Ibn Abbas: When God revealed the Verse (Those who believe and
do good surely they are the best of men.) the Prophet addressed at Ali
"It is your adherents and you who shall be pleased and satisfied on
Resurrection Day."

Ibn Merdawayih: Ali: The Prophet (peace be upon him) addressed at me
"Have you not heard God's saying (Those who believe and do good surely
they are

**( 179 )**

the best of men.)? They are your adherents and you. My meeting with you
all shall be on the divine pool when nations shall be come forth for
judgment. You shall be called 'the bright faced the shining.'"

We lack enough space to discuss documentation of such hadiths. It is
sufficient to hint at the fact that hadithists affirm that no individual
attained forms of praise addressed by the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) at Ali (peace be upon him). AnNisai's Khassaisu Ali Bin Abi
Talib is quite abundant in this regard.

One of the wonders of history is that no single individual among
companions of the Prophet suffered ten percent of the endeavors of
screening standings and merits Ali (peace be upon him) had suffered on
the hands of the Nasibite state and its officials who issued the
decision of imposing cursing and reviling at Ali during Friday prayers
all over the Islamic state for about seven decades. Nevertheless such
considerable hadiths relating merits of Ali and his adherents could
endure in reference books of Sunnis our brothers.

Quite truthful was that who said "What can I say about a man whose
opponents hid his merits for their enviously and adherents hid them for
their cautiously. Between these two merits too abundant to be endured by
hearts emerged." Another veracious individual said "We do not know what
to do with Ali Bin Abi Talib. We will miss our mundane affairs if we
cherish him. And we will miss the Paradisiacal affairs if we hate him."
