Chp 11 Husham Bin Al-hakam the Genius
=====================================

**( 197 )**

Husham Bin Al-Hakam is the most remarkable Shiite whom were frequently
accused of corporalism by authors of books dealing with the Islamic
sects. Any historian can not notice any signal or pace of such accusal
during investigating the life accounts of such accused persons. Finally
it shall be discovered that the main and only reason beyond charging
such accusation is nothing other than those persons' die hardism in
defending the Ahlul-Beit sect and its imams.

By ensuing history of the man it is obvious that Husham Bin Al-Hakam was
the best arguer in the reign of Harun Ar-Rashid. He was evaded by the
master Jews Christians Magi and atheists. This man did challenge and
overcome all these categories. He also subdued Amr Bin Ubeid Abu Hutheil
Al-Allaf and their Mutazilite and Asharite likes.

While the caliph Harun was hiding behind a screen for listening Jafar
Al-Barmeki was holding sessions of disputation between followers of the
different religions and sects. Husham was the most remarkable and famous
in such sessions for his clat and deduction. Some of his argumentation
on masters of other religions are recorded.

Because of antagonism against the Prophet's progeny Ar-Rashid's vizier
could use his Magian shrewdness for provoking Husham on defending
Imamate during one of these session. Hence the caliph aimed at killing
him. But he could escape. Till his death he attempted at evading the
caliph and his authorities.

In his Muroujut-Theheb Al-Masudi refers to this incident.

On page 379 part 3 he writes:

Yahya Bin Khalid held sessions at which theologists whether Muslims or
of other religions used to debate in their beliefs. Yahya said to them
"You have overstated about denial and materialization of the divine
attributes Is imamate mandated by the Lord or is it submitted to
people's own opinions? etc.

**( 198 )**

We are to mention Sharif Al-Murteda's defending Husham before we move to
rending models of that man's disputation that are acceptably sufficient
to prove his innocence from charges recorded in books of the Islamic
sects.

**Sharif Al-Murteda's Ashafi page 83:**

As much as it is conceivable Husham's saying "He is a corporeality
unlike ordinary corporealities" is the main incentive beyond accusation
of his adopting for corporalism. Indisputably the forecited statement
does by no means refer to anthropomorphizing repeal a principal nor does
it deny a branch. It is a statement of a rhetorical question. Majority
of our acquaintances assert that this statement was within a longer one
Husham addressed at the Mutazilite who had claimed the Anterior Lord's
being a thing unlike ordinary things. The whole statement is "Supposing
your claiming the Anterior Lord's being a thing unlike ordinary things
you should say then He is a corporeality unlike ordinary
corporealities." It is not necessary that opinions used in refuting a
belief are actually adopted by the refuter. It is so applicable that
Husham might aimed at discerning their answer or showing their
inadequacy to introduce an answer for such a claim. Many other
probabilities can be regarded in this topic.

Reports relating Husham's regarding the faith that Allah is a
corporeality that enjoys the entire qualities of ordinary corporealities
and his narrating the hadith of the Lord's measures are exclusively
arisen by Al-Jahiz who relates them to AnNaddam. The latest is a
doubtful narrator whose accounts are untrue.

Generally faiths should be taken from embracers masters and trustful
reporters. It is impracticable to refer to claims of the rivals since
this will make the matter worse and more calamitous. Thus reports and
documentations will not be trusted especially in fields of providing
faiths of a sect.

If Husham was actually bearing faith of corporalism this would have been
common and well known. For instance faiths of Al-Khawarzmi and his
followers are well known.

Imam As-Sadiq addressed at Husham "As long as you Husham defend us you
shall be backed by the Sacred Spirit." He also addressed at Husham the
young when he preceded and sit him next to his place while master Shias
were attendant there "This is our supporter by the heart the hand and
the tongue." Imam As-Sadiq also said "Husham Bin Al-Hakam is the pioneer
of our rights and our spokesman. He is advocating our truthfulness and
defending nullity of our antagonists. He that follows him and his affair
shall be following us. And he whoever opposes and denies him shall be
opposing and denying us." Finally the imam was used to guiding and
urging people on referring to Husham in questions of arguing the
opponents. These are adequate proofs on wrongfulness and nothingness of
the previous claims against Husham. Hence it

**( 199 )**

is nonsense to perceive that Husham might have said that his lord is
seven arms length.

Moreover it is most surely that such claims against Husham are seen as
reviling at Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) and ascribing him as
bearing the same faiths since the imam as we have previously introduced
did praise and support Husham. Thus Imam As-Sadiq should have denied
banished and censured Husham for bearing such horribly forlorn faiths if
only that had been pure.

Husham's book regarding contingence of the cosmos is also forged against
him. We have not seen such a book. We also have not had a written
document or an authentic report asserting so.

In his Al-Milelu WenNihel part 1 page 185 Ashehristani records:

Husham Bin Al-Hakam is a deep scholar in questions of principals of the
religion. It is impractical to scorn his decisive disputation against
Mutazilites. As a matter of fact this man is more excellent than his
disputation and more exalted than anthropomorphism ascribed to him. He
overcame Al-Allaf when he stated "You claim of Allah's being knowing by
His knowledge and his knowledge is His Essence. Thus He should share the
contingent beings in being knowing by a knowledge and He should oppose
them in His knowledge being His Essence. Then why do you not claim the
Lord's being a corporeality unlike the corporealities a feature unlike
features and a component unlike the components?"

Just after describing Husham in such an admirable way Ashehristani
claims Husham's claiming Ali's godhood! This is really strange! Finally
Husham is nobler than claiming such a faith.

It is also really strange that a Wahabist researcher reviles at Husham
for his uttering that Allah is a corporeality unlike ordinary
corporealities when this is the faith of Wahabism indeed! Bin Baz and
Ibn Teimiya as it has been previously introduced did evade the idea of
denying God's being a corporeality. Hence Wahabists should have claimed
Husham Bin Al-Hakam's being one of them because of his previous saying!
Nevertheless readers shall soon give credence to Husham's being released
from such faiths of anthropomorphism and God's occupying a certain
space.

### HUSHAM'S ARGUMENTATION AGAINST A MAGIAN BELIEVING IN GOD OF LIGHT AND GOD OF GLOOM

**Uyounul-Akhbar part 2 page 153:**

Al-Mubith: O Husham! There is a thing around the cosmos isn't it?

Husham: No it is not.

Al-Mubith: Nothing shall stop my hand if I send it out of this cosmos
then.

**( 200 )**

Husham: Nothing shall stop it and there is nothing you shall send your
hand to.

Al-Mubith: How should I recognize such a thing?

Husham: O Mubith! Supposing you and I were on the edges of the cosmos. I
will claim of seeing nothing. You will ask me why. I will answer here is
no gloomy intercepts me from seeing. Then it is your turn to claim of
seeing nothing. I will ask you why. You will answer there is no light to
look at. In that case will the two light and gloomy be equal in
contradiction?

Al-Mubith: Yes they will.

Al-Mubith: If they are equal in contradiction why will they not be equal
in nothingness?

Hence Al-Mubith submitted.

On another day Husham asked Al-Mubith: Are they light and gloomy of the
same power?

Al-Mubith: Yes they are.

Husham: Are they of the same particles?

(Saying to himself aloud) Al-Mubith: If I say they are of the same
particles they shall be of the same characteristics. And if I say they
are not they shall be contracted in wills and deeds.

Husham: Why do you not submit to Islam then?

Al-Mubith: Far is that!

### HUSHAM'S ARGUMENTATION AGAINST A CATHOLIC

**As-Saduq's At-Tawhid page 270:**

My father: Ahmed Bin Idris and Mohammed Bin Yahya Al-Attar: Mohammed Bin
Ahmed: Ibrahim Bin Husham: Mohammed Bin Hemmad: Al-Hassan Bin Ibrahim:
Younus Bin Ibrahim:

For seventy years a catholic named 'Bureiha' challenged Muslims. He used
to challenge the arguers by providing knowledge of the Christ with his
qualities miracles and portents. None could challenge him in this field;
therefore Bureiha's reputation was highly considered by Christians
Muslims Jews and Magianists. Christians were very proud of their man.
They used to say "Even if Christianity had Bureiha alone he would be
satisfactory." Nevertheless Bureiha was continuing on seeking the most
righteous path to take. He was inclined to Islam. In private Bureiha
used to inform a woman who served and accompanied him for ages of
failing of the Christian's proofs.

Bureiha toured all over countries challenging people in their faiths. He
discussed the entire sects of Islam. He was always the prevalent. "You
would

**( 201 )**

have had a little of right if your masters had been the right." Bureiha
was wont to address at the defeated sects. He however used to argue the
most knowledgeable pious and cognizant scholars. Finally he was told of
Shism. Some picked up Husham Bin Al-Hakam as the spokesman of Shias.

Husham was in his shop encircled by students of Quran when a big crowd
of Christians associated by about one hundred monks in black putting
caps. The master was Bureiha the grand Catholic. They encompassed his
shop. A chair was prepared for the grand Catholic while the capped
priests and monks were inclining against their canes. "Saving you no
other theologist could escape my challenge and prevalence in arguing
about Christianity. Today I am to argue with you about Islam " spoke
Bureiha. Husham smiled "O Bureiha! Do you want me to show you miracles
as those shown by the Messiah? I am not the Messiah and I will never
attain his resemblance or approach him in any way. He is a perfect
excellent and elevated spirit. His miracles are obvious and his portents
are efficacious." Later on Bureiha confessed that he had been admired by
Husham's words.

"This is the proper place of argumentation " Husham suggested.

Hence Bureiha asked: well what is the lineage linking your prophet to
the Messiah.

Husham: He is the cousin of his maternal grandfather. The Messiah is the
offspring of Isaac while Mohammed is the offspring of Ishmael.

Bureiha: How could you limit his father's lineage?

Husham: I can tell you of the lineage we regard and I can tell of that
you regard.

"I will overcome if he regards the lineage we believe in " Bureiha said
to himself.

Bureiha: Well mention the lineage we regard.

Husham: You claim of his being anterior and a part of an anterior. Then
who is the father and who is the son?

Bureiha: The son is that who descended to the earth.

Husham: No the father is that who descended to the earth.

Bureiha: The son is the messenger of the father.

Husham: The father is wiser than the son since he is the creator.

Bureiha: Creation is the father's and the son's.

Husham: Supposing they have been associates in creation what for then
did they not descend together?

**( 202 )**

Bureiha: How should they associate in a matter when they are the
identical thing? They only differ in names.

Husham: They only similar in names.

Bureiha: This is nonsense.

Husham: This is reality.

Bureiha: The son is connected to the father.

Husham: The son is disconnected to the father.

Bureiha: This is contradictory to people's faith.

Husham: Providing people's faith is taken in consideration you are
defeated then. People do believed that the father had been in being a
long while before the son came to existence.

Bureiha: I do not mean this.

Husham: What for then have you provided people's faith as your evidence
while you reject it on yourself?

Bureiha: The father and the sons are only names of the Anterior.

Husham: Are these two names as anterior as the father and the son?

Bureiha: No names are contingent.

Husham: Well you have substituted the father for the son and the son for
the father. If the son not the father is the maker of these names he
will be the father. If the father not the son is the maker of these
names he will be the father and there will be no son since the son is
the father.

Bureiha: The son is the name of the spirit when descended to the earth.

Husham: Supposing the spirit did not descend to the earth what should
the name be then?

Bureiha: The name is 'the son' whether the spirit descended or not.

Husham: Then this spirit had two different names before descending to
the earth?

Bureiha: All is the identical. It is only one spirit.

Husham: You divided that spirit into two parts; the son and the father.

Bureiha: No name of the father and name of the son is the same.

Husham: Then the son should be the father of the father and the father
should be the father of the son. And the son is the same.

**( 203 )**

"Well you have never encountered such an embarrassing day. You should
leave " the attendant monks advised their master.

For a while Bureiha was perplexed. As he tried to leave Husham seized
him and asked "What occludes you from embracing Islam? Is there any
other question regarding Islam you doubt? You'd better say it otherwise
I will provide a single question about Christianity and till next
morning you will be trying to find its answer. The next morning you will
be lead straightly to me." "Do not avoid this question. It may be the
way to overcoming " the monks suggested. "Well what is it man of
wisdom?" Bureiha asked.

Husham: You see that the son knows completely what the father has do you
not?

Bureiha: Yes indeed.

Husham: You see that the father knows completely what the son had do you
not?

Bureiha: Yes indeed.

Husham: You see that the son is competent to bear whatsoever the father
bears do you not?

Bureiha: Yes indeed.

Husham: You do see that the father is competent to bear whatsoever the
son bears do you not?

Bureiha: Yes indeed.

Husham: Then how is it acceptable that one of them is the son of the
other while both are enjoying the identical competencies? Similarly how
should one wrong the other?

Bureiha: They both have no injustice at all.

Husham: If so it is just that the son should be the father of the father
and the father should be the son of the son. Think of it Bureiha!

Hence the Christians went back damning the time at which they saw Husham
and his acquaintances.

Bureiha's maid asked him an explanation for the depression he had. He
told her of his situation with Husham. "Woe is you! Do you intend to
support the right or the wrong?" she asked. "The right of course "
Bureiha answered. "Then you should turn to the right whenever it was.
Beware disputation. Disputation is doubt. Doubt is evil. People of evil
shall be in hell " she advised.

Bureiha opted for her saying and decided to see Husham again.

**( 204 )**

Next morning Husham was alone when Bureiha came to him and asked "O
Husham! Is there a definite person whose sayings you revere and refer to
and obey?"

Husham: Yes Bureiha!

Bureiha: What are his specifications?

Husham: The racial or the religious?

Bureiha: Both.

Husham: Regarding the racial he is the head of the Arab the choice of
Quraish the select of Hashemites. He is lineally the most favorable.
Quraish is the best of the Arab. Hashemites are the best of Quraish. The
best of Hashemites is their celebrity chief and master. Sons of the
master are preferred to others. He is the son of the master.

Bureiha: What about his religion?

Husham: The jurisprudence or the material qualities?

Bureiha: The material qualities.

Husham: He is so sinless that he does never defies and so generous that
he is never niggardly and so courageous that he is never coward and so
intelligent that he does never omit any of the knowledge he receives. He
is the observant of what is imposed on him the descendant of the
prophets' progeny and the compiler of the prophets' knowledge. He
possesses himself when enraged and gives the due and supports when
satisfied. He acts fairly to the adherent and the antagonist. He does
never outdo with his opponents. He does never block advantage of his
advocate and acts as exactly as the Divine Book instructs and makes
miracle things. He is one of people of purity. He relates sayings of the
immaculate imams. None could ever repeal his argumentation. He did never
ignore a question. He adjudges in every field and clears every
blackness.

Bureiha: You have just counted peculiarities of the Messiah and remarked
his evidences and marvels. Yet personality is different from qualities
and description depends upon the described. We will believe if the
descriptions are found in the described.

Husham: You shall certainly be guided if you believe and you shall never
be censured if you follow the right. O Bureiha! The entire
argumentations God has instituted upon the earlier are the same
instituted upon the middle and the late. Hence argumentations faiths and
beliefs shall never be elapsing.

Bureiha: This is very alike to the right and very near to the truth. It
is indeed the quality of the wise who verify the true argumentation in a
way repealing the heresy.

**( 205 )**

Husham: Yes indeed.

Later on Husham Bureiha and his bond began their journey to Al-Madina
for meeting Abu Abdillah (peace be upon him). First they met Musa Bin
Jafar (peace be upon him) before whom Husham related the whole story.
Subsequently imam Musa Bin Jafar asked "O Bureiha! How about your
knowledge of your Book?"

Bureiha: I am surely knowledgeable in this regard.

Imam: How about its interpretation.

Bureiha: I am the most trustful in interpretation of the Book.

Hence imam Musa Bin Jafar went on reciting the Bible. "The Messiah was
reciting in this very way. None else did recite. You are the very man I
have been looking for fifty years."

Bureiha and his maid embraced Islam in a distinguishable way.

Husham Bureiha and the maid saw Abu Abdillah (peace be upon him)
afterwards. As Husham related the story of Bureiha and his conversation
with Musa (peace be upon him) imam recited God's saying (Offspring one
of the other and Allah is Hearing Knowing). "How have you the sacrificed
obtained the Torah the Bible and the prophets' books?" Bureiha asked.
"We have them in inheritance. We recite and utter them as the prophets
recited and uttered. Allah does never elect a representative who should
say 'I do not know' about any question."

Bureiha adhered to Abu Abdillah (peace be upon him) and to his son Musa
(peace be upon him) till his death. Imam Musa Bin Jafar performed the
ritual bathing coffining and burying of Bureiha and said "This is among
the Disciples of the Messiah. He does respect God's rights."

Most of Bureiha's acquaintances hoped had they been like him.

### SOME OF THE DEBATE OF IMAM AS-SADIQ RELATED BY HIS DISCIPLE HUSHAM BIN Al-HAKAM

**Al-ihtijaj part 2 page 69:**

Husham Bin Al-Hakam: A miscreant asked Abu Abdillah about the on
existence of the Creator of the cosmos.

Abu Abdillah: The evidence is the actuality of deeds referring to
efforts of the maker. Whenever a constructive building is seen it is
directly understood that there should be an expert constructor who did
so. Yet this constructor is not met.

The miscreant: What is that Creator then?

**( 206 )**

Abu Abdillah: He is a thing incompatible to things. I only used 'thing'
for referring to him. He is a thing only by His objective being. He is
neither a corporeality nor a feature. He is neither materialized nor
measured. He is not comprehended by the five senses. Allusions cannot
apprehend Him. Ages cannot degrade Him. Time cannot effect Him.

The miscreant: Every alluded is inevitably created.

Abu Abdillah: If this is true we shall not be submitted to monotheism.
We are not mandated to believe in a being that is not alluded. We say
that anthropomorphized beings that are alluded comprehended and
conceived by senses must have been inevitably created. It is essential
to substantiate that the Maker of things must have been out of the two
unacceptable articles. First article of denial that particularly stands
for nullity and nonexistence. Second article of anthropomorphizing the
creatures that are evidently structured. Consequently it is essential to
affirm existence of the maker due to existence of the made and their
being made exhibits their indigence for the maker. This results in
proving that the maker is not like the made. Specifications of the made
such as their extrinsic structure and composition their being after
nonexistence and their changeability in size color and strength do
assert their want to their Maker.

The miscreant: As you have proved His existence you have demarcated Him.

Abu Abdillah: I have not demarcated. I only prove His existence when
there is nothing stands between proving and denial.

The miscreant: What about His saying (The Beneficent settled on the
Throne)?

Abu Abdillah: He characterizes Himself by this expression. He is
prevalent over the Throne and abstracted from His creatures. The Throne
is not a place dedicated to Him. We believe that He is the bearer and
the holder of the Throne. We repeat His statement (His Chair is as large
as the heavens and the earth.) Hence we prove existence of the Throne
and the Chair but We do deny that the Throne and the Chair are
containing Him. We also deny that the Lord the Powerful and Glorified is
in need for a space or any created thing. We do affirm that His
creatures are in need of Him.

The miscreant: What is the difference then between raising or lowering
the hands towards the heavens or the earth?

Abu Abdillah: There is no difference according to the Lord's knowledge
comprehension and competence. However He the Powerful the Glorified
ordered his devotees and servants of raising their hands upward towards
the Heavens since He made it source of subsistence. Hence we do affirm
what is affirmed by the Quran and the Prophet who says "Raise your hands
to Allah the Powerful the Glorified." This fact is unanimously agreed
upon by the entire sects of Muslims.

**( 207 )**

The miscreant: Is it practicable that there are more than one creator
for this cosmos?

Abu Abdillah: If there were two creators they both should be either
anterior and powerful or both be weak or one should be weak while the
other powerful. Regarding the earliest probability what for do they not
challenge on having the godhead singularly? If one is powerful and the
other is not then it is provable that there is one creator since the
other is weak.

Furthermore if there were two creators they should be accordant in
definite not all matters. As we notice this orderly creation and current
planets and consequence of night day sun and moon; these all referred to
ultimate coincidence of affairs of creation. Finally this shows that the
Maker if One.

**Husham Bin Al-Hakam:**

As Abul-Awja was before Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) he was asked
"O Abul-Awja! Are you made or not?

Abul-Awja: No I am not made.

Imam As-Sadiq: How should your figures be if you were made?

As he could not find an answer Abul-Awja went out.

**Husham Bin Al-Hakam:**

Abu Shakir AdDeisani the miscreant addressed at Abu Abdillah "O Jafar
Bin Mohammed! Lead me to my god." There was a child having an egg in the
hand. Abu Abdillah asked the child to give him that egg. Then he
commented "O Deisani! In my hand is a covert fortress with a packed
crust. Under this crust there is another one but lank. A liquid golden
yellow and a dissolved silvern are under that lank crust. Neither the
liquid golden yellow fuses with the dissolved silvern nor does the
dissolved silvern coalesce the liquid golden yellow. Hence each is on
its manner. No sound thing can go into it to tell of its soundness and
no rotten thing can go there to tell of its putridity. It is unknown
whether it was created for the male or the female. It bursts colors like
these of a peacock. Do you see there must have been a maker of such a
thing?"

The man nodded his head for a considerable time before he declared "I
admit there is no god but Allah lonelily without any associate and I do
admit Mohammed is His servant and apostle and you are the imam and God's
argumentation on His creatures. I do declare my repentance"

**Husham Bin Al-Hakam:**

An Egyptian miscreant decided to see Abu Abdillah (peace be upon him)
for disputation since he had heard of his knowledgeability. As he could
not meet the imam in Al-Madina he continued his way to Mecca. We were
with the

**( 208 )**

imam when that Egyptian miscreant met him during the time of the ritual
Circumambulation. After greeting Abu Abdillah asked about his name.

The miscreant: Abdul Melik (servant of the king).

The imam: What is your nickname?

The Miscreant: Abu Abdillah (father of the slave of God).

The imam: Who is that (king) you are serving is he a mundane or a
heavenly king? What about your son? Is he a slave of a mundane or a
heavenly god?

The miscreant could not find an answer.

The Imam: You should answer.

The miscreant kept up his silence.

The imam: You may see me after accomplishing this Circumambulation.

We were attendant when the miscreant came to Abu Abdillah.

The Imam: You know there is something beneath the earth and there is
something above it do you not ?

The miscreant: Yes I do.

The imam: Have you gone beneath it?

The miscreant: No I have not.

The imam: Can you realize what is there?

The miscreant: I cannot. But I surmise there is nothing there?

The imam: Surmise is deficiency unless it is ascertained. Have you been
in the heavens?

The miscreant: No I have not.

The imam: Can you realize what is there?

The miscreant: No I cannot.

The imam: Have you seen what is beyond the east and the west?

The miscreant: No I have not.

The imam: What a strange man you are! You have not attained the furthest
east or west and you have not descended under the earth and you have not
ascended to the heavens to know what creatures there are and meanwhile
you deny all! Is it practicable for the sane to deny what they ignore?

The miscreant: indeed none addressed such wording at me.

The imam: Hence you doubt so. Maybe yes maybe not.

**( 209 )**

The miscreant: Maybe!

The imam: O man! The ignorant have no argumentation on the knowing.
Similarly the illiterate have no argumentation on the literate. O you
Egyptian brother! Try to understand me. Do you not see the sun the moon
the day and the night come one into the other without difference in
disposition? Do you not see them go and return orderly. They are bound.
They lack any other place to go in. If they were able to go why would
they be returning. If they were not bound what for would they not
interchange their roles or places. They are by God bound. O Egyptian
brother! You believe it is the nemesis which arranges all these things.
Then what for is it incompetent to stop what is going on or release what
is bound? See how the heavens is uplifted and the earth is ballast. The
heavens should never fall on the earth and the earth should never
incline on what is beneath. By God it is the Creator the Maker who holds
them.

(Husham:) Hence that miscreant believed and succumbed to the imam who
order me of instructing that man.

**Al-ihtijaj part 2 page 142:**

Husham Bin Al-Hakam: Ibnu Abil-Awja Abu Shakir AdDeisani AbdulMelik
Al-Basri and Ibnul-Muqaffa met at the Holy House of God for mocking the
pilgrims and reviling at the Holy Quran. Ibn Abil-Awja suggested that
each should find faultfinding in a quarter of the Holy Quran so that the
next year they should repeal the Quran entirely. They agreed upon
meeting in the same place. They assured that faultfinding of the Quran
should result in repealing Mohammed's prophecy which leads to nullity of
Islam. This would prove those four person's being the right.

The next year they met in the same place. Ibn Abul-Awja confessed "Since
our last meeting I have been thinking of the Verse (Then when they
despaired of him they retired conferring privately together. 12:80) I
could not find any fault in the rhetoric and meaningfulness of this
Verse; therefore I could not see another Verse."

AbdulMelik spoke "Since our last meeting I have been thinking of the
Verse (O people! A parable is set forth therefore listen to it; surely
those whom you call upon besides Allah cannot create a fly though they
should all gather for it and should the fly snatch away anything form
them they could not take it back for it; weak are the invoker and the
invoked. 22:73) I could not say anything about this Verse."

Abu Shakir spoke "Since our last meeting I have been thinking of God's
saying (If there had been in them any gods except Allah they would both
have certainly been in a state of disorder. 21:22) I could not say
anything about this Verse."

**( 210 )**

Ibnul-Muqaffa spoke "Since our last meeting I have been thinking of
God's saying (And it was said: O earth! Swallow down your water and O
cloud! Clear away. And the water was made to abate and the affair was
decided and the ark rested on the Judi and it was said: Away with the
unjust people. 11:44) I could neither conceive it nor could I say
anything about it."

Meanwhile Jafar Bin Mohammed As-Sadiq passed by them and recited God's
saying (Say: if men and jinn should combine together to bring the like
of this Quran they could not bring the like of it though some of them
were aiders of others. 17:88)

They looked at each other and confessed "If Islam is an actuality
Mohammed's succession shall be in the hands of none other than Jafar Bin
Mohammed. We have never seen such a person. We revere him whenever we
see. Besides we feel embarrassed when we meet him" Hence they escaped
after they had declared their submission.

### HUSHAM'S ARGUMENTATION AGAINST AMR BIN UBEID

**Al-ihtijaj part 2 page 126:**

Husham Bin Al-Hakam: I was greatly touched when I received the news of
Amr Bin Ubeid's opinions and his holding sessions in Basra Mosque. Hence
I went there.

It was Friday when I arrived in Basra and went directly to the Mosque. A
great number of people were encircling Amr who was in a black garment in
the twist and another on the shoulders. People were referring to him in
their questions. I could push my way through them till I had a seat
rather near. I knelt and asked "O master! I am a foreigner. May I ask
you a question?"

Yes you may.

Do you have eyes?

O son! What sort of question is this?

Well this is my question.

Although it is an idiot question I am to answer.

Well you will answer me?

Ask then.

Do you have an eye?

Yes I do.

What is its function?

I can distinguish colors and person with it.

**( 211 )**

Do you have a nose?

Yes I do.

What is its function?

I smell with it.

Do you have a tongue?

Yes I do.

What is its function?

I use it in articulation.

Do you have an ear?

Yes I do.

What is its function?

I hear sounds with it.

Do you have hands?

Yes I do.

What is their function?

I use them for seizing things and discerning the flimsy from the dense.

Do you have legs?

Yes I do.

What is their function?

I use them for moving from a place to another.

Do you have a mouth?

Yes I do.

What is its function?

I taste the different drinks and food.

Do you have a heart?

Yes I do.

What is its function?

I use it for sensing whatsoever comes to the other organs.

What for should this occur while the other organs are sound and cogent?

**( 212 )**

O son! If the other senses or organs doubt anything they will refer to
the heart for noticing. Function of the heart then is asserting the true
and eradicating the doubted.

This means that God made the heart for guiding the other organs to the
true does it not?

Yes it does.

This means that the heart is inevitably necessary for eradicating doubts
of the other organs does it not?

Yes it does.

O Abu Marwan! God the Blessed the Exalted did not leave your organs
before He selected a leader whose mission is affirming the true and
denying the doubted. How is it practicable for Him to leave all these
beings subsisting in their perplexity suspicion and discrepancy without
selecting for them a leader to whom they should refer in states of
suspicion and perplexity like He had done when He selected a leader to
whom the other organs should refer in states of doubt and perplexity?

For a considerable while Amr could not find an answer. He then glanced
at me and asked "You are Husham are you not?" "No I am not " I answered.
"You are one of his disciples are you not?" he asked. "No I am not " I
answered. "Where are you from then?" he re asked. "From Kufa " I
answered. "It is indeed you Husham." He asserted and embraced me. He sat
me next to him without uttering a single letter till I left.
