Chp 12 Models of Shias' Texts Regarding Monotheism
==================================================

**( 213 )**

Opponents of the Prophet's household and their adherents used policy of
covering up the Prophet's traditions respecting merits of his progeny.
They also covered up narrations and opinions of the Prophet's household
and their adherents (Shias). This is not our topic here. But Dr.
Al-Qifari who mentioned in his threevolumed book about faiths of Shias
about three hundred Shiite reference books that he claimed of depending
on in citing his book obliged us to assert so. Evading these three
hundred reference books the professor rested upon reference books of
Shias' opponents when he debated topic of Shism and anthropomorphism. By
the same token as he accuses Shias of following Tatilism the professor
eludes resting upon a single reference book from those three hundred.
Moreover he claims that As-Saduq died in 281 A.H relates more than
seventy narrations in his At-Tawhid referring to Shias' adopting for
Tatilism. At any rate this academic professor could not cite any of
these (seventy) narrations.

As a matter of fact As-Saduq's At-Tawhid can be seen as one of the most
excellent ancient reference books of Islam in this regard. From those
(seventy) narrations we are to cite ten only.

**As-Saduq's At-Tawhid page 107:**

Abu Abdillah: His fathers (peace be upon them all):

As he passed by a man raising his hands to the heavens as he was
supplicating God the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
addressed at him "You may put down you sight. You shall never see Him."

Similarly the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) passed by a man
extending his hands upward while he was supplicating God. He said to him
"Relax your hands. You shall never reach him."

**( 214 )**

Assim Bin Hameed: Before Abu Abdillah (peace be upon him) I mentioned
their narrations about God's seeableness. He commented "The sun is a
single part of the seventy parts of light of the Chair. The Chair is a
single part of the seventy parts of light of the Throne. The Throne is a
single part of the seventy parts of light of the Curtain. The Curtain is
a single part of the seventy parts of light of the Screen. Supposing
they are truthful let them face the sun with their sights.

Ibn Abi Nasr: Abul-Hassan Ar-Rida (peace be upon him): The Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family):

When I was taken to the heavens Gabriel attained a place he had never
attained before. There my Lord showed me a part of His Excellency
illumination.

**As-Saduq's At-Tawhid page 113:**

Ibrahim Bin Mohammed Al-Khezzaz and Mohammed Bin Al-Hussein:

Before Abul-Hassan Ar-Rida (peace be upon him) we mentioned the
narrative that the Prophet had seen his Lord in a look of a thirty year
old young man whose legs were in a green place. "Husham Bin Salim and
the Taqi and Al-Meithami claim that the upper part of the Lord is hollow
while the lower is compact " I added.

Immediately the imam prostrated himself down and stated "Praised be
Thee. They have neither recognized nor monothesized Thee. Therefore the
ascribed to Thee such descriptions. Praised be Thee. Should they
recognized Thee they would refer to Thee only what Thou hast referred to
Thy Essence. Praised be Thee. How dare they to anthropomorphize Thee. O
my God! I should not use for Thee except the attributes Thou hast used
for Thy Essence. Nor should I anthropomorphize Thee. Thou art source of
every wealth. Make me not with the unjust people."

After a while the imam turned to us and advised "You should regard Allah
as unlike anything your minds may surmise. We Mohammed's progeny are the
middle category. The exaggerative will not attain us and the late will
never precede us."

He then addressed at me "O Mohammed! When he saw Excellency of his Lord
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) was as same as a thirty
year old young man's look. O Mohammed! My Lord be more exalted and
glorified than being bearing creatures' descriptions."

"I be your sacrifice!" I said "Whose legs were in a green place?" "That
was Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family) " answered the imam
"When he perceived his Lord by heart He was made in an illumination like
that of the divine Curtains till he discerns what is there. God's
illumination is of different

**( 215 )**

colors. Some are green red white and the like. O Mohammed! We dedicate
our sayings to only what is affirmed by the divine Book and the
Prophet's traditions."

**As-Saduq's At-Tawhid page 398:**

Hafs Bin Gheyath: The best of Jafars Jafar Bin Mohammed: The opener of
knowledges of the earlier and the late Mohammed Bin Ali: The master of
the reverent Ali Bin Al-Hussein: The master of the martyrs Al-Hussein
Bin Ali: The master of the prophets' successors Ali Bin Abi Talib:

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) was sitting in the mosque
when a Jew came and asked "O Mohammed! What are you soliciting to?"

The Prophet: I am soliciting to admitting there is non god but Allah and
I am the apostle of Allah.

The Jew: O Mohammed! Tell me how that lord you are soliciting to his
monotheism and claiming of your being his apostle is.

The Prophet: O Jew! My Lord is not submitted to conditions. He is the
Creator and the Maker of conditions.

The Jew: Where is he then?

The Prophet: My Lord is not submitted to spaces. He is the Creator and
the Maker of space.

The Jew: Have you seen him Mohammed?

The Prophet: He cannot be seen by eyes and cannot be comprehended by
allusions.

The Jew: How should we know of his existence?

The Prophet: We should know so by His signs and portents.

The Jew: Does he bear the Throne or does the Throne bear him?

The Prophet: O Jew! My Lord is neither a corporeality to occupy a thing
nor is He an space to be occupied by things.

The Jew: How are his mandates issued?

The Prophet: They are issued by creating articulation in the spaces.

The Jew: O Mohammed! Are the entire creatures his?

The Prophet: Yes they are.

The Jew: On which criteria had he elected some of them for conveying his
message?

The Prophet: On criteria of their precedence to submitting to His
godhood.

**( 216 )**

The Jew: How have you then claimed your being the best of those elected?

The Prophet: Because I was the foremost in submitting to my Lord's
godhead.

The Jew: Well tell me if your lord acts injustice.

The Prophet: No He does not.

The Jew: Why not?

The Prophet: Because He realizes offensiveness of injustice and because
He does not need it.

The Jew: Have Verses regarding this concern been revealed to you?

The Prophet: Yes He has. He says (Your Lord is not unjust to His
servants. 3:182) (Allah does not wrong people in any amount but people
wrong each other.10:44) (Allah does not want injustice to peoples.
3:108) and (Allah does not want injustice to the servants. 40:31).

The Jews: O Mohammed! You have claimed your lord's evading injustice.
How had he then drowned people of Noah while children were among them?

The Prophet: O Jew! For forty years the Prophet occluded women of Noah's
people from giving births. Hence no child was among them when they were
drowned. Allah should never punish the progeny for their fathers' sins.
My Lord be highly exalted against injustice and wrong.

The Jew: If your lord does never wrong anybody how shall he then
eternalize in agony incessantly those who disobeyed Him for a number of
days?

The Prophet: The Lord eternalizes as to the disobedient's intention. He
eternalizes in agony for ever those whom He does know that they shall be
keeping on disobeying Him if they are given an eternal life in this
world. Intentions however are worse than deeds. By the same token Allah
eternalizes in the Paradise those whom He does know that they shall be
keeping on obeying Him as they are given an eternal life in this world.
The intention here is better than the deed. Due to intention people of
the Paradise are eternalized there and people of hell are eternalized
there. Allah the Powerful the Glorified says (Everyone acts according to
his manner; but your Lord best knows who is best guided to the straight
path. 17:84)

The Jew: O Mohammed! In the Torah I recite that every prophet should
have a successor from his nation. Who is your successor then?

The Prophet: O Jew! My successor is Ali Bin Abi Talib. In the Torah his
name is 'Ilia' and in the Bible 'Heidar'. He is the best of my people
and the most knowledgeable of my Lord. For me his standing is as same as
Aaron's to Moses except that there will be no prophet after me. As I am
master of the prophets he is master of the prophets' successors.

**( 217 )**

The Jew: I do admit there is no god but Allah and you are the apostle of
Allah and Ali Bin Abi Talib is your successor indeed. By God I swear I
did notice your entire answers in the Torah. I have also inspected
characteristics of you as well as your successor in the Torah. Your
successor shall be wronged and martyred. He is the father of your two
sons and grandsons Shubbar and Shubeir. They are masters of the youth of
the Paradise.

**As-Saduq's At-Tawhid page 77:**

Abul-Abbas Al-Fadl Bin Al-Abbas Al-Kindi (in Hamadan 354 he permitted me
to relate the following): Mohammed Bin Sehl Al-Attar Al-Baghdadi (from
his book in 305): Abdullah Bin Mohammed Al-Balawi: Imara Bin Zaid:
Abdullah Bin Al-Ala: Salih Bin Subei: Amr Bin Mohammed Bin Sasa'a Bin
Sawhan: His father: Abul-Mutamir Muslim Bin Aws:

I was attending at Kufa Mosque when a yellowish Jew Yemeni stood erect
and addressed at Ali Bin Abi Talib "O Amirul-Muminin! Describe your
Creator before us and characterize Him as simple and evident as possible
as if we have Him before us."

Ali (peace be upon him) said:

"Praised and Glorified be Allah.

Praised be Allah who is incipient without a rise of anything or an
interior in anything. He is abiding whatsoever the condition is. He is
not intermixed with anything and not an illusive fancy. He is not a
ghost that is seeable or a corporeality that is divisible or a trimming
that is final or a contingent that is visible or a hidden that is
revealed or curtained that is comprised.

He was being when there were no places occupying Him or bearers that
lift Him by their power. He was not being after He had not existed.
Allusions are too perplexed to choose a condition of the Creator of
conditions of things. He is permanent without a place. He does never
perish for changeability of times. He does not turn into other things.

He is the remote from being attained by surmise of hearts and the
exalted from being a thing or a model. He is the unique the knowing of
the unseen. Significations of creatures are negated for Him and their
hiddens are not hidden for him. He is recognized without a certain
condition. He cannot be comprehended by senses or measured to people.
Visions cannot comprehend Him and ideas cannot arrive at Him and minds
cannot estimate Him and allusions cannot get Him. Whatsoever estimated
by minds and exampled is finite.

That who is not incarnating in things to say He is being and not remote
from them to say He is alien and not out of them to ask about His space
and not sticking to them and not departing them. He is in the entire
things without a

**( 218 )**

certain condition. He is nearer to us than veins and the furthest in
likening. How is it possible then to compare Him with ghosts or to
describe Him with the most eloquent tongues?

He has not created things on eternal grounds or origins previously
originated. But He created His creatures in the best making and made His
made things in the best picture. Praised be Him whose oneness is in His
elevation. Nothing can stand against Him. He has no benefit by obedience
of any of His creatures. Ready is His response to the supplicators. The
angels in the heavens and the earth are submitted to Him. He spoke to
Moses thoroughly without organs or means or labium or uvula. Praised and
exalted be Him against having descriptions. He that claim of the Lord's
finitude is ignoring the Creator the Adored

**As-Saduq's At-Tawhid page 254:**

Abu Muammar As-Sadani: A man came to Ali Bin Abi Talib and said:

O Amirul-Muminin! I began to doubt the Book of Allah.

Woe is you! How dare you to doubt the Book of Allah?

I found it contradictory. How should I then not doubt it.

Book of Allah is wholly accordant. But you have not been given an
intellectuality sound enough to benefit. Now you may lead me to
positions you have doubted.

Allah says (So today We forsake them as they neglected the meeting of
today. 7:51) And says (They have forsaken Allah; so He has forsaken
them. 9:67) And says (And your Lord is not forgetful. 19:64)

Hence once He tells He will forget and another He tells He will never
forget. How is that Amirul-Muminin?

What else?

Allah says (They shall not speak except he whom the Beneficent God
permits and who speaks the right thing. 78:38) And says (They would say:
By Allah our Lord we were not polytheists. 6:23) And says (Then on the
resurrection day some of you shall deny others and some of you shall
curse others. 29:25) And says (That most surely is the truth; the
contending one with another of the inmates of the fire. 38:64) And says
(He will say: Do not quarrel in my presence and indeed I gave you the
threatening beforehand. 50:28) And says (On that day We will set a seal
upon their mouths and their hands shall speak to us and their feet shall
bear witness of what they earned. 36:65)

Hence once He tells they will not speak except those permitted by the
Beneficent God and another He tells they will never utter while He
communicates their saying "By God our Lord we were not polytheists." On

**( 219 )**

another occasion He tells they will contend with each other. How is that
Amirul-Muminin? How should I not doubt when I conceive so?

What is else?

Well Allah the Powerful the Glorified says (Some faces on that day shall
be bright looking at their Lord.) And says (Visions comprehend him not
and He comprehends all visions and He is the Aware the Cognizant.) And
says (And certainly he saw him in another descent at the farthest
lottree.) And says (On that day shall no intercession avail except of
him whom the Beneficent God allows and whose word he is pleased with. He
knows what is before them and what is behind them while they do not
comprehend Him in knowledge.20:10910)

Knowledge does comprehend whatever is comprehended by visions. How is
that Amirul-Muminin? How should I not doubt what I am receiving?

What else

Listen. Regarding God's saying (Some faces on that day shall be bright
looking at their Lord) this shall occur after the Lord completes the
judgment. God's disciples shall be taken to a river called 'Al-Hayawan'
(the fresh life) where they bathe and drink. Immediately their faces
shall be bright as every mote or dot shall be removed from them. Then
they shall be taken to the Paradise. On that situation they shall look
upon their Lord's rewards. The angels greet them "Peace be upon you.
Enjoy and enter it for good." They will be ascertained of their abiding
in the Paradise and they will be waiting for their Lord's promises. This
is God's saying (Looking at their Lord.) 'Looking at the Lord' stands
for 'looking at His rewards.'

Regarding his saying (Visions comprehend Him not) this means that
allusions cannot perceive Him while He comprehends visions and perceives
them since He is the Aware the Cognizant. That is a sort of Praise our
Lord the Blessed the Exalted has used for Himself. Moses (peace be upon
him) asked his Lord a calamitous question "My Lord! Show me Thyself so
that I may look upon Thee."

Allah the Blessed the Exalted answered "You cannot bear to see me but
look at the mountain if it remains firm in its place then will you see
me." Hence our Lord made some of His signs and manifested His glory to
the mountain that was immediately broken up and crumbled. Moses fell
down in a swoon. Then Allah enlivened and pardoned him. Moses expressed
"Glory be to Thee. I turned to Thee and I am the first of the
believers." This means that he believed before others that Allah cannot
be seen.

The intended in God's saying (And certainly he saw him in another
descent) is Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family). He was at the
furthest lottree that none should pass. God's saying (The eye did not
turn aside nor did it

**( 220 )**

exceed the limit. Certainly he was of the greatest signs of his Lord)
alludes to the Prophet's seeing Gabriel in his actual look twice.
Gabriel's look is tremendously great since he is one of the divine
spirits that none but Allah the Lord of the worlds can comprehend their
creation and quality.

AtTebirsi in his Al-ihtijaj part 1 page 358-62 relates the same with
little difference:

A miscreant came to Ali (peace be upon him) and said "I would embraced
your religion unless I found the difference and contradiction in the
Quran." "What is that contradiction?" Ali asked.

The same is recorded in Al-Majlisi's Biharul Anwar part 4 page 32.

**As-Saduq's At-Tawhid page 99:**

My father: Ali Bin Ibrahim: His father: Al-Abbas Bin Amr: Husham Bin
Al-Hakam:

A miscreant asked Abu Abdillah (peace be upon him) about God's
substance. Abu Abdillah answered "He is a thing unlike ordinary things.
Ascribing 'thing' to Him is made only for affirming His existence and
proving His being a Being. However He is neither a corporeality nor an
aspect."

**As-Saduq's At-Tawhid page 176:**

Ibrahim Bin Abi Mahmud:

"O son of Allah's Apostle! What do you suggest about the saying they
relate to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) that he said
'Every night Allah the Blessed the Exalted descends to the lowest
heavens.'?" I asked Ar-Rida (peace be upon him). "Cursed be the
distorters " said the imam "By God I swear the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) did never utter so. He only said 'Except the Friday
night which is wholly considered in the last third of every night Allah
the Blessed the Exalted gives His order to an angel to descend to the
lowest heaven and declare whether there is a supplicator to be responded
or a repentant to be admitted or a seeker of forgiveness to be forgiven.
He also urges seekers of good to hurry up and seekers of evil to stop.
This lasts to the dawn when he returns to his place in the heavens.'
This is what my father related to his father to the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family)."
