Chp 1 Question of God' Seeableness in Abstract
==============================================

**( 13 )**

Is it possible to see Allah the Exalted with mere eyes in this world or
in the Hereafter? This is concisely the question of God's seeableness.

The Prophet's household Aisha and a good deal of the Prophet's
companions denied this matter absolutely. Philosophers Mutazilites(1)
and others adopted this question acceptably. The earlier group referred
to the following sayings of God as their evidence:

(Nothing like a likeness of Him; and He is the Hearing the Seeing.
42:11)(2)

(You cannot see me. 7:143)

(Visions comprehend him not and he comprehends all visions. 6:103)

Intellectually what is possibly seen by eyes should be a material
substance occupying a definite place and time.

Hanbalites(3) and followers of Asharism(4), Hanafites(5), Malikites(6)
and Shafiites(7),

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Mutazilism is an Islamic theological sect. 2. The Quranic texts are
almost quoted from M. H. Shakir's translation of the Holy Quran. The
first number after each Quranic text stands for the sura chapter while
the other stands for the Verse. 3. Hanbalism is one of the four major
Sunni jurisprudential sects, founded by Ahmed Bin Hanbal. 4. Asharism is
an Islamic theological sect founded by Al-Ashari. 5. Hanafism is one of
the four major Sunni jurisprudential sects, founded by Abu Haneefa. 6.
Malikism is one of the four major Sunni jurisprudential sects, founded
by Malik Bin Anas. 7. Shafiism is one of the four major Sunni
jurisprudential sects, founded by Mohammed Bin Idris Ashafii.

**( 14 )**

believe that Allah can be seen by mere eyes in this world or in the
Hereafter. Their evidences were some Quranic Verses a surface sight at
which shows the ability of seeing Allah. Such as (Some faces on that day
shall be bright. Looking at [waiting for] their Lord. 75: 23-4) They
also referred to a number of hadiths and narratives regarding
possibility of seeing Allah in the Hereafter. Moreover regarding
Verses(8) and hadiths denying possibility of Allah's seeableness with
mere eyes they set up representation fitting their conception.

### ADVENT OF NARRATIVES OF GOD'S SEEABLENESS AND CORPORALISM

Pursuant to hadiths and history during reigns of the Prophet and Abu
Bakr the conception that Allah the Elevated is not classified to visible
or sensible matters since He is a Being of a degree higher than
materialities was commonly prevalent. Hence sights cannot fall on Him
and allusions cannot attain Him. He is reachable by intellects and
seeable by minds the visions of which are more elevated and deeper than
those of eyes.

During and after Omar's reign conceptions of God's seeableness and
corporalism were generally prevalent. The Prophet's household and some
companions took the charge of refuting and belying such misallegations.

Like many others UmmulMuminin(9) Aisha was stunned by such odd sayings
far away from Islamic beliefs and contrary to the Prophet's conveyance
of Allah's mission.

Aisha expounded upon falsity of such narratives. She declared: "Such
sayings are impending lies forged against Allah the Elevated and His
Apostle. Muslims should refute and belie such malicious accusation."

The following is related in Al-Bukhari's AsSahih (Book of hadith) part 6
page 50:

Masruq: I asked Aisha (God may please her) whether the Prophet (peace be
upon him) had seen his Lord. "Your words have made my hair chill!" said
Aisha and added "You should know three things the talker of which is
surely a liar. He is certainly a fabricator that whoever tells of
Mohammed's having seen his Lord. (Visions comprehend him not and he
comprehends all visions; and He is the Knower of subtleties the Aware.
6:103) (And it is not for any mortal

------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. 'Verse' in this regard stands for the Quranic texts, while hadith
stands for the Prophetic texts. 9. UmmulMuminin (Mother of the
believers) is a name exclusively said to the Prophet's wives.

**( 15 )**

that Allah should speak to him except by revelation or from behind a
veil; 42:51).

He is also lying that whoever tells of realizing the morrow (And no one
knows what he shall earn on the morrow; and no one knows in what land he
shall die. 31:34).

He is also lying that whoever tells of the Prophet's having concealed (O
Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and if
you do it not then you have not delivered His message. 5:67). Yes indeed
the Prophet could see the Angel Gabriel twice in his actual appearance."

In His AsSahih part 8 page 166 Al-Bukhari also records:

Ashi'bi: Masruq: Aisha (God may please her) stated:

"He is fabricating that whoever tells of Mohammed's having seen his Lord
(Visions comprehend him not and he comprehends all visions; and He is
the Knower of subtleties the Aware.)

He is fabricating that whoever claims of realizing the future (Say: No
one in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen but Allah. 27:65)."

Similar narratives are written down in Al-Bukhari's AsSahih volume 2
part 4 page 83 and Volume 3 part 6 page 50 and volume 4 page 83.

Muslim's AsSahih (Book of Hadith) part 1 page 110:

Aisha stated: "He is fabricating that whoever tells of Mohammed's having
seen his Lord."

The same is recorded in An-Nisa'i's book of Tafseer-exegesis of the Holy
Quran part 2.

On page 245 of the same previous reference the following is recorded:

Abu Dherr stated: The Prophet saw his Lord by his heart not eye."

This narrative is also written down in IrshadusSari part 5 7 and 10 page
276 359 and 356. Ar-Razi in his Al-Mettalibul-Aliya volume 1 part 1 page
87 records the same.

In AtTirmithi's AsSunen part 4 page 328 the following is recorded:

Masruq: I was before Aisha when she spoke: "O Abu Aisha! He is forging a
serious falsification against Allah that whoever discusses one of three
subjects. He whoever claims of Mohammed's having seen his Lord is
forging serious falsification against Allah Who says (Visions comprehend
him not and he comprehends all visions; and He is the Knower of
subtleties the Aware. 6:103) (And it is not for any mortal that Allah
should speak to him except by revelation or from behind a veil. 42:51)."

**( 16 )**

I immediately sat erect and wondered: "O mother of believers! With
relaxation answer me please. God says (And certainly he saw him in
another descent. 53:13) (And of a truth he saw him on the clear horizon.
81:23)"

She commented "By God I swear I was the first who asked the Apostle of
Allah (peace be upon him) about this matter. He answered that it was
Gabriel whom he had seen. He also added that saving these two occasions
he had not seen the Angel in his actual appearance. He saw him descend
from the heavens blocking all what is between the heavens and earth due
to tremendousness of his creation." She then added "Similarly he whoever
claims of Mohammed's having concealed any of what was revealed to him is
forging serious accusation against Allah Who says (O Apostle! Deliver
what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and if you do it not then
you have not delivered His message. 5:67). He whoever claims of
realizing the morrow is forging serious accusation against Allah Who
says (Say: No one in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen but
Allah. 27:65).

AtTirmithi commentates:

This hadith is authentic and qualified with a rather doubtful narrator.
Masruq Bin Al-Ajda is called 'Abu Aisha'.

AtTabari in his book of Tafseer part 27 page 30 relates the same
narrative. On page 200 of the same reference a similar hadith is written
down:

Ashi'bi: Aisha stated "He whoever claims of having seen his Lord is
forging a serious falsification against Allah Who says (Visions
comprehend him not and he comprehends all visions; and He is the Knower
of subtleties the Aware.)"

Adopters of this conception claim that comprehension in the Verse
involved stands for sight. They deny that Allah can be seen neither in
this world nor in the Hereafter. Regarding the Verse (Some faces on that
day shall be bright. Looking at [waiting for] their Lord. 75:234) they
allege that 'looking' in the Verse stands for waiting for God's mercy.

Ahmed in his book of hadith part 6 page 49 relates a similar narrative
with the following addition:

**( 17 )**

Aisha said: Glorified be Allah! Your words have made my hair chill!

Al-Baghawi relates an alike narrative in part 4 page 30 of
MassabihusSunneh.

AsSuheili in Ar-RawdhilEnif part 2 page 156 and AnNuweiri in
NihayetulIreb part 8 page 16 hadith 295 relate the previous with the
following addition:

Aisha said: "My hair is chilled."

As he relates a similar narrative in part 3 page 252 of his
Al-Jawahirul-Hisan At-Thalibi comments:

Al-Beihaqi opted for narratives of Aisha Ibn Mas'ud and Abu Hureira
involving that it was Gabriel the Angel who had been intended in the
visions mentioned in the Verses (Then he drew near then he bowed 53:8).
Shureik's narrative however is repealed by Abu Dherr's most authentic
one: "O Apostle of Allah! Have you seen your Lord?" asked Abu Dherr. "He
is brilliance. How can I see brilliance?!" answered the Prophet.

Regarding God's saying (The heart was not untrue in making him see what
he saw. 53:11) Ibn Abbas claims that Mohammed (peace be upon him) has
seen his Lord with eyes of his head. Aisha denies so: "I myself asked
Allah's Apostle about these Verses. He told that Gabriel the Angel was
the one seen."

Ibn Jazi in his AtTasihil part 2 page 381 records:

Some claimed that the Prophet had seen Allah the Elevated. Aisha denied
this claim.

The following is recorded in AtThehbi's Siyeru A'laminNubela part 2 page
166:

Aisha (God please her): "He whoever claims of Mohammed's having seen his
Lord is forging serious falsification against Allah the Elevated. The
Prophet saw Gabriel twice in his actual appearance which was blocking
all what is between horizons."

We had no single evident narrative involving the Prophet's having seen
his lord with his eyes. This question however is not that important
since a Muslim may disregard. Regarding narratives of seeing Allah in
dreams a good number of variant acceptable reports has been related.
Texts regarding seeing Allah with eyes in the Hereafter are so
uninterrupted that certitude is obtained. AdDarqutni Al-Beihaqi and
others compiled reports regarding the topic concerned.

AtThehbi in his commentary on Ahmed's book of hadith part 6 page 2416
records:

Ibn Abi Edi: Dawud Bin Abi Hind: Ashi'bi: Masruq:

Before Aisha I said "God says (And certainly he saw him in another
descent. 53:13) (And of a truth he saw him on the clear horizon. 81:23)"

She commented: "I was the first who asked the Apostle of Allah (peace be
upon him) about these Verses. He answered that it was Gabriel whom he
had seen. He also added that saving these two occasions he had not seen

**( 18 )**

the Angel in his actual appearance. He saw him descend from the heavens
blocking all what is between the heavens and earth due to tremendousness
of his creation."

Muslim relates this report numbered 177 to Ashi'bi. He records it in
Chapter: Faith Title: Significance of God's saying (And certainly he saw
him in another descent.) Al-Bukhari relating it to Ashi'bi and Masruq
records the report in part 8 page 466.

For AtTirmithi the report is numbered 3278. In his book of Tafseer he
relates it to Sufian: Mujalid: Ashi'bi. It is however of authentic
documentation.

Aisha's denial in fact included seeing Allah in the Hereafter. AtTabari
supports this meaning; therefore AtThehbi and others had to find
acceptable construction for Aisha's reports particularly and Verses and
reports respecting denial of seeing Allah generally. Additionally they
forbade from debating reports respecting seeing God and the divine
attributes. Besides they denied and reckoned with deviation and atheism
all those debating such subjects. Further discussion to be provided
later on.

**AdDimiri's HayatulHawanilKubra part 2 page 71:**

Aisha denied significance of the Prophet's having seen Allah mentioned
in sura of Najm. She in truth denied the whole question of seeing God
under any circumstance. Glorified and Elevated be Allah. He is more
exalted and excellent than being described by localities demarcated by
attributers accounted by times or denoted by places and zones. For these
considerations it is impracticable to describe His Essence as identified
to a certain region or movable from a place to another or falling in a
certain place. It is related that Moses received the direct words of
Allah from every side. Proving this it is illicit to characterize Allah
as occupier of a definite point and settler of a definite place. Unlike
conception of the Hashawite Hanbalites His words are without letters or
sounds.

### SIGNIFICANCE AND SOURCE OF FORGING LIES AGAINST ALLAH

Forging lies stands for fabricating grave heresies and speaking
intentional lies against religion of Allah the Exalted. Meanings of the
Arabic 'firya' are detailedly discussed in Al-Khalil's Al-Ein part 8
page 280 Al-Jawhari's AsSihah part 6 page 24 and Ar-Raghib's Al-Mufredat
page 379.

It is not unacceptable to state that the origin of the expression of
'forging lies against Allah' is the Prophet. It is probable that Aisha
and the Prophet's household adopted the expression from Allah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Hashawism is an Islamic theologian subsect.

**( 19 )**

Ahmed in his book of hadith part 3 page 491 relates:

Wathila Bin Al-Asqa: The Prophet (peace be upon him) said "The gravest
forging against Allah are three:"

Similarly it is impracticable that this expression was used for
describing the Jews.

In Majma'uzzawa'id part 4 page 122 Al-Heithami records:

As he glanced at the Jews' datepalm trees Abdullah Bin Rawaha stated "I
by God lack knowledge of creatures more functional in forging lies
against Allah and more antagonistic to Apostle of Allah (peace be upon
him) than you."

The next narrative indicates that the Jews were the source of forging
lies against Allah the Elevated.

Al-Majlisi in BiharulAnwar part 36 page 194 records:

Ibn Abbas: Omar Bin Al-Khattab asked Ka'bul-Ahbar whether he had
retained the Torah. Ka'b answered affirmatively. A man attending at that
session sought Omar's asking Ka'b to mention where God had been before
he created the Throne and from which element He the Elevated had created
the water on which He located His Throne. "Yes AmirulMuminin!" answered
Ka'b "In the Wise Origin we exposed that Allah the Blessed and Exalted
had been anterior before creation of the Throne. He was establishing
Himself on the rock of Jerusalem in ether. As He willed to create His
Throne He salivated a single spit from which deep oceans and revolved
waves were originated. There He created His Throne from a part of the
rock on which He was settling. The rest of that rock was taken as a
mosque of His Sacredness."

Ali Bin Abi Talib who was also attending stood erect and shaked his
dresses uttering expressions of glorifying and exalting the Lord. Omar
adjured him to return to his place. Ali responded. "Sink for it you
great diver! What is your commentary Abul-Hassan! You have been always
relieving troubles " Omar addressed at Ali. "Wrong were your
acquaintances!" Ali (peace be upon him) turned to Ka'b "They distorted
Book of Allah and inaugurated forging lies against Him. Woe is you Ka'b!
The rock you have intended should never accommodate Allah's exaltation
or comprehend His prominence. The ether you have mentioned should never
maintain His sides. Had the rock and the ether been anterior they would
have had His anteriority. Allah the Elevated is more excellent than
having an indicated place. Unlike sayings of unbelievers and surmise of
the ignorant Allah was existing when there was no place in a form
unattainable by mentalities. My saying 'was' is a lack of His being. It
is a part of what He had taught from mode of expression. Allah the
Magnified the Exalted says (He created man taught him mode of
expression. 55:34) Using

'was' for Him is a part of mode of expression He had taught so

**( 20 )**

that I would speak out His arguments and excellence. Our Lord was and
still potent of doing whatever he desires aware of everything. He then
composed what He desires without referring to an occurring idea or an
intercepting confusedness. He the Magnified the Exalted created a light
originated from nothing. Then darkness was prompted from that light.
Like creation of light He had the capability of creating darkness from
nothing. From that darkness He created a light from which a ruby as
crammed as seven heavens and seven earths. Owing to His chiding the ruby
deliquesced for His consensus. It was transferred into water shaky till
Day of Resurrection. He then created His Throne from His own light and
established it on water. The Throne has ten thousand tongues each is
praising Allah in ten thousand totally different languages. Draperies of
haze were down the Throne when settled on water. This is the
significance of His saying (And his throne was on water that he might
manifest to you. 11:7).

Woe is you Ka'b! He whose spit was these oceans as you claim should be
greatly larger than being contained by the rock of Jerusalem or the
ether you have indicated to."

Immediately Omar Bin Al-Khattab laughed and confessed "This is it
indeed. This is the knowledge not yours Ka'b. May God terminate me
before being in time Abul-Hassan is absent."

In addition to many others these persuading texts lead to perceiving
that existence of a trace of the Jewish culture in the question had been
the motive beyond such an abundant denial and firm situation.

### Al-ALBANI DISDAINS DENIAL OF ALLAH'S SEEABLENESS ADOPTED BY THE PROPHET'S COMPANIONS

The following is quoted from Al-Albani's Al-Fatawi page 143:

Not only was conception of Allah's seeableness referred to by the
Prophet's tradition but also it was asserted in the Holy Quran that is
uninterruptedly related to the Prophet. Regarding the Exalted's saying
(Some faces on that day shall be bright. Looking at [waiting for] their
Lord.) the faces intended are surely the believers' who shall be looking
at their Lord. Mutazilites and Shias invented a philosophy indicating
that meaning of the Verse is looking at the Lord's boons. Such sorts of
philosophy is surely an ax destructuring the authentic traditions.

Al-Albani and his likes as a matter of fact missed the fact that it is
impermissible to rest upon a part of the Holy Quran and neglect others.
Thus it is essential to take in consideration the Verses (Visions
comprehend him not ) and (Nothing like a likeness of Him;) in addition
to many others pertaining denying Allah's seeableness. The next step is
lining the decisive with the allegorical Verses. In this regard it is so
appreciable to cite that the Verse

**( 21 )**

involved is revealing a morrow situation before entering to the
Paradise. This is evidenced by God's saying (And other faces on that day
shall be gloomy knowing that they will be made to befall them some great
calamity. 75:25-6)

The believers' faces shall be tending to their Lord waiting for His
mercy and bounty. The unbelievers' on the other hand shall be lassitude
anticipating His penalty. As a result the Verses are lacking any signal
to ocular sight at Allah's Entity whether after or before abiding in the
Paradise.

Secondly they missed that considering disregarding narratives about
Allah's seeableness is a sort of destructuring the Prophet's tradition
it is they who did perpetrate such a destruction since they disregarded
the authentic narratives of Aisha recorded by Al-Bukhari Muslim and
others.

It is seemly to say that Verses regarding denial of Allah's seeableness
are downright and decisive. It is also improper to intersect such Verses
by others the surface perspectives of which show Allah's optical
seeableness. Allegorical Verses should be measured to the decisive and
their appearances should be passed.

Within the hadiths there are those denying Allah's seeableness and
others admitting. Both are authentic and recorded in dependable
references. They are too contrasted to be regarded. Hence it is
necessary to favor some and neglect the others. It is illtimed to arise
the misallegation that Mutazilites and Shias were the originators of
such denial and regarding such a denial as destructuring the Prophet's
traditions. The entire adopters of Allah's optical seeableness such as
Al-Albani and Bin Baz hint at narratives of Aisha. Meanwhile those who
ruled of impracticability of Allah's seeableness and corporeality
referred to narratives of Allah's seeableness. This matter then is not
reckoned with destructuring of the Prophet's traditions. In study of
principals of jurisprudence this matter is named 'equality and
preponderancy'. One of the conclusive principal of this discipline is
favoring the most suitable group to the less in case it is unworkable to
combine contrasted hadiths. Preference here is the share of hadiths of
denying Allah's seeableness. The following are additional points of
superiority of hadiths regarding denial of Allah's seeableness:

Hadiths regarding denial of Allah's seeableness are concordant to
Quranic decisive Verses such as (Visions comprehend him not and he
comprehends all visions) and (Nothing like a likeness of Him;).

Hadiths involved are concordant to origin. The origin however is ruling
of impracticability of Allah's optical seeableness till a decisive proof
is provided.

Hadiths of the Prophet's household and Aisha regarding denial of Allah's
seeableness are opposing and nullifying the others. Hadiths of Allah's
seeableness however are neither opposing nor nullifying the others.

**( 22 )**

Unlike those proving Allah's seeableness hadiths of impracticability of
Allah's seeableness are concordant to the decisive ruling of intellect.

### THEY DENOUNCED AND MISTREATED AISHA THEIR MOTHER

In his KitabutTawhid page 225 Ibn Khuzeima records:

As much as I conceive Aisha uttered her words while she was highly
enraged. It was more becoming for her to use a better utterance for
communicating her idea. It is unacceptable for any to pronounce "Ibn
Abbas Abu Dherr Anas Bin Malik or any group of people had forged a grave
fabrication against their Lord!" People however may use words of less
value during rage. The extensiveness of this matter can be summarized by
stating that Aisha Abu Dherr Ibn Abbas and Anas Bin Malik were engaged
in dispute appertained to the subject whether the Prophet (peace be upon
him) had seen his Lord or not. Aisha (God please her) answers with
negation while Abu Dherr and Ibn Abbas (God please them) affirm so.
Aisha does not relate that the Prophet himself has informed her of not
seeing his Lord the Elevated (!) she only repeats Quranic Verses
(Visions comprehend him not ) and (And it is not for any mortal that
Allah should speak to him except by revelation or from behind a veil;).
A scrutinizing glance at the Verses involved with being guided to the
correct exposes that both have nothing inciting to forging grave lies
against Allah! God's saying (Visions comprehend him not) may refer to
two meanings adopted by followers of conception of Allah's seeableness.
First it may be accordant to the saying of 'the Quran's interpreter'
addressed at Ikrima the slave "That is His brilliance which is his
brilliance. Nothing would comprehend Him when He comes into view by His
brilliance." The second meaning is that people's eyes cannot comprehend
Him. Pursuant to the Arabic tongue the item 'absar' visions includes
commonly a group's eyes. It is unfeasible to use 'absar' for
individuals' eyes. The item 'basar' vision expresses an individual's
eyes. In a like fashion it is impracticable to use 'basaran' two visions
for expressing an individual's eyes. Hence it is unacceptable to use
'absar' for expressing a single individual's organs of sight. Falsity
and prevarication shall be certainly imputed to us if we claim that
visions can see our Lord in this world.

Claiming of the Prophet's having seen his Lord exclusively does not
propose that visions have seen the Lord in this world. How is it ye
possessors of intellects practical for those who deny the Prophet's
having seen his Lord exclusively to prove that visions have seen the
Lord. Perceiving this point leads to understanding that Ibn Abbas Abu
Dherr Anas Bin Malik and their adherents had neither forged grave lies
against Allah nor had they opposed a single letter of Allah's Book
regarding this question!!

Aisha uttered the Verse (And it is not for any mortal that Allah should
speak to him except by revelation or from behind a veil;) during
providing evidences on impracticability of the Prophet's having seen his
Lord. Neither Abu Dherr

**( 23 )**

Ibn Abbas Anas Bin Malik (God please them) nor did any of their
followers in the question involved allege that Allah communicate the
Prophet in these very moments of seeing. Therefore none could attest any
sort of contrast to the Verse concerned. Those claiming the Prophet's
having seen his Lord are not opposing God's saying (And it is not for
any mortal that Allah should speak to him except by revelation or from
behind a veil;). Those claiming God's having communicated the Prophet at
the same time of their reciprocal optical viewing are only opposing the
Verse.

In spite of his exalted standing scholarship godfearing and position in
Islam and knowledge Ibn Omar seeks the reality of this question from the
Quran's interpreter and the Prophet's cousin. "Has the Prophet (peace be
upon him) seen his Lord?" Ibn Omar asks Ibn Abbas as he esteems his full
acquaintance of this question. It was proved that Ibn Abbas could
certify the Prophet's having seen his Lord. This question in fact is not
attained by intellects opinions hearts and conjecture. Such a knowledge
is received through prophetic course only. This course however is
limited to a divine book or a favorable prophet. As much as I am to
surmise no single acquainted individual may doubt that personal
inference and conjecture were the authors of Ibn Abbas's claiming of the
Prophet's having seen his Lord. The same may be said about Abu Dherr and
Anas Bin Malik.

Conclusively we should repeat the words of Mu'ammar Bin Rashid regarding
discrepancy between Aisha (God please her) and Ibn Abbas (God please
him) about question of Allah's optical seeableness. "For us Aisha is not
more knowledgeable than Ibn Abbas." We add that Aisha the veracious and
daughter of the veracious and dearest of God's dearest was educated and
jurisprudent. Ibn Abbas on the other hand was cousin of the Prophet
(peace be upon him) who supplicated God to bestow him with wisdom and
knowledgeability. This is the operation of that supplication. He is
named the Quran's interpreter. Al-Faruq (God please him) as well was
wont to accept Ibn Abbas's opinions even contrasted to others of older
age and superiority in accompanying the Prophet (peace be upon him). It
is impossible to say that Ibn Abbas forged a grave lie against Allah
just because he affirmed a matter denied by Aisha (God please her). Even
in cases of misrepresentation of a Quranic Verse or a prophetic
tradition scholars should never utter such a statement. How is it then
admissible to impute forging grave lies to Allah to individuals proving
a matter not explicated in the Quran or through the Prophet's
traditions? Understand this question and make not mistakes!!

This was a part of Ibn Khuzeima's words. He was however the tutor of
compilers of the Sahih books and the grand instructor. He spared no
efforts for proving Aisha's flaw in denial of the Prophet's having seen
his Lord with his own eyes. These replicative words were too rude to be
stood even by the

**( 24 )**

revisor of his book; Sheik Mohammed Khalil Harras an instructor in
College of Religion Principals in Al-Azhar. In his commentary Harras
writes down:

Aisha (God please her) only traverses and denies the matter involved
affirmatively. She said to Masruq "Your words have made my hair chill!"
It is unrightful for the author Ibn Khuzeima to learn his mother
civility!! She did realize what to say. Secondly Aisha (God please her)
addresses generally without identifying any addressee. No narration
mentioned that Ibn Abbas had claimed the Prophet's having seen his Lord
with his own eyes. He only claimed that it was with heart and mind.
Saving Ibn Abbas the general companions of the Prophet such as Ibn
Mas'ud and others were agreeing with Aisha in question of denial of
Allah's optical seeableness. Regarding the other wives of the Prophet
despite the fact that none of them could occupy any part of scholarship
and jurisprudence Aisha enjoyed no single narrative revealed they had
disagreed her in the question concerned. Attesters of a matter should
provide evidences. Attesters of Allah's optical seeableness could not
provide any. Hence denial is the origin till an evidence is proved.
Aisha (God please her) supported her claim of denial with some Quranic
Verses as testifiers. Correctness of a claim is regarded after an
evidence is provided. Otherwise denial is preferred since it does not
need an evidence. How should that grand instructor have been
disappointed by his knowledgeability when he misthought that the denied
matter was visions' comprehending Him in such a way that providing a
single vision was involved comprehension should be realizable!!
Considering someone says "I do not have pomegranate." This claim does
not mean that he may have a single grain of pomegranate. God's mercy be
upon Ibn Khuzeima. He had erred. None however is perfect.

In addition to the previous words of Sheik Mohammed Harras we may add
the following:

Except for Abu Dherr's question and Aisha's asking the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) there was no single narrative recorded in
references of hadith relied upon by Sunnis our brothers regarding the
optical seeableness involved. Denial of Allah's optical seeableness
however was confirmed in the two narratives previously excluded.
Personal inference was the proof of those who claimed the Prophet's
having seen his Lord with his own eyes. They however rested upon no
narrative at all.

Contradiction in fact occurs between narratives of Abu Dherr and Aisha
regarding the Prophet's denial of his having seen his Lord from a side
and personal inference from the other. Ibn Abbas's narratives are so
contrasted and confused that they should be ruled as ineffective.
Therefore the origin which is denial of the question involved is
supposed except in case that an evidence is provided.

**( 25 )**

Before he denounces Aisha Ibn Khuzeima himself had recorded narratives
related by Ibn Abbas concerning denial of Allah's seeableness. On Page
200 he writes down:

With reference to exegesis of the Verse (And certainly he saw him in
another descent.) variant narrations were ascribed to Ibn Abbas. Some
related that sight had been with the heart.

Al-Qasim Bin Mohammed Bin Ebbad Al-Muhellebi: Abdullah Bin Dawud
Al-Khureibi: Al-Amesh: Ziyad Bin Hussain: Abul-Aliya:

Regarding God's saying (And certainly he saw him in another descent.)
Ibn Abbas stated "He had seen Him with the heart."

Ismail: Abdurrezaq: Israil: Semmak: Ikrima:

Regarding God's saying (The heart was not untrue in making him see what
he saw.) Ibn Abbas stated "He had seen Him with the heart."

The strange matter is that in the commencement of his commentary Ibn
Khuzeima overlooked Aisha's manifest narrative concerning the Prophet's
denying seeing his Lord. Importunately he insisted on reckoning that
narrative with personal opinion and inference. Finally he had to declare
that Aisha's relation was tradition of the Prophet. Nevertheless he
imposed Ibn Abbas's saying as a hadith standing against Aisha's. He
ruled that Ibn Abbas's narrative must have been following Aisha's. How
did he realize that Ibn Abbas's saying had been a narrative and
following Aisha's? Even if this is acceptable Aisha's narrative is such
an absolute denial that it opposes and traverses the converse ones. Ibn
Abbas's narration is a partial affirmation. How is it then acceptable to
prefer to the previous? Furthermore how could Ibn Khuzeima conclude a
general ruling of preferring narratives of affirmation to those of
denial in case of contradiction deciding the previous as repealing the
latter? Would he then apply this ruling on narrations denying the
Prophet's having nominated Ali in his will and those proving this
question? As for his ruling narratives affirming the Prophet's having
nominated Ali (peace be upon him) for succeeding him in leadership
should be preferred to those denying. In addition would Ibn Khuzeima
commit himself to the claim that Ibn Abbas's words are always preferred
to Aisha's? In this case he should regard his testimony that the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) had nominated Ali (peace be upon him)
as his successor in leadership and ordered Muslims of declaring their
fealty to him in Ghadir Khum just after the Farewell Pilgrimage(11). And
similarly he should overlook Aisha's testimony that the Prophet was
deceased before he had willed of anything to anybody!!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. The Farewell Pilgrimage is the final pilgrimage performed by the
Prophet.

**( 26 )**

Ibn Khuzeima would never commit himself to anything! Because he was
brought up and fed with conception of Allah's optical seeableness he is
ready to engage himself in confiscatory inferential and seemingly
contradictory affairs for proving that conception.

In his Tafseerul-Menar part 9 page 148 Mohammed Abduh did say honorably:

Consequently it is realizable that Ibn Abbas's narrations contrary to
Aisha's was only personal inference without being imputed to the
Prophet. Reports of Ibn Abbas's dedicating seeing by heart is acceptable
contradiction to the authentic exegesis of Sura of Najm imputed to the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) that it was Gabriel the Angel
whom had been seen by the Prophet in his actual appearance. Likewise Ibn
Abbas's saying related by Ikrima was probably conceived from
Ka'bul-Ahbar about whom Muawiya the narrator say: "Lies were largely
uttered by Ka'bul-Ahbar." This saying however is recorded by Al-Bukhari.
Ibn Isaaq the reporter of the other narrative is fabricator. He is
trusted in reports regarding battles only not hadiths. Hence his report
involved is valueless. In reports and conceptions Ibn Abbas's absolute
affirmation is preponderant.

From words of Mohammed Abduh recorded in Tafseerul-Menar part 9 page 139
we can perceive that Aisha's words are judged as evidential inference if
inference is ascribed to her. He says:

Aisha one of the most eloquent people of Quraish refers to visions'
incomprehensibility as an evidence on denial of Allah's seeableness in
regard to the difference between the two. She also provides God's saying
(And it is not for any mortal that Allah should speak to him except by
revelation or from behind a veil;) as another evidence. Scholars however
applied these evidences to Allah's seeableness in this world. Like this
world Allah's visual comprehensibility is also impracticable in the
Hereafter.
