Chp 2 Trends Towards Verses and Hadiths of Divine Attributes
============================================================

**( 27 )**

Since first century four or more schools were originated due to the
Sunnis' engagement in admissibility in hadiths of Allah's optical
seeableness. These ideological schools were come forth a long time
before emergence of their jurisprudential schools. Up to now these
ideological trends prevailed masters and followers of these
jurisprudential schools.

The first trend is school of interpretation. This school is almostly the
nearest to Ahlul-Beit's sect. Its basic sentiment is regarding the
decisive Verses of Allah's oneness such as (Nothing like a likeness of
Him;) and (Visions comprehend him not.) as the base of promoting Allah
the Exalted against unfitting affairs. It also tends to represent any
text signaling at Allah's corporeality or optical seeableness in a way
harmonizing intellectual judgments and other Quranic and prophetic
texts. It seems that followers of this school are forming the majority
among the former as we ass the recent Sunni scholars. Philosophers and
Mutazilites enter under this class. It is the trend adopted by
Ahlul-Beit; the Prophet's household (peace be upon them).

The second trend is school of commendation. Followers of this school
abstain from construing Quranic and prophetic texts respecting the
divine attributes. They commend their meanings to God. This trend is
followed by most of the former narrators and few of the recent.

The third trend is school of extrinsic meanings. Followers of this
school suspend the extrinsic meanings of the divine texts. They believe
that Allah the Exalted has material hand face leg and rim. Christians
and Jews adopt this trend. Ka'bulAhbar Wahab Bin Munebbih and their
associates took the task of publicizing this trend among Muslims. It
became the formal trend adopted by

------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Ahlul-Beit stands for the Prophet's progeny, and their sect is
Shism.

**( 28 )**

the ruling regimes in the Umayid reign. Hanbalites as well as part of
the Asharists adopted that trend. Ibn Teimiya and Wahabists attempted at
attaching this trend to the worthy ancestors and Sunnis.

The fourth trend is school of commuters vacillators and the perplexed.
Models of such three categories have been rendered in our
Al-Aqa'idulIslamiya Volume One.

The name 'Metawila' interpreters commonly used in Syria Palestine and
Egypt at describing the Shias was seemingly originated from the
corporalists who ruled of the Shias' atheism. They also ruled of atheism
of Muslims apart from their sects whose course was finding suitable
representation for the Quranic and prophetic texts.

Although majority of Sunnis our brothers are 'interpreters' the name of
'Metawila' with all of its ill meanings and effects was stuck to the
Shias the wronged. The description 'Mitwali' gave an idea in mentalities
of the Shias' rivals worse than that of 'kafir'- disbeliever.

The following is a rather detailed submission of these trends.

### SCHOOL OF INTERPRETATION

Followers of school of interpretation who form majority of scholars
allege that it is normal that every idiom should be interpreted in the
most suitable way. An utterance is exposed pursuant to its real meaning
unless there is a pronunciational or intellectual obstacle against
appropriating. Only then metaphorical meaning is adapted according to
principals of discourse experienced by specialists.

The Arabic is highly remarkable in rhetoric and eloquence due to various
expressive styles of metaphor metonymy allegory simile etc. Thus the
Prophet's companions and their associates dealt with expressions of the
Holy Quran and hadiths on this basis. They appreciated that texts
appearances of which contrast Allah's divine exaltation were metaphoric
listed under comparing the percipient to the materialistic so that
Allah's attributes and deeds would be evidently conceived by ordinary
mentalities. They decided the unintendedness of susceptible appearances
of such divine texts. Hence metaphor should be referred to for
interpreting. In God's saying (The hand of Allah is above their hands.
48:10) neither the organic hand nor is any akin thing had by Allah is
intended. He the Exalted alludes that the other party of allegiance of
fealty altogether with His propensity prevalence and elevation is higher
than the previous. As a matter of fact this is very natural in any
language. In our daily speech expressions of gratitude are said as an
answer for those who address at you "You have done a heartbreaking job."
Immediately it is understood that a heartbreaking job is a deed of an
expressive value that it affected emotions. It does not mean that due to
that job spears or bullets were

**( 29 )**

sent to hearts that made them breakable. Hearts however cannot be broken
materially.

### EYAD THE JUDGE ASSERTS THE MUSLIMS' UNANIMITY ON INTERPRETATION

In his Sharhu Sahihi Muslim volume 3 part 5 page 24 AnNawawi records:

Eyad the judge states:

Including jurisprudents and hadithists Muslims unanimously rest upon
that the skyey phenomena mentioned in the Holy Quran should not be taken
for their preliminary meaning of their aspects. The entire Muslims found
interpretation for such expressions.

AnNawawi in volume 5 part 9 page 117 of the same reference records the
following:

Eyad the judge states:

Al-Marizi interprets 'Yadnu'- come close-mentioned in the Holy Quran as
coming close of His mercy and dignity. It does not stand for the
material closeness which is connected to distance and contiguity.

In Jami'ulAhadithilQudsiyyeti MinesSihah part 1 page 74 the following is
recorded:

AnNawawi: This is one of the divine attributes texts. Two trends are
regarded to the idea of this text. Trend of majority of theologists and
a good number of the worthy ancestors is that the most fitting
interpretation should be found for explicating such hadiths. Hence Malik
Bin Anas interpreted the most suitable meaning. He stated "His mercy and
affairs or angels are the things descended in stages."

On page 160 of part 1 of the same reference the following is written
down:

The ever first matter to be believed is promoting Allah the Exalted
against qualities of His creatures. Believing in a contrary matter is
actually prejudicing faithfulness. Unanimously the entire master Muslims
agreed upon the fact that it is imperative to believe in the
unintendedness of the extrinsic meanings thrown by Quranic Verses
respecting Allah's attributes and ascribing material attributes to Him
the Exalted. It is inapplicable to accredit the apparent meanings of
Quranic Verses to Allah the Exalted.

The following is recorded in part 1 page 167 of the same reference:

In his Sharhul-Ahadith Al-Mazini states:

This is among the matters obligatorily interpreted. It comprises God's
having a hand. This may lead to the Lord's corporeality and limitedness.

**( 30 )**

In Siyeru A'laminNubela part 8 page 243 AtThehbi states:

AtTufi: Scholars and regardable individuals unanimously agreed on the
metaphoricality of this expression and the metonymically statement of
Allah's giving victory aid and support to His slave. He the Exalted
corresponds His divine Entity to instrumentalities used by His slaves.
"By through Me he perceives. By me he sees. By me he strikes. By me he
walks." This is a piece of a hadith.

For Wahabists as it will be detailedly debated soon they rule that
interpretation of the Holy Quran and hadiths is wholly deviation from
God's right path and atheism. Correspondingly they must have ruled of
the deviation and atheism of all of those who interpreted including Ibn
Khuzeima their master in conception of Allah's corporeity. Bin Baz
however advises of reviewing Ibn Khuzeima's books.

### IBN KHUZEIMA INTERPRETS THE HADITH "GOD CREATED ADAM ON HIS LOOK."

Sunnis our brothers narrate:

As he heard a man revile at a friend by saying "Deformed be your look
and its like." the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) addressed
at him "Seek not deformation of his look. God had surely created Adam on
his look."

Some of the Prophet's companions adhered to this saying claiming its
concordance to the Jews' conception of Allah's creating Adam on His
divine look. This means that mankind's look is as same as Allah's. We
the Shias followed our imams (peace be upon them) who assert that the
Prophet's intendment was "The look of the man you are deforming is as
same as the look of Adam." Hence the pronoun in 'his look' refers to the
addressee not God the Exalted.

A good number of Sunni scholars agreed with us in this question. Ibn
Khuzeima the criticizer of Aisha and the so called 'the grand master'
who embraces fanatically conception of Allah's optical seeableness was
one of those scholars involved.

In His AtTawhid page 37 Ibn Khuzeima says:

Some of the unacquainted misthought that 'his look'- intended in the
hadith involved refers to Allah. The Beneficent our Lord be more exalted
than being intended. The pronoun 'his' in fact refers to the reproached
man. The Prophet (peace be upon him) intended that that reproached's
look was the same chosen by Allah to be Adam's. As the reviler was
censured by the Prophet for imputing deformation to his acquaintance's
face and those bearing the same this means he imputed deformation to
Adam's face since his sons' faces are as same as his. God's mercy be
upon you perceive this point in this form so that you should

**( 31 )**

evade errors and misunderstanding otherwise you will be deviating the
right path by adopting for conception of Allah's corporeity that is
actual deviation.

An expression more ambiguous than that reported by Abu Hureira was
mentioned in another report:

Yousuf Bin Musa: Jarir: Al-Amesh: Habib Bin Abi Thabit: Atta Bin Abi
Rebah: Ibn Omar:

The Prophet (peace be upon him) said "Impute not deformation to faces.
Sons of Adam were created on the look of the Beneficent."

AtThawri reported the same wanting uninterrupted documentation.

Abu Musa Mohammed Bin Al-Muthenna: Abdurrahman Bin Mahdi: Sufian: Habib
Bin Abi Thabit: Atta:

The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated "Deformation should not be
imputed to faces. Sons of Adam were created on the look of the
Beneficent."

By this expression a famous scholar who should not surmise knowledge was
perplexed. They misthought that attaching 'the look' to 'the Beneficent'
is a sort of attaching attributes of entity. Yet this is a big mistake
and an ugly statement comparable to that of the anthropomorphists. May
God protect Muslims and us against their statements!

As much as I can perceive regarding interpreting this report providing
authenticity of communication is proved there are three points of error.
First AtThawri contrasted Al-Amesh in documentation. He relate without
referring to Ibn Omar. Second Al-Amesh is fabricator. He could not
receive the report directly from Habib Bin Abi Thabit. Third Habib is
also fabricator. He could not receive the report directly from Atta.
Assuming authenticity of documentation of the report it may hint at the
idea that attaching 'the look' to 'the beneficent' is a sort of
attaching creation to the Creator. Creatures are attached to the
Beneficent since He was the Creator. Similarly looks are attached to the
Beneficent the Creator. This is clear by God's sayings (This is Allah's
creation but show Me what those besides Him have created. 31:11). Allah
attaches creation to Him since He was the creator.

(This will be as Allah's shecamel for you a sign. 7:73). Allah attached
the shecamel to Him. He added (Leave her to pasture on Allah's earth).

(They shall say: Was not Allah's earth spacious so that you should have
migrated therein? 4:97)

(Surely the land is Allah's; He causes such of His servants to inherit
it as he pleases. 7:128). Allah attached the land to Him since it was He
the Creator.

(-Allah's nature- The nature made by Allah in which He has made men.
30:30). Allah attached that nature to Him as He made people in. God has
not attached

**( 32 )**

to Him two attached items; one attachment of entity and the other is
that of creation.

For evading errors you should understand these two meanings. Considering
the authenticity of communicative documentation of the report sons of
Adam were created according to the look created by the Beneficent when
He first created and puffed spirit in Adam. Allah the Exalted says (And
certainly We created you then We fashioned you. 7:11).

The following narrative is a good evidence on accuracy of the
interpretation we have recently rendered:

Abu Musa Mohammed Bin Al-Muthenna: Abu Amir AdulMelik Bin Omar:
Al-Mughira Bin Abdirrahman: AbuzZinad: Musa Bin Abi Othman: his father:
Abu Hureira:

The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated "Allah created Adam on his look.
His was sixty yard longetc."

Owing to its concordance to logic and our sect we the Shias admit Ibn
Khuzeima's interpretation involved. Wahabists however adopted for hadith
of 'on the look of the Beneficent'. They alleged that Omar the caliph
admitted the Jews' claim Allah's creating Adam on according to His
divine look. So they opted for a (god) of a look of mankind!!

### SAMPLES OF ANNAWAWI'S INTERPRETATION

In Sharhu Sahihi Muslim part 2 page 116 AnNawawi states:

"he keeps on supplicating God till this causes God to laugh" Scholars
determine that God's laughter is an expression of His satisfaction with
His slave's act His affability to him and attiring the slave with His
grace.

In the same reference part 10 page 249 AnNawawi says:

(Release of Allah's hands) stands for His ability. Since people's acts
are usually done by hands Allah opted for this organ for promoting the
significance intended.

In the same reference volume 2 part 3 page 12 AnNawawi states:

"O Apostle of Allah! Have you seen your Lord?" asked Abu Dherr. "He is
brilliance. How can I see brilliance?!" answered the Prophet. This
implies that Allah's curtain is brilliance that cannot be seen. Eyad the
judge asserts "It is impossible to regard Allah's entity as a brilliance
that is a corporeality. Allah the Praised the Exalted is excellently
elevated against being so.

In the same reference volume 4 part 7 page 6 AnNawawi says:

The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated "Our Lord descends to the lowest
heavens every night." Two conceptions vex this saying. First majority of
the

**( 33 )**

worthy ancestors and some of theologists claim that it is right as much
as it conforms to Allah the Exalted. Aspect of the saying is unintended.
Allah is promoted against having His creatures' qualities. Second this
saying is metaphoric.

In the same reference volume 4 part 7 page 98 AnNawawi records:

"the beneficent should take with the right hand" Al-Maziri claims that
such statements are subject to customary expressions. Taking with the
right hand is an expressive phrase that stands for Allah's admissibility
to the alms. Allah the Exalted is excellently promoted against being a
corporeality.

In the same reference volume 6 part 12 page 212 AnNawawi writes down:

Eyad the judge declares:

Good conditions and sublime standing are the real meanings of being to
the right of Allah.

Ibn Arafa:

Coming from the right side implies the very suitable side.

In the same reference part 8 page 16 AnNawawi states:

"The just shall be on rostra of brilliance to the right of Allah.
Allah's both hands are right."

Ibn Arafa explicates: The second expression draws attentions to the fact
that 'the right' intended is not that limb.

In the same reference part 8 page 44 AnNawawi records:

Al-Mawardi states: God's indignation mentioned in the Prophet's saying
stands for rage. This is by reason that indignation is not ascribed to
Allah the Exalted and Praised.

On page 132 part 17 volume 9 of the same reference AnNawawi records:

Regarding explaining Ibn Omar's narrative of Allah's corporeality Eyad
the judge states: We do believe in Allah the Exalted and His divine
attributes. We do not resemble Him to anything. The Prophet's clutching
and opening his fingers is a representation of grabbing extending and
gathering creatures. It is also a representation to the grabbed and the
extended; that are heavens and earths. It does not indicate to
attributes of grabbing and extending that are attributes of Allah the
Grabber the Extender. 'Release of Allah's hands' stands for His ability.
Since people's acts are usually done by hands Allah opted for this organ
for promoting the significance intended.

**( 34 )**

On page 60 part 17 volume 9 of the same reference AnNawawi records:

The Prophet (peace be upon him) said "Allah is more blissful for His
slaves' repentance." Scholars explained Allah's bliss by His
satisfaction. For assuring significance of satisfaction in receivers'
minds expression of bliss was used.

On page 182 part 17 volume 9 AnNawawi states:

The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated: "The hell shall not be saturated
unless Allah the Blessed the Elevated lays His leg in."

This is one of the most famed hadiths of divine attributes. Scholars
were of two variant opinions regarding its exegesis. First
interpretation of these words should be neglected. The extrinsic meaning
however is not intended since there is a suitable meaning involved. This
opinion is adopted by majority of the worthy ancestors and a good number
of theologists. Eyad the judge says:

The most apparent interpretation of this hadith is that they are people
who deserved and were created for the hell. It is essential to pass over
the surface of the text since it is decisively evidential that limbs are
impracticably ascribed to Allah the Exalted.

On page 44 part 10 of the same reference AnNawawi states:

Regarding the Prophet's saying "Allah created Adam on his look." this is
one of hadiths of divine attributes. Some scholars discard stating any
interpretation claiming that they believe it but there should be a more
suitable meaning since the surface is not intended. This opinion is
adopted by most of the worthy ancestors. It is however the most cautious
and appropriate. Another opinion states that such texts should be
interpreted on bases of promoting Allah the Exalted against such
descriptions.

On page 200 of Riyadhus-Salihin AnNawawi records:

On Resurrection Day believers shall be close to their Lord. This
closeness expresses dignity and benevolence. It does have nothing to do
with distances. Allah the Praised is promoted against distances.

### WAHABISTS DISCARDED ANNAWAWI'S MASTERY

Wahabist committee of issuing verdicts part 3 page 136; Question 12
Verdict 4264:

Q. Some claim AnNawawi's resting upon Asharism in questions regarding
the divine names and attributes. Is this true? What is your proof? Is it
acceptable to provide such questions regarding scholars? Some claimed
that in his book titled 'BustanulArifin' AnNawawi proves his being Sufi.
To which extent is this claim true?

**( 35 )**

A. Regarding the divine attributes AnNawawi had a number of errors in
which he rested upon course of the interpreters. Hence he is
disregardable in this affair. It is obligatory to adhere to sayings of
AhlusSunna(13) concerning confirming the divine names and attributes
mentioned in the Holy Quran and the infallible authentic traditions of
the Prophet. It is also obligatory to believe in such names and
attributes in a way becoming to Allah the Exalted passing over
distortion denudation modification or representation. Hence it is
imperative to apply God's saying (Nothing is like a likeness of Him; and
He is the Hearing the Seeing.) and the like.

The Permanent Committee of Scholastic Searches and Issuing Verdicts.

### MODELS OF INTERPRETATION OF Al-QASTALANI

On page 235 part 4 of IrshadusSari Al-Qastalani records:

Rage of creatures is a feeling engaging minds. It is unbecoming to
ascribe such a quality to the Creator the Exalted. Thus this should be
interpreted in a way fitting Allah the Exalted.

On page 319 part 5 of the same reference Al-Qastalani writes down:

Abu Hureira: The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated "Allah created Adam
on his look."

This indicates that Allah suspends him on the look He had created on.
This interpretation however is contrasted by another hadith "Adam was
created on the look of the Beneficent."

On page 36 part 7 of the same reference the following is written down:

The judge: Regarding the Prophet's saying that Allah laughs to two men
Allah's laughter however is a metaphoric expression. Corporealities only
may laugh. Allah is promoted against being a corporeality. Satisfaction
is the significance of laughter mentioned in the hadith.

On page 187 part 9 of the same reference Al-Qastalani says:

The descending mentioned in the hadith implies descending of God's mercy
affair or angels. Al-Beidawi comments: It is proved by positive
evidences that Allah is highly promoted against being a corporeality or
occupying a definite space; therefore it is impracticable to credit
transferable descending to Him.

On page 348 part 9 of the same reference it is recorded:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. AhlusSunna stands for people of the Prophet's traditions. They are
the Sunnis.

**( 36 )**

The Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "Hell keeps on demanding with more
till Lord of Dignity places His foot precedence in it." Some discussed
that 'foot' in this regard refers to the most evil people God had
prepared to be preceded to hell.

On page 250 part 10 he records:

Ire of Allah the Exalted stands for His desire to penalize.

On page 269 part 10 the following is written down:

God says (The hand of Allah is above their hands). God named the
Prophet's hand as the hand of Allah since it advanced others'. Allah the
Praised the Elevated is exaltedly promoted against having limbs and
corporeal characteristics. Meaning of the Verse however is recognition
that a covenant contracted with the Prophet (peace be upon him) is
regarded as same as that contracted with Allah.

On page 388 part 10 Al-Qastalani states:

A man addressed at the Prophet (peace be upon him) that Allah holds the
heavens with a single finger and the earth with another. The Prophet
(peace be upon him) laughed to excess. These characteristics are
impracticable to Allah the Exalted.

On page 391 part 10 the following is recorded:

God says (Then He settled on the Throne. 7:54). AhlusSunna state that
Allah the Praised the Exalted describes Himself with 'on' which is one
of attributes of Entity. Mutazilites state that the preposition stands
for prevalence by means of power and pertinence. The corporalists claim
that it indicates settlement.

On page 398 part 10 of the same reference Al-Qastalani records:

The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated "On Resurrection Day you
tranquilly and peacefully shall see your Lord as clear as this moon."
This means that you shall not wrong each other on that situation since
the Lord shall be seen from every side. Allah is exceedingly promoted
against being having a definite space. Simile here is for the view not
the viewed.

God says (Looking at [waiting for] their Lord). Ways conditions and
distances are nonexistent during looking at the Lord.

On page 402 part 10:

"he keeps on supplicating till this causes God to laugh". The matter
intended is accomplice of laughter; satisfaction.

On page 420 part 10 Al-Qastalani records:

**( 37 )**

God says (Then He settled on the Throne). It is wrong to explain 'the
Throne' as a bench and 'settled' as an act of stability. This
explanation is adopted by anthropomorphists. Allah the Exalted was being
before the Throne when there was no space. Now He is as same as he was
being. Moveableness is a characteristic of cosmoses.

On page 435 part 10 the following is recorded:

Abu Hureira: The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated "Our Lord the
Blessed the Elevated descends to the lowest heavens every night." This
means that He orders an angel of descending. Ibn Hazm interpreted that
this act is done by Allah in the lowest heavens for commencing
responding supplications. Ibn Khuzeima adds "At daybreak He returns to
the Throne."

Al-Qastalani tries to say that Ibn Khuzeima adopt for corporalism as he
states that Allah Himself descends and returns.

### MANY OTHERS CONSENTED INTERPRETATION

In his AtTasihil Fi UlumitTanzil part 3 page 283 Ibn Jazi records:

Doctrinally imputing characteristic of being up to Allah the Elevated is
dedicated to the meaning fitting His divine region not the meaning that
may illusively refer to limitation.

AsSuheili in his ArRawdulAnif part 3 page 24 records:

IbnulLebban: Laying hands to Allah is a form of metaphor. He the Exalted
the Praised is greatly promoted against having a limb.

On page 24 part 3 of the same reference AsSuheili records:

Attaching shadow to Allah the Elevated the Praised is a form of
honoring. He the Exalted is promoted against having a shadow which is
one of specifications of corporealities. Shadow of His divine Throne is
intended. This is clear in Selman's report.

On page 48 part 3 of the same reference the following is recorded:

Significance of the Lord's laughter is pleasing to excess.

ArRazi's Al-Mettalibul-Aliya volume 1 part 1 page 10:

Philosophers agreed upon proving the existence of beings that are
neither occupying certain spaces nor falling in a locale. Intellects
souls and prime matters are examples of such beings. Like Muammar Bin
Ebbad the Mutazilite and Mohammed Bin AnNuman the Rafidite(14) a good
number of grand masters of Muslims' scholars opted for this conception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Rafidism is a name Sunnis addressed at Shias. It stands for mutiny.

**( 38 )**

Mohammed Bin AnNuman previously mentioned by ArRazi is Sheik Al-Mufid;
one of the grand masters of Shias. Rivals of Shias accused him of opting
for corporalism. ArRazi communicates Al-Mufid's opinion that there are
beings selfsufficient from occupying spaces. Creator of these beings
should be more willingly having this characteristic.

**Ibn Hazm's Al-Fasl volume 2 part 2 page 167:**

The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated "Hell keeps on demanding with
more till Lord of Dignity places His foot precedence in it."

In this text 'foot' stands for precedence. This meaning is mentioned in
God's saying (A footing of firmness with their Lord. 10:2). Hence
meaning of the hadith is that Allah should fill in hell with people who
preceded others in evildoing. The same is said about the authentic
hadith "Allah created Adam on his look." This indicates that Allah had
opted for the look according to which He created Adam.

### MODELS OF RASHID RIDA'S UNRESPONSIVE INTERPRETATION

**TafseerulMenar part 3 page 2201:**

Some claimed impermissibility of resting upon other than the Quran and
the uninterruptedly documented hadiths regarding the divine attributes.
Single reports interpretation and narratives should not be admitted
engaged and regarded in this question since these matters depend upon
surmise.

This saying however is not that far away from fact except that it is
disagreeing the worthy ancestors' apparent modes. These reports and
narratives were admitted recorded and ruled of being authentic as the
narrators were trustful. At any rate there are two answers to be
provided for this question.

First followers of the Prophet's companions recognized by doctrinal
proofs it is impermissible to accuse trustful individuals of fabrication
especially in matters pertaining to the divine attributes. Refuting a
report narrated by AsSiddiq Abu Bakr (God please him) for example and
related directly to the Prophet (peace be upon him) is regarded as
belying him and judging of his invention or inadvertence. On that
account followers of the Prophet's companions admitted and communicated
such a narratives accrediting them to Abu Bakr or Anas and directly to
the Prophet (peace be upon him). From this cause it is provable by
doctrinal evidences that paths to accusing the pious and the decent
among the Prophet's companions of fabrication are totally blocked; how
is it then obligatory to avoid accusing conjecture of reporters of
single narratives? Similarly how is it obligatory to treat with surmise
as same as the decent's reporting disregarding the fact that suspicion
in some cases is a sin? The divine Legislator ordered of admitting
communicating and publicizing reports of decent individuals. This does
in no means suggest that personal surmise and conjecture should be
admitted publicized and communicated. For

**( 39 )**

that reason we are to say that whatsoever is reported by other than the
decent concerning question of the divine attributes should be shunned
and neglected. Reports of admonition and examples should be scrutinized
accurately.

Second these reports were communicated by the Prophet's companions only
after they had certainly heard from the Prophet personally. Their
followers likewise admitted and communicated so. During their
communication the followers had been wont to refer to the Prophet's
companions before they refer to the Prophet (peace be upon him). They
were honest. As each hadith had a definite point they neglected no
single one except those bearing expressions that may convey a meaning
opposite to the intended. As an example the following hadith is cited.

The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated: "Our Lord descends to the lowest
heavens every night "

This hadith was communicated in this form for the purpose of urging on
performing prayers and worshipping rites and practices. It has an
enormous effect in driving towards night worship which is the most
excellent. This great advantage would have been negative had this text
been let pass. Such an advantage should not be negligible. For children
and ordinary people the hadith may hint at Allah's practical descending.
At any rate it is an easy duty for the educated to plant pictures of
glorifying and promoting Allah against practical descending. A
well-grounded may use the following style "Providing God's descending to
the lowest heavens is for making us perceive His call this descending
shall be useless since we could not perceive. The Lord however could
have called at us from His Throne or the most elevated heavens."

This would make ordinary people understand nullity of practical
descending. The following example can also be cited. It is futile for a
man in the furthest west of the earth to advance just few steps for
making a man in the east hear his call. This advancement should be
reckoned with deeds of the insane. This amount however is so sufficient
that ordinary people would understand the nullity of practical
descending. It is also conceivable that corporealities are impracticable
for Allah. This leads to the fact that impracticability of moveableness
of other than corporealities is as same as impracticability of
descending without moveableness.

This proves that advantage of communicating such reports is great while
harm is scanty. This should by no means be equal to question of
communicating personal surmise as truths.

Rashid Rida this well-educated exegesist was guided by his intellect to
the very right! He could prove that the serious questions of beliefs
should not be admitted by a single report series of its narrators is
totally unrealizable. Avoiding this perplexity the well-educated
exegesist submitted his mind to

**( 40 )**

deeds of the worthy ancestors who ruled of obligation of admitting
reports of a single companion even if concerning beliefs or contrasting
the Holy Quran! On that account they admitted hadiths of Allah's
descending and seeableness although each was related by a single
narrator. They issued the obligation of admitting relations of definite
individuals claiming Allah's giving orders of admitting such narratives.
Correspondingly the ruled of obligation of denying fabrication making
mistakes and inadvertence of such individuals. Finally they proposed
denial of any contradiction between any two narratives related by two of
the Prophet's companions.

As if he had not been acquainted of confusion troubles and conflicts
broken out between Muslims due to the variant conceptions respecting
beliefs it is noticeable how that exegesist alleviated mischances
probably encountered by Muslims and sometimes their scholars owing to
hadiths of corporalism and anthropomorphism. Such hadiths were the
direct reason beyond publicity of reports and legends of the Jews
Christians and Magi regarding the Lord's corporeity appearance and
descriptions. Some of such fables suppose that Allah the short
roughhaired breadless and youth descends to the lowest heavens on the
back of a donkey. The most pious and godly individuals went on searching
for the Lord inspecting the descriptions given among boys. They also
fabricated stories about their meeting shaking hands and associating
with the Lord. This is only a minute part of the misfortunes of
corporalism and anthropomorphism opposed firmly by the Prophet's
household Aisha and other virtuous companions of the Prophet. They
confronted flamers of spark of this disaster warned Muslims against its
dangers and demanded them with refuting and belying such matters.

Viewing at his saying "It is an easy duty for the educated to plant
pictures of glorifying and promoting Allah against practical
descending." we perceive how that exegesist allayed removal of effects
and reports of corporalism. Had his claim been true why then it would
have been impossible for scholars and philosophers to persuade
corporalists and anthropomorphists of the other opinion? As a matter of
fact those people could plant such misplaced beliefs in ordinary
people's mentalities. In alike fashion had the matter been so easily let
a well-grounded scholar plant Allah's elevation and exaltation against
corporalism in the hearts of Ibn Teimiya Mohammed Bin AbdilWahab Bin Baz
and Al-Albani and enlighten them with nullity of the practical
descending.

Finally how did this well-informed exegesist espy that when Allah the
Exalted intended to drive Muslims towards performing prayers and night
worshipping rites He used a funny style "Every night I descend to the
lowest heavens; therefore I order you of worshipping at night." This
style duped and made them bear an illusive belief about the Lord.

**( 41 )**

Reality of this matter is that Rashid Rida and his likes intend only to
defend personality of Omar the caliph since he was the originator of
Allah's corporeity and descending. What should we do then if it is not
serviceable to defend such an unreasoning idea the caliph had taken in
from Ka'bulAhbar's culture?

### SCHOOL OF COMMENDATION AND FORBIDDING INTERPRETATION

As we have previously mentioned the Prophet's companions and their
associates referred to rules of the Arabic during dealing with
expressions of the Quranic and prophetic texts. Whenever there is an
intellectual or expressional presumption metaphorical significances were
preferred. They also referred to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) who spared no efforts in explicating intendments of Verses and
hadiths. A curious view at their numerous usual inquiries addressed at
the Prophet and his most knowledgeable companions concerning purports of
Quranic and prophetic texts it is noticeable that some questions were
customary inquisition to certain conceptions and judgments. Some in fact
were purposed for defining a definite meaning personally intended.
Others were the cause of decline and ignorance of their mental levels
and rhetoric.

Before he departed them for good the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) had nominated the reference they should rest upon. "I am leaving
with you the two weighty things; Book of Allah and my progeny; my
household."

Unfortunately they did not refer to these two things after the Prophet.
Consequently various ideological problems were originated in the midst
of Muslims. This was because of variety of references commenting on
Quranic and prophetic texts. By the same token surmise conjecture
exegeses and sayings of different companions of the Prophet or their
followers were contrasted. Soon after contradictory hadiths all ascribed
to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) emerged. In due course
a group opted for trend of interpretation. Some scholars of the other
sect issued verdicts of obligation of keeping silence in the face of
exegeses so that they would keep their principal religion and evade
committing a mistake in such a serious question. "Read them find not any
exegesis and commend your affair regarding these questions to Allah the
Exalted." This was the advice commonly provided for followers of this
trend; trend of commendation.

This is the exact meaning of commendation and abstinence from
interpretation. This school became a formal trend for majority of
Muslims in time of publicity of contradictory exegeses and supporting
hadiths. The foremost text respecting trend of commendation and
forbiddingness of interpretation I could

**( 42 )**

distinguish was that recorded by As-Suyouti who relates it to Malik and
Sufian Bin Uyeina in AdDurrulManthour part 3 page 91:

Al-Beihaqi recorded: Abdullah Bin Wahab:

We were attending at Malik when a man entered and asked about the way of
the Beneficent's settling on the Throne. For a considerable time Malik
nodded the head down and shivered. Finally he raised his head and
addressed at the man "(The Beneficent settled on the Throne) is as
exactly as He had described. It is impracticable to ask 'how' about Him.
This word is canceled for Him. In addition you are a heretic man!" Malik
ordered of throwing that man out.

Al-Beihaqi recorded: Ahmed Bin AbilHawari: Sufian Bin Uyeina stated:

The exegesis of whatsoever is accounted as Allah's describing His Entity
with is only reciting and acquiescing in it.

Al-Beihaqi recorded: Isaaq Bin Musa: Sufian Bin Uyeina stated:

The exegesis of whatsoever is accounted as Allah's describing His Entity
with is only reciting. Saving Allah the Exalted and His Apostles (peace
be upon them) none is admitted to interpret such matters.

**AtThehbi's Siyeru A'laminNubela part 8 page 466:**

Mohammed Bin Isaaq AsSagani Luwein:

As he was asked about hadiths regarding Allah's seeableness Sufian Bin
Uyeina answered "They are right as long as we could perceive from our
trustful and honest ones."

Ahmed Bin Ibrahim AdDawraqi: Ahmed Bin Nasr:

Importunately I insisted on Sufian Bin Uyeina seeking answers for my
questions about the exegeses of the hadiths "Allah bears the heavens on
a single finger." "Hearts of people are fixed between two of the
Beneficent's fingers." and "Allah laughs if He is mentioned in marts."

"These hadiths are as they were conveyed. We recognize without
commenting." Sufian answered.

**AtThehbi's Siyeru A'laminNubela part 10 page 505:**

Abu Mohammed Bin Alwan: Abdurrahman Bin Ibrahim: AbdulMughith Bin
Zuheir: Ahmed Bin Ubeidullah: Mohammed Bin Ali Al-Ashari: Abul-Hassan
AdDarqutni: Mohammed Bin Mukhalled: Al-Abbas AdDawri:

Having mentioned hadiths of Allah's optical seeableness the Chair place
of the two feet laughter and previous space of the Lord Abu Ubeid
Al-Qasim Bin Selam commented "These are authentic hadiths conveyed by
hadithists and

**( 43 )**

jurisprudents one another. For us these are doubtless. If an
interpretation of the way of our Lord's laughter and place of feet is
required we should answer that we neither have an exegesis nor did we
hear anyone interpret."

### INDICATIONS OF THE COMMENDERS' TEXTS

Many substances are shown from texts rested upon by the commenders. The
following are the most remarkable:

First school of commendation came after that of interpretation.

Second generation of the Prophet's companions were totally dependent on
the Prophet's presence among them. They were either questioning him or
not. The same thing occurred to the caliphs and their words or imams of
the Prophet's household (peace be upon them) and their words.

Third majority of followers of the Prophet's companions depended upon
interpretation or commendation. The third and fourth generations were
almostly commenders that this was taken as the formal trend of
hadithists facing Shias and Mutazilites who were interpreters.

Fourth commendation was nearly dedicated to the divine attributes and
reports such as Allah's settling on the Throne laughter and ire.
Attributes of operations were approximately interpreted.

Fifth it is unnecessary for commenders to leave interpretation at all.
Commendation and interpretation could be opted according to the question
involved.

As we have previously referred to on page 187 part 9 of IrshadusSari
Malik the master says:

The descending mentioned in the text implies descending of God's mercy
affair or angels.

On page 91 part 3 of AdDurrulManthour Malik's relying upon commendation
in question of Allah's settling on the Throne is recorded. Question of
Allah's settling on the Throne was largely distorted and adopted by the
corporalists as an evidence.

Commendation and interpretation followed one of two matters. First
recognizing the narrator who is usually one of the Prophet's companions
who communicate the significance of the text involved. Second existence
of an authentic hadith that is irrefutable and untranslatable on bases
of reasoning.

### JURISCOUNSULT OF Al-AZHAR RECKONS THE COMMENDERS WITH THE INTERPRETERS

Sheik Salim Al-Bishri used the name of interpreters to the entire
commenders. Because they denied the divine attributes' having definite
points and material

**( 44 )**

significances without mentioning the very intendment they are ruled as
general interpreters. Sheik Al-Bishri named the late commenders as
particularized interpreters since they denied material significances and
identified the exact intendments of allegorical Quranic and prophetic
texts.

In his missive entirely provided in Chapter Seven Sheik Al-Bishri says:

Such questions are classified as conjectural phenomena that are not
opposite to the absolute decisive evidences referring to nonexistence of
the Lord's definite space and locale. Obligatorily such questions are
interpreted and based upon accurate predicates admitted by evidences and
legal texts either generally without identifying the exact intendment or
particularly by identifying predicates and their intendments. The first
however is attitude of the worthy ancestors while the latter is the
late's."

### REASON BEYOND FORBIDDING EXEGESIS AND INTERPRETATION

A good deal of scholars asserted that the reason beyond the worthy
ancestors' commending Verses and hadiths of the divine attributes to the
Lord had been a sign of their analytical deficiency and anticipation of
erring. This situation in fact should be naturally adopted by every
reverent scholar intending to surpass his limits.

**Jami'ulAhadithilQudsiya part 2 page 46:**

In addition to our believing in Allah's being exaltedly promoted against
any unfitting saying Verses and hadiths of divine attributes should be
totally believed and credited according to conception of commendation
adopted by the worthy ancestors. Since the late's sayings involved
require a considerable amount of knowledge to understand we would better
ensue conception of the worthy ancestors so that dangers would be
evaded. False interpretation of words of Allah and His apostle is a
horrendous danger.

Reason beyond the analytical deficiency intended by scholars is not
scarcity in scholastic levels since most of scholars enjoyed penetrating
mentalities. The reason is that narratives of practical descending
seeableness anthropomorphism and corporeity of Allah publicly advertised
by the ruling authorities were contrary to intellects and the Holy Quran
and each other. Such narratives repudiated reasonable interpretation.
Owing to authenticity of such narratives on their criteria they had to
admit and commit themselves to. The best solution they could attain had
been stopping at relating these narratives and absconding from finding
exegeses. They ruled of obligation of believing without inquiry.

It is as a matter of fact a perceptible circumstance that Sunni scholars
our brothers admit contraposition and commit themselves to believing in
it. Moreover this question is not the only in this regard. Numerous
questions

**( 45 )**

received by the worthy ancestors and delivered to the generations with
full admission and believing without providing any evidence or exegesis.

The principal concern beyond such an impetuous admission and every
contradiction noticed in Islamic rulings and conceptions was the
discrepancies arisen just after the Prophet's decease. It was asserted
by the formal situation adopted by Sunnis our brother when they declared
the ultimate decency of the entire companions of the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family). Contradiction is an inevitable result attained
by acceding to contrasted groups. Perplexity likewise is an unavoidable
result of committing to partners differing with one another.

Doors to solving contradiction would have been opened before Muslims if
they majority of this nation and ruling authorities had confessed of the
Prophet's companions' having been engaged in discrepancies to the degree
that they exchanged charges of atheism and killed one another. They
should have conceded to the fact that the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) had foretold of some companions' being in Hell. He had also
told that some of his companions would not be seen by him and would not
see him because they would change to the other side just after his
decease. Finally they should have declared that Muslims individually
should exert all efforts for scrutinizing the most virtuous and trustful
individuals among the Prophet's companions and leaving the others'
affairs to Allah the Exalted.

On the contrary the Prophet's companions were imposed on Islam in spite
of their contrast. According to personal desires they forbade Muslims
from putting any question or wonderment about the Prophet's companions.

We aim at exhibiting two matters. First contradiction in narratives of
the divine attributes is in the surface only. The factual contradiction
falls in resting upon a definite individual in the entire questions of
religion. Second corporalists and anthropomorphists capitalized on
silence imitated by the commenders. They alleged that the real reason
beyond commendation was their abstinence from publicizing the cerebral
exegeses of the divine attributes texts that they totally had been
acquainted with. This is the worst category of distortion. It is using
words for interpreting silence and misapplying commendation for
interpreting commendation.

### SCHOOL OF CORPORALISM

This attitude was adopted by those who forbade interpretation and
commending to Allah the Exalted and imposed the extrinsic meaning of
expressions. They opted for material meanings.

Seemingly they differ little but greatly from the commenders. The latter
adopted an attitude of abstinence from interpreting the divine
attributes while

**( 46 )**

resting upon extrinsic meanings is ruled as a declaration of opting for
corporeal meanings.

For the commenders the expression 'hand of Allah' does neither refer to
ability as the interpreters claim nor does it refer to that material
organ as the corporalists claim. They abstain and halt before they
discuss the meaning of such an expression.

Commenders occasionally deny and rule of unintendedness of the corporeal
appearances since they rule that meanings are commended to Allah
exclusively. This has been obviously shown through AnNawawi's previous
opinions.

Corporalists rule of obligation of opting for the actual meaning not the
metaphoric of hand. They were so daring that they denied existence of
any metaphoric style in the Holy Quran as well as hadiths. Hence they
canceled metaphor of the Arabic since the Quran and hadiths pursued the
exact linguistic rules and expressions of this tongue.

During discussion they expound that Allah has a corporeal hand but
different from that possessed by humans. They do believe that Allah has
organs like a hand a leg an eye and so on. Nevertheless they only
declare that Allah's organs are different from ordinary ones since they
do believe that Allah's look is as same as humans; therefore he should
have the same limbs and organs. Later on this shall be proved through
their words.

### FIRST EMERGENCE OF CORPORALISM

Rivals of Shias misalleged that Husham Bin Al-Hakam had been the first
man who provided conceptions of Allah's corporeity. Husham is a Shiite
theologist and one of disciples of Imam Ja'far AsSadiq (peace be upon
him). He died in 200 A.H.

In his Ussoulu Matheb Ashi'etilImamiya part 1 page 529 Dr. Nasir
Al-Qifari the Wahabist records:

SheikhulIslam Ibn Teimiya identified the first man who took the charge
of this terrible forgery. He said "Husham Bin Al-Hakam was the first man
in Islam whom was known as the originator of the saying that Allah is a
corporeality. (MinhajusSunna part 1 page 20.)"

On page 5301 part 1 of the same reference Al-Qifari records:

Anthropomorphizing Allah is a trend existed at the Jews and found its
way to Shias. Shism was the habitation of foes of Islam and its people.
The first man who committed this great forgery was Husham Bin Al-Hakam
from whom this conception transferred to others ascribed as immoderate
and aberrant.

**( 47 )**

Masters of the Ithnasharites(15) went on defending such devious
individuals commonly known as seditious and evildoers. They also
attempted to find interpretation and belie each heresy imputed to such
individuals. Al-Majlisi says "Obstinacy might be the only motive adopted
by the dissidents' ascribing these two sayings to those people."

Concerning denial asserted by some of Shias this is not strange. Their
habit was gainsaying obvious realities and trusting evident mendacities.
Shias' supporting those individuals is not inexplicable since things
usually defend their classes. They defended their associates. A faction
of them went on exonerating the eminent disorderly ones whose evildoing
dissension and deviation had been too widespread to be concealed.

Had Al-Qifari taken a look at Al-Bukhari's book of hadith besides many
other references of hadith he would have practically perceived with
hands before eyes that saying of anthropomorphism had been come forth
since Aisha's time. KabulAhbar and his party arose ideas and origin of
this conception in the reign of Omar the caliph. This means that before
the birth of Husham Bin Al-Hakam's Abavus grandfather this conception
was prevailed among Muslims. References of Sunnis our brothers recorded
(authentic) hadiths of the Divine Throne's cracking fracturing and
snapping due to the heavy weight of Allah the Exalted.

**Al-Heithami's Majma'uzzawa'id; part 1 page 83:**

Omar: A woman sought the Prophet's supplicating God to enter her to the
Paradise. The Prophet glorified the Elevated and blessed Lord and stated
"His Bench extended to the heavens and the earth. Its cracking is as
same as cracking of the new saddle used by a heavy man."

Al-Bezar relates it with series of trustful men relied by the most
authentic books of hadith.

On page 159 part 10 of the same reference the compiler says:

Saving Abdullah Bin Khalifa Al-Hamadani the trustful the hadith
previously provided is written down in Abu Yali's Al-Kabeer and ascribed
to series of trustful men relied upon in the most authentic books of
hadith.

On page 373 the compiler of Kenzul-Ummal rules of authenticity of the
hadith involved. Its authenticity is also asserted on page 466 part 2 of
the same reference.

**As-Suyouti's AdDurrulManthour part 1 page 328:**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. Ithnasharism is another name called at Shias who believe in imamate
of twelve imams.

**( 48 )**

Abd Bin Humeid and Ibn Abi Asim (in his AsSunna) and Al-Bezar and Abu
Yali and Ibn Jarir and Abusheik and At-Tabarani and Ibn Merdawayih and
Addiya (in his Al-Mukhtara); all record the following:

Omar relates: A woman sought the Prophet's supplicating God to enter her
to the Paradise. The Prophet glorified the Exalted and Blessed Lord and
stated "His Bench extended to the heavens and the earth. Its cracking is
as same as cracking of the new saddle used by a heavy man. Less than
four fingers only remains."

**Ad-Deilami's FirdawsulAkhbar part 3 page 86:**

Omar Bin Al-Khattab stated:

Allah settles on the Throne so heavily that a cracking as same as that
of a new can be heard.

**Al--Khatib's Tarikhu Baghdad part 1 page 295:**

Abdullah Bin Khalifa: Omar Bin Al-Khattab stated:

Allah settles on the Throne so heavily that a cracking as same as that
of a new saddle can be heard.

**Al-Khatib's Tarikhu Baghdad part 4 page 39:**

Jubeir Bin Mohammed Bin Jubeir Bin Mutim: his father: his father:

"O Apostle of Allah! Souls have striven children starved and wealths
lost. Seek your Lord's watering us with rainfall. We do seek Allah's
intercession to you and your intercession to Allah." a Bedouin orated.
The Prophet (peace be upon him) went on uttering 'praised be Allah'
severally that the attendants were bewildered. Then he added "Woe is
you! Do you realize Allah? His divine concern is greater than anyone's
interceding in His affairs. He is aloft His heavens on His Throne. A
dome covers His throne that cracks as same as a new saddle under a heavy
man."

**Ad-Deilami's Firdawsul-Akhbar part 1 page 219:**

Ibn Omar: Allah the Exalted has surely crammed in His throne. From every
side of the Throne four fingers of Him the Beneficent remain.

It seems that Abdullah Bin Omar made the Divine Throne four fingers
larger than the Exalted Beneficent. Pursuant to authentic narratives
Adam who is sixty or seventy arm long was created as same as Allah's
look; therefore each finger of their (lord) should be longer than a
meter!

**Abu Dawud's book of hadith page 418:**

"His Throne forms a dome over His heavens. It makes sounds of cracking
as same as those made by a new saddle under a heavy man."

**( 49 )**

Ibn Bashar: "Allah is on His Throne. His Throne is on His heavens"

The same hadith is related by Abdul-Ala and Ibnul-Muthenna and Ibn
Bashar. They referred it to Yaqub Bin Utba and Jubeir Bin Mohammed Bin
Jubeir: his father: his father.

Yahya Bin Muin and Ali Bin Al-Madini in addition to others admitted the
documentation of Ahmed Bin Sa'eed and regarded as the most authentic.
Ahmed records that a good group of narrators relate the Ibn Isaaq's
report. The same version was rested upon by Abdul-Ala IbnulMuthenna and
Ibn Bashar. As a footnote it is written down: Cracking of saddle stands
for its sounds.

**Al-Bidaya WenNihaya part 1 page 54:**

Cracking occurs when it is disable to carry heavy things. Cracking of
saddle occurs only due to heaviness.

Although we are acceptably sufficed by the previously mentioned
references of report of the Throne's cracking the following related the
same:

**AdDeilami's FirdawsulAkhbar part 1 page 220.**

Majma'uzzawa'id part 10 page 398.

**Kenzul-Ummal part 1 page 224 part 2 page 73 part 10 page 363 and 367
and part 14 page 469.**

It is so obvious even for the minimal educated that sayings and hadiths
of the Lord's corporeity came forth just after the Prophet's decease on
the hands of Jews of Al-Madina and particularly KabulAhbar. After that
these sayings took the form of the Prophet's traditions on the hands of
some companions. Some brothers were so biased towards these sayings that
they betook as an attitude. Sunni references of hadiths publicized such
sayings exclusively. No single saying was mentioned in any of our
reference books of hadith. On the contrary imams of the Prophet's
progeny related their refuting and denial of such sayings. Has it now
become evident for Dr. Al-Qifari how corporalism found its way into
Islam?

Sheik Mohammed Zahid Al-Kawthari the researchist in Al-Azhar could
approach the truth when he confessed that roots of corporalism and
anthropomorphism had been in the Sunni reference books of hadith.
Lacking enough courage to accuse the Prophet's companions Al-Kawthari
charged responsibility of these beliefs to the corporalists among
followers of the Prophet's companions and the successive generations. In
the introduction of Al-Beihaqi's Asma'i WesSifat Al-Kawthari records:

Hadithists and narrators occupy a great standing at majority of
scholars. Unfortunately among such hadithists and narrators there are
those who

**( 50 )**

exaggeratively exceeded their limits and engaged themselves in fields
they ignored. Hence they introduced dishonor and harsh injury to their
sects associates and followers.

Most of those who engaged themselves in question of the divine
attributes are reckoned with the previous class. As an example we cite
Hemmad Bin Selema's narratives respecting the divine attributes. These
contained a great number of fraudulent reports communicated among
classes of narrators. This man married one hundred women without
obtaining a single child. This matter affected his mentality to the
degree that he confused his source narratives with those falsely
intrigued by Ibn AbilAwja and Zeid Bin Hemmad his fosterchildren.
Narrators of Thabit Al-Benani that are related to Hemmad Bin Selema are
entirely authentic. Majority of minor narrators were deviated by the
false reports imputed to that previously eloquent supreme narrator.
Readers may notice miscellaneous examples of such doubtful reports
mentioned in sections dealing with monotheism in books of ordinary
subjects and those of hadithists. Some spared no efforts for defending
that man. Their efforts still went with the wind. Allah's laws should be
preferred to defending an individual against whom decisive unjustifiable
accusations were targeted.

Nueim Bin Hemmad's narrators played the same previous role. He was such
an enthusiastic person that he was dragged to believing in Allah's
corporeity. The same happened to master of his master Muqatil Bin
Suleiman.

Injurious effects of such narrators can be readily seen in books of
narrators who followed partisan pursuance in referring to such erroneous
hadithists. The following are examples of these books:

Khusheish Bin Assram's Kitabulistiqama.

AsSunna books compiled by Abdullah AKhellal- Abusheikh Al-Assal Abu Bakr
Bin Asim AtTabarani and Al-Jami.

Harb Bin Ismail AsSirjani's AsSunnetu WelJama'a.

Ibn Khuzeima's AtTawhid.

Ibn Minda's AtTawhid.

Al-Hakam Bin Mabid Al-Khuzai's AsSifat.

Othman Bin Sa'eed AdDarmi's AnNaqdh.

Al-Ajuri's Ashari'a.

Ibn Batta and Abu Nasr AsSejzi's Al-Ibana.

Abu Yali Al-Qadi's NaqdhutTawilat.

DhemmulKelam.

**( 51 )**

Al-Faruq.

All these books contained narratives disdained by the doctrine and
intellect in the same time. Othman Bin Sa'eed AsDarmi AsSejzi was the
daring among corporalists who gallantly distributed such injurious
ideas. He said "Had Allah the Exalted desired to settle on a back of a
bug His divine propensity would have enabled him of so. How is it then
for an ample throne?!"

Sheik Al-Harrani Ibn Teimiya pursued him in such a saying. In
Ghawthul-Ibad Published in Al-Halabi Publication 1351 texts referring to
the purport involved are recorded. In addition many other calamities
such as Allah's moveableness and the like are invented by that AsSejzi.

Many alike books of false and dishonorable reports and ideas were
publicized. Fissure became highly extensive and catastrophe became so
effective till honest trustful scholars took charge of blocking that
fissure by means of narration and hypothesizing. Al-Khattabi Abul-Hassan
At-Tabari Ibn Fawrak Al-Huleimi Abi Isaaq Alisfraini AbdulQahir
Al-Baghdadi and many others are included with the honest scholars.

Like Al-Kawthari the fair Sunni scholars admit that hadiths of Allah's
seeableness anthropomorphism and corporeity are entirely belonged to
Hemmad Bin Selema Nueim Bin Hemmad Muqatil Bin Suleiman and Wahab Bin
Munebbih. Those individuals had the same master; KabulAhbar. They the
fair Sunni scholars lack the heart to ascend a little to reach the
Prophet's companions who adopted publicized and islamized the ill ideas
of KabulAhbar.

### CORPORALISM OF KABULAHBAR BECAME AN ISLAMIC TREND

**Ashehristani's Al-Milelu WenNihel part 1 page 93; AlHalabi Publication
Cairo 1968:**

Majority of the worthy ancestors recognized the eternal attributes of
Allah the Exalted. Knowledge competence vitality will hearing viewing
wording exaltation altruism generosity bestowal potency and magnanimity
are eternal attributes. They cited no difference between attributes of
Entity and those of operation. They treated the two in the same measure.
They also recognized communicative attributes such as Allah's having
hands face and the like. They neglected finding suitable interpretation
for such questions. However they called such attributes as communicative
since they were perceived through reports of Islamic legalism.

Unlike the worthy ancestors Mutazilites denied the divine attributes.
Therefore they were called 'Tatilites(16)' disavowers while the worthy
ancestors were called 'Sifatiya' attributers. Some of the latter
exceeded when

------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Tatilism is a theologian Islamic faction that disavow the Lord's
attributes.

**( 52 )**

they anthropomorphized the Lord. Others stopped at proving attributes
indicated by the divine deeds and narratives. Hence they became two
parties. Some interpreted according to a form rather concordant to the
expression used. Others vacated interpretation as a whole. "By
intellects " the latter party claimed "We perceive that Allah the
Exalted has no equivalent at all."

Decisively Allah is neither like any of His creatures nor are they like
Him. Purports of expressions of involved texts; such as (The Beneficent
settled on the Throne. 20:5) (I created with My hands. 38:75) (And your
Lord came. 89:21) and the like are unattainable for us. Besides we are
not legally required to recognize the exact exegeses and interpretation
of such texts. We are only required to believe that Allah has no
associate and nothing is like Him. We could prove these matters in means
of conviction."

A group of the late added the following to the belief of the worthy
ancestors. "Such expressions ought to be taken as they seem and
interpreted as they are without criticizing their interpretation or
passing over the extrinsic meanings."

This conception which is totally contrary to the worthy ancestors' led
them to literal anthropomorphism indeed. Anthropomorphism was adopted by
certain Jewish groups. These were groups of their scholarly who found
expressions bearing such meanings during reciting the Torah.

Ashehristani's current wording asserts that anthropomorphists became a
limited sect that was exhortative for Sunni scholars. It also indicates
that those group emerged in recent times surpassing the worthy
ancestors' instructions of forbiddingness of interpreting divine texts
of corporeality. On that account Ashehristani compares them to the Jews
who recited the Torah since they were believing in Allah's corporeity
purely. He adduces that anthropomorphism adopted by those Muslims was
mixed not pure because of their circumspection against the other
Muslims.

This assertion coincides the following assertion of Ibn Khuldoun and
others who identified history of establishment of this sect or belief
that provided Allah's materiality!!

**Ibn Khuldoun's Muqaddima page 462:**

In numerous Verses of the holy Quran ascribing untranslatable evidential
and illimitable exaltation to the Lord is regularly emphasized. These
Verses were entirely negative and comprehensible; therefore it was
obligatory to give credence to them. A good deal of Prophet's sayings as
well as his companions and their followers referred to opting for the
extrinsic purports of such Verses and hadiths. Other Quranic Verses
although few referred illusively to Allah's corporeity. Some believed
and in the same time rejected penetrating and interpreting such Verses
as they revered them for their being words of Allah. This was the
purport majority of them intended by saying "Recite these Verses

**( 53 )**

as they are. Believe that they are Allah's. But advance not upon their
interpretation or exegesis. They might be a sort of divine trial. Hence
it is obligatory to abide and comply with them." In the same time
heretic people were deviated by pursuing allegorical Verses. They probed
deep in anthropomorphism. A group of them anthropomorphized the Divine
Entity by imputing a hand foot or face to the Lord depending upon
illusory expressions respecting so. They fell in direct corporalism and
dissented Verses of illimitable divine exaltation that are greater in
number and manifestation. Intellectuality of corporealities imposes
deficiency and privation. fixing upon negational style in Verses of
illimitable divine exaltation that are greater in number and
manifestation is more approving than clinging to unessential illusory
appearances. Another group combined the two evidences by resting upon
personal interpretation. In fact their claim of Allah's being an
incomparable corporeal that is different from others is seen as
absconding from offensiveness of their combinatorial attitude. This
claim however is profitless for them since it is a contrasted opinion
that combined affirmation to negation in case of regarding the
individual intellectuality of corporals. Providing they differentiate
and deny the familiar intellectuality they will be according us in
attitude of exaltation. Then they should reckon 'corporeality' with the
Divine Names. Such matters depend upon permission.

Another group adopted anthropomorphism in the divine attributes. They
ruled of Allah's having a definite locale settling descending utterance
and the like. This attitude proceeds straightly to chamber of
corporalism. Therefore they adopted the same saying "Incomparable locate
settling descending and utterance that are different from those of
ordinary corporealities."

Like the former this attitude collapsed. The worthy ancestors' beliefs
and creeds of believing in such texts as they are in order that denial
of their meanings should not reach their authentic and avowed entities
survived alone.

From the above it is understandable that ideological principals and
sectarian forms of corporalism were Jewish and Sunni. Shias are totally
remote from this version except that proofless and false accusation
against Husham Bin Al-Hakam!!
