Chp 3 Hanbalites and Corporalism
================================

**( 55 )**

### GROUND OF CORPORALISM RELIES ON EXPRESSIONS

References of theology and biography profess that followers of
corporalism formed majority of the ruling authorities retinue and the
Hashawites who partisanly clung to whatsoever is narrated. "Corporalism
was commonly spread among the incognizant narrators and majority of
hadithists." Ibnul-Jawzi asserts.

Some to no avail attempted at supporting the Hanbalites. That matter was
constant and familiar to the degree that Az-Zamakhshari recorded the
following poetry foot in his Al-Kashaf part 2 page 573:

If I claim being Hanbalite They would affirm I am gloomy incarnationist
odious corporalist.

**AlFakhr Ar-Razi's AlMetalibulAliya volume 2 part 2 page 25:**

Chapter Three

**Providing Evidences On Allah's Impracticability Of Being A
Corporeality.**

Two famous opinions regarding this question are rendered by scholars:

Majority of people agreed upon promoting Allah the Praised the Exalted
against corporeity and occupancy. Others claimed Allah's occupying a
definite location. Those are the corporalists who disputed in some
questions. Some claimed Allah's having mankind appearance while others
denied so. Regarding the earlier Muslim anthropomorphists claimed the
Lord's being a young man while the Jew anthropomorphists claimed His
being an

old man. They also disputed about the Lord's moveableness. A group of
the

**( 56 )**

Karramites(17) admitted Allah's coming going moving and subsiding while
others denied so. Majority of Hanbalites admit.

**Al-Fakhr ArRazi's Al-MetalibulAliya volume 1 part 1 page 26:**

Corporalists disputed about Allah's going and coming. The believers in
His being a brilliance deny His having organs and limbs; like a head
hand or leg. Majority of Hanbalites confirm existence of such organs and
limbs.

**AlKhattabi's Me'alimusSunen part 4 page 302:**

The trend followed by scholars and jurisprudents was dedicating to the
extrinsic meanings of doctrinal texts respecting the divine attributes.
They abstained from probing purports and interpretation since they
realize their unattainability to understand such affairs. Some master
hadithists erred during their commentary on hadith of Allah's descending
to the lowest heavens. "If it is claimed that our Lord descends to the
lowest heavens some may interrogate about way of descending. This may be
answered that Allah descends as He wills. If the wonderment whether our
Lord moves or not is put it may be answered that He moves when He wills
and does not when He wills.

By these words Al-Khattabi adopts school of commendation. He represents
that the divine attributes should be taken as they are without
interpretation. These words of commenders prove that they were the seed
from which the third school was emerged and the hay the followers held
fast. They claimed that the worthy ancestors referred to the physical
demeanor of language which is in fact corporeality by preserving
appearances and depending exclusively on explicit indications of the
divine attributes texts.

The following text of AtThehbi shows that Al-Ghezzali had led a campaign
against corporalism and corporalists.

**Siyeru A'laminNubela part 17 page 558:**

This course adopted by the worthy ancestors was clarified by Abul-Hassan
and his acquaintances. It indicates submission to Quranic and prophetic
texts. IbnulBaqillani Ibn Fawrak and Al-Kebbar adopted this opinion
which lasted to Abul-Me'ali. In time of Sheik Abu Hamid various
discrepancies and divergence occurred to this opinion.

This saying shows that corporalism attained its climax in reign of
Seljukian dynasty on the hands of Abul-Me'ali Al-Juweini An-Nisapuri
ImamulHaramein who died in 478 A.H. After people of Nisapur had banished
him the Seljukians favored and assigned him as a tutor in Al-Madrasa
An-Nidhamiya school in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Karramism is an Islamic theologian faction, founded by Mohammed Bin
Karram.

**( 57 )**

Baghdad. In his last days AbulMe'ali adopted this concept after he had
been interpreter.

Al-Ghezzali who succeeded him contradicted his opinions creating a noise
by defending the interpreters. Through a considerable number of books of
exegesis it was noticeable however that Al-Ghezzali aimed at pleasing
the corporalists.

In Al-Aqa'idulIslamiya volume 2, a thorough chapter is given over to
exhibiting standings of the anthropomorphists and the corporalists in
reference books of the Sunnis our brothers.
