Chp 4 Ibn Teimiya the Reviver of Corporalism of Hanbalites
==========================================================

**( 59 )**

**Ibn Batuta's Rihla page 90:**

Taqiyyuddin Bin Teimiya the grand Hanbalite master of Syria had
acquaintance of the entire aspects of principals. Yet he had a trouble
in the mind. On a Friday I attended one of his sermons in Damascus.
While he was admonishing people he said "Allah descends to the lowest
heavens just as this descending." Meanwhile he descended a scale down
the pulpit. A Malikite jurisprudent named Ibnuz-Zahra objected and
denied these words. People used their hands as well as sandals in
beating that jurisprudent so heavily that his turban fell to the ground.

**AsSaqqaf's SharhulAqidetitTahawiya page 170:**

Ibn Teimiya in his Al-Muwafaqat (printed in the margin of MinhajusSunna)
page 1118 claims "It became manifest that sayings of the commenders who
maintain of their following the Prophet's traditions and the worthy
ancestors' practices are the worst among sayings of the heretic and
atheists."

**Ibn Teimiya's book of Tafseer part 6 page 386:**

Six variant opinions regarding Allah's settling coming and the like
which are mentioned in the Quran were followed by people:

A group claim that such affairs should be taken in as their extrinsic
meanings require. They rule that Allah's coming and settling is as same
as any creature's. Those are the corporalists the anthropomorphists.
Some of this group claim that the Throne becomes empty during the Lord's
descending.

A group claim that the most suitable explication of such texts should be
regarded and accorded to descriptions the Lord has used. He is (Nothing
is the like of his likeness) inimitable in His Entity attributes and
deeds. They claim that He descends and comes a sort of descending and
coming fitting His

**( 60 )**

majesty. "He descends and comes while He is still Elevated on the Throne
" they assert. Hemmad Bin Zeid says "While He is on the Throne the Lord
approaches the creatures as He wills." Isaaq Bin Rahawayih expresses "He
descends and keeps up in the Throne in the same time." Isaaq claims that
this was Ahmed Bin Hanbal's opinion messaged to Musedded.

According to report of Abu Omar Bin Abdil-Berr defining the Lord's
descending as a deed of selfmastery was the opinion adopted by the
hadithists. It was also adopted by majority of Ahmed's followers. Ibn
Hamid and others asserted this opinion. At-Tamimi Ibn Kelab Abu Yali and
his followers denied falling of the optional deeds.

Two groups claim that the Lord descends but does not come. One attempted
at finding suitable interpretation of this saying while the other
suspended the meaning.

Two groups suspended the whole matter. One confessed of their lacking
the knowledge of God's intendment from such attributing. The other was
sufficed by reciting the Quran.

Majority of Sunnis and worthy ancestors' followers rule of fallibility
of interpretation deciding denial of the Lord's settling and coming.
Most of them however refute void interpretation and reckon such texts
with 'Items interpretation of which should be concealed'."

**Ibn Teimiya's book of Tafseer part 6 page 118:**

This implies that Allah's exaltation is one of the indispensable
attributes of praise. Thus it is impermissible to refer opposite of
exaltation to Him. The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated "Thou art the
Prior. Nothing was before Thee. Thou art the Ultimate. Nothing is after
Thee. Thou art the Ascendant. Nothing is over Thee. Thou art the
Prevailing. Nothing is after Thee." See that the Prophet (peace be upon
him) had used 'after' instead of 'under'.

This hadith has been discussed under another title. Owing to texts in
the Quran and the Prophet's traditions; such as (Are you secure of that
in the heavens that He 67:13) and the like some may conceive that the
heavens is the very elevated created thing including the Divine Throne
and whatsoever down. Hence they claim that (in the heavens) mentioned in
the previous text stands for 'on the heavens'. They treated this text as
same as God's sayings (I will certainly crucify you in the trunks of
palm trees. 20:71) and (Walk in the earth. 67:15). In addition Every
elevated thing is unidentifiably called 'heavens'. Hence (in the
heavens) indicates whatsoever is elevated not low. The Lord is the
Elevated and the Highest. He occupies the most elevated point in the
heavens; the topmost of the Throne. There is nothing other than the
Elevated the Highest the Praised and the Exalted.

**Ibn Teimiya's ArRisaletut-Tadmuriya page 39:**

**( 61 )**

Attributes of affirmation and negation are ascribed to Allah the
Praised. Examples of the earlier are His sayings (The Knowing of
everything. 2:29) (He has power on everything. 2:20) (He is the Hearing
the Seeing. 42:11) and the like. An example of the latter is His saying
(Slumber does not overtake him nor sleep. 2:255). Unless it comprises
affirmation style of negation is bare from praise or perfection. This is
by reason that sheer negation is not sheer. Whatsoever is not sheer is
nothingness. Nothingness is too deficient to be a style of praise or
perfection. Praise and perfection are not attributed to nonexistence and
nonbeing. On that account the general negational descriptive accounts
used in the Quran comprised affirmation of praise. The same thing is
said about God's saying (Visions comprehend him not). In this Verse
comprehension which is awareness was negated exclusively. This meaning
is adopted by majority of scholars. Mere seeableness is not negated
since nonexistent things are not seeable. Being not seeable is not
approbation. Had this been true nonexistent things should have been
submissive to acclamation. Praise in fact is dedicated to point of the
praised's incomprehensibility even if he is seeable and realizable. The
Lord is incomprehensibly seen when He is seeable and incomprehensibly
realized when He is realizable.

**Ibn Teimiya's Ar-Risaletut-Tadmuriya page 47:**

Answering the wonderment whether aspects of texts are their meanings or
not we are to cite the following.

Expressions of aspects are generalized and combined. Considering
believing that aspects of texts reveal anthropomorphizing the creatures'
attributes and specifications this will certainly be unintended. Neither
the worthy ancestors nor did the master scholars regard this as aspect
of the texts. They also refuted the claim that aspects of the Quranic
and prophetic texts are atheism and wrong. Allah the Praised the Exalted
is too knowledgeable and wise to show atheism and aberrance exclusively
through aspects of texts regarding His divine attributes. Adopters of
such a trend either decide the void meanings as aspects of the text in
order that this would be in need of interpretation contrasting the
aspects or refute the true meaning that is ostensibly provided and
decide its falsehood.

**Ibn Teimiya's Ar-RisaletutTadmuriya page 72:**

It is inappropriate to say that an expression is interpreted since this
means that it is transferred from the predominant probability into the
less. It is also unsuitable to say that interpretation of a definite
text is known by Allah alone except that the aspect involving creation
exclusively is intended. Indisputably adopters of this meaning have an
interpretation violating face of the texts. Supposing they claim such
texts are not submitted to interpretation violating their aspects or
they are submitted to their manifest meanings only they will be
inconsistent. Confusedness will be decided in case they intend two
different

**( 62 )**

meanings each for a certain situation of the same text. Providing they
figure mere expression as their intendment from regarding aspects of
texts neglecting understanding their meanings this will engage them in
contrast whether they prove or deny interpretation. This is by reason
that proving or denying an interpretation affirms perception of
meanings. The previous debate shows the contrast people are engaged in
regarding matters of proving or denying the divine attributes.

**Ibn Teimiya's Ar-Risaletut-Tadmuriya page 55:**

It is provable that Allah the Exalted created the cosmos in serial
stages. He created progressive independence of these stages. The upper
should not be in need of the next. Atmosphere is not in need of the
earth that carries it. The same thing is said about clouds that are
above the earth. The heavens that are higher than the earth are not in
need of the earth's carrying them. The Exalted and Highest is the Lord
who is the owner of everything. He is in the highest point on His
creatures; how is it then acceptable for Him to be in need of His
creatures or Throne? How should His extreme elevation prompt such a need
which is not prompt to His creatures? It is affirmative that the Creator
is more rightful and deserving in affairs of His creatures. If a
creature is in no need for another in a certain field such as wealth
this will be discussing that Allah shall be more deserving to such a
needlessness. Authentically the following prophetic saying is
communicated: "Whenever you ask your Lord for the Paradise you are
advised to name Al-Firdaws which is the top and the middle of the
Paradise. The ceiling of the Paradise is the Beneficent's Throne."

The last sentence shows that the Throne is on top of orbits.

**Ibn Teimiya's ArRisaletutTadmuriya page 75:**

Even if some impute anthropomorphism to this signification this does not
mean it is denied by intellects and audible perceptions. The obligation
is not more than denying what is denied only by legal and intellectual
evidences. The Quran denied onymous of 'the like' 'the equivalent' 'the
peer' and the like. Some claim that in the Arabic quality is neither
like equivalent nor is peer the described. Hence this meaning does not
participate in texts. Intellects however do not deny term of
anthropomorphism intended by the Mutazilites.

**Ibn Teimiya's ArRisaletut-Tadmuriya page 90:**

The Competent is exaltedly promoted against having such organs of eating
and drinking. The hand is different since it is the organ of acting and
doing. Acting and doing are ascribed to Him the Praised. These are
attributes of perfection. The able is more perfect than the disable. He
the exalted is also exaltedly promoted against having organs and
acquirements of having spouse and sons. Allah the Praised is also
promoted exceedingly against weeping and grief since

**( 63 )**

these qualities prompt feebleness and deficiency. Happiness and ire on
the other hand are ascribed to Him since they are attributes of
perfection.

**Ibn Teimiya's Ar-Risaletut-Tadmuriya page 95:**

Some of the divine attributes are recognized by intellectuality.
Attributes of knowledgeability competence and vitality are recognized by
the same way. (Does He not know who created? 67:14). This Verse guides
to the meaning involved. Unanimously scholastic provers of the divine
attributes assert that the following divine attributes are recognized by
the learned with the intellect. They are vitality knowledgeability
competence willingness. Hearing seeing and uttering are added to these
attributes. Pleasantness satisfaction and ire can be proved by intellect
too. The Lord's exaltation and incomparability are also recognized with
the intellect. Ahmed Bin Hanbal Abdul-Ali Al-Mekki Abdullah Bin Sa'eed
Bin Kelab and others proved this question. The Lord's seeableness is
proved by intellects. Some alleged that seeableness of every being is
possibly attainable. Others claimed that seeableness of every
idiosyncratic entity is possibly attainable. The latter is more
adequate. The Lord's seeableness can be proved by other means of
distributing affirmation and denial. It is claimed that seeableness is
exclusively depending upon existential affairs. The Anterior Necessary
Aseity is more deserving than possible beings in affairs depending upon
existential affairs exclusively.

### COMPONENTS OF IBN TEIMIYA'S SCHOOL

The previous were a set of Ibn Teimiya's texts respecting hypothesizing
his school. Later on more shall be proceeded. The following points are
acceptably sufficient for proving Ibn Teimiya's believing in
corporalism:

First: Ibn Teimiya refuses commending interpretation of the divine
attributes to Allah the Exalted since "these are the worst among sayings
of the heretic and atheists." This testifies that he carries in mind the
ill idea that abstinence from interpreting 'face of Allah' and 'hand of
Allah' is reckoned with flat atheism!

Second: Ibn Teimiya decides the obligation of concluding the manifest
linguistic aspects of Quranic texts respecting the divine attributes.
This means that he opts for material meanings of such texts. He also
stands against culling metaphoric meanings since as he believes there is
no existence for metaphor in Quran and hadiths.

Third: Pursuant to Ibn Teimiya's trend Allah the Exalted is existent at
the top of this world. Except air nothing is above Him. Below Him is
this world. "See that the Prophet (peace be upon him) had used 'after'
instead of 'under'." The Lord is existent on His Throne. He may descend
to this world. He sees with the eye since "seeableness is exclusively
depending upon existential

affairs. The Anterior Necessary Aseity is more deserving than

**( 64 )**

possible beings in affairs depending upon existential affairs
exclusively." The evidence he cited on Allah's being selfsufficient
against the world was so derisive that even ordinary people would
disgust. He stated that every exalted thing dispenses with what is under
it. Accordingly leaves of a tree dispense with trunks and upper story
dispense with the lower!

Fourth: For Ibn Teimiya Allah's descending to the lower heavens is
intrinsic. He asserted "The Lord's descending as a deed of selfmastery
was the opinion adopted by the hadithists.." In addition to Ibn Batuta's
testimony it is proved that Allah's descending is a physical descending
of a material being. Hence Ibn Teimiya's words of evading this idea were
futile.

Fifth: Ibn Teimiya aimed at defending his belief by denying its
comprising anthropomorphism. He stated that the Lord has a physical face
and hand but not like these of humans or other creatures. For him this
statement is enough to exclude circle of anthropomorphism. Cautiously he
omitted anthropomorphism by inventing another matter. He stated that
texts should be regarded according to their material aspects "fitting
His Glory" not the unbecoming.

Sixth: Proceeding in a daring step towards proving anthropomorphism Ibn
Teimiya stated "Even if some people impute anthropomorphism to this
signification this does not mean it is denied by intellects and audible
perceptions. The obligation is not more than denying what is denied only
by legal and intellectual evidences." By these words Ibn Teimiya tries
to say that Quranic and prophetic texts negate Allah's having peers
associates likes and equivalents. They do not negate His being
anthropomorphized. At exposing God's saying (Nothing like a likeness of
Him;) majority of Muslims; Shias Sunnis philosophers and Mutazilites
negate Allah's having a resemblant. Hence nothing may stop in the face
of negating Allah's having an alike since this matter is negated by
texts and Allah's anthropomorphizing His creatures!! As long as He does
not deny His being anthropomorphizing His creatures what is the wrong
then if we adopt so?!

Ibn Teimiya therewith declares that God's saying (Nothing like a
likeness of Him;) implies negation of His like not resemblant. Allah
does have a resemblant; Adam and another resemblant; Ibn Teimiya!!

Seventh: Supposing the following argument is provided before Ibn
Teimiya. "You definitely refer to anthropomorphism by your denying
interpretation and commendation and insist on interpretation according
to aspects of texts." He shall certainly answer "Majority of Sunnis and
ancestors' followers rule of fallibility of interpretation deciding
denial of the Lord's settling and coming. Most of them however refute
void interpretation and reckon such texts with 'Items interpretation of
which should be concealed.'

**( 65 )**

Ibn Teimiya consequently decides that it is not inadmissible to liken
Allah the Exalted to His creatures. He also emphasizes that
interpretation of anthropomorphism should be concealed. He exhibits that
his god is existent in a certain point up the heavens we could see. That
god is a physical being occupying the Throne. Nothing except air is
above him while he is restricted from beneath. That god can move and
descend to the earth. Ibn Teimiya however is unlike Ibn Khuzeima his
master who claims that god's ability of ascending. Exalted and glorified
be Allah against such funny statements! Later on the other sides of Ibn
Teimiya's beliefs will be debated.
