Chp 5 Atthehbi Is Ibn Teimiya's Inheritor
=========================================

**( 67 )**

Familiarly Ibnul-Qeyim Al-Jawzi is Ibn Teimiya's inheritor. At-Thehbi in
fact is an invisible successor of Ibn Teimiya. Since enough light has
not been focused on this personality we are to pass upon him
exclusively.

**Describing AtThehbi's tendency towards corporalism and corporalists
As-Sebki in his TabaqatusShafiiya part 2 page 13 records:**

Demeanors and variety of beliefs of both the criticizer and the
criticized ought to be taken in consideration during scrutinizing
criticism. This point is stressed by Ashafii who states "Seconders ought
to be clear from malice and fanaticism in beliefs in order that they may
not be induced to criticizing a litigant or approving a skeptic." A
great number of master scholars were the victims of such a fanaticism.
The criticizers were wrong and the criticized were right but such a
confusion occurred due to conventional prejudice. In his Aliqtirah
Sheikhul-Islam and master of the late Taqiyuddin Bin Daqiq Aleed refers
to this point. He states "A Muslim's repute is a hole of hell. Two
groups of people stopped at the brim of that hole. They are the
hadithists and the rulers."

Regarding Abu Hatem Bin Hebban some anthropomorphists alleged that he
was inaccurate in his religion. They confessed that they banished him
out of Sejistan because he had denied Allah's having an edge. Alas!
Which team should be banished; the believers in Allah's having an edge
or those promoting Him against corpreity?! Many examples can be cited in
this regard. At-Thehbi our master is a good example. Although he enjoys
a considerable amount of knowledgeability and piousness he assails
Ahlus-Sunna exceedingly. Therefore it is impermissible to rest upon him.

**AsSaqaf's SharhulAqidetitTahawiya page 315:**

**( 68 )**

While the heretic assert that attributes Allah has ascribed to Him
should be used restrictively in referring to Him they say that He
settled on the Throne by His Essence. What is the source of that Essence
they used? In which part of the Quran or the Prophet's traditions has
this word been used? This expression leads undeviatingly to
anthropomorphism and supports their masters' saying that their god
abides on the Throne so extensively that only a four finger distance
remains.

An alike flaw occurred to Al-Khellal when he recorded the following
narrative of doubt documentation more than fifty times in his AsSunna
during providing the exegesis of God's saying (Maybe your lord will
raise you to a position of great glory. 17:79):

Mujahid: The Verse implies that the Lord reposes on the Throne and seats
Mohammed (peace be upon him) near to him in the four finger distance
space of the Throne.

Al-Hafiz At-Thehbi who moderated only after his youth denied so and
retreated from the ideas he had written down in his Siyeru-
A'laminNubela regarding those who added 'Essence' after mentioning
Allah's exhalation settling and the like. He records "We have previously
mentioned that the word 'Essence' is superfluous since it injures
minds."

AsSaqaf however was inadvertent to the fact that At-Thehbi had never
negated Allah's descending by His Essence by selfmastery.

This is clear from his words recorded in Siyeru A'lamin-Nubela part 19
page 605:

Ibnuz-Zaghawani composes a poetry:

High on the elevated Throne by His Essence Praised be Him against a
saying of the aberrant and atheists We have previously mentioned that
the word 'Essence' is superfluous since it injures minds. Neglecting
this expression is favorable.

Granting that was At-Thehbi's word it is inevitable to interpret it in a
way becoming his beliefs. He believes that Allah the Exalted reposes
physically on the Throne and descends materially to the lowest heavens.
He only assumes that it is favorable to neglect discussing bases of his
belief. He also sees that since 'Essence' is unacceptable expression for
Muslims' minds it ought to be avoided and kept within secrets of the
belief and said before followers only. This is indicated by the fact
that as if he approved Az-Zaghawani's deciding atheism of the entire
Muslims except anthropomorphists AtThehbi shows no denial against this
verdict issued by that Hanbalite master while he was providing his life
account.

**( 69 )**

**This is also supported by his statements recorded in Siyeru
A'laminNubela part 20 page 331:**

It is obligatory to believe in the descending of Allah and it is
favorable to neglect discussing its essentials. This was the worthy
ancestors' course. Claiming of descending by His Essence was only
purposed for submitting the interpreters who claimed descending of His
knowledgeability. We do seek Allah's protecting us against disputing in
the religion. The same thing is said about Allah's coming and the like.
We say "He came" and "He descends" but we warn against claiming
descending by Essence. In the same time we do not claim descending of
His knowledgeability. We only keep silent so that we may not invent
heretic expressions before the Prophet (peace be upon him).

Hence AtThehbi refutes the interpretation that descending falls by means
other than the Essence. Meanwhile he finds an excuse for those who claim
descending by the Essence. He allege that such individuals said so just
for submitting the interpreters who dispute and litigate in religious
questions. This indicates that AtThehbi adopts claim of descending by
the Essence. He at the same time warns the anthropomorphists his group
against claiming descending by the Essence so that others should not be
spurred against them! AtThehbi's attitude is evidently shown in his
statement "It is favorable to neglect discussing bases of his belief."

He realizes and believes in essentials of the material descending.
However neglecting such essentials is favorable. It is may be acceptable
and excusable to disclose these essentials before rivals in cases of
inescapable necessity.

This fact is also supported by his words about Kutah whose master
dismissed him because he had been claiming "descending by the Essence"
and was warmly received by the Syrian anthropomorphists.

**TethkiratulHuffaz part 4 page 13:**

Kutah: The Quran reciter the master Abu Masud Abdul-Jalil Bin Mohammed.
Abu Musa Al-Madini states "He was unique in learning in addition to
manners and decency. He was one of the favorable followers of Ismail
Al-Hafiz. I attended some of his sessions and heard Abul-Qasim Al-Hafiz
in Damascus extol him nobly raise his standing and accredit erudition
and accuracy to him.

He also was learned by Abdul-Qahir Ashebrawi in Nisapur and another
group in Baghdad. His master Ismail dismissed him because he asserted
that Allah "descends by His Essence"

This is also supported by his defending and praising Al-Hafiz
Abdul-Ghani the famous corporalist.

**Siyeru A'laminNubela part 21 page 463:**

In Miratuz-Zeman Abu Muzaffar Al-Waiz records:

**( 70 )**

Al-Hafiz Abdul-Ghani used to provide his lectures after the Friday
Prayer. Muhyiddin Diyaddin and others went to the governor and
complained against Abdul-Ghani claiming his adopting anthropomorphism.
The two parties argued. Abdul-Ghani stated "I do not promote Him against
ill matters so excessively that I deny His actual descending." "Allah
was when there was no space. Today He is not as he was." and "Allah
possess symbols and voice."

The adversary party concentrated on these points. They commented
"Considering the Lord was not as he was this means that He has a
definite space. Proving the Lord's actual descending affirms acceptance
of His moveableness. Regarding symbols and voice masters such as Ahmed
Bin Hanbal dedicated so to Allah's words that are not created."

The two parties were engaged in noisy discrepancy. Burghush the
government asked "You think all those are wrong and you alone is right.
Do you not?" "Yes I do " affirmed Abdul-Ghani. Thus the governor ordered
of destroying his pulpit and banishing him to Balbak. Later on he
traveled to Egypt. Scholars there ruled of permissibility of killing
him. They argued that he was ruining people's beliefs and advocating
corporalism. Hence the vizier ordered of banishing him to Morocco. He
died before execution of that order.

Owing to publicity of Abdul-Ghani's importunate adherence to his
anthropomorphism scholars agreed upon deciding his atheism and heresy.
They also issued the impermissibility of keeping that man among Muslims.
Hence he sought them to be granted only three days before he would be
banished. They responded.

I noticed carelessness and lack of piety of Abul-Muzaffar IbnulJawzi in
his historical texts. He was inclining to Rafidites. I could see one of
his writing works brimming with calamities supporting the previous
allegation. He would not have been alive if his claiming jurisprudents'
deciding his atheism had been true. In Damascus Al-Imad Muwaffaquddin
Abu Omar Shamsuddin Al-Bukhari and the other Hanbalite scholars agreed
with him. Besides the country was full of master scholars who did
neither decide his apostasy nor did they declare his downright
statements due to which he was suppressed. It would have been safer and
better for him had he shunned such statements and followed expressions
of the texts. No single text regarding such illusive statements was
reported. His worst statement was deciding aberrance of the present
scholars and his being the right alone. He worded a statement filled in
with evil depravity and disadvantage. May God forgive and be merciful to
the all since they intended only to glorify and promote. The most
perfect course of glorifying and promoting the Lord against ill matters
was stopping at expressions of the Quran and the Prophet's traditions.
This course was adopted by the worthy ancestors (God may please them).
At any rate Al-Hafiz Abdul-Ghani was one of the religious learned pious
and righteous men. He

**( 71 )**

enjoyed numerous merits. Finally we seek God's protection against
caprices prevarication fanaticism and forging lies. We also disavow
every corporalist and Tatilist.

At-Thehbi's skillfulness of attaching school of his master Ibn Teimiya
and him to the ancestors who were commenders should be acknowledged. He
used their silence for his good and provided it as an adaptation of the
material exegesis.

**Siyeru A'laminNubela part 10 page 505:**

Scholars of the worthy ancestors interpreted expressions whether they
were remarkable or not. They did not approach Verses and hadiths of the
divine attributes at all. Yet these are the most remarkable questions of
the religion. They would have taken initiative in interpreting such
texts had they been conceivable. Hence it became appreciable that the
right is only reciting and recognizing these texts without trying to
find any other interpretation. Like the worthy ancestors we should
believe and acquiesce in such texts.

In the previous text AtThehbi commits a distortion so daringly that no
anthropomorphist could attain. This distortion AtThehbi attires dress of
reasoning is clarified by the following example:

Considering there is an article of a law so ambiguous that it has two
significances; extrinsic and metaphoric. An individual abstained from
finding an explanation for that article claiming acquiescing in its
aspect and commending its significance to the legislator. Do others dare
to regard him as opting for the very extrinsic significance since he
abstained from interpreting? Of course none dare to regard as so since
that individual will certainly answer "I am abstinent from any
interpretation. None is allowed to attach any interpretation including
the extrinsic to me."

At-Thehbi however dared to say so. He states "Hence it became
appreciable that the right is only reciting and recognizing these texts
without trying to find any other interpretation." He means any
interpretation other than the material. Just after that he asserts "Like
the worthy ancestors we should believe and acquiesce in such texts."
This indicates that we should believe that material appearances of the
texts should be embraced and then acquiesce in essentials of the belief
like the commenders.

The entire words of the Sunni scholars flow in the same stream.
"Recognize the texts as they are." "Pass the texts as they are." "Recite
the texts as they are." "Take the texts as they are." "Acquiesce in the
texts." All these words have the same meaning; Interpret not these texts
and commend them to Allah the Elevated and His prophet. None at all
ruled of opting for faces of these texts. How should then the
anthropomorphists adopt

**( 72 )**

(involving the appearances as they seem.) and attach to the commenders
among the worthy ancestors?

It is not improbable that 'pass' mentioned in words of the Sunni
scholars was in the origin 'recognize(18)'. But owing to clerical errors
the word was confused. 'Recognition' is used for constant matters while
'passing' is used for the movable. Neither the early nor the late
scholars used this word at all except in the item involved. For
eloquence it is inappropriate to used 'pass' to unchangeable matters.
The word however is used for expressing movable things. For example;
'pass the sheep' means 'let those walking sheep pass.' For constant
things; such as texts we use 'recognize' which means 'accept'.

The following are examples of the worthy ancestors' words:

**AlMizi's Tahdibul-Kemal part 1 page 514:**

Ahmed Bin Nasr: I asked Sufian Bin Uyeina an interpretation for the
sayings that hearts are between two of Allah's fingers and that Allah
laughs when He is mentioned in marts. "Pass them as they are without
asking how" answered Sufian.

**AtThehbi's Siyeru A'laminNubela part 5 page 162:**

Al-Awzai: Az-Zuhri and Mackhul used to say "Pass the hadiths as they
are."

**AtThehbi's Siyeru A'laminNubela part 5 page 337:**

Al-Awzai: He used to say "Pass the Prophet's traditions as they are."

**AtThehbi's TethkiratulHuffaz part 1 page 304:**

Al-Walid Bin Muslim: I asked Mali Al-Awzai AtThawri and Al-Leith Bin
Sa'd about hadiths pertaining the divine attributes. "Pass them as they
are without asking how " they answered.

**AtThehbi's Siyeru A'laminNubela part 7 page 274:**

Sufian was asked about hadiths pertaining the divine attributes. "Pass
them as they are " he answered. Abu Nueim stated "Were I to skip out
these hadiths totally." Abu Usama: Sufian said "Had my hand been
amputated before I sought a hadith."

The two last sayings indicate that the reason beyond adopting for
commendation was anticipating being sinful in case they adopt an
interpretation leads to affirming anthropomorphism.

**AtThehbi's Siyeru A'laminNubela part 8 page 162:**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. In Arabic, the two words; 'recognize' and 'pass' differ in a single
similar letter only.

**( 73 )**

Al-Walid Bin Muslim: I asked Mali Al-Awzai AtThawri and Al-Leith about
hadiths pertaining the divine attributes. "Pass them as they are without
asking how " they answered. Abu Ubeid commented "As we could not
recognize a single individual cite an interpretation to these texts we
should also neglect so." This Abu Ubeid compiled a book dedicated to
strange hadiths. He neglected discussing any of hadiths of the divine
attributes at all. As he told that he could not recognize a single
individual cite an interpretation of such texts he abstained from
interpreting. Positively had interpretation of such texts been
conceivable or fundamental it would have been more concerned that
interpretation of hadiths of secondary affairs and ethics. As scholars
neglected citing any interpretation for such texts and passed them as
they were it was perceivable that their course what the absolute right.

Abu Ubeid's saying "We could not recognize a single individual cite an
interpretation to these texts." implies denial of the claim of opting
for extrinsic interpretation. This saying also denies Ibn Teimiya's
claim that Abu Ubeid did interpreted the Lord's settlement into
descending. This claim is recorded in his book of Tafseer part 6.

The latter wording of At-Thehbi is an attempt to decide 'passing their
texts are they are' as same as interpreting them according to their
aspects. Hence he attempts at making the commenders adopt the faith Ibn
Teimiya and he had embraced.

**AtThehbi's Siyeru A'lamin-Nubela part 8 page 467:**

Respecting the hadith "Allah is astonished or laughs when He is
mentioned in marts." Sufian commented "It is as it came. We accept and
communicate it without asking how."

**AtThehbi's Siyeru A'laminNubela part 9 page 165:**

Ahmed Bin Ibrahim Ad-Dawraqi: Waki:

We should submit to these hadiths such as that of Allah's burdening the
heavens of one of His fingers as they are. We do not ask how or what
for.

**AtThehbi's Siyeru A'laminNubela part 15 page 86:**

AbulHassan compiled four books appertained to principals of the religion
and bases of the worthy ancestors' belief in the divine attributes. He
records "These texts should be passed as they are. This is my saying and
belief. I should not seek an interpretation."

Besides AtThehbi as well as the worthy ancestors recorded tens of texts
discussing this topic. All those texts indicated that trends of
commendation and interpretation were the two major schools the Sunni
ancestors belonged to. School of resting upon extrinsic meanings was
adopted by the corporalists; the Hashawites some of the Hanbalites and
few of the Asharites.

**( 74 )**

At-Thehbi asserted that there had been three trends respecting this
question.

**AtThehbi's Siyeru A'laminNubela part 19 page 582:**

I asked him about hadiths of the divine attributes. He answered "People
litigated about them. Some interpreted. Others abstained and others
believed in their extrinsic meanings. I believe in one of these three
trends."

Likewise Ibn Khuldoun discerned school of commendation from that of
resting upon aspects of the texts. Moreover some late scholars such as
AnNawawi assert that the course of Sunni ancestors was commendation and
refutation of the extrinsic meanings. This is a strange matter indeed.
Commendation totally reconciles denial of extrinsic interpretations but
it does in no means concur extrinsic interpretation. Any text is not
commended to Allah if it is interpreted according to its aspect. While
denial certain interpretations of a text does not injure commending to
Allah.

**Seyid Sharafuddin's Abu Hureira part 1 page 57:**

An-Nawawi the master asserts:

A number of scholars dispense with finding interpretations for such
hadiths claiming "We do believe they are right and their extrinsic
meanings are not intended and there are meanings becoming them." This is
in fact trend of majority of the ancestors. It is the safest and the
most secure.

### CORPORALISTS ARE HEIRS OF EXTRINSICISM

It is obvious that the hypothetical base upon which corporalism was
founded is necessity of resting upon extrinsic meanings of texts. This
base seems to be imitated a long period after emergence of extrinsicism
created by Dawud Alisfahani who publicized it in Morocco. Effects of
that school are still manipulated in Ibn Hazm Al-Andalusi's written
works.

Ideas and course of corporalism were originated a long time before
coming forth of extrinsicism. This indicates that the objective base of
their school was authored after existence of the school itself. In other
more objective words their base was discriminating just like communism.
The latter had been originated before it was fanatically embraced. A
period after that its hypotheses were adopted by dialectic. Thus this
historical article was picked up to be the objective base of communism.

**AsSemani's Al-Ansab part 4 page 99:**

Extrnisicism is imputed to that group who adopted school of Dawud Bin
Ali Al-Isfahani. They opt for the extrinsic meanings of texts. They are
numerous. AbulHussein Mohammed Bin Al-Hussein Al-Basri acceded to
extrinsicism.

Corporalists in fact mutinied against their fathers; the extrinsicists
neglecting their principals and rules. Dawud Az-Zahir (the extrinsicist)
and Ibn Hazm opt

**( 75 )**

for the extrinsic meanings to definite limits after which they
interpret. They are then interpreters. For corporalists those two
individuals are aberrant and atheists because they were not
extrinsicists.

**Ibn Hazm's Al-Fasl volume 1 part 2 page 122:**

Sayings of Allah the Exalted should be taken as their extrinsic meanings
unless there is another text congruity or a necessity contrasting so. It
is recognized that whatsoever is existent in a place occupies that
place. These all are qualities of corporealities. Regarding so it is
proved that nearness intended in God's saying (And We are nearer to him
than his lifevein. 50:16) stands for control and awareness only.

**Ibn Hazm's Al-Fasl volume 1 part 2 page 166:**

**Discussion Of The Divine Face Hand And Eye:**

Allah the Exalted says (And there will endure for ever the face of your
Lord the Lord of glory and honor. 55:27)

Corporalists used this saying as argument for their trend. Others said
that 'face of Allah' is His person. This is actually the right proved by
clear evidences The purport of such things; Allah's hand eye face and
the like is Allah the Exalted and nothing else.

**Ibn Hazm's Al-Fasl volume 1 part 2 page 167:**

The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated "Hell keeps on demanding with
more till Lord of Dignity places His foot precedence in it."

In this hadith 'foot' stands for precedence. This meaning is mentioned
in God's saying (A footing of firmness with their Lord. 10:2). Hence the
meaning of the hadith is that Allah should fill in hell with people who
preceded others in evildoing. The same is said about the authentic
hadith "Allah created Adam on his look." This indicates that Allah had
opted for the look on which he created Adam.

**Ibn Hazm's Al-Fasl volume 1 part 2 page 140:**

Unanimously Muslims agreed upon Allah's being hearing and seeing since
this truth is emphasized in the Holy Quran. A group of Sunnis Asharites
Jafar Bin Harb the Mutazilite Husham Bin Al-Hakam and the corporalists
claimed "We decisively believe that Allah the Exalted is hearing by a
means of audition seeing by a means of sight." Groups of Sunnis
including Ashafii assert that Allah the Exalted is hearing and seeing
but they refuted mentioning means of audition and sight since Allah the
Elevated has not referred to so. They believe that the Lord is hearing
by His Essence and seeing by His Essence Thus we adopt this very saying
and rule of impermissibility of claiming of means of audition and sight
since this claim has not proved by a text.
