Chp 7 Scholars' Rebuttals On the Wahabists' Corporalism
=======================================================

**( 125 )**

### Al-HAFIZ IBN HAJAR

**Ibn Hajar's Fetihul-Bari Fi Sharhi Sahihil Bukhari part 3 page 23:**

Adopters of trend of God's having a locality cited the Prophet's saying
"Our Lord descends to the lowest heavens " as their evidence. Majority
of scholars denied so since it leads to the Lord's demarcation. Allah be
exalted against so. Various opinions were cited in respect of meaning of
the Lord's descending. Anthropomorphists rested upon its extrinsic
material meaning. Allah be exalted against their misallegation.
Kharijites and Mutazilites denied the whole matter; authenticity of such
hadiths. This is indeed an exaggeration. While they have been finding
suitable interpretation for Quranic texts respecting such a subject they
either ignorantly or inflexibly denied hadiths involving the topic. The
worthy ancestors passed such texts as they are believing in them
generally and promoting Allah the Exalted against conditions and
anthropomorphism. Like many others Al-Beihaqi relate this viewpoint to
the four masters the two Sufians the two Hemmads Al-Awzai Al-Leith and
others. Others interpreted meaning of the hadith into a proper form
common in Arabic. Others opted for an interpretation too exaggerative to
evade distortion. Others discerned what is interpreted in a form near to
Arabic from what is rarely used. Hence some was interpreted and the rest
was commended. This is Malik's trend. Ibn Daqiq Al-Abd followed this
trend lately.

Al-Beihaqi: The most secure trend is that of believing without seeking
conditions and suspending the intended meanings saving those
communicated by authentic narrators. They agreed upon nonobligation of
resting upon the identified interpretation. Only then commendation to
Allah becomes safer

Ibnul-Arabi: It is said that the heretics refute such texts while the
worthy ancestors passed them as they are. A third group ruled of finding
interpretation

**( 126 )**

for them. The latter however is the most suitable for me. God's sayings
are referred to His deeds not Essence. It is also an indication to the
angel who descends with His orders and instructions. Like corporealities
descending can be through mental meanings. Providing the material
meaning is adopted it will be alluded to the angel conveyed. Supposing
the mental is adopted that is called a descending to a lower rank. It is
also an accurate style of Arabic.

Ibnul-Arabi intends to say that there are two sorts of interpretation.
First the extrinsic meaning that is descending of God's affair or
angels. Second metaphoric meaning that is the Lord's kindness to His
supplicators and responding them.

Abu Bakr Bin Fawrak records some scholars utter the text in a way
inciting that the angels not the Lord are concerned. As an evidence on
the forecited reciting is AnNisai's narrative ascribed to Al-Aghar Abu
Hureira and Abu Sa'eed. The hadith then should be in this form "Allah
respites till midnight. After that He orders a declarant to announce if
there is a supplicator so that he will be responded" Othman Bin AbilAas
relates it in the following form "Is there a supplicator so that he will
be responded?"

Al-Qurtubi: Only in this way this problem should be solved. It is also
not defeated by Refa'a Al-Juheni's narrative "Allah descends to the
lowest heavens and declares that His servants should not ask but Him."
since this does not deny that interpretation.

Al-Beidhawi: As long as it is certified by decisive proofs that Allah is
promoted against having corporeity or being restricted in a definite
space it is impracticable for Him to descend which hints at moveableness
to a lower point. Illumination of His mercy is intended. In other words
He shifts from attribute of glorification which requires ire and
reprisal into attribute of benevolence which requires lenience and
compassion.

### AlHAFIZ IBNULJAWZI

A 300 page book allocated to this topic was written by Ibnul-Jawzi named
Defu Shubehit Tashbeeh Bi EkuffitTanzeeh Obviating heresies of
anthropomorphism by hands of promotion. Sheik Hassan As-Saqaf revised
this book which was published by DarulImam AnNawawi Publication Oman.
As-Saqaf's two essays named Traditional statements of scholars in
explication of falsity of the hadith of 'I have seen my Lord' in the
most handsome look and The sufficient evidential explication of falsity
of imputing Kitabur Ruyeh to AdDarqutni are appended to the third
edition published in 1413.

**Describing the Hanbalite corporalists Ibnul-Jawzi states on page 99:**

By their books they offended against their sect. They slipped to level
of ordinary people when they rested upon extrinsic meanings of aspect of
the divine attributes texts

**( 127 )**

Within the words of Sheik Mohammed Abi Zuhra cited later on
Ibnul-Jawzi's words shall be provided.

Ibnul-Jawzi rebutes corporalists' exegeses of the allegorical Verses. He
criticizes sixty false and mistranslated texts. They are bases on which
Wahabists and their forefathers constructed their sect.

### AS-SIBKI AND Al--HALABI

**AsSibki's Tabaqatus Shafiiya part 9 page 34:**

Ahmed Bin Yahya Bin Ismail; Sheik Shihabuddin Al-Jelabi Al-HalabiHe was
deceased in 337 I could obtain one of his books consecrated to rebutting
Ibn Teimiya's claiming Allah's occupying a locale. The book comprises
about fifty pages. The following is quoted from page 401 of that book:

Ashafii when asked about God's attributes says "It is haram forbidden
for intellects to present Allah the Exalted. It is haram for illusions
to limit Him. It is haram for conjectures to decide Him. It is haram for
selves to think about Him. It is haram for minds to deepen in Him. It is
haram for senses to cognize Him. Only what He Has ascribed to Himself in
the words of the Prophet (peace be upon him) is excluded."

The following is Ahlus-Sunna's opinion in this subject:

Allah is anterior and eternal. Nothing is alike Him and He is not
equivalent to anything. He enjoys neither locality nor space. He is not
influenced by a time or an age. It is impracticable to ask or say
'where' about Him. He is seeable not by means of meeting or any ordinary
means. He was when there was no space. He made the cosmos and arranged
the time. Now He is as He was.

**Page 43:**

Monotheists agreed upon denial of the Lord's occupying a locality. A
faction like Ibn Teimiya is excluded.

**Page 534:**

Hadith of amulet Ibn Teimiya cites as an evidence on Allah's existing in
a definite point seems to be excerpted from texts of the Torah or the
Bible. It is "Our Lord Allah sanctified be Thy Name. Thy affair in the
heavens is like Thy affair on the earth. Thy bestowal is in the
heavens." From the hadith " The Throne is above all of that and Allah is
above all of that." Ibn Teimiya the dissident understands that Allah is
materially above the Throne.

**Page 83:**

Promoting Allah against having a locality is evidenced by reports and
traditions and sayings of scholars Nullity of Ibn Teimiya's deceitful
ideas. This nullity is proved by Quranic and prophetic texts

**( 128 )**

**AsSibki's TabaqatusShafiiya part 9 page 36:**

Heretics misallege that they are following course of the worthy
ancestors which is monotheism How is it reasonable to believe that the
worthy ancestors adopted faiths of anthropomorphism and keep still
before emergence of origins of heresy? God says (And do not mix up the
truth with the falsehood.)

### AZZAHAWI; AN IRAQI SCHOLAR

**AzZahawi's Al-Fajrus Sadiq page 28:**

**Corporalism of Wahabists:**

Wahabists decide atheism of those who visitate the Prophet's tomb and
judge seeking his intercession to Allah the Exalted as citing associates
in Allah's godhood. They also rule obligation of promoting God against
such deeds. In the same time they were highly confused in promoting God
against unfitting matters. It is they who emphasized on considering
Allah's settling a physical firmness settlement and elevation on the
Throne. It is they who ascribed material face and hands to the Lord and
divided His touchable missions by holding the heavens to a finger the
earth to another trees to a third and royalty to a fourth. In a like
fashion they made him occupy locality. They claimed the Lord's being
above the heavens constant on the Throne and can be physically pointed
to by material fingers and can descend and ascend to and from the lowest
heavens. Their poet composes:

If asserting His settling on His Throne is corporalism I am then a
corporalist.

If proving His attributes is anthropomorphism I am keeping on
anthropomorphism.

If denying His settling and attributes and speaking is promoting Him
exaltedly.

I promote our Lord against that promotion by His support. He is higher
and more proficient.

From Addinul Khalis the following statements involving the topic are
quoted:

"If it is intended that corporealities are compound of material and form
or of atoms Allah the Exalted is definitely promoted against so. It is
correct to negate possible things from Him too. A created corporeality
is not compound of such things."

This statement is filled up with confusion. The writer denies existence
of necessary or possible corporealities according to the form he refers
to. It seems he intends at negating corporeality that is a principal in
his belief in Allah the Exalted. In order to avoid being accused of
anthropomorphizing the Creator the writer negates corporeality from
creatures. Indisputably if a corporeality is not compound of material
and form it is most surely compound

**( 129 )**

of atoms. Stupidity however is boundless. It is not strange that such an
individual achieves such a record in hideous confusion. He should have
mentioned things from which corporealities are compound. I do not see
him too tedious to state that corporealities are composite from infinite
things. The total scholars deny such a claim. Modern sciences and
decisive evidences proved nullity of such an ill claim. He then added
"If corporealities that are described capable of seeing speaking
addressing hearing observing pleasing and being irate these are proved
for the Lord the Exalted. Such attributes are ascribed to Him. We do not
negate so even if you dedicate such attributes to corporealities"

As much as we know we cannot name anyone defining corporeality as the
thing speaking addressing hearing seeing pleasing and being irate. These
are specifications of lively sane beings. We admit that corporealities
can see through eyes but ascribing corporeality to Allah the Exalted in
this very sense is degrading Him to levels of His creatures in a way
denying His godhood. Allah's being a corporeality in this sense is a
defect against which Allah is obligatorily highly promoted.
Intellectually Allah's being a corporeality is denied since scientists
of optics proved that vision occurs when light rays fall on surface of
the visible object and becomes thrown back to the eye. Accordingly
visible things necessarily have surfaces. This requires partitioning of
that surfaced thing. The idea as a whole nullifies godhead of Allah
since corporeality in this sense is identical to that the writer has
previously negated from Allah the Exalted and possible beings.
Reportedly denial of Allah's being a corporeality is proved by God's
saying (Visions comprehend Him not and He comprehends all visions;).
This Verse is not contradictory to the other (Some faces on that day
shall be bright. Looking at [waiting for] their Lord.) Condition of
Seeing God the Exalted on Resurrection Day is unfamiliar. This is the
most acceptable faith. It is possible that vision on Resurrection Day
shall be by a sort of revealing and divine manifestation that is in no
need for an organ of vision. God's selecting the word 'faces' instead of
'eyes' proves that that vision shall be away from processes of material
organs of visions. Likewise the word 'bright' expresses attaining
perfect blissfulness for that divine revealing.

The writer adds "If corporealities that are materially pointed to are
intended the most cognizant creature did actually refer to Allah by
raising his finger upward towards the heavens"

Intellectual intuition rules that every entity materially indicated
should be occupying a definite locality and space and should be seeable.
All these are impracticable for Allah the Exalted. Providing Allah was
in a definite space or locality anteriority of that space or locality
should be necessarily decided. Evidences on Allah's being the only
Anterior have been decisively cited. He would have been lacking the
space He occupies had He been in a definite point.

**( 130 )**

This contradicts necessity of God's Being. Likewise had He been in a
certain space He would have been there either for a considerable period
or permanently. Regarding the earlier it is null since times are equal
to each other and ascribing Him to definite times should be also equal.
Dedicating definite times to Him then should be a sort of giving a
casting vote to improbabilities. This is in case nonexistence of an
extrinsic dedicating matter is concerned. If there is an extrinsic
dedicating matter the Lord's occupying a certain space should be
requiring an accessory matter. Regarding the latter if nullity of God's
being occupying the entire times in the same time is not proved it
requires involvement of matters occupying spaces in points engaged by
corporealities. Naturally this is impossible. Moreover it was
permissible to point at the Lord materially it should be possible to
point to him from every point on the earth. As the earth is globular it
would be necessary that Allah the Exalted was encircling it totally.
Lest it is improper to point to Him with material indicators and
consequentially He should not be settling on His Throne as Wahabists
claim. If His Throne encompassed the seven heavens it would be
imperative for Him to decrease His corporeality when He descends to the
lowest heavens and increase it during ascending. If so He should be
variable. Allah be highly promoted against sayings of the ignorant.
Reported sayings adhered by Wahabists as evidences on their claims of
validity of the material pointing to the Lord are conjectural phenomena
that are not contradicting ascertained matters. Such sayings should be
interpreted in two ways. First general interpretation and commending
details to Allah. This opinion is adopted by majority of the worthy
ancestors. Second opting for detailed interpretation. Majority of
scholars adopted this trend.

Reports appertained to pointing to the heavens as an indication to the
Lord are tokens of His creating the heavens or the heavens that contain
such tremendous worlds that our earth is but one of their tiny fragments
are one of appearances of His divine competence. Ascending to the Lord
can be interpreted into seeking a place allocated for worshipping Him.
At any rate there are several sorts of interpretation.

**Az-Zahawi's Al-Fajrus Sadiq page 31:**

**Wahabism and discarding intelligence:**

Because intellectuality and sound reasoning contradict their faiths
completely Wahabists had to cast mentality off and adhere to extrinsic
aspects of reports even if impracticability tyranny and deviation are
the effects. Due to such an adherence to extrinsic aspects of Verses
they believe that Allah was physically settling on His Throne and lying
over it. They also believed that He could have a face and two hands and
could perform material descending to the lowest heavens and returning to
His place. They believed that He could be pointed to. Allah be highly
exalted against sayings of the wrong.

**( 131 )**

Wahabists who decided visitators of the Prophet's tomb as pagans are
pagans indeed. They worship a god having a corporeality of an animal
sitting on a material throne descending to a lower grade ascending and
having physical face hand leg and fingers. The Right God is promoted
against physical matters.

If they are disputed that intellectual proofs verify that ascribing
physical matters to the Lord does indeed contradict His godhead they
will answer that such disgraced mentality cannot occupy any space in
field of divinity which is in a rank exceeding mentality of mankind.
Hence they form no difference from trinitarianists who claim recognizing
trinity is a matter exceeding mentalities of mankind so largely that it
is illicit to think about.

It is indisputably rational that reports should be interpreted when
contradicting mentality since it is impossible to prove both of them
because the inadmissible concurrence of antinomous matters will befall.
In the same way it is impossible to deny both of them because nullity of
both antinomous matters will befall. Hence there is one way only which
is admitting one and denying the other. Shunning mentality and opting
for reports is null since it is unreasoning to depend on secondary
matters for invalidating principals.

Explicating this matter we are to say that reported tidings should be
certified by mental devises. Validity of reporting affairs such as
existence of an absolute creator and recognition of divine prophecy and
the like can be credited exclusively by mentality which is principal and
reliable evidence on reported things. Supporting reported matters are
preceded to mental both will be invalidated since when principals are
null branches are null sequentially. Validity of reporting is a branch
of mental judgment which is deniable and voidable. Hence preferring
reported matters to mental results is nullity of the two. Inconsistency
which leads to nullity is the effect of correcting a branch by
invalidating the principal. Pursuant to the previous it is necessary to
prefer mental proofs to reported.

Relying upon the above obligation of finding suitable interpretation to
texts the extrinsic meaning of their aspects contradicts intellectuality
is clearly evident. Such texts should be interpreted in two ways. First
general interpretation and commending details to Allah. This is the
opinion adopted by majority of the worthy ancestors. Second opting for
detailed interpretation. Majority of scholars adopted this trend. God's
settling on the Throne stands for predominance on cosmos. The Arabic
tongue confirms such an interpretation. Likewise God's coming mentioned
in the Verse (And your Lord comes and the angels in ranks. 89:22) stands
for approaching of God's affair. Regarding His saying (To Him do ascend
the good words) this means that Allah admits the good wording. Words
however are incapable of ascending by themselves. Coming mentioned in
God's saying (They do not wait aught but that Allah should come to them
in the shadows of the clouds along with the angels.

**( 132 )**

2:210) implies coming of His anguish. God's saying (Then he drew near
then he bowed so he was the measure of two bows or closer still)
indicates that the Apostle becomes near to his Lord owing to his
extraordinary compliance with Him. The measure indicated is a sort of
depicting the mental things by visions of materiality. The Prophet's
statement "Allah the Exalted descends to the lowest heavens every night
" refers to descending of His mercy. Night however is the time usually
consecrated to loneliness adoration and worshipping. Alike
interpretations are cited for the like texts.

### ABU ZUHRA IN TARIKHUL METHAHIBIL ISLAMIYA

**Mohammed Abu Zuhra's Tarikhul Methahibil Islamiya part 1 page 225:**

Salafites modern radicalists are those who ascribed ensuing the worthy
ancestors' trends to themselves. Later on we shall discuss some of their
beliefs. They came forth in the fourth Hijri century. They were
Hanbalites. They claimed their beliefs are accredited to Ahmed Bin
Hanbal who had enlivened and fought for the sake of the worthy
ancestors' beliefs. In the seventh Hijri century they re came forth.
SheikulIslam Ibn Teimiya was extremous in advocating those beliefs. As a
matter of fact he added new matters originated due to ideologies of his
time to the sect. In the twelfth Hijri century Mohammed Bin Abdil-Wahab
enlivened these beliefs in the Arab Peninsula. Wahabists as well as some
Muslims have been fanatically soliciting to these beliefs. Hence it is
necessary to provide these beliefs.

Those Hanbalites discussed affairs of monotheism and connected it to
shrines of the pious. They also controverted Quranic texts appertained
to interpretation and anthropomorphism. This was first originated in the
fourth Hijri century and ascribed to Ahmed Bin Hanbal. However some
virtuous Hanbalite scholars argued their ascribing the beliefs to Ahmed
Bin Hanbal.

Fatal combats against Asharites were occasionally broken out by those
Salafites. Litigious dispute about whose party had been being the real
followers of the worthy ancestors was always arisen The following is a
scrutinizing critique to beliefs of the Salafites who ascribed this name
to themselves. However we are to discuss whether there is a relation
between name and reality of its bearers.

**Mohammed Abu Zuhra's Tarikhul Methahibil Islamiya part 1 page 232:**

They recognize attributes and affair of God the Praised mentioned by
Quranic or prophetic texts. They recognize God's liking ire rage
satisfaction calling wording and descending to people in shadows of
clouds. They also recognize the Lord's settling on the Throne having a
face and a hand without any interpretation or nonextrinsic exegeses.
Without attempting to finding a

**( 133 )**

suitable interpretation or condition Ibn Teimiya saw that the worthy
ancestors recognize God's having a hand and a face and enjoying
descending and ascending and the like affairs inferred from the
extrinsic meanings of aspects of Quranic texts. He claimed that had been
aiming at referring to the literal not metaphorical phenomena. He
nevertheless claimed being neither corporalist nor Tatilite. He states
"Sect of the worthy ancestors is between Tatilism depriving the Lord of
the entire attributes for attaining denying His Existence and
anthropomorphism. They do neither compare the Lord's attributes to these
of His creatures nor compare His Essence to His creatures' entities. In
the same time they do not negate attributes and affairs the Lord has
used for Himself or the Prophet has used through describing his Lord.
They claim they opt for so in order that they would not deprive the Lord
of His divine names and excellent attributes alter words from their
proper places and blaspheme God's Names and Verses. As a matter of face
Tatilites and anthropomorphists are joining Tatilism to
anthropomorphism.

Asserting the faith that Allah descends and occupies the top space and
may be beneath without a definite condition Ibn Teimiya in his
Al-Hamawiyatul Kubra Fi Majmu'etir Resailul Kubra page 419 adds:

"There is no single letter whether in Book of Allah the Prophet's
traditions the worthy ancestors' statements the Prophet's companions'
words the followers' sayings or words the scholars who coincided in time
of caprices and dispute contradicts these faiths whether in meaning or
in aspect. No single one from the forecited categories has been claiming
Allah's being not in the heavens not on the Throne not in everywhere not
for Him all spaces are equal not being neither in nor out of this cosmos
not connected not disconnected and not indicated by material signs."

On that account Ibn Teimiya decides that course of the worthy ancestors
is shunning interpretation and recognizing the literal extrinsic
meanings of aspects of Quranic and prophetic texts referring to God's
being descending and ascending and having a face and a hand and feeling
affectionate and irate. Is this by God course of the worthy ancestors?

As an answer we should emphasize that in the fourth Hijri century
Hanbalites arouse the same claim. Scholars of that time argued them and
proved that their beliefs would have been leading to anthropomorphism
and corporalism. They could never deny so since even material indication
according to their faith was applicable to Allah! The Hanbalite master
jurisprudent and orator IbnulJawzi undertook the mission of opposing
these beliefs and asserted that course of the worthy ancestors should in
no way be taking in these false principals. He also denied accrediting
that school to Ahmed.

He stated "I could cognize some improper ideas rendered by some of our
acquaintances regarding principals of Islam. They wrote a book

**( 134 )**

in which they offended the sect. They were so lowly that they rested
upon the material meanings of the divine attributes. As they perceived
the text 'Allah created Adam on his look.' they recognized Allah's
having a definite look. They also accredited a face added to the Essence
a mouth uvulas dents facial flash hands fingers a palm a little finger a
thumb a chest a thigh legs and feet. Finally they claim they had not
been acquainted whether He had a head or not!! They rested upon the
extrinsic meanings of aspects of the divine attributes and names texts.
Heretically they ascribed such false things to the divine attributes.
They could cite no single proof neither mentally nor reportedly. They
turned their faces against texts shunning the extrinsic meanings of
aspects and proving meanings inciting God's necessary attributes. They
also disregarded cancellation of the extrinsic meanings leading to
attributes of contingency. They transcended limits to the degree that
they overstepped attributes of Essence in addition to attributes of
acts. When they proved these meanings' being attributes they reject
resting upon their interpretative linguistic meanings; such as 'hand'
stands for grace and aptitude 'coming' stands for forms of benevolence
and compassion and 'leg' stands for incisiveness. On the contrary they
rested upon the familiar extrinsic meanings. Extrinsic meanings imply
the familiar descriptions of people. Extrinsic meanings of aspects are
rested upon only when it is mentally possible. If not metaphoric
meanings should be adopted.

While their words evidently refer to anthropomorphism they shunned and
scorned confessing of it. They claim their being Ahlus-Sunna. A number
of ordinary people ensued them. I did advise the heads and followers
when I said "O acquaintances! You are depending upon reports and
traditions. While he was suffering lashes Ahmed Bin Hanbal the grand
master was shouting 'How should I say what was not said?!' Hence I warn
you against ascribing false things to his sect. Then you claim resting
upon the extrinsic meaning of aspects of texts. This means that the word
'foot' alludes to that organ. Maintaining that Allah settles by His
Essence hints at accrediting materiality to Him the Praised. You ought
not to disdain the devise of recognizing principal; intellectuality. By
our minds we recognized Allah the Exalted and decided His anteriority.
None would have censured you had you been sufficed by reading the texts
and keeping peace! The unacceptable matter is your resting upon the
extrinsic meaning of aspects of texts. You should not add new things to
the sect of that Salafite follower of the worthy ancestors man."

Ibnul-Jawzi however provided abundant explication and proofs on nullity
of their beliefs and argumentation.

The judge Abu Yali the famous Hanbalite jurisprudent died in 457 was one
of the adopters of beliefs criticized and contradicted by Ibnul-Jawzi.
His opinions were the basic reason beyond the harsh criticism and
reproach addressed at

**( 135 )**

that Hanbalite judge. A Hanbalite jurisprudent said "Abu Yali
contaminated Hanbalism in such a way that waters of the entire oceans
cannot clear away." An alike statement is expressed by Ibnuz-Zaghawani
the Hanbalite died in 527. A Hanbalite scholars says "Abu Yali's
statements of anthropomorphism are too bizarre to be understood by the
exceptional intelligent."

Owing to the general denial especially that declared by the master
Hanbalites these faction hid themselves during the fourth and fifth
Hijri century till Ibn Teimiya relived it so daringly and importunately.

It is important to mention that the claim of being followers of the
worthy ancestors is problematic. Previously Ibnul-Jawzi's opinion
respecting the subject has been forecited.

Linguistically we should wonder whether expressions such as (The hand of
Allah is over their hands ) and (Everything is perishable except His
face ) allude to material meanings or they refer to other meanings
fitting the Essence of Allah the Exalted. It is quite true to interpret
the hand of Allah into His might or grace and His face into His Entity.
Likewise the Lord's descending to the lowest heaven can be interpreted
into intimacy of His judgment and approach to His servants. Language is
so extensive to subsume such interpretations. Majority of theologists
jurisprudents and researchists opted for such interpretations.
Indisputably interpretation is favored to opting for the extrinsic
literal meanings of aspects of texts and neglecting their conditions.
They claim that Allah has a hand but they neglect its trimming. Finally
they recognize that it is different from hands of contingent beings.
Correspondingly they declare there is an act of descending belonging to
Allah but they claim its being distinct from ours. Such claims are
classified as committing to unknown substances purports and purposes of
which are inconceivable. On the other hand had such texts had been
translated into familiar meanings admitted by language we would have
attained satisfactory results that lead to promoting the Lord against
unbecoming affairs and revealing any unreachable matters.

### Al-BISHRI AND Al-QAZAI

**Al-Qazai's Furqanul Quran Bein Sifatil Khaliqi W Sifatil Akwan page 72
(Printed in the margin of Al-Beihaqi's Al-Asma'u WesSifat):**

Unanimously the worthy ancestors and descendants of this nation agreed
on evading resting upon the extrinsic material meaning of aspects of the
allegorical Verses. Reckoning such courses with forsaken nonsense and
irreliable redundant speech exegesists and hadithists as well as the
worthy ancestors and descendants of this nation named adopters of such
physical meanings as corporalists and Hashawites.

We close this chapter by citing the verdict of the actual 'SheikulIslam'
master of Islam head of proficient scholars mentor of mentors Sheik
Salim Al-Bishri

**( 136 )**

(May God embrace him to His mercy and elevate his rank in the uppermost
Paradise) regarding this topic.

The following problem and its answer is literally quoted from the master
prompter and the prosperous infallible teacher Ahmed Sheik Ali Badr's
Shamsul Haqiqeti Wed Diraya Firreddi Ela Ehlid Dhelaleti Wel Ghiwaya.
The question is addressed at SheikulIslam Al-Bishri:

Q. What do you see about a scholar reckoned with jurisprudents who shows
his belief in recognizing Allah's material elevation? Meanwhile he
claims following the worthy ancestors' course. Few people followed him
while majority of scholars deny his claims. I could hear from him
personally that the reason beyond his acceding to this sect is that he
had read a statement ascribed to Ibn Teimiya in a book written by an
Indian scholar regarding substantiating the Creator's occupying a
locality.

Moreover this man believes in the in essence elevation of Allah the
Glorified. In other words he believes that Allah is physically over the
Throne but in a way becoming Him. He also decides falsity of
Abul-Barakat AdDirdir's saying "Allah be promoted against incarnation
occupancy connection disunion and illmindedness." He also decides Sheik
Al-Liqai's saying "It is impractical to the Bearer of the divine
attributes to be like this universe in having locality." Generally he
decides falsity of any scholar disregarding his objective status who may
deny Allah's having a locality. In addition to the forecited book this
scholar exhibits Al-Alusi's Rouhul-Me'ani (Exegesis of the Holy Quran)
as his evidence. Al-Alusi's exegesis of God's saying (And He is the
Supreme above His servants. 6:18) is revealing such an indication into
having a definite locality but as a matter of fact the exegesist
expresses inaccuracy of this exegesis. He also cited Quranic Verses;
such as (And He is the Supreme above His servants. 6:61) (They fear
their Lord above them. 16:50) (To Him do ascend the good words) and
their likes as other evidences. He also cites the deaf bondmaiden's
indication towards the heavens as a sign to Allah when the Prophet's
asked her about the place of the Lord as another evidence. He also
refers to some books of HijjetulIslam Al-Ghezzali (God please him) as
evidences on accuracy of his sect. Truly Mohammed Murteda at clarifying
Al-Ghezzali's Ihya'u Uloumiddin hints at such points. He also mentions
the hadith that the Prophet (peace be upon him) pointed to the heavens
with his finger when he said "O Allah! Be the witness." in the Farewell
pilgrimage. He also quotes the Karramites' saying "Denial of Allah's
being in one of the six directions is an assertion of His nonexistence".
As your excellency realizes discussions about the Lord's having locality
is commonly familiar. Still the decisive judgment in this topic is your
excellency's wording. God save you and support you as long as you are
backers of Ahlus-Sunna sect.

**( 137 )**

A. To Sheikh Ahmed Ali Badr the virtuous scholar and servant of
honorable Islamic mastery in Bilsfoura:

On 22nd of Moharram 1325 I received your missive comprising questioning
about the judgment should be issued on those who substantiate Allah's
occupying a locality. Hence we write the following answer. It is however
sufficient for followers of the right and fair. God may reward you good
on behalf of Muslims.

It is to notice may God give you His support and lead you as well as us
to paths of equity that course of the saved party and unanimity of
Sunnis is promoting Allah the Exalted against being likened to the
contingent beings. They rule that the Lord is far away from
specifications of contingency. Likewise He is highly promoted against
being occupying a locality and a space. This is evidenced by conclusive
proofs. God's being in a definite locality requires ruling of
anteriority of that locality or space. Localities and spaces are part of
this cosmos which is different from Allah the Exalted. Ultimate
credentials on contingency of all beings saving Allah the Exalted have
been positively cited by both deniers and adopters of Allah's occupying
a locality. Since entities of occupying substances is impossibly existed
unless there is a space comprising while it is possible for spaces to
exist without occupying substances because of permissibility of vacuums
this will require probability of necessary beings and necessity of
probable beings. Both are void. Supposing the Lord has a definite point
to occupy He then shall inevitably be an atom since it is impracticable
for Him to be an accident. Supposing so He shall be either divisible or
indivisible. Both are void. Indivisible substances are the most
diminutive. Allah is highly promoted against being a diminutive being.
Divisible substances are compound corporealities. Complexity contradicts
the intrinsic necessity. Compound substances are possible beings that
lack influential cause. It is positively provable that Allah the Exalted
is essential Aseity Selfsufficient and Requisite by all beings. Allah be
praised (Nothing like the likeness of Him and He is the Hearing the
Seeing.)

Allah has disgraced some people who were deceived and mislead by the
Satan. They ensued their caprices and adhered to unavailing things. This
occurred only when they substantiated Allah's occupying a locality.
Allah be exaltedly promoted against such a thing. They agreed upon
identifying that locality. They claimed Allah's being occupying an
elevated point. Soon afterward they disagreed. Some believed that Allah
is a corporeality touching the upper surface of the Throne. Jews and
Karramites whose atheism is indisputably decided opted for so. Others
substantiated the locality but with promoting God against unbecoming
matters. They ruled that God occupies the locality in a way different
from corporealities' occupation. Those are also deviant and lacking true
faith. The legislator impermitted such a sort of accreditation to Allah.
In

**( 138 )**

effect faith irreverence is uglier and more unacceptable than limb
irreverence especially for leaders and masters.

Besides many personal misbeliefs contradicting unanimity of Muslims and
inadmitted by the current scholars who issued decisive scandalous
verdicts that attained to deciding atheism Ahmed Bin Abdil-Halim Bin
AbdisSelam Bin Teimiya Al-Harrani AdDimeshqi the Hanbalite one of
scholars of the eighth Hijri century adopted the misbelief of Allah's
occupying a locality. This man suffered miscellaneous sorts of
humiliation and ignominy for such ill beliefs. Some of his partisans
however aimed at supporting and defending him by releasing him from the
accusals addressed. He accredited some statements to his master
clarifying their purports and people's misunderstanding him. He also
cited evident statements said by his master for refuting that accusal.
He tried to prove that the man for his honorable esteem and mastery had
not broken unanimity of Muslims.

Impotent illusory details scholars adequately nullified have been
provided as evidences on the misbelief of Allah's occupying a locality.
They adhered to extrinsic meanings of aspects of Quranic and prophetic
texts; such as God's saying (The Beneficent settled on the Throne) (To
Him do ascend the good words;) (To Him ascend the angels and the Spirit;
70:4) (Are you secure of [that] in the heavens that He should not make
the earth) (He is the Supreme over His servants) the Prophet's saying
"Our Lord descends to the lowest heavens" and the deaf bondmaiden's
indication towards the heavens as a sign to Allah when the Prophet's
asked her about the place of the Lord. The Prophet certified her being a
believing individual.

As an answer of such texts we may say that conjectural extrinsic
meanings of aspects do not injure the persuasive decisive evidences
referring to denial of Allah's occupying a definite space or locality.
Such texts should be interpreted and made becoming true meanings
certified by indications and doctrinal texts. Interpretation may be of
two sorts. First general interpretation without identifying the intended
meaning. This is the worthy ancestors' course. Second detailed
interpretation by identifying the purports. This is the worthy
descendants' course.

The latter interpreted 'settling' into prevalence depending upon an
example from Arabic poetry. They interpret 'ascending of the good
wording' into the Lord's satisfaction and pleasingness. The rely upon
impracticability of material ascending of words. They interpret 'that in
the heavens' into God's affair predominance or an angel undertaking the
charge of irritating. Likewise they interpret 'ascending of the angels
and the Spirit' into their arising to a definite rank in which they seek
favor of the Lord. God's being above His servants is an indication to
His supremacy and power since the supreme and powerful is in a rank
higher than the overcome. By the same token God's

**( 139 )**

descending to the lowest heavens alludes to descending of His mercy and
kindness. It also indicates that Allah does not deal with His servants
out of His elevation might and supremacy. The Prophet's asking about the
Lord with 'where' is a way of descrying whether that bondmaiden had
believed in the Lord's having a certain point like the pagans or not. As
she pointed at the heavens the Prophet understood that she had intended
to refer to the Creator of the heavens.

Relying upon decisive convictional evidences and inclining the
conjectural scholars could find suitable interpretative construction for
the entire Quranic and prophetic texts regarding the topic involved.

It is so strange for a Muslim to shun the unanimous sayings of Muslims
and their masters and consent to deviation and heresy of the dissidents.
Has such an individual not heard God's saying (And whoever acts
hostilely to the Apostle after that guidance has become manifest to him
and follows other than the way of the believers We will turn him to that
to which he has himself turned and make him enter hell; and it is an
evil resort. 4:115) I advise such individuals who have been stained with
such filthy things to repent to Allah the Exalted and avoid ensuing
steps of the Satan who enjoins obscenity and evil. I also warn them
against being so obstinate that they would transgress in insisting on
erroneous beliefs. The best correctness is returning to correctness.
Indulging to excess in wrong is resulting in the most severest sort of
torture. (Whomsoever Allah guides he is the rightly guided one and
whomsoever he causes to err you shall not find for him any friend to
lead aright. 18:17)

We do implore our Lord to guide us all to the right path. On Him we do
hold fast and He is the best reliable. God's peace and blessings be upon
Mohammed our master and his companions entirely and their virtuous
followers to Day of Judgment.

The needy to God's mercy;

Salim Al-Bishri servant of scholarship and Malikite mastery in Al-Azhar.

**Al-Qazai comments:**

Sheik Al-Bishri's saying "for his honorable esteem and mastery" reveals
his good impression toward plea provided by that disciple.

It is indisputable for deep viewers in books of Ibn Teimiya and
Ibnul-Qeyim to ascertain that they believe in corporalism
anthropomorphism and Allah's occupancy. Those two men release themselves
from clinging to the terms and claim adopting for promoting the Lord
against unfitting affairs. At any rate they utter the word of promotion
while they are so remote from its meanings. The current scholars of that
man Ibn Teimiya are the most familiar of his

**( 140 )**

personality. The pious master of Islam Ali Bin Abdil-Kafi who coincided
in time of Ibn Teimiya wrote various books in refutation of Ibn
Teimiya's misbeliefs. In his Ad Durretul Mudhiya Firraddi Elebni Teimiya
this pious master refuted ideas of that heretic deviant man who decides
invalidity of suspended divorcement on oath and reckons it with
violation to unanimity of Muslims and forging lies against the Prophet's
companions and their followers.

The master scholar says "Ibn Teimiya breached principals of Islamic
doctrine and repealed pillars of Islam while he was hidden under
curtains of followership of the holy Book and the prophetic traditions
and proclaiming of soliciting the right and leading to the Paradise. He
dissented from followership to heresy and gainsaid the Muslims'
unanimity. He advocated affairs of corporalism and complexity in the
divine Essence. He ruled that lacking parts is not impossible. He also
claimed incarnation of contingency in the Essence of Allah the Exalted.
He decided that the Quran is contingent that Allah spoke through it
after it had been nothing and that it might utter or keep peace. He also
determined contingency of the Lord's Essence according to the creatures.
He surpassed exceedingly when he ruled of anteriority of this cosmos.
This required the claim of eternality of creatures. He affirmed that the
anterior attribute had been contingent and the contingent creature had
been anterior. No single follower of any nation or creed had ever
combined these two beliefs. Hence he was out of the seventy three
parties of this nation. Hence he depended upon no single nation or
creed. All the previous can be seen as nothing if measured to the ill
matters he attached to branches of the religion."

It is a precious essay in which Sheik Ali Bin Abdil-Kafi refuted Ibn
Teimiya's misbeliefs and exhibited the right creeds. The essay however
was printed in Damascus.

Moreover In his Tekmiletur Raddi Ela Nuniyatibnil Qeyim Al-Kawthari
provides adequate exhibition on this man and his faction. Allah may
protect Muslims and us from following caprices.

**Al-Qazai's Furqanul Quran Bein Sifatil Khaliqi W Sifatil Akwan page
17:**

This faction was highly fond of forging false affairs and imputing them
to the supreme scholars of this nation. Since first emergence till now
followers of this faction have been agitating and falsifying nearly in
every century. On the other side there have been troops of Ahlus-Sunna
defending and exposing the right in private and general sessions of
dispute and argumentation as well as writings that used the illumination
of logic reasons for removing darkness of such heretic confusedness. For
seekers of guidance these writings are reckoned as unexhausted fortune
and interminable treasures. One of such ceaseless inheritance is the
book of Abu Bakr Ahmed Bin Hussein Bin Ali Al-Beihaqi the trustful
supreme hadithist and jurisprudent who died in 458. In his time

**( 141 )**

unbecoming discussions about the divine names and attributes were
farreaching; therefore he wrote his book Al-Asma'u Wes-Sifat. Tajuddin
AsSibki states "I have never seen a written work equivalent to
Al-Beihaqi's." This is quite true since the writer gathers every single
text upon which the heretic anthropomorphists and Hashawites rested. He
features perplexity of each text and removes every problematic affair by
referring to the allegorical object and attaching the fitting Quranic
Verses. In addition he records sayings of scholars preceded him. God may
reward him the best on behalf of the religion and nation of Mohammed
(peace be upon him). It seems that Al-Beihaqi records this book as
removing away the dishonor Ibn Khuzeima did pertain to hadithists. This
man wrote a book named AtTawhid in which he combined and misrepresented
the allegorical texts in a way unfitting believing in Allah the Exalted
and sayings of the worthy ancestors and descendants. Fakhruddin ArRazi
threw at him a fatal shot. Through providing the exegesis of God's
saying (Nothing like the likeness of His;) ArRazi comments "In his
AtTawhid Mohammed Bin Isaaq Bin Khuzeima records our acquaintances'
bringing this Verse as their evidence. Ibn Khuzeima's book is in fact a
book of atheism. I am to comment on his wording since he was an unsound
speaker and illminded man." Immediately ArRazi affixes Ibn Khuzeima's
wording. Since it is such an ill wording that it is unseemly for a sane
believer who recognizes his Lord to utter we shun recording it here so
that a feeble would not be influenced. ArRazi then comments "This poor
ignorant adopted such fables since he lacked knowledge of analogy.
Scholars of monotheism talked adequately about real monotheism. Because
of his being remote from recognizing realities that man ensued words of
ordinary people and took pride in his wording. We do seek the Lord's
granting us with the acceptable end result."

Readers of Ibn Khuzeima's AtTawhid find excuses for ArRazi's sayings. We
have already stated that mastery in hadithology does not necessarily
lead to mastery in other fields of religious sciences. Hence scholars
should be taken in only in their field of specialization. Gainsaying
this rule results in occurrence of flaws in principals and branches of
religion. As much as I am concerned I do advise seekers of safety to
hold fast to books of Abu Mansur Al-Materidi and Abul-Hassan Al-Ashari
in affairs respecting principals and creeds of Islam since these two
books demonstrate the path to which Book of Allah and the Prophet's
tradition lead without inclination exaggeration or blemish.

In ArRazi's book of exegesis of the holy Quran part 27 pages 1503 third
edition Ihya At-Turath Al-Arabi publication a detailed exposition of
ArRazi's refuttal on Ibn Khuzeima AnNisapuri's claims in his AtTawhid is
rendered. Like defects regarding God's seeableness already mentioned in
the first chapter of this survey ArRazi exhibits Ibn Khuzeima's defects
regarding definitions of semblance and analogy aimed at proving God's
corporeity.

**( 142 )**

ArRazi pierced in such a way equivalent to Ibn Khuzeima's ugly failing.
He paraphrased the actual definition of analogy of corporealities and
proved God's being not analogous to such corporealities. In the next
chapter ArRazi's thesis in negating corporalism shall be rendered. It is
worthy mentioning here that supreme scholars of Wahabism guide Muslims
to Ibn Khuzeima's AtTawhid because of its comprising ideas of
corporalism.

**Al-Qazai's Furqanul Quran Bein Sifatil Khaliqi W Sifatil Akwan page
61:**

It is necessarily provable that Allah is promoted against being compound
or divisible or enjoying any quality of materiality and corporeality.
This is averred by Verses of the holy Quran and addressed at hearing
people and at those who give ear while they are witnesses. Ahlus-Sunna
who were unlike whimsical people and Jews and Christians who have been
affected by unsoundness of anthropomorphism and corporalism did
thoroughly adopt this course.

It is a funny thing to see Ahmed Bin Abdil-Halim Ibn Teimiya the
supporter and master of corporalists Karramites and ignorant hadithists
who misunderstand what they retain consider ImamulHaramein and
Hujjetul-Islam Al-Ghezzali as more heretic than Jews and Christians
because of their opting for promoting God against unfitting affairs.
This is mentioned in his Al-Muwafaqa printed in the margin of
Minhajus-Sunna. At any rate principal of promoting God against
corporeity and the like material affairs is not adopted exclusively by
these two masters. As a matter of fact it is the principal adopted by
majority of Muslim scholars since the Prophet's companions time up to
the current till Resurrection Day. The Prophet (peace be upon him)
states in an authentic hadith "A party of this nation is still keeping
the right uninfluenced by dissidents or opposers till the coming of
God's affair." This party forms the greatest majority of the nation.
This fact is averred by some ways of narrating the previous hadith.
Further discussion of danger pursuance of this man his written works and
his faction as well as opinions of master scholars regarding his
misbeliefs shall be rendered later on.

**Parable exaltation is a common metaphorical style in Arabic:**

Expressive exaltation is widespread in the holy Quran and common in
Arabic. It is ordinarily used for accrediting suitable qualities to the
Creator and His creatures. The following Quranic texts are examples.
(And be not infirm and be not grieving and you shall have the upper
hand. 3:139) (Saying; exalt not yourselves upon me. 27:31) (For surely
if they prevail [above] you; 18:20) (And that do not exalt yourselves
against Allah; 44:19) (Surely Pharaoh exalted himself in the land. 28:4)
(And that they might destroy whatever they gained in ascendancy; 17:7)
and (Fear not you are the uppermost. 20:68). When the polytheists tasted
temporary victory upon Muslims one of them shouted "Exalt Hubal a
pagan." The Prophet ordered Muslims to reply "Allah is more

**( 143 )**

Exalted and glorified." Arabic poetry comprises such expressions. At any
rate a volume may not contain the entire expressions of metaphorical
exaltation used in God's Book and Arabic texts. It is quite
understandable that there is a difference between exaltation of a place
and exaltation of power. Spatial exaltation is a corporal accidental
perfection which is definitely different from the origin essential
perfection. Allah be exalted against theses of the afield.

Through rendering exegesis of God's saying (Everything is perishable
except His face) Abu Jafar AtTabari according the ancestors demonstrates
that 'face' stands for the entity.

Al-Bukhari through rendering exegesis of the same Verse rules that
'face' stands for God's property or deeds intended exclusively for His
sake. Hence Al-Bukhari whose being the best of the worthy ancestors is
never suspected asserts that 'face' stands for God's property. He also
interprets God's holding creatures by their forelock mentioned in the
Verse (There is no living creature but He holds it by its forelock.
11:56) into the Lord's property and prevalence.

God says (And Allah is Ample Knowing). It is familiarly known that
'ample' stands for material extension. However no single scholar opted
this meaning.

AtTabari states "From God's saying (Allah is the light of the heavens
and the earth; 24:35). No single individual from the worthy ancestors
did refer to that light reflecting on walls and widespreading in air as
the intended in the Verse. Master scholars and exegesists are far away
from taking in such an extrinsic odd meaning."

According to the authentic documentation of AtTabari Ibn Abbas explains
the light in the forecited Verse as guidance. Anas Bin Malik opts for
the same exegesis. Mujahid however interprets the light into
superintendence. AtTabari selects the earlier exegesis and shuns the
other. He also interprets the Lord's encircling things into awareness
willingness and prevalence. None renders the material meaning of
encircling. Allah be exalted against qualities of corporealities and
specifications of contingency.

Sources of the worthy ancestors' sayings reveal the meanings becoming
Allah the Exalted identifiably. Unidentification is communicated by
illiberal researchers. Al-Bukhari's book of hadith and Ibn Jarir
AtTabari's book of exegesis of the holy Quran do assert what we have
been suggesting. We have only shown examples for concluding our claims.
Al-Beihaqi's Al-Asma'u WesSifat is adequately enough in discussing this
topic. Scholars rendered abundant explanation of the allegorical texts.
We have already provided Abu Bakr Bin Al-Arabi's narration regarding
Malik's interpreting the Lord's descending mentioned in the Prophet's
saying "Allah descends to the lowest heavens;" into descending of His
mercy not moveableness. At any rate Malik might have not been acquainted
of the other prophetic saying explaining the

**( 144 )**

previous. He might have suspected the hadith documentation; therefore he
evaded citing it as an evidence. The Hadith however is "Allah respites
till midnight. After that he orders a declarant of expounding whether
there is"

Thus it is explicative that God's descending is metaphorical expression.
It is not unusual to use metaphor in documentation not in the party.
Meaning of God's saying (When we have recited it) indicates to Gabriel's
reciting it out of the Lord's order. Al-Bukhari in the hadith related to
Ibn Abbas removes perplexity of such a topic. Pursuant to an authentic
narration Ibn Abbas opted for exaltation not material sitting as the
exegesis of God's saying (The Beneficent settled on the Throne.)

Moreover we have previously demonstrated sayings of AtTabari and
At-Thehbi referring to unanimity of scholars on denying conditions of
Allah's settling. We have also explained this point so evidently that
any confusion should be eliminated.

Master scholars preceded us in this field. They wrote a good deal of
valuable concised and elaborate books appertained to the allegorical
texts. Thus readers should fill in their hearts with creed of promoting
Allah the Exalted against corporeity and material phenomena.

### AlKAWTHARI REFUTES CORPORALISTS AND THEIR FALSE ACCREDITATION TO MASTERS OF THE ISLAMIC SECTS

**In the introductory of Al-Beihaqi's Al-Asma'u WesSifat Al-Kawthari the
reviser writes down:**

Al-Beihaqi wrote a book in which he freed Ahmed the master from matters
of anthropomorphism and corporalism ascribed to him falsely. This book
refutes words falsely accredited to Ahmed by some of his followers.

Abul-Fadhl At-Tamimi head of Hanbalites in Baghdad stated that Ahmed
contradicted those who accredited corporeality to the Lord. He said
"Names are inferred from the doctrine and language. Linguists assign
'corporeity' to beings having length width density structure picture and
complexity. Allah the Praised is out of all these things. Hence it is
illicit to assign corporeity to Him since He is out of being a
corporeality. The Doctrine also did not mention such a thing."

Al-Beihaqi states "Al-Hakim: Abu Amr Bin AsSemmak: Hanbal Bin Isaaq:

Ahmed my uncles said 'On that day day of argumentation in the presence
of the caliph they contended that suras of Baqara and Tebarak will
materially come on Resurrection Day as the Prophet had told. I say that
this stands for reward of these suras. God's competence is intended by
God's saying (Your Lord will come.) Quran is a set of examples and
admonition.'

**( 145 )**

Documentation of this narrative is not doubtful. At any rate it proves
that Ahmed had not believed in material coming and descending mentioned
in Quranic and prophetic texts. He presumed that such matters were
expressions of advent of God's marvels and competence. They claimed that
it would be unfit for the Quran to practice material coming and going if
it was one of the Lord's attributes of Essence. Abu Abdillah answers
that it is the reward which will appear on that day. Hence appearance of
the reward was expressed by using coming and going. Saving the most
intelligent masters who promote the Lord against unfitting affairs none
would be guided to such an answer."

Al-Beihaqi's Al-Asma'u WesSifat is an unparalleled book. The writer does
not criticize those who claim Allah's being in the heavens or on the
Throne resting upon texts supporting this meaning but he deprives the
Lord's being in the heavens or on the Throne of all meanings of
materiality unlike anthropomorphists. This is proved by his wording
while he discusses the Lord's settling on the Throne. We provided a
considerable commentation there. He adjudges believers in Allah's being
materially in the heavens as deviant. Meanwhile he permits this saying
linguistically if it is alluded to the Lord's being so exalted and
elevated without referring to a definite point or locality. Doctrinally
there are some legal phenomena permitting such a saying. Since some
hadiths such as that of Abu Zurein and the ibex reveal to some extent
unacceptable remarks it is precautious not to speak of so even if
promoting the Lord against unbecoming affairs is declared. Moreover it
is obligatory not to publicize such hadiths at all for sake of blocking
doors into anthropomorphism so firmly. As a matter of fact there is no
single authentic hadith regarding this topic plainly. Hadith of the deaf
bondmaiden comprises a bewilderment so consequential that it is
unbefitting to rest upon in topic of beliefs. Acceders to God's saying
(Are you secure that Who is in the heavens) as their argumentative
evidence are totally wrong. Later on this will be proved. Statements of
Al-Beihaqi and his corollaries respecting permitting claiming Allah's
being in the heavens as a signification of His exaltation and
glorification do not flow in the good of those assigning material
exaltation and space to the Lord. In miscellaneous places of this book
Al-Beihaqi assures this fact. It is quite wrong to reckon such
statements of Al-Beihaqi and his corollaries with evidences on
substantiating the Lord's physical exaltation. Within narrators of
relations respecting the divine attributes ascribed to Abu Haneefa is
Nueim Bin Hemmad and his maternal grandfather. Abdullah Bin Nafi
Al-Assem the doubtful narrator is within the series of narratives
ascribed to Malik regarding this topic. Likewise Abul-Hassan Al-Hekari
Ibn Kadesh and Al-Ashari are within series of narratives related to
Ashafii regarding the same topic involved. Those three men are notorious
doubtful narrators. Some however were deceived by such reports.
Depending upon the previous it is unacceptable to ascribe the faith of
Allah's being in the heavens to the three masters of the sects.

**( 146 )**

### SAYID Al-AMIN'S KESHFULIRTIYAB FI ITTIBA IBNI ABDIL-WAHAB

**In His Keshfulirtiyab Fi Ittiba Ibni Abdil-Wahab page 94 Sayid Al-Amin
records:**

Quran and the Prophet's traditions are in Arabic. Like ordinary Arabic
texts they comprise factuality and metaphor. Factuality is the actual
use of an expression; such as saying "I saw a lion in the jungle." Lion
here stands for that strong animal. Metaphor on the other hand is the
use of an expression for exposing a condition between the expression and
the meaning intended. As an example on this we cite the sentence "I saw
a lion in the meeting." Lion here may stand for a brave individual. The
acceptable condition linking the two is courage.

Like Quranic and prophetic texts Arabic texts used metaphor so
generally. The following are Quranic metaphorical texts:

(The hand of Allah is above their hands.)

(And make the ark before Our eyes.)

(That you might be brought up before My eyes.)

(You are surely before Our eyes.)

(And could you see when they are made to stand before their Lord.)

(Woe is me for what I have squandered in the side of Allah.)

(Everything is perishable except His face.)

(Whither you turn thither is Allah's face.)

(And there will endure only the face of your Lord.)

(The Beneficent settled on the Throne.)

(They fear their Lord above them.)

(So he was the measure of two bows or closer still.)

(Only whom your Lord will have mercy on.)

(Only whom Allah will have mercy on.)

(And Allah will send His wrath on him.)

(Allah shall pay them back their mockery.)

(And does come your Lord.)

Presumption of metaphor of the previous Quranic texts is impossibility
of intending the factual meanings that result in God's corporeity
occupying a definite space existing in a definite point and being
encountering contingent affairs.

**( 147 )**

Metaphorical expressions should be having a presumption. Back to the
earlier example wild animals do not attend meetings usually.
Occasionally the presumption is circumstantial that is indicated through
the circumstance not expressional that is indicated through
representation of wording; therefore some cannot comprehend it
correctly. Metaphor sometimes is used so commonly that it does not need
a presumption. It is also named reported metaphor when it attains rank
of factuality.

**Keshfulirtiyab Fi Ittiba Ibni Abdil-Wahab page 119:**

Wahabists claimed their being the only monotheists while other Muslims
are entirely polytheists. In fact Ibn Teimiya Mohammed Bin Abdil-Wahab
and their followers abused desecrated and raped monotheism. They
ascribed unbecoming affairs to Allah the Exalted. Allah be highly
exalted and glorified against sayings of the wrong. They materialized
Allah's having the physical upper locality settling on the Throne which
is above the heavens and the earth descending to the lowest heavens
coming going and alike material matters. Without any interpretation they
also claimed His having a face two hands fingers palm and eyes. This is
indeed a clear corporalism. They rested upon the extrinsic meanings of
aspect of the divine attributes and names texts; therefore they proved
Allah's affection mercy pleasingness wrath and the like. They alleged
that Allah articulates physically. Thus they decided God as a contingent
being.

Ibn Teimiya asserted the Lord's occupying a locality having corporeality
material settling on the Throne and physical articulation. He was the
foremost in this misbelief. He wrote dependent essays in this regard.
His Al-Aqidetul Hamawiya and Al-Wasitiya and many other essays are good
examples. His two students; Ibnul-Qeyim Al-Jawziya and Ibn Abdil-Hadi as
well as their partisans ensued him. Jurisprudents and master scholars of
his time judged him as deviant and atheist. They asked the ruler to kill
or detain him. Hence he was banished to Egypt where he was argued
commonly. He was sentenced to imprisonment. In the prison he died after
he had breached his word of repentance.

For recognizing the actual value of Ibn Teimiya the following are
sayings of the master scholar regarding his personality and beliefs.

Ahmed Bin Hajar Al-Heithami Al-Mekki the Shafiite writes in his
Al-Jawharul Munaddham Fi Ziyaretin Nabiyyil Mukarram:

Ibn Teimiya transgressed the divine presence and violated fence of the
divine excellence when he provided claims of Allah's having a locality
and a corporeality before the public.

In His AdDurrarul Kamina Ibn Hajar records:

People stated various opinions about Ibn Teimiya. Some assigned claims
of corporalism to him. This was because of his writings in his
Al-Aqidetul

**( 148 )**

Hamawiya and Al-Wasitiya when he claimed Allah's having material hands
feet leg and face. He also claimed that He is settling on the Throne
physically. As he was argued that these beliefs lead to corporalism he
answered "I do not submit to the matter that having a locality or
divisibility are specifications of corporealities." This means that he
had indeed claimed the Lord's having a definite space.

In Ashraful Wasail Ila Fehmi Shemail the writer records that Ibnul-Qeyim
and his master Ibn Teimiya pronounced a funny thing when they claimed
that the reason beyond recommendation of sending edges of the turban on
the shoulders was the Lord had fixed His hands between shoulder of the
Prophet while he was looking at him! Therefore the Prophet honored that
position. "We have not found a single report supporting this claim."
Al-Iraqi asserted. However such claims are listed under misbeliefs and
deviation of these two individuals. They adopted and spared no efforts
in finding evidences on corporalism and anthropomorphism. In addition
they aimed at debasing Ahlus-Sunna for their denying this misbelief.
Greatly exalted be Allah against sayings of the wrong and atheists.
Moreover they oversaid in this topic such catastrophic statements that
ears cannot bear and forgery belying and fraudulence are easily decided.
Deformed be their sayings and them. Ahmed master of Hanbalism and his
reverent acquaintances are freed from such a hideous stain. For majority
it is decided as atheism.

In Hellul Ma'aqid Al-Mawlawi AbdulHalim Al-Hindi records "Taqiyuddin Ibn
Teimiya was Hanbalite. But he transcended limits and attempted at
substantiating matters contradicting the Lord's glorification and
excellence. Besides many others he claimed Allah's occupying a locality
and a corporeality. The judge sentenced him to imprisonment in 705. In
Damascus it was publicly declared that properties and souls of followers
of Ibn Teimiya's misbeliefs are lawfully disregarded. This was recorded
in Abu Mohammed Abdullah Al-Yafii's Miratul Jinan. After he has shown
repentance and declared of being Asharite Ibn Teimiya was released in
707. Immediately he breached his repentance and showed his heretic
affairs anew. Thus he was detained in more severe circumstances. He
could escape and resettle in Syria. Historical records wrote down his
circumstances conditions and sayings. Sheik Ibn Hajar in the first
volume of his AdDurarul Kamina recorded his manners and events. The same
thing was written by At-Thehbi in his book of history as well as many
others. In brief words Ibn Teimiya claimed Allah's being a corporeality
and lacking a space. He relied upon the fact that every corporeality
needs a space. Resting upon God's saying (The Beneficent settled on the
Throne.) Ibn Teimiya claimed the Lord's occupying the Throne.
Accordingly he had to state anteriority eternality and ceaseless
renovation. The Lord's final possibility is eternal while the limited
are contingent.

Abul-Fida in his book of history; events of 705 records:

**( 149 )**

On that year Taqiyuddin Ahmed Bin Teimiya was summoned to Egypt where he
was publicly argued. Owing to his belief of corporalism he was detained.
Within the royal judgment against Ibn Teimiya the following statements
are mentioned "During this period Ibn Teimiya the miserable used his
quill and wording for delving into questions of the Quran and the divine
attributes. He spoke in illfavored affairs and asserted what was denied
by masters of Islam. Unanimity of scholars contracted him since he
contravened savants and jurisprudents of his time and province. We have
been informed that his people complied with him after he had betrayed
them. We have been acquainted that they declared their misbeliefs of the
Lord's having physical articulation and corporeality."

Mohammed Bin Abdil-Wahab and his group did adhere to beliefs of Ibn
Teimiya regarding corporalism visitating tombs intercession to Allah and
the like. Without interpretation son of AbdulWahab exceeded his master
in substantiating that Allah has a definite locality which is above and
settles on the Throne that is above the heavens and the earth and enjoys
physical corporeality material mercy satisfaction wrath right and left
hand fingers and palm.

Partisans of Mohammed Bin Abdil-Wahab claimed Allah's occupying an upper
locality settling on the Throne having a face hands and eyes descending
to the lower heavens coming nearness and the like; all with the material
meanings wanting interpretative exegeses.

The following is written down in the fourth chapter of Al-Hadiyetus
Sunniya recorded by Mohammed Bin AbdulLatif the grandson of Mohammed Bin
Abdil-Wahab. "Allah the Exalted is on His Throne as he said (The
Beneficent settled on the Throne;) and He has two hands wanting a
certain condition as he said (When I created with My hands;) and (His
hands are open.) He also has eyes and face wanting a certain condition
as he said (And there will endure the face of your Lord )" They give
credence to the Prophet's saying "Allah descends to the lowest heavens"
and they believe that Allah shall come on Resurrection Day as he said
(And there come your Lord and the angels.) By the same token they
believe that Allah comes near to His creatures as he desires. He said
(We are nearer to him than his lifevein.)

In the fifth chapter of the previous book the writer records "We do
believe that Allah settles on the Throne and exalts over His creatures.
We believe that His Throne is above the heavens. Allah said (The
Beneficent settled on the Throne.) We believe in the expression and
substantiate reality of settling without suggesting a definite condition
or picture. We adopt the saying of Malik Bin Anas master of DarulHijra
(Al-Madina). When he was asked about condition of the Lord's settling
Malik answered 'Settling is known and its way

**( 150 )**

is unexplored and believing in this is obligatory and questioning about
it is heresy.'"

This saying results in one of two things; either corporalism or
impossibility. Both however are impracticable. Occurring of material
settling wanting a definite condition is impossible on criteria of
mentality. Occurrence of material settling with a definite condition
results in opting for corporalism. Hence it is requisite to opt for
finding interpretative exegesis or resting upon metaphorical meaning.
Presumption however should be intellectuality. This proves that the
previous statement ascribed to Malik is rarely true. The good reputation
of the man makes us suspect authenticity of assigning this statement to
him. Malik's statement 'Settling in known' if the material meaning of
settling is intended is impracticable according to intellectuality since
Allah's corporeity is infeasible. It is also impossible to settle
materially without being a corporeality. How is it practicable to
decided asking about it as a heresy while giving credence to unknown
matters is impossible?! If the meaning intended by Malik is believing in
the settling proposed by the Lord without asking about its detailed
conditions its impracticability should be ruled for the same previous
intellectual grounds. If he alludes to the metaphorical meanings only
where is the actuality of settling then?!

Moreover if those faction take Malik's words as their guidance and
principals what for did they shun his statements regarding directing
towards the Prophet's tomb and seeking his intercession to Allah then?
Malik did instruct Al-Mansour the caliph to turn his face towards the
Prophet's tomb and seek his intercession to the Lord.

Abdullah Bin Mohammed Bin Abdil-Wahab in the second chapter of
Al-Hadiyetus Saniya states "Our claiming of the Lord's having a
locality; which is the above does in no means require our being
corporalists since consequences of a sect are not the sect itself." If
the previous rule is true it stands for the idea that adopting a certain
faith does not necessarily require believing in its consequences. But
when this faith is false its consequences shall be false too. Falsity of
consequences leads to falsity of principals. Lest inherence is totally
null. If corporeity of Allah is false accrediting locality of exaltation
to Him shall be void and null too. We have previously provided that Ibn
Teimiya their master and guide was decided as atheist and sentenced to
death penalty in absentia and imprisonment because he claimed corporeity
of the Lord. Mohammed Bin Abdil-Wahab founder of their faction followed
Ibn Teimiya in claiming Allah's having right and left hands fingers and
palm. Those are following these two so accurately and comprehensively
that they would not be acquitted even if they declare freeing from
corporalism.

**( 151 )**

### ASSAQAF IN ASSAHIH FIL AQIDETIT TAHAWIYA

**In AsSahih Fil Aqidetit Tahawiya page 165 As-Saqaf the current reviser
states:**

Singling out metaphor is a course adopted by the worthy ancestors. No
single sane can doubt so. Ibn Teimiya in his Al-Iman page 85 records
Ahmed's considering metaphor as a style used in some expressions.
Al-Hafiz AzZerkashi in Al-Bahrul Muhit Fi Ilml Usoul part 2 page 182
relates so to Ahmed. Ibn Teimiya and Ibnul-Qeyim failed in their
endeavors to deny metaphor. They contrasted themselves! While he decides
metaphor as a sort of devil deeds Ibnul-Qeyim in his Al-Fawaidul
Mushawiqa contrasts himself as he proves and cites many evidences on
materialization of metaphor. Sheik Al-Albani the selfcontradictor
opposes Ibn Teimiya in this regard when he upholds metaphor in the
introduction of Mukhtasarul Uluw page 23 (the margin). On page 31 of our
Al-Bisharatu Wel-Ithaf we have referred to this contradiction.

Because of compulsion and force the present compiler of Adwa'ul Bayan
was suffering in the country he had lived in in his final days he had to
deny metaphorical expressions of the texts. Compulsion however has its
own rulings! At any rate denial of this scholar is not that strong
evidence to which students and seekers of the truth via individuals not
seekers of individuals via the truth should hold fast especially when
clear proofs have been provided. Allah however is the guide.

It is quite strange for Ibn Teimiya to claim on page 85 of his Al-Iman
that neither Ahmed's followers Malik Ashafii nor did Abu Haneefa
maintain that there are metaphorical expressions in the Quranic texts.
He also claimed that division of factuality and metaphor had been
originated in the fourth Hijri century and that it might have emerged in
the last of the second and the first of the third Hijri centuries!

Indeed this is inconstancy in identifying history. It is aimed for
nothing more than deviating the readers. Masters of sects specially
Ashafii who used another term did refer to metaphor. Muammar Bin
Al-Muthenna whose birth was in 106 did compile a book named Mejazul
Quran Metaphor in the Quran.

**AsSahih Fil Aqidetit Tahawiya page 311:**

Corporalists provided God's saying (The Beneficent settled on the
Throne) as their evidence on God's being sitting on His Throne and being
materially utmost. Evading stating belief of God's material settling and
physical exaltation some say that Allah is being above in the heavens.

Indisputably this is a clear blunder. Allah is gloriously promoted
against having a space. In Arabic the expression 'He is in the heavens.'
is used for glorifying. The following are detailed exposition about
meanings of this Verse and its likes

**( 152 )**

quoted from Ibnul-Jawzi's Dafu Shubehit Tashbih page 121 in addition to
our comments:

The word 'Throne' mentioned in God's saying (He settled on the Throne)
stands for the royal bench. It is commonly used in Arabic before and
after Islam. It is also used occasionally in the holy Quran. The item
'settle' has various meanings. It may hint at equity perfection
direction or prevalence.

**AsSahih Fil Aqidetit Tahawiya page 324:**

Corporalists and anthropomorphists claim that deniers of God's being in
or out of the cosmos are denying His Existence. This is a valueless
mistake. They compare the Lord to corporealities. They believe that the
Lord is a thing like other things and beings that occupy a point in
spaces. Some imagine that He is compact corporeality like mankind or
loose like air light or gas. In spite of their denouncement they all
imagine the Lord as a corporeality conceived by mentalities whether in
or out of the cosmos. Our duty is clarifying this question resting upon
Quranic and prophetic texts.

Scholars at suggesting that Allah is neither in nor out of this cosmos
intend that He the Praised cannot be given descriptions of this material
cosmos. Hence He is neither connected nor disconnected to this universe.
Connection and disconnection are qualities of corporealities. Allah the
Exalted is as he describes Himself (Nothing like His likeness). The
point corporalists and anthropomorphists claim of being above the Throne
and occupied by the Lord the Praised the Exalted should be positively a
space. It would not have been possible to conceive had this point not
been a space. By the same token it would not have been described as
occupied by the Lord being above the Throne if it had not been a spatial
point. Finally it would not have been possible for them to indicate to
that elevated point for referring to the Lord if it had not been a
definite point. Correspondingly they imagine that Allah is a corporeity
comparable to material beings. They conceive that He is being above the
Throne that He created along with the cosmos. Accordingly they believe
Allah had had a lower locality before He created this cosmos. He would
certainly have upper before behind left and right localities had He a
lower one. Complex of those corporalists and anthropomorphists is that
they have not submitted totally to the doctrine. Hence they could not
recognize that Allah the Exalted is incomprehensible and inconceivable
and that He is promoted against whatever may come to connotation and
minds. Had they submitted to His extraordinary Existence and
incomprehensibility they would have been saved and joined to faith of
promotion; the genuine faith of Islam.

**AsSahih Fil Aqidetit Tahawiya page 334:**

The supreme reliable masters of Islamic scholarship and hadith pledged
God's promotion against being in or out of this cosmos. They used the
following expressions in various occasions. "He is neither in nor out of
this cosmos."

**( 153 )**

"He is neither connected nor disconnected to this cosmos." "He is
neither combined nor separated from this cosmos." "He is neither
touching nor quitting this cosmos." The entire expressions however lead
to the same purport indeed. The following are sayings of those master
scholars:

**1. Al-Ghezzali in Ihyau Uloumiddin part 4 page 434:**

Allah the Exalted is holily elevated against having a space and
blessedly promoted against having measures or localities. He is neither
in nor out of this cosmos. By the same token He is neither connected not
disconnected to it. He bewildered some people's minds so perplexedly
that they denied His Existence when they were unable enough to listen
and recognize Him.

**2 & 3. AnNawawi and Al-Mutawalli:**

In his Rawdatut Talibin page 1064 AnNawai records:

Al-Mutawalli says "He is an atheist that whoever believes in anteriority
of the cosmos contingent of the Creator negation of constant unanimous
attributes of the Anterior connection or disconnection of the Lord."

An-Nawawi however certifies this statement; therefore this is considered
as sayings of two supreme scholars.

4. Al-Beihaqi in his Al-Asmau Wes-Sifat pages 4101 as well as Shiebul
Iman renders this faith with thorough details.

5. Alizz Bin Abdus-Selam in his Al-Qawaid page 201 asserts that within
faiths that are rather difficult for the public to apprehend is God's
being neither in nor out of this cosmos and neither connected nor
disconnected to it.

6. Abul-Muzaffar Al-isferaini in his AtTabsiru Fiddin page 97 revised by
Al-Kawthari Publication of Al-Anwar 1359:

and to apprehend that moveableness and stillness connection and
disconnection are impracticable for Allah the Exalted since all require
an edge and end.

7. Ibnul-Jawzi the Hanbalite in his Dafu Shubehit Tashbih page 103
Publication of Darun Nawawi:

By the same token it is illicit to claim that Allah is in or out of this
cosmos since being in or out are consequences of spatial beings.

The previous was a good number of the master scholars who assert that it
is impracticable to describe Allah the Exalted as being in or out of
this cosmos.

**AsSahih Fil Aqidetit Tahawiya page 339:**

The following is a literal quotation of his statements:

**( 154 )**

"The hadiths 'Allah comes with His face' and 'Allah is between your
hands in prayers' do not contradict His being on His Throne elevating
His creatures. This fact is asserted by Quranic and prophetic texts as
well as traditions of the Prophet's companions and the worthy ancestors.
Still Allah is being far ranging and comprehending the whole cosmos. He
has told that His servants encounter His face whenever they turn their
faces. Naturally exalted things encounter whatever is below from every
side. Hence Allah the Comprehensive of everything should be fitting this
affair more intensely. More details can be provided in books of
SheikulIslam Ibn Teimiya specially Al-Hamawiya and Al-Wasitiya pages
20313 that are revised by Zeid Bin Abdil-Aziz Bin Feyad."

As if they are divine texts Al-Albani in the introductory of Mukhtasarul
Uluw page 71 attests and cites Ibn Teimiya's statements recorded in his
AtTadmuriya as his evidence. "If localities are created beings Allah
then is not included with His creatures. If localities are what is aloft
the cosmos it is most surely that Allah is being aloft the cosmos. The
same thing is said about those who substantiate that Allah is being in a
certain locality. If they claim Allah's being aloft they will be right.
But if they claim His being included with His creatures this will be
wrong."

Thus they claim existence of an area lying beyond the cosmos which is
not included with the created beings. Hence in that area god of those
faction exists!!

**AsSahih Fil Aqidetit Tahawiya page 358:**

Corporalists and anthropomorphists are two names of the same faction.
They conceive God's being a definite corporeality. Most of them imagine
the Lord's being in a form of a man sitting on a great seat (throne).
Statements of those faction appertained to questions of monotheism and
faiths recorded in their books are clear evidences on the previous
allegation. One of the most evident witnesses is the book titled AsSunna
and ascribed to son of Ahmed the master founder of Hanbalism. They do
prevaricate when they claim their being believing in a faith other than
the forecited. Their books wordings speech private orations and many
other ostensible matters; these all are obvious indications on
authenticity of our claims against them. For instance although they
reckon with the divine attributes they aver the Lord's having limbs and
organs such as a hand fingers face leg feet eye side and the like. They
ascribe qualities of contingent material beings to the Lord; such as
sitting moving edges and localities.

**( 155 )**

### ASSAQAF IS WRONGED BY Al-ALBANI

**Fetawi Al-Albani page 520:**

Q. As-Saqaf has fabricated a new heresy when he claimed his ability to
prove Allah's being aloft the heavens like that bondmaiden.

A. Escaping from attestation such individuals utter such statements. In
his books the man affirms that declaring of Allah's being in the heavens
is a sort of atheism. He also claims Allah's being neither in a certain
place nor out of space. He also claims Allah's being neither in nor out
of this cosmos. The man then follows trifles of Tatilites.

The bondmaiden mentioned in the question above is that who before the
Prophet pointed to the heavens as an indication to Allah. The Prophet
however accepted her indication. Wahabists cited this narrative as their
evidence on God's occupying an aloft locality. As-Saqaf refuted this
exegesis. He only believed in authenticity of that bondmaiden's claim of
God's being immaterially exalted. This is a true claim admitted by the
entire Muslims other than corporalists. As he could not welcome this
Al-Albani accused As-Saqaf as well as every denier of God's materiality
of being Tatilite. The same judgment of Al-Albani's ancestors is
repeated. They decided atheism of every individual contradicting their
beliefs.

**At-Thehbi's Tarikhul-Islam part 14 page 384:**

Safwan Bin Salih: Marwan Bin Mohammed decides those who assert that
Allah does not have an eye or a hand as followers of Tatilism.

For Wahabists it is essential to admit the Lord's physical attributes;
such as the foot hand eye face and other organs otherwise reckoning with
Tatilites who deny the divine attributes and names is decided.

This is the ill thoroughly material utterance of these faction who
stubbornly or senselessly confuse qualities of organs to attributes of
denotation and these of deeds. Accordingly corporalists and
anthropomorphists became quite faithful believers while deciders of
God's being promoted against unfitting matters who disavow ascribing
material qualities to the Lord and form majority of Muslims became
Tatilites apostates and disbelievers.

This is the very Jewish scrupulous materiality adopted by ulema of the
two holy precincts who intend by means of spending fortunes and
recruiting Indian and Syrian scholastic individuals to make the Islamic
world submit to it. This is in the twentieth century which witnessed
collapse of the historical materialism.
