A Short Biographical Sketch of the Author
=========================================

AGHA MUHAMMAD SULTAN MIRZA was the only child of Professor AGHA
MOHAMMAD SAJJAD MIRZA, who served, inter ALIA, as the second Principal
of SIND (MADRASAT AL-ISLAM) (1886 to 1887), Karachi, and was himself an
author. He was born in 1885 at Delhi, and passed his Matriculation
Examination from the Anglo-Arabic School, and B.A., LL.B., and M.A.
Examinations from the Muslim University, ALIGARH.

He passed the Provincial Civil Service (Judicial) Competitive
Examination with distinction in 1910, and was posted in the Punjab. In
recognition of his meritorious awarded the title of Khan Sahib in 1930.
After giving served in various cities of the Punjab, he retired as
District & Sessions Judge, from GUJRANWALA, in 1944, and settled in
Delhi.

After his retirement, and until the Partition of India, he served as,
Honorary Special Magistrate, member of the Delhi University Syndicate,
President SHIA MAJLIS-E-AWQAF, and member of the Provincial Council of
ANJUMAN SHIAT-AS-SAFA. He migrated to Pakistan in January 1948 and
re-settled at Karachi. In order to utilize his vast judicial and
administrative experience, the Government or Pakistan appointed him as a
Special Magistrate, and in addition, entrusted him with the task of
inspecting and re-organizing all the City Courts. He prepared a
voluminous Report, and as result of recommendations made therein,
separate Copying and NAZARAT Branches and Mal KHANA, were set up de
novo. He laid foundation of the RIZVIA Housing Society, and was elected
unopposed as its President for several years.

From the beginning of his career, his one consuming hobby was the
pursuit of knowledge, literary and religious studies, and research. He
assembled a most valuable library, comprising several thousand books, on
all topics and in all the important languages.

Apart from a number of scholarly treatises and articles, he has written
the following historical-cum- religious-cum- biographical books in
Urdu:

1-Al-BLAGHUL MOBEEN (three volumes):
2-KITAB-UT-TAFRIQUE-WAT-TAHREEF FIL ISLAM:
3-NURUL MASHRIQAIN-min- HAYAT-IS-SADIQAIN:
4-FALSAFA-L-ISLAM (two volumes):
5-SEERAT-L-FATIMA -TUZ-ZAHRA.

The most famous and highly appreciated of his books is, "Al-BLAGHUL
MOBEEN", which was published in Delhi, in 1944, and numerous Editions
thereof have been published since. It is generally recognized by the
scholars and ULEMA, that such an authoritative, well-argued, and
irrefutable book on the historical-cum-religious subject of "KHILAFAT"
has not been written in the Urdu language until now, as the following
excerpt from a letter of Professor MIRZA MOHD: SAEED, a prominent member
of the Indian Education Service, addressed to the author, indicates;

"I have read 300 pages of your book (Al-BALAGHUL-MOBEEN) so far, and
the effect it had on me, is, that the beliefs and views which I had
formulated after years of studies and research, have been shaken to the
core…"

He had set for himself highest standards of integrity moral probity,
during his Government service, and never bargained on principles, nor
allowed his judgment to be influenced by any SIFARISH (recommendation),
or consideration for his own worldly interests. One example would
suffice here. The students of various Colleges in Lahore had formed a
procession, to protest against the hanging of BHAGAT SINGH, a well-known
revolutionary.

The British Senior Superintendent of Police, Mr. HARDINGE, and the
British Superintendent of Police, Mr. Neal, after dispersing the
procession, entered the premises of D.A.V College, in pursuit of the
students, and gave a thrashing to Professor SANT RAM SIAL, who was
taking a Class at the time. The Professor filed a criminal suit in the
Court of AGHA Muhammad: Sultan MIRZA, who imposed heavy fines, and
passed severe strictures against both the British Police Chiefs. Mr.
Gordon WLAKER, the British District & Session Judge, Lahore, at the
time, told AGHA SAHIB, that he was very unhappy with his decision in the
case, and so also was the Government. He replied that his Judgment was
based on facts, relevant law, and justice, according to his lights, and
was not intended to make him or the Government happy. As a consequence
thereof, his increment and promotion were stopped for a number of
years.

He breathed his last peacefully, on 17th December 1965) 24 SHA'BAN,
1385, A.H.), and lies buried in the BAGH-E-KHORASAN graveyard.

(AGHA ZULFIQAR ALI)
B.A, LL.B. C.S.S (RTD.)
Son of the author


**EDITOR'S FORWARD**

IN THE NAME OF THE MOST HIGH.

Editing this worthy book has been an honor and a privilege, but it has
not been without its difficulties. The book was written late in the
Author's retirement, and had he lived longer, he would doubtless it into
a condition suitable of presentation to the publishers. However, after
the elapse of almost forty years, this daunting task has finally fallen
to myself: it has been my prayer that Almighty God might guide me in it.
It is inevitable that in a book being published so long after it was
written, the style acceptable to the reader of today is somewhat
different to that of the Author's day, and this has obliged me to take a
certain amount of liberty with word order and word usage. However, in
quotations taken from other authors I have tried to leave the text
alone.

While the basic subject matter of a book of this kind stands
independently of time, it shows its age in the use of example, and I
have seen fit to delete from the survey of democracy in "modern" states
the passages on the Soviet Union of Stalin and the China of Chiang
KAI-SHEK as inappropriate, Conversely, I have added as footnotes a few
more modern examples.

In addition to the eleven chapters of the book, the manuscript
contained an unfinished twelfth chapter entitled "To Sum Up". This I
have omitted: it contained no new material or discussion that was not
already present in the book, but was an incomplete attempt at a summary,
which it was clear had been added by the Author as an afterthought, and
its omission in no way detracts from the book.

Finally, I have admitted defeat on editing the spelling of names, and
pass this task to others more versed in the accepted forms. I ask for
the Reader's forbearance for any errors that might remain, and wish him
the best in his search for truth.

HAIDER R. REEVE, 23rd October 1988


**Preface**

Three revolutions of the greatest magnitude and importance, and having
extremely far-reaching consequences, took place in Islam on the death of
its Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H.). Those revolutions were firstly
political, secondly religious, and thirdly social. They are all
interrelated, having a common origin Towards the close of the Prophet's
career, when the whole of Arabia had well nigh been conquered, a party
arose among his companions, which wanted to seize power on his death. In
the execution of their designs they found themselves face to face in
opposition to IMAM ALI, whom the Prophet (P.B.U.H.) had designated as
his successor. For the reasons detailed in this book, the political coup
d'état staged at the SAQIFA succeeded in transferring power to that
party. This political revolution led to the other two revolutions.

The Party Government formed as a result of this coup was quite
naturally subjected to severe criticism by those -and they were many- to
whom wisdom came after the event. The ANSAR, without whose help this
party could not have succeeded, realized, though too late, that they had
been duped, and the nation was at once divided into two hostile camps:
the ANSAR, who had relented, and the MUHAJIRIN, who did not wish them to
do so. For the Government, it was a very dangerous situation. The brain
that devised the plan that averted the imminent catastrophe deserves the
admiration of the statesmen of all ages: the whole nation was at once
ordered out on expeditions to Iran and Syria. The device well suited the
Arabs, who loved only two things in this world: women and booty:

This device provided the means to get both. Having been accustomed to
depredatory raids, which had been almost the only source of their
livelihood for countless centuries (agriculture coming later, and that
too for the rich only), the Arabs took this order of their rulers as a
boon, and the feelings of hatred and chagrin at once gave place to love
and gratitude. Thus, Medina, which was the only seat of political power,
became calm and quiet. The victories, which attended these expeditions,
silenced the rich, and the streams of wealth, which flowed into Medina,
satisfied the poor. The fickle-minded greedy Arab forgot the rights and
wrongs of a question, which ceased to have any practical importance for
him.

These expeditions came just at the moment when the two great empires of
the ancient world, the Iranian and the Roman, enervated by luxury and
weakened by internal dissentions and religious disputes, stood on the
brink of their graves: the final push from behind was given by the Arab
armies, who overran their countries in the twinkling of an eye. The
Iranian Empire was gone forever, and the Roman armies were finally
expelled from Asia.

On the heels of the political revolution, and closely connected with
it, came the religious revolution. Those were the days of faith, and the
Government, knew full well that they had to justify their action from
the religious point of view. Therefore, professing themselves to be the
successors of the Prophet (P), they invented certain dogmas to suit
their case, and took care to incorporate them into the everyday
religious philosophy of the common man. Even MAWLAWI SHIBLI, the great
Indian historian of this distorted Islam, who in religion is the
follower of the Government Party of those days, is constrained to admit
that most of the religious dogmas which we find current today had their
origin in politics,

and were invented to shield the rulers form adverse criticism and to
meet the arguments of their detractors. SHIBLI, however, lays the blame
at the door of BANU OMAYYA his childhood education and inherited
religious traditions prevented him from probing deeper. I have proved in
my other writings that these dogmas were invented during the time of the
first Caliph, when they were most needed.

This was a revolution whose effects are felt even today. Religion was
assimilated into politics and made subservient to it. All those devices
in the shape of dogmas and beliefs, which could go to strengthen the
position of the Party, were invented and utilized. The influence of the
politics of that period on Islam greatly damaged its purity. The
premature embarking on foreign expeditions, which was also due to home
politics, resulted in further injury to Islam, and it subsequently
became tainted with the customs, manners and beliefs of the Christians,
Jews and heathens.

The Muslims themselves had not by that early stage become well enough
versed in the religious philosophy of Islam, and were not able to meet
the cleverly worded arguments of Christian wranglers and Greek
philosophers. The influx of thousands of slaves, male and female,
travels into foreign lands, and intercourse with strangers, all resulted
in the adulteration of the religion and corruption of the morals of the
Muslims, whose head was completely turned by the ruddy wines of Syria
and the charming song stresses of Persia. Wine, women and music became
the fashion of the day. AMIR ALI informs us that, "The women of the
northern city were good singers; and according to the chroniclers, the
austere UMAR often stopped in his rounds to listen to their music". The
simple social life that was Arabia in the days of the Prophet (P) was
gone never to return; its place was taken by that artificial life of
gaiety, levity and laxity, which has always been the curse of humanity.
This social revolution was unique in the history of humanity on account
of its sudden and speedy appearance and permanent stay.

I9t is not within the compass of this book to describe fully the
religious and social revolutions of that period. It will suffice to say
that they had very far-reaching consequences. It is certain that they
were the direct result of the political upheaval, which took place on
the death of the Prophet (P) due to the passions, prejudices and
jealousies of the tribes that comprised the Islamic community in those
days. It is the Islam thus tainted and adulterated that has reached us,
not the pure, unalloyed Islam which was taught by Muhammad (P). Though
the un-Islamic nature of their Islam is universally admitted to the
Muslims, they dread to probe deep below the surface for fear of exposing
the very delicate nerves of their religion, which do not brook close
examination.

The purpose of this book is to describe this political upheaval,
together with its causes and consequences.

The pent-up feelings of years found free vent on the death of the
Prophet (P), who had been the only controlling force that had kept knit
together-and even then with great difficulty- the conflicting elements
of Arabia. Jealousy and mutual distrust were born instincts in the
Arabs; implicit obedience was not rendered even to the Sheikh of their
tribe, whom they followed only on the occasions of actual warfare. By
nature, the Arab was haughty, insolent, jealous, distrustful and
impatient or restraint in any sphere of life, whether moral, religious,
social or political.

These traits of his character were responsible for his unpopularity
with subject races, and also for his eventual downfall. To have kept
together these unruly and fiery people, and to have welded together into
one nation these jarring and troublesome elements, was the greatest
social reform for the Prophet (P) to have effected. This unity might
have continued even after his death, had not the dazzling glare of
"HUKUMA" and the overwhelming passion for power rudely subjected the
fidelity of the Prophet's followers to a severe test.

In his plan of a universal religion, the Prophet had intended to base
the structure of Islamic society and government on the fear of God, an
all-seeing, all-pervading being who rules the world and shapes the
destiny of man. In this scheme, society was to be graded not according
to his piety and fear of God, the Holy QUR'AN says, "The most honored of
you in the sight of God is he who fears God most". This was the standard
prescribed by Islam by which men were to be judged, and their rulers
selected. An impartial and thoughtful consideration of this rule will
convince that it revolutionizes the whole structure of society, which
must be regarded and reformed. It assigns quite different values to
ideas and things,

and opens up to man's eyes a totally different vista. Respect and honor
are no longer to be dealt out on the basis of power and wealth;
henceforth powers is to be weaned away from wealth, and assigned instead
to character, in which fear of God is to be the dominant feature. In
disregard of all worldly possessions, honor must go to the man who fears
God most, even if he is the poorest of the poor. Money is no longer to
be the arbiter of man's fate and the goal of his life. All types of
"isms" -Communism, Capitalism, Socialism, Marxism, Existentialism,

etc, -are done away with at a stroke; all schism between poverty and
privilege, that has on so many occasions shaken human society to its
foundations, is gone; all disputes between labor and capital, that are a
menace to modern society, are settled. The incentive to accumulate
wealth disappears, and contempt is no longer an accompaniment of
poverty. Poverty loses its sting and wealth its glamour, both meeting on
the same level. High, middle and low strata of society are formed not
according to the level of wealth possessed, but according to loftiness
of character. There are to be no disputes between the serf and the Lord
of the Manor,

between plebeian and patrician, between laborer and employer, as their
relations are to be regulated by fear of God, the Justest of the most
just. Serenity and perfect peace prevail in society, and the oppression
of the poor by the rich is unknown; in short, perfect justice is the
order of the day. This, without doubt, was the state of affairs at
MEDINA during the lifetime of the Prophet (P). This dream of a utopian
state on a wider scale was well nigh realizable at the time the Prophet
died. But the whole aspect was changed at once, and the new lessons were
soon unlearnt. The Prophet (P) had left a state, which was to be
captured at any cost, and it had to be done with the help of the rich
and powerful. Fear of God receded into the background, and power and
wealth came again to the fore. The lessons had been perfect, but the
time allowed for practice had been too short. The result was moral
chaos.

ASH-SHAHRISTANI, the well-known historian of the numerous sects of
Islam, has rightly observed that the most disastrous dissention in Islam
has been over the question of the succession to the Prophet (P), and
that over no other religious dispute has so much blood been shed or so
much misery caused. This being the case, the distortion of history by
the winning party was a foregone conclusion.

As a matter of fact, the whole structure of KHILAFA (succession) has
been based on the wrong notion that the Prophet of Islam did not
designate anyone as his successor in the spiritual and temporal
government of Islam. Moreover, according to this theory, he observed
total silence with regard to his successor, not even hinting how he was
to be appointed or selected.

This means that he entirely overlooked a most important part of the
constitution of the State he founded. The object of this treatise is to
show that this notion is founded on a misapprehension of facts, and that
in fact the Prophet (P) designated Imam ALI for the vicegerency, and
duly announced it on many occasions, notably on the occasion of the
return journey from the performance of the "Farewell Pilgrimage" during
a halt at a place called KHUM.

That an attempt to secure the headship in the theocracy founded by the
Prophet was started on his death cannot be denied, and it is also
certain that the aspirants to that exalted office could have no locus
stand unless they could prevail upon the people to believe that the
Prophet himself had failed to make any provision for that eventuality.
This was the raison d'être of this view. The question then arises as to
who those persons were, and how this incorrect view has come to be
accepted throughout the ages. These questions have been fully
investigated and answered in the following pages, and the erroneous
nature of this view has been brought into full relief. Throughout this
book I have termed this mistaken view "The Non-appointment Theory".

I have sought to maintain a historical and rational line of treatment
throughout the discussion of this subject; the religious and passionate
sides of it have been largely ignored. But at the same time, historical
personages who are held in esteem by any faction or class of the Muslims
are spoken of with great respect. It must however be admitted that in
the discussion of a subject like the present one, a criticism of their
words and deeds is unavoidable. The book is an attempt by a seeker after
truth to ascertain the real facts, and should be read in that spirit. It
is really a matter of history to know whether the founder of a great
system, a great empire, and a great nation was far-sighted enough to
select, train and nominate his successor, or whether he gave no thought
to the future and left everything unsettled in an "after-me-the-deluge"
spirit.

It is one of the chief concerns of any student of history to know the
rules of the constitution laid down for his State by the Great
Founder:

whether he meant it to be republic, in which authority is divided and
placed in several hands, or whether he desired the centralization of
power in one strong and competent hand; whether the wished the head of
the state to be elected by several parties, which in the case of Arabia
meant tribes, or whether he preferred to make the nomination of his
successor himself: whether the Islamic state was intended to be run on
democratic lines; whether any rules to that effect were laid down by the
Prophet (P), or whether there is anything in the QUR'AN to indicate that
sort of thing.

The student of history must also question the events themselves. Were
the rules of democracy honestly and sincerely followed in the election
of the first Caliph, or was it more in the nature of a political coup
than an election? If nomination was to be discarded by the nation, why
did the first Caliph nominate his successor? Why did nomination become
the rule ever after (except in the case of Imam ALI, when there was
no-one to nominate and no-one to accept the Caliphate due to the
confusion that followed the murder of UTHMAN)? When, during his last
illness, the Prophet wanted to write his will and asked the Companions
present there to supply writing material,

why was it not supplied to him, and why was his wish passed off as the
ravings of delirium; why was it pleaded that no further directions were
needed due to the Book of God being sufficient for all eventualities?
Why was the same thing not said to ABU BAKR when he caused his will to
be written under worse circumstances, and why was his will accepted and
acted upon? Did the Companions from one solid block, as has been urged
for political reasons, or were they divided into two great camps
corresponding to these two great parties? What was the nature of the
SHURA of six men appointed by UMAR to select his successor? Why was no
ANSAR, included in it? Why were all the members of the SHURA, excepting
Imam ALI, men of great riches, having relationships with and
inclinations towards UTHMAN? Why was UTHMAN, a scion of the house of
OMAYYA selected for this favor? Did the constitution of the SHURA and
the directions given to its members by UMAR not indicate that he
intended UTHAMN to be selected as the Caliph? Why was a strong OMAYYAD
kingdom allowed to grow and take root in Syria under MU'AWIYA?

These and the like are the questions that arise in the mind of a
student of Islamic history, and demand a solution. An attempt has been
made in this book to supply satisfactory answers to these important
questions. As a matter of fact, no intelligible Islamic history worth
the name can be written without discussing and explaining all these
crucial issues. Books on Islamic history written by Muslim historians
tend to fight shy of these important points, and the European authors
have followed suit. Those of them who, like MARGOLIOUTH, try to find
solutions to some of these matters, find themselves landed in a quagmire
of absurdities when they follow the Theory of Non-appointment and the
data on which it is based through to its legitimate conclusion. Some
instances of this awkward situation have been cited in this book. To
merely shut a door to all enquiry into these questions by the evasive
remark that they are religious questions concerning two factions of the
Muslims, is to deny the writing of Islamic history on rational lines.

DR CONDE, the historian of Muslim Spain, has rightly observed "that a
sort of fatality attaching itself to human affairs would seem to command
that in the relating of historical events, those of the highest
importance should descent to posterity only through the justly suspect
channels of narrations written by the conquering parties". He goes on to
remark that "a sound and just discrimination forbids us to content
ourselves with the testimony of one side only; this requires that we
compare the narrations of both parties with careful impartiality,

and commands us to cite them with no other purpose than that of
discovering the truth". My only wish is that this wholesome rule be
observed in ascertaining the true facts about the history of the early
Caliphate, which has been written by the conquering party, that is,
those who succeeded in securing the throne and occupying it almost down
to our own time when an end was put to the Caliphate by the Young Turks.
The need for precaution is all the greater, as the very existence of the
Caliphate depended on this Theory of Non-appointment. By way of
comparison, the majority sections of the Muslim nation have felt the
necessity of rewriting the history of their period of domination in
India, as it has been written by the conquering party, that is the
British, who were naturally interested in showing their predecessors to
disadvantage.

The semi-government organ of Pakistan "Dawn" in its issue of 22nd
October 1948, contains an exhortation to write a new history of Muslim
Rule in India, as the British, for reasons of their own, have written a
false history of this period. The effect of the British rulers having
merely put their own version of the case, has been that a number of
so-called Muslim historians have either accepted the perversion as
truth, or at least, write as half-hearted apologists. The Government of
Pakistan has taken up the suggestion, and a committee is to be
established, entrusted with the task of rewriting the history of the
Muslim rule in India (as announced on Pakistan Radio on 9th February
1949). I fail to understand why the same steps should not be taken with
regard to the history of the early Caliphate, and an examination be made
of the Non-appointment Theory, which have come down to us as written by
the conquering party, whose kings, unlike the British, did not rest
content with the merely passive measure of foisting on the world their
own perverse view, but suppress the correct position.

This book is intended to expose to the world the correct position of
affairs that existed at the time of the Prophet's death, and to remove
the thick fold of veils that has remained hanging over the true facts
for full fourteen centuries. I can well imagine that this veritable
revolution in the realm of Islamic history will give rise to vehement
opposition from various quarters, and I am perfectly aware of the
Herculean nature of the task that I have set before me. I have to face
the fanaticism of religion, the prejudice of ancient and inherited
opinions. The dread of disturbing the status quo, "the awe of the
majority", and the cumulative effect of the propaganda of over thirteen
centuries.

Add to this the fact that has been so frankly admitted by MAWLAWI
SHIBLI, that all the books on Islamic history have been written by
SUNNIS, that is, by persons who hold it as a religious belief that the
Prophet of Islam did not nominate anyone as his successor and KHALIFA
and that therefore ABU BAKR was validly elected or selected as Caliph at
the SAQIFA on the death of the Prophet (P), and you will in some measure
realize the Himalayas of difficulties that bar my to truth, and will
apprehend the almost superhuman exertion that I will have to make in
unearthing the truth that lies buried under the mountains of debris that
have accumulated over this long period, and the effort required by the
reader in recognizing and admitting it. In this arduous task I have two
helpers: Reason and Justice.

I beseech my Reader to commence the reading of this book with a clean,
unbiased mind, free of any preconceived ideas or prejudices. His
solitary object should be to ascertain the truth and to do justice to
personages of history who have long since left the stage, and who now
expect justice at the bar of posterity, their contemporaries having
failed to fulfill that duty. I appeal to his reason and sense of
justice, and claim no other indulgence. If he finds what I have to say
to accord with reason and justice, then let him accept it: if not, then
let him reject it and think no more of it.

In order to close all avenues to doubt or uncertainty, I have made it a
point to base my arguments only on the books written by the learned men
belonging to the faction with whom the Non-appointment Theory is an
article of faith, and in the learning and veracity of whom the whole
community has had full faith and confidence for generations. There are
some five hundred notes of reference, and not in a single one of them is
there included any book written by a member of the opposite party.

I have referred only to those authors and books that are held in the
highest esteem by the learned men of the Sunnis, for example-
Al-BUKHARI, Muslim, IBN MAJA, IMAM AHMAD IBN HANBAL, AT-TABARI, IBN
AL-ATHIR, IBN HISHAM, IBN KHALDUN, TARIKH Al-KHAMIS, SHIBLI, SHAH WALI
ALLAH, AS-SIRA AL-HALABIYYA, MISHKAT, etc. (See Bibliography). This is
the chief characteristic of the book, and should greatly enhance its
reliability and augment its worth, as the most conclusive demonstration
of the strength of case is that it can be built on the arguments of its
adversaries.


M.S.MIRZA
10,Sunny-side Mansion,
Artillery Maidan-3,
27th February 1949


