Temporal Government
===================

Having dealt with the qualities needed for spiritual government, we now
turn to temporal government. I have listed at the start of this chapter
the seven qualities necessary in a successor to the Prophet (P). I do
not think that it has ever been asserted or even hinted that Imam Ali
was inferior to anyone in any of these qualities. In fact, he possessed
them to their fullest extent, whereas his rivals were deficient in most
of them. The political propaganda that has been disseminated against the
children of the Prophet sums up the case against him in these words: "He
was inferior to the first two caliphs in diplomacy and political acumen
in as much as he failed to secure the caliphate, though well-knowing
that the honor of the position was his by right, as the person indicated
by Muhammad (P)".

Then the civil wars and his inability to extend the limits of the
Empire are taken to point in the same direction. It is also said that he
showed lack of tact and wisdom in dealing with TALHA, AZ-ZUBAIR,
MU'AWIYA and the murderers of UTHMAN. A historian passes judgment in
these words: "His wisdom in counsel and his reputed sagacity in framing
sententious proverbs were great, though he was not wise enough to escape
the doom, that was the certain result of a policy so little
characterizes by strength as was that which he followed". Gibbon accuses
him of rashness and indiscretion as "He neglected to secure, either by
gifts or fetters,

the doubtful allegiance of TALHA and ZUBAIR, two of the most powerful
of the Arabian chiefs". These kinds of accusation indicate that the
critics have not studied the character of Imam Ali as closely and
carefully as they ought to have done before passing judgment on him. To
mete out punishment on mere suspicion was not Imam Ali's way, as it was
quite opposed to the spirit of Islam. Nor would Imam Ali stoop to bribe
his enemies into submission. Bribery and intrigue, two powerful weapons
of his adversaries, were foreign to his nature and contrary to the
tenets of Islam.

The criticism resolves itself into the following:

1. Inability to secure the caliphate.
2. TALHA, AZ-ZUBAIR, and the battle of JAMAL.
3. MU'AWIYA and the battle of SIFFIN.
4. The murderers of UTHMAN.
5. The foreign conquests.

1. Inability to Secure the Caliphate:

To judge a man and to pass judgment on his life as a success or failure
is one of the most difficult tasks of the historian. He has to study the
man very closely and fine out what goal he set out on life's journey to
attain, the opposition he encountered, the means he adopted to overcome
it, and his ability to maintain the highest standard of character under
the temptations and pressures of his long drawn out struggle with its
many ups and downs. The historian will also have to judge whether the
object, which the man set his sights on, was worthy of the sacrifices he
made for it. Then, and only then, will he be in a position to pass
judgment on his life and say whether it was a success or failure.

A close observation of conduct of Imam Ali throughout his life shows
that his solitary object in life was to safeguard the interests of
Islam, to defend it against the onslaughts of paganism, to see that its
purity remained undefiled, and to ensure that it was running on the
straight path that had been marked out for it by the Prophet (P). Imam
Ali was ready to give up not only the caliphate, but even his life for
the Islam.

The Victor of BADR and HUNAIN showed that for him, victory over his
self was as easy as victory over formidable foes. Those who have had the
experience of a struggle against the self know that it is much more
difficult to gain victory over one's self than to gain victory over
enemy armies. The victors of AUSTERLITZ and DUNKIRK could not gain
victory over themselves; Napoleon yielded to the temptation of marrying
into a royal family of Europe to create a line of emperors, thus having
to commit the misdeed of divorcing the loving Josephine, and was
punished with waterloo. And Hitler's ambition to conquer the world (if
we are to believe what we are told by his vanquishers) got the better of
him and led to his downfall.

That Imam Ali did not secure the caliphate in the first instance is
correct. He could however have done so without difficulty, had he left
the body of his dead Prophet (P) alone and gone to the SAQIFA to present
himself with the other candidates. He would certainly have been chosen,
because the only argument whereby ABU BAKR and UMAR managed to silence
the ANSAR was that they were related to the Prophet (P) and were his
heirs, while the ANSAR were total strangers, and that the Arabs would
not agree to the rule of anyone who was not of the family of the Prophet
(P). Imam Ali fulfilled these conditions to a much greater degree than
ABU BAKR or UMAR, and in view of his services to Islam no one would have
raised a single word against him.

But it would not have been an easy thing for Imam Ali to have left the
dead body of the Prophet unattended, waiting for the last rights with
not a single man there, all having gone off to fight for an empire which
had been acquired by the man lying there dead - that man who was not
only a Prophet, but also the benefactor of a nation, who had given them
a religion, made a nation of them, acquired for them an empire, reformed
their society, and taught them lessons of virtue. They were poor; he
made them rich. They were as beasts; he made them men. They were at
daggers drawn with each other; he made them live like brothers.

In fact all that they had, had been given to them by this man whose
dead body was lying there in its forlorn condition. Besides the duties
made incumbent upon them by Islam, this was a shameful demonstration of
the most base vice in man- ingratitude. As if this was not enough, they
added insult to injury by declaring as their excuse for this conduct,
which must have appeared even to themselves as highly improper, that
they were obliged to adopt this course because the appointment of a
successor to the Prophet was of the highest import and called for their
immediate attention, as the Prophet (P) had neglected to discharge this
very important duty. This surely was the unkindest cut of all, as it
implied that they were wiser and more solicitous about the good of Islam
than the Prophet himself. Do those critical of Imam Ali's "political
acumen" think that he should have joined them in this scramble for
power? Had he done so, it would have been served to open the door to the
following inferences and outcomes:

1. The Prophet (P) was careless enough to leave Islam (un-provided-for
by not appointing his own successor or not making any arrangement for
it.
2. This carelessness was so palpable and so grossly sinful that it
leads to the obvious conclusion that the Prophet (P) had no love for
Islam.
3. This, coupled with the attitude of his nearest relative in
discarding all the maxims of virtue, morality, decency and humanity
professed by Islam to indulge in the unseemly quarrel for power, would
have confirmed the charge made by the heathens that Muhammad (P) was
aiming at monarchy in the garb of Prophet-hood.

4. Imam Ali's conduct would have furnished a precedent to the ensuing
generations of Muslims to put their selfish ends before any
considerations of decency, morality and religion.

5. The enemies of Islam, the MUNAFIQIN and the pagans, would have been
furnished with deadly effect.

It is therefore clear that by remaining at the Prophet's bedside at
that moment Imam Ali saved Islam from dishonor and ignominy, and shut
the door against all the criticisms that could otherwise have been
raised by the MUNAFIQIN and the pagans. He saved Islam, and lost the
caliphate. And later on, he avoided causing the ruination of Islam and
the reversion to paganism, by desisting from taking up the sword to
avenge his wrongs.

This was what ABU SUFYAN had wanted, and he incited Imam Ali to act.
But Imam Ali foresaw this and refrained from bringing it about. When one
looks at the provocations to which Imam Ali was subjected, one has to
admire the patience with which he put up with them. Imagine the
consequences had he not exercised a self-control which was almost
superhuman. He was called to the DARBAR and prevailed upon under threat
of death to make the BAI'A to ABU BAKR; is friends and partisans were
dragged to the DARBAR and compelled to make the BAI'A; fire was actually
brought to the house of the Prophet's daughter, who was threatened with
arson if her husband did not come out. He put up with all these threats
and insults, and did not raise a finger against those people. Why?

It was not the cudgel of UMAR that kept him back; "DHU AL-FIQAR" had
tasted the blood of much greater warriors than him. But Imam Ali knew
full well that if he ejected them from the caliphate, they would resort
to intrigue, collusion and mischief -making on a scale that would lead
to the deprecating of Islam and the denouncing of the Prophet (P). They
would have openly said that the only object of Muhammad (P) had been to
acquire a kingdom for his family, and that Islam was simply a cover.
Reversion to paganism would have been a certainly. Not willing to allow
Imam Ali any credit for standing firm, they resorted to a stratagem:
they let it be known that Ali had acquiesced in the selection of ABU
BAKR, in the nomination of UMAR, and in the farcical election of UTHMAN.
Nothing could have been further from the truth; the threats made against
Imam Ali themselves furnish testimony to its being a lie.

It is an enormity, as well as a good demonstration of the power of
propaganda, that the first two caliphs should have been given the credit
for there having been no civil war in their time, and that Imam Ali
should have been taken to task for its incidence during his caliphate.
The fact of the matter is that the credit for there being no civil war
on the death of the Prophet rightly belongs to Imam Ali; and its
occurrence in imam Ali's time was in fact due to the policy followed by
his three predecessors.

2.TALHA, AZ-ZUBAIR and the Battle of JAMAL:

Gibbon writes: "In the first days of his reign, he (Imam Ali) neglected
to secure, either by gifts or fetters, the doubtful allegiance of TALHA
and AZ-ZUBAIR, two of the most powerful of the Arabian chiefs. They
escaped from Medina to MAKKA, and thence to BASRA; erected the standard
of revolt; and usurped the government of AL-IRAQ, or Assyria, which they
had vainly solicited as the reward of their services. The mask of
Patriotism is allowed to cover the most glaring inconsistencies; and the
enemies, perhaps the assassins, of UTHMAN now demanded the vengeance of
his blood. They were accompanied in their flight by A'ISHA, the widow of
the Prophet (P), who cherished, to the last hour of her life, an
implacable hatred against the husband and the posterity of FATIMA".

This charge sheet framed by Gibbon against Imam Ali is in effect Imam
Ali's reply to the charge. Let us analyze it. It comprised the following
informative statements:

1. As soon as Imam Ali ascended to the caliphate, he ought to have
purchased the submission of TALHA and AZ-ZUBAIR by gifts.
2. By "gifts" is meant the governorships of KUFA and BASRA.
3. Alternatively he ought to have coerced them into submission by
sending them to jail.
4. In either case their allegiance would only have been doubtful.
5. TALHA and AZ-ZUBAIR were responsible for the murder of UTHMAN, for
it not themselves the actual murderers, they certainly instigated it.
6. They made the murder of UTHMAN an excuse for revolting against Imam
Ali.
7. A'ISHA was the inveterate foe of Imam Ali and his children, and
remained steadfast in her enmity against them right up to her death.
8. She instigated the revolt against Imam Ali.

As I have already said, to punish people before having committed an
offence was not in accordance with the tenets of Islam. As to the
gifting of KUFA and BASRA, only those persons could be appointed as
governors whose fidelity and loyalty to the central authority was above
suspicion. Moreover, according to the theology of Islam, the caliph is
responsible for the misdeeds of the subordinates appointed by him; he is
accountable to God for the actions done in their official capacity.
Leaving aside these pious considerations,

which are beyond the comprehension of the Modern Age, even ordinary
statesmanship requires that the governors be selected from among those
fidelity and loyalty to the ruler can be depended upon under all
circumstances and against every enemy. TALHA and AZ-ZUBAIR did not
fulfill this important condition. Gibbon himself says that even after
the gifts of these two provinces, their allegiance would have at best
been doubtful. To purchase doubtful allegiance at this huge price and
involving so many risks would not have been a wise act.

The governorships of KUFA and BASRA were in any case not their ultimate
objective. As they had both been members of the SHURA and had thus been
candidates for the caliphate, they considered themselves to be as much
entitled to it as Imam Ali, and were lamenting having allowed him to
obtain it. They were aiming for the caliphate itself, and were desirous
of getting BASRA and KUFA only as stepping-stones to the main goal.
Gibbon is right in saying that these three persons, if not the actual
assassins of UTHMAN, were certainly the instigators of his murder. TALHA
himself boasted of having brought it about by his tactics. Now to make
that murder an excuse for raising a revolt against Imam Ali, and to
demand satisfaction for it, was as much derogatory to the position of
the Prophet's companions as it was indicative of their real nature and
enmity for Imam Ali.

Such unscrupulous men could not be entrusted with the government of
Islamic provinces, as piety was one of the preconditions of appointment;
nor could they be depended upon as true friends. Had Imam Ali complied
with their request, KUFA and BASRA would have been made the centers of a
huge revolt against Imam Ali, who would then have had to fight three
MU'AWIYAS instead of one. For Imam Ali to have given them the
governorships of KUFA and BASRA would have been to strengthen them and
supply them with the means to carry on their struggle against him in
their quest for the caliphate. On the other hand, to have sent them to
jail on mere suspicion before having actually committed any act meriting
imprisonment, would have been against the rules of Islam and unworthy of
a successor of the Prophet (P), and would moreover have set a very
dangerous example for his governors and the succeeding tyrannies in the
ensuing generations.

3. MU'AWIYA and the Battle of SIFFIN:

On this point Imam Ali has been criticized thus: "The first thing that
Imam Ali did on his accession was to dismiss MU'AWIYA from the
governorship of Syria, who had acquired great influence there.
AL-MUGHIRA IBN SHU'BA and ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS advised him to postpone his
dismissal after he had taken the BAI'A from him…. Imam Ali refused to
follow this advice, and sent the order of dismissal not only to MU'AWIYA
but to all the governors appointed by UTHMAN…. His first great mistake
was not to accept the advice of AL-MUGHIRA and IBN ABBAS; his second
great mistake was to install in government posts such men as MUHAMMAD
IBN ABI BAKR and AL-ASHTAR AL-NAKH'I, who had been suspected of having a
hand in the murder of UTHMAN".

This criticism is based on a defective survey of the events of that
time. A mere BAI'A would have been of no avail, as a insincere BAI'A in
the case of TALHA and AZ-ZUBAIR had proved to be of no use. Moreover,
MU'AWIYA was not a man to be deceived by a postponement of his
dismissal. He had studied the situation so closely that it was
inconceivable that he would fail to see that Imam Ali was temporizing.
It must also be borne in mind that MU'AWIYA would not have sat idle
during this interval. He would have been able to utilize it too much
greater advantage than Imam Ali. He had the crafty AMR IBN AL-AS with
him. One trip of his to BASRA or KUFA would have been sufficient to win
the people over to his side, with the help of the most effective
weapon-money. And for those, and they were few, who were likely to
resist the temptation, the other weapon, poison, was ready.

This is abundantly proved by the fact that before Imam Ali could even
issue the order calling upon MU'AWIYA to make the BAI'A to him, the
bloodstained shirt of UTHMAN and the fingers of his wife, NA'ILA, had
already reached Damascus, and were being exhibited publicly in the
mosque to incite the hatred of the people against Imam Ali. Had Imam Ali
remained silent, MU'AWIYA would have taken the initiative and invaded
"AL-IRAQ. More than twenty-five years" rule with kingly pomp and show
had firmly established him in his position. He had freely used the money
to attach the people to himself. He had purposely kept them in complete
ignorance of political affairs,

and most of them did not even know who Imam Ali was or what his
connection with the Prophet was. For example, when interrogated as to
who Imam Ali was, some of them replied that he was one of the highway
robbers against whom it was their duty to fight. Some said he was the
father of FATIMA. When asked who FATIMA was, they replied that she was
the wife of the Prophet (P) and daughter of A'ISHA, who was the sister
of MU'AWIYA. When asked about Imam Ali, a man who was the wisest of them
all said that Imam Ali was killed at the battle of HUNAIN with the
Prophet (P). They were deliberately taught that there were no heirs or
relatives of the Prophet (P) besides BANU OMMAYA.

Such was the hold that MU'AWIYA exercised over the perceptions of the
people he governed. The most important thing to bear in mind is that
MU'AWIYA had his eye on the caliphate, and from the moment that UTHMAN
ascended the throne, the fulfillment of his heart's desire had appeared
certain to him. His culpable inaction during the long period when UTHMAN
had been besieged, in spite of the fact that UTHMAN had nervously
beseeched him to come to his aid, points in the same direction. His
masterly inactivity when the battle of JAMAL was being fought betrays
the same state of mind. The whole show of clamoring for vengeance for
the blood of UTHMAN was a contrivance to weaken Imam Ali, not a sincere
desire to avenge the murder. MU'AWIYA did not therefore really want to
help the nobles of Medina.

His desire rather was to have them blotted out of the picture, so that
in case of final victory there would be no one else to claim the
caliphate. The suggested procrastination would have been of immense
value to the governor of Syria, and decidedly detrimental to the
interest of the caliph in Medina. It appears to me that AL-MOGHIRA IBN
SHU'BA gave that advice to Imam Ali in the interests of MU'AWIYA. He had
been Imam Ali's bitterest enemy since the day Imam Ali advised UMAR to
stone him to death in accordance with QUR'ANIC Law when the offence of
adultery was proved against him. AL-MOGHIRA'S advice was based on the
supposition that by means of Imam Ali's apparent silence, MU'AWIYA would
be hoodwinked into believing that he had become his friend overnight,
and would therefore give up all thoughts of opposing Imam Ali. No one
with a knowledge of MU'AWIYA'S nature and record can believe that he was
a man to be fooled like that, especially in view of his long-cherished
desire to become the caliph of the Muslims and the founder of a dynasty
of kings. I for one cannot assign that degree of stupidity to him.

Ali's strongest motive for removing MU'AWIYA was one, which will be
scarcely appreciated in this age of atheism. He firmly believed, with an
ardor wholly unintelligible today, that the person having the right to
appoint and dismiss the officers of State is responsible before God and
man for all the misdeeds committed by those officers, and will also have
to answer for any injustices, tyrannies, ungodly acts, and
contraventions of the QUR'AN and the SUNNA of the Prophet (P), committed
by those officers.

As to the second part of the historian's criticism -the employment in
government service of men suspected of having a hand in the murder of
UTHMAN- I will discuss it when I come to that subject.

4. The Murderers of UTHMAN:

It is said that Imam Ali ought to have punished the murderers of UTHMAN
and ought not to have employed in government service the men who had
been suspected of this offence. This criticism betrays the same
carelessness and absence of historical insight that generally
characterizes the accusations leveled at Imam Ali by his detractors. The
simple facts are:

1. In spite of Imam Ali's requiring them to establish who the assassins
of UTHMAN were, they were unable to name any.
2. Those who claimed, as heirs of UTHMAN, to be avenging his blood, had
themselves instigated his murder.
3. This cry of vengeance was only a political slogan to rouse the
people against Imam Ali.

The circumstances in which UTHMAN was killed indicate a woeful moral
state in the OMAYYA community. In the midst of his own kinsmen and in
his own house at Medina, this caliph remained besieged for full forty
days, and no attempt to rescue him was made by his kinsmen, who were
numerous and upon whom he had lavished gifts, favors and positions of
honor. In fact, his undue partiality to his kinsmen had been the cause
of all his misfortunes and troubles. His enemies, while on their way
back from Medina where a sort of compromise had been effected between
them and the caliph through the intercession of Imam Ali, had
intercepted a letter from UTHMAN addressed to the Governor of Egypt
ordering him to do away with the leaders of this disaffected array of
men. As soon as they returned to Medina to demand an explanation, UTHMAN
sent information of this rising and a request for help to the places
from where it would be possible for it to arrive in time, such as MAKKA,
Syria, KUFA, BASRA and important places in Arabia.

It was the time of HAJJ, when people from all parts of the Muslim
Empire had assembled at MAKKA. He therefore sent a long letter there
containing an urgent summons for help; messengers were sent for this
purpose, and the letter was read before the assemblage. UTHMAN also sent
a special and very forceful communication to MU'AWIYA. The following is
the translation of an extract from AT-TABARI:

When UTHMAN saw the calamity, which had befallen him, and how people
had risen against him, he sent the following letter to MU'AWIYA in
Syria: "In the name of the most merciful and compassionate God, the
people of Medina have rebelled against me, and have broken the BAI'A.
Therefore, please send to me an army from Syria immediately and without
delay". When this letter reached MU'AWIYA, he did not obey the order,
and thought it inadvisable to oppose the companions of the Prophet (P),
even though he had known that they had banded together against UTHMAN.
Before this, MU'AWIYA had been present at a meeting of the governors of
the provinces, and had given UTHMAN some advice to dispel the clouds,
which were gathering round the caliph.

As for AMR IBN AL-AS, he had become the bitterest enemy of UTHMAN, who
had removed him from the governorship of Egypt and appointed his own
kinsman in his place. This action earned him the undying hatred and
enmity of AMR, who excited the Egyptians to rise against him. UTHMAN had
called him, and addressing him as the son of NABIGHA (a prostitute), had
demanded to know why he had joined his enemies, when in the days before
Islam UTHMAN had been more respected than him. In reply, AMR cursed and
abused UTHMAN'S father. When he had gone, MARWAN came to UTHMAN and
taunted him that matters had come to such a pass that the sons of
prostitutes should have the courage to abuse his father. When the news
of the murder of UTHMAN reached AMR, he exclaimed proudly, "I am ABU
ABDALLAH; when I scratch a wound, I remove the skin completely. I used
to incite people to rise against UTHMAN to such an extent that I incited
even a shepherd who was grazing his goats on the hills".

As for TALHA and AZ-ZUBAIR, I have already quoted Gibbon to show that
they had at least instigated UTHMAN'S murder, even if they were not the
actual assassins. And it was on TALHA that the blood of UTHMAN was
avenged by MARWAN. As both of them were aiming at the caliphate, they
turned against Imam Ali when he became the caliph. They were the chief
conspirators in leading the people against Imam Ali on the field of
JAMAL. MARWAN thought it the most convenient occasion for taking revenge
on TALHA for the murder of UTHMAN. He therefore killed him by means of
an arrow while he was walking in the lines of his own army. MARWAN then
turned towards ABBAN son of UTHMAN, and said, "I have taken revenge for
the murder of UTHMAN at least against one of your father's murderers".

WELLHAUSEN writes: "In Egypt, instead of the conqueror AMR IBN AL-AS,
UTHMAN appointed his cousin IBN ABI SARH, although the latter was
outlawed by Muhammad (P). AMR, a very dangerous man, consequently became
his foe, helped to arouse feelings against him in Medina, and probably
did not refrain from doing the same in Egypt".

Describing the policy of MU'AWIYA concealed behind his demand of
revenge for the blood of UTHMAN, OSBORN writes"

This dexterous policy, however, had not merely the effect of throwing a
cloud over the fair name of Imam Ali, but of attaching to the cause of
MU'AWIYA a man, without whose cunning and fertility of resources his
machinations would not, in all probability, have terminated in success.
This was AMR IBN AL-AS, the conqueror of Egypt. He had been deprived of
the governorship of that province by UTHMAN, and had labored
assiduously, but in secret, to embitter the conspirators against the
caliph. In so doing he was actuated partly by desire for revenge, but
more so by simple ambition….

He had hesitated for a while which side to espouse, but it did not
require much time to convince him that the tortuous paths in which he
delighted to treat were alien to the simple and candid mind of Ali. When
intelligence reached him of the effect MU'AWIYA was producing in
Damascus by his exhibition of the bloody shirt of UTHMAN, AMR broke out
in an exclamation of delight, as of one who recognized a kindred spirit,
and repaired to Syria without loss of time. Between these two
arch-conspirators there was no attempt to conceal the real character of
their cause under a veil of specious pretences. AMR said, candidly
enough, that in espousing the cause of MU'AWIYA in preference to Ali, he
had chosen the good of this world rather than the rewards of the next,
and that he must be paid accordingly. He demanded the government of
Egypt in perpetuity, with the revenues of that rich province entirely at
his disposal. MU'AWIYA joyfully acceded to these terms.

Regarding the policy of MU'AWIYA, Gibbon writes: "The sacred duty of
pursuing the assassins of UTHMAN was the engine and pretence of his
ambition". These were the pampered favorites of UTHMAN who turned
against him and contrived hid death. Ingratitude of this kind can be
neither forgiven nor forgotten in any religion or code of morality, but
surely the lowest depths of degradation to which human nature could fall
were reached when these very same persons turned round to demand
vengeance for the blood of UTHMAN and excited people against Imam Ali in
UTHMAN name. They asked Ali to deliver up to them certain persons whom
they were pleased to name as UTHMAN'S murderers,

while they were quite unable to bring the accusation to bear. Their
demand was that the whole of the Egyptian army should be disgraced and
sent home, and that the selected persons named by them for punishment as
the murderers of UTHMAN. Could anyone in whom the slightest trace of
judicial sense was left agree to this wholesale slaughter of his friends
on the mere asking of his foes? They named those persons not because
they honestly believed them to be the murderers of UTHMAN, but because
they were the staunch friends of Imam Ali and were stalwart warriors on
his side. The only person present with UTHMAN at the time of his murder
was his wife NA'ILA, and on enquiry being made of her, she said, "Only
two persons murdered UTHMAN; I do not know their names, but if they come
before me. I shall be able to identify them. MUHAMMAD IBN ABI BAKR is
right; he did not kill UTHMAN". This clinches the whole matter.

Obviously the whole army could not have killed UTHMAN, nor was there
any intention common to all of them to do so. They had come not with
this intention, but simply to demand MARWAN, whom they considered to be
at the bottom of all this mischief. The letter mentioned above was in
his handwriting. When UTHMAN refused this, the demand developed into one
for abdication. There is absolutely no evidence to show that all or any
of them had any idea or intention of killing the aged caliph. It appears
that when the siege was prolonged due to the obstinacy of the caliph,
the mob was enraged. But even then there was no intention to kill him.
All at once, from among the defenders of the house, someone threw a
stone at a companion of the Prophet (P), killing him. The event is
described by a European historian thus:

The decisive change for the worse, the first bloodshed was caused by
the defenders of the DAR. One of them threw a stone at the head of an
old Companion who was standing outside in the crowd, and killed him.
UTHMAN refused to deliver up the culprit. The besiegers felt justified
and duty bound to cast aside all considerations, and began the attack
upon the DAR; the Egyptian IBN UDAIS of the BALI tribe commanded,
leaning against the mosque. At the door, the friends of UTHMAN fought
for him, and even after it was set on fire they tried to keep the
assaulters at bay. But a few of the latter had meanwhile penetrated the
DAR through a neighboring building, and now pressed into the very
chamber of the caliph.

It must have been the friends or relatives of the Companion thus killed
whom, on the refusal of UTHMAN to hand the culprit over, took it into
their head to kill UTHMAN. MUHAMMAD IBN ABI BAKR was certainly in the
army besieging UTHMAN. But the Egyptians arrived on the scene when the
siege had already lasted for twenty-two days. They came only one week
before his murder. MUHAMMAD IBN ABI BAKR went into the house where
UTHMAN was, but came out without doing the caliph any harm. When he went
in and caught hold of caliph's beard, and the caliph rebuked him and
saying that his father would not have treated him like that, MUHAMMAD
IBN ABI BAKR came out, saying that he did not intend to kill him.
AT-TABARI says that the persons who actually killed UTHMAN were SAWDAN
IBN HAMRAN and perhaps QATIRA. But both of them were then killed on the
spot by the slaves of UTHMAN. Imam Ali sent his own sons to defend the
caliph, and they actually fought the besiegers and kept them from the
house. It was only through the adjoining house that the besiegers were
able to get in.

It is thus established beyond all doubt that the persons who actually
killed UTHMAN did not survive the tragedy. At least, they could not be
spotted afterwards. It was therefore impossible for Imam Ali to punish
the murderers. He could not punish the whole army, because in all this
consternation it was not evident that they were in the wrong. They were
simply demanding redress for the wrong that had been done to them. In
fact at one stage they left the siege of their own will after an
understanding had been arrived at between them and the caliph through
the mediation of Imam Ali. They went back only when, on their way home,
they intercepted a message from the Government of Medina to the Governor
of Egypt aski9ng him to kill the leaders of the Egyptians when they
arrived back.

The Egyptians were naturally and justly incensed at this flagrant
breech of faith by the caliph, and returned to Medina and demanded an
explanation. The caliph said that it had been written without his
knowledge. As the letter was in the handwriting of MARWAN, the Egyptians
demanded that he should be handed over to them, but UTHMAN refused. Who
was in the wrong? Whom was Imam Ali to be expected to punish? The real
fact of the matter is that the demand for vengeance for the blood of
UTHMAN was only an excuse for creating trouble for Imam Ali. Had he
punished the whole army of Egypt, who were quite innocent of the blood
of UTHMAN, he would have lost the sympathy and support of a large army,
and that was what MU'AWIYA wanted.

5.The Foreign Conquests:

I have already remarked that the conquests were made possible in the
time of the first two caliphs because of the peaceful conduct of Imam
Ali, who controlled himself and did not create any trouble; and that
foreign conquests were made impossible in the time of Imam Ali because
of the turbulent conduct of his enemies, who had become firmly
entrenched during the reign of the first three caliphs. But the matter
does not stop here. The historian has also to investigate the
circumstances that produced TALHA, AZ-ZUBAIR and MU'AWIYA and created
the atmosphere under which they could thrive and prosper. A perusal of
this book from its beginning up to this point must have made it clear to
the reader that it was the well-organized and successfully conducted
conspiracy to take the caliphate out of the family of the Prophet (P)
which gave rise to those circumstances which eventually culminated in
this woeful state of affairs.

But apart from what has been stated above, a close and careful study of
Islamic history reveals the following undeniable facts about the
unnaturally rapid conquests of the days of the first two caliphs:

(a) They were undertaken not in the interests of Islam, nor according
to its dictates, but for internal political reasons.
(b) They were hasty and premature.
(c) They were against the laws of JIHAD as laid down by the Holy QUR'AN
and enforced by the Prophet (P).
(d) They were therefore more harmful than beneficial to Islam as a
world movement for the spread of universal love, brotherhood of man, and
the idea of the fatherly oneness of the God of all mankind.

Unjustifiable use of the sword, that began just after the death of the
Prophet (P) and became a model for all future rulers of Islam, created
that deep-seated hatred and undying disgust for Islam in the hearts of
the people of the world, which the passage of time has been unable to
erase. The scope of this book does not allow a thorough discussion of
the subject, which requires a volume to itself. But its importance does
not permit me to pass it by. I therefore merely touch here on the
salient features of each of the points noted above.

(a) The Foreign Expeditions were due to Internal Exigencies:

The following needs prompted these expeditions:

1. To engage the people elsewhere and escape their criticism, which had
started on the very day following the SAQIFA coup. The rapidity with
which the coup had been carried out confounded the people of Medina into
silence for the time being. Imagine their state of mind: their Prophet
is dead; his body is lying before their very eyes; they are expecting
everybody to mourn, to be submerged in grief and sorrow, to go and offer
condolences to the Prophet's only daughter, to sympathize with his close
relatives, and to share the grief of his grandsons whom he loved so
dearly; they look around to see how his death is being borne by his
UMMA; but instead of what they imagine, they behold their new ruler
returning from the SAQIFA; they can hardly believe their eyes, and for
the present they are confounded. However, this state of bewilderment was
not likely to last long; it was bound to give place to a more thoughtful
survey and scrutiny of events. It soon wore off, and people began to ask
each other why Imam Ali was ignored and how the caliphate could go to a
comparatively unknown and unimportant tribe. The boded ill for the new
government, but the man who had masterminded its coming into being was
equal to the situation, and he adopted many methods to win the people
over to his side. One of the most effective measures for avoiding the
ill effects of the coup was to send the people out to foreign lands. If
they won, well and good; The "GHANIMA" (war booty) that they brought
would seal the lips of every man. If they perished in the attempt, then
the government would be rid of a turbulent section of the people.

2. To prevent the people from aiding and sympathizing with Imam Ali.

3. To provide an occupation for the people who were likely to create
trouble at home. "The young man surplus". Wells has well said, "if it is
not consumed, is the main source of rebels, revolutionaries and
disturbances of all kinds". In the case of the Arabs, fond as they were
of war and booty, these expeditions were the surest means of relieving
"the accumulated tensions of unsatisfied youth".

4. To extinguish the smoldering fire of disaffection and to acquire the
sympathy and goodwill of the people by means of the wealth and booty
obtained in the wars.

5. To have ready at hand a well-equipped army for any emergency that
might arise in view of the uncertain attitude of BANU HASHIM. The value
of war booty for motivating the expeditions to Iran and Syria in the
time of the first two caliphs, and for winning popularity with the War
Lords of Medina, cannot be overemphasized. The following is a
translation of a passage occurring in SHIBLI'S "SIRAT-AN-NABI":

The greatest difficulty was that the people were unduly saturated with
a passion for booty, so much so that it was the most potent cause of
wars. The Prophet (P) took very gradual steps to correct this tendency.
In the Days of Ignorance, war booty used to be the most alluring object
for the people. From ABU DAWUD we learn that a man asked the Prophet (P)
whether a man would get any reward for the JIHAD if he also had some
worldly gain in view. The Prophet (P) replied, "No". But the people
regarded this as very strange. They sent man after man to put the same
question to the Prophet (P). Each time, the Prophet (P) replied that he
would get no reward in the next world for a JIHAD in which he had some
worldly gain also in view. It was then that the people believed that the
Prophet (P) really meant what he said.

Once the Prophet (P) sent certain companions of his to fight a tribe.
One of the companions was walking a littler ahead of the army. The
tribesmen came out weeping, and met the man who was walking in front of
the rest of the army. He told them that they could escape the fate that
surely awaited them if they recited the KALIMA. They embraced Islam, and
thus the fight was avoided. His comrades blamed him for converting them
to Islam, as by their becoming Muslims, the army had been deprived of
the booty. ABU DAWUD records this in that man's own words: "My comrades
reproached me and said that I had deprived them of the GHANIMA". They
took it so much to heart that they complained of his conduct to the
Prophet (P). But the Prophet (P) applauded hid deed, and said that for
each man that embraced Islam, he would get a high reward in the life to
come.

In spite of such strictness and the frequent admonitions, the battle of
HUNAIN in A.H 8 was lost on account of the people occupying themselves
with gathering the booty. In "SAHIS AL-BUKHARI" where this battle is
described, it is said, "The Muslims proceeded towards the GHANIMA, and
the enemy attacked them with their arrows".

In ABU DAWUD, the statement of an ANSAR is thus recorded: "Once we went
out on an expedition; we met with great privations and hardships. By
chance we espied a flock of goats belonging to the pagans. We all looted
the goats. When the Prophet (P) came to know of it, he came up to the
spot, and saw the flesh of the goats beings cooked on the fore. There
was a bow in his hand. With it he overturned all the vessels in which
that meat was being cooked, and said that the looted property was like
dead animals' flesh". Gilman writes:

Despots have always found it necessary to employ their subjects in
foreign wars from time to time, in order to keep them away from feeling
the galling chains by which they are bound, or to hear their clanking;
and it came to pass that when the caliph had all the tribes of Arabia
under control, he saw no better way to restrain them from new revolts
than by tempting them to make inroads upon their neighbors. Nothing
could have been better planned by a ruler acquainted with the volatile
nature of his subjects.

I cannot help quoting from a very carefully written chapter in "The
Cambridge Medieval History". The learned historian says"

Just as the ecclesiastical conception on the one hand broke the
historical continuity, it perceived on the other hand in the expansion
of the Arabs noting but a further extension of the religion of Islam and
therefore totally misunderstood the real nature of the movement. It was
not the religion of Islam, which was by that time disseminated by the
sword, but merely the political sovereignty of the Arabs. The acceptance
of Islam by other than Arabians was not only not striven for, but was in
fact regarded with disfavor. The subdued peoples might peacefully retain
their old religions, provided only that they paid ample tribute.

As on conversion to Islam these payments ceased, at least in the early
times, such changes of religion were disliked. The circumstances that a
few pious men subsequently practiced such proselytism, or that the
material advantages of apostasy gradually led the population of the
conquered countries to Islam, must not blind our eyes to the fact that
the movement originated from quite other motives. The sudden surging
forward of the Arabs was only apparently sudden. For centuries
previously, the Arab migration had been in preparation. It was the last
great Semitic migration connected with the economic decline of Arabia….
In short, long before Muhammad, Arabia was in a state of unrest, and a
slow, uncontrollable infiltration of Arabian tribes and tribal branches
had permeated the adjoining civilized lands in Persian as also in Roman
territory, where they had met with the descendants of earlier Semitic
immigrants to those parts, the ARAMAEANS, who were already long
acclimatized there.

Persia and Byzantium suffered severely from this constant unrest in
their border provinces, and both empires had endeavored to organize the
movement and to use it as a fighting medium, the one against the other.
The Romans had organized the Syrian Arabs for this purpose under the
leadership of princes of the house of GHASSAN, the most celebrated of
whom even received the title of patrician, while the SASSANIDS founded a
similar bulwark in HIRA, where the LAKHMITES, under Persian sovereignty,
lived a princely life,

greatly celebrated by Arabian poets. A short-sighted policy, and
probably also internal weakness, permitted the ruin of both of these
states, which would have offered an almost insuperable barrier to the
Islamic expansion…. Thus the great empires had succeeded in destroying
the smaller Arabian states, which had grown too powerful…. The expansion
of the SARACENS is thus the final stage in a process of development
extending over centuries. Islam was simply a change in the watchword for
which they fought…

Under these circumstances it would be a mistake to regard the Arab
migration merely as a religious movement incited by Muhammad. The
question may in fact be put whether the whole movement in not
conceivable without the intervention of Islam. There can be in any case
no question of any zealous impulse towards proselytism. That strong
religious tie, which at the present time binds together all Muslims,
that events, not the primary cause of the Arab migration, but merely a
consequence of Islam in this direction lies in its masked political
character, which the modern world has even in our own time to take into
consideration.

In the outset Islam meant the supremacy of Medina, but it soon
identified itself with ARABIANISM, i.e. it preached the superiority of
the Arabian people generally. This great idea gives an intellectual
purport to the restless striving for expansion, and makes a political
focus of the great Arabian State of Medina, founded on religion. Hunger
and avarice, not religion, are the impelling forces, but religion
supplies the essential unity and central power. The expansion of the
SARACENS' religion, both in point of time and in itself, can only be
regarded as of minor import and rather as a political necessity. The
movement itself had been afoot long before Islam gave it a party cry and
an organization.

It is thus evident that these expeditions were not sent out for the
sake of Islam, or in its interests. Avarice and political needs, not
religion, were the driving forces, and as a matter of fact conversions
to Islam were discourages as tending to lessen the income of the State.
With them, Islam was merely their cry.

(b) The Conquests were Hasty and Premature:

The majority of the Arabs accepted Islam when it was well-nigh on the
road to success, and when its victories had assured them that it was the
dominating force in Arabia, and that the interests of their worldly
welfare required that they side with the Muslims as the winning party.
They cared little to know what were its principles, and less to put them
into practice. Their period of contact with the Prophet (P) was much too
short to accustom them to the practice of those austere rules of Islam
which, as we have seen, opposed to their nature and conflicted with
their immediate good as they understood it to be. As attested to by the
Holy QUR'AN, most of the conversions took place after the conquest of
MEKKA, and the Prophet (P) lived for only two years after that event.
The accumulated experiences and habits of centuries could not yield to a
halfheartedly learnt lesson of but two years duration. Gibbon thus
writes of these people:

The revolution of Arabia had not changed the character of he Arabs; the
death of Muhammad was the signal of independence; and the hasty
structure of his power and religion tottered to its foundations… the
increasing myriads, who acknowledged Muhammad as their king and Prophet,
had been compelled by his arms, or allured by his prosperity. The
polytheists were confounded by the simple idea of a solitary and
invisible God; the pride of the Christians and the Jews disdained the
yoke of a mortal and contemporary legislator. Their habits of faith and
obedience were not sufficiently confirmed, and many of the new converts
regretted the venerable antiquity of the law of MUSA; or the rites and
mysteries of the Catholic Church, or the idols, the sacrifices, the
joyous festivals of their pagan ancestors.

The jarring interests and hereditary feuds of the Arabian tribes had
not yet coalesced in a system of union and subordination; and the
barbarians were impatient of the mildest and most salutary laws that
curbed their passions or violated their customs. They submitted with
reluctance to the religions precepts of the QUR'AN, abstinence from
wine, the fast of Ramadan, and the daily repetition of five prayers; and
the alms and tithes, which were collected for the treasury of Medina,
could be distinguished only by a name from the payment of a perpetual
and ignominious tribute.

Turning to ABU BAKR, the Prophet (P), who knew well his countrymen,
once said, "Heathenism is still working imperceptibly within you like
the movements of ants". AL-ALLAM AL-MASHRIQI has well said that though
Islam and the QUR'AN did much for the Arabs, yet they could not change
their nature and alter their habits in such a short time. The old habits
and ideas, which had become ingrained in their nature over a span of
thousands of years, could not leave them all at once. Those old beliefs
and ideas still lingered on in their mind. Speaking of the high moral
tenets and lofty principles of Islam, NICHOLSON says:

Against such doctrines, the conservative and material instincts of the
desert people rose in revolt; and although they became Muslims en masse,
the majority of them neither believed in Islam nor knew what it meant.
Often their motives were frankly utilitarian; they expected that Islam
would bring them luck; and so long as they were sound in body, and their
mares had fine foals, and their wives bore well-formed sons, and their
wealth and herds multiplied, they said, we have been blessed ever since
we adopted this religion; and were content; but if things went ill, they
blamed Islam and turned their backs on it.

Apart from their natural inability to appreciate and assimilate the
doctrines of Islam, political exigencies required that the doctrines and
principles of Islam should be so molded and shaped, and the QUR'AN so
interpreted and explained, as to be of use in the propaganda of the men
who had seized power on the death of the Prophet (P). They had to
justify their actions to the nation and prove that they had divine
sanction for what they had done. With this end in view, they sat down to
"amend", modify and abrogate the various provisions of Islamic Theology.
(for a detailed account of this systematic attempt at molding Islam to
suit their ends, I refer the reader to my book in Urdu entitled
"KITAB-AL-TAFRIQ WA AL-TAHRIF FI AL-ISLAM"). Here I shall mention but
one or two examples. The first doctrine to receive their attention was
the concept of "JIHAD". They so molded it by precept and practice as to
bring every manner of looting and exploitation under it.

I will discuss it at its proper place under the next heading. Another
of the doctrines invented for their purposes and given wide publicity
was this: "We must submit to what has actually taken place, because
whatever happens does so with the will and pleasure of God". MAWLAWI
SHIBLI says that this and like doctrines were invented and added to the
Theology of Islam for political reasons by the OMAYYAD despots, who
wanted to silence their critics and make them bear their tyrannies and
oppression with patience. For obvious reasons the learned historian
throws the blame on the OMAYYAD rules, but it is evident that this
doctrine was invented by UMAR. It is proved by the conversation, which
UMAR had with ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS in which UMAR is reported to have said
Imam Ali could not succeed the Prophet because it was God's wish that he
should not, just as his father ABU TALIB did not accept Islam because
that was God's will.

The weakness of this logic is plain, and that it is foreign to Islamic
Theology is plainer still. Were we to accept it, virtue would have no
reward, and vice would incur no punishment; complete chaos would reign.
If we succeeded in committing a robbery or murder, we would have to be
reworded, because we had aided the will of God; but if we failed in the
attempt to commit those offences, we would have to be punished because
we had attempted what was not willed by God. But due to this force of
propaganda, Islam, on the basis of this doctrine, has been misunderstood
by aliens as a religion teaching fatalism. It is a tragedy that a
religion that inculcates such clear doctrines as "Man can have nothing
but what he strives for", should come to be described by others thus:

Fatalism is thus the central tenet of Islam…. History repeats itself in
MUHAMMADAN countries with a truly doleful exactness. The great bulk of
the people are passive; wars and revolutions rage round them; they
accept them as the decrees of a fate, which it is useless to strive
against. All power passes accordingly into the hands of a few ambitious
and turbulent spirits unencumbered with scruples of any kind, animated
by no desires except those of being rich and strong. There is never a
sufficient space of rest to allow institutions to grow up. Each
adventurer as he rises to the summit of his ambition can keep his
unsteady footing only by smiting down those who are climbing after him.
Sooner or later, of course, he sinks to give way to another; and so the
scene shifts and changes, until utter exhaustion and swift corruption
(the state of the MUHAMMADAN world at the present day) supervene on this
insane and convulsive activity.

These observations are quite justified, in as much as, from the
distorted view of Islam that has been presented to them, they can draw
no other conclusions.

These were the people, still saturated with (paganistic) ideas, and
immersed in the civilization of their pagan ancestors that were borne on
the crest of the waves of conquests to foreign lands; and this was the
Islam they carried with them, misinterpreted by ignorance and
intentionally disfigured by ambition.

Now let us follow the Arabs on their career of conquest. We come first
to Syria. It was given over to BANU OMAYYA as a measure of political
necessity, to set up a sure and reliable center of opposition to BANU
HASHIM headed by Imam Ali, whom they had deprived of the caliphate by
their coup d'état at the SAQIFA; and though Imam Ali was not inclined to
seek redress through an appeal to arms, yet those at the helm of
affairs, who naturally judged others by their own standard, deemed the
possibility to be there. And then again, no one could foresee the future
turn of events. From the moment Syria was handed over to BANU OMAYYA, it
must be considered to have been lost to Islam. Speaking of the times
when this policy brought forth its anticipated fruit, Professor Browne
writes about them thus:

the triumph of the OMAYYADS was in reality, as Dozy well says, the
triumph of that party which, at heart, was hostile to Islam; and the
sons of the Prophet's most inveterate foes now, unchanged at heart,
posed as his legitimate successors and vicegerents, and silenced with
the sword those who dared murmur against their innovations. Nor was
cause for murmuring far to seek even in the reign of MU'AWIYA, who in
the splendor of his court at Damascus, and in the barriers, which he set
between himself and his humbler subjects, took as his model the
Byzantine Emperors and Persian Kings, rather than the first vicars of
the Prophet.

He then goes on to describe "the sacrilegious actions, the ungodly
lives, the profanity and worldliness of these rulers". I cannot help
quoting another European writer, Osborn says:

History records few stranger freaks of fortune than that which seated
the son of ABU SUFYAN on the throne of the Caliph. ABU SUFYAN was the
bitterest and ablest opponent of the Prophet. His wife, HIND, was one of
the few specially excluded from the mercy of the Prophet when he made
his triumphant entry into MAKKA as the greatest chieftain in Arabia -an
exclusion richly merited by her conduct after the battle of UHUD. The
conversion of ABU SUFYAN himself was merely a political man-oeuvre, the
insincerity of which was apparent. The children of ABU SUFYAN made some
clumsy endeavors to smooth over the awkwardness of these antecedents by
putting certain sayings in the mouth of the Prophet attesting the zeal
and devotedness of ABU SUFYAN…. But even to the almost unbounded
credulity of the Arab, these traditions must have come under the heading
"MUNKAR", i.e. traditions proceeding from a reporter of feeble
authority.

MU'AWIYA, the son of ABU SUFYAN, seems to have been in almost every
respect the duplicate of his father. Faith in Islam he had none; in his
contest against Imam Ali he was spurred on simply by worldly ambition,
as was also his friend and colleague, AMR, the conqueror of Egypt.
Astute, unscrupulous and pitiless, the first caliph of the OMAYYA shrank
from no crime necessary to secure his position. Murder was his
accustomed mode of removing a formidable opponent. The grandson of the
Prophet he caused to be poisoned; MALIK AL-ASHTAR, the heroic lieutenant
of Imam Ali, was destroyed in a like way. To secure the succession of
his son YAZID, MU'AWIYA hesitated not to break the word he had pledged
to IMAM AL-HUSSAIN, the surviving son of Imam Ali. And yet this cool,
calculating, thoroughly atheistic Arab ruled over the regions of Islam,
and the scepter remained among his descendants for the space of nearly
one hundred and twenty years. About another OMAYYAD king, the same
writer says"

AL-WALID ll was surnamed "The Reprobate". He was dissolute in his life,
revolting in his language, and disgusting in his habits. In one of his
orgies, a chamberlain said to him, "Prince of Believers, the approaches
to the palace are filled with delegates from the Arabs and QURAISH, and
your condition is not becoming the dignity of the caliph". By way of
reply, the prince ordered the chamberlain to seat himself among the
drinkers, and on the latter refusing to do so, he had him seized and
bound, a tube forced between his teeth, and wine poured through it till
the wretched man fell dead drunk. On another occasion, happening to
repeat the following verse of the QUR'AN, "Then sought they help from
God, and every proud rebellious one perished; hell is before him, and of
tainted water shall he be made to drink", he ordered a copy of the
sacred book to be brought before him, and, setting it up as a mark,
pierced it with arrows, while he recited the verses of pagan poetry to
the following effect….

Were these conquests of any use to Islam, as distinct from the Arab
nation? Islam should not be confused with the Arab Nation. The two are
not the same thing.

It has thus been abundantly proved that genuine Islam had not been
assimilated in the Arabs' nature before they embarked on their career of
conquest. Referring to a fragment to YAZID'S verses preserved in the
pages of IBN KHALLAKAN'S Biographical Dictionary, Osborn writes: "It is
important, as showing at what an early date the contact with Christian
and Persian thought commenced to undermine the doctrines of the QUR'AN".
I should rather say, "the doctrines of the QUR'AN as interpreted by
those Muslims".

Speaking of the influence of the subject races on the religion of the
Arabs, Browne says, "Amongst the most striking illustrations, which he
(GOLDZIHER) gives of the preponderating influence of those foreign
MAWALI, is a dialogue between the OMAYYAD Caliph ABD AL-MALIK and the
famous theologian AS-ZUHRI, whence it appears that alike in MAKKA,
YEMEN, EGYPT, MESOPOTAMIA, KHURASAN, KUFA, and BASRA, foreign "clients"
held the chief positions of authority in religion".

As to Persia and the ABBASSIDS, things were in no better condition.
Every religion that existed in Persia exerted its influence on Islam and
destroyed its purity. The ZOROASTRIAN religion was introduced into Islam
through the natives, with the result that it came to have great
attraction for these Muslims. Many ideas were borrowed by Islam from
Zoroastrianism. The first two or three centuries immediately following
the Muslim conquest of Persia were a period of immense and unique
interest, of fusion between the old and the new, of transformation of
forms and transmigration of ideas. In the intellectual domain, Persia
soon began to assert the supremacy to which the ability and subtlety of
her people entitled her. Even the forms of state organization were
largely adapted from Persian models. Various departments of the State
founded by UMAR were almost entirely based on Persian and Roman
models.

The ABBASSIDS were no less perfidious and unscrupulous than the
OMAYYADS. Speaking of the revolution brought about through the
propaganda carried on by the ABBASSIDS, Browne says:

Many of those who had worked so strenuously for the revolution were
most bitterly disappointed when it was an accomplished fact. More
especially was this so in the case of the SHIA who, misled by the
delusive belief that by the term "HASHEMITES", in whose name the
propaganda was carried on, the House of Imam Ali was intended,
discovered, when it was too late, that not even in the OMAYYADS had the
true descendants of the Prophet enemies more implacable than in their
"HASHEMITE" cousins of the House of ABBAS.

The greatest orient-list of our century quotes the historian AL-FAKHRI
in these words:

Know that the ABBASID dynasty was a treacherous, wily, and faithless
dynasty, wherein intrigue and guile played a greater part than strength
and energy, particularly in its latter days. Indeed, the later rulers of
this House lost all faculty of energy and courage, and relied solely on
tricks and stratagems. Browne goes on to quote Dozy thus:

The ascendancy of the Persian over the Arabs, that is to say, of the
conquered over the victors, had already for a long while been in course
of preparation; it became complete when the ABBASSIDS, who owed their
elevation to the Persians, ascended the throne. These princes made it a
rule to be on their guard against the Arabs, and to put their trust only
in foreigners, Persians, especially those of KHORASAN, with whom,
therefore, they had to make friends. The most distinguished personages
at court were consequently Persians. The famous BARMECIDS were descended
from a Persian noble who had been superintendent of the Fire-temple at
BALKH.

Again, to draw upon that same inexhaustible storehouse of information:
The BARMECIDES naturally used their great influence in favor of their
compatriots, but they had to be careful lest a too evident partiality
for the institutions of Persia should bring them under suspicion of
being still at heart MAGIANS…. VON KREMER treats fully of the Persian
influences, which were everywhere, active, and which so largely molded
not only the organization of the Church and State, but in ABBASSID
times, even the fashions of dress, food, music and the like.

This state of things, coupled with the fact that the Muslims, during
the early caliphate, had been given the sanction to use their own
judgment in religious matters if they thought there was nothing in the
QUR'AN or HADITH applicable to the case under consideration, led to
Islam being rent asunder into different sects, most of them taking their
inspiration not from the QUR'AN, but from the atheistic philosophies of
Greece and India. The example of the sect known as the "MO'TAZILA" is a
case in point.

The stamp of Greek philosophy is boldly imprinted on their main
beliefs. They refer to the QUR'AN also as their authority as a last
argument, the QUR'AN as interpreted by them under the influence of Greek
philosophy, and not as explained by the Prophet (P). The other source of
their beliefs was Christian Theology. There arose in Persia, therefore,
many "outwardly MUHAMMADAN heresies embodying and reviving in new forms
per-Muslim and non-Muslim ideas". Under the direct influence of OMAYYAD
rule, a sect called "MURJI'A" arose. Imam ABU HANIFA was one of them. It
was on account of OMAYYAD influence that they entertained the obviously
untenable belief that no Muslim, whatever sins he may have committed,
will be doomed to everlasting perdition.

Clearly discernible in this license to a Muslim to commit any number of
the most heinous crimes with impunity, is the OMAYYAD anxiety to save
from present calumny and future damnation their rulers, among whom were
included such profligates as AL-WALID and such tyrants as YAZID.

Sufism, which has had great influence on Muslim conduct, is another
product of the same combination. There are two schools of thought
regarding the source of Sufism. One school represented by Von Kremer
holds that "Sufism took into itself two different elements, an older
Christian-ascetic, which came strongly to the front even in the
beginning of Islam, and then later a Buddhist-contemplative, which soon,
in consequence of the increasing influence of the Persian on Islam,
obtained the upper hand, and called into being the Mystic-proper of
Islam". Te other view is expressed by Browne in these words: "SUFI
pantheism presents far more striking analogies with neo-Platonism than
with either VEDANTISM or BUDDHISM, while historically, it is much more
likely that it borrowed from the first that from either of the two
last". The following passage from Professor Browne's excellent History
throws considerable light on the subject under discussion"

And now, under the ABBASSID Caliphate, it was these pagans of HARRAN,
who, more than anyone else, imparted to the Muslims all the learning and
wisdom of the Greeks which they had so jealously guarded… and, thanks to
their influence at a court singular in the world's history for its
devotion to learning, their coreligionists were suffered to continue in
their thinly disguised paganism…. Thus did the civilization of BAGHDAD
become the inheritor of the ancient wisdom of Assyria, Babylonia,
Persia, India and Greece; and for this it was chiefly indebted to
heathens like… Christians like…. MAGIANS, converted or unconverted,
like… besides sundry Jews and NABATHAEANS. To this splendid synthesis
the Arabs… lent little save their wonderful and admirable language….

That they were sensible of their own indebtedness to these Non-Muslims
who bestowed upon them the wisdom of the ancients appears amongst other
things, from the elegy composed in praise of THABIT IBN QURRA, the
SABAEAN physician and mathematician…. Strange and heterogeneous were the
elements, which made up the intellectual atmosphere of BAGHDAD during
the first century of ABBASSID rule. The pious Muslims of MAKKA and
MEDINA who came thither were scandalized to find unbelievers invested
with the highest offices at court, and learned men of every religion
holding friendly debate as to high questions of ontology and philosophy,
in which, by common consent, all appeal to revealed scripture was
forbidden.

To acquire knowledge from every possible source, heathen or Muslim, is
commendable, and both the QUR'AN and the Prophet (P) urged the Muslims
to set out in quest of knowledge. It is matter of pride for us that the
Muslim kings patronized learning to such a great extent. All praise is
due to them for their toleration, which permitted every religion to
exist side by side with Islam in their dominions. But so far and no
further. The passages quoted above show that the Muslims assumed the
role of pupils, while the rod of teaching was put in the hand of the
heathens and Christians. What did they teach? The ancient wisdom of
Assyria, Babylonia, Persia, India and Greece.

That is a euphemistic way of saying that they taught their own
philosophy as tinged by their religion. Philosophy was the most popular
branch of learning in those days, and the Muslims were eager pupils who
considered themselves indebted to their teacher for what they imparted.
They felt that they had nothing suitable to give in return for the Greek
Philosophy and HINDU VEDANTISM which was so graciously granted them by
those heathens. The poverty of Islamic thought could not be described in
more appropriate terms. Most significant of all is the fact that all
appeal to revealed scripture was forbidden. Why this ban on revealed
scripture? Greek Philosophy did not claim any revealed origin;

there was no revealed scripture for VEDANTISM or Neo-Platonism;
ZOROASTRIANISM had no divine background. As to the Bible, it is a holy
scripture, but I do not think any claim is generally laid these days to
its being a divinely revealed scripture. But it there should be any
doubt in the reader's mind; I would refer him to the excellent work of
ERNEST RENAN on the "Life of Jesus". It is thus evident that this
condition was intended to exclude the QUR'AN had no place. And this was
conceded by the Muslim theologians when they consented to the condition
of its exclusion from the discussions.

This discomfiture on the part of the Muslims was due to the fact that
the early and premature conquests had brought them to the world stage
before they had thoroughly imbibed the principles of Islam for it to be
infused into their very existence. They had only outwardly left
paganism, and old habits of thought that had been ingrained in their
nature by centuries of continuous conduct and practice, were still
lurking in their minds, and like old companions of childhood, held more
attraction to them than the new tenets of Islam that were so different
to what they had hitherto known and experienced.

Their minds were still saturated with (paganistic) ideology, traditions
and customs, with the result that when they saw their old likeness
reflected in the teachings of those heathens, they felt an
uncontrollable propensity towards them, and eagerly and fondly embraced
those teachings like old friends whom an inexorable fate had so long
kept apart. They could not abjure Islam all at once; they rent it into
sects, the leader of each sect trying to absorb into his teachings as
much of the pagan philosophy as he could manage consistent with his
position, which compelled him to refer to the QUR'AN as his authority in
order to make his teaching acceptable to the man in the street.

To those people, the truth of a religion was in proportion to the
compatibility of its doctrines with Greek Philosophy or HINDU VEDANTISM.
This should not excite any feelings of surprise, as in our own day we
see the tenets of Islam being tested daily on the touchstone of European
thought and civilization. Referring to the verses of RABI'A, a female
SUFI saint, NICHOLSON says:

These lines serve to mark the end of orthodox Sufism and the rise of a
new theosophical system which, under the same name and still professing
to be in full accord with the QUR'AN and the SUNNA, was really founded
upon pantheistic ideas of extraneous origin-ideas irreconcilable with
any revealed religion, and directly opposed to the severe and majestic
simplicity of the MUHAMMADAN articles of faith.

Further on, the same writer says:

Under the OMAYYADS, the old pagan spirit asserted itself once more.
Consequently the literature of this period consists almost exclusively
of poetry, which bears few marks of Islamic influence…. The poets of the
period with which we are now dealing follow slavishly in the footsteps
of the ancients, as though Islam had never been.

Speaking of the evil influence of wealth that followed in the wake of
these conquests, the same learned historian says:

The conquests made by successors of the Prophet brought enormous wealth
into MAKKA and Medina, and when the OMAYYAD aristocracy gained the upper
hand in UTHMAN'S caliphate, these towns developed a voluptuous and
dissolute life which broke through every restriction that Islam had
imposed…. It is characteristic of the anti-Islamic spirit which appears
so strongly in the OMAYYADS, that their chosen laureate and champion
should have been Christian (AL-AKHTAL) who was in truth a lineal
descendant of the pagan bards.

Of the influence and position of these poets he says: We must remember
that the poets were the leaders of public opinion; their utterances took
the place of political pamphlets or of party oratory for or against the
government of the day.

It can well be imagined in what shape Islam emerged from this medley of
ideas, in which the doctrines of genuine Islam had the weakest position.
It was itself an immature, imperfect and defective Islam, which the
armies carried to foreign lands and gave to the converts, who in turn
mixed with it their old ideas and habits of thought. It was almost
inevitable that their Islam should have more of a (paganistic) beliefs,
for example those regarding the AUTARS, AVA GAVAN, Self-annihilation
(NIRVAN), and KARMA etc, found their way into Islam under the Arabic-zed
names of HULUL, TANASUKH, HAQIQA and FANA'. Their FANA' is nothing but
the Self-annihilation, or NIRVAN, of BUDDHISM. MAWLAWI JALAL-ED-DINE
AR-RUMI expresses his belief in TANASUKH in the following couplet:

I have, like vegetation, grown many a time;

I have inhabited no less than seven hundred and seventy bodies". They
have clothed the vagaries of their imagination under the name of
"HAQIQA" as opposed to the SHARI'A. By this they mean that the laws and
rituals prescribed by the Prophet (P) form only the kernel; Reality,
that is, Truth, is not found there; it is found in their Sufism, and can
be discerned only by those who seek it in the bottom of a cup of wine.
They closely guarded secrets of Divinity, which are said by the SHARI'A
to be beyond human understanding, and which even a man learned in the
SHARI'A can never know, are intuitively known, it would seem, to the
tavern boy. For them, "SANAM" (idol) alone is entitled to their love,
and can guide them to Truth. Dancing and Music, proscribed by Islam, are
the necessary rituals of their religion. Looking to their aversion to
Islam, foreign critics have come to the conclusion that Sufism is the
reaction of the Aryan mind to a Semitic religion imposed upon it by
force.

Professor Browne writes:

AL-JUNAYD spoke much in the same fashion. "For thirty years", said he,
"God spoke with mankind by the tongue of AL-JUNAYD, though AL-JUNAYD was
no longer there, and men knew it not. The supreme degree of the Doctrine
of the Divine Unity is the denial of the Divine Unity". In short, with
these men, whom the SUFIS reckon amongst their teachers, a very
thoroughgoing Pantheism is superadded to the quietism of the older
mystics. Some of them like AL-JUNAYD and HUSSAIN IBN MANSUR AL-HALLAJ
claimed that they were the Truth (i.e. God). The author of that
monumental work on Persian literature, Professor Browne, says:

We have seen that the creation of a common national feeling amongst the
Arabs, nay more, of a common religious feeling among all Muslims, in
place of the narrow clannishness of the heathen Arabs, was one of the
greatest and most notable results of the Prophet's mission. But such
counsels of perfection were from the first hard to follow, being too
radically opposed to ancient and deeply-rooted national instincts.

The learned might well have referred to the manner in which the caliph
was appointed at the SAQIFA after the death of the Prophet (P). The most
reasonable way would have been to consider impartially the merits and
qualifications of the respective candidates, and to select the best man
from among the whole of the Muslim community. But instead of doing this,
they cut the Muslim community in two, and the only question, which they
brought into the controversy, was from which of the two divisions, ANSAR
or MUHAJIRIN the caliph should be taken. This was the old tribal spirit
brought into play. Speaking of the un-Islamic haughtiness of the OMAYYAD
rulers, the same writer says:

The "Clients" (MAWALI) or non-Arab Muslims, who, far from being treated
by the government as equal to their co-religionists of Arab birth, were
regarded as subject races to be oppressed, exploited and despised by the
rulers…. The clients were indeed regarded by the Arabs as an inferior
race, little better than slaves.

Another European critic says:

Conquerors of Asia, of Northern Africa, of Spain, the Arabs never rose
to the level of their position. Greatness had been thrust upon them, but
in the midst of their grandeur they retained in all their previous force
and intensity the passions, the rivalries, the petty jealousies of the
desert. They merely fought again on a wider field the battles of the
Arabia before Islam. The explanation is the same: they went out to meet
the world prematurely, before Islam had had the change to penetrate deep
down into every fiber of their frame and so bring about harmony between
belief and conduct.

It has been admitted by Muslim historians that the greatest possible
harm was done to Islam under the OMAYYAD and ABBASSID rules, and than in
the midst of worldly grandeur and power, Islam stood deserted and
forlorn.

(c) The Foreign Expeditions Were Against the Laws of JIHAD:

The Holy QUR'AN deals with the subject of JIHAD very fully and
forcibly. According to that book, war is exclusively a political affair,
and its object is only to protect the nation from outside aggression and
defend it from encroachment on its honor and prestige. Though absolutely
essential as a defensive measure, it should on no account be made a
weapon of offence or a means to acquire kingdoms. It cannot be used to
extend the boundaries of the realm or to place one nation over the head
of another.

Its interference in the domain of religion had been prohibited in the
QUR'AN in these words: "There is no compulsion in religion". This
principle of allowing the greatest possible freedom of opinion in
religious matters was entirely unknown to, and sharply in contrast with
the intolerant views of the rest of the world, from the beginning of
history right up to the nineteenth century (C.E.), from the Laws of
Plato and the Twelve Tables to the Inquisition and the Pillory,

and is clearly demonstrative of the prophetic nature of Muhammad's
mission. That this principle should have been entirely ignored by the
non-Muslim world is most unfortunate, but can easily be explained. It
can be attributed to the fighting started by the early caliphate against
its non-Muslim neighbors, for in reality they were not religious wars,
and were not prompted by religious motives, as we have shown above.

But a religious coloring was given to them for the sake of infusing in
their armies that zeal and disregard for life which is so essential for
winning a war, and it was thus represented to the credulous Arabs that
they were fighting in the way of God, and that if they won they would
get GHANIMA, and if they fell fighting they would be admitted into
Paradise. To complete the illusion, when the two armies were face to
face and on the point of starting to fight, their generals would offer
Islam to the enemy, adding that if they refused they must be prepared to
fig0ht. Prepared to fight they already were;

this was neither the occasion nor the manner for inviting an outraged
enemy to accept the teachings of Islam when those teachings were
presented to them in such an un-Islamic way. They fought and won, and
the vanquished were quite justified in proclaiming to the world that
Islam was thrust on the people at the point of the sword. The cry was
eagerly taken up by the Clergy of Europe and preserved in their books
for the coming generations. This was a great injustice of Islam, which
even in that age of bigotry and intolerance taught that there was no
compulsion in religion. This mistaken view of the world about Islam was
due to the unjustifiable wars carried on by the Early Caliphate against
Persia and Syria, and imitated by the OMAYYAD and ABBASSID kings. The
teachings of the QUR'AN, as enforced by the Prophet (P), were quite
contrary to this. There was no element of force in the promulgation of
Islam, as I will presently show. But I must first describe the laws of
JIHAD as laid down in the QUR'AN.

As a safeguard against the indiscriminate resort to war, no Prophet, or
his community of followers, have been permitted to make war on the
infidels without divine permission to that effect. This rule is very
clearly demonstrated in the story of Samuel and Saul as given in the
QUR'AN. When hard pressed by the Philistines, the Israelites asked their
Prophet Samuel to appoint a king, and to get God's permission to fight
their enemy. Their Prophet asked whether, if God commanded them to
fight. It was then that the permission was given. Similarly, the Muslims
did not fight unless and until they were commanded to do so. As in the
case of the Israelites, so with the Muslims; this command or permission
to fight was given on certain conditions and with certain reservations,
which constitute the rules of Holy War, or JIHAD. They are contained in
the following verses:

1. "Fight in the cause of God those who fight against you, but
transgress not the limits, for God loveth not the transgressors". (SURA
II, 190).

2. "Slay them wherever you find them, and turn them out from where they
have turned you out; for FITNA (oppression, tumult) is more grievous
than slaughter; but fight them not in the Sacred Mosque, unless they
attack you therein; but if they fight you, then slay them. Such is
Oft-forgiving, Merciful. And fight them until FITNA is no more and the
religion is for God; but if they desist, then let there be no hostility
except to the oppressors. A sacred month -and prohibited things - as per
the law of retaliation. Whoever transgresses against you, then
transgress against him in like manner; and fear God, and know that God
is with the MUTTAQIN (heeders of their obligations)". (SURA II,
191-194)

3. "…and let not hatred of a people induce you to act with injustice;
act justly, that is the nearest to TAQWA (piety, righteousness); and
fear God…" (SURA V, 9)

These are the QUR'ANIC laws of Holy War, or JIHAD; and it is impossible
to find rules on the subject more sane and reasonable, or more in
keeping with justice, equity and good conscience -even in the modern
code of international morality. Study them very closely; a general
permission to fight every infidel or unbeliever is not given. The
Muslims are to fight only those who have already declared war and have
committed acts of hostility against them. Mark the very healthy rule
that they should not be the first to attack. This rule alone, if
scrupulously observed and faithfully put into effect, is sure to
eliminate war. Exhortation to do justice even with one's enemies is
another beautiful doctrine peculiar to Islam, which proves the divine
source of these mandates. There is nothing in these rules of JIHAD to be
afraid of for those who want to live peacefully as the neighbors of the
Muslims, and who do not transgress the limits of co-existence by being
the first to attack.

But if they do, then no quarter is to be given, except, of course, if
they desist from their evil course. Osborn is certainly in error when he
asserts that SURA IX (AT-TAWBA) "is that which contains the Prophet's
proclamation of war against the votaries of all creeds other than that
of Islam". In fact, it is limited to those pagans of Arabia who had
treacherously broken their terms. It is they alone who are denounced,
and who have their treaties annulled.

But even among them, those who have scrupulously kept the terms of the
treaty are excluded from the purview of this SURA. Past experience had
shown that they would never rest contented, and that they would go on
intriguing against the Muslims and damaging and injuring their
interests. It was therefore ruled that the Muslims must fight them
wherever they were to be found. This is made perfectly clear in that
SURA thus: "Will ye not fight against people who have violated their
oaths, and conspired to expel the Messenger, and who were the ones to
start hostilities against you". (SURA IX,13). And in another verse of
the SURA: "How so (i.e. how can there be a league with the idolaters),
since if they prevail against you, they do not have regard for you by
way of either kinship or covenant". (SURA IX,8).

It is thus abundantly clear that this SURA refers to the infidels of
Arabia only, who had been the deadly enemy of the Muslims and were at
war with them. It was not a declaration of war against the unbelievers
of the beautiful doctrine "There is no compulsion in religion" was the
Prophet's motto only when he himself was persecuted, and that in
success, he laid down a rule quite the reverse of it, namely "Kill them
wherever you find them until they accept Islam". I have already shown
that this is a mistaken view. Had the first rule been abrogated, the
verse would not have found its way into the QUR'AN. The fact is that the
former rule relates to the promulgation of a religion, while the latter
rule governs the conditions of war. "Them" here refers to the pagans who
had already been at war with the Prophet (P). MAWLAWI SHIBLI says:

The only object of Islam is to spread its mission by persuasion. If a
nation does not obstruct this peaceful mission, Islam has no dispute
with it and must not fight against that nation: a pact of peace is
enough. There are many instances of this. But if a nation, without any
cause, stands up to oppose Islam and wants to annihilate it, then Islam
is bound to take up the sword in defense and keep that nation under
subjection. KHAIBAR was the first conquered place in accordance with
this rule.

The Prophet (P) conducted his wars in accordance with the rules laid
down in the QUR'AN, and observed all the limitations and restrictions
prescribed by that authority. It was for this reason that the majority
of the nations did not respond to his call to arms with any alacrity or
zeal. The Holy QUR'AN bears testimony to this reluctance of theirs, and
mentions various false excuses made by them for being allowed to stay at
home and not join the army. On the other hand, when the expeditions of
the early caliphate were sent to Persia and Syria, knowing that the
rigidity of the rules was no more, they vied eagerly with each other to
join the armies. During the time of Imam Ali the application of the
rules was (reimposed), with the result that the same reluctance to join
the armies was once again in evidence.

The following rules of JIHAD are deducible from the verses quoted
above:

1. The Muslims must not be the first to attack a nation; they are to
fight only those who begin to fight against them.
2. Even towards an enemy they must behave with justice and equity.
3. The Muslims are to observe the sanctity of the prohibited months and
the mosque; but if the enemy fights them during that time or in that
place, they are also to do the same.
4. 0In war, they should not be the transgressors.
5. It is thus apparent that the law of JIHAD is nothing more than the
Law of Retaliation.

These rules are illustrated in the wars of the Prophet (P). It has been
thoroughly proved that these were in self-defense. Controversial writers
have tried to find fault with the battles of BADR and KHAIBAR, and the
words "brigandage" and "loot" have been used in connection with the
former. But all this is entirely wrong. There had been continuous
warfare between QURAISH and the Muslims since the time that the latter
had been obliged to flee from MAKKA. They were expelled by QURAISH from
their native town,

as alluded to in the above-mentioned verses. The Prophet (P) was
therefore quite justified according to all canons of warfare, in
utilizing his opportunity when it presented itself. On this occasion
also QURAISH were the first to begin the attack. They sent no less than
three armed bands, one after the other, towards Medina. AMIR ALI says:
"The MAKKANS and their allies commenced raiding up to Medina, destroying
the fruit trees of the Muslims and carrying away their flocks. A force
consisting of a thousand well-equipped men marched under the noted ABU
JAHL, the "Father of Ignorance", towards Medina to destroy the Muslims,
and to protect one of the caravans bringing munitions of war".

This was the battle of BADR:; no one can now say that the Prophet (P)
took the offensive or was the first to attack. As to the battle of
KHAIBAR, all the Jews of Arabia had collected there. "The Jews of
KHAIBAR, united by an ancient alliance with the BEDWIN hordes of BANU
GHATAFAN and other cognate tribes, worked incessantly for the formation
of another coalition against them. This was as much a defensive measure
as the digging of the ditch round Medina when the Confederates invaded.
He who cannot anticipate, and provide against the next move of the enemy
is certainly a bad statesman. Writing about the battles and expeditions
of the time of the Prophet (P), MAWLAWI SHIBLI says:

The SARAYA (expeditions under persons other than the Prophet) were of
different kinds, according to the object with which they were
undertaken, that is, (1) expeditions sent to ascertain the movements of
the enemy, (2) on hearing the preparations of the enemy some detachments
were sent, (3) expeditions sent to harass the enemy through his trade
caravans in order to make him leave his habit of preventing the Muslims
from performing the HAJJ, (4) punitive expeditions to keep to peace, (5)
Muslim missionary parties accompanied by some soldiers who were
expressly directed no to use the sword.

The GHAZAWAT (battles personally under the command of the Prophet (P))
were to two kinds, according to the object with which they were
undertaken, viz. (1) to defend Medina when actually attacked by the
enemy, and (2) to anticipate the hostile movements of the enemy and to
defeat his designs, when the Prophet (P) received information of those
designs.

All the wars that were fought, and all the expeditions that were sent
out in the time of the Prophet (P) were for either of these objects. But
the wars against Persia and Syria undertaken by the first two caliphs do
not fulfill these conditions and were, therefore, against the teachings
of the QUR'AN. The Persians and Syrians had given no offence, and were
not preparing to attack the Muslims. It was quite unjust and
un-neighborly to attack them unawares. Apart from doing Islam n o good,
these attacks definitely injured its cause by furnishing its enemies
with an argument to justify their accusation that Islam owes its
existence to the sword. These conquests led directly to the
establishment of Imperialism, and the domination of the Arab nation over
the weaker nations. This was the object neither of Islam nor the Prophet
(P), and therefore Imam Ali could not indulge in the same pastime as
these weaker souls, destroying others for the sake of their own glory.

If any doubt still remains, there are three facts, which prove
conclusively that foreign conquests by means of the sword were not the
object of Islam. Warlike expeditions are impossible without a
well-furnished treasury and a well-equipped standing army. The fact that
the Prophet (P) made no arrangements for these two things shows that his
mission did not include territorial expansion through the sword. He had
neither a state treasury nor a standing army.

These two institutions were brought into existence for the first time
by UMAR. The Prophet's practice was to distribute among the people at
one sitting everything he received by way of war booty or KHIRAJ.
Whenever he wanted to send out an expedition, he called upon the people
to come and form an army. The need for these two institutions was felt
in the time of ABU BAKR, who established BAIT-AL-MAL, or State Treasury,
which UMAR made full use of.

It was the first two caliphs who needed and established a standing
army. The third fact, which goes to show that Islam does not permit the
conquest and annexation of other people's lands, is this. The QUR'AN
prescribes very definite and rigid rules regarding the disposal of
property of the enemy acquired in war. But it does not even mention
conquered lands, let alone give any rules for their disposal. This
conclusively shows that Islamic Theology does not contemplate the
eventuality of other people's lands taken by the Muslims.

The fact is that Islam does not countenance large empires, just as it
does not favor big business concerns dependent for their working on the
labor of countless human beings, as the one leads to Imperialism and the
other to Capitalism, and both tend to create a slavish mentality in
people, eventually giving rise to riots, disturbances and bloodshed when
an awakening finally comes to the sleeping masses. Some theologians of
Islam have, therefore, held that the lands acquired in consequence of
the conquests were MAGHSUBA (usurped) lands, and they avoided and
prohibited their mortgage and sale. On the basis of analogy with the
rules for movable properties acquired during the war as GHANIMA, the
soldiers demanded that the conquered lands should also be divided among
them. It was obviously inadvisable from both social and political
considerations to annex conquered cities and vast tracts of land as
private property. The caliph therefore rejected their demand, but with
unconvincing arguments.

The SUNNI writers have also awakened to the reality that the grandeur
of Granada and Baghdad was in fact the death of Islam. SAYYID. ABU
AL-HASSAN AL-NADAWI says that during the ascendancy of the Muslim
nation, Islam was neglected and forsaken in its own land, and that the
Muslims were treated like DHIMMIS.

A word of warning is needed here. Islam should not be confused with the
Muslim community current, or the Arab nation. Muhammad (P), peace be
upon him, was not sent to extend the limits of Arabia, nor to acquire a
kingdom for the Arab nation. The only object of his mission was to bring
humanity round to the worship of the One God. He wanted, undoubtedly, to
spread his teachings to every corner of the world; but his desire was to
extend the limits of Islam, not the territorial boundaries of Arabia. He
wished to rule the heart of Man in every part of the world, and not his
lands. But the way taken by the first two caliphs and the succeeding
kings was not the way to rule the heart. That was the way to alienate
hearts, not to win them. Had the way shown by the Prophet (P) been
followed by those caliphs,

the Empire of Islam would be found today over the whole of the world,
as strong and dazzling in its pristine glory as ever. But what we
actually find is the Muslims beaten on every field, and the divine words
of the QUR'AN brought into full significance: "You will gain mastery if
you are true in faith". (SURA III,139).

But true in faith they were not, for they used the hand of force to
gain an empire. And the same hand of force snatched it from them. Those
who depend on force must be prepared to face any eventuality that force
may bring about. They took the models of a state treasury and a standing
army from Persia and the Roman Empire; but they failed to take note of
how Christianity had captured the world. It slowly made its way from the
commonalty to the Crown, and therefore its rule in the world endured;
they hurried to the Crown, and missed their chance.

Let us describe the programmed set out by the Prophet (P) for securing
the sovereignty of the world for Islam. The rules for inviting people to
Islam and for conveying its message throughout the world are mentioned
in the QUR'AN:

1. "There is no compulsion in religion". (SURA II,256).
2. "Invite people to the way of the Lord by wisdom and goodly
exhortation; and argue with that are best" (SURA XVI,125).
3. "Let there be from among you a party who invite to goodness, and
enjoin that what is right, and forbid what is wrong". (SURA III,104).

These are the three rules, which the Muslims must observe when they
invite the people to their religion. The sword, or force, finds no place
here; on the contrary, it is expressly prohibited. Not to mention the
sword, even injury to the feelings of opponents in argument is
forbidden. They must be persuaded by means of that which looks most
pleasing. One of those means is that the Muslim must model his life, his
way of living, his manners, and his behavior according to the tenets of
Islam; he must himself observe its rules, and go among them with his
actions, words, manners and conduct all bearing the stamp of Islam.

When they see from the picture of Islam in action that it is very
pleasing and inviting, they will be attracted towards him and hence
towards Islam. The Prophet (P) put these rules into practice; he sent
missionary parties to the neighboring places, and also to the crowned
heads of the world. To head these missions he chose those persons who
were best able to translate the tenets of Islam into action. Imam Ali
was at the head of a party that was sent to the important places of
Yemen. We learn from AT-TABARI: "The Prophet (P) used to send missionary
parties to places round MAKKA; they strictly enjoined not to fight. It
is a pity that the first two caliphs did not follow this procedure.

SAYYID ABU AL-A'LA AL-MAWDUDI is one of the greatest thinkers of Islam
of the present century. His writings are generally characterized by
sound logic and convincing arguments; and what is more valuable; he has
the courage of his convictions and publishes his conclusions fearlessly.
It is only when he has the courage of his convictions and publishes his
conclusions fearlessly. It is only when he has to discuss the topics
that involve the taking stock of the beliefs of his childhood that his
pen begins to stumble,

and then this stumbling is so marked that even he cannot conceal it.
His sound judgment and accurate reasoning have led him to the conclusion
that Islam does not only not permit wars of conquest, but it also
prescribes punishment for those who indulge in such wars. His definitive
finding is that the Holy QUR'AN does not contain any direction to
convert people to Islam by means of the sword, and moreover that there
is no AYA which can lend itself, even with twisting or stretching, to an
interpretation favoring conversion by that means. Naturally enough, this
led him to ponder the wars waged by the first two caliphs, which he
tries to justify by the following argument:

I have, in this book, mentioned many a time, and will have occasion to
repeat this absolute truth as I proceed, that in Islamic Theology, it is
religiously prohibited to make war for the sake of conquering lands. Now
the question arises that if the wars of conquests are religiously
prohibited, what explanations will you give for the invasion of AL-Iraq,
Syria, Iran, Armenia, Egypt and Northern Africa and other countries by
the Companions and the KHULAFA AR-RASHIDIN.

This objection has been very seriously made by the opponents of Islam,
and the Muslim Historians and authors have tried to meet them. But none
of those Muslim Historians and authors has taken into consideration the
difference that exists between the viewpoints of Islam and the
Non-Muslims in this matter. For this reason, those of the Muslim writers
who have met this objection from the viewpoint of the Non-Muslims have
misinterpreted Islamic Theology; and those of the Muslim writers who
have entirely ignored that viewpoint, have succeeded only in raising
other doubts.

The fact of the matter is that so far as the right and title to govern
is concerned, Islam recognizes no difference between foreign and
national governments. It regards Justice and Tyranny only as the
discriminating factors. If the rulers of a national government are
tyrannical, unjust, ungodly, lovers of oppression and selfish, Islam
discards them as much as it would shun foreign rulers having the same
defects….

The idea that an Arab tyrant has a better right to rule over Arab than
Non-Arab, though he has all the good qualities of a ruler, and that a
Turk though just, virtuous and Godly cannot be accepted by the Iraqis
solely because he is a Turk, is not tolerated in Islam. This is an idea,
which Islam detests as wholly wrong and entirely untenable. Islam
regards the matter of government, not from the point of view of a nation
or a country, but from the broader outlook of Humanity as a whole. Its
irrevocable decision is that a just and virtuous man is in every case
preferable to a vicious tyrant, and that in this selection to
differentiate between Indian and Iraqi, national and stranger, black and
white is a sinful prejudice.

According to this view in Islam, the criterion of a good government is
not its being national or self-chosen, but its being just and upright.
The only question is whether a government is just, equitable and fair in
its dealings with its subjects, or whether it is the reverse of it. In
the former case, Islam does not, cannot, even think of replacing it, but
if otherwise is the case, Islam considers it its first duty to subdue
and replace a tyrannical rule by a just and upright government…

From all this it should not be inferred that Islam is an enemy of a
national government. It admits the right of every nation to reform its
rule and set right its affairs; but if it is unable to do so, and falls
so low as to obey its vicious and wicked persons, then according to the
tenets of Islam, that nation loses its right of self-determination, and
another nation which is more virtuous and upright acquires a right to
rule over that nation.

The writer quotes three QUR'ANIC verses (see below) as his authority
for the views enunciated above, which I shall discuss presently. He then
goes on to say that as the governments of Iran, Syria, Egypt etc. had
fallen to the lowest depths of degradation, the Islamic Caliphate, which
had a better government, had every right to conquer and annihilate
them.

Consider this quotation very carefully, and say whether it is not the
same thing as has so often been said from time immemorial, and is even
now being said by all conquering, imperialistic nations. We have heard
the imperialistic nation of Europe repeating and nauseam their pious
resolve to subdue weaker nations only in order to improve their mental,
moral and material condition,

and to replace a tyrannical and oppressive rule with their own benign
government. In so many conflicts each of the parties tries to convince
the world that they are the angels and their opponents are the devils,
and that they are fighting only to rid the world of those SATANS.
AL-MAWDUDI anticipates this criticism, but meets it by asserting that
Islamic rule was in truth a blessing. But every class of people honestly
entertains the same conviction about its own system as AL-MAWDUDI has
about Islam. You can silence the Muslims in this way, but you cannot
convince strangers to Islam with this argument.

If such a way of arguing, and the principle on which it is based were
accepted, there would be perpetual warfare in the world. Are the Muslim
countries, as we find them today, now prepared to be annihilated in
accordance with the principle by the stronger nations of the world who
are decidedly better governed and in a better social and moral
condition? The reply that the QUR'AN of the Muslims is much better than
the code of laws of those nations would not hold water for a single
moment; the principle must be acceptable to Non-Muslims,

for it is they whose conquest is sought to be vindicated, and for them
the question is not of what is written in the books, but of how the
people are governed and what their moral, material and social condition
actually is. As the Muslims of the present age currently stand very low
in comparison with the progressive nations of the world, then were we to
accept the formula laid down by AL-MAWDUDI, we would deserve to be
turned out of our possessions bag and baggage.

AL-MAWDUDI uses the word "ZULM" for that which, if indulged in by a
nation, incapacitates it from governing its own affairs. "ZULM" means
injustice or usurpation. Now in the QUR'AN, SHIRK (association of false
gods with the true God) is described as the greatest ZULM. If the
formula of AL-MAWDUDI is carried to its logical conclusion, no
Non-Muslim nation had the right to rule over its own country, and they
should all retire in favor of the Muslims. This is exactly what Islam's
detractors mean when they say that the Muslims in their heyday wanted to
convert the whole world to Islam by means of the sword. An argument,
which leads to such absurd conclusions, must surely be rejected.

The learned writer himself is conscious of the weakness of his
arguments. Realizing that they cannot carry conviction to an impartial
reader, he winds them up by saying, "You are at liberty to attribute
these expeditions to dictatorial arrogance and imperialism; but you
cannot deny this historical fact that the Muslim rule pulled these
nations out of that abyss of degradation into which they had fallen, and
raised them to a high level of moral, material and spiritual
progress".

AL-MAWDUDI bases his arguments on the following three verses of the
QUR'AN.

1. And if you turn back, He will substitute another people in your
stead, who shall not be like unto you". (SURA XLVII,39).
2. "Unless you go forth (when you are summoned to war). God will punish
you with a grievous punishment; and he will place another people in your
stead, and you shall not hurt Him at all, for God hath power over all
things". (SURA IX,39).
3. "If He pleased He could remove you, O people, and bring others…"
(SURA IV,133).

It is obvious that these verses are quite wide of the mark as far as
the point under discussion is concerned. The first two verses are
addressed to the Muslims, and this fact is sufficient to show that the
Iranians and Syrians are not threatened, and are not meant to be
substituted by others. The third verse is general, and refers to the
human race as a whole, and means substitution by some other race. By no
stretch of the imagination can these verses be said to authorize the
Muslims to undertake wholesale extirpation of any nation, which, in
their opinion, is on a lower plane of civilization or morality. These
verses are in fact intended to impress upon the minds of Muslims and
other people the omnipotence of God, who does not stand in need of their
obedience of faith. If they do not mend their ways in spite of all this
teaching, they cannot hurt God; He is able to replace them with others.
This power is God's; He has not delegated it to the Muslims.

The weakness of the argument of those who support these expeditions is
plain. Their untenable insistence on its validity makes people think
that these expeditions and wars were motivated by the teachings of the
QUR'AN, and thus Islam gets a bad name. It would have been much better
to concede the fact that these were the actions of individual kings, and
were not in accordance with the teachings of the QUR'AN and the Prophet;
Islam is not responsible for them, just as it is not responsible for the
un-Islamic actions of any other individual Muslim.

But here a word of warning is needed. The only object of my arguments,
which are intended to show the religious point of view, has so far been
to prove that these expeditions that were led into foreign countries
under orders from the caliphate were neither based on a desire to spread
Islam, nor were authorized by that religion. The primary object of these
wars was entirely secular. They must, therefore, be taken out of the
category of religious JIHAD altogether. Moreover, the controversial
writers have no right to criticize Islam as a religion on the basis of
those wars.

But so far as the Muslim nation and its secular interests are
concerned, they were of immense value. These conquests opened up great
possibilities for Islam, and provided means for its expansion. To have
conquered two of the greatest empires of the ancient world within such
an incredibly short period, and to have acquired and built up an empire
"which in less than a century spread itself over a greater part of the
world than the Romans were ever masters of", is a feat of arms, nay a
miracle, unparalleled in the history of the world.

European writers, whose fears, hopes and expectations do not, and from
the nature of their civilization cannot, go beyond the scope of the
present life of man on this earth, are filled with admiration for the
first two caliphs, and allot them a very high place among the great men
of history, like CAESER, HANNIBAL, HITLER, NAPOLEON, and others of the
same caliber. Yes, it was an imperialism - but imperialism of the best
kind; it was despotic - but despotism of the most liberal sort, having
the interests of a majority of its subjects at heart. It was despotism
of a type, which even democracies of the modern age might well envy.

Descriptions of the courts of HARUN and AL-MA'MUN, whence flowed
streams of charity and munificence, still excite the wonder of the
world. Their patronage of art and learning has elicited admiration even
from their enemies. Not to speak of the kings, the nobles of their court
also vied with each other in emulating the liberality and munificence of
their sires. There is no doubt though, that side by side with this,
there existed in individual cases instances of utmost brutality and
injustice on the part of these rules;

there were executions on the slightest suspicion, torture, life
imprisonment, and killing by poison, just to eliminate the possibility
of any threat to their position by those who had a much superior claim
to rule. We accept these accusations, which are true and which we have
condemned in the preceding pages of this book. At the same time however,
we should also keep in view some of the deeds of the "civilized world"
of the twentieth century, which blotted out of existence millions of
innocent men, women and children under the pretext of the exigencies of
war; we should also remember the cold-blooded murders by the so-called
"Tribunals of Justice" of NUREMBURG, which sullied the fair name of
justice by passing sentence which were determined solely by enmity and
revenge.

Thus, despite the weakness from which the Muslim rule suffered due to
the original wrong perpetrated by the usurpers of Imam Ali's claims, the
European historians should not adopt a holier-than-thou attitude and
paint Islam as a barbaric religion. We do not blame Christianity for
what these Christians have done, and are doing; and similarly we urge
that Islam should not be called to account for the evil deeds of the
Muslim kings.

(d) The Damage Done to Islam through these Early Conquests:

That these early conquests proved more destructive than beneficial to
Islam must be evident from the preceding discussions. Here is a list
summarizing some of the evil consequences that ensued:

1. A wrong impression was created that Islam owed its existence to the
sword.
2. The violations of the QUR'ANIC injunctions on the subject gave rise
to the idea that Islam was a bloodthirsty religion, which advocated the
use of force.

3. In the clash with other religions systems and philosophies in
foreign lands, this mutilated Islam of the still-raw Muslims was at a
disadvantage, with the result that it became adulterated and lost its
purity forever.

4. The sense of injustice that was created in the minds of the
conquered peoples on account of the invasion of their countries without
reasonable cause, proved very harmful to Islam.

5. Islam claimed to be the teacher of the world, with a mission to
raise humanity to a higher level; but the Muslims betrayed this claim by
showing scanty regard for reasonableness, justice, and good neighborly
relations in their dealings with other nations.

6. The accumulation of immense riches, which they did not know how to
utilize properly and beneficially, led to numerous vices.

7. Imperialism and Capitalism were the direct result of these
conquests.


**Chapter Twelve : To Conclude**

Thus have all the dimensions of this question over the succession been
discussed. If the reader has managed to consider the matter from the
aspect of a seeder after truth who has no personal involvement in one
side or the other, and does not therefore have any cause to care for the
consequences for himself of favoring a view different from that with
which he was brought up and by which those who are near and dear to his
live, it should be very clear from the foregoing that the Prophet (P)
did indeed nominate Imam Ali as his KHALIFA.

It is in the first instance primarily a matter of history. Whatever the
effects on the ensuing history of Islam have been, the historical truth
of the matter stands in its own right. However, to accept not that the
majority view has been in error is not without its implications for that
history of Islam, and this very observation is reason enough for most
people to conveniently close their eyes to the truth as the only
alternative to accepting the unthinkable.

To date that has not been too difficult, as the majority of Muslims
have been able to assume with an untroubled conscience that they can
rely on their learned men, who cannot possibly all be wrong. Many a
good, sincere and true Muslim, who cannot himself be expected to be an
expert historian, has understandably clung to the security of the
prevalent view, especially when, under attack from the non-Muslim world,
he feels it to be his first duty to rush to defend Islam, along with the
deeds of its history. In this way the Muslim is reassured, but the
non-Muslim remains unconvinced, armed as he sees it with the weapon of
historical fact, which his adversary seems to have buried in the sand.

However, the Muslim should not fear truth provided that he is able to
face up to the consequences for his previously held position. When
challenged by the orient-lists that Islam was spread by the sword, he no
longer needs to pretend apologetically that the conquered peoples were
for the most part willing takers of refuge in Islam from a hitherto
oppressed condition. But at the same time, knowing now the historical
truth of the matter, he no longer needs to feel that he is betraying
Islam by acknowledging it as a religion that was spread by the swore.
Yes, a spreading process did take place, and yes, the sword was
instrumental in that process.

But was it Islam, the true Islam of the Prophet (P), that was being
spread, and that motivated that spreading? As we have seen earlier in
the book, definitely not. So the Muslim has no need to fear that he is
doing any disservice to his religion; rather, he is putting its own
house in order, which is an essential prerequisite for the future
spreading of Islam throughout the world among people who will need to be
convinced in a thorough way in which the mere appeal to established
majority views can play no part.

But there is one price to be paid for this reconciliation between
Islam's historical credibility and its claim to be the True Religion of
God. That is, the actions of those responsible for these historical
events cannot at the same time be defended. It is a simple and real
choice that the Muslim must make. He can accept that the majority has
been wrong, and that the actions of those in power were not those that
the world's historians would have been recording had the Prophet's
nomination of Imam Ali as his successor been allowed to take effect.

Or he can continue to maintain the pretence by closing his eyes to any
closer enquiry into the matter. This brings us to the present book,
which should greatly facilitate the recognition of the truth of the
question of the succession, and enable all Muslims to be united- not
merely on the basis of a majority perception, but united in truth.


