Chapter One : the Theory of Non-appointment and Why It Was Invented
===================================================================

Very soon after the arrival of the Prophet at MEDINA, it became evident
to all that a Muslim state was in the making. With this knowledge, the
idea naturally entered every mind as to who the next ruler of this state
after the Prophet would be. As time went on and the state expanded, this
idea took deeper root and different shapes in the minds of different
persons.

It was all too plain that the Prophet (P) had selected Imam Ali to be
his successor. But this was not to the liking of many people, and their
sullen mood was fed and fostered for their own ends by those who thought
themselves to be in a position to make a bid for the prize. They set
about canvassing and inviting people to their way of thinking, with the
result that a party comprising this ambitious and refractory element was
soon formed. By the time the question of the succession arose, this
opposition party had gained considerable strength and momentum of its
own.

The gradual acquisition of power and the cause that led to their
ultimate success, form the subject matter of the following pages. But a
formidable difficulty faced the opposition from the outset. According to
the tenets of Islam and the behests of the QUR'AN, they had to yield
unquestioning submission to the will of the Prophet and were to carry
out his orders without demur, nay without feeling even the slightest
disinclination in their hearts. They were to take these orders with a
joyful acceptance springing from their firm conviction in the
infallibility of the Prophet and the honesty of his purpose.

In fact this was the main condition of their being accepted into the
fold of Islam. Without this unquestioning submission and unhesitating
obedience, they could not be Muslims. Now the dilemma before them was
this; if they unquestioningly accepted and obeyed the orders of the
Prophet designating Imam Ali as his successor, they would have to give
up the long cherished desire of their hearts and lose the Caliphate for
ever; yet if they were to declare themselves openly in opposition to the
wishes of the Prophet, they would be stigmatized as KAFIRIN
(unbelievers) and so losing the caliphate anyway as no opponent of the
Prophet could be his successor. It was certainly a mastermind of
politics who devised the means to steer clear of this rock. The device
was this;

instead of openly disobeying the orders of the Prophet, they feigned
not to believe that the Prophet (P) had designated Imam Ali, or anyone
else for that matter, as his successor. This is the raison d'Ã©tre of the
Non-appointment Theory.

The person who formulated this Theory was definitely UMAR, and it has
become an accepted article of faith with one of the two factions of the
Muslim nation into which it has since been divided on the question of
the Caliphate, as we have learnt before. On his deathbed, when asked to
nominate his successor, UMAR said that if he did so he would be
following the example of one who was better than himself, namely ABU
BAKR, and that if he did not designate anyone as his successor, he would
be following the example of one who was also better than himself,

that is, the Prophet. It has been an article of faith with this faction
ever since. They have proclaimed it as an established fact that the
Prophet (P) did not designate anyone as his successor, whether Imam Ali
or ABU BAKR. Not only this; they maintain that the Prophet did not give
any direction as to how the succession should be regulated. At the
SAQIFA, where ABU BAKR was selected as Caliph, no definite direction of
the Prophet was cited and none was followed.

The so-called election at the SAQIFA, the arguments that were advanced
there, and the conduct of UMAR and ABU BAKR in abruptly leaving the dead
body of the Prophet and hastening to the SAQIFA to get ABU BAKR selected
as the Caliph, can have a meaning only on the assumption that the
Prophet did not nominate his own successor.

All the Muslim writers whose on Islamic History have been acknowledged
as authentic have been Sunnis, that is, belonging to the majority party
who formulated the Non-appointment Theory, and they believe as an
article of their faith that ABU BAKR was rightfully elected by the UMMA
as Caliph. This explains why they are unanimous in saying that the
Prophet did not nominate his successor. But as a piece of historical
evidence, this unanimity is of no value.


**Chapter Two : The Parties**

We have seen that the birth of the Islamic State gave rise to
speculation regarding the ruler after the Prophet, and that this made
certain people take stock of their own possibilities and potentials.
They were determined to make a bid for the throne. The result was that
the companions of the Prophet were, during his life, as his UMMA has
been since his death, divided into two groups, viz. (a) those who
accepted and were prepared to obey the Prophet's orders nominating Imam
Ali as the successor, and (b) those who were opposed to this. The
opposition party comprised by far the majority of the companions, and
was headed by many influential persons.

But for obvious reasons this opposition was kept screened from the
public view. There were however occasions on which the leaders of the
opposition would discard their mask when silence would have greatly
jeopardized their cause. One such occasion was the time when the Prophet
expressed his desire on his deathbed to write a will in favor of Imam
Ali, and demanded writing materials for the purpose. Silence on that
occasion would have been fatal to their cause; the mask was, therefore,
taken off.

The Prophet (P) was fully aware of the existence of this party. He used
to say to Imam Ali, "The hearts of these people are filled with jealousy
and animosity towards thee, which they conceal now, but will disclose
after my death". The Prophet was quite right when he said, "O Ali, this
nation will play you false when I am gone". The members of this party
used to talk among themselves About ways and means of taking possession
of the Government after the death of the Prophet.

It can well be believed that whenever they met in groups, they used to
engage in propaganda work against the AHL-AL-BAYT (family) of the
Prophet (P). This is evident from the following observation of the
Prophet (P); "What has become of these people; whenever they see a man
of my family. They at once cut off their talk. By God, true faith does
not enter the heart of anyone unless and until he loves my AHL-AL-BAYT
for the sake of God and on account of my relationship with them". It
appears they criticized the Prophet's laying emphasis on the importance
of this relationship; they refuted the Prophet's remark with the
assertion that relationship to him could be of no avail in the next
world.

He had, therefore, to repeat the fact in these words; "What has become
of these people; they say that my relationship will be of no use. By
God, it will benefit the people of this world and the next. Take note
that I will arrive at the HAWD AL-KAWTHAR on the Day of Resurrection
before you. A group of people will be brought to me who will try to make
me recognize them by letting me know their parentage. I shall reply;
"Indeed I know you, but you reverted to disbelief and disobeyed my order
after my death". This last HADITH is called "HADITH AL-HAWD". It has
been mentioned by several eminent writers that it was in these words
that the Prophet (P) spoke; "On the Day of Resurrection, I will arrive
at the HAWD AL-KAWTHAR long before you. Some of my companions will be
brought there. I shall recognize them, but when I am about to give them
water from the HAWD, I shall be told; "They do not deserve this; you do
not know what ill deeds they did after you". I will then have them
removed from my presence".

Reading these sayings together, it becomes abundantly clear that the
Prophet's meaning was that the companions who would thus be deprived of
the benefit of the HAWD would be those who had been Imam Ali's opponents
and enemies in this world. This conclusion receives support from another
saying of the Prophet, which says that it is Ali who will thus drive
away the guilty ones from the HAWD.

From whatever point you argue, the same conclusion is reached; the
companions who are driven away from the Prophet's HAWD will be the
persons who have gone astray. Who learn from another HADITH too that
those who leave Ali will go astray. This HADITH runs as follows:

"I am leaving behind me two very precious things: the Book of God and
my ITRA (progeny); these two will never leave each other until they both
appear before me on the Day of Resurrection at my HAWD (Fountain). Let
us see now you behave towards them after my death. You will never go
astray so long as you follow them".

The abandonment of the one is the abandonment of the other, as the two
are inseparably linked together. The companions who have gone astray and
will, therefore, be driven away from the HAWD, are thus those persons
who had left Imam Ali and deprived him of the leadership of the Muslims.
These were the persons whom the Prophet in this life also drove away
from his presence by saying "QUMU ANNI" (Be you gone from me!) on the
occasion when at his deathbed they disobeyed him, and stood in the way
of him writing his will in favor of Imam Ali.

The existence of this party and their objectives are conclusively
proved from the conversations UMAR had with ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS, as
related in "Al-FARUQ" of SHIBLI says: "AT-TABARI and other books. In
quoting them, MAWLAWI SHIBLI rightly says that those conversations
reveal UMAR'S real mind. SHIBLI says: "AT-TABARI has set forth the ideas
of UMAR on this point in the shape of conversations. We reproduce them
below in this connection, because they disclose the secret mind of UMAR.
The conversations took place with ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS, who belonged to
the tribe and party of Ali". He then reproduces two conversations, as
follows:

UMAR: But I know your nation did not wish you to be the leader and
head. ABDALLAH: Why?

UMAR: They did not want the NUBUWWA Prophet-hood and the Caliphate to
go to the same family. Perhaps you will say that ABU BAKR deprived you
of the Caliphate. But by God, this is not the fact. ABU BAKR did what
was proper. Had he intended to give the Caliphate to you, it would not
have benefited you.

The first conversation ends here. The other conversation, MAWLAWI
SHIBLI says, is fuller. It covers some of the points already given in
the first one; but it has more besides. Here it is:

UMAR: Hallo, ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS, I have been hearing many things about
you. But I did not make further enquiry regarding them, lest your
respect in my eyes should suffer.

ABDALLAH: what are those things?

UMAR: I have heard that you have been complaining that the Caliphate
has been taken out of your family unjustly, on account of jealousy.
ABDALLAH: I do not like to say anything about the word "unjustly", as it
is known to all. As to jealousy, why the surprise? IBLIS envied Adam,
and we are the children of Adam; it is no wonder if we are envied.

UMAR: Alas, old grudges and ancient malice remain ever engraved on the
hearts of the children of HASHIM. ABDALLAH: Do not say this: the Prophet
(P) belonged to the family of HASHIM.

UMAR: leave this topic. ABDALLAH: very well.

MAWLAWI SHIBLI has related only these two conversations. There are some
more, which I take from the "Commentary" of IBN ABI-AL-HADID.

UMAR: O ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS, whence are you coming?

ABDALLAH: From the mosque.

UMAR: In what state have you left you cousin?

ABDALLAH: (Thinking he meant ABDALLAH IBN JA'FAR) I left him playing
with his playmates.

UMAR: I do not mean IBN JA'FAR: I mean Ali, the head of your family.
ABDALLAH: He is watering the garden of a certain person, and is reciting
the QUR'AN while watering the trees. UMAR: ABDALLAH, tell me the truth,
and if you conceal anything then the sacrifice of camels will become
incumbent on you, as I am putting you on oath. Is anything even now
lurking in the heart of Ali regarding the Caliphate? ABDALLAH: Yes, it
certainly is. Why not?

UMAR: Does Ali think that the Prophet designated him to the
Caliphate?

ABDALLAH: Certainly, and what is more I have heard from my father that
this contention of Ali regarding his designation to the Caliphate is
right. UMAR: There is no doubt that the Prophet said and did many things
in this connection which does not support our view that he did not
nominate Ali as his successor. The fact is that on many occasions the
Prophet did go to the extreme in favoring Ali. It is a fact that during
his last illness, the Prophet wanted to write a will designating Ali
expressly to the Caliphate; but I prevented him from doing so. By God,
the QURAISH will never unanimously agree to Ali's Caliphate, and if he
is ever direction.

IBN ABI Al-HADID says that he has copied this conversation from the
History of Baghdad by Ahmad IBN TAHIR.
There is yet another conversation which took place in Syria where
ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS had accompanied UMAR.

UMAR: I must complain to you about your cousin Ali; I asked him to
accompany me, but he refused. I often find him angry with me. What is
the reason for that?

ABDALLAH: He believes that the Prophet (P) reserved the Caliphate for
him. UMAR: O IBN ABBAS, it is true that the Prophet intended and wished
that Ali should attain the Caliphate. But the wish of the Prophet can
carry no weight, as God did not will it to be so. The Prophet wished
that Ali should attain the Caliphate, but God wished it otherwise. The
will of God prevailed, thus the Prophet's desire could not be fulfilled.
See, the Prophet wished that his uncle should embrace Islam, but God
willed that he should not embrace Islam, and therefore he did not become
a Muslim. The Prophet wished to write a will giving the Caliphate to
Ali, but I prevented him form doing so in the interests of Islam. The
Prophet also came to know what was in my heart, and refrained form
writing the will. The will of God prevailed.

One day, while walking in the streets of MEDINA, the following
conversation took place between UMAR and ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS: UMAR: O IBN
ABBAS, I think much injustice has been done.

ABDALLAH: (Thinking to himself not to let this opportunity slip) O AMIR
AL-MU'MININ, the return to him what has been snatched form him unjustly.
(ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS says that upon hearing this, UMAR took his hand away
from that of ABDALLAH, and walked ahead murmuring something. Then he
stopped and ABDALLAH caught up with him).

UMAR: I think, IBN ABBAS, that your people considered Ali to be too
young for the Caliphate, and therefore prevented him form succeeding to
the Prophet (P).

ABDALLAH: (Thinking this reply much more vicious than first one).by
God, Allah and his Prophet (P) did not consider him too young when they
took the verses of SURAT AT-TAWBA away from your friend ABU BAKR and
gave them to Ali to announce to the MAKKANS.

Hearing this, UMAR turned his face, and went away without giving any
reply.

These conversations are very helpful, as they conclusively prove the
following facts:

1.There was a strong party opposed to Imam Ali succession.
2.Tribal jealousy and enmity towards BANU HASHIM, especially Imam Ali,
and not the love of Islam, were the motivating drive of the
opposition.
3.Umar was in the confidence of this party, and was aware of their
secrets.
4.Imam Ali and all other members of BANU HASHIM held that Imam Ali had
been deprived of the Caliphate unjustly, through jealousy.
5.Imam Ali, ABBAD, ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS and other BANU HASHIM maintained
that the Prophet (P) had designated Imam Ali as his successor.
6.Umar was of the opinion that the families of BANU HASHIM were
actuated by motives of ancient grudge and deep-rooted malice.
7.There is an admission here by UMAR that the Prophet (P) had
designated Imam Ali as his successor, that UMAR was opposed to it, and
that it was, chiefly he who had stood between Imam Ali and the
Caliphate.
8.These conversations clear up all doubts about the incident of the
writing of the will on the deathbed of the Prophet (P) when he demanded
writing materials for the purpose. They prove beyond all doubt that the
Prophet wanted to write his will in order to nominate Imam Ali to the
Caliphate, that those present there knew that this was his intention,
that UMAR knowing this prevented the Prophet from writing the will, and
that his talk about delirium and the Book of God was merely a political
move to create an atmosphere of confusion and contumely.

It is thus clear as day that there was an opposition party among the
companions of the Prophet on the question of the Caliphate, and that the
object of the party was an opposition party among the companions of the
Prophet on the question of the Caliphate, and that the object of the
party was to prevent Imam Ali from succeeding the Prophet (P). It was in
fulfillment of this objective of the opposition party that ABU BAKR,
UMAR and Abu UBAIDA IBN Al-JARRAH went to the SAQIFA to contest the
Caliphate, and therefore these three companions belonged to the
opposition party.

It may be argued that the ANSAR had the objective at the SAQIFA of
electing their own man as the Caliph, and that therefore the motive of
these three gentlemen in going there was to oppose the ANSAR and defeat
their objective, not that of the Prophet regarding Imam Ali. This is a
very interesting question, and we reserve it for later discussion when
we come to write about the SAQIFA affair, suffice it to say here that
they did not go to the meeting with the object of preventing the ANSAR
from electing their own man; they went there with the determination to
get their own man elected. There is a great difference between these two
aims.

If their objective had simply been to prevent the ANSAR from proceeding
to the end, then their line of argument would have been quite different
from what it actually was. They would have tried to impress their point
upon the ANSAR in a reasonable manner in words such as the following;
"This is a matter of far-reaching consequences, it should not be decided
in a hurry; let us first attend to the obsequies of the Prophet, and
after that we should assemble in the Prophet's mosque and find out
whether he has nominated anyone to the office; if not, then we should
select the best man from among us, and ignore any divisions by clan or
tribe, ANSAR or MUHAJIRIN. We should regard the Islamic UMMA into ANSAR
and MUHAJIRIN, and utilized the opportunity for getting their own man
elected. They purposely avoided making it a representative body, for
only in this way and no other could Imam Ali be ignored.

The first item on the agenda of this party was to acquire strength by
numbers. Every man, every party that was against Ali was welcome. The
MUNFIQIN, who though really pagan at heart concealed their feelings of
animosity towards Islam and its leading proponents under an outward show
of Islam and friendliness, are frequently mentioned in the QUR'AN. They
were always on the lookout for opportunities to undermine the State of
Islam by spreading disaffection against the Prophet (P). The frequent
conversations and lectures of the Prophet in which he dwelt on the right
of Ali to succeed him, and his final announcement to that effect,
provided them with a good opportunity.

They argued with great vehemence that Muhammad's claim to inspiration
from on High was only a cloak to cover his-cupidity to create an empire
for himself and his family. This argument, which was very appealing to
the Arabs, seething as they were with tribal jealousy and feuds, also
provided a good excuse to the faction that was bent upon securing the
throne for itself at any cost. The MUNAFIQIN were the greatest enemies
of Imam Ali, whom they regarded as the person solely responsible for all
their misfortunes and mishaps.

The extent and importance of the service rendered by Imam Ali to the
cause of Islam will be apparent as we proceed further in our narration.
Suffice it to say here that the Prophet (P) was fully aware of their
feelings of animosity and hatred towards Imam Ali, and was therefore
able to guess rightly that they would vent their feeling after his
death. The attitude of the MUNAFIQIN towards Imam Ali is abundantly
clear from remarks made to him by the Prophet from time to time, such as
the following:

"No-one except a true Muslim will love thee, and no-one except a
MUNAFIQ (hypocrite) will be thy enemy".
"But for thee, the true Muslim would not be able to be distinguished
from the MUNAFIQ after my death".

"True faith lies in thy love, and jealousy of thee is the symbol of
hypocrisy. The first man to enter Paradise will be thy friend and the
first man to enter Hell will be thy foe. Happy is he who loves thee, and
woe to thy enemy". JABIR and Abu DHARR, the well-known companions of the
Prophet (P), used to say:

"During the lifetime of the Prophet we used to distinguish a MUNAFIQ by
his enmity to Ali". The concurrence of interests led to a complete union
between the MUNAFIQIN and the opposition party. This gave rise in turn
to a unity of action: and this unity of motives and actions caused them
to coalesce into one whole. The evidence of this coalescence is supplied
by Al-BUKHARI himself, from whom we learn the following information:

HUDHAIFA son of YAMAN says: "Today the MUNAFIQIN are more dangerous
than they used to be in the time of the Prophet, because in those days
they used to conceal their nefarious activities, whereas today they
openly and freely come out in public and carry out their ulterior
objectives".

Why was this so? For the simple reason that the men in authority were
their friends and comrades-in-arms against Imam Ali. During the
Prophet's mission the MUNAFIQIN and their deeds were mentioned
frequently in the QUR'AN. An instance of their attitude can be seen on
the occasion of the expedition to TABUK, which was the only time when
Imam Ali was not included on an expedition. It is said by the
chroniclers that it was the MUNAFIQIN who made much of this fact, as in
their opinion it cast a slur on Ali. The MUNAFIQIN were so jubilant over
the matter that the Prophet (P) had to clear up the misunderstanding by
saying that this posting of Ali to MEDINA was for other reasons, and
that Imam Ali was to him what Aaron was to Moses.

This proves beyond all doubt that hostility to Imam Ali was the chief
characteristic of the MUNAFIQIN. With the commencement of the Caliphate,
their separate identity ends and they become verged with the common
people. This was anticipated by the Prophet when he said that after his
death the MUNAFIQIN would find themselves so favorably placed that they
would appear just like ordinary Muslims, and that in that situation the
only thing that would distinguish them from the rest of the Muslims
would be their hostility to Imam Ali. (This saying has already been
referred to above).

In order to prevent the people from finding fault with the MUNAFIQIN
and from accusing the Government of associating with them, a HADITH was
fabricated; it is called "HADITH al-NUJUM", the word "NUJUM" meaning
"stars". The Prophet (P) is represented as saying that all his
companions were like stars shedding the light of truth, and that the
UMMA was al liberty to follow any of them who were equally learned,
pious and God-fearing. That this is an invention is obvious;

many companions were addicted to drinking, many were caught in
adultery, many were ignorant of the true interpretation of the QUR'AN.
UMAR himself had to punish his son for drinking. Even the learned Sunnis
have now found by thorough enquiry that this HADITH is a fabrication.
But it did the work for which it had been intended-it shielded the
MUNAFIQIN who were, of course, the companions of the Prophet (P), as
they came under the definition of a "Companion of the Prophet". (See in
this connection Al-BUKHARI, who says that anyone who associated with the
Prophet, or who, from among the Muslims, saw the Prophet, was a
Companion). There were many persons who though not well known as
MUNAFIQIN, in reality were.

There was yet another class of men whose relatives had been killed by
Imam Ali in the battles for Islam, and they were very many in number.
There was hardly a family, which had not had one, or two members thus
killed by him, and they entertained the bitterest feelings against him.
They carried this feeling of animosity with them even after their
conversion to Islam, and it was fanned to white heat by interested
persons. The following anecdote fully illustrates this latter point;
once UMAR met SA'ID, son of Al-A'AS, while on his way.

UMAR stopped him and said, "I think you have a grudge in your heart
against me; I presume that this grudge is on account of the death of
your father, whom you think I killed in the Jihad. But this is wrong; I
killed my own maternal uncle Al-A'AS son of HISHAM son of MOGHIRA. It is
true; I passed by your father, whom I found wallowing in his own blood
like a wounded bull. I avoided him, but just then I saw Ali coming
toward your father and killed him".

There was a fourth party who must also be included in the category of
MUNAFIQIN, which in reality they were. But I mention them separately, as
within a very short time they captured the Caliphate as a direct result
of the efforts of the opposition party. I am referring to BANU OMAYYA
Writing about the accession of MU'AWIYA to the throne of Muhammad; SYYID
AMIR Ali quotes a European historian thus: "Thus, by one of the
strangest freaks of fortune ever recorded in history, did the
persecutors of Muhammad usurp the inheritance of his children, and the
champions of idolatry become the supreme heads of his religion and
empire"

BANU OMAYYA the MUNAFIQIN and the other QURAISH whose relatives had
been slain in the Jihad by Imam Ali never forgave him and never forgot
that Imam Ali had been the chief cause of their disgrace and
discomfiture. Ali the enemies of Islam, and they were many, knew that
Islam could not have won but for the sword of Imam Ali. In short, by his
zeal in the cause of Islam Imam Ali had earned for himself the deadliest
and everlasting enmity and hatred of the enemies of Islam,

who looked upon him as the sole cause of their misfortune and miseries.
From the first they had been the enemies of Islam and Muhammad; but
matters had now reached such a stage that it was not safe for them to
show that enmity openly, and after the battle of KHAIBER, no occasion
was left for translating those feelings into action. As they were able
to successfully conceal their emotions against Islam and the Prophet
(P), they could not be distinguished from the rest of the Muslims. But
they had no such pressing need to conceal their feelings against Imam
Ali. Moreover, in order to gain their object, it was necessary for them
to create an atmosphere of ill will and hatred towards Imam Ali by
propaganda and intrigue.

Feelings of animosity against Imam Ali, lurking paganism, trial
jealousy and ambition, all combined together to make these parties
coalesce into one solid block against him.


