Chapter Five : the Nomination
=============================

To appreciate fully how wisely and cautiously the delicate problem of
the nomination was handled by the prophet, we must realize the awkward
situation created for him by his enemies and by the attitude of his
companions towards this problem. From the very beginning, QURAISH had
accused Muhammad of seeking personal aggrandizement in the garb of a
prophet, and had been harping upon this theme ever since the message was
announced.

What was worse, among his own followers there had arisen a faction
which had an eye on the throne, and were ready to exploit any rumor or
murmuring against the prophet and his mission. And the nomination of
Ali, which appeared to them to amount to the perpetuation of rule in his
family, was a theme well worth building a huge edifice of calumny and
vilification on.

The prophet (P) knew full well that they were likely to stop at
nothing, however damaging to the interests of Islam, to achieve their
object. As s matter of fact, when the nomination became well known it at
once brought about a fusion between these two parties, that is, the
pagan Arabs with their veneer of Islam, generally known as the
MUNAFIQIN, and the party of ambitious companions of the prophet who were
determined to make a bid for the throne. The existence of such a party
among his followers, and the prophet's knowledge of it, have already
been discussed.

The prophet (p) therefore had to take every step in this direction with
a caution bordering on hesitation. But at the same time he had to
proceed in the matter as it was imperative for the continuance and
development in the right direction of his mission, which, as he honestly
believed, was to endure for all time to come. The message could not be
completely and entirely executed unless and until he had made
arrangements for its continuance after his death.

Therefore, keeping in view all these things, the prophet proceeded
cautiously but firmly and with undaunted determination. His method,
which was characterized by caution, clarity and thoroughness was this;
to prepare the people for the final announcement, he declared on every
proper occasion that in Ali were combined those qualities of head and
heart -and indeed he possessed those requirements- which are essential
and indispensable for a successor of the last of the prophets. In
between these declarations, he also made statements indicating,
sometimes by implication, sometimes expressly, that Ali was to succeed
him.

To refute his enemies and confound the MUNAFIQIN, it was necessary to
establish beyond all doubt that Ali's appointment was not due to
nepotism or a selfish desire for personal or family aggrandizement. This
object was achieved by announcing Ali's appointment at the very
beginning of his ministry at MAKKA, when no one could dream of a worldly
position for Muhammad, not to speak of an empire, when forlorn and
forsaken he wandered from place to place meeting with derision and scorn
everywhere, and when his very life was in danger. This announcement came
at a time when the great events of his life were yet to follow; he was
to be pursued and persecuted from place to place; he was to have to seek
the protection of his uncle Abu TALIB, without which his life was in
danger;

he, with all the children of HASHIM, was to be confined in a cave and
to be excommunicated. "After a time the situation became intolerable.
The resources of the believers who were independent were insufficient to
support the strain of their starving brethren, nor was the life of the
latter endurable, amid ceaseless vexations and persecutions". In the
end, life at MAKKA became so intolerable that flight from the place was
thought the only means of safety. All these events were yet to come when
this nomination was made. The announcement of Imam Ali's nomination as a
Vizier and successor of Muhammad (p), coming as it did at a time when
despair and disappointment stared Muhammad in the face, proves
conclusively the sincerity of his heart and the truth of his mission. We
proceed to describe this very important event.


**THE ANNOUNCEMENT AT THE FEAST:**

Ali's Caliphate was announced at the same meeting and at the same time,
as the prophet's own NUBUWWA was announced. This was done under express
divine command. I refer to SURA XXVI, 213, which translated into English
runs as follows: "Admonish thy nearest relations". Muhammad had not as
yet publicly announced his mission, for he could not do so without God's
permission. Now this permission had been given, but it was restricted to
his nearest relatives. I quote from ABU AL-FIDA?

"For the first three years, the prophet carried on his work of
conversion secretly. After that, God commanded his Prophet to invite
people openly. This AYA was therefore revealed to the Prophet (P). Upon
this, he sent for Imam Ali and asked him to prepare food consisting of
goat meat and milk and invite all the children of ABD AL-MOTALIB, so
that he might talk to them and convey to them God's message. Ali did so;
they numbered about forty persons, including the Prophet's uncles, ABU
TALIB, HAMZA and ABBASâ€¦. When those persons had finished eating, the
Prophet wanted to speak to them;

but ABU LAHAB forestalled him, and the assembly dispersed without
hearing Muhammad. The Prophet (P) asked Imam Ali to do the same thing on
the following day. When they had finished eating, Muhammad spoke to them
thus; "In the whole of Arabia, I do not know anyone who has brought
better things to his nation than what I have brought to you, which is
good both for this world and the next. Verily God has commanded me to
incite you to Him. Who is there among you ready and willing to assist me
and share my burden in this mission of mine,

and be my vizier, my colleague, my WASI, and my KHALIFA". All of them
remained silent. Then Ali, who was the youngest of all, stood up and
said, "Oh Prophet of God, I am prepared to be your vizier, to share your
burden with you, and be your KHALIFA". Upon this the Prophet (P) caught
hold of the neck of Imam Ali and said, "Oh people, this Ali is my
colleague, my WASI, and my KHALIFA. You are all to hearken unto him and
obey him". All of them got up laughing, and turning to ABU TALIB, they
said, "Listen to thy son and obey him!".

This is a very important matter and must be given due weight. The
unequivocal term KHALIFA should be notices. After that solemn
declaration of nomination, coming as it did in the form of an offer
being accepted, did anything unusual happen to cancel it? Its
cancellation without good cause would have been very damaging to the
reputation of a Prophet who claimed God's inspiration for his words; for
of what use was that inspiration if it failed him on this momentous
occasion and in this very important matter, arranged as it was under
God's command? From Muhammad's circumspective nature,

it is evident that he would not have made this declaration in respect
of a boy in his teens, especially in the presence of the elders of the
family, many of whom were in the habit of deriding him and his uncles,
among whom was the father of Imam Ali himself, unless he had been driven
to do so God's command. The evidence that this nomination and its
announcement were under the command of God is inherent in the very
nature of the nomination itself.

Who except God could have known at that time that this boy would prove
himself worthy of the position that was being reserved for him? At a
time when nothing certain could be known about Ali's character and
qualities, he being yet a raw youth, Muhammad says with a certainty that
is obviously prophetic that Ali is his vizier, WASI, KHALIFA and a
sharer in the great responsibility that has been placed on his own
shoulders. What if in later years Ali turned out to be a coward,

running after the joys of this world and shunning the hardships and
toils of warfare, lukewarm, in his profession of the faith like so many
others, and avoiding the brunt of battle, fleeing for his life as others
had? Friend and foe alike would have tauntingly said that the God of
Muhammad could not foresee of what stuff the successor of Muhammad had
been made. But the events of Ali's life that took place in the ensuing
years, being quite in keeping with this prophetic declaration, clearly
prove that the declaration was one of the ways in which "God fulfils
Himself".

The story of his life shows that Imam Ali completely fulfilled the
promise that he had made to the Prophet (P) at the Feast. Was the
Prophet to break his own promise, and leave the succession to the
chances of an election? Were there for that matter any grounds to break
that solemn promise? Two objections may be anticipated here. Firstly,
the assembly was a limited one comprising only the relatives, and so the
whole UMMA cannot be bound by the declaration. Secondly, a successor
should be chosen only towards the end, when the true character of every
man is pretty well known, and when the mission is just entering its
first stage. I will proceed to meet both these objections.

Regarding the first objection, God had willed that Muhammad's successor
should be from among the nearest of kin. The same principle had been
observed by the previous prophets, and there were no grounds for
deviating from that well-established rule, which among other reasons had
the law of transmission through heredity in its favor. It has now been
established that experience and habits pass on from father to son
through the hereditary process. Anyhow, I need not pursue this subject
any further, as I have another mathematically exact argument that will
carry conviction to even a biased mind. At the momentous meeting of the
SAQIFA where ABU BAKR was declared Caliph through the efforts of UMAR,
this latter,

cornered from every side, took refuge not in the Book of God but in the
HADITH of the prophet, and declared that the prophet had said that the
Imams (leaders of the Islamic Nation) must only be from the tribe of
QURAISH. This was to meet the arguments of the ANSAR, who had been
maintaining that the Caliph should be from them. At the time of
appointing the SHURA, UMAR said that the ANSAR had no claim to the
Caliphate. But why not? The reason given by ABU BAKR at the SAQIFA was
that it was because the prophet did not belong to that tribe. If this
principle is accepted, and there is no reason why it should not be as it
effectively silenced the ANSAR at that critical moment, then it must
also devolve from within the tribe to the family, and from within the
family to the nearest relative.

I turn now to the second of the above objections. This earliest
announcement was absolutely essential. It served many purposes, and I
invite attention to the following.

1. The situation pertaining to crown princes in all monarchies is so
well known that little needs to be said about it. The prince designated
as the crown prince is given special education to prepare him for the
high position that he is to fill and the onerous duties he will have to
discharge.

2. This earliest announcement at a time when there was no kingdom and
thus no attached worldly glamour prevented any doubts or sinister
suspicions from crossing the minds of friends or foes when the
announcement was finally made at the place called KHUM, after an empire
had been established.

3. It served as a clear demonstration of the truth and genuineness of
the NUBUWWA of Muhammad, as no one except a prophet could have known at
that time this boy of fourteen would prove himself worthy of this great
task being entrusted to him at such a tender age.


**The Condition For The Making Of an Ideal Caliph**

For the efficient running of an institution, it is absolutely essential
that the successor, who follows the founder in the management of that
institution, be an exact similitude of the founder, a mirror in which he
is reflected in his true exactness, a faithful facsimile. That Ali
fulfilled this condition to the greatest possible extent was disclosed
by the prophet in the following sayings. I have divided these sayings
into four sections.

1. HADITH AL-NUR:

The prophet (p) said:

"Ali and I have been created out of the same NUR. This NUR has been
engaged in worshipping God on the right side of His throne for fourteen
thousand years before the birth of Adam. After his birth, this NUR was
being transferred from the same parents, all of whom were immaculate,
until finally it was deposited in the back of ABD AL-MUTTALIB, whence it
was divided in two; half of it went to my father ABDALLAH of whom I was
born, and the other half was transferred to ABU TALIB of whom Ali was
born".

I have already explained what "NUR" means in Muslim theological
parlance. The language of this HADITH is no doubt unintelligible to
those born and brought up under the "modern" atmosphere of atheism. But
this atheism is of a fairly recent growth. Not so long ago, even in the
latter half of the nineteenth century, European philosophers could write
in language such as this; "All truly historical events are brought about
by God's raising up of gifted men, or "geniuses", and breathing into
them his own light and life". What is this light? The same NUR spoken of
in this HADITH.

It is comparatively recently that Frederick Von Schlegel wrote; "For
this organic frame of the human body, which has become a body of death,
is still endowed with many and wonderful powers, and still encloses the
hidden light of its celestial origin". What is this celestial origin?
This same NUR. Nor should those who claim to have understood and
appreciated the intricate problem of "three-in-one-and-one-in-three" and
to know the nature of the "Father" from the nature of the "Son" or the
"Holy Ghost", look askance at those who believe in this theory of NUR.
Even in this modern age, and even in Europe, we find an increasing
number of people who believe in the existence of the soul after the
death of the body. If the soul can exist after death, it must have
existed before birth. That state of the soul before the birth of its
body is what is termed NUR in Muslim theology.

As to worshipping God before the birth of the body which it was to
inhabit, we must admit that the problem of the "chance of birth" has not
so far been satisfactorily resolved; why one soul should be "born" into
a royal family and another into a beggar's hut; how it is that one man
is born a genius and another a dunce; or one man born with virtuous
proclivities and another with vicious propensities. How is this to be
explained?

Brahmanism purports to explain it by means of a theory called
"transmigration of souls". The modern philosopher is almost silent over
the main problem, though he conjectures that transmission of vice and
virtue may be through the law of heredity. The former is a very
defective explanation, and the later is no explanation at all. Heredity
does not take into account the main problem concerning the "chance of
birth". As to vice and virtue, it may explain their existence in the
sons, but how they first came into the nature of the fathers it does not
say. Why should Cain feel a desire in his heart to kill his brother
Abel, and why should Abel not raise his hand against his brother? The
theory of heredity cannot explain it.

To let things remain stationary is not the law of God. Is it not
reasonable belief that before its birth in a body, the soul had s sphere
of activities, and that the differences of birth are the result of those
activities?

2. Brothers in this World and the Next:

Earlier at MAKKA, and later on his arrival at Medina, the Prophet (P)
declared the formation of fraternal relationships among his companions.
He also included himself in this. It involved one man being proclaimed
to be the brother of another. The chief consideration in pairing the
brothers was their similarity of character and mental capacity; I quote
below the English version of a passage from the "Life of Muhammad" by
IBN-ISHAQ, as arranged by IBN HISHAM, the earliest work extent on
Muhammad.

"Saying "Let you be brothers, one man a brother of the other", the
Prophet (P) caught hold of the hand of Imam Ali, and said, "This is my
brother". Thus, the Prophet (P) who was the head of all the Prophets,
the leader of the virtuous, and the messenger of God, having no like of
his among the creatures of God, became the brother of Imam Ali".

IBN-ISHAQ then goes on to mention who was the brother of whom JA'FAR,
brother of Imam Ali, though in ABYSSINIA at the time, was made the
brother of MA'ADH and HAMZA, the uncle of the Prophet, was made the
brother of ZAID, a freedman. ABU BAKR was made the brother of "UTBA",
son of MALIK, and so on.

IBN-HIJIR AL-ASCALANI has written a very good note about this event.

MAWLAWI HAFIZ MUHAMMAD ALI HAIDAR HANAFI, a SUNNI historian, says "The
word "MU'AKHAT" means brothers. This is a proof of the fact that the two
men who have been made brothers are similar in character and equal in
qualities". On two occasions, once at MAKKA and again at Medina, the
Prophet (P) made Imam Ali his brother. This is an established fact, and
every historian has mentioned it.

This event must be given the weight it deserves. It clearly indicates
the Prophet's scheme to install Ali in his place. I would like to point
out, as an aside, the manner in which the historians of the majority
section write their histories. MAWLAWI SHIBLI, that great historian of
India, who has written his histories simply to distort and mould the
facts in order to suit or support his religious beliefs, has prepared a
statement showing who was made the brother of whom, and a footnote says
that his statement has been prepared from the "SIRA" of IBN HISHAM. But
significantly enough, the names of Ali, HAMZA and JA'FAR, though given
in IBN HISHAM'S original book, are omitted from this statement.

The reason why is obvious; MAWLAWI SHIBLI has mentioned this event in
such a way as will minimize its importance. He means to convey instead
the idea that this was simply a temporary arrangement to provide for the
homeless MUHAJIRIN who had come from MAKKA, and who in their turn
educated the ANSAR in the tenets of Islam by example. Had the learned
"historian" mentioned Ali, JA'FAR and HAMZA in this statement, he would
not have been able to propound his pet theories intended to minimize the
importance of this event.

HAMZA was made a brother of ZAID, freedman of the Prophet (P), and both
were MUHAJIRIN; JA'FAR was not in need of help from MA'ADH IBN JABAL,
whose brother he was declared to be, as JA'FAR was in ABYSSINIA at that
time. Thus neither the question of education nor that of support arises
here. Imam Ali and the Prophet (P) were both MUHAJIRIN, yet Imam Ali was
not paired with any one of the ANSAR of Medina. This was something far
higher than mere relationship; JA'FAR and Ali were real brothers, yet
they were not made brothers at this function. HAMZA too was not given to
anyone of his own kin. Now it is clear as day why the great historian of
Muslim India did not mention JA'FAR, Ali and HAMZA in his statement,
even though their names appear in the original book of IBN HISHAM.

3. "Both as One":

The Prophet (P) said:

"Ali is from me and I from Ali, and no one can execute this mission of
mine except Ali or I".
"He who abandons Ali abandons me, and who abandons me abandons God".
"He who is spiteful towards Ali is spiteful towards me, and he who is
spiteful towards me is a KAFIR".
"He who obeys me obeys God, and he who disobeys me disobeys God; and
he, Oh Ali, who obeys you obeys me, and he who disobeys you disobeys
me".
"He who causes pain to Ali causes pain to me".
"He who curses Ali, in fact curses me".
"He who deprecates Ali deprecates me".

4. Exhortation to Love Ali"

We often hear such expressions as "love of God", "love of the Prophet
(P)", "love of one's leader", "love of one's parents". Let us see what
love of a superior implies. It implies the following:

1. To obey his orders willingly and with pleasure.
2. To follow his actions with a view to imitating his conduct.
3. To be always ready to please him, and never to think of displeasing
him.
4. To yield to him what he wants.
5. Never to give him any cause of grief, sorrow or pain.

When the Prophet (P) required his UMMA to love Imam Ali, he meant all
these things. He wanted them to obey and follow Imam Ali, to yield
themselves entirely to his will, and never to do anything that would
cause him pain or sorrow. In view of the Prophet's exhortations, they
ought not to have disputed the Caliphate with Imam Ali. How these orders
of the Prophet were obeyed by the UMMA we all know. The Prophet (P)
said:

"He who loves Ali loves me, and he who loves me loves God. He who
offends Ali offends me, and he who offends me offends God". "One who
desires to live a life like mine, and to die a death like mine, and then
to dwell in the abode of everlasting bless, let him love Ali son of ABU
TALIB, as he will never lead you away from the right path, and will
never lead you into error". (Addressing Imam Ali) "No one but a true
faith, and enmity against thee is hypocrisy to Islam. The first person
to enter paradise will be thy friend, and the first person to enter hell
will be thy enemy. Happy is he who loves thee, and woe to thy enemy".

"He who loves Ali during his life and also after his death will be
blessed by God with peace and protection against the fire".

During the time of the Prophet (P), people used to distinguish the
MUNAFIQ from the true Muslim by the formers enmity to Ali (see note 44);
and the Prophet (P) used to say that but for Imam Ali, the true Muslims
would not be known-able after his death (see note 42). This is obvious,
because it was love of Ali, alone which discriminated between the Muslim
and the MUNAFIQ, as the latter could never love Ali. The question
naturally arises as to why this was so, and why the love of Muhammad
should not be the distinguishing criterion; for if loving anyone were to
be a precondition of salvation, why would it not be love of the Prophet
himself? It is on the basis of these sayings that the critics are wont
to say that the SHI'AS have installed Imam Ali in the place of God and
the Prophet (P). These sayings are found in the books of the Sunnis, and
yet the SHI'AS are blamed for them. I proceed to answer their
objection.

The MUNAFIQIN, who though really heathen at heart concealed their inner
feelings under an outward show of Islam, are frequently mentioned in the
QUR'AN. Their contrivances for concealment were so complete that
sometimes it was very difficult to know them, and the QUR'ANIC
revelations became necessary for apprising the Muslims of their
machinations. These MUNAFIQIN were always on the lookout for
opportunities to spread disaffection against the Prophet (P). The
efforts of the Prophet (P) to secure Imam Ali's succession, or more
accurately his sayings in appreciation of Imam Ali,

provided them with a good opportunity; they argued with much vehemence
that Muhammad's claim to inspiration from one high was only a cloak to
cover his ardent desire to acquire an empire for himself and his family.
This way of talking, which was very appealing to the Arab nature,
saturated as it was with tribal jealousy and love of feuds, also
provided a good handle to the faction that was bent on taking the
Prophet's place after his demise. The identity of interests, namely the
undoing of Muhammad's work, though for different motives, and the
identity of their methods for achieving that object, that is, by
dislodging Ali from the position which the Prophet had allotted him to
ensure the power, continuity and progress of Islam in the right
direction, made them join hands in the pursuit of their common
objective. There were also other parties who were animated with strong
feelings of animosity against Ali, whom I have described in Chapter
Three of this book. Thus the enmity of Imam Ali was common to all these
parties.

Imam Ali had not had any private dealings with them; the only grounds
for this hatred and enmity was that Imam Ali had served Islam, the
Prophet (P), and God with a zeal and devotion that totally and finally
defeated paganism, and won everlasting victory for Islam. A detailed
account of the battles fought by Imam Ali for Islam is given in Chapter
Seven of this book. Suffice it to say here that by his selfless devotion
in the cause of God and the Prophet (P), Ali had earned himself the
deadliest and everlasting enmity of these enemies of Islam, who looked
upon him as the sole cause of their misfortunes and miseries.

No doubt they were in the first instance the enemies of Muhammad (P)
and Islam, but for obvious reasons it was not safe for them to express
those feelings; and at this stage it had become entirely useless for
them to give vent to their emotions against the Prophet and Islam, as no
hope remained for them to begin the fight afresh. They had, therefore,
to conceal their feelings, and on account of this they could not be
distinguished from the true believers. But in the case of Imam Ali they
had no such need to conceal their feelings of hatred and enmity from the
common Muslims. Here the case was quite the contrary; they could not
gain their object unless and until they disseminated, by propaganda and
intrigue, all those "evil" consequences which in their opinion would
result from Imam Ali's taking the place of Muhammad (P), such as the
likelihood of Islam becoming ingrained in the nature of men in its
purity and thereby ensuring its permanency.

That was an eventuality, which they could not conceive without horror
and anguish. In the case of the Prophet (P), they could not show their
hostility for fear of bringing the wrath of the whole nation on their
heads. In the case of Imam Ali however, there was no such impediment.
They were the enemies of the Prophet and Islam, but without Imam Ali
they could not be known. The love of Ali was therefore the touchstone by
means of which the genuineness of a man's faith could be tested. IBLIS
(Satan) was turned out of paradise and doomed to everlasting perdition
because he refused to bow before Adam when ordered to do so by God,
maintaining that he was superior to Adam. He never refused to kneel
before God, whom he always acknowledged as his Lord. It does not follow
that Adam was equal to or greater than God. Similarly, their refusal to
acknowledge Imam Ali as the rightful successor of the Prophet meant
disobedience to the orders of the Prophet and God.

On the other hand, the love of and submission to Imam Ali, and the
acknowledgment of him as the rightful successor of Muhammad (P), in
spite of the attraction of worldly gains and advancement in the opposite
camp, indicated an unflinching belief in the prophet-hood of Muhammad
and a staunch faith in his infallibility as a messenger of God. It can
therefore be rightly said that the love of hatred of Ali, more than
anything else, has correctly exposed the innermost recesses of the
Muslims' hearts, both then and for all time to come.


**MUHAMMAD'S TREATMENT OF ALI AS HIS HEIR AND SUCCESSOR:**

1. Education:

In this day and age, no long or labored dissertation is required to
prove the advantages of an early education and training over a later
one. First impressions become ingrained in nature, later images are
faint and fading; the former are indelible, the latter liable to be
washed away by any storm that blows. Anxious, therefore, to train Ali
under his own eyes, Muhammad (P), who had evinced a peculiar interest in
him right from the time of his birth (which took place inside the HARAM
of the KA'BA under the express directions of the Prophet to Ali's mother
when she had felt the onset of travails while engaged in performing the
religious circuits of the KA'BA, took Ali from his parents when he was
an infant of four or five years, and trained him and brought him up in
his own house as his own child. The historians rightly remark that this
early training under the very eyes of the Prophet was one of those
blessings of God to Ali in which none else shared.

It is true that at the time of Ali's birth and education, Muhammad (P)
had not yet proclaimed his Prophet-hood. But both the Bible and the
QUR'AN say that the Prophets are Prophets from the moment of their
birth. It is immaterial at what point in their life they are called upon
to declare themselves to the world as the chosen Prophets of God.
Muhammad himself is known to have said that he was a Prophet before
Adam's soul had been joined to his body. The QUR'AN declares in
unambiguous terms that the Prophets were given their powers as Prophets
at birth. It was as a baby just born that Christ spoke up for the
innocence of his mother and declared that he had been given the
knowledge and the Book. The Gospel of St Matthew tells us of the
prodigies that attended the birth of Christ. The declaring of Ali's
succession simultaneously with the announcement of his own Prophet-hood
at the meeting of the family members ("Feast of the Relatives") showed
clearly that the two were coeval.

2. Substitution on the Bed on the Night of HIJRA:

When threat and persuasion failed to check the advance of the Prophet
in his mission, QURAISH assembled in the town hall to devise ways and
means to do away with Muhammad. ABU SUFIAN was the soul of this
conspiracy. It was suggested by an old man, and finally agreed to, that
a number of young men chosen from different families should plunge their
swords simultaneously into Muhammad's chest, so that the responsibility
for the murder would lie upon all the families, and the relations of
Muhammad would be unable to avenge it. Some youths were selected for the
sanguinary deed. MR. AMIR ALI says, "As the night advanced, the
assassins posted themselves around the Prophet's dwelling. Thus they
watched all night, waiting to murder him when he left his house in the
early dawn, peeping now and then through a hole in the door to make sure
that he still lay on his bed".

He then goes on to say, "In order to keep the attention of the
assassins fixed upon the bed, Muhammad put his own green garment upon
the devoted and faithful Ali, bade him lie on his bed, and escaped as
David had escaped, through the windows". Ali slept soundly, taking no
account of what was happening outside. The crowd kept throwing stones
and bricks throughout the night. In the early morning they rushed into
the house, and were greatly incensed at finding Imam Ali instead of
Muhammad (P). They were greatly enraged at Imam Ali, through whose
agency Muhammad had escaped.

This rage resulting from the failure of their scheme was greatly
heightened by a sense of having been duped, and the person who had been
the chief instrument of all this discomfiture was before them. All honor
is thus due to Imam Ali for his devotedness and faithfulness in courting
death in order to protect the Prophet (P), and thereby save Islam. The
majority section of the Islamic Nation would have us believe that the
Prophet (P) forgot all these sacrifices of Imam Ali, as well as the
promise he had made him in his announcement at the Feast of the
Relatives,

and that when the time came for rewarding merit and selecting the right
person to lead the nation, he left Imam Ali in the lurch by keeping a
meaningless silence on the question. The angry crowd asked Imam Ali
where Muhammad was. Undaunted by their numbers and unmoved by their
threats, the future conqueror of Khyber and HUNAIN replied, "Did you
entrust Muhammad to me that now you want him back from me?" overawed by
this unprecedented defiance of danger and matchless display of courage,
the crowd retreated. The Prophet (P) had asked Imam Ali to return the
deposits that had been entrusted to his care by the people to their
owners. Imam Ali remained at MAKKA for three days for this purpose, and
having completed the task joined his illustrious cousin at Medina.

ABU BAKR was not aware of the Prophet's having left MAKKA on that
night. After the Prophet had gone, he came to his house, and finding
Imam Ali in his bed, asked him where Muhammad was. Imam Ali replied that
he had proceeded towards the cave of THAUR, and that if he wanted to see
him he should go there. ABU BAKR, therefore, proceeded in that direction
in haste. When the Prophet heard the sound of his footsteps, he
quickened his pace, thinking that some enemy had come in pursuit, as he
had not anticipated the arrival of ABU BAKR. He increased his speed so
much that his feet began to bleed. ABU BAKR, realizing this, raised his
voice. The Prophet, now knowing that it was ABU BAKR, stopped. It was no
use sending him back,

so he took him with himself into the cave. This stands to reason; it
was not a thing to be bruited about, for strictest secrecy was the soul
of the whole scheme. It was also a matter of far-reaching consequences
and involving unknown dangers. It could not be undertaken by the Prophet
(P), who claimed direct union with God, without God's express commands.
Muslim historians and traditions are unanimous in saying that after the
meeting of QURAISH when this deadly scheme was decided upon, and when
the selected youths set out to take up their positions in front of the
Prophet's house, JABRA'IL appeared to Muhammad with a message from God,
informing him of the designs of QURAISH and asking him not to sleep in
his bed that night; he also commanded him to undertake the HIJRA
directly. Muhammad (P) made up his mind at once, and asked Imam Ali to
sleep in his bed that night, and then come to Medina after discharging
the Prophet's debts and returning to their owners the deposits which
they had entrusted to him.

In the QUR'AN this plan is ascribed to God Himself. It is obvious that
under the circumstances no time was left to go to ABU BAKR'S house, the
way to which must have been infested by the Prophet's enemies, who were
keeping a watch on him. The saying that it was at ABU BAKR'S house that
the two camels were provided, and that the Prophet and ABU BAKR started
out from the latter's house by camel, is ascribed to A'ISHA. This is
highly improbable under the circumstances then prevailing. A departure
on camelback would have drawn everyone's attention to their going. The
fact is that the camels were brought to them at the cave when they were
leaving it, and the Prophet took one only after first paying for it.
Furthermore, AISHA'S narrations in such matters are looked on with
suspicion by MARGOLIOUTH. The fact that the two were found in the cave
has lent color to this theory, which in fact is incorrect.

The following AYA was revealed in praise of Imam Ali, who saved the
Prophet at the risk of his own life: "Among the people, there is a man
who sells his life to earn the pleasure of God, and God is full of
kindness to His devotees". (SURA,VIII. 207). All commentators of the
QUR'AN are agreed that this verse refers to Imam Ali, and is in his
praise.

3.The Closing of the Doors to the Mosque from the Houses of all the
Companions except Imam Ali:

The Prophet (P) and his companions had built their houses round the
mosque and opening into it. Thus ingress to and egress from their houses
was through the mosque, which had become, as it were, a part of the
houses. Under the Islamic SHARI'A, a man is considered to be impure
after nocturnal emissions or coition until he makes the ablution in the
prescribed form. It was considered improper that the Companions should
pollute the mosque by entering it in this impure condition.

They were therefore ordered to close off the doors opening into the
mosque, and open up new doors on the other side. However, the Prophet
(P) and Imam Ali were exempted from this order. This exception in favor
of Imam Ali greatly annoyed the other Companions, and gave the MUNAFIQIN
a chance to sow disaffection among them.

They openly criticized the Prophet for letting the door of Ali's house
remain open. This disaffection was so great that the prophet had to tell
them from the pulpit that it was not his order, but the command of God,
which had closed their doors but allowed Ali's door to remain open. He
recited the AYA of the QUR'AN, which states that God sent a message to
Moses and Aaron to build hoses in Egypt for their community, and to make
their own houses into places of worship and establish regular prayers.
He likened himself to Moses, and Ali and his sons to Aaron and his
sons.

This was certainly an instance of the treatment of Imam Ali as the
successor of Muhammad (P), both being treated alike and being given the
same position. UMAR used to say that Ali had three distinctions of such
a high degree that if he had but one of them it would be more valuable
to him than red-eyed dromedaries. Those three distinctions were (a), he
had as his wife FATIMA, the daughter of the prophet (P), (b) he was
allowed to reside in the mosque by virtue of the opening of his door
into it remaining intact, while the doors of the others had been closed
up, and (c) he was given the flag at the battle of KHYBER. It is
expressly mentioned that the doors of ABU BAKR, UMAR and HAMZA were also
closed.

This distinction in Ali's favor was too great to escape the notice of
BANU OMAYYA tyrants, and so they had similar HADITH coined for ABU BAKR.
Some of the writers say that a window of the house of ABU BAKR was
allowed to remain open towards the mosque. In the first place, this is a
fabricated story. In the second place, the question is one of ingress
and egress through the mosque, and in the regard a window is irrelevant,
as it is not used for passing through but is meant only for view or
ventilation. AL-BUKHARI set the ball rolling by mentioning this HADITH
in his "SAHIH". In one place its "RUWAT" (narrators) are: ABDALLAH IBN
MUHAMMAD, ABU "AMA, FALIJ, SALIM, BISR IBN SA'ID and ABU SA'ID
AL-KHUDRI.

It has been repeated twice in "KITAB-AL-SALAT", once with the word
"BAB" (meaning door), and again with the word "KUWWA" (meaning window).
Their narrators respectively are (1): MUHAMMD IBN SANA'AN, FALIJ, SALIM
IBN AL-NADR, UBAID IBN HUNAIN, BISR IBN SA'ID, and ABU SA'ID AL-KHUDRI;
and (2): ABDALLAH IBN MUHAMMAD, WAHAB IBN JARIR, YA'LA IBN HAKIM,
AKRAMA, and ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS.

Thus, there are three versions; in two of them ABDALLAH IBN MUHAMMAD is
common, and in the third, his father Muhammad appears. Let us see what
the evaluators of these RUWAT have to say about some of them:

(a) ABDALLAH IBN MUHAMMAD: He used to narrate fabricated HADITH, and
used to "steal" other people's HADITH, as IBN ADEI has said. DAR QUTNI
and ABDAL-GHANI say that he is always to be avoided (That is, HADITH
mentioned by him are to be avoided). IBN HABBAN says that he used to
forge false HADITH. The same thing is said about him by HAFIZ ABU
NA'IM.

(b) MUHAMMAD IBN SAN'AN: ABU DAWUD says that he is a liar. IBN KHARASH
says that he is not truthful.

(c) FALIJ IBN SULAIMAN: IBN MU'IN, AL-NISA'L and ABU HATIM say that he
is not to be relied upon. ABU HATIM says that he has heard MU'AWIYA IBN
SALEH quoting YAHYA IBN MU'IN that neither FALIJ nor is son are
reliable. UTHMAN IBN SA'ID says that he is very unreliable. ABBAS has
said that he heard YAHYA saying that FALIJ should not be relied upon.
ABDALLAH IBN AHMAD says that he heard IBN MU'IN saying that the HADITH
told by three persons must be rejected: MUHAMMAD IBN TALHA, AYYUB IBN
'UTBA, and FALIJ IBN SULAIMAN: he had heard this from MUZFFAR IBN
MUDRAK. MU'AWIYA IBN SALEH reports YAHYA as saying that no confidence
should be placed in FALIJ.

(d) AKRAMA: People question his faith. Imam MALIK has avoided him.
WAHAB says that he went to YAHYA IBN SA'ID and AYYUB, and both of them
spoke about AKRAMA; YAHYA said that AKRAMA was a great liar; AYYUB said
that he was a liar to some extent. JARIR quotes ABDALLAH IBN AL-HARITH
through YAZID IBN ABI ZIYAD saying that he (i.e. ABDALLAH IBN HARITH)
went to ALI IBN ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS, and saw AKRAMA chained at the door,
that he asked ALI IBN ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS what he had done, and that he
replied that the wicked AKRAMA was narrating false and forged HADITH
with his (i.e. ALI IBN ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS) father's references.

TAWUS says that had AKRAMA had any fear of God, and were he not to tell
false HADITH, people would have come to him frequently. MUHAMMAD IBN
SIRIN says that he would think it strange if God sent AKRAMA to
paradise, and that AKRAMA was a great liar. ABI ZAYID says that AKRAMA
was not religious. YAHYA IBN BUKAIR says that AKRAMA came to Egypt on
his way further west, that the KHAWARIJ of the west were his followers
in religion, and that they accepted his HADITH. AL-ZUBAIRI says that
AKRAMA was a KHARIJI; the same thing is said by his master ALI IBN
ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS. AKRAMA used to visit rich people and demand rewards
from them, IBN UL-MUSSAB says. He told his slave Bard not to quote false
HADITH with his reference, as AKRAMA used to do.

Such are the RUWAT of the HADITH relating to the door or window of ABU
BAKR. On the other hand, let us hear what a great SUNNI divine learned
in HADITH has to say regarding the authenticity of the HADITH relating
to the order permitting the door of Ali's house to remain open but
ordering those of the houses of all other Companions and relatives to be
closed. IBN HIJIR AL-ASCALANI, the great commentator of BAKHARI, says:

"Many sayings of the Prophet have been handed down to us relating to
the closing of the doors to the houses which had been built around the
mosque.

One of them is the HADITH related by SA'D IBN ABI WAQQAS, who says that
the Prophet ordered all the doors opening into the mosque to be closed,
but the door of the house of Imam Ali which also opened into the mosque
was allowed to remain open. This HADITH has been testified through
reliable narrators by AHMAD IBN HANBAL and AL-NISA'I, and all their
RUWAT are very reliable. There is a similar HADITH in the "AUSAT" of
AT-TABARANI with some addition. Its RUWAT are also undoubtedly reliable.
The addition is this: "They said, "Oh prophet of God, you have closed
our doors, but have left open the door of Ali's house". The prophet (P)
replied, "I have neither closed your door nor left open his. All this
has been done under God's commands". "A similar tradition has been
handed down to us through ZAID IBN ARQAM. He says "Some of the
Companions had built their houses with doors opening into the mosque. On
this the prophet said, "Close all the doors except the door of Ali".

The people began to criticize this order. Upon this the prophet said,
"By God, I have neither closed your door nor opened that of Ali. All
this I was commanded to do by God and I have followed his commands".
"This tradition has been verified through its narrators by AHMAD,
AL-NISA'I and AL-HAKIM, and all his RUWAT are pious and reliable. To the
same effect is the tradition handed down through ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS, who
says, "The prophet (P) ordered all the doors except the door of Imam Ali
to be closed? Ali had only this one door. He therefore used to pass
through the mosque in every condition, even when JUNUB (i.e. the
condition after coition or nocturnal emissions prior to making
ablutions). "All the RUWAT of this tradition are also reliable. There is
another tradition through JABIR IBN SUMRA, who says, "the prophet
ordered us to close all the doors opening into the mosque except the
door of Ali. He therefore used to pass through the mosque in all
conditions, even when he was JUNUB". This tradition has been verified by
AT-TABARANI".

Another learned SUNNI writer criticizes and rejects the HADITH relating
to the window or door of ABU BAKR thus:

"But the traditions of AL-BUKHARI relating to the door or window of ABU
BAKR appears to be forged. In the first place, in some traditions "BAB"
(door) is mentioned, while in other traditions "KUWWA" (window) is
mentioned. The meanings of these two words are quite different.
Secondly, one tradition of AL-BUKHARI is FALIJ, who is extremely
unreliable. YAHYA IBN MU'IN, ABU HATIM and ABU DAWUD say that ASIM IBN
UBAIDALLAH, IBN AQIL, and FALIJ are not to be relied upon in HADITH. ABU
DAWUD says that FALIJ is worthless; AL-NISA'I says he is unreliable; IBN
ALI says FALIJ narrates false HADITH. AT-TABARI, the historian, says
that AL-MANSUR appointed FALIJ to supervise SADAQAT, and that FALIJ
imprisoned the children of HASSAN IBN ALI. The other tradition of
AL-BUKHARI is from IBN ABBAS. This is also not genuine according to
those learned in HADITH, as it involves AKRAMA:

it is he who relates it through IBN ABBAS. AKRAMA is unreliable
according to Imam MALIK and other learned men. He is known to be a liar,
a KHARIJI, and a NASIBI, as is related by IBN KHALAKAN in his "TARIKH"
and other books of reference. Besides this, there are traditions from
IBN ABBAS in the "MUSNAD" of Imam AHMAD IBN HANBAL, which contradict
this HADITH of AL-BUKHARI.

4.The Placing of Imam Ali under the Subordination of No-one except the
Prophet (P):

This is very important; it unequivocally shows that the Prophet (P)
intended Imam Ali to be their ruler, for in this case he could never
make him subordinate to any one of them. The fact is undeniable. Even in
the battles that were conducted by the Prophet in person, the principal
flag of the army was always in the hands of Imam Ali. This was
considered to be a unique honor intended only for one specially chosen.
ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS says, "Ali has four unique distinctions which did not
fall to the lot of anyone else; he was the first man among the Arabs and
non-Arabs to accept Islam and read the prayers with the Prophet; he was
the man who held the flag of the Prophet in every battle; he was the man
who never fled the field of battle, always remaining at the Prophet's
side even when all the others had fled and forsaken him; and it was he
who gave the last bath to the prophet".

On the other hand, other Companions were placed under the subordination
of others superior to themselves. In the expedition called
"DHAT-AL-SALASIL" in the month of JUMADA-AL-AKHIRA A.H.8, AMR IBN AL-AS
was sent with three hundred soldiers to fight the tribe of QUDA'A. He
did not succeed at first, and applied to the prophet for help. The
prophet sent two hundred soldiers under ABU UBAIDA IBN AL-JARAH to help
him. ABU BAKR and UMAR were among those who had been placed under ABU
UBAIDA. Upon joining up with AMR,

AMR was to be the head of the whole army. On one occasion, AMR ordered
his army not to light any fires. UMAR disobeyed, and AMR punished him
for his disobedience, threatening to throw him into his own fire if he
persisted. UMAR remained silent at the time, but when he returned to
Medina he complained of this treatment to the Prophet, who asked UMAR
what the matter was. UMAR explained that the fires would have indicated
their positions and smallness of numbers to the enemy. It may be noted
that ABU BAKR had also joined UMAR in making the complaint. On hearing
the explanation the Prophet approved of the orders of AMR, and held UMAR
and ABU BAKR to be in the wrong.

In the army of OSAMA, which the Prophet ordered to be mobilized during
his last illness, all these Companions except Ali were placed under the
subordination of the youthful OSAMA. I give the details of this later in
their proper place.

5. The Clearing of the KA'BA of its Idols:

The chief object of Muhammad's mission was to dispel the darkness of
paganism and polytheism and preach the unity of God, to destroy the
idols and replace idolatry by the worship of the one true God. To
associate Ali with himself in that work was to associate him in his
mission. When MAKKA had been subjugated, the first thing the Prophet did
was to break and remove the idols that had been there for centuries. The
Prophet did not invite anyone to share in this task except Ali. The two
alone went into the KA'BA, and began the work of dismantling the
idols.

The biggest idol had been installed on the roof of the KA'BA; it was
made of metal and was strongly fastened to the roof. Out of respect for
the Prophet (P), Imam Ali bent down to take the Prophet on his
shoulders, but could not bear his weight. Then the Prophet bent down,
and Ali, standing on his shoulders, broke the idol into pieces and threw
it down. Thus the foremost item on the Prophet's list of duties was
executed with Ali's aid. This was a very clear indication of the fact
that Imam Ali was intended to succeed the Prophet (P).

6. Promulgation of the State Policy:

In the month of DHU AL-QIDA', A.G.9, the first forty verses of SURAT
BARA'A (AT-TAWBA) containing the future policy of the Islamic State
towards the non-Muslims, were given to ABU BAKR to announce to the
assemblage that was to gather at the time of the HAJJ, that is, the 10th
of DHU AL-HIJJA in that year. But as soon as he had started out with the
caravan he was to lead, the Prophet (P) was reminded through inspiration
that it was a duty which should be discharged either by him personally
or by the one of his own kith nearest to and like him. The Prophet (P)
therefore entrusted this task to Imam Ali, and sent him on his special
camel with orders to take the verses from ABU BAKR and promulgate them
himself at the time of the HAJJ. He was thus made the AMIR of the
Hajj.

Imam Ali overtook ABU BAKR on the way and communicated the prophet's
orders to him. ABU BAKR complied and handed the verses to Imam Ali, but
was naturally very dejected, did not proceed further, and came back to
the prophet, asking if anything had been revealed to the prophet against
him. The prophet (P) replied that nothing particular against him had
been revealed on this occasion, but that God had commanded that is was a
duty which should be carried out either by himself personally or by one
of his own kith nearest to and like himself. The prophet (P) went on to
say, "Ali is my own; he is my brother, my WASI and my successor and
KHALIFA in my UMMA after me. He will discharge my obligations and
fulfill my promises, and no-one other than Ali can discharge my
obligations".

Another clear and direct indication to the same effect is that if ABU
BAKR could not discharge the burden of only forty verses, how could he
fulfill the obligations of the whole of the QUR'AN? How beautifully and
effectively the prophet demonstrated to the whole Muslim nation, and for
the benefit of the generations to come, that the mission of Muhammad
could be executed and completed only by the prophet or, in his absence,
by Imam Ali and that therefore Imam Ali was his rightful KHALIFA. The
displacement of ABU BAKR in this task added very significant
pointed-ness to the event. ABU BAKR felt his dismissal very keenly, and
no wonder. He could not control his feelings, returned at once to the
prophet (p) and was told that the work was of such a nature that it
could be done only by either the prophet or his KHALIFA. This is also
yet another proof of the fact that age is not determining factor in the
leadership of Islam. YUSUF Ali, the modern translator of the QUR'AN,
refers to these verses as a notable declaration of state policy.

7. The Spiritual Duel ("MUBAHALA") with the Christians of NAJRAN:

This is yet another instance of Imam Ali taking a very prominent part
in the discharge of the duties connected with the prophet's mission. In
the year of the deputations (A.H.10), a Christian emissary came from
NAJRAN, a flourishing Christian colony on the seventh stage of the road
from MAKKA to Yemen. The Christians had a magnificent church in this
place, which was known as the "KA'BA of the Christians" on account of
its having been built in rivalry to the KA'BA of MAKKA. It was the
biggest Christian church in the whole of Arabia, and very learned
bishops and monks resided there. The highest leader was called a
"SAYYID", and the next one down from him was known as an "AQIB". The
deputation included one SAYYID and one AQIB, plus five other persons of
lower rank.

The prophet (P) invited them to Islam. They put many questions to him,
which were answered with the help of revelations. During their stay at
Medina, no less than eighty verses of SURAT AL-IMRAN, which contained
replies to their queries, were revealed. Their careful perusal is
essential for a person who wants to appreciate the religious differences
of the two parties. Owing to the unscientific collecting together of the
verses of the QUR'AN, these verses are not all found together, nor has
the chronological order of their revelation been observed. I cannot help
quoting one of those verses, as it is so beautiful and logical in
expression and so catholic and tolerant in spirit. Its English
translation runs as follows:

"Say: Oh people of the book, come to those principles that are common
to us both, that is that we should not worship anyone except the one
true God, that we should not associate any partner with Him, and that we
should not make anyone of us a lord beside God".

But the compromise could not be effected even on these terms. In theory
the people of the Book could agree to all these three propositions, but
in practice they failed to do so. Their inexplicable doctrine of "Three
in one and one in three" came in the way. The members of the deputation
asked what view the prophet held about Christ. The following verses were
revealed in reply:

"The similitude of Jesus before God is as that of Adam: He created him
from dust, then said to him "Be", and he was". But the Christians could
not accept this description of the nature of Christ. Then came the final
challenge: to refer the matter to the arbitration of God. The memorable
words are:

"And whoever shall dispute with thee concerning him (Christ), after the
knowledge which has been given thee, say unto them, come, let us call
together our sons and your sons, and our wives and your wives, and our
selves and your selves; then let us utter imprecations, and invoke the
curse of God on those who lie".

The prophet (P) asked them to get ready for this mutual imprecation and
invoking of the curse of God on the one who was in the wrong (known as
"MUBAHALA"). The Christians asked for one day's delay to consider the
matter: this was agreed to. On the following day, the prophet (P)
prepared himself for praying to God to punish the liars, and in the
morning he came out of his house prepared for the "MUBAHALA". SHAH ABD
AL-HAQQ of Delhi says that the scene was worth observing; the prophet
(P) took Imam HUSSAIN, the son of Imam Ali on his lap; Imam HASSAN,
another son of Imam Ali he took by the hand; his daughter FATIMA, the
wife of Imam Ali, was behind him; and Imam Ali was behind her. The
prophet (P) asked them to say "AMEN" to his invocation of God's curse on
the liars. When the Christians saw these angelic faces, awe and terror
filled their hearts, and they refused to enter into the MUBAHALA with
them. Except for the payment of KHIRAJ, their liberty of thought and
action was not touched.

The whole period of the prophet's mission is full of instances of Ali's
direct involvement in its discharge. This was the best example, and was
also an instance of the QUR'AN and the Children of the Prophet coming
together and complementing one another's work.

8. The Disclosing of State Secrets and Other Important Matters to Imam
Ali, and his Presence with Muhammad (P) when he Breathed his Last:

AT-TIRMIDHI has it from JABIR, and AT-TABARANI and AL-NISA'I have it
from ANAS, that on the day when AT-TA'IF was besieged by the prophet
(P), he sent for Imam Ali, and was closeted with him for a long time.
This created jealousy in the hearts of many of the Companions, some of
whom could not restrain their feelings and remarked to the Prophet that
he had spent much time in telling secrets to his cousin. This criticism,
based on jealousy of Imam Ali, led the prophet (P) to declare that he
had held this secret talk with Imam Ali under orders from God, and that
one who was jealous of Imam Ali was in fact jealous of the prophet (P),
and moreover that jealousy of the prophet would lead to heathenism.
SHAIKH ABD AL-HAQQ of Delhi, a great SUNNI divine, traditionalist and
historian says:

"When the prophet was in the agony of death, he asked his daughter
FATIMA to send for HASSAN and HUSSAIN, who came, and seeing the
condition of their grandfather began to weep. Their cries caused
everyone present there to weep. The prophet kissed them, and as a last
wishes asked the Companions and the UMMA to love and respect them. After
that, he sent for Ali, and took his head on his thighs. The prophet
said, "I had taken a loan from a certain Jew for the preparation of the
army of OSAMA, be careful to pay that debt and lighten the burden from
my shoulders. Oh Ali, you will be the first to arrive at the HAWD where
I will be on the Day of Resurrection.

When I am dead, many calamities will befall you; you should bear them
patiently; and when you find that the people have chosen this world, you
should choose the next"â€¦. Ali says that while he was thus speaking, the
water from his mouth was falling on him. Just then his condition became
worse, and the women began to weepâ€¦ Some persons say that AISHA used to
boast that at the time of his death, the head of the prophet was her
lap; but this is wrong. AL-HAKIM and IBN S'AD have definitely proved
that the prophet died while talking to Ali and when his head was on
Ali's thighs".

IBN SA'D says that when the prophet (P) died, his head was in the lap
of Imam Ali. Similarly he has it form IBN ABBAS, who was asked by
ABU-ATFAN as to whose lap the head of the Prophet was in at the time of
his death. IBN ABBAS replied that the prophet (P) was reclining on bosom
of Imam Ali when he died. ABI ATFAN then said that URWA had narrated
through AISHA that the prophet (P) had died with his neck between her
neck and breast. IBN ABBAS replied, "Don't be a fool. By God, the
prophet died while reclining on the bosom of Ali, who also gave him the
last ablutions".

9. Knowledge: The "HADITH of MEDINAT-AL-ILM":

Knowledge of the kind mentioned in the QUR'AN is absolutely essential,
as much for his successor as for the prophet himself. The QUR'AN abounds
in statements about the fact that God Himself imparts knowledge of
things to His chosen ones. Among others, consider the following AYAT:

1. "God has imparted knowledge to him (TALUT) and has given him
strength".

(SURA II, 247)
2. "And God taught Adam the nature of all things". (SURA II,31)
3. "And him we had taught knowledge from Our own presence". (SURA
XVIII, 65)

4. About Christ it is said, "Thou didst speak to the people in infancy
and maturity. Behold, I taught thee the Book and wisdom".
(SURA V, 113) 5. "We gave him (YAHYA) wisdom while he was still an
infant".
(SURA XIX, 12)
6. "To each (of Our chosen ones) we gave wisdom and knowledge". (SURA
XXI, 79)

Those not conversant with spiritual matters may scorn the idea of
God-given knowledge as unworthy of serious consideration. But let them
pause a moment and reflect. Consider for example a man of fifty who does
not know how to swim: he requires instructors to teach him. But the
young of fish are born with a knowledge of the rules of water, and cam
swim without being taught the art. It has taken many centuries to invent
the airplane; yet the birds, from the commencement of winged life on
earth, know all the rules of the air. Can man extract honey from flowers
without the aid of instruments and with the residue make hexagons of
geometrical accuracy? The bees can. Who has imparted all this knowledge
to the birds and animals? It might be said that they have it by
"instinct"; but what, then, is this instinct? Is it gifted or acquired?
It cannot be acquired, because it is obvious that these birds and fish
have not learnt their art in stages by experience. It can only be
gifted; but gifted by whom?

By heredity or nature? I have purposely used the word "nature" because
modern man dislikes the word "God". Heredity is not an adequate
explanation as this only pushes the question back in time; the first
fish of the world did not have the benefit of heredity, yet it had to
know the art of swimming from the very moment it saw the light of the
world, or else die. This knowledge must therefore have been instilled by
nature. But this does not take us any further, for what is this nature?
Nature could be defined as the final outcome of working of certain rules
on matter. But who then formed these rules and created this matter? This
is the point at which the existence of a "first cause" has to be
admitted. And that first cause must itself have life, intelligence and
knowledge in order to be able to impart the life, intelligence and
knowledge, which we find in the things, created in the universe. That
first cause we call God, though you may call it by any name you like.

Now, if God, or the "First Cause", can impart knowledge to birds, fish
and insects, then surely He can also give knowledge to men of His own
selection. Just as it may be said that instinct is an inherent part of
the beast, bird, animal or insect with which it is born, and is not
imparted at any particular stage of its life, so the same can be said in
the case of God's chosen ones. They are born with knowledge, purity and
immunity from sin interwoven in their nature, kneaded with it so as to
make one complete whole, with the result that these attributes become a
second nature to them. Can knowledge be thus mixes with a man's nature?
I see no reason why not. If knowledge can be interwoven in the nature of
birds, beasts and insects and be called instinct, then it can also be
interwoven in the nature of certain men and be called second nature.

The knowledge, which God imparts to His chosen ones, is different from
the knowledge which man acquires through his efforts, or learns from his
teachers. The Holy QUR'AN abounds in instances of knowledge of the
former kind, for instance SURAT AL-KAHF and SURAT MARYAM. We learn that
God teaches wisdom and grants knowledge to His chosen ones from their
birth. This kind of knowledge is essential for both the prophet and his
successor, because both have the same assignment, and, as we have learnt
from SHIBLI and SHAIKH ABD AL-HAQQ, the natures of the two are similar;
they are born alike. The prophet Muhammad (P) refers to this same kind
of knowledge when he says, in what is known as the "HADITH of MEDINAT
AL-ILM":

"I am the city of knowledge, and Ali is its gate; those who desire to
get knowledge must come to the gate".

This means that Imam Ali is the only source from which a correct
exposition of the QUR'AN and the right knowledge of Islam and its
teaching can be obtained. Everywhere else you are liable to get a wrong
interpretation of the QUR'AN and twisted teachings of Islam. To save
Islam from dangerous divisions and sinful dissentions, and to prevent
the Muslims from straying along diverse paths and dangerous offshoots,
all leading go jungles of confusion and whirlpools of destruction, the
prophet (P) wanted to fix a center where all should converge and
combine, and whence all should derive right knowledge of the QUR'AN and
Islam. He strongly deprecated running hither and thither in search of a
leader, favoring instead the appointment of one trusted and able leader
capable of taking decisions on all the various problems arising,
quickly, confidently and correctly.

The prophet (P) wanted to give such a leader to the UMMA, but they
refused to accept him, with the consequences that are all too apparent.
The UMMA went in a direction quite opposite to the one indicated by the
prophet (P). In a well known speech at JABIA, UMAR exhorted the people
thus: "Anyone who wants to learn the QUR'AN must go to UBAI IBN KA'B, he
who wants to know the intricacies of the law relating to inheritance and
other matters must go to ZAID IBN THABIT, and he who is desirous of
learning FIQH should go to MA'ADH IBN JABAL". The name of Imam Ali is
conspicuous by its absence, which makes this in direct opposition to the
prophet (P), and in a much too direct and pointed way to be ignored.

UMAR also sent round a circular to all his officials that they were to
decide cases and pass orders in accordance with their own free judgment
if they could find nothing applicable to the case in hand in the QUR'AN,
the HADITH, or in the decisions of the first Caliph. Now, it is a matter
of common experience that the powers of deduction and inference of
people differ. For example, one man might find solid stuff for human
thought in Herbert Spencer's "First Principles", while another can see
nothing but confusing ideas jumbled together in incomprehensible
language, even though both may be graduates of the same university. And
then there is the matter of personal predilection to be reckoned with.

What ensued as a consequence of these orders of UMAR could easily have
been foretold. To permit everyone to use his own judgment in matters of
religion and theology was tantamount to permitting the people to tear
Islam to shreds, each one using his own judgment and then sticking to
it, and thus creating as many sects and sub-sects as the persons who had
leisure enough to indulge in the pastime. This in fact has been the
result; and this is what the prophet wanted to avoid. MAWLAWI SHIBLI
says that UMAR was the first to use his own discretion and judgment in
religious matters, and that up till the death of ABU BAKR, the deciding
factors were the QUR'AN, the HADITH of the prophet (P), and the IJMA.

10. Purity:

There is an AYA of the QUR'AN, known as "AYAT AT-TATHIR", as follows:
"Verily God has wished to remove all impurities and abominations from
you, Oh ye members of the family, and to make you pure and immaculate".
(SURA XXXIII, 34)

When this verse was revealed, the prophet (P) took Imam Ali, FATIMA,
Imam HASSAN and Imam HUSSAIN with himself under a covering, and then
recited this verse, adding that it applied to them alone and no one
else.

To emphasize this fact and to demonstrate it to the whole UMMA clearly
and unequivocally, the prophet (P), for full six months, used to go to
the house of Imam Ali and FATIMA every morning and call out to them, and
addressing them, would recite this verse, showing that it was applicable
to them and no-one else.

'AISHA says that one day, the prophet (P) came out of the house wearing
a black cloak, AL-HASSAN came alone, and the prophet took him in under
the cloak. Then AL-HUSSAIN came, and the prophet did likewise. Then
FATIMA came and he took her under the cloak too. Then the same with Imam
Ali when he came. Thus with them all under the cloak, he then said,
"These are the members of my family", and then recited this verse. UMM
SALAMA says, "This verse was revealed in my house; the prophet then sent
for Ali, FATIMA, AL-HASSAN and AL-HUSSAIN, and then said they were the
members of his family meant by this verse.

I have proved beyond all doubt in my other works that the wives of the
prophet are not meant by this verse. But I need not go into that
question here, as it is admitted by all that Imam Ali is included in
this verse, and that those who superceded the prophet after his death
are not; this is enough for our present purposes.

11. The Position of Imam Ali in Relation to the prophet (P), and the
Duties of the UMMA towards Both:

The Prophet (P) said on many occasions:

"Ali is to me what Aaron was to Moses, except that there will be no
Prophet after me". This saying, known as "HADITH AL-MANZILA", bears
directly on the subject in hand, and leaves little doubt as to his
intention regarding a successor. Of all the persons in the world the
Prophet (P) loved Imam Ali the most.

The Prophet (P) described himself and Imam Ali as "Two fathers of the
UMMA" in the following saying:


"Ali has the same rights on you as I have. God has enjoined upon you to
obey me, and has warned you against setting my authority at naught.
Similarly, he has enjoined upon you to obey Ali, and has warned you
against setting his authority at naught. Ali is my WASI and heir. He is
the master and ruler of all the Muslim men and women, as I am. Love of
him is the faith; enmity of him is KUFR. He and I are the two fathers of
the UMMA".


