Chapter Six : Final and Formal Announcement Or the Successor
============================================================

Knowing that he was approaching his end, the prophet (p) determined to
make a farewell pilgrimage to MAKKA. On the 25th DHU AL-QI'DA, A.H.10
(corresponding to 23rd February, A.C.632), he left Medina with a large
concourse of Muslims, estimated to number between 90,000 and 140,000
souls. On the return journey after the performance of the Hajj, at a
place called KHUM, the following divine injunction was received:

'O Apostle, proclaim the message which hath been sent to thee from thy
Lord. If thou didst not, thou wouldst not have fulfilled and proclaimed
His mission. And God will defend thee from men (who mean mischief). For
God guideth not those who reject faith". (SURA V,70).

On receipt of this peremptory command, the prophet (p) ordered a halt;
those who had proceeded ahead were called back. The place was cleared of
its thorny bushes, and a pulpit was made out of camel seats. The prophet
(p) ascended it accompanied by Imam Ali, and raising him aloft, he
proclaimed Ali's succession. He had barely finished it when the verse
announcing the completion of his mission was revealed. A special turban
was placed on the head of Imam Ali, who was seated in a separate camp,
and all the UMMA, including the wives of the Prophet (P), were ordered
to go there and make the "BAI'AT" (acknowledgment of over-lordship) to
him. This caused a great commotion in the camp of the opposition.

The whole of the proceedings fall into six well-defined topics, each of
which requires careful consideration. They are:

1. The divine injunction.
2. The place and the formalities.
3. The Proclamation.
4. The BAI'A and the congratulations.
5. The completion of the execution of the entire mission.
6. The commotion in the opposition camp.
I proceed to discuss each of these topics in turn, though the sixth
item will fall under a separate chapter.

**1. The Divine Command:**

The words of this divine mandate have been set out above. It is
abundantly proved from the statements of eminent traditionalists that
this verse was revealed on the return journey from the Farewell
Pilgrimage near KHUM, and that as soon as it was revealed, the Prophet
(P) called a half. AS-SYYUTI says:

"IBN ABI HATIM, IBN MARDAWEIH and IBN ASAKIR have quoted the "RIWAYA"
traced from ABU SAI'D AL-KHUDARI that this verse was revealed to the
prophet on the day of KHUM in respect of ALI IBN ABI TALEB. This is also
traceable to ABDALLAH IBN MAS'UD. Three companions of the prophet (p),
namely A'MASH, ABU SAI'D AL-KHUDARI and ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS, have been
reported to have declared that this verse was revealed to the prophet
(p) in respect of Imam Ali on the day of KHUM.

I quote the following from TAFSIR (commentary on the QUR'AN) called
"KASHF AL-BAYAN" by ABU ISHAQ AHMAD ATH-THA'ALIBI, in the exposition of
this verse he says:

"When this AYA "O Apostle proclaim the message…." Was revealed to the
prophet, he caught hold of the arm of Ali, and said, "Ali is the master
and ruler of whomsoever I have been the master and ruler… etc. I have
been told by ABU AL-QASIM YA'QUB IBN AHMAD IBN ASSARI who was told by
ABU BAKR MUHAMMAD IBN ABDALLAH IBN MUHAMMD… and so on till ADIL IBN
THABIT, who was told by AL-BARA'' IBN AZIB, a companion of the prophet
(p), that we were in the company of the prophet (p) during the Farewell
Pilgrimage. When we arrived near KHUM, suddenly a call to prayer was
made, and a pulpit was arranged for the prophet under two trees. The
prophet (p) caught hold of the arm of Imam Ali and asked of the
congregation, "Am I not the master of the souls of the Muslims"?

They replied, "Yes, you are". The prophet (p) then said, "This Ali is
the master of the souls of all of whom I am the master. O God, be the
friend of him who is Ali's friend, and be an enemy to his enemy". UMAR
met Ali and congratulated him in these words: "O son of Abu TALIB,
congratulations to you. You have become the MAWLA of all the Muslims,
men and women". IBN-ABBAS says (I have omitted the names of the
intervening RUWAT) that the verse "O Apostle proclaim the message…" was
revealed to the prophet in respect of Ali; the prophet (p) accordingly
caught Imam Ali by the arm and said, "This Ali is the MAWLA of all of
whom I have been the MAWLA. O God, be a friend to Ali's friend, and be
an enemy to his enemy".

Imam FAKHR-ED-DINE-RAZE, in his AT-TAFSIR AL-KABIR MAFATIH AL-GHAIB",
while commenting on this verse says exactly the same thing as has been
reproduced above, with the addition of the congratulations of UMAR.

The message spoken of in this verse was the one requiring the prophet
(p) to announce that Imam Ali had been appointed to succeed him. Two
relevant questions arise in this connection, viz. (1) Where is the proof
of this assertion, and (2) Why was the name of Imam Ali not mentioned
expressly? I proceed to answer these questions.

In connection with the first question, the first thing to remember is
that this was the penultimate verse of QUR'AN. Only one more
AYA-revealed just a few minutes afterwards- and the QUR'AN was closed.
The inclusion in the verse of the words, "…. God will defend thee…"
reveals that, for the necessity to have arisen of assuring the prophet
of divine protection, the message referred to must have been of such a
nature as would give umbrage to a strong party. Now consider what that
message could have been. This was only about two months before the death
of the prophet (p), by which time almost the whole of Arabia had been
cleared of the pagans; the Jews had been humbled, and the Christians had
finally made peace with the prophet.

MAKKA had been conquered, and had accepted Islam. Thus it was not from
these quarters that any danger was to be apprehended. Moreover, what
message could have been more offensive to these groups than what had
already been publicly communicated to them; the forty verses of SURAT
AT-TAWBA contained terrible threats to the pagans and unbelievers, and
had been announced to them By Imam Ali at the Hajj preceding this Last
Hajj. They had done their worst and failed; the danger from them had
already come and gone, and no such assurances of divine protection were
needed at that time in their case. All this shows, therefore, that this
new message was of such a nature that it could be the cause of a new
danger from a particular quarter, a danger of such a sinister and
formidable nature as to require special assurances of divine
protection.

I cannot lay too much emphasis on the fact that the conquest of Arabia
by Muhammad was almost complete by the time that this verse was
revealed, as it is a pointer to the outcome of the present enquiry,
namely, what the nature of the message referred to in the verse was.
There had been a time when the prophet had been alone, preaching his
mission to a hostile world, driven from place to place, stoned, teased,
harassed and injured, with no shelter, no helper, until at last obliged
to leave his native town.

All those dangers encountered had been successfully overcome; yet no
such divine assurances had been needed then. The danger at this final
stage must therefore have been of a peculiar kind not experienced
before, and be from a quarter so insidious and sinister as to be
inconspicuous and not easily discerned. The danger arising from the
suddenness of the impending attack was formidable, and the nature of the
quarter from which it was to come was uncertain. It was for these
reasons that divine assurances became necessary.

All these factors combine to indicate that the danger implied in the
verse must be from the Muslims themselves, and must be in consequence of
a matter which had come to the surface recently, brought on by the
likelihood of the succession opening in the near future. God alone knew
exactly what plans the people with an eye on the Caliphate had made,
what their details were, and how they were to be executed. As I have
stated above, there were many classes of men among the Muslims; but all
of them, except the true Muslims who were few, were unanimous in their
hatred of Imam Ali. This Proclamation was bound to unite them all in
their efforts to harm the prophet (p).

Another important point in the verse is the threat that if the message
was not proclaimed forthwith, it would be as if the entire mission had
not been executed. This also has a very significant implication. Islam
was to continue after the death of the prophet (p); in fact, it was the
last message of God to man, and was meant to continue till the end of
the world. This was the entire mission. The arrangement regarding the
successor was the basis for the future continuation of that mission, and
if that arrangement was not made, then the mission would not continue in
its purity after the death of the prophet (p), and would come to an
end.

For the complete discharge of the mission, it was necessary that the
arrangement for its continuation after the death of the prophet should
also be made. It was absolutely essential that the complete message
should be delivered and proclaimed to the world; it would then be for
the people to accept it or reject it, as Islam has allowed freedom of
will in the matter of religion. It says in the QUR'AN, "There is no
compulsion in the matter of religion" if the people accept it, it is for
their own good, if they reject it, it will be they alone who will have
to bear the consequences. It was therefore said by God to the prophet
that if he did not complete the mission by proclaiming this particular
message, it would be tantamount to the non-execution of the entire
mission.

The second question is the omission of any mention of the name of Imam
Ali. There are other instances of a similar nature. For example, the
details of the rules and calculations of the ZAKAT are not given in the
QUR'AN, nor even the mode of the prayers, such as the number of RAK'AT
for each prayer time; the RUKU' and SUJUD are not mentioned. Another
instance with the greatest significance to the present case is that of
the involvement of AISHA in a false accusation; when the matter reached
an acute stage,

an AYA was revealed to clear her of the accusation. But in none of the
AYAT is her name actually mentioned. We know that they relate to her
simply because of the traditions that have reached us regarding them. As
she belonged to the fouling party, these traditions were assiduously
promulgated without let or hindrance, with the result that no one now
feels the necessity to prove that they relate to her. But the traditions
showing that the AYAT under discussion relates to Imam Ali were against
the interests of the ruling party, and therefore are now put to the
proof.

There is also another point. They were bent upon disobeying this order.
If the name of Imam Ali had been mentioned in any AYA, they would
certainly have omitted such verses when compiling the QUR'AN, this
compilation being in their hands. Soon after their accession to the
throne, they undertook to prepare an official edition of the QUR'AN, and
it is this edition which is in vogue now.

**2. The Place and the Formalities:**

The prophet (p) started out on his Last Hajj with a great concourse of
men, estimated to number up to one hundred and forty thousand, and it
greatly increased on the way as people continued joining him from the
vi9llages en route to MAKKA. He started on the return journey from MAKKA
at the end of the Hajj with the same large array of men. It may be noted
that at the Arafat before the Hajj, the prophet gave a lengthy speech in
which he reiterated all the principles of Islam and gave much advice
regarding their conduct as Muslims. On the return journey near GHADIR
KHUM, the verse mentioned above was revealed, in compliance with which
the prophet ordered a halt.

It is to be remembered that the place where this verse was suddenly
revealed and where therefore the halt was ordered, was not a regular
"MANZIL" for caravans and travelers to stop at; it was a desert place,
full of thorny bushes and kicker trees, which he ordered the place to be
cleared of. The choice fell on this uninviting place because from it
many paths branched out in different directions, and the whole array of
men would split up there. The message had to be delivered to the
undivided UMMA. Before the Proclamation, the prophet (p) placed on the
head of Imam Ali a turban, the emblem of authority and succession in
eastern countries. The prophet (p) himself wound it around Imam Ali's
head. I quote this from "KANZ AL-UMMAL":

"Ali says that on the day of the GHADIR, the prophet wound a turban
round his head, and that both ends of the turban were left dangling on
his shoulders, and the prophet added that on the day of BADR. God had
sent for his succor the array of angels wearing turbans in this fashion,
and that the turban was a screen between the Muslims and the
unbelievers".

"ABD AL A'LA BIN ADI says that on the day of KHUM, the prophet sent for
Ali9 and wound a turban round his head, leaving both the ends of the
turban lying on his shoulders". "On the day of KHUM, the prophet wound
round the head of Ali a turban, and then said "Come forward", then said
"Go back", and then said that the angels had come to his succor on the
day of BADR in that way. Then he proclaimed, Ali is the master and ruler
of everyone of whom I have been the master and ruler".

**3. The Proclamation:**

AMIR Ali writes:

"It is generally supposed that the prophet did not expressly designate
anyone as his successor in the spiritual and temporal government of
Islam; but this notion is founded on a mistaken apprehension of facts,
for there is abundant evidence that many a time the prophet indicated
Ali for the vicegerency, notably on the occasion of the return journey
from the performance of the "Farewell Pilgrimage" during a halt at a
place called KHUM. He convoked an assembly of the people accompanying
him, and used words which could leave little doubt as to his intention
regarding a successor. "Ali", said he, "is to me what Aaron was to
Moses, O Almighty God, be a friend to his friends and a foe to his foes;
help those who help him, and frustrate the hopes of those who betray
him"

For a description of the event, AMIR Ali relies on KHALLAKAN, whom he
has mentioned as his authority. This extract, besides being an apt
illustration of the reluctance with which the historians of Islam, when
they see no way out of it, admit the facts which go against their
accepted views, and even then half-heartedly, taking care to minimize
their effect as much as they can, is a good instance of the difficulties
which beset the impartial seeker after truth who wants to ascertain the
true facts of the disputed event. AMIR Ali chooses not a historian or
traditionalist, but a biographer, IBN KHALLAKAN, having inclinations
like his own, in order to find an authority for his having suppressed
the part of the Proclamation which was its very soul, viz.

Ali is henceforth the MAWLA of every one of whom I have been the MAWLA
Not content with this, in order to minimize the effect of his own
admission, the great historian of Islam says, "On the other hand, the
nomination of ABU BAKR to lead the prayers during the prophet's illness
might point to a different choice".

This is also an instance of the anxiety of these historians to shield
the leaders of their fancy at the expense of the Prophet (P). If both
the above quoted statements of AMIR Ali are read together, the result is
absurd. On the hand he says that the general assumption that the Prophet
did not designate anyone as his successor is entirely wrong, and that
"many a time the prophet (P) indicated Imam Ali for the vicegerency",
yet on the other hand he says that the prophet (P) selected ABU BAKR for
the vicegerency.

What does this amount to? Does it not reflect badly on the prophet's
good sense and straightforwardness? Is this action credible for one who
claims to receive his instructions directly from God? Anyone acting like
this could well be accused of vacillation, or even of being unjust
without good reason (if there can ever be a reason for doing injustice),
as Imam Ali had deserved to succeed him on account of his manifold
qualities, and what is more had also been proclaimed as his successor at
KHUM. Where was the reason to set aside Imam Ali's nomination during his
last illness, a nomination which had been made after due consideration
and evaluation of the qualities and abilities of all the Companions, and
make a "different choice"?

One hears of doting husbands doing many unreasonable things at the time
of their death under the influence of their wives, but it is untenable
to hear this implied of any prophet, let alone the prophet of Islam. The
true, simple fact is that the prophet (p) did not contradict himself by
appointing ABU BAKR to lead the prayers; it was, rather, a game played
by AISHA in the interests of her father, as I shall presently show. But
this is the truth, which these historians will not admit, even if the
attitude they have adopted puts their prophet in a bad light. The great
historian and traditionalist, AT-TABARI, relates this Proclamation from
RUWAT through ABU SAI'D AL-KHUDARI, as ALI MUTTAQI does from RUWAT
through ZAID IBN ARQAM. ALI MUTTAQI says:

"When the prophet returned from the Last Hajj and came to GHADIR KHUM,
he ordered that the ground should be leveled, and then stood up and
said, "I am shortly to leave this world. I am leaving behind me two
precious things among you, the one greater than the other, the Book of
God and my Children. You must treat them well. They shall ever remain
linked together until they come to me at the HAWD on the Day of
Resurrection".

He continued, "God is my MAWLA and I am the MAWLA of all the Muslims,
and (holding Ali up by the arm) similarly this Ali is the MAWLA of all
of whom I have been the MAWLA. O God, be a friend to his friends, and a
foe to his foes, and frustrate the hopes of those who betray him". I
asked ZAID whether he himself had heard this from the prophet. He
replied that everyone who was there saw this with his own eyes and heard
it with his own ears. Muhammad IBN JARIR AT-TABARI has related this very
"RIWAYA" through ATIYYA AWFI from ABU SAI'D AL-KHUDARI".

This Proclamation has been related by both historians and
(traditionists). They divide it into two parts, one mentioning the two
precious things, the QUR'AN and the Children of the prophet, called
"HADITH- ATHAQALAIN', and the other containing the declaration called
"HADITH- AL-GHADIR". ("THAQALAIN" means "two precious things").

I repeat in other words the HADITH of THAQALIN; "I am shortly to leave
this world. I am leaving behind me two very previous things among you,
the one greater than the other, the Book of God and my Children. They
shall ever remain linked together until they come to me at my HAWD on
the Day of Resurrection. You shall never go astray up to the Day of
Judgment if you follow them both after me".

I also repeat in other words the HADITH of GHADIR:

"God is my MAWLA, and I am the MAWLA of the Muslims, having control
over their lives; this Ali is the MAWLA of every one of whom I have been
the MAWLA; O God Almighty, be a friend of his friends and a foe of his
foes" ("MAWLA", remember, means "master and ruler"). SHAIKH ABD AL HAQ
of Delhi, speaking of the HADITH of GHADIR, writes thus:

"This HADITH is undoubtedly correct and genuine; no less than sixteen,
and according to Ahmad IBN HANBAL thirty companions of the prophet who
had themselves heard it from the prophet Testified to its correctness
and genuineness when called upon by Ali to mention it on oath. Many
eminent traditionalists, for example AL-NISA'I, AT-TIRMIDHI, and Ahmad
have related it and testified to its genuineness; it has been related
through many channels, and most of its "ASANID" (RUWAT, references are
correct and unimpeachable. No attention should be paid to those who
criticize it, nor to those who say that the sentence "O God, be a friend
to his friends and a foe to his foes" is an interpolation, as that
sentence is also reported through unimpeachable authorities, most of
which have been scrutinized by ADH-DHAHABI and IBN HIJIR and found
correct".

ADH-DHAHABI says in his "TADKHIRAT-AL-HUFFAZ", while narrating the
events of the life of the great historian AT-TABARI, that AT-TABARI
wrote a book spreading over many volumes dedicated exclusively to
proving the correctness and genuineness of the HADITH of GHADIR, and its
words "Ali is the MAWLA of every one of whom I have been the MAWLA", and
ADH-DHAHABI says that he was wonderstruck when he saw the many
unimpeachable authorities of this HADITH in that book of AT-TABARI.
Similarly, while writing the life of AL-HAKIM, ADH-DHAHABI says that
this HADITH is genuine beyond any doubt, and that he too had written a
book solely on this HADITH of GHADIR in which he collected all the
unimpeachable authorities on it. MIRZA MUHAMMAD IBN MO'TAMID KHAN
says:

"The HADITH of GHADIR is genuine and very well known. No-one doubts its
genuineness and authority except a bigoted person, and no reliance can
be placed on the word of a bigoted person".

The famous Sunni writer, QAZI SANA'-ALLAH of PANIPAT writes thus about
the HADITH of GHADIR:

"This HADITH is no doubt genuine; it has reached the degree of
"TAWATUR" (being repeated very frequently by numerous unimpeachable
authorities). Thirty of the companions of the prophet, e.g. Ali, ABU
AYYUB, ZAID IBN ARQAM, AL-BARA IBN AZIB, AMR IBN MURRA, ABU HURAIRA, IBN
ABBAS, "AMARA IBN BURAID, SAI'D IBN WAQQAS, IBN UMAR, ANAS, JARIR IBN
ABDALLAH-AL-BAJALI, MALIK IBN HUWAIRITH, ABU SA'ID AL-KHUDARI, ABU
TUFAIL, HUDHAIFA IBN ASYUD and others have mentioned this HADITH in
their books, and have verified its genuineness".

IBN-UQDA, AT-TABARI, AL-HASAKANI, MAS'UD AL-SAJISTANII and ADH-DHAHABI,
have each written book on this HADITH alone, mentioning its various
sources and narrating its different authorities, and have verified its
genuineness.

**4. Homage and Congratulations:**

I quote below, in English translation, from "HABIB AS-SAYYAR":

"After the Proclamation, Ali, in accordance with the orders of the
prophet, sat in a separate tent to receive homage and congratulations
from all the people. One of those who came to congratulate him was UMAR,
who said, "Congratulations to you. O son of Abu TALIB, you have become
my MAWLA and the MAWLA of all the Muslims, men and women". After this,
the Mothers of the Muslims, that is, the wives of the prophet, under
orders from the prophet, went to him and congratulated him".

UMAR'S congratulating Ali on this occasion has been mentioned by many
historians and traditionalists. The prophet (p) ordered his poet, HASSAN
IBN THABIT, to compose poems to commemorate the event. He complied, and
his poems have been copied in the "HABIB AS-SAYYAR" and other books.
Other poets also wrote poems to celebrate the event. Imam Ali himself
was a good poet, and he has written much on the subject, urging his own
claims to the Caliphate one the basis of this event. One of his couplets
runs as follows: "For this reason the prophet installed me as their
Imam, And proclaimed this to them at GHADIR KHUM".


**5. The Complete Execution of the Entire Mission:**

After the prophet (p) had made the Proclamation, he was still on the
pulpit when the following verse declaring the completion of the mission
was revealed:

"Today I have perfected for you your religion and have completed my
favors on you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion". (SURA
V,4). The fact of this verse being revealed just after the Proclamation
is mentioned by eminent historians and traditionalists. AS-SAYYUTI says:
"ABU HURAIRA says that on the day of GHADIR KHUM, 18th DHU AL-HIJJA, the
prophet said that Ali was the MAWLA of all of whom he had been the
MAWLA; just then the AYA "Today I have perfected for you your religion…"
was revealed".

There are other authorities to the same effect. This shows that the
mission was perfected and completed only when the Caliphate had been
bestowed, and proclamation there of had been made.


