Foreword
========

Aminah Haidar Al-Sadr was born in the holy city of Kadhmain, Baghdad in
1937. Her father, a renowned religious leader, died when she was two
years old. She enjoyed the loving care of her mother and two kind
brothers, Sayyid Ismael and Ayatollah Muhammad Baqir Al-Sadr.

Aminah Al-Sadr, known as Bint Al-Huda, did not attend any government
school, but was well educated at the hands of her two scholar brothers,
especially Ayatollah Muhammad Baqir, who recognized her bright talent.
As a teenager, Bint Al-Huda was a voracious reader who always spent her
pocket money on useful books and increasing her knowledge.

The first half of this century indicated that Western cultural values
dominated the Arab and Muslim countries of the world. Secular systems
spread deviation and corruption and branded Islam as reactionary and as
a hindrance to progress.

At the age of 20, Bint Al-Huda began writing articles in Al-Adhwa
magazine published by the religious ulema in the holy city of Najaf,
Iraq. Her articles drew the attention of intellectuals in Najaf and
became torches which illuminated the darkness for women. Her writings
awakened a society which, like many societies in other Muslim countries,
was being deviated under the pretexts of freedom and equality.
Possessing keen insight, she felt the great damage that was being
inflicted upon Islam through the deliberate corruption of women. Her
simply-written stories tackled these wrong traditions and presented
truly Islamic concepts concerning woman and her specific role in a
healthy society.

It is a great pity and a serious setback that the Muslim women of the
world lost this great woman writer so early. A major crime of the Iraqi
Ba'thist regime was the tortured murder of this noble lady and her
brother and religious scholar, Ayatollah Muhammad Baqir Al-Sadr (May
Allah bless them both). The tyrannical, anti-Islamic regime of Saddam
was well aware of their brave struggle for the sake of Islam and decided
to finish them off. They were arrested in April, 1980, and killed in
cold blood three days later

By presenting these stories written by Bint Al-Huda, we aim to acquaint
our English readers with this brave woman who confronted tyrants and
achieved martyrdom for the sake of Islam.

Islamic Thought Foundation

Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran

October 1987.


