Social Measures
===============

The lady of the house, dressed in the latest fashion, was waiting
impatiently for her daughter Zaynab to get dressed for the wedding
party. The lady was impatient, and walked up and down the room. Now and
then she stopped in front of a mirror to have a look at her image. Her
daughter was a bit late, so she rang a bell and a pretty maid came in
the room. She was wearing a short dress and had her hair done.

The woman admired the attractive maid and said, "I see, Samia, you have
finished before your little lady. Go and tell her to hurry up. We have
no time to spare… It takes an hour to reach the bride's house."

The maid replied, "Yes, my lady." Samia left the room and soon returned,
saying that Zaynab would be getting ready now. Zaynab's mother became
angry and exclaimed, "What has she been doing All this time?"

The maid answered, "She has been praying."

"Praying?! Oh, what an abnormal girl she is! Go again and tell her to
hurry up."

The maid went out and came back to announce that Zaynab was coming.

The mother said, "What did you say? How could she get ready in such a
short time? Surely she will bring disgrace to me at this party. How I
pity her. She is spoiling her beauty by negligence and indifference."
Admiring herself again in the mirror, she saw her daughter enter with a
smile on her angelic face.

The daughter said, "Here I am mother, quite ready."

Her mother gave her a sharp look, and said ironically, "Of course you
are ready! What is this? Are you going in this long dress? Where is your
make-up? Is there a girl of your age who does not know how to color her
lips or put on eyeliner except you? I have been waiting all this time
while you did nothing but pray. Now you say you are ready!"

Zaynab waited for her mother to finish, and then she said politely,
"Yes, I have performed my prayers since it is my religious duty, and I
cannot pray at the party which will end after prayer time. My dress is
not that long, but it certainly is not a mini. My hair is tidy, with no
need to waste my time at a hairdresser to be polluted with chemicals. As
for the make-up, of course, I know how to color my eyes and my lips, but
I feel this is not necessary. I like to show myself as I am, with no
mask on my face. "

Her mother turned her head away, disapproving of her daughter's logic.
She said, "Let us leave before you get on the pulpit and give us a long
sermon, as is your habit. But I feel bitterness when I see the maid
exceeds you in her good appearance."

Zaynab replied, "If such measures are the true criterion, I agree that
she does exceed me." The mother stated,” In fact, I don't know how you
are going to face the famous people there. You will appear so poor and
humble among the men and women."

"The party is not for both sexes," Zaynab replied.

"Had it been like that, I would not have agreed to go. In any case,
there will not be any singers or music of any kind."

The mother laughed in a mocking tone and said,

"Then the party is for giving a religious speech on the decency of
hijab."

Zaynab answered quietly, “No! There is no religious speech. It is only a
formal farewell party to a bride starting her honeymoon."

The mother feared delay, so she said to her daughter, "Come on; tell me
the details on our way to the party." Zaynab put on a long black coat
and a scarf on her head as she always did. They got into their car, with
the maid carrying a box of her mistress's cosmetics.

While they were driving, Zaynab's mother asked her daughter, "How do you
know that the party is not for both sexes?" Zaynab answered, “It was
supposed to take place at one of the clubs, according to the bride's
mother. But my friend, the bride, is a good believer, as you know. Thus
she refused to have her wedding party according to western values, or in
defiance of religious morals. Quarrels started between the mother and
daughter. But the groom took the side of the bride, and my friend
insisted on canceling the celebration. Finally her mother gave in and
agreed to have a simple farewell party."

Zaynab's mother was astonished and asked, "Does the groom have the same
reactionary beliefs as the bride?" Zaynab tried to smile at her mother's
cruel words.

She said, “Of course he has the same beliefs, and he is of equal
moderation. Otherwise, she would not have agreed to marry him. A good
believer does not marry a playboy who is totally different in beliefs
and ideals. Disputes in such matters are a serious threat to a marriage.
How can you brand such ideals 'reactionary' while they are the essence
of our religion? They are clearly elaborated in the Holy Qur'an .Our
belief is the right path, while the non-Islamic way is the reactionary
one, since it goes back to the primitive stage of humanity when there
were no Divine creeds or human values."

Her mother was affected by the argument and she said," You are right,
but civilization requires something different."

Zaynab replied, "Oh, mother! What civilization is this? Tragedies and
disasters are under the surface. Bright masks hide devilish motives and
inhuman desires. Oh, mother! We should not be fooled by this
civilization."

The mother spoke in a sorrowful tone, "This is the general attitude of
the day and the social measures that count."

"We shall try to defeat such perceptions," Zaynab said. "We will prove
that in a society, a young girl can show herself through her real
personality -not by her make-up or her fashionable clothing. When she
has an independent personality, she will taste the sweetness of victory.
It is contrary to woman's true nature to expose her in a framework of
fashion or make-up, which is only a means for public exposure."

They arrived at the house of the bride. The mother tapped her daughter
on the shoulder and said, "May Allah bless you. I wish I could have your
strong faith and self-confidence."


