The Red Alert
=============

When Ahmad returned home, his wife Maryam was still out. He sat down
next to his children and joined them in their game. Afterwards, he
picked up a book and passed the time reading. Finally at 10 o'clock that
evening his wife returned home. She did not even allow Ahmad to greet
her, but quickly rushed passed him to her room and took off the mask
that transfigured her natural form. She looked less beautiful but more
gentle. From her behavior, Ahmad knew that she had something to tell
him.

As soon as the children went to bed, she said to her husband, "Oh,
Ahmad, you have not asked me about my visiting today."

Ahmad smiled and said, "I hope you have enjoyed yourself."

Maryam said, “…I had a wonderful time! The house and the garden were
magnificent, and their table was rich with delicious foods. My friend,
Hana, had the most beautiful wig. Dr. Iram's wife wore an expensive
suit. It was quite beautiful."

Her husband smiled ironically and asked, “The suit or the Dr.'s wife?"

“Oh, the suit was wonderful! But I was too embarrassed to enjoy the
visit," she added. Ahmad silently beseeched Allah to give him patience
and said to himself," This is just the beginning; Allah will help me in
the end." He did not answer his wife's remarks. She continued, "It seems
as if you do not care for me. Am I nothing to you? You do not ask the
reason for my uneasiness. You regard me as if I were a stranger.”

Maryam seemed truly upset, so her husband said to himself, "I place my
affairs before Allah. If I do not ask her the reason, she will cry.”

He gently asked her, “Why do you think such a thing? You are my dear
wife and the mother of my children. Why are you upset? Were you
embarrassed by your clothing?"

"Oh no, although it was not as beautiful as the Dr.'s wife's suit, I can
buy a better one in the future. The source of my uneasiness has been in
my failing to ask my friends to visit me. It has been a long time since
I last invited them to my home. How would they account for such delay?
Surely they will think it is due to some financial hardship, or that you
are a miser or ignorant of social formalities. Such ideas hurt me, since
I know you are an excellent husband and a good father."

"Thank you for the compliment. Now what exactly do you want?"

Maryam replied, "Today is the fifth of the month. I can fix a day for
their visit as long as we can afford to spend some money."

"You talk as if the event is a victorious battle in need of great
preparation,” Ahmad said. His wife laughed, "No. it is not like that,
but it doest cost....”

Ahmad said, "But how can we manage until the end of the month if your
party will be expensive? We are already in debt. Now you want to make
matters worse." "You can borrow some money from your friends," his wife
suggested. "You know I have borrowed from many of them. How can I ask
for more?"

"Oh, how miserable I am! I was brought up in a rich family and lived a
luxurious life. Now I cannot even afford to invite my friends over for
an afternoon. Oh, what a shame! How am I to face them? Can I show myself
in society? This means I must isolate myself and give up all of my
friends." Maryam started crying, while her husband tried to convince her
of his viewpoint. She never listened to him, but said, “Oh, surely I
shall suffer from sickness. If I stay two days at home, I shall suffer a
nervous breakdown and lose my appetite."

Finally, Ahmad gave in and agreed to his wife's demand. His wife
arranged everything for the special day. She asked her sisters to help
her arrange the rooms for the occasion. She would have never imagined
that the outcome of her party could be the destruction of her family
life. On the day of the party, Maryam asked her husband to stay out
until a late hour and she sent her children to her mother's house. She
got herself ready for her guests, who arrived shortly before sunset.
They were all dressed in the latest fashion and with full makeup. The
home was soon filled, and gossip and idle speculation dominated the
conversation. Each was criticized by the other. One's dress was not to
the taste of the other; and this hairdo was not nice as another's. Silly
talk and jokes filled the air.

At 8 o'clock, Maryam called her guests to dinner. Suddenly the phone
rang and one of the guests was called. As soon as this lady put down the
phone, she came to Maryam and apologized for having to leave at once.
Her husband had warned of a red alert and she had to reach home before
the lights went out. Upon hearing this news, the other guests rushed
towards the door. They left without even a good-bye. Maryam emerged from
the kitchen to see that her guests had all disappeared. She was shocked
and dismayed to see her party come to such an end, especially when she
thought about all the trouble she had gone to and the dispute with her
husband about the matter. She had hoped to make a good impression on her
friends. She sat down and wept bitterly. She wished her husband would
come home early, before the red alert sounded. She waited to hear its
wailing but there was none.

At 10 o'clock Ahmad came and was surprised to see the house empty. His
wife told him the whole story. She feared that he would be angry, but he
was quite at ease. He said, "It may be a lie. There is no need for an
alert since there are no impending raids. Anyway, I hope you have
learned a lesson."

The wife said, "Indeed, I have. I won't undergo such an experience
again."

The next day, Maryam's friend phoned and apologized for the previous
evening. Her husband had lied to her in order to get her home early
since her child had been crying for his mother.

Maryam told her friend that it had been a silly joke, but a good lesson
too.


