Firm Stand
==========

As the first rays of dawn shone on the horizon, Sumayah awoke. She had
spent the previous night in tears. Sumayah felt certain that the dawn
had come to dispel her bitter suffering and open the door of hope,
through prayer, to her; a door which would direct her towards her
Creator. She hurried to get ready to pray, as if she were on her way to
meet a loved one. Forgetting the suffering and pain she had experienced
for many years, Sumayah merged with her prayer, giving all of her
attention to Him.

Sumayah finished her prayer and thought once more about the two paths
open to her-one leading to I happiness in this temporary life; the other
ending in spiritual happiness in eternal life. She was well-aware that
true peace could only be found by remaining a faithful Muslim and
adhering to Islamic principles, thus avoiding any deviation from Islam.

The first path would take her to a world of luxury filled with
misleading comforts and illusionary happiness. The other road would
guide her along the path of Islamic guidance. By following this path,
she would taste victory and be crowned with the laurel of firm belief
and determination. Since she was a Muslim, naturally she rejected the
first, misleading road. But still, Sumayah sometimes felt weak in the
face of threats and temptation.

Sumayah silently beseeched God: “Oh God, You know I am an orphan who
lost her parents at an early age. My only brother is studying abroad.
Europe, with its so-called civilization, has trapped him. He has
forgotten me and is busy running after amusements. God, Your blessings
caused my soul to be flooded with the light of Islam. My conscience is
clear. You have armed me with the weapon of strong faith, which enables
me to remain steady and have a pure heart neither stained by
pseudo-civilization nor attracted to the glittering results of false
progress.

I am not fooled by any poisonous, imported ideologies. Oh God, help me
to be content. Help me to find joy in assisting misguided Muslim girls
so that I forget my own unhappiness and the painful loss of my parents.
Such happiness, the result of helping others, can compensate for my
uncle's cruelty.”

Sumayah's troubles had begun when a stranger a young man, had become
acquainted with her uncle, who was her guardian. The young man was
wealthy and fascinated Sumayah's uncle with his fast cars and various
properties.

This man had made life hell for Sumayah ever since he had become
attracted to her and had asked her to marry him. Sumayah never let
herself to be influenced by his wealth. She avoided his company because
he was careless and wild. Her uncle was trying to pressure her into
marrying the young man by describing how happy she would be with every
imaginable earthly comfort. He built palaces for her based on his wishes
and hopes.

Sumayah's uncle ignored her objections, and she was afraid that if she
gave in to her uncle's demands, she would be deviated from Islam. Would
my brother take my uncle's side if he was here?' she wondered. She
thought about how much she needed to see .her brother. She always
remembered him in her prayers, and asked Allah to guide him.

Sumayah's uncle had locked her in her room for two days in his attempts
to pressure her. As she sat in the room, she said to God, “O God I am
afraid of what may happen, but I will stand firm. I shall keep on
struggling until you help me by Your mercy.” Her prayer put her at ease.
She reasoned that only real submission to God could cause her to feel
such calmness and then she slept, exhausted from the previous sleepless
night.

Suddenly her uncle's sharp voice awoke her. He was knocking loudly on
the door, saying, “Are you still asleep, you woman from the Middle
Ages?" Sumayah sat up, shaking, and answered meekly, "Yes, I had been
asleep.”

Her uncle opened the door and tried to speak in a friendly tone, "You
look happy this morning, Sumayah. I'm certain that you have returned to
reality and have given up your impossible dreams."

"Uncle, I have always lived in reality."

"Yes," he replied, “The reality of ancient times.”

Now were living in the twentieth century, and if you give up your old
ideas, I will keep the door unlocked."

Sumayah told him, "Oh uncle, I don't want you to open a door for me
which leads to worldly pleasures and close the door to God's blessings
and forgiveness. Please be kind enough to let me manage my own affairs."

Her uncle angrily retorted, "I won't let this opportunity pass by. I
don't want you to stay hidden in your room constantly reading and
writing. You have disappointed me greatly."

Sumayah answered him quietly, “I will always be as I have been and am
now.”

"Then you must leave my home. I won't let you trouble me."

"Are you serious?” Sumayah anxiously asked.

"Yes!", replied her uncle."You either agree to marry this man, or leave
my house and never return. We shall see how much you will gain from your
belief in Islam."

Sumayah said after a short while, “I have made up my mind."

"Then you will marry the rich man?"

"No. I will never exchange my principles for temporary gains."

Her uncle, greatly vexed, rushed to open the front door of his home.
"Then leave. You have no place here, you ungrateful girl. I regret all
that I have done for you. Go to your Islam, or to your brother, who has
forgotten you. Leave quickly! I cannot stand your presence here any
longer."

Sumayah had gathered her few belongings while her uncle was speaking.
She only owned a gold bracelet, a Qur'an and some books. She turned to
her uncle and said, "Uncle, you may regret this."

"Never, go find your brother. There is no hope for you."

Sumayah walked out the door, saying, "I am leaving, and I am happy. God
has given me strength. Farewell."

She thought that her uncle would change his mind, but he continued to
ridicule her until she disappeared around the corner.

As she walked along, Sumayah felt lost. Where could she go now? She
detested the corrupt society she lived in, and it, in turn, hated her
attempts to reform it. Feelings of despair started to overwhelm her.
Suddenly she heard the Qur'anic verse:

***“Or did you think that you would enter the garden while yet... when
will the help of Allah come? Now surely the help of Allah is near!”
(Al-Baqarah, 2: 214)***

Sumayah felt as if she was being addressed. The verse renewed her hope
and she felt victorious. She calmly thought about where to go. With an
uplifted spirit, she recalled her friend Maryam. Maryam's brother was a
friend of her brother, and she thought that he could surely help her
contact her brother and ask him to return.

She walked to Maryam's house filled with hope. When she knocked on the
door, Maryam opened it and welcomed her warmly. Maryam then
congratulated Sumayah and said, "God knows how happy I am for you."

Surprised by her words, Sumayah asked, "What on earth are you
congratulating me for?"

"Hasn't your brother written to you?" Maryam replied. "He is on his way
home, and should be here today or tomorrow."

This unexpected news was too much for Sumayah and she nearly lost her
balance." Are you sure he is coming?" she asked.

Maryam took her into the house, where she regained her strength. Sumayah
soon began to feel nervous, however, as she imagined how her brother
might have changed and that perhaps he was just like her uncle, who had
kicked her out of his home only an hour earlier. With a serious
expression, she turned to Maryam and said, "How do you know this? What
has caused him to return?”

Maryam understood her friend's fears and told her, “He recently wrote a
letter to my brother. He said in the letter that he could no longer
endure being so far away from you. He experienced western civilization
and rejects its values. Here is his letter; read it!"

Sumayah was so overcome with joy that she could not read it. She knew
that Allah had answered her prayers. Her religion, as she had always
hoped, had strengthened her and brought back her brother to her.

She asked Maryam to read the letter for her. Maryam read, “Oh, dear
friend, I have been misled for some time, thinking this loose life is
the way to happiness. This western culture has caused me forget my
responsibility towards myself and my sister. I confess, my friend, that
I forgot myself. Now I have realized the truth. These great buildings
where people drink until morning and these night-clubs which are full of
indecency are all means to fool and mislead youths and will eventually
endanger their future.

This generation of women, who are proud of equality with men, is nothing
but a mere commodity within the reach of all men for exposure and
exploitation. This boredom and running, after whatever is called a
civilization and progress, contains hidden sufferings and great problems
in which are flooding western society. As a result, I have regained my
awareness. Now, I fear for my sister, who is a young girl. I fear she
may suffer a similar fate and be caught up in the deviated currents in
many Islamic countries under the false names of civilization and
progress. I have decided to come home to be with her... We will both
find true happiness in the instructions of Islam..."


