Had I But Known
===============

Anfal, a rich young girl, sat waiting impatiently at the doctor's clinic
to get the results of a medical test. She was in a hurry to attend a
party and feared she might be late for her appointment with the
hairdresser. She never thought the result would be anything important.
It was just a precaution insisted upon by her family. She had never
suffered any serious illness, apart from the odd ache in her never
suffered any serious illness, apart from the odd ache in her limbs.
Then, it was her turn to see the doctor. She hurried inside to get it
over with as quickly as possible. She was surprised to see the doctor
look sad and concerned as he asked, “Is this yours?"

She answered, "No, it is my daughter’s."

She wanted to know the truth and thought that perhaps he would hide the
truth, if she told him it was her own. He asked her to have a seat, so
she sat feeling somewhat afraid. She looked at him anxiously, as he
said,

"Why did not you send a man to get the results?"

Anfal said, "It was on my way so there was no need to send someone
else."

The doctor looked sadly at her and said, "You seem to be an educated
girl. You understand the nature of life."

He stopped talking, and she began to tremble.

She asked, “What do you mean doctor?"

The doctor said, "The result indicates that there is a blood disease."
He looked down at his papers and remained silent. Anfal had to ask him
to give her more information. She cried in fear, "Is it cancer?"

He did not look at her, but a cloud of sadness covered his face. It was
as if he was sentencing her to death.

She said in a broken voice, "I am finished then." The doctor knew then
that she had lied, but it was too late to hide the truth. He looked
kindly at her and said, "I am sorry for you. Why did you lie? Anyway
life and death are matters within Allah's power. Many sick people live
long and many healthy ones die."

Anfal felt as if she were drowning, as if a hard fist was cruelly
squeezing her heart. She tried hard to regain her strength and said, "I
do apologize. Thank you, doctor."

The doctor encouraged her saying, "Be strong and optimistic. Medical
science is constantly progressing. Some of today's incurable sicknesses
can be cured tomorrow I still have hope. Leave me your telephone
number.” She repeated the number automatically without knowing what she
was saying. Feeling great shock and bitterness, she again thanked the
doctor and left.

At home she kept the truth to herself. She did not know how to share it.
Anyway, everyone was busy, getting ready for the party. Her mother
asked, "Have you been to the doctor? Why did not you go to the
hairdresser?" It was just a by-the-way question, needing no answer. She
briefly said, "I am not going to the party!"

She went upstairs into her room and locked the door.

She stretched out on her bed fully clothed and listened to her family's
voices, as if they were coming from a far away place. The wind seemed to
her to be a funeral sad tune, lamenting her approaching death. The
bedroom seemed strange to her as she would be leaving it soon. What
about the house? It would not remember her. She was just a guest. Others
would take her room and soon forget her. She tried to cry but tears did
not help. She looked around her in pain. Those curtains that she had
tried so hard to get, would stay after her. It would not have mattered
if they had been made of the roughest fabric, she would leave them for
others. She wished she had not troubled herself for such things. She
wished she had saved her time and money for more useful things, which
could have been helpful to her in her difficulty.

She wondered, "What is useful to me?" She was young, beautiful and rich
with everything her heart could desire. Could anything help her and save
her from death? She had always longed for an official job with a good
salary. She had it, but could it save her from death?

An idea struck her. She hurried to the phone while everyone was away.
She dialed the doctor's number and asked eagerly, “If I travel abroad
can I find a cure?"

He said, “There is nothing new abroad. It is a waste of money."

She put the phone down and sat on a nearby chair.

Her salary would not change matters. She walked through the house's
rooms as if saying her farewells. She paced the small garden and looked
at the trees. She whispered, “I wish these trees knew I am leaving them,
those stones, walls...I wish these doors knew my hands will soon no
longer open them. I wish those flowers, that I planted and watered knew.
How often the thorns and hard stones tore my hands! How often I watered
those dying flowers with my tears when there was no water. I wish they
knew the meaning of my departure.

These fruiting trees were tiny when I planted them. I did my best to
help them flourish until they grew up healthy and fruitful. Will they
know I am soon leaving? Will they remember my days in their company?
What about these seats, I used to rest on. Will they miss my presence?
Will they be ready for someone else to settle on them? My writing desk
felt my writing in tears and in smiles, does it know I am leaving? Will
it miss my pen and papers in its drawers? I wish they all knew I am
leaving. I wish I had known I was leaving, then I would not have cared
so much for this life. I would not have felt proud and arrogant…

Had I known I were a guest in this world I would not have been cheated
or tempted by its luxuries…

Had I known this I would have been aware that leaving a simple life is
easier than leaving a luxurious one…

Had I lived a simple life, I would not have found it difficult to cross
from this world to the next. My family is now enjoying the party…how
often I longed for such parties, how much I cared for fashion and
hairstyles! Can they help me now?"

Anfal threw herself down on the nearest chair as if she had realized a
truth previously unknown to her.

She said, "What shall I take with me… besides a coffin and my deeds.
What kind of deeds will go with me on my long journey? Nothing! Yes,
nothing!" She remembered her friend Sarah, who used to advise her and
guide her to the right path of Allah. She used to remind her of the
Qur'anic verse:

***“...and make provision, for the provision is the guarding of
oneself.” (Al-Baqarah, 2:239)***

She had never considered the importance of good deeds. Now she was in
need of such deeds to present to Allah. She would stand to give her
account, but what would she say? How could she expect Allah's mercy when
she disobeyed His orders? How could she ask for forgiveness when she
never even thought of obeying Him in her life's affairs? She wished she
had read the Holy Qur'an instead of all those cheap novels. She wished
she had gained some knowledge of her religion instead of reading
film-star magazines. She continued wishing she had done few things, and
not done other things. She wished she had not angered this person or
that, and had never lied or gossiped about anyone. She wished she had
not been proud and despised the poor.

She said, “I wish I could start my life all over again to make-up for my
errors and to obey Allah's orders. I worshipped my desires and ignored
my Creator. I wish I could live for a while to make up for my sins."

She remembered a Qur'anic verse, her grandfather used to recite:

***“Until when death overtakes one of them he says: Send me back, my
Lord. Haply I may do good in that which I have left. By no means! It is
a mere word that he speaks, and before them is a barrier until the day
they are raised.” (Al-Mominoon, 23:99)***

Here she said, "Oh God, I do mean it..." Tears burst from her eyes. She
cried bitterly in repentance, not pain. She decided to obey Allah in all
His orders if she lived a bit longer. The phone rang and she walked
towards it lazily. Tears in her eyes she said, "Yes?"

Someone said, "Can I speak to Miss Anfal?" She knew the speaker. It was
her doctor. She said, “Yes, speaking."

The doctor said cheerfully, "Congratulations my daughter! There is
nothing wrong with you. Thank God!"

She was stunned with surprise. She did not know what to say. “No
disease? How? You are joking, doctor!"

The doctor said, "May Allah protect me I am not joking. I have just got
an apology from the analyst. He explained that there was a mix-up with
the names. Your name was written instead of someone else. I have your
medical report here in front of me. You are quite well. Be thankful to
Allah my daughter."

Excitedly she said, “Thanks be to Allah, Thank you doctor."

She put the phone down, feeling as if she was new born. She knew she was
safe for a while, but death would certainly come one day. She had no
time to waste. However long she lived she was a guest. The first thing
she did was to perform her prayer, which she had neglected for a long
time. She promised Allah to obey His orders to pray, fast, and stick to
wearing decent clothes. She would also give up whatever Allah had
forbidden. In order not to forget this, she wrote the Qur'anic verse on
a placard and hung it on the wall. On the other side she wrote a wise
saying:

"Repent the day before you die. Because you do not know when you will
die, then always be repentant."


