Spiritual Surgery
=================

Ikhlaas considered her sister-in-faith, Wafa, to be a real help to her
in understanding life as being a righteous attempt towards achieving
perfection. She could never be out of her company for even a short time,
and Wafa was always nearby to support her in times of crisis. She would
remind Ikhlaas of her duties, if ever she forgot, and was, to her, like
a mirror, gently reflecting any defect or weakness in her character. In
fact Ikhlaas felt uneasy and suffered spiritually, whenever Wafa did not
call or turn up at meetings.

Waiting would cost her a lot; therefore she rushed anxiously to enquire
about her friend's absence but could get no news of her. There was
nothing for it but to go herself. Wafa, looked rather pale, but welcomed
her friend with a smile. Ikhlaas kissed her saying, "Oh dear sister I
why haven't you come recently? I hope there is nothing wrong?" Gently
Wafa said, "Nothing, but a little surgery." Shocked, Ikhlaas said, "Oh
dear, surgery? Where? When? Why? ..." Calmly Wafa said, "Oh sister, you
have raised many questions that cannot be answered all at once. Let us
answer the first question, 'Where?', the answer is here at home!"

Ikhlaas wondered, "Here? At home? 'Who was the doctor, who performed the
operation ? Where is the pain ? You look, quite well, thank God!"

Wafa said, "You have again raised many questions, I shall therefore,
follow your style in my answer. As for the doctor, it has been myself,
as for the wound, it is unseen."

Ikhlaas thought Wafa was joking; she said, "When did you become a
surgeon? We know you as our spiritual guide." Wafa spoke in a serious
calm tone. She said, "Every person should be his own surgeon. A sick man
is ready to resort to the doctors to rid him of a tumor or a rotten
limb. Why does he do that? Why does he risk his life at the hands of
someone else? Of course to be saved from a disease that is eating up his
body. As for spiritual diseases, the case is different. When a person
feels such diseases keeping him from happiness he should do something to
cure himself. Surgery with a difference is necessary, in this case. He
himself must be the doctor. By means of faith he can perform the
operation, and hence the house replaces the hospital. So I was not
joking when I referred to the reason for my absence."

Ikhlaas was excited at this. She was about to cry out of fear for her
friend. She anxiously said, "How do you feel now dear sister? Shall I
congratulate you on your recovery?" Wafa did not answer, but was silent
for a while. Ikhlaas was greatly concerned. It was not easy for her to
see her best friend suffer such a dangerous disease and she was relieved
when Wafa said, "I think I am quite well again."

Ikhlaas wanted to learn something from her friend, so she asked, "How do
you know that you are safe, sister?"

Wafa said, "Life's incidents have helped me to recognize the disease and
itâ€™s cure. Don't you see that these incidents are the experimental tools
which operate upon the human personality?"

Ikhlaas said, "So I see, but still one should not forget the other
surgeon's knife." Wafa nodded saying, "That's a fact. Physical treatment
is as important as spiritual."


