A Bad Bargain
=============

Early on in their engagement, he sat near his fiancée saying, "Oh, how I
love you...in fact I adore you, you are my life..." He uttered words of
love that she vainly enjoyed listening to. He told her that he could
hardly wait for their wedding day, as life away from her was meaningless
to him. He wondered how he had managed to live before knowing her. He
assured her that she was the source of happiness in his life. He was
sure to rent a great house that would match his feelings. They would
spend their honeymoon abroad, in one of the western capitals.

He carried on talking, repeating words of love, while his girl was lost
in her daydreams, which had at last come true. Suddenly she was aware of
her hair dropping across her forehead. She raised her hand to put it in
place and said flirtatiously, "You were in such a hurry that you did not
even give me time to have my hair done."

He said, "Your hair is lovely anyway, and you are quite beautiful."

She smiled, proudly encouraging him to praise her still more. She said,
"You did not even wait for me to get my new dress from the tailor."

He said, "Have not I said that this does not matter. I never worry about
such things as my real aim has been reached."

She eagerly said, "Are you quite sure?" He said,

"Yes. I swear by my love, that I mean every word."

She said, "I am very happy. I have always hoped to get a husband who
does not care for material things..."

He said, "I am just like that, you can be sure."

She went on, "You know that money is something that comes and goes. I
don't care much for it. In fact, I give all of my salary to my father
who suffers financial difficulties."

At first he did not answer, then he said: "It is nice that you help your
father. Financial problems cannot be tolerated. Then I suppose we can't
rent a big house!"

She said, "Whether big or small, it does not matter .It should at least
be comfortable."

He said, "Yes, there should be all the necessary amenities: a
refrigerator, a cooler, a washing machine..."

She interrupted him saying, "Such items can be bought one by one. At
first we can start a simple life. You know that at present my father
cannot help us."

He was silent again. He looked at his watch and then said, "Simplicity
is nice. I think we should not go abroad! "

She answered, "Yes that is much better. You know I must pay back my
debts!"

No longer he could conceal his disappointment, so he said sharply,
"Then, your salary is already spent in advance!"

She said, "Nearly!"

He moved in discomfort saying, "I, myself am in debt, so, I'd better not
marry at present."

Standing up he said, "We may not meet again. I wish you good luck!"

He left quickly as if running away from a monster! Only few minutes
before he had spoken words of love and claimed that he could not live
without her. The waiter came to her with the bill that the young man had
not paid.

Amused she said to herself, “I guessed right! I was right to lie about
my wealth. How stupid he is! He never thought I was testing him. My bank
balance is good and I am not in debt to anyone! Anyway, it was a good
experience for me, even if it was a bad bargain."


