The Last Days
=============

In despair Sarah wept saying, "Oh! I didn't know that those were her
last days or that that was to be our last meeting with her! Had I only
known...", her tears choked her. Saliha, the friend who had brought her
the sad news, was brave enough to have carried the message. She offered
condolences to her friend and stretched her cold and shaking hand in
comfort, to Sara. She said, "It would not have made any difference. She
kept it to herself and suffered in silence, patiently awaiting her end.
She tolerated the horrors of waiting death. What could you have done,
had you known ?”

Sarah said, "I would have learnt much from her, I would have learned
lessons that would have helped me to find my way in life. I would have
said farewell to her, and have assured her of my undying love and
respect. Oh! I am lost since her departure..."

Saliha said, "She knew how much you appreciated her friendship, which is
why she left you her writing."

Sarah dried her tears and said wonderingly, "Her writing? "

Saliha said, "It seems to be her diary ...I've come to give you this
precious trust."

She opened her handbag and got out the diary. Sarah took it and noticed
on the cover the Holy Qur'anic verse: ***We are Allah s and to Him we
shall return***.

On the first page she read:

...So, my life will come to an end soon. It is a matter of just a few
days. Only yesterday was I informed of this fact. Anyway, it is the end,
but I am not thinking of the end so much, as I am thinking of the
beginning, and the incidents that have filled the space between the
beginning and the end. Those incidents will strongly affect the end.

They indicate the end, as it says in the Qur'anic verse:

***“Allah is the Guardian of those who believe. He brings them out of
the darkness into the light..”. (Al-Baqarah 2: 257)***

Thus, I must review my past deeds and call myself to account, in order
to know what is awaiting me. Light or Darkness, joy or sadness, chains
or freedom...

In fact, I am seriously thinking of the beginning. What was the
beginning? When and where should I start? Should I start at my
childhood? Oh, no. I don't want to write my life story that takes the
time of whoever reads it. I shall express the feelings of one who stands
at the crossroads of this life and the hereafter. My childhood has
nothing to do with that. It has nothing to do with what is waiting for
me now! Childhood is a break in man's life, before he is required to
perform his responsibilities. Yet, childhood signifies many meanings. I
have heard and read about childhood. They say it is the happy joyful
world of hopes and wishes.

They say it is the time when a child gains the necessities for a life
that will give him satisfaction. They say this and more. Though I have
read about childhood, I have never realized the meaning of my childhood
as defined by others. My childhood was a stage in life; I crossed it
with no weapons of knowledge or faith.

Hence I suffered a lot and was bewildered at the conflict between my
inner self and the tiny body, between my great responsibility, which was
ahead of me, and the limited range of my thinking. Childhood means
nothing to me but a fruitless expanse of frozen time. So I won't put
those days of childhood on trial. I will start with the early days of
youth and girlhood.

What is youth to me? It is a film full of images; some are dull and
heavy, some are light and bright. It is a theatre where one's story is
told; the story of someone searching for perfection; one who looked all
around for the thread that would lead to it. I tried to understand life.
I was never satisfied with its outward face. I dived deeper to reach my
aim. I came to understand, through this universe, that there is a mighty
Power with firm laws that regulates its movements.

That is why it is so wonderful, so magnificent. I strived to understand
people, but faced amazement, hesitation and disappointment most of the
time. How often I returned home crying and broken-hearted; but, it was
not always like that. Thank God! Through experience I gained more
knowledge and more understanding of human nature and personal habits. I
persisted in the pursuit of knowledge and understanding.

Where did I find it? It was in Islam, in my Qur'an that is the message
from Heaven. I felt so thirsty that I hurried to this spring. This was
my early youth which I intend to record in this diary...' shall write
down its hours whether of happiness or sadness, satisfaction or
disappointment. I will consider my life's course and whether or not it
was on the right path. I must tell the truth, whatever that may be. I am
now standing at the doors of other world. What was my reaction to
incidents and events in those past days? What was my reaction to faith
and belief in Allah the Almighty? Hiding, or running away from the truth
won't help. I am on my way to stand in front of a Just Judge. There is
no room for denial or lying. The Qur'anic verse says:

***“On the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet shall
bear witness against them as to what they did...” (Al-Nur, 24:24)***

I need to be frank and put myself on trial. I must be serious in calling
myself to account, for haven't I known that death is the certain end of
every human being? It is written on every person clearly as a necklace
on a young girl's neck. Did I not hear that Imam Ali (A.S.) said, **"Oh
people! you are chased by** **death...!?"** Then it is not only I who
should call myself frankly to account. Everyone should know that he is
created to achieve perfection through the worship of Allah the Almighty.
When one dies, one will reap what one has sown. Oh, you who think you
are safe, be careful! You will not be spared.


