The Last Hours
==============

Now I must write about the last hours, which have been imposed, on me.
There is no way out; death spares no one. The Holy Qur'an says,

***Wherever you are, death*** ***will overtake you though you be in
lofty towers...*** ***(Al-Nisa, 4:78*** ***)***

Is there any escape from Allah's order? The Divine narration says,
**Whoever rejects** **My rule, should leave My** **Earth and Heaven**.
Every believer should accept death willingly; with whatever pleases
Allah, the Almighty. Am I sorry to be leaving this world? The answer is:
Yes and No. I am sorry at leaving it because it is the way that leads to
Allah's pleasure and mercy. Its days are trials offered to man in which
to make his choice. Had I to live longer I might achieve a better level
in the worship of Allah.

There is another reason for my sorrow. My friends and relatives will
feel sad and miss me; but this is the nature of life. I am not sorry,
because it is not worth a feather, as a poet says, ...One should be
careful of its plots. Divorce is thrice (three times in the Islamic
Religion) yet I divorced it a thousand times...

Its changes are fearful, its promises are false and its hopes are worn
out. I wonder how some hold onto such a hope Don't they know, good deeds
are the best provisions and that the final settlement is in graves? ...
Oh, how sorry one feels when the last hours draw near. How regretful one
is for past errors! How one wishes for a new chance to make-up for them!

One is ready to give whatever one has, to make-up for those sins. How
wonderful it is for one to call oneself to account. How wise it is for
one to consider the result of each step one takes in life, so that one
may not feel sorry at the last hours. The Holy Qur'an says

***“most surely (one's) self is wont to command evil except such as my
Lord had mercy on, surely my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.” (Yousef, 12:
53)***

***“Oh God, I do love Thee, the same as I fear Thee... Oh God, grant me
Your mercy and forgiveness, deprive me not of Your pleasure...Oh Mighty
God, how happy I am to be released of the chains and concerns of this
world. I am happy to becoming free of its evils and sins. Oh God, grant
those who loved me patience and double their reward. Oh God, keep them
on the right path, so that they can continue their good deeds through
which I may survive...Oh God, grant me mercy... surely Thou art the most
liberal Giver…” (Ali-Imran, 3: 8)***


