The Homeless Aunt
=================

Khadijah listened as her aunt tearfully complained to them about her
miserable situation. She was saying, "So you see, I have received
nothing for my trouble. Both of my children disregard all that I have
suffered for their sake. I sold my last gold ornament to send my
daughter abroad. I have mortgaged my house twice to enable my son to
become a doctor.

I sold a valuable carpet so that I could buy a colour T .V. to please my
daughter. Do they appreciate or even remember such sacrifices? No. My
son wants me to stay away from his home since his wife can't tolerate my
presence in the company of her aristocratic visitors. She says she wants
to be free in my son's house, as if I deprived her of her freedom.”

“I thought that my daughter would be happy to have me live in her house.
She is my only daughter. You remember how I helped her to live a life
free from worry. Do you know how she treated me in return? Like a maid
in her service who should clean her house for her and look after her
child while she and her husband spent their time at theaters and clubs.
Yesterday, she was out until one in the morning. Her child cried and
cried and I couldn’t calm him. When she finally came home, I was tired
and complained about her behavior. I wanted her to treat me like her
mother, not like a servant or a baby sitter….”

“Can you guess what she said to me? Without any shame, she told me that
since she gave me shelter and food, I had no cause to complain. She also
told me that she valued her freedom and was not ready change for the
sake of either her child or her mother."

She wept bitterly, unable to continue. Khadijah gave her something to
drink and Khadijah's mother tried to comfort her sister. Khadijah told
her aunt gently, “…It is a pity that you have taken so much trouble to
raise your children. You have brought them up in such away that you
yourself produced the present state of affairs.

You thought that your daughter's happiness could be found in unlimited
freedom, and, as a result, she did not learn what her responsibilities
were towards you. You helped her neglect her religious duties. Your
methods have backfired. She enjoyed life to the utmost without the least
concern for Allah, and she forgot the high position Allah the almighty
has assigned to a mother. She forgot the Qur'anic verse:

***“And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve but Him, and
goodness to your parents. If either or both of them reach old age with
you, reprimand them not, nor chide them, and speak to them a generous
word. And make yourself submissively gentle to them with compassion and
say: Oh, my Lord! Have compassion on them as they brought me up.” (Al
Isra, 17:23, 24)***

And the Qur'anic verse:

***“...and keep up prayer, surely prayer is timed ordinance for the
believers” (Al-Nisa, 4:103)***

"You should have taught her the verse in the Holy Qur'an concerning
hijab, " continued Khadijah,

 ***“...and let them (women) wear their covering over their bosoms and
not display of their ornaments...” (Al-Nisa, 4:31)***

"The result of being raised with no regard to religious duties is always
deviation from the right path. There is a great difference between one
who spends long hours watching television and indecent films and a
person who spends his nights reading religious books which tell him that
caring for parents is equal to worshipping Allah, and that Paradise lies
at the feet of mothers. You have sold your gold ornament," she
continued, "and sent your daughter abroad, but you have forgotten that
such travel can uproot all good instincts still buried within her
conscience. She has returned to you a figure empty of compassion."

Her aunt sighed deeply and said, "You are quite right, Khadijah. It is
my own fault, but I have realized this too late. I followed my husband's
advice, which was to raise my children free of all complexes, and to
allow them to have whatever they desired. Now, I see how mistaken I have
been. Your parents, who brought you up with much attention to religious
instructions, are quite happy with you." Khadijah replied, "They are
happy as well with my husband and with my brother's wife. My husband
encourages me to fulfill my duty towards my parents in order to please
Almighty Allah."

Her aunt then said, "I wish I had chosen a righteous husband for my
daughter to help her rid herself of all deviation. She should not have
married a man who gambles and drinks."

Khadijah then asked, “Why did you agree to such a marriage?"

"It was his expensive car that attracted my daughter, and the high dowry
impressed me and prompted me to accept him as a son-in-law," replied her
aunt. Sorrowfully, Khadijah said, "Oh, how frank you are, dear aunt! It
is a pity that you have realized the truth too late. May Allah save you
from this loss, since you admit your fault."

The aunt spent a week in her sister's house, and during that time
neither her daughter nor her son showed any concern for her well-being.
Khadijah's mother wanted her sister to live with them, but their house
was small. The aunt was seriously pressed for a place to live. One
morning, Khadijah and her husband said to her, “Please come and stay
with us. We really would like to have you. Don't disappoint us."

"Oh, I am a broken-hearted woman. What can I do for you?” her aunt
replied. Then she accepted their kind offer gratefully. Khadijah
mentioned a narration of the Prophet of Islam (SAWS) in this regard,
which states: A Muslim believer came to the Prophet (SAWS) and asked
what he could do to please Allah. The Prophet (SAWS) asked him if he had
a mother, and the man said: “No". Then the Prophet (SAWS) asked if he
had an aunt, and he answered: "Yes". The Prophet (SAWS) recommended that
he should look after her and love her because she had the same position
as mother. The aunt feared that she would be a burden to them.

But Khadijah's husband said, "Please do not say such a thing. I lost my
mother too early in life to enjoy her love and care. Perhaps Allah has
sent you to make up for that loss. You can live with us and you can
receive your son and daughter here whenever you like."

Khadijah's mother, who was seated nearby, said, "They are quite serious
about wanting you to live with them. I would be very happy to know that
you are near my daughter."

The aunt moved to her new home and was comfortable and at ease for the
first time in her life. She never felt like an intruder, and Khadijah
accompanied her when she attended religious meetings. The aunt benefited
very much from these meetings and enhanced her religious knowledge. She
compared Khadijah's happy marriage to her daughter's. She could feel the
harmony and spiritual understanding between Khadijah and her husband,
and recalled her daughter's life, which was full of quarrels resulting
from jealousy, selfishness and indifference. She could easily
differentiate between the normal, healthy life of her niece and the
disturbed, unnatural one of her daughter. She could do nothing but pray
to Allah to guide her daughter and son to the right path.

Early one morning a few months later, the doorbell rang continuously,
and Khadijah hurried to open it. She was surprised to see her cousin
standing at the door, carrying her child in her arms. Her eye was black
and she looked pale. Khadijah welcomed her cousin and took her to her
mother's room. The mother was surprised to see her daughter, and she
rushed towards her to take her in her arms. She thought that her
daughter longed to see her and she had regretted her past behavior. But
her daughter sat down on the nearest chair without the faintest idea of
her mother's feelings.

The daughter said, “My husband has turned me out of our house, as if I
were a piece of used furniture that could be replaced." Her mother's
face grew pale and she said, “He turned you out? When? How?"

Her daughter replied, "Oh, mother. You know how he is. He returns home
late every evening, quite drunk. He throws himself on the bed dead with
sleep. When I object to his behavior, he reminds me of our deal that we
should respect each other's freedom. I can do nothing but keep silent,
since this idea of freedom was my wish from the beginning. But things
have grown worse recently. He has started to help himself by my salary
and deprived me of my rights in my house.

"Yesterday he said he would no longer tolerate the chains of marriage
and made me leave my own home. I spent the night in the garden. I have
nowhere to go! My only brother won't allow me to stay in his house. I
have none to turn to but you."

Her mother did not know what to say. She thought her niece was kind
enough to have her in her house. Could she bring someone else to live
with her? It was too much a favor to ask. Khadijah, who had heard
everything, knew of her aunt's hidden suffering. She decided to save her
the trouble. She told her cousin, "You have done the correct thing by
coming to your mother. She will be happy to have you with her until
things get better."

The distraught young woman thanked her cousin for her kind help and
said, "Oh, how grateful I am to you, Khadijah! You have been so kin d to
my mother. Now you are doing me a great favor."

Khadijah smiled and said, "Oh, don't say such things. You should
consider this house as your own." The aunt was so moved that she rushed
to Khadijah and kissed her. She said, "How wonderful you are, my dear!
What great faith you have."

Khadijah whispered into her ear, “Please, aunt ask your daughter to wear
her hijab as long as she is in our house." The aunt answered
immediately, "Oh, yes, I have already decided to do so."

She settled herself near her daughter and said "I have never felt such
comfort in my life as I feel here. I have found in your cousin Khadijah
and her husband love and care that I never found in you and your
brother. You are my own children, but you showed ingratitude towards me,
while my niece and her husband flood me with kind feelings. I wish you
knew the reason." She was silent for a while. Then her daughter said,
"Oh, mother, surely it is faith in Allah and His Pleasure that dominates
their life, while we lack such faith."

"Praise is due to Allah the Almighty that you have realized the truth by
yourself I" said her mother. "Therefore, you should start to show regret
for the past and return to religion by first wearing your hijab." The
daughter looked down at the floor and was silent. Then Khadijah said
“..I think she has found out what happens when one neglects one's
religion. She now feels the importance of Islamic ethics."

Her cousin looked up at her and said “You are right, Khadijah. I am
tired of this life of pretence. I need someone to lead me and teach me
true faith and real salvation with no submission to other's wishes and
desires. But I can't help wondering what people will say about me."

Khadijah replied, “You always tried to please people in the past, which
made you their slave. You have gained nothing from that but false
happiness. You have wasted years, running the wrong way. Now, it is time
for you to come back to your religion and understand Islamic values in
order to gain happiness in this life and the Hereafter."

“Will Allah accept my repentance after years of deviation?" her cousin
asked.

“Yes, of course, Allah loves those who repent and hates those who insist
on doing wrong." Then Khadijah recited the Qur'anic verse:

***“Do they not know that Allah accepts repentance from his servants and
takes the alms, and that Allah is All Compassionate? Say: Work and Allah
will see your (good) work and so will His Apostle and the believers ...”
(At-Tawbah or Bara’at, 9:104, 105)***

The cousin spent a few weeks with her mother. She was greatly affected
by Khadijah's strong faith. Khadijah did her best to help her, and she
gave her some Islamic books that she read and discussed later.
Khadijah's cousin eventually became a good Muslim, and she knew she
could no longer live with a man addicted to drinking and gambling. She
filed for divorce. She gave up all her rights to her home in return for
keeping her only child. She intended to raise him to be a good believer.


