A Visit To A Bride
==================

After finishing her morning prayer, Fatimah usually sat down to recite a
chapter from the Holy Qur'an. She always found great pleasure in reading
each verse as she thought about the sublime meaning of the Divine words.
At such times, she felt as though she on a higher plane, a spiritual
world with a sacred atmosphere. The words taught her lessons and flooded
her life with new light when she read the Qur'anic verses:

***“And one of His signs is that He created mates for you from
yourselves that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love
and compassion. Most surely, there, are signs in this for people who
reflect.” (Al-Rum, 30:21)***

And,

***“And they who say: Oh our Lord! Grant us in our wives and our
offspring the joy of our eyes and make us guides to those who guard
(against evil).” (Al-Furqan, 25:74)***

The words reminded her of famous Muslim believers. She gave a deep sigh.
She really felt quite sad when she saw some Muslims failing to continue
striving towards perfection. However, there were still promising
examples. She thought about her friend, Khadijah, who had just begun her
married life and was visiting some holy shrines during her honeymoon.
Khadijah was a good Muslim sister who chose her partner carefully and
according to religious measures. She rejected all anti-Islamic
traditions that distorted the meaning and essence of marriage.

She always said that, according to Islam, marriage is the first brick of
a foundation in raising a generation of good believers. Fatimah
beseeched Allah to guide her dear friend along the right path in her new
life. She had barely finished her prayer when one of her Muslim friends
rang the doorbell. She had come to tell Fatimah that Khadijah had
returned from her honeymoon and that she had settled in her new home.
Fatimah rushed to put on her hijab to go and visit her, but the sister
told Fatimah it was too early to go that day, and that Khadijah was not
quite ready to receive visitors. Fatimah was surprised. How could
Khadijah refuse a Muslim sister's visit? She felt sad and said, "I can
hardly believe this. Why don't we go and clear up the matter?”

The sister replied, “Oh, perhaps Khadijah will be annoyed for some
particular reason."

Fatimah said, "Yes, it may be so. Otherwise, she would not refuse her
sister's visit simply because she lacked furniture or some similar
reason. She has never been concerned about materialistic things."

Fatimah spent that day depressed. She feared Khadijah might yield to the
false values of society, yet she knew that her friend was a good
believer and would not change easily.

At nine o'clock that evening, the doorbell rang and Fatimah went to open
it. She was so pleased to see Khadijah standing there that she could
hardly believe her eyes. They exchanged kisses and words of welcome and
Fatimah congratulated Khadijah, and told her of her desire to visit her.
Khadijah expressed surprise at the delay in visiting her, but Fatimah
said, "Have you not announced that you are not ready to receive
friends?”

Khadijah replied, “Why should I? I have missed you all so much and have
been waiting for your visit since my arrival."

Fatimah said, "Well someone said that your house was not fit yet for
visitors."

Khadijah was surprised and said, "Oh, dear! Since when have I cared for
such trifles? How can you believe it?" Fatimah was pleased to hear this.
She said, “Praise is to Allah! How happy I am to hear you say this! But
such un-Islamic rumors should be stopped. We are quite happy that you
have begun your married life in harmony with your religious beliefs. We
shall soon visit you, God willing."

Khadijah warmly replied, “You are all welcome any time; the sooner, the
better."

The next morning Fatimah phoned the other sisters and told them of her
proposed visit to Khadijah on that day. While she was thinking about
telling her cousin, she heard her talking to her mother. Fatimah went to
her and asked her to join them, but her cousin said, “Oh, thank you,
but..."

Fatimah was surprised at her cousin's answer, and asked, “What is the
matter with you? Didn't you say that you wanted to go with us?"

Her cousin replied, “Yes, but it is clear that you do not want me to
accompany you."

Fatimah was amazed. “What makes you think so?" she asked.

Her cousin answered, " How can you inform me of the visit on the same
day? How am I to get ready when I need at least two days to get anew
dress and buy a nice present? Do you think I can go without a gift?"

Fatimah said, “Not necessarily. A present can enhance friendship and is
recommended in our religion. But buying a present should not cause
financial strain. Otherwise, it seems as if it were a tax to be paid. A
present can be something simple and still special. Our Prophet (SAWS)
used to accept even a cup of milk as a present."

Fatimah's cousin retorted, “Don't you think it would be shameful to give
her a cheap present?"

Fatimah said firmly, “A gift is not valuable because of its price, but
by its being given. A useful book, for instance, is a good gift. As for
anew dress, I suggest you visit Khadijah in your old dress and you can
buy a new one another time."

The cousin thought for a while, than agreed to go. On that day, the new
bride Khadijah was busy with her daily work. She baked a cake for her
expected visitors.

She was active and at ease. Thinking of the upcoming visit, she recalled
pleasant memories of the past. The doorbell rang and one of her
relatives, who also happened to be her neighbor, was at the door.
Khadijah welcomed her and invited her in. They sat down and chatted a
while.

Her relative told Khadijah about their district, most of the inhabitants
of which were wealthy. Khadijah said, "I do not care much for this
aristocratic district. A true Muslim does not change his or herself to
fit in with any particular class of people."

The relative answered, "Well, I just wanted to tell you about some
matters concerning the district where you have settled."

"Does it really matter?" asked Khadijah.

"The style of your hijab is not accepted here. You look peculiar.”

Khadijah proudly replied, "I am happy to look different in my decent
Islamic dress."

Bewildered, her relative asked, "Why should you be happy to be so
different from the rest?"

Khadijah said, "First of all, my aim is to obey my Creator and gain His
pleasure. Also, when I wear my hijab, I surely remind others of Allah
and their obligation to worship Him cording to the Qur'anic verse:

***“And I have not created the jinn and mankind except that they should
worship Me.”(Al-Zariat, 51:56)***

“My duty is to enjoin the good and forbid evil. Through my appearance I
call people to Allah’s religion. In any case, thank you for your
advice."

Khadijah's relative could not believe her ears. She changed the subject,
saying, "You are expecting some guests, aren’t you? I smell fresh cake."

Khadijah smiled and said, "Yes, I expect some of my sisters in faith."

"It is pity you have not furnished your home yet,"

Khadijah's relative remarked, looking around the living room. "Since you
have no chairs, I can lend you some, and any other things you might
need."

"Thank you very much, but I do not need to borrow any chairs. I can
manage without them. I consider such things to be of little value. I
believe in the Qur'anic verse:

***...And the embellishment of gold, and all of this is naught but
provision of this world's life; and the hereafter is with your Lord;
only for those who guard (against evil)." (Al-Zukhruf, 43:35)***

That evening, Khadijah entertained her friends, who enjoyed the visit
and were warmly welcomed by the bride.


