Determination
=============

It was a gloomy, overcast night. The wind was blowing and it was going
to storm. Khadijah and her three young children were sitting on an old
worn carpet in their room Khadijah looked out the window often, trying
not to draw her children’s attention. She was worried that the storm
would break before her husband arrived. Finally, hearing the key turn in
the lock, she quickly got up, telling her children to go welcome their
father.

"Oh mother", said the youngest child, "Has he brought us food?" She
gently scolded him, saying, "This is not important. Don't ask him this
question." The children ran towards their father and, although she was
upset, Khadijah, too, greeted him with a smile. Her husband had brought
a few pieces of bread and cheese, which he handed to his wife. She soon
served the simple meal on plates that had lost their colour through long
use.

Khadijah spoke cheerfully while they ate and later the children slept,
dreaming of sweets, toys and games. Their parents sat quietly for a
while.

"So this year is about to end," Khadijah's husband, Hassan, said
bitterly, "And I still haven't found a job. We have spent our savings
and sold what we could of our furniture. We have nothing left with which
to fight our hunger."

His wife replied, "We still have faith and determination, which are the
keys to all which is good and brings happiness."

"What good thing or happiness has our faith brought us? Our children are
wearing torn clothes and are hungry. It is this very faith that has made
life difficult for us, and it is guidance, which has led us to poverty!
In the past we were living in luxury..."

Khadijah interrupted her husband, asking, "What kind of luxury was it?
Since when has gambling been a way of providing for one's family! Allah
has said that gambling is forbidden to Muslims. How could we have been
happy knowing that the food we ate and the clothes we wore would send us
to the Fire in the Hereafter? Our gain caused others to go hungry and
naked!

"Yes, Khadijah," Hassan said. "I know you are right. For these very
reasons I gave up gambling, but it has brought us nothing. I thank you
for helping me out of that bottomless pit. All praise belongs to Allah
for His guidance. Still, poverty is bitter and the shamefulness of being
needy is almost unbearable."

Upon hearing these words, Khadijah consoled him saying, "Oh Hassan, it
is only temporary. Allah says that with every difficulty comes relief.
The life of the Hereafter is the real and endless one. We still have
hope. This future, everlasting life is the one we should care about and
make ready with good deeds. Don't regret what has passed; instead, thank
I Allah for possessing the means of obtaining His forgiveness. Happiness
belongs to those who are patient while facing hardships and avoid
disobeying Allah."

"Oh Khadijah, I am not without hope, but I'm afraid that Satan will
cause me to sin- then I will fall and lose everything."

"I still have my gold wedding ring," his wife said.

"Tomorrow I shall sell it and we will have money for a while. Almighty
Allah will help us. Be confident that you will find a job, with Allah's
help. Allah doesn't leave those who worship Him without hope of His
compassion. You will surely see how the future will brighten for you,
and how generous Allah is to those who believe."

With a sigh, her husband replied,” If you think so, I will believe you
but what is the wisdom behind our hardship?"

"Oh, Hassan," She cried. "Don't you know the Qur'anic verse:

***"And we will most certainly test you with what you fear, and hunger,
and loss of property and lives. Therefore, give good news to the
patient?" (2.157)***

"But when will this hardship end?" he asked.

"As soon as we pass our test successfully," she replied. "Through
patience, prayer, and avoiding sinful ways of getting money, we shall
succeed."

At this point, the couple stopped talking and fell asleep, putting their
trust in Allah. At dawn they awoke for their morning prayers.
Afterwards, Khadijah began preparing breakfast and her husband sat down
to recite some suras from the Qur'an. When the children woke up, their
mother poured tea for them. One of the children asked for bread. He
said, “My friend and his brothers have eggs and butter every morning."

His mother, feeling great pain in her heart, smiled, kissed him and
said, "'Tomorrow, by Allah's will, you will have whatever you like."

The child innocently asked, “Why do you say: 'By Allah's will'?"

"Because," she replied, “It is Allah Who gives us everything and helps
us to do our work. Without His will, we can't even breathe."

"Mother, does that mean Allah will give us eggs and bread for
breakfast?"

“Yes, my son. By the will of Allah it will happen." The father listened
to his wife. He was greatly surprised by her strong faith. He began to
feel hopeful and confident. He started talking with his children about
the days to come and how Allah would help him to find a good job. Then
he would buy whatever sweets and fruits they like. Then there was a
knock at the door. Wondering whom it could be at such an early hour,
Hassan went to find out. When he returned, his face was shining with
happiness. Upon seeing this, his wife said, "Hassan, I feel our test is
over."

In a voice choking with emotion, he replied. "Yes, my dear wife, Allah,
the Exalted, has ended our test. Praise to Allah, it has happened with
your patience, efforts and faith. There is a hadith which says: ‘A good
woman is better than 1000 men’ our hardship is finished by the grace of
Allah and your strong faith."

"Was it the messenger of Hajj Sahib?"

"No, it was Hajj Sahib himself. He said that he had been looking for
someone to manage his business and heard about our situation and my past
experience. Allah used him as the way to save us from despair and to
give us hope, as Allah promised to the patient believers. Hajj Sahib
said to me, ‘You are now cleaner and purer than all of us. You are now
as one newly born.’”


