The Lost Diary
==============

It was by chance that Tuqa found a small diary lying on the ground
outside the public library. When she picked it up and opened it to the
first page, she read the following lines:

4.8.87

“Am I strong enough to hold onto these tiny threads of hope? Can I
continue in spite of these difficulties and reach the source of light
behind these clouds? Who can give me a helping hand so that I can endure
this cruel life? Oh God, what darkness surrounds me!" Tuqa read another
page:

26.8.87

"Again I resort to my diary to complain about my suffering. I feel as if
my nerves are about to shatter ...I have no one to talk to; no one at
all. Oh, why can't I sleep? The moon and the stars gaze upon me as if
mocking my dreams."Tuqa looked for an address in the diary but she could
only find a name-Huda Najafi. She went into the library and asked to see
the list of book borrowers of the past week. Finally, she found the name
she was looking for. Huda's address was written next to her name, so
Tuqa decided to pay her a visit to return the diary and see if she could
help this troubled sister.

The next day, Tuqa went to Huda's house. As she rang the bell, she
wondered if she was doing the right thing. But since she knew that her
intention was pure, she was at ease. A young girl opened the door, and
Tuqa asked to see Huda. The girl asked her to enter and showed her to
Huda's room. Huda was surprised to see an unknown visitor, but she
welcomed Tuqa with a warm smile. They shook hands and sat down. Tuqa
took the diary out of her purse and gave it to Huda, who was very happy
to see it. She held it close and said, "Thanks God I have it -at last!
Thank you for bringing it to me!"

Tuqa introduced herself and said, "Please excuse me for reading a few
pages of your diary. I found it yesterday on the ground, near the
library."

“There is nothing to apologize for! I have suffered greatly since I lost
it. I was nearly heart-broken when I realized that my diary was
missing."" Why should you be so upset at the loss of a few pages?" asked
Tuqa.

"These words reflect my innermost feelings; they are like apart of my
soul,” replied Huda.

"But such reflections are but a small part of a person's thoughts, since
life is an enormous theatre comprised of countless images. Life is like
a wild garden wherein various kinds of flowers fill the air with their
fresh scent. Yet there are also trees and thorny weeds in the garden,
which may hurt a person. The earth from which flowers emerge nourishes
weeds as well."

Huda listened attentively, and then said, "Thorns cause one to bleed,
and weeds hinder the growth of blossoms." "It isn't always so," replied
Tuqa. "Hopes and disappointments follow each other in turn. This is a
natural law of life. However, great one's sufferings are, one still
hopes for the dawn which follows even the darkest night."

In a weary voice, Huda said, "But this dark night may be so long that it
causes one to lose hope." "You can counter feelings of hopelessness by
having true faith in Allah's help and guidance. A life of hardship is of
no value if one forgets about Allah and His Compassion. Master yourself,
and you can direct your thoughts and actions towards the right path."
"But some things are beyond a person's control and cause pain and
disappointment," Huda persisted.

"Still", said Tuqa, "Disappointment is not in itself evil. If a believer
has strong faith, a new door opens when another is closed. Never give up
hope.”

Tears formed in Huda's eyes and she said, “I don't know. Perhaps Allah
has sent you to save me from my despair.”

Tuqa recited a verse from the Holy Qur'an:

***“...and despair not of Allah's Mercy; surely none despairs of Allah's
Mercy except the unbelievers” (Yusuf, 12:87)***

Then Tuqa stood up, saying it was time for her to leave in order to
reach home and perform the evening prayer. Huda begged her to stay a
little longer and suggested that they pray together. After praying, they
resumed their discussion and Tuqa reminded Huda of the Qur'anic verse:

***Do people think they will be left alone saying: We believe, and not
be tried? And certainly we tried those before them so Allah will
certainly know who are true and He will certainly know the liars.***
***(Al-Ankabut, 29:2,*** ***3)***

Tuqa added, “I all that we experience during our brief lifetimes
prepares our soul to control itself through using good will. Some losses
are considered to be disasters while, in fact, they are disguised
blessings. A calamity which disrupts a happy life may be a means to
crystallize thoughts and can direct a person towards faith in Allah and
obedience to His orders."

"My dear friend Tuqa, I thought that I was a good believer in Almighty
Allah, but I was about to fall apart."

Tuqa firmly stated, “Faith will defeat earthly concerns through
submission to Allah and acceptance of His Will. Failures can teach us
many useful lessons. Hardships can make a person wise if they stand
firm."

Thinking that she had given enough advice for one afternoon, Tuqa tried
to change the subject, “Aren't you going to ask me how I found your
home?" Huda replied, “I believe Allah sent you to me, no matter how you
found you way."

It was time for Tuqa to leave, and Huda made her promise to visit again
soon. The next meeting between Tuqa and Huda took place a few days
later. This time, Tuqa decided it was better to let Huda do most of the
talking. Huda talked about her younger sister, whom she said had a great
desire for learning. Huda said, "She studies continuously, but I fear
that she may one day give up her studies."

Tuqa asked, "What makes you think so? I think that she may become even
more interested in acquiring knowledge as she gets older." "But life is
not generous enough to help one achieve one's dreams and wishes,"

Huda replied. "Pessimism should not dominate anyone's thoughts. If evil
has an effect on a person's life, goodness is still more effective. Rays
of sunlight can penetrate the thickest clouds," Tuqa said. She felt that
her friend still needed encouragement, so she added, "Muslims know the
origin of life, the story of creation. Almighty Allah gave all human
beings the opportunity to perform good deeds in this life and has given
them the chance to worship Him. This worshipping of Allah gives us the
opportunity to evolve into more, which will benefit us in the next life,
the Hereafter. Therefore, if one comprehends the aim behind this worldly
life, the death of a dear one can be tolerated.

"As for suffering due to material poverty, a wise person should know
that true poverty is embodied in spiritual shortcomings, which can bring
about various illnesses," Tuqa concluded.” Nevertheless, poverty can
cause one to be ashamed,"

Huda said, "There is nothing shameful about poverty,"

Tuqa told her. "One should be ashamed to be rich and dishonest. A poor
man who remains virtuous and rejects dishonest means of living enjoys
self-respect. Poverty not only is not a source of shame, it is an aspect
of the lives of righteous believers. As Allah states:

***And We will most certainly try you with something of fear and hunger
and loss of property and lives and fruits,' and give good news to the
patient. (Al-Baqara, 2:155)***

Tuqa continued, “A Muslim is not envious of another's good fortune. He
feels optimistic that he will have his r turn one day. A wise believer
has a strong will, and if he is betrayed by a friend he will not regret
the loss of such a person. Perhaps such an experience will cause him to
choose his friends more carefully."

“But one can be hurt by ingratitude or even aggression when one tries to
help another."

Tuqa answered, “This is not the case with a true Muslim who does not
trade his good deeds. He is ready to help purely based on his good faith
and expects nothing from anyone but Allah. It is better that good deeds
be rewarded in the Hereafter."

“What you're saying is true. You have been so kind and helpful to me
that I can hardly find a way to express my gratitude", Huda said.

Tuqa told her, “There is a narration from our Prophet (SAWS) ‘*If one
cares for a fellow believer, one should manifest one's concern.*' The
best thing you can do is to respond to Islamic ideals and think over my
words. As material concerns bring about unhappiness, spiritual values
lead to happiness. Imam Ali (A.S.) says: ‘If a man behaves properly in
matters concerning himself and Allah, Allah keeps proper the matters
between him and other people; and if a man keeps proper his affairs for
the next life, than Allah keeps proper for him his affairs of this
world...'" (Nahjul Balagha)

Feeling much better, Huda said, “Due to your helpful words, I feel
optimistic about the future. I shall never feel hopeless again. I will
use my faith like a weapon to confront hopelessness and to strengthen my
will."

Tuqa happily replied, “Faith produces security and calmness. Faith
itself is obedience to Allah's commandments. Through faith, earthly
concerns are shaped and invested with various meanings. Hence, sickness
can alleviate sins and disappointment can lead to victory. The Qur'an
says:

***Surely We have made whatever is on earth an embellishment for it, so
that we may try them (as to) which of them is best in work. (Al Kahaf,
18: 7)***

“We are tested by Allah throughout our lives. Now that you have helped
me out of my difficulties, will you remain my friend?"

Huda asked. “Of course, our common faith has sealed our friendship. The
best sort of friendship is based on spiritual harmony and righteous
ideals. Such a foundation is unshakeable. The faith that floods a
believer's heart is enough to flood the entire universe with mercy and
compassion."

"Have you noticed how few establish relations based on faith and common
ideals?" asked Huda.

“Yes that is precisely why the majority fail and friendship so often
turns into enmity. But since we are inspired by faith and we have good
intentions to reform society, Allah will surely help us."


