Ingratitude
===========

Waiting is often a source of annoyance. The longer the wait, the greater
the feeling of hopelessness becomes. Aminah was waiting for her friend,
Huda, who had promised to visit her that day. It was nearly nine o'clock
in the evening, and Huda still hadn't arrived. Aminah could not stop
worrying. She knew that something important had kept her friend at home.
She tried reading a book, but couldn't concentrate. At half past nine,
the telephone rang.

Aminah rushed to answer it, and Huda was on the line, apologizing for
not coming. She promised to come the following day. The next day, Aminah
was so happy to see Huda that she hardly noticed her paleness. They sat
together to talk, and Aminah noticed the lack of warmth and animation
that was usually evident in Huda's voice. She was saddened by her
friend's unspoken distress. Huda was not only a sister in faith for
Aminah; she was also a torch that lit the darkness for her. Huda's
strong belief and worthy ideals attracted the admiration of others. She
was calm and wise when she advised her Muslim sisters.

Hoping to discover what was wrong, Aminah asked her friend, “Now, what
prevented you from showing up yesterday?

“Sometimes I am unable to keep my promises," Huda replied, sighing.

"That is not unusual," Aminah told her. “Various reasons can prevent a
person from carrying out his plans sometimes."

Aminah saw that Huda was too upset to even speak. "Are you crying?", she
asked. Tears should be shed for the sake of Allah. What is important
enough to make you so upset?" Do you imagine that I would cry for any
reason other than His cause? In fact, my sadness is for the sake of
Allah."

Aminah tried to reassure her friend, “Then you have no reason to be
upset, because you are on the right path. You should find comfort and
solace in your faith. Shouldn't a Muslim feel happiness knowing that she
is hastening towards Allah with a clear conscience? Such a person
hearkens to the Prophet's (SAWS) words: "How I long to meet them-the
true believers."

"That is exactly the source of my sorrow," Huda replied. "I am afraid
that I may stop in the middle of the road and that I will fall to meet
the Seal of the Prophets with an unblemished record." "Do you feel that
you are performing your religious duties inadequately?", asked Aminah.

"Oh no, I always do my best. But, sometimes one is forced to ...", Huda
broke off her sentence.” Forced to disobey religious' commandments?" I
would never do such a thing, even if the world pressured me to do so!",
asserted Huda. "My discomfort arises from the thought that I cannot
increase my Islamic activities so that I may reach a higher stage. I
sometimes feel depressed when I think that I'll never reach perfection."

Aminah admonished her friend," How can you feel depressed? Don't you
know that it is unbelievers who despair of Allah's Mercy and
Forgiveness?"

Huda replied, "Of course, I do not despair of Allah's Mercy, but when I
encounter ingratitude or unfair treatment, I feel that it is due to my
inadequateness or to a lack of faith on my part. Hence, I feel at a loss
and do not know what to do. I fear that such self-doubt may endanger my
spiritual strength."

"All aspects of a Muslim's life are based upon adhering to religious
principles. One should recognize one's faults and weaknesses and work to
correct them. Strive to increase

your Islamic activities and efforts, " advised Aminah. "I have thought
deeply about this matter", said Huda, "but I have come to no conclusion.
This is why I have confided in you. A Muslim is like a mirror, which can
reflect a fellow believer's faults and also show how they can be
corrected."

"But I haven't seen any faults in you," Aminah answered. "So I can only
advise you to continue on the right path; the one which you are on now.
You have the ability to plant seeds in every sort of soil. If anyone
doubts or mocks your good intentions, another person will benefit from
the fruits of your knowledge. An important aspect of a believer's life
is suffering which brings him or her closer to Allah. When one has a
divine aim, the negative reactions of others are not of any value. For
Allah, a good deed will be rewarded tenfold. Such efforts will inspire
others. Please don't allow any pessimistic thoughts to dominate your
thoughts. You are young and active, so don't lay down your weapon or
leave the field. Have confidence in yourself and you will surely
overcome all difficulties."

"Thank you so much!" Huda exclaimed, embracing her friend." Your words
have brought me tremendous relief. I feel sure now that I will continue
on the correct path and that Allah will help me to do so."


