Introduction
============

There is something quite strange yet intriguing with the name ?Imam
al-Husain?. One of the most charming and pleasing names, the name ?Imam
al-Husain? implies noble characteristics and most admirable qualities.

Yet, it mysteriously inspires his adherents and admirers to carry out
their most sincere duties and modes of servitude, simply for the sake of
meeting his satisfaction. The compiler of the present volume simply
aspires to be regarded as one such person.

Throughout history, the purest and noblest forms of art, literature,
architecture, and so forth have been associated with either religion
itself, or figures closely associated with God and/or religion. Hence,
the most sincere feelings of devotion are crystallized in the form of
poetry, regardless of the language used.

The impact of Imam al-Husain on poets is highly evident in such
languages as Arabic, Persian, Urdu, or Turkish, being the dominant
languages of Muslim populations.

Such poems reveal the extent and depth of the impression the Imam has
since exerted on the culture of the language in question. By the same
token, it is interesting to examine such

21

devotional poems in English. Indeed, such poems only express the poet's
most sincere feelings or reflections about the admirable figures in
question.

The bulk of ziarat 1 texts, poems, prose pieces, laments, sermons, and
tazia (Shiite version of passion play) 2 scripts devoted to the Ashura
tragedy collectively make up what can generally be called Ashura
literature.3 Granted that such forms of Ashura literature necessitate
redefinition of ?

literature proper? simply to cover literary and linguistic
manifestations of the whole event, Ashura literature is by no means
limited to the Islamic era, beginning specifically from the very day of
Ashura.

1

- According to The Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed., 20 vols [^1989],
s.v. ?ziarat?), the word ?ziarat? is defined as ?A Muslim place of
pilgrimage, a shrine; a pilgrimage to such a place.? This is one sense
of the word ?ziarat? as used in Arabic and Persian. Although not
recorded in The Oxford English Dictionary, there is still another sense
of the word which concerns prescribed and often-recommended texts, of
various lengths, to be read while paying such a visit. ?Ziarat texts?
deal with the second sense noted here; they signify a religious meeting,
far beyond the bounds of time and place, with a mostly monologue type of
talking.

2- Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (5th ed., 2 vols [^2002]) defines
it in this way: ?A play commemorating the suffering and death of Husain,
performed esp. on the anniversary of the event each year.?

3- In Arabic, it is called Adab al-Taff (lit. Karbal? Literature). Taff
is another designation of Karbal?. See, for example, J. Shubbar, Adab
al-Taff, 10 vols (Beirut: Dar al-Murtada, 1409 AH/1988). In Persian, the
following works must be mentioned as examples: H. Gool-Muhammadi, ed.,
Ashura va She're Farsi [Ashura and Persian Poetry] (Tehran: Atlas, 1366
Sh/ 1985) and M.-A. Moj?hedi, Shokuh-e She?r-e ?shur? dar Zab?n-e F?rsi
(Qom: Shahid Mahall?ti Institute, 1379 Sh/1999).

22

Ashura literature dates back to the pre-Islamic period.

According to an account related in Maf?t?h al- Jin?n,1 following the
Safw?n prayer, Imam Ja?far al-S?diq remarks, through the chain of
authorities indicated therein, that the text of the Ashura Ziarat was
initially composed and issued by the Almighty.

(Supposing that there had not been any praise for Imam al-Husain except
the very account indicated here, this single account itself proves well
indicative of the magnificence and significance of the Ashura incident
and the unique personality of Imam al-Husain.)

If such an authoritative text as the Ashura Ziarat could provisionally
be put aside on the basis of the fact that its source of production was
God the Almighty, the first human-produced work in the rest of the
common heritage of Ashura literature dates back at least to the very
first elegy which the Christian apostle Zachariah composed on the Ashura
incident2-3

1

- Maf?t?h al-Jin?n is a collection of prayers for recitation,
non-obligatory, recommended rituals, and so forth anthologized by the
late Sheikh Abbas Qommi. Although the explanations were originally
phrased in Persian, the whole text later on appeared in Arabic and Urdu
translations. Various editions and selections of the book are widely
available.

2- See the annotated English translation of the Holy Quran produced by
S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali (1st US ed., Elmhurst, NY: Tahrike Tarsile Qur'an,
1988), s.v. the Quranic mysterious letters K?F, H?, Y?, ?AYN, S?D in the
first verse of the Sura Maryam (viz. Mary), p.242f, 1309.

3- Viewed from this broad perspective, one may come up with a
classificatory scheme of Ashura literature. That is, it may be
classified as a) pre-Islamic vs. b) post-Islamic accounts of lament on
Imam al-Husain

While of the former there are just some reports in certain hadith-based
exegeses (tafs?rs) of the Holy Quran, the latter can (conveniently and
irrespective of the language used) be subdivided into poetic prose
pieces, lectures and sermons, and poems, all focusing on the captivating
personality of Imam al-Husain, his speeches, addresses, the poems
(ascribed to him), and particularly the hardships he and his matchless
adherents endured. As such,

23

several centuries ahead of its taking place. (There are some
outstanding and high-ranking Shiite ulema [clerics] who have written
various accounts1 of the similarities observable between the attributes
and fates of the Christian apostle John [Arabic Yahy?]

and Imam al-Husain.) Such literary forms are entirely devoted to
revealing the purest and noblest kinds of sincere feelings of their
composers as well as serving as accounts of the hardships and
afflictions Imam al-Husain's front suffered and endured in the Ashura
tragedy.

2 In the Islamic period, since the Ashura tragedy onward, almost every
devout belletrist, author, or researcher, however amateur or proficient,
has produced (at least) a work, literary or scholarly,

chiefly to mark his or her reverence and tremendous respect for Ashura
literature proves to be one of the most interesting literary genres not
only far beyond the frontiers of Islam but signifying a linking thread
between (at least) such Abrahamic religions as Judaism, Christianity and
Islam.

Unfortunately, such an archetypal and symbolic tragedy seems not to
have received the due attention it deserves in most Western or Islamic
literary circles. Needless to say, Ashura literature cannot logically be
restricted to any predetermined languages and genres, nor to the faith
and denomination of anyone who composes such a devotional piece of
literature.

1- See, for example, J. Sh?shtar?, Dam? al-?ayn ?al? Khas?'is
al-Husain, Persian title [Ashk-e Rav?n bar Amir-e K?rav?n], trans.
Sayyed Muhammad Hosseyn Shahrestani (first lithographic ed., 1313
AH/1895; 9 th ed., Qom: Dar al-Ketab, 1381 Sh/2002), pp. 439-443, and
pp. 423-450, for Imam al-Husain's similarities with other prophets and
apostles; cf.

the Arabic original under the title of Al-Khas?'is al- Husain?yya:
Khas?'is al-Husain wa Maz?y? al-Mazl?m, ed. Sayyed Ja?far B?qir al-
Husain? (Qom: Anw?r al-Hud?, 1425 AH/ 2004), pp. 496-503, on the
similarities between Imam al-Husain and the Apostle John; the entire
Chapter 10, pp. 475-515, is concerned with the similarities between Imam
al-Husain and other prophets and apostles.

2- Undoubtedly, the earliest piece of Ashura lament (viz. nawha) was
produced by Lady Zaynab, Imam al-Husain's sister, beside the Imam's
decapitated body on the Karbala battlefield of Ashura.

24

Imam al-Husain. Such works are by no means limited to Shiite literary
figures; rather, quite a lot of Sunnite, even Christian, Jewish, and
Hindu figures have shown and continue to show their respect and
reverence by composing such pieces.1 Truly amazing is the fact that
Ashura literature transgresses beyond all bounds of religion, political
leaning, or language in that almost nothing can stand on a par with it
as so penetrating and moving and, at the same time, smoothing.

The more a person reads or writes about it, the more eager they feel to
go on with it. It makes one ponder, feel aflame, produce a work,2 feel
satisfied for having done his or her duty, and then find it far from
expressing their true feelings and pathos they experience, let alone to
reflect the smallest degree of the depth and wide horizons of the event!
In a nutshell, fatigue does not make sense here for this is a true
instance of a labor of love.

Ashura literature in its entirety is not, and should by no means, be
restricted to the main languages of the Muslim population. Such
literature has been either translated into major European languages or
produced directly in such languages as

1

- See, for example, A. Bara, Al-Husain f? al-Fikr al-Masi?hi (2nd ed.,
Beirut, 1979; Qum: Fadak, 1426 AH/2005); A. al-N?blus?, Al?qah
al-Mas?h?yy?n bi Ahl Bayt al- Nab?yy (Beirut: D?r al-H?d?, 1422
AH/2001). Here mention must be made of Archbishop Sebouh Sarkissian's
work ?The Events of Karbala: A Survey of Some Classical Sources:
al-Ya?qubi, al-Tabari, and al-Mas?udi?

(Unpublished thesis, University of Birmingham, 1981), and Kam?l
al-Sayyid, Boules Sal?mah: Sh?'ir al- Ghad?r wa Karbala f? al-Zaman
al-Akhir (Beirut: Dar al-Ghadir, 1425 AH/2004). Part of the last work
(pp. 46-76) focuses on the Ashura incident as mirrored in the poems of
Boules Salamah, a famous Lebanese Christian poet.

2- This encompasses any type of work colored and minted with a sincere
sense of devotion, be it drawing an artistic work, e.g. the contemporary
Iranian painter Maestro Farshchiyan's famous painting ?Asr-e ?Ash?r?
[The Ashura Afternoon].

25

English, French, and so forth. As long as Ashura is remembered and
devoutly commemorated, its literature will remain and survive, for
Ashura has been an incident far beyond the bounds and confines of the
precise day of Ashura, the plain of Karbala, and the religion of Islam.
It will remain imbued with invaluable and perennial lessons, moral,
religious, and educational for all humanity.

Ashura will always remain a never-ending lesson. It has since
vociferated the voice of the perennial battle between right and wrong,
darkness and light, and it continues to mark the oppression of pure
religious thought and noble human characters. In this way, it
reverberates the voice of religious nobility as exemplified and
crystallized in the Ashura battle.

Throughout the ages, Imam al-Husain, the mourning ceremonies held for
him, and even going on pilgrimage to humbly pay visitation to his sacred
tomb and sanctuary, and even paying a visit to those who have been on
pilgrimage to Karbala, have not been altogether devoid of political
implications for those who have realized the inherent political force
behind the belief in the personality of Imam al-Husain as well as the
spiritual and religious rewards and virtues recorded in the
authoritative and canonical hadith texts. 1 To these, one

1

- The bulk of hadith literature in this regard is legion and amazingly
abundant, thought-provoking, and awe-inspiring. See, for example, the
hadiths recorded in such texts as Ja?far b. Muhammad b. Q?lawayh
al-Qumm?, K?mil al-Z?y?r?t, ed. ?Abdul Husain al-Am?n? ([lithographic
ed.] Najaf: al-Murtadaw?yya, 1356 AH/1937), ?Abdul Husain al-Am?n?,
'Adab al-Z?'ir Liman Yamamm al-H?'ir, ed.

Naj?h J?bir Salm?n alHusain? ([orig. lithographic ed.] Najaf, 1362
Ah/1943; repr. Beirut: al-Balagh, 1424 AH/2003); Muhammad b. ?Al? b.
al-Hasan al-?Alaw? al- Shajar?, Fadl Ziy?rat al-Husain ?Alayh al-Sal?m,
ed. Sayyed Ahmad al-Husain? 26

must add the innumerable biographies 1, nawhas (viz. laments),
marthiyas (viz. elegies), and dramas, 2 produced in Arabic, Persian,
Turkish, and Urdu, to mention just a few. 3

The present book is by no means the first and last volume collected in
this field. Contrary to an initial anticipation, it seems that Ashura
literature in English will occupy at least five volumes of books. Hence,
readers and (Qom: Ayatollah Mar?ash? Public Library, 1403 AH/1982) which
contains eighty- nine hadiths on this topic.

1- A huge number of volumes of bibliographies have been compiled on the
biographies of Imam al-Husain. The bulk of biographical accounts is
legion and incalculable. Certainly no other figure can match Imam
al-Husain as the subject of so many books, treatises, theses,
dissertations, and biographical accounts, short or long, published or
unpublished, in history. Excluding manuscripts and essays on his
biography, compiling a bibliography of the published books dealing with
the life of Imam al-Husain would turn into a voluminous work.

There is a short list of 103 important Arabic books on Imam al-Husain
in M.-A. al-Am?n? al-Najaf?'s thirty-two page Introduction to Maqtal
al-Imam al-Husain of M.-R. al-Tabas? al-Najaf? (Qom: Muhibbin, 1382 Sh/
2003), pp. 9-20. See also the bibliographies of such short accounts as
M. T. al-Sam?wi, Ibs?r al-?ayn f? Ans?r al-Husain, rev. ed., ed. A. J.
al- Hasan? (Beirut: al-Bal?gh, 1424 AH/2003), and M.-B.

Pour-Amini, Chehreh? dar Hem?se-ye Karbal? (Qom, Iran: Boust?n-e Ket?b,
1382 Sh/ 2003). The Persian books and monographs on the subject are
almost innumerable. The present author has not had access to a list of
such biographies and research monographs written particularly in
English; however, it is not illogical to guess that quite a great number
of such accounts must have been produced in Muslim countries where
English is the lingua franca.

2- For instance, A. Al-Sharqawi, Husain the Martyr: A Play in Six
Scenes, trans. A. Abdul-Razzak (Chicago, Ill.: The Open School, 1997).

3- See, for instance, the articles ?An?s?, ?Marthiya?, and ?Muhtasham-i
K?sh?n?? in The Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition (Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1960- ). I should here like to mention a research project on the
Turkish heritage of Ashura literature, currently under development by
Dr. Amir al-Khaledi at the University of Kufa in Najaf, Iraq (personal
communication).

27

critics are requested to contribute to this collection by providing the
compiler with poems not included in the large corpus so far collected.

An attempt has been made to facilitate the readers' tasks. Where a
person, a concept, a term, or an event is mentioned in a poem, the
reader may refer to the endnote indicated, geared to its proper line
number.

This is for the reader's ease of reference to the lines in which they
appear. Just after each poem, there are some explanations to save the
readers' time, and to provide them with some basic information to
comprehend the fragment(s) in question.

The present introductory essay can hardly be regarded as a true
introduction to a poetic collection on Ashura. It merely serves as a
text by way of introduction. And, no doubt, any introduction to the life
and afflictions of Imam al-Husain will prove far from adequate in
respect of the greatest tragic incident in the world.

1 After all, who dares, or may even claim, to adequately describe the
life of Imam al-Husain whom God honored with martyrdom?2 Any attempt to
describe such a great incident would be like an ant's description of the
Prophet Solomon's kingdom.

1

- Take note of the following phrase quoted from the Ashura Ziarat
?mus?batan m? 'a?zamuh? wa 'a?zama raz?yyatuh? f?'l-isl?m wa f? jam??
al-sam?w?t wa'l-ard? [an agony for which there is nothing comparable in
Islam and even in the whole world]. 2- Consider the fragment of the
'Arba??n Ziarat which reads ?akramtah? bi al- shah?da? [you, viz. God,
respected and honored him [Imam al-Husain] with martyrdom].

28

The present introductory discourse ends with a fragment of a poem by
the Iranian poet Seyyed Ali Musavi- Garmarudi: ?Here the word ends/
Where I reach an end/ At you no end bends.?

May God the Almighty consider and accept the present humble attempt.
Amen!


