Introduction: The Period of Hopes and Aspirations
=================================================

The period of youth is an age of aspirations and hopes. A time to be
happy. This is the time when the future of every young person comes
before his eyes in the form of sweet dreams. He begins to think. He
makes programs and treasures grand ambitions in his heart.

However, sometimes it also happens that a man breaks down right during
the time of his youth. Such a person is never able to achieve any of his
aspirations, even till the time he becomes old.  
 Sometimes it also happens that, quite unexpectedly, a person obtains
much beyond his expectations and all of his sweet dreams become reality.

Surely one man’s success and another’s failure are not accidental or
without reason behind them. The causes of both must be sought in the
very lives of the persons concerned.  
 We can be sure that one who succeeds has started life in a way, which
assures his success and one who fails, most probably, does so due to his
own mistakes. It is because he has walked a path that did not lead to
his destination.

In this book, our aim is to describe the reasons for the success of the
world’s successful people so that the young generation may benefit by it
and adopt the path, which is straight, and avoid the alleys, which are
unknown and full of hurdles.

Secrets of success are not merely one or two. Though a part of their
success is due to what they had obtained as legacy from their parents in
the form of internal qualifications, natural traits and intelligence.
Certainly such traits cannot be obtained by making efforts, as they are
Divine gifts, which the Almighty God has bestowed upon them for
administering their worldly affairs.

This book will also prove that even though such factors facilitate the
development of the youths they are not the sole determinants of a
successful life. The actual factors of progress are different and they
are such that anyone who aspires to be successful can seek them out
easily and use them to his advantage. By adopting such techniques he can
certainly become a distinct member of the society if not one of the most
successful persons of the world. Such an achievement too is praiseworthy
and laudable, because, there are so many young people who miss the path
of success and meet failure in life.

The progress of man mostly depends upon training, zest, struggle and
proper programming. The readers will find these things in the following
pages of the first part. The influence of ‘heredity’ is much less in
comparison to them.  
 We shall now explain briefly the secrets of success illustrating the
same by examples from the lives of great men.  
 Ja’far Subhani


