History is the Best Teacher
===========================

We are fortunate because we are not the first ones to arrive in this
world. The sky above us has seen the lives of millions of human beings
on this planet through the ever-observing eyes of the star. Those people
saw happiness and sorrow, brightness and darkness, love and hatred. They
indulged in war and peace. In short, they saw thousands of aspects of
human life.

Though, prior to us, many people went to their graves taking the secrets
of their success with them without revealing them to others and they
have been forgotten, yet different parts of the earth and apparently the
silent deserted lands and the ruined structures have preserved
noteworthy aspects of their lives for us and writers have noted them
down for our benefit. Thus this world has become a great training school
for us.

We obtain several lessons by studying the pages of history, by
researching the lives of men in various parts of the world and by
pondering over ancient remnants and can thus become wiser like our
elders.

Is it not so that the product of a whole life is only a little
‘experience’?  
 Does history not make us conversant with the best of experiences? Is
not human history a mirror showing the past people in their entirety?
The misfortunes and mistake as well as the victories and reasons thereof
are clearly seen in this mirror.

In the Holy Quran, the last edition of Divine Guidance for mankind, we
find this ordinance of studying the life of past communities. We have
been asked to take lessons from the special aspects of their lives.

The commander of the believers, Ali (a.s.) says, “O My son! Though I did
not myself live with the people of the past yet I have studied their
history thoroughly and attentively. Thus I have been aware of the ups
and downs of their time and I know the relevant laws. I have
comprehended their history so perfectly that, it seems I were living
among them.”

History is the best guide for the present generation. Teaching history
is much more difficult then teaching physics and chemistry. There are
some formulas by which the teacher can teach these subjects nicely. But
in case of history it is necessary to think deeply, make research and
strive hard to reach the conclusion. Until history teachers do not get
themselves satisfied regarding these requirements they cannot fulfill
their obligation and cannot get the desired results. On this basis
everyone who knows history cannot be called a historian.

A point, which is more minute than a hair, is that everyone who does not
shave off his hair cannot be considered a sage.  
 We must make efforts to understand the secrets and truths of history.
Otherwise it is no use just reading it or only memorizing it. Secrets
and truths of history are those bitter medicines which man can obtain
with much difficulty. Man can cure both individual and collective
ailments by using those medicines.

It is incumbent upon everyone, especially upon the administrators and
other managers, to make deep study and research in the history of
England, history of the great revolution of France, and, especially the
history of Islam and of the last part of the rule of Banu Umayyah and
the revolution of the Abbasids and ascertain the causes of the failures
of those who had ruled over the masses for centuries.

As a principle we should cultivate within us a zeal for reading books
because it raises the level of thinking, strengthens the mind and offers
the treasures of great people free to those who can obtain it. Today the
standard of a nation’s progress is measured and its culture weighed by
the use of paper by that community. It is said that in Switzerland,
which is understood to be the cradle of civilization, taking into
consideration its population, the quantity of paper used is much more
than any other country. Experts have confirmed that paper used in Tehran
is more than the paper utilized by all other provinces of Iran
collectively.

Today it can be ascertained how many books are published in a year in a
country and how many copies are printed in each edition. It is also
calculated how many people benefit from the public libraries in a
particular country.

In this way it is determined how much the level of public thinking has
risen during the past year and how did it fare compared to other
nations.

Secrets of authors are always hidden somewhere in their books. Once when
Aristotle intended to publish his book Alexander put a hindrance so as
to prevent others from reaching the level of his teacher’s
accomplishments.

During the medieval centuries the Popes and Clergy had established an
‘educational society’ and had prevented the general public from reading
books so that they (the clergy) might make maximum earnings from the
ignorance of the masses and may continue to have total control on them.

A good book adorns morality, builds up the personality and teaches the
secrets of life. However useless books should be discarded as harmful
books impair ones intelligence.

A wise man has said, “Let me know what you are reading, so that I may
tell you what you are.”  
 Shouphenhauer has said, “Life is more precious than the time spent in
reading useless books.”  
 We must spare some time every day for reading useful books that
increase our knowledge and we must consider the book as our best friend.
There is no friend in the world better than a book. No one is more
sympathetic than a good book in this house of sorrow. In moments of
solitude there are thousands of bounties in the company of a book and
not a single hardship.

Making Use of Opportunities
---------------------------

People do get enough opportunities and time but they do not take the
advantage of this golden key to success and miss the chance due to
procrastination. One should not only complete today’s work today but if
possible also do the next day’s work today.

Once Abu Muslim Khurasani was asked, “What is the secret of your
success?”  
 His response was, “I have never postponed today’s work for tomorrow.”  
 Sometimes it also so happens that energy spent in postponing a job
proves enough for finishing the same work.

Some students who are not allowed to appear in the March-April
examinations and who have to appear in October-November take the maximum
advantage of this time and opportunity whereas some waste their time in
repenting and in meaningless thoughts until the time of examination
arrives. Such pupils not only face failure they also retreat a few steps
backward. Some people only shed tears on the past and say:  
 “Had we purchased that garden we would have a earned much benefit. Had
we enrolled in this university we would have become among the VIPs of
the country today...”  
 Such people waste all their time in repenting and shedding tears on
‘yesterday’s grave’, though, if even now, they become wise and restart
their jobs they can fulfill all, or at least, some of their aspirations.
But they continue to cry on spilt milk.

You cannot repurchase time that is spent. Hence it is better not to sell
it in the first place as time is a precious pearl.

Some people have the opposite nature. They think of the future but their
worry is so much that in that anxiety, they are unable to do anything
during the time that is at their disposal. We have seen students who are
always afraid of being debarred from appearing in the examination and
who keep on saying, “We are afraid our year will be wasted, we may not
be allowed to sit in the examination.”

Such restlessness does not allow them to work and study and they lose
the opportunity. How meaningful is this Arabic couplet:  
 Whatever time is gone is gone and what will come has not yet come so
get up and take the maximum benefit of what is in between the two
nonexistent moments.  
 O Saadi! Yesterday has passed away and the forthcoming tomorrow does
not now exist. Hence appreciate the time between the two.

Youth is the most opportune time
--------------------------------

Youth is the best time for working, learning and earning. The greatest
opportunity in ones life is the youth. A young man is like the
mountaineer who has reached the top of Himalayas and is full of joy. He
has passion, aspiration, hope, zeal and ardor for work. He has numerous
capabilities for inventing things. After some years these physical and
spiritual powers begin to decrease. Nerves become weak, eyesight becomes
feeble, and capacities lessen.

The Master of the Pious, Ali (a.s.) says, “Man understands the
importance of his youth and health after losing them.”

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had given many admonitions to his great
companion, Abu Zar. One of them was, “Realize the importance of your
youth before the advent of your old age.”

A young branch is the adornment of a garden. When it becomes old the
gardener pulls it out and throws it away. A young branch produces a new
fruit for every flower and the old branch is destined to wither away.

The great and successful people never repent over the past. At the same
time no anxiety regarding the future prevents them from performing their
jobs at the appropriate time.

Almighty God has given a natural wisdom to every man, which, increases
with the passing of age. But, in addition to this natural wisdom, in the
light of knowledge and experiments, we also get a sort of acquired
wisdom. This acquired wisdom, in fact fosters the natural wisdom and
raises it to perfection.

Suppose we have two trees of pistachio. Both are capable of giving nine
kilo pistachio. But if we provide fertilizer to one of them, the treated
plant would produce twice the pistachios.  
 Only those people are successful who always and in all available
opportunities, be it childhood, youth or old age, polish their natural
brainpower or intelligence with the acquired knowledge. And the best
time for doing so is youth.

The Holy Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.a.) has said, “Opportunities pass away
like the clouds of spring. Success is the right of a farmer who takes
advantage of it.”

Those who have valued their time and age never waste their life in
futile works. Some scholars have written their books during hours, which
are not appreciated by the common people.

For example, Dr. Mardun Cud wrote one of his famous books during the
time he got while traveling from one patient’s house to the other’s.

Dr. Borni learned French and Italian languages during the time he got
while commuting to his office and back.

The great scholar, the late Mudarris Khayabani had written one of his
famous books regarding Persian synonyms during refreshment breaks.

Napoleon had defeated the enemy in the event of ‘Arikula’ with the help
of only 25 companions because the opponent was tired and Napoleon took
the advantage of this opportunity and was victorious despite having
lesser men.

Some people waste their life and time as if they are the enemies of
their own lives and times. Today there are many pastimes that provide
less recreation and waste more time.

Of course, tired nerves do require rest and recreation. One should never
think that recreation is a waste of time. Because, lacking a stroll,
breathing fresh air, viewing beautiful scenes, participating in joyful
meetings and all such things give respite to our nerves from tension and
add vigor to life.  
 But at the same time we should not squander our precious life by
imagining that every vain and futile pastime is recreation.

Today’s youth mostly turns to television, cinema and magazines for
recreation. They should realize that every film is not worth viewing.
Nor is every book pleasing, educational, instructive and advantageous.

Crime, horror and sex films are not worthy of appreciation. Rather they
turn youth into untimely old age.


