Firm Determination
==================

Man, like other animals, also has the power of ‘determination’. In other
animals it is controlled by their beastly nature, whereas man’s
determination or will must be in control of his brain or wisdom.  
 In this chapter on determination we do not intend to say that we must
hand over the reins of our will or wish in the hands of passionate
desires and perform every deed according to beastly nature. In that case
we will not rank above an animal and thus will lose our status.

Here our aim is that after giving proper thought if we come to a
conclusion that such and such work is beneficial or desirable and that
it should be done then we should make a decision to do it and should
remain firm on that decision to the best of our ability. We must realize
that the more the hardship or difficulty in any work the more is the
demand to be firm and unflinching for its performance. Here the secret
of success is firm decision or strong will. It removes difficulties and
obstacles from the path.

The demeanor and the facial appearance of great people give an idea of
their unyielding and firm determination, which pours success on them.

Men with firm decision are always respected in every strata of the
society. Others cannot harm them. But people having a weak will power
wander like stray dogs and are so frail and shaky that the enemy
overcomes them easily.

Reluctance and hesitation is disastrous for success and it is a clear
sign of moral debility. Indecision inflicts a fatal blow to carefulness
and higher intelligence.

Alexander the Great had said, “One of the secrets of my victories is my
strong will. After making a decision I do not like to hesitate in
carrying it out.”

Timurlane, Napoleon and Nadir Shah were among the recognized military
commanders. They used to delay their decisions but after making a
decision they never changed it.

A man with a firm decision is like a soldier on duty who has already
received alert orders. Such a man bears all circumstances and no
hindrance can block his path. The difficulties in the path leading to
his goal are unable to make anything appear impossible in his eyes.

Goethe says, “A man with firm decision and strong will can change the
world to his liking.”

In the war of Qudisiyah, the commander-in-chief of the Persian army,
Farrukhzaad called a delegate from the commander of the Muslim army. The
Muslim commander, Saad bin Waqqas, sent Rabe bin Amir as his
representative. The strong will of this Bedouin Arab made Rustom
spellbound.  
 When he arrived in the court of Rustom, he saw that Rustom was sitting
on a golden throne and rich carpets were spread on the floor with
gold-threaded pillows on them.

Such deceptive things never awe a man with firm decision and strong
will. His determination did not flinch at all that pomp.

When he arrived near Rustom he did not alight from his horse, rather he
pushed his animal forward and entered Rustom’s stable in a mounted
position. When the servants of Rustom tried to stop him he retorted,
“You had invited a delegate from us. I am the representative of the
Muslims. If you do not want to see me I will go back.”

Then slowly and silently, with complete ease and seriousness, he
approached the throne of Rustom. Walking over the pompous carpets he
went forward and sat down on the floor. Then said, “We are not
accustomed to such luxury.”  
 When the interpreter of Rustom asked him why the Muslim army had
attacked he replied, “Allah Almighty has put a responsibility on us that
we should release God’s slaves from all sorts of oppressions and from
the evils of other religions and invite them to abide by and accept the
just law of Islam. If they accept our invitation we have no enmity
toward them. Otherwise we will fight with them and will either kill or
be killed. Either way we reach paradise.”

Observing such a strong determination of this Bedouin, Rustom who was
struck with awe, said, “Give us some time for corresponding and
consulting our elders.”

“We can give you three days. More delay is not advisable,” said the
Muslim representative.  
 Rustom said, “It seems you are the commander and thus you intend to
sign a treaty with us.”  
 He replied, “No. I am merely a member of the Muslim society. Of course
all the Muslims are limbs of a single body. If any one of them gives
shelter to others, all the Muslims are bound to concur with it.

The Commander of the faithful, Ali (a.s.) orders his son to have firm determination
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Battle of Camel was fought between Hazrat Ali (a.s.) and the
breakers of the treaty. For making an attack in this war Amirul
Mo-mineen (a.s.) had given the flag to his dear son, Muhammad Hanafiyah
and to fortify his determination he advised, “Even if the mountains
around Basra give way, you should not budge from your place, to retreat.
Lighten your teeth. Offer your head on loan to Allah. Keep your eye on
the last rows of the army. Close your eyes for seeing any adversity and
remove difficulties with the special strength of your firm will.
Understand that the final victory is in the hands of Allah. Our
responsibility is only to fight in the way as shown by Him.”

The Amirul Mo-mineen sent one of his commanders (Malik Ashtar) as the
governor of Egypt. In his letter addressed to the people of Egypt, Ali
(a.s) had praised his emissary thus:  
 “O people of Egypt! I have sent to you a slave from among the slaves of
Allah towards you. He does not sleep during the hours of danger. He does
not fear the enemy in time of peril. For evildoers he is more
devastating than fire…He is one of the swords of Allah, which does not
blunt nor it misses its hit.

We can benefit from the precious pearls hidden beneath the ground of our
intelligence, wisdom and alertness only if we have an unbreakable
determination. Man can advance only in the light of his steel-like will.

What is self-confidence? Only that man may take a decision in the light
of his brainpower and then act accordingly. He may regard himself able
to perform that task and refrain from those matters, which can weaken
his will.

People, who have toured the entire world, possessed positive thinking
and who had founded educational institutions and industries had removed
the words like ‘impossible’ from the vocabulary of their lives. They
viewed everything from the angle of ‘feasible’ and ‘I can’. A man having
negative thoughts and weak will not only loses the benefit from
advantageous opportunities but he also becomes a hindrance in the way of
others. He wastes his life in disallowing his inner potentiality and in
creating roadblocks for himself.

One of the motives of strengthening the will is love for our aim and
zeal in work. First of all man must try to cultivate interest and zeal
for his work. Awake or asleep, he must always dream of his work. This
should continue until his mind is occupied with that issue every moment.

The gigantic pyramids of Egypt, the lofty palaces of the czars, sky-high
mansions, and multi-volume books are the results of unbreakable
intention.

The expertise of Russians and Americans in astronomy is skyrocketing
only due to their strong will.  
 Weak willed people are like papers flowing on the surface of the sea.
They have no strength of their own. But men with firm determination are
like expert swimmers who, with the power of their will and
determination, rip the water currents and proceed in the direction of
their choice.

Napoleon used to say, “The word, ‘impossible’ should be removed from the
dictionary of life.” He used to become very unhappy on hearing words and
like ‘cannot be done’, ‘I cannot do’ and ‘I do not know’. He used to
say, “Just desire and it will be done.”

Nowadays many ailments are treated by strengthening ones will power.
Many difficulties become easy before a firm determination.

In the words of Hafiz Shirazi: There are many dangers in the way to
Laila’s house. For taking the first step it is necessary that you should
be Majnoon.


