Awareness of Circumstances
==========================

Before starting any work it is necessary to understand the conditions
and demands of the atmosphere and then to draw a program accordingly.
Jobs done without first studying the relevant trends often end up in
failure.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said, “One who becomes aware of the conditions
of his times is saved from a sudden attack.”

This is a very valuable principle. Had the Muslims and other backward
communities of the world, paid attention to this rule in the matter of
politics they would never have been subdued by the invaders. Many
misfortunes are the result of ignorance of and carelessness toward
prevailing conditions.

In western Rome Before the advent of Islam, there was no progress at all
in arts and science, trade and industry and military affairs, because
the people there were so unmindful of the world that when the Muslim
army besieged Constantinople their wise men were discussing vain issues
as: Can some angel accommodate them on the point of a needle?

History repeats itself. Muslims also fell to such idleness at a time
when they were at the peak of their progress and advancement. The
eastern states, particularly the heads of Islamic countries were
pitiably unaware of the conditions of their masses. They woke up only
after the west took control of all sciences and industries.

Even the recurring defeat of the Ottoman Empire did not awaken its
rulers. The rulers remained in sleep even after being defeated by the
Europeans. Suddenly when they saw enemy planes roaring over their heads
they began to open their eyes wide with astonishment.

They could not imagine that it was the work of human beings. Perhaps
they were thinking that the flying machines were the handiworks of
angels!

The nineteenth century was very important from the viewpoint of
discoveries and inventions. But in those days Iran was engaged in
internal struggles. Those responsible for such state of affairs were in
deep sleep. They were unaware of the conditions of the world.

For example it would not be out of place to mention here that during the
reign of Fatehali Shah, Napoleon wanted to conquer India. He intended to
snatch away that fertile land from the hands of the British East India
Company. In this connection, in order to obtain the support of Iranian
public and government, he wrote a letter to the Shah of Iran.

Strangely enough they could not find anyone in the court of the Shah of
Iran who could translate the letter of Napoleon for the king.

It was considered inadvisable to get it translated from the embassies of
other countries. They were thus compelled to send that letter to the
Iranian embassy in Baghdad where there was a French-knowing person who
translated it.

Such a dosing nation cannot preserve its political, economical and
cultural independence and it has to live under the obligation of others.

A great Iranian poet has given vent to his burning feelings in this
connection thus:  
 We are the ones who had collected tax from kings, then we took away
their belt and crown.  
 We took their royal cap and their throne, which was decorated with
pearls and ivory.  
 We emptied their treasures.  
 We did not fear storms and high-speed winds.  
 We were a dreaded topic in China and other countries.  
 Egypt and Oman were awed by our glory.  
 Our power was obvious in Spain and Rome.  
 Granada and Ashbila used to obey us.  
 Saqliya was under our flag.  
 Royal decree was our sign, which used to cover everything under the
sun.

These couplets pertain to the era when Muslims and Iranians were awake.
It can be said that the East was proud of the glorious past of the
Islamic world. But what is our condition today? The same poet
describes:  
 Alas! This field has been destroyed by flood.  
 The afflicted farmer went into deep sleep.  
 The blood of our heart took the color of wine.  
 The heat of fever burnt down our body.  
 The cool face turned into a burning one.  
 The eyes of intelligence too got covered with blood.  
 The wealth went away and health turned to illness.

Institution of the Pope
-----------------------

The Pope’s grand institution, after a long duration of oppressive rule,
got disintegrated, because it had tried to remain in power by creating a
cruel court called Inquisition. But it had erred seriously and was
unaware of the changes, which had already taken place in the masses.
Those changes in the thoughts of the people tended to destroy the wrong
thoughts of the clergy and the priests. The church took no notice of
those changing trends at all. It was of the opinion that it would be
able to stem the flood with the help of oppression, use of force and
torture. But this thinking was merely the result of their ignorance of
the change in winds. If it had not, at the last moments of its life,
prepared a new plan and had it not adapted itself to the new age, no
sign of Christianity would have remained in the world today. It cleared
its sleepy eyes, changed its course, started schools, colleges and
universities and regained its past position through educational service
to the society.

The Most Intelligent Man of the East
------------------------------------

In the nineteenth century, an ordinary but a very intelligent person
(Amir Kabir) rose up. He felt that the misfortune of the easterners was
due to the changes, which had taken place in the west. Those changes had
created a vast gulf between the people of the east and the west. So long
as that gap was not filled the western communities would continue to
monopolize Iran.

So he studied the circumstances carefully and realized that it was not
the time to fight with swords and arrows. Modern technology has changed
the method of production. Gas and steam have subdued all material
treasures.

Therefore, Amir Kabir, in 1849 AD (1266 HE) established an institution
named ‘Daral Funoon’ (House of Arts & Science). The eastern wing of this
institute was completed by the end of the year 1267.

They deputed a reliable person to Vienna who requested the Emperor of
Austria to send a commander of infantry, a tutor of artillery, a teacher
of mounted police, an expert of mining, two miners, a professor of
medicine and surgery and a pharmacist for five or six years and paid
each of them a monthly salary of 4000 Tomans.

But alas! Traitors of the nation came forward to put off this shining
lamp and Amir Kabir was killed at the hands of the butchers of Qachar a
few years after the establishment of Daral Funoon in the year 1268.

Observing closely the trends of the world, Amir Kabir had realized that
a major cause of the backwardness of Iran and other counties was that
their economy depended on the west. Iran had become a market of the
west-manufactured materials and was only their consumer.

This reliance on the west, rather helplessness and beggary, had
destroyed the capabilities of Iranians. The Iranis had become only the
suppliers of raw material to the industries of the west. They were
pulling on their days like a daily-waged laborer. Amir put at the
disposal of the artist enough capital for the expansion of manufacturing
industries.

He established sugar factories in Saari, rope and cloth in Tehran, silk
in Kashan and Horse-carriages in Isfahan etc. He gave much assistance to
cloth manufacturers in Isfahan and Kashan, encouraged many experts for
preparing new things and making inventions and had also arranged an
exhibition of Iranian products in Iran.

All these services rendered by Amir Kabir were the result of his
awareness about the existing trends and circumstances.

When roads were built in Iran and automobiles started rolling thereon,
the joyful journeys on horseback and in horse and donkey carts came to
an end. The carriers of mule-litters began to complain so much that,
strangely enough, they even asked the government to cancel the licenses
of pannier-owners! All this was the consequence of remaining unaware of
the happenings in the world.  
 Sometimes our businessmen do things, which are disliked by people in
today’s world. In fact such deeds of theirs are like waging war against
progress. As a result they meet with sure defeat.  
 Here we become convinced of the importance of a great religious
leader’s words who said: Do not fight with time otherwise time will
fight with you.

Enemy: A Step-stone to Success
------------------------------

Only he is victorious who has recognized the world fully and who
considers his enemy as the first step toward victory.

Intelligent people think that the enemy teaches him how to march towards
success, because, the adversary is the best type of mirror with reflects
our defects through pen or tongue. It decreases our pride and arrogance
and, sometimes, helps in uplifting our hidden abilities.

The advances of the east and the west are the consequence of
competition. If competitions come to end, capabilities would not flower.
Thus, if there were no struggle between individuals or masses the
progress in new inventions too would become stagnant.


