Courage and fearlessness
========================

Courage, valor, fearlessness and boldness are all synonymous words. They
are recognized as the basic qualities of a successful personality.

Surely, boldness is different from carelessness and haughtiness or
impudence or rudeness. Similarly there is a vast difference between
bravery and indiscipline.

Courage and fearlessness are the signs of manliness and in many tasks
these qualities serve as a bridge to success. Rather no achievement,
progress and advancement are attainable without courage and gallantry.
All social and intellectual revolutions too require these qualities.

Fearful and timid people hide themselves in corners like birds retreat
in cold season. They do not undertake any task for fear of their
opponents. Such people neither become reputable nor can they bring any
change in life. At the most they can remain in their original condition.

But bold and courageous people first realize the importance of their
aim, ponder over every side of the matter, weigh probable profit or
loss, prepare a program and then begin their job without caring for
anything.

Here there is a difference between haughtiness and madness and courage
and boldness. Careless people jump in without pondering over related
matters. They do not keep an eye on their benefit or loss. Even if they
prepare a program, wise people do not appreciate it. Such people are
deceived by their strength and they take undue pride in themselves.

Here we can further clarify by giving an example from history.  
 After the passing away of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a), a person named
Musailima Kazzab claimed to be a prophet in Oman. The Muslim army went
there to crush him. Musalima’s men scattered away but he himself and
some of his companions took shelter in a garden. That garden had four
walls and it was situated in the midst of a castle. There was enough
provision for four months in that fort.

The Muslim soldiers remained around the fort for some days but could not
do anything. A meeting was held under the leadership of a famous
commander Abu Dajana wherein, in the very beginning, it was decided that
if Musailima were not captured at the end of the siege, the mischievous
fellow would continue to mislead the people by his deceitful gestures
and thus would prove to be great risk to Islam. So it would not be a
matter of regret if some Muslims were martyred in an attempt to capture
him. Then there was a discussion about the ways of arresting him. Abu
Dajana said, “I want only ten persons who are ready to sacrifice their
lives for this cause.”

At once ten people came forward as volunteers. Then Abu Dajana said,
“These ten persons including myself will, one by one, sit on a shield.
Other soldiers will, with the help of their spears, raise that shield
upward until the hand of the man sitting on the shield reached up to the
wall of the castle. Thus when all reach the wall they will enter the
castle with the help of ropes. First of all I will hold the rope and go
inside and try to open the gates from inside. If my companions see that
I am killed, another will follow. If he too is killed, the third man
will get in. In this way, as a result of the self-sacrifice at least one
person will reach the gate and open it for the Muslim army.

Per chance, Abu Dajana, himself achieved the task. He lowered a rope,
entered the fort, fought for a while and succeeded in opening the gate.
Thus the last center of corruption was destroyed with the capture and
killing of Musailima Kazzab.  
 Had Abu Dajana not shown this courage, the Muslims would have never
succeeded.

At the time of victory over Spain, Moosa bin Nasir, who was the
commander of the Muslim arm in Africa, determined to capture Europe. He
sent his slave Tariq bin Ziyad with a small group of people to Spain for
spying.

When Tariq reached Spain and observed the enemy from every angle he
understood that they were bent upon attacking the Muslims. Tariq thought
that if he sends a report to his chief and awaits his response the enemy
might become alert. So he ordered his men to burn down the ships in
which they had reached the coast of Spain. When the ships began to burn,
some took exception to that act and said, “You have made us shelter less
by burning our ships. Now we cannot return to our homes.”

Tariq replied, “The Muslim is not like a bird, which has a particular
nest.”  
 Then he got up, stood in the valley which today is known by the name of
Gibraltar. Before his eyes the sea was roaring loudly. He delivered such
a forceful speech that the audience could hear only his words even in
the midst of the lashing of the ocean waves. The sea had, perhaps,
become silent.  
 Tariq said, “Brother! The roaring sea is behind you and the army of the
enemy in front of you. Your enemy has heaps of foodstuff and arms
whereas you have only that which you can snatch from them with the
strength of your hands. You do not have any armor except the swords
hanging on your waists.”

This forceful speech inspired much courage in the Muslim warriors. Their
blood began to boil in fervor and they forced the enemy to surrender in
a very short time as a result of their fearless fighting. Spain was
conquered in this way.

The Courage of Martin Luther in Bringing about Religious Reform
---------------------------------------------------------------

Due to the fear of the Christian clergy the uneasiness of the masses
could not be expressed by their tongues and they were feeling
suffocated. No one dared to utter a single word of complain against the
Pope and the clergy around him.

Martin Luther went to Rome in 1510 AD and saw for himself that those
occupying high ranks in the church were careless in their duties
regarding religion. So his determination to reform the religion doubled.
Finally he put up a notification at the gate of the highest church
informing the people that he had some points, which he wanted to discuss
with knowledgeable persons.

Luther raised serious objections against the ways and manners of the
religious leaders. He said that after becoming respectable in the eyes
of the masses the priests claimed to get people’s sins pardoned. Martin
said this gesture of the priests was a kind of misappropriation.

The clergy became very angry at this criticism. They warned Martin to
refrain from his undesirable propaganda. But he took no notice of their
threats and continued voice his criticism in public meetings.

The Vatican was then compelled to declare that Martin had become
unbeliever. Martin burnt the Pope’s edict in public and took shelter
with Frederick the third. Yet he continued his mission and at last, as a
result of his courage he rested only after separating some wrong things
of Christianity from religion and founded the Protestant order.

The examples quoted by us so far were related to courage in social
affairs. But you can find many events of boldness in individual and
personal matters too in human history. Whosoever wants to be successful
must note that: Success is impossible in any sphere of life without
courage and boldness.  
 If, today, our society is slow in accepting reforms its only cause is
that the foundation of our life is based only on defense. We have no
courage to go forward. Persons having courage and valor can be counted
on the fingers of ones hand.

Those who have no courage or boldness move only to maintain their
present status. They do not have any idea of progress or advancement.
Even if they opportunities in their life they are unable to take any
advantage from them. On the contrary, when courageous people find any
possibility of betterment and change they take its full advantage even
by suffering hardships.  
 We should know that every progress and every change demands hard work
and patience. Pain is always present at every corner of life. When a
baby wants to come to this world from its mother’s womb it has to
struggle through a narrow passage.

Bold people, when they reach any crossroad in their life, they bear
every hardship with a smiling face.

It has been observed that many people are not happy with their present
position but since they have no courage they are unable to bear
hardships and difficulties for improving their condition. Thus they
remain where they are and continue lamenting throughout their lives.


