Self Sacrifice
==============

The importance of high and holy aims is much more than physical comfort
and material possessions in the eyes of the wise and intelligent people.
Only he can get success in such aims that does not care for his life and
other material things.

If one aims to attain holy goals for the benefit of his body or life or
for material progress it would be a kind of madness, because holy aims
demand sacrifice and sacrifice means being unmindful of life, and it is
lunacy to sacrifice ones life for material things.

However if one has so much affection and love for a religious aim that
it is dearer to him than his life and body and material gains then, in
that case, sacrifice, that is the losing of life and money and family
and material status will be considered a sign of success.

Those who view life from material angle and desire everything only for
material benefit are unable to show the correct reason of the sacrifices
offered by the prophets, pious leaders, Imams, great people, selfless
diplomats and person having religious and spiritual aims.

It is possible that the materialists may look at those sacrifices as a
legend, myth or fiction, and even brand those great persons as lunatics.
But one who gives preference to his aim over his life throws himself in
dangers with a smiling face and a heart full of lofty sentiments.

Prophet Isa (a.s.) suffered so many difficulties and tolerated the
taunts of the Jews only for a Holy aim, which was dearer to him than his
life.

Hazrat Ali (a.s.) slept on the bed of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) on the
night of migration (Hijrat). It was the same kind of sacrifice.

If the leader of the martyrs, Imam Husain (a.s.) colored the soil of
Kerbala with his blood and that of his near and dear companions, it too
was the result of the said love for a holy aim. In his eyes a respectful
and honorable death was better than a life of dishonor.  
 His philosophy was: A red death is better than a black life.

In the battle of Naharawan, a youth, on his own, took a copy of the holy
Quran from the Commander of the Faithful (a.s) and went to the
battlefield only to be cut into pieces by the enemy, it was also because
of his love for his aim. He wanted that truth should overcome
falsehood.  
 If Columbus discovered America, it was his act of sacrifice. He was an
expert seaman and had made several voyages of the Atlantic since the age
of fourteen.

Columbus and started his voyage on 3rd October 1492 with a convoy of
three ships. After tolerating many hardships, dangerous storms, ailments
and harsh words of his companions, he reached the shore of America at
last.

If, on 6th April 1909, Robert Edwin Perry reached the North Pole it was
also his sacrifice. This American seaman, along with his five
companions, had reached there only after suffering several difficulties.
Perry himself was the captain. After reaching there he made many
calculations to fix the exact position of the North Pole. Thereafter he
rested for 36 hours continuously. The fingers of his feet had, due to
the freezing cold, become useless. His companion, Methinan, amputated
those four fingers while Perry was asleep. On the return voyage all the
five fingers of his other feet too became useless.


