Accepting the Reality
=====================

We must accept the reality or truth, as it does not matter whether it is
in our interest or against us. We must never imagine the reality to be
always in our favor.  
 Everyone should wear a spectacle, which can show him the facts
honestly, and he too should view them honestly, without any prejudice.

Those who want to spread corruption in society always create rumors to
satisfy their mean souls. So as a result of continuously deceiving their
hearts they tend to believe their own lies making their minds blind.

On 6th August 1945, the first atom bomb was dropped on the Japanese city
of Hiroshima, which has become the world’s unforgettable city due to
this unfortunate event. The bomb afflicted 1,50,000. Its population,
which was 3,44,000 in 1940, was reduced to only 286 in 1953. Three days
later a bomb fell on another Japanese city of Nagasaki. The Japanese
surrendered a week later. The whole world condemned the beastly act of
America, which had mercilessly massacred thousands of innocent men,
women and children. This barbarous deed is unprecedented in world
history. It was president Truman who had ordered this bombing, whose
heart began to trouble his mind thereafter. All the peace lovers of the
world condemned Truman whose status was reduced to dust. The world
called him a killer instead of a diplomat.

Now, let us see, how Truman had viewed this event and how he was
deceiving his soul, distorting the truth and trying to present poison as
nectar. He says, “I had issued this order to save millions of American
soldiers. If the bombs had not been deployed the U.S. army would have
had to attack the shores of Japan, which was very secure with military
arrangements. Thus it would have been a furious battle in which Japanese
too would have suffered much.

These are the words of an ex-president of America, but even a layman can
understand that Truman was deceiving himself through false arguments. He
did not want to see the reality. Moreover, he has been thinking that his
prestige has remained intact and also his popularity, but very soon he
tested the fruits of his folly. Freedom lovers of the world threw him
out of the field of politics and public life and this stain remained on
him forever.

Businessmen, diplomats and other people can succeed in their fields only
when they see their conditions truthfully and without any bias. It is
necessary for a good trader to listen to the criticism made by the
customer about his merchandise or about the way he conducts business
with a cool mind and full attention and thereafter remove objectionable
things. Similarly it is necessary for a diplomat to consider people’s
objections properly. Without proper understanding he should not brand
the people’s movements as self-motivated struggles. He should not try to
suppress people by alleging that they are anarchists or lawless.
Politicians should always remember that only by loving the truth and
appreciating it can a nation be made stable, and their politics secure.
Truthfulness is the first condition.

The student who loves progress tolerates the teacher’s scolding happily.
When he gets fewer marks he never alleges that the teacher was partial.
Rather he pays attention and examines his own self and his method of
study. Possibly the truth was that he himself had made mistakes and
faults. Such understanding of truth will serve him as a ladder to future
success.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) used to assess the enemies and their power
before waging a war against the polytheists and idol-worshippers. He
used to gather relevant information before starting a campaign. The
facts were sometimes unpleasant too but he never considered the strength
of the enemy insignificant and worth ignoring. He never deceived himself
or the Muslims through wishful thinking, saying, for instance, that we
will finish the enemy with a single assault or will push them into the
sea instantly.

In the battle of Badr, Muslim spies captured a soldier of the polytheist
Quresh on the well of Badr and brought him to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.). They had not, till then, known the number of the enemy
forces.

The Holy Prophet (s) asked him, “How many camels are being slaughtered
by the Quresh daily?”  
 The captured man replied, “Some times nine sometimes ten.” The Holy
Prophet said, “The enemy’s strength is between nine hundred and one
thousand men.”

The 6-day war between the Arabs and the Israel in June 1967 ended in the
defeat of the Arabs. It is painful to state that very few have confessed
this bitter truth only because it is bitter. The fact is that the cause
of the defeat was that the heads of the Arab states and their internal
and external supporters, instead of making a correct and truthful
assessment continued to sing and broadcast war songs. Had they done so
they would have never faced such a humiliating defeat unparalleled in
human history.

Indeed, doubt is a ladder to surety and trust. So long as a man does not
develop doubt about anything he does not care to make inquires and act
seriously.

Similarly objection and criticism also are ladders leading to
perfection. Successful is one who listens to people’s criticism
carefully. He takes into account every criticism, which has been made
selflessly with an intention of improvement. The truth is that true
reflection of man and his defects are seen in the mirror of public
criticism.

Jamshed made the Jame Jahan Numa (world reflector cup) only because he
was not aware of the truth that the world itself is a Jaam (cup)
exhibiting itself.

We should remember that Imam Ja’far (a.s.) has said, “Dearest to me
among my brothers is the one who presents to me my shortcomings and thus
makes me aware of my defects.”

In the eyes of our great leaders the best gift is to show the defects of
people to them in the nicest possible manner.

In today’s free world, criticism is the foundation of life.  
 The European world invites experts from other countries and entrusts
governmental and other departments to them so that they may examine them
and offer criticism.

One who feels bad hearing his criticism and who does not like to see the
reality as it is and who dislikes to know people’s opinion about him,
should be told: Break thyself, as it is wrong to break the mirror, which
reflects real face.


