Flexibility
===========

There is a distinct difference between being flexible and being a
weathercock. A flatterer and weathercock type man has no aim in life. He
does not follow any true principle. He puts on different masks on his
face and appears before others on the stage of life. He destroys all
principles for his personal benefits and to satisfy his passions.

But a flexible person behaves mildly unless there is a danger to his
principles or aims. He makes agreements even with his enemies when
essential. He lets go many of his personal advantages in order to
safeguard his principles and if need be, gives preference to the wishes
of others ignoring his own liking.

The changing circumstances of the world are mostly like the storms,
which uproot many. A windstorm starts and attacks trees. Green trees
show some flexibility and allow the storm to pass overhead and soon
thereafter become upright after bowing for a while. But dry and hard
trees try to remain standing in the face of stormy winds. The hardness
and stiffness does not allow them to be flexible and consequently they
are uprooted.

The head of a state who is in charge of all affairs, the managing
director of an organization who has to deal with hundreds of people, a
trader or businessman who faces all kinds of consumers and buyers are
such people that if they sacrifice their principles for gaining passing
and temporary benefits, they are weathercocks.

But the same people, if they show a little flexibility, become somewhat
soft and give some positive response to the demands of relevant people,
and win over their hearts by suffering a little material loss then, we
can consider them as people having a desirable flexibility.

In this connection, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) says, “In the face of
the storms of events the position of a believer is like a flexible
plant. When a stormy wind hits, it shows softness and does not remain
stiffly erect. But an unbeliever is like a hard dry tree, which does not
bend and consequently gets uprooted.

If these people are harsh in ordinary matters in dealing with different
types of people it can harm their reputation. Such harshness creates
hatred in the hearts of the masses and, therefore, such people cannot
attain high status nor can they perform commendable deeds. Only one with
some flexibility in temper can become popular in society.

If you see the Treaty of Hudaibiyah you will be surprised to observe the
flexibility shown by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). The treaty he signed
in the 8th year of the Hijri Era with the idolaters of Quresh was even
criticized by some ignorant and unwise persons, but with the passage of
time it was proved that flexibility was necessary for future success.

The biggest hurdle in the advance of Islam was the idolaters of Quresh.
They had, through their continuous attacks taken away the freedom of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a). Had there not been this hindrance, the Holy
Prophet’s call was so effective and impressive that, by dispatching a
few preachers and by propagating and spreading the message of the holy
Quran, he could have brought the entire Arab Peninsula under the banner
of Monotheism. However the idol-worshippers had deprived the Holy
Prophet of this chance by direct and indirect attacks on him.

The high aim and noble intention of the Holy Prophet was to get secure
freedom for propagating Islam. With this aim in view he signed the peace
treaty with the Quresh and showed a high and uncommon measure of
flexibility.

In order to explain our point we mention hereunder some points:  
 The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had entrusted the writing of the treaty to
Ali (a.s.) who wrote on the first page: “Bismillahirrehmaanirraheem” (In
the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful), but at once the
delegate of the Quresh said, “We do not know the words Rahman and Rahim.
According to Arabian customs, you should write ‘Bismika Allahumma. The
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a) accepted this proposition. Then Ali wrote, “This
is an agreement, which has been entered into, by God’s Messenger
Muhammad with the representative of the Quresh.” Immediately the Quresh
said, “We do not recognize Muhammad as the messenger of God. Had we
recognized him as the prophet of God, we would not have fought him.” The
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) asked Ali to erase the words “Messenger of God”.

One of the conditions of this agreement was that if any polytheist flees
Mecca and reaches the Islamic capital of Medina, it would be the
responsibility of the Islamic state to return that man to the
authorities of Quresh. But if any Muslim runs away from Medina and takes
shelter in Mecca the Quresh will not be responsible for returning him to
the Muslims.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) accepted this condition too so that he and
his followers may get some relief from the Quresh, and a path may be
opened for propagation of Islam. The advantages he obtained in
connection with the propagation of Islam were more important than the
allowances he gave to Quresh.

One of the defects of our way of working is that when we calculate our
profit and loss, we forget to maintain a balance. If we cut off
relations with some people, we do so forever continuously and never
think that the relations can be restored under some special conditions.
In other words we consider flexibility as a sign of defeat and disgrace.
But both wisdom and Shariat say that it is a principle of success to
show flexibility to an extent, which does not harm our original aim.


