Liking and Enthusiasm
=====================

One of the causes of success is taking up the vocation to your liking
and that which commensurate to your intelligence or mental ability.  
 God has not created all of us alike. We all are not bestowed with the
ability of doing everything. But, in order to run the society smoothly
He has given a distinct taste and tendency to everyone. It is so, in
order that one may take up the profession of ones own liking or bent of
mind, and that, which attracts one; thus deriving benefit from ones
natural competence.

Generally one of the causes of young people’s failure and defeat is not
following this established rule. As a result of wrong propaganda and
faulty training they go after jobs, which are not according to their
aptitude. They take up vocations for which they are not suitable.  
 They forget the accepted principle: “Every mind has certain
predisposition. Lucky is the one who finds it out.”

I remember that in the years 1951-53 the subject of oil had seized
public attention. Every Iranian man and woman was thinking only about
oil. The value of oil exports had soared high in the eyes of the Iranian
society. This had caused a change in the thinking of the student
community. All or most of the students desired to join the oil industry
though many of them did not have a natural bent for it.

The progress and success of a student gets a lethal blow if he enters a
field, which is not in line with his or her natural bent. For instance,
if a youth is interested in literature, if his tongue and pen spread
literary pearls and he has no liking at all for mathematics he will
definitely not succeed except in the field of literature.

A page from the Biography of a Famous Painter
---------------------------------------------

Now let us read an extract from the diary of a famous painter: He was an
idle boy during his college days. He neither studied properly nor
allowed his companions to do so. He was a thorn both in his own path and
that of others. Yet his appearance showed that he was a capable boy.  
 A professor who was an expert psychologist called him, gave him some
advice and warned him of the bad consequences of his life-style. He
counseled: Nobody is fortunate enough to have the protection of a father
forever. Life is full of difficulties. The way you live will make you
suffer badly in future…

However, the professor observed that when he was advising the boy he was
busy drawing a picture with a piece of coal on the floor.  
 The intelligent professor at once understood that this boy was born to
be an artist and had nothing to do with the problems of algebra. No
amount of effort in the field of mathematics would benefit him.  
 Realizing his responsibility in this connection, he informed the boy’s
guardian of this discovery. He told the boy’s father to the effect:
“Your son is very much interested in drawing. If you change his faculty,
he might earn much fame in art.”

Days passed and the words of the professor came true. That boy soon
became an expert painter.  
 Edison was asked by some, “Why most of the young people are unable to
live a successful life?” He replied, “Because they are not aware of
their path and they traverse other routes.”  
 Such people prove harmful to the society in two ways: They do not adopt
the vocation for which they are capable and wherein they can get success
and another harm is that they take upon themselves a responsibility
which they are unable to fulfill.

The arrow showing aptitude
--------------------------

Every child is born with a sign, which shows the field of activity for
which he is born. Lucky is the one whose guardians can read this sign in
time. Nowadays the talents of the people are ascertained through
vocational tests in advanced countries and they are advised to go for
the course for which they are most suitable.

How nice it would have been if the scientist, along with instruments of
measuring temperature and tremors, also invented something to measure
the capacity and capability of people and install it in all educational
institutions! It would have saved many people’s talents.

Galileo was fond of making toys in his childhood. His parents ignored
this aptitude of their son and got him admitted to a course in medicine.
He could make no progress. Thereafter he studied Maths and Physics and
as a result his talents in astronomy became apparent.

Galileo was the first one to prove that the earth revolves around the
sun. He was the first to invent the pendulum, which was widely put to
use in the manufacture of clocks.

Tolstoy loved books while yet a child. He read many books on philosophy.
While reading he was trying to understand various issues about life.
Till the end of his life he remained occupied in this field.

George Moreland took up drawing the figures of animals. His art became
apparent from the time he was only six. Though he lived for only 41
years he left numerous memorable pieces of art.  
 The expertise of Zerah Calburn in mathematics could also be seen right
from his childhood. Some times people used to ask him as to how many
seconds were there in a year or more and he would give the correct
answer in an instant.

James Watt was the inventor of many machines and the one who had
discovered the power of steam. He was very fond of conducting
experiments in his childhood. Subsequently he attained much fame in the
world of physics.

Darwin had domesticated a number of animals in his childhood. This hobby
encouraged him to study the lives of animals and the changes through
which they passed. After making a long journey he wrote a book
classifying and describing the different kinds of animals and put forth
a new theory of evolution.

Know Yourself
-------------

Our religious leaders have emphasized that we must know and be
acquainted with ourselves; that we should delve deep to find out our
inner self.

Our internal feelings are like a magnet attracting similar things. They
store things or events in ‘memory’ so as to bring them out later when
needed. Man is able to savor their benefits then.  
 If whatever we learn is in line with our inner aptitude then it is
easily stored up in the treasury of our memory and remains safe for a
long period.

But if we do a thing, which is contrary to our liking, then our mind
forgets it soon. Thus the chances of our success are reduced.

One who has ignored his natural aptitude is like one who swims against
the currents or like the one who has entrusted himself to the giant
waves which could sweep him away to the other side. Such a man seldom
succeeds in his work.

In short, when man becomes aware of his capabilities and knows his
liking and then adopts a suitable vocation he soon becomes successful
because he has a powerful inner attraction for the same.

Latent Capabilities
-------------------

Some powers appear at a certain time. An able and expert psychologist
can detect them. Sometimes it so happens that a person appears a slow
learner in the early stage of his schooling. But the same student proves
to be intelligent later on. Obviously, particular conditions are
required for the blossoming of such talents.

It is said that Einstein, who was a great scholar and mathematician of
his time used to fail in his primary school examinations. But in
particular circumstances his competence came out shining.  
 Sometimes it so happens that an officer appears to be mild and timid
for sometime. But when the occasion arises he exhibits such bravery and
courage that onlookers become spellbound.

News reached Malik Shah, the Seljuk king that the Qaiser of Rome was
planning to conquer Baghdad. The Shah moved toward the borders of Iran
with his regular army.  
 His Minister Khwaja Nizamul Mulk was once inspecting the forces when he
spotted a short-stature soldier. He ordered that he should be brought
out of the ranks.

He was of the opinion that a man of such a short stature would not be of
any use in the army. But Malik Shah told his vizier, “How do you know?
Maybe this man captures the Qaiser himself.”  
 Finally the Muslims were victorious and this soldier was the one to
capture the Qaiser!


