The Correct Way
===============

One of the great economists says, “Financial institutions and factories
manufacturing various items decline due to their tendency of maintaining
their original position.”

Intelligent people believe that to remain in the same condition is a
kind of downfall. But is this law only for factories? Or is it a common
law applicable to all categories of every kind and every field?  
 In this respect Ali (a.s.) says, “If a man passes two continuous days
in such a way that from the material and spiritual viewpoint the latter
day is just like the former one, then that person has suffered a great
loss in his life.”

Man’s greatest capital is the life span gifted to him. This precious
capital is being spent gradually. If its return is not of the same value
then it means that we have lost our capital and have not been able to
make any profit by it.

As a principle doing new things is a part of human nature. Man becomes
bored doing the same work continuously for a long time. Even the most
delectable things lose their taste if they are consumed daily.

Shopkeepers and departmental stores owners, in order to avoid monotony,
rearrange their materials every now and then even if the profit from
both the settings is same.

Newspapers having large circulations, in order to avoid similarity,
change printing or color every day or every week, so that it may not
appear awkward.  
 Similarly the decorations of dining halls in big restaurants are
changed often so that they appear attractive and people may not be
bored.  
 But is every kind of change and novelty a sign of progress? Is it so
even if good thing turns into bad ones? Never!

While the great economists consider changelessness a kind of decline
they also consider it suicidal to change a good thing into a bad one.
From this viewpoint, every change should be proper and it should be
better than earlier. When we make an improvement we should not
concentrate only upon its outer change, but we must also pay attention
to the original aim and make changes accordingly.  
 The main defect of our eastern factories is that when once the masses
like their products they never think of making any changes and if they
ever do so they do not do it in a nice way.

The Holy Prophet always liked regularity, discipline and aptness in
every work.  
 When a military officer Saad bin Maaz died and his coffin was lowered
in the grave, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) observed that people are
dropping dust in it in an inappropriate manner, which made him
sorrowful. He sat down near the grave, leveled the earth of the grave
with his own hands and then said to his companions, “I know that this
grave will soon become old. But God likes a slave who performs his work
nicely and perfectly.”

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) knew that this mismanagement and
irregularity could enter every walk of life. He did not like that even a
minor and ordinary work should be done haphazardly even if it was not to
last long.

Any young man or woman that desires appreciation of his deeds and one
who aims for permanent success should perform today’s work in a way
better than yesterday.


