Waiting For a Chance
====================

It cannot be denied that sometimes incidents do ease man’s difficulties
and that everybody experiences such chances in his or her life. History
has recorded many of such incidents and chances some of which are as
under:

(1) Imadud Daulah occupied Isfahan and Faris and threw out the governor
of Isfahan. Not before long his army’s provisions were exhausted. He was
afraid that his men would loot the property of people and infuriate
them. Thinking this he looked at the ceiling and saw a snake poking its
head out of a hole and then withdrawing it. The snake repeated this
action several times. He ordered the demolition of the roof to find out
where the hole of the snake leads. When they reached the other end of
that snake-hole they found some utensils full of golden coins stored for
emergency by a former ruler of the territory. Imadud Daulah ordered they
all be taken out. Thus he was saved from a big financial crisis.

(2) After defeating Amr Laith, Shah Ismail Samani met with financial
crisis. Soldiers were likely to plunder public wealth. So he ordered the
soldiers to vacate the city. While marching out the soldiers saw a crow
flying over their heads with a necklace in its beak. They followed the
bird, which dropped that necklace in a well. At the command of the king
some soldiers went down the well to find therein a box full of precious
stones. Slaves of Amr Laith had hidden it at the time of his arrest but
could not take it out thereafter.

(3) Shaikh Muslihuddin Sadi Shirazi has narrated a story about a
shooting contest: A prince had placed a narrow ring at a high place so
that sharp shooters may try to pass their arrow though it and earn a big
reward. All the expert archers failed. In the meanwhile a man who did
not know even the basics of archery tried and hit the target and got the
prize.

But can such stories guide people and can a man ever rely on such
chances?  
 The proportion of success through chance is much less that that
achieved by efforts and incidence of success by chance is very less. It
also happens that chance gives a fruit bitter than poison. Wise men
never sit idle waiting for a chance. They never ignore apparent causes
and fall in a superstitious chance. Such chances are less than one in
thousands.

Suppose 10,00,000 people live in a city. An airplane is about to drop
two gold coins in the city. Can one leave his business keeping his eye
on that plane?

If we do so and if our pocket is empty our stomach too would remain
empty!!  
 Those nations, which do not rely on their own efforts and await
favorable global conditions for drawing mercy from them, are sure to be
destroyed.  
 A student who does not study and awaits an unusual happening bestowing
him good marks by chance is never likely to succeed.

One of the religious leaders of Islam has said something which is very
important in the eyes of the wise people: “A nation that has natural
resources on land and in water but does not utilize these great divine
blessings and becomes poor, the Almighty Allah would drive it away from
His Mercy.”  
 No nation of the world has ever won nor any individual ever succeeded
without utilizing the apparent natural causes. They must have taken the
trouble to walk towards the goal with a strong faith in Allah’s
Omnipotence, without waiting for favorable chances.

In the words of a poet:  
 A great man must have a greater resolution to solve his difficulties.  
 Freedom depends on the sword. So great people always rely on it.  
 It is a law of nature that those who get habituated to rest, ease and
luxury,  
 Are sure to be weakened.  
 May be some people or nations get some success owing to chance. But
success resulting through chance is as baseless as winning a gamble.  
 In the words of a wise man: “A short cut is most difficult and
dangerous. Though long routes do take more time to pass through but man
reaches his destination safely and easily.”  
 Sometimes man also reaches his destination via short cuts. But if a
nation remains idle waiting for a short cut it is doomed.  
 Advanced societies never wait for chances, but idle and lazy people who
do not even want to think always say: “Just see this chance! Man must be
so lucky...”  
 However, a thing, which has never contributed to the success of the
nations, is something called ‘coincidence’ or ‘chance’. If the advanced
people have ever got a chance it was the chance to work and to strive.

Those who do not want to perspire and want to scale great heights via
the imaginary staircase of ‘chance’ fall down before they could go any
further.  
 It is said that an apple incidentally fell on Newton and he discovered
one of the greatest laws of (the law of gravity). However there is
misunderstanding here as people have seen such things several times but
never discovered any laws from them.  
 The truth is that Newton possessed the necessary means for finding out
the said law. He thought over it and had studied and any other man of
thought and research too could have made such a discovery.

If a scientist analyzed light by observing the foam of soap it was not
chance. He had done studied and worked on that subject earlier.
Otherwise washer men see such bubbles every day but derive nothing from
them and never discover any law.


