Incorrect understanding of Destiny
==================================

When we say that luck is imaginary and illusory, it does not mean that
Divine religions and the holy Quran has said so. What we mean is that
some simple-minded people think that they are captives of luck and that
someone else makes and unmakes their destiny.  
 We may be theists or materialists; we may be of the opinion that some
‘intellect’ controls the management of the universe thoughtfully and
with a planning; or we may say that the universe has come into existence
by chance through the coming together of innumerable atoms.

Anyway we cannot deny that ever since a young man has started drinking
he has made his future dark for himself and ruined his luck. After some
time he would end up in a hospital with a damaged kidney then either his
heart would fail or his nerves break.

We are sure that a man who does not know how to control carnivorous
animals should not start playing with the tail of a lion or a cheetah.
Otherwise he would become a morsel for them within no time.

Surely when a gambler loses he himself is responsible for his bad
luck.  
 Someone has said quite correctly: It is madness, not misfortune to lean
out precariously from the terrace and then fall down. Work is the best
wing to fly in the sky of knowledge. Art is the best wealth in the
world. You should keep trying even if your aim is beyond imagination and
you must continue walking even if your path passes through the mouth of
a python.

A successful student who had studied day and night has improved his
destiny ever since he entered the university.  
 To summarize, our efforts today construct our future. Worldly affairs
are interconnected like the rings of a chain. If an intermediary ring
breaks off the whole series or scheme of life is disturbed. Every ring
is the cause for another.

Every happening is based on a series of causes and effects. For example,
today’s events will become the cause for tomorrow’s events. Similarly
the causes of tomorrow will be the reasons for the happenings of the day
after. The story of future is inscribed on the forehead of the present
day. Previous events themselves tell us that today’s happenings are the
harbingers of tomorrow’s events. The relation between the two is
unmistakable. If somebody ponders over the management of the Creator he
can clearly predict tomorrow’s events.

If we read in religious books or in the holy Quran that man lives within
the limits of destiny or if it is written in the holy Quran that
whatever you do has been inscribed in the Lauhe Mahfuz (Protected
Tablet) from the beginning, it does not mean that we are the prisoners
of destiny and are bound to act accordingly. Rather what is meant
thereby is that the Omniscient God is aware of all the events of the
past and the future and knows who will work voluntarily for what and
will consequently decide his own good or bad fortune.  
 Allah is aware of what man will do but man is absolutely free to shape
his destiny.

A wrong notion about destiny
----------------------------

Some people deceive themselves and ignore the voice of their intellects.
The mind, in the words of Rumi, says:  
 When you say I will do this or that, my dear!  
 It is the proof of your freedom of action.

Some people think that they are born helpless and that they have no
freedom of action at all. In their opinion they are like stones dropped
from above that cannot do anything except falling down.  
 Or they are like a plant, which grows and flourishes in a certain way
by which it is bound. They think against the dictates of their intellect
and that of the nature. Everyone knows that he is free to do what he
likes. He himself shapes his own destiny.

Force of Environment
--------------------

If, in earlier days, people used to blame destiny for the bad effects of
their wrong deeds, people today say that environment is responsible for
the adverse effects of their bad deeds. They are deceiving themselves
and trying to cover up their own misdeeds.  
 Let us see what is the ‘Force of environment’, which is mentioned in
some social and philosophical books.

What they mean is that it is in the interest of man to meet the demands
of time and to live according to the times.  
 For example, today, people share the benefits of modern technology.
They travel by airplanes; rest under the shades of electricity (air
conditioning) and modern techniques are utilized in the educational
field etc. Thus man has to walk with the society and has to act like
others. We accept the ‘force of environment’ upto this limit.

However some people take undue benefit and blame the society and the
environment for their own wrong ways and if the young generation is
being spoilt they say, “The youths are not to blame because the
environment is bad.” Such people make a mockery of reason and logic.
They are themselves responsible for the consequences because were free
to act rightly or wrongly.

Under the Shade of Allah’s blessings
------------------------------------

It is necessary to mention here that though man is free to make or
unmake his destiny, it does not mean that he needs no one else and that
he can do everything without the help of Allah. Such a theory is neither
accepted by the Divine scriptures nor by intelligence and logic. However
strong a man may be, he is after all created by Allah----God has created
him and he needs innumerable things to live. He uses the energy given by
God for fulfilling his needs.

Man is like an electric bulb, which needs to remain connected with the
powerhouse for remaining on. But he is free to light up either a mosque
or a nightclub.  
 If man realizes that he is connected with the limitless power of Allah,
he will never become lazy. Rather his working power will increase,
because he will be aware of the fact that a great source of power is
backing him, and that he has not been left alone to suffer the hardships
of this world.  
 Soldiers who remain in the front ranks of the army for fighting the
enemy can fight courageously only when they are confident that they are
sufficiently backed. Without such assurance they would become nervous.

Giving instruction in a battlefield Ali (a.s.) had advised his son: My
Son! Remember that real help comes only from Allah.


