Inherited Wealth
================

A friend of mine used to say about the children of rich people born with
a silver spoon in mouth and who get a high position due to their family
prestige: Some people are lucky right from the womb and they possess a
very good fortune.

He thought that good luck depended on riches and luxuries and that a man
born rich remains respectable in the eyes of the people for a period of
time and that he need not make any effort.  
 I do not accept this opinion at all. It is true that a man’s progress
is made easier by the honorable position of his parents and family
wealth. Man can obtain considerable assistance from these things. But it
should not be forgotten that if a boy born rich does not get proper
guidance he becomes more helpless and degraded than a poor child.

Prestige and wealth of the parents can make their children lucky only
when they do not indulge in immorality and vices owing to the inherited
wealth. Alas! It seldom happens that God-given blessings are utilized in
the right path. Most of the time the consequences are not good.

History testifies that prophets were born and bred in poor homes and
that great men used to live in huts before scaling great heights in the
social framework. It is even said that in special circumstances poverty
proves to be the cradle of intelligence and History and experience prove
this to be true.

The Seal of the poets, Abu Tamam has written *Hamasah* and other nice
books. He was born in a poor home, and had to work as a water carrier to
maintain himself.

The greatest book of Geography in the Muslim world, *Mojamul Buldan* was
written in the seventh century of the Hijri ear. Its author, Yaqoob
Hamawi was merely a slave. His master, Ibrahim Hamawi, used to send him
on business tours to different cities and he used to note down the
geographical conditions of each place. At last he compiled ten big
volumes from his notes. Even today, this book is referred to whenever
one wants to know the actual conditions of these cities in that era.

A great intellectual like Amir Kabir was the son of a cook born in a
society, which had suffered many atrocities of oppressive rulers. Those
experiences were so severe that they turned him into a courageous and a
confident man.

Sir Thomas Lawrence was the son of an unemployed father but he had
intelligence and other capabilities. He could learn poems by heart at
the age of five. At sixteen he was awarded a prize for drawing a picture
on the occasion of an annual festival by ‘The Association of Artists’.  
 Napoleon says, “Wealth is a deadly weapon in the hands of a youth by
which he kills himself and his relatives.”

An Arabic language poet says: “Youth, unemployment and richness destroy
a man badly.”  
 We had said earlier that unless these blessings are utilized in a wise
way they prove harmful. Correct guidance is necessary in this matter.

Shaikh Sadi says: When Syria witnessed turmoil, all went into corners.
Unwise sons of the minister went to the villagers begging and village
beggars became the ministers of the king.

There is a Persian proverb: Poverty is the mother of inventions.

There was a time when Japanese markets were full of European goods till
they halted the imports of foreign goods and the Japanese prime minister
announced, “Until shoes are not manufactured in Japan all Japanese
people should walk barefoot.” Then they started to progress in every
field and consequently became self-reliant and produced all kinds of
goods from their raw material.

The lineage of Shakespeare is not known exactly but all say that he was
the son of a butcher and himself cleaned wool in his childhood. It is
also said that he worked as a school peon. Thereafter be became a
writer. But this very intelligent man possessed the essence of many
experiences. He had worked in almost all the fields, which increased his
knowledge, study and wisdom. He began to compose poetry and his poetic
compositions are considered masterpieces of the literary world even
today.

From a Tailoring Shop to the Presidential Chair
-----------------------------------------------

President Andrew Jackson was well known for his wisdom and knowledge. He
gave a long speech in Washington and described various stages of his
life and said that at first he was a tailor and then rose to presidency
passing though many stages. When people looked astonished he told them,
“People look at me with contempt as I was a tailor in the beginning. But
I never felt ashamed to work as a tailor. When I was tailor I was well
known as an honest and expert artisan. I used to give tailored clothes
to my clients in time and all were pleased with my work.

We have also seen the children of great people who fell into bad times
due to lack of proper guidance. But, contrary to it, we have also seen
youths who have improved their conditions themselves and have scaled the
ladder of progress.

History proves that whether in the field of education and morality or
crafts and politics, only those have proved to be great who got some
position due to their own learning, hard work and ability. No other
factor has been responsible for their progress and success.


