Faith in Intention
==================

Faith or belief in ones aim is such an inner motive force, which
definitely takes one to the final goal. Man loves himself too much and
this love never abates. From this view if one is convinced that ones
welfare and success lies in a particular work he would definitely
proceed towards it.  
 One who values ones health takes the most bitter medicine in case of
illness and finds that it easy to do so. He even puts himself on the
operation table if necessary. Why? Because he knows that his safety is
in taking that bitter medicine and his welfare demands the cutting off
of certain diseased parts of his body.

If the diver is sure that there are precious pearls at the bottom of the
ocean he submits himself to the waves of the sea with a particular zeal
and enthusiasm. But if his belief were weak he would remain sitting idle
on the shore and never venture into the deep waters.

Man steels his will power to attain some goal under the influence of
such belief and faith that he does not care for the difficulties,
hurdles and bitterness on the road to his goal. He befriends the thorns
in his path and never complains of pain.

Sometimes the love for attaining a goal is so strong that man does not
care even for his life. He sacrifices himself for his aim. He even
greets death with a smiling face and sacrifices his life for his goal.
Someone has correctly said:  
*Shall I tell you the sign of a Faithful Man?*  
*If death approaches him he embraces it with a smiling face.*

It is the same trust and faith in the aim that carries the astronauts
high up into the thresholds of death. They risk their lives to discover
the mysteries of space and exploit them for the benefit of mankind. They
struggle hard relentlessly and courageously to attain this goal.

Fourteen hundreds years ago the Muslims were not more than 313 in number
and they did not have enough weapons when they faced the powerful army
of Quresh at Badr. From the viewpoint of warfare experts there was
remote chance of the Muslim victory. It was unimaginable that such a
little group of Muslims would scatter the powerful army of Quresh. But
contrary to the thinking of Materialist the small group, which was armed
with Faith, overpowered the physically strong opponents within hours.
The cause of the victory of the tiny minority was the same Faith, which
had made it very easy for them to sacrifice their lives in the path to
their goal. This truth was also accepted by their enemies. Before the
Badr encounter, a brave soldier of the unbelievers was asked to
ascertain the material and spiritual power of the Muslims. He said,
“Though the Muslims are much less than us in number and also inferior in
material power they are much more strong in spirituality and
steadfastness in the path of their religion. They are a group whose
shield is their sword. None of them would die unless and until he kills
at least one of your warriors. What can we gain when they kill an equal
number of our men?”

Huzaifah in the Court of Qaiser
-------------------------------

A warrior who has complete faith in his goal never hesitates in
sacrificing anything. For him there remains no difference between the
nuptial bed and the battlefield.  
 The history of Islam is replete with such examples and we come across
such incidents in the history of others communities also. A brigadier
was arrested along with his men by the Byzantine army. The martial court
of the enemy sentenced all the Muslim prisoners to death and ordered
their massacre. The said brigadier was told that if he becomes a
Christian the court would reverse its decision.

But the Muslim commander valued his aim more than his life. He knew that
even if he gives up Islam apparently and becomes a Christians just for
show, the resolve of all the other Muslim warriors who had fought
courageously would also weaken and they would be deceived by the
conspiracy of the enemy.

Thinking on these lines he rejected the court offer in unequivocal
terms. Then the court promised that if he (Huzaifah) embraces
Christianity the daughter of Qaiser would be given to him in marriage,
and moreover he would be given a high position, but he rejected this
offer too.  
 Emperor Qaiser was personally present in the court. He ordered that one
of the commander’s men be thrown in boiling oil so that he may see with
his own eyes that the court’s decision was serious and not a joke.  
 Huzaifah witnessed his man being thrown into the boiling oil and saw
his flesh coming away from his bones and being dispersed in boiling oil.
Seeing this Huzaifah wept in grief.  
 The enemy thought that Huzaifah was weeping due to fear. But suddenly
he turned toward the courtiers and spoke thus: “I am not weeping over
the consequences of this man. I myself am awaiting for this end. I
grieve because I have only one life to sacrifice on Islam. If only I had
as many lives as the number of my hair, I would have sacrificed all of
them on my religion.”  
 Those who heard these words were extremely astonished at this
unflinching faith and under some pretext they released Huzaifah along
with his eighty companions.

In the world of politics today there is a problem called ‘Vietnam’. It
was a poor nation having the power of bow and arrow only but it has
complete faith and trust in its aim. This nation brought down America’s
vast economy and administration on its knees. In fact only one ‘Viet
Kong’ compelled America to spend 10,00,000 dollars.

In the year 1965 alone America dropped 80,000 bombs on South Vietnam
(which is under the control of Viet Kong) and on North Vietnam and in
1966 America had to spend 15,80,00,00,00 dollars in these hostilities.

We see today the religious leaders of the Buddhists immolate themselves
in the fields of ‘Saigon’ without the least sign of grief on their faces
as they burn like a candle before the eyes of their followers who
surround them singing religious songs. All this is only due to their
unflinching faith and therefore their land has today become the
battlefields for the east and west.

On the other hand, for creating courage and determination America has to
dispatch a group of artists at a huge cost to provide light to the
darkened hearts of their soldiers by dance and other material
entertainment.

The Vietnamese soldiers are fighting for a particular aim and their goal
is to end the rule of injustice and oppression and live freely, while
the American soldier does not know what he is fighting for because there
is a distance of thousands of miles between his country and Vietnam.  
 There are many examples of faith in aim. The greatest sign of Faith is
that one bets ones life on it. The Holy Quran has mentioned this very
clearly.


