Focus
=====

One of the causes of success is focus or total attentiveness. As a
consequence of centering thoughts on a single point the mind remains
attached to it. Then even the hardest hurdle cannot weaken the man’s
concentration.

Focus is for work what a lever is for lifting weights.  
 The principle of a lever is that force concentrates at one point, which
makes it easy to lift up heavy objects. Similarly by concentrating the
mental powers on a single point one is able to solve complex problems.

The working of our mind and body is like that of raindrops.  
 When collected at one place they make a vast ocean. But if they fall
here and there in scattered manner they disappear in the dust with out
any visible effect.

We all must have heard about the great personality of Shaikh Bahai. He
had mastery over many sciences like physics, mathematics and Islamics
and has left a number of his precious books for the posterity. He says,
“I have debated with many scientists and scholars. Though their
knowledge was very wide in every field I used to win the debate. However
when I came across a person who was a specialist in his field, he
vanquished me easily. It was so because my knowledge was insufficient in
that particular subject.

Mental abilities resemble the sunrays in the matter of solving problems.
If sunrays are made to concentrate on a certain point with the help of a
magnifying glass they burn down whatever is kept there. Though the
scattered rays do not affect anything.

In the same way unless the rays of human thoughts focus on a point they
cannot remove hurdles, as the different aspects are not illuminated.
Veteran teachers always instruct their students to study everything
deeply which only means that the thoughts must concentrate on a
particular subject. All inventions and discoveries are the result of
concentrated effort.

Aimless people
--------------

There are some of us who do not have any particular aim in life. They
wander here and there like a drifting ship that dashes against submerged
rocks. We can also compare it to an aeroplane without a compass. People
without a program of action also smash against the rocks of difficulties
or sink in an ocean of nothingness.

There also are some people who do have some program of activities but
midway to their goal backtrack and begin to walk in another direction.
Only those succeed who do not leave their path before reaching their
goal and even if the journey is very long it does come to an end after
continuous travel.

Some people fail despite being active and prepared because their mind is
not constant. It wavers and jumps from one place to another. They step
in different fields, starting a new venture before completing the
previous one. They are jack-of-all-trades but master of none and they
are not perfect in any particular field.

Nature has taught us a nice lesson. If we continue to uproot a sapling
and put it in another place over and over again it would wither away and
cannot grow up. But a plant that remains firmly rooted at the same spot
grows into a huge tree. Then it flowers and also bears fruit.  
 Want of concentration or hesitation is same as a plant that is uprooted
every now and then. So it neither flowers nor gives fruits. Rather it
withers away and dies.  
 It is rightly said that concentrating the thoughts at one point is the
hallmark of the wise.  
 Taking up many assignments together brings personal loss and also harms
the society. It can damage a nation’s economy and culture and result in
anarchy, which is difficult to control.  
 Boron used to say: Man’s interest and natural talent implies that he
can concentrate his conscience and feelings on one point.

Newton was asked how he was able to discover so many things. His answer
was that by constantly thinking about them. He was thinking on a subject
so thoroughly and deeply that the subject became as clear as daylight
before him.

A special feature of the modern civilization is specialization. We have
experts in all walks of life. Specialization has become so necessary
that the world cannot advance in its absence.


