Discipline
==========

Not only that discipline is a secret of the success of great men, our
universe also stands on the same foundation. If the solar system is
working regularly, if the stars are revolving around the sun
systematically and if there is no flaw in this function for millenniums
it is only due to the fact that the solar system is based on order.

Order is found in everything around us from the largest bodies of the
universe to the minutest thing called ‘atom’. Everything in this world
is made up of tiny atoms. A wonderful discipline is in action and it is
seen in each and every movement of the universe. There are tiny atoms in
every system.  
 Every atom has its own center, which is called ‘proton’. Many
‘electrons’ move round the center like stars and moons. In the words of
a great Muslim scholar: “If you tear up the heart of every atom you will
find its sun in its center.”

The universe is the best guide for all of us. We should learn about life
and the causes and reasons of its stability and success from it. This
universe tells that: “The secret of my survival is the regularity and
orderliness which my Creator has ingrained in me.”

If the educational system of any country becomes chaotic, if the trade
and economy of any nation is disturbed, if the balance of supply and
demand is upset, if the law and order of any country turns corrupt, if
the army gets out of control the end of that nation becomes certain.

When the commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.) was fatally injured by
the sword of Ibne Muljim, the first bequest uttered by him to his sons,
after advising them to refrain from Allah’s disobedience, was regarding
this orderliness in every affair: “I advise you to refrain from
disobeying Allah and to abide by law and order and regularity in life.”

One of the ways of orderliness is to divide our daily time according to
our needs. Doing every necessary work in its proper time is life. We
should further this foundation of life. We must refrain from
disorderliness and indiscipline because irregularity ends propriety and
destroys our talent and competence.

The leader of the God-fearing people Ali (a.s.) says, “A Muslim must
divide his time into three parts. One part should be reserved for
Allah’s worship, one for earning livelihood and the third for attending
to the demands of the body which cannot be ignored.”

If there was no orderliness or discipline in our past life can we
benefit from such orderliness in the remaining years of our life?  
 “Certainly, we can…” because the three stages of our life, viz,
childhood, youth and old age are like three compartments of a ship which
can be separated from one another by pressing a button. If a compartment
is damaged it can be separated from the rest.

Only he is successful who can, using his wisdom, separate different
compartments of his life and deal with them separately.  
 It is pitiable that man, instead of gaining from the present
opportunities, should remain sorrowful for his past, thus wasting the
time available to him and become careless about bringing order in the
forthcoming time.

A competent minister was carrying out his administrative duties with the
help of his assistants. When asked as to how he was arranging his
affairs he replied, “I never postpone today’s work for tomorrow. In my
view it is not correct to delay anything.”  
 We see signs in offices and workshops saying: Time is Gold. It
surprises me because the value of time becomes more than gold if
everything is done in time.


