Surah al-Qalam, Chapter 68
==========================

**(The Pen)**

**Section (juz’) 29**

**Number of Verses: 52**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

The Chapter, revealed in Mecca, has 52 Verses. Some Qur’an exegetes have
entertained doubts about the Revelation of all the blessed Verses of the
Chapter in Mecca, though the Chapter stands in total harmony with Meccan
Chapters in terms of tone and content, since above all, it treats of the
Noble Prophet’s (S) Prophetic call and confrontation with the foes who
regarded him as insane, call to patience and steadfastness, and warning
the opponents against Divine torments.

All in all, the topics discussed in the Chapter may be epitomized as
follows:

1. The blessed Chapter opens with some of the excellences peculiar to
the Messenger of Allah (S), particularly his nobilities, and proceeds to
lay emphasis on them.

2. The blessed Chapter proceeds with an enumeration of his foes’ vices.

3. Making mention of the people of Paradise actually serves as a warning
against the evil polytheists.

4. Mention is also made of miscellaneous material regarding the Day of
Resurrection and the disbelievers’ torments.

5. The Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) is enjoined to persevere
and exercise patience against obdurate foes.

6. Warnings against polytheists.

7. Finally, the blessed Chapter in question closes with the glory of the
Holy Qur’an and different conspiracies of enemies against the Noble
Prophet (S).

The designation of the Chapter, mentioned by some as Nun, derives from
the opening Verse. Though some of the traditions narrated on the merits
of the blessed Chapter reflect that the title is Nun wa ’l-Qalam.

The Merit of Reciting the Chapter
---------------------------------

In this vein, it is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) that one who
recites the Chapter Nun wa ’l-Qalam shall be granted the Divine Rewards
in store for those who possess moral nobilities.[^1]

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that one who recites the Chapter Nun
wa ’l-Qalam in his obligatory or supererogatory ritual prayers shall be
safeguarded by God Almighty against indigence for good and shall be
secure against the pressures of the grave upon his demise and shall be
granted Divine Graciousness.[^2] It is worthy of note, however, that
being granted such Rewards is subject to honoring religious obligations
rather than paying lip service to the same.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 1-4
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ن ۚ وَالْقَلَمِ وَمَا يَسْطُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَنتَ بِنِعْمَةِ رَبِّكَ بِمَجْنُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ لَكَ لَأَجْرًا غَيْرَ مَمْنُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلَىٰ خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. By Nun, pen and by what they write.***  
***2. You, by the Grace of your Lord, are not insane.***  
***3. And for you shall be a Great and Everlasting Reward.***  
***4. And you possess an exalted character.***

The Chapter in question is the only One opening with the detached letter
nun. Mention has been made above as to the detached letter, particularly
under the opening blessed Verses of Chapters 2, 3, and 7.

What is worthy of note herein is that some Qur’anic exegetes maintain
that the detached letter is a hypochoristicon of and an allusion to the
Arabic Divine Attribute rahman ("the Most Gracious"), though some have
considered it as a metalypsis alluding to a river in Paradise.

The blessed Verse 1 contains oaths taken as to two most significant
issues in human life, saying:

***"By the pen and by what they write."***

The oath is quite astonishing, since the object of the oath is seemingly
an insignificant point, a piece of reed or something resembling the same
and a little black material.

Nonetheless, it is the fountainhead of all human civilizations,
advancements, and development of sciences, awakening of thought,
formation of religions and schools of thought, and the springhead of
human guidance and awareness such that human life thereby falls into
pre-historic and historic eras.

Human history begins by the discovery of writing through which man was
able to record the story of his life and left behind

***"what they write."***

The majestic nature of the oath is rendered further evident by according
attention to the point that such blessed Verses were revealed when there
were no writers in that milieu and the number of the illiterate
inhabitants of Mecca, the focal point of devotions, politics, and
economy of Hijaz, did not exceed twenty.

Thus, swearing by the pen in such milieu is of a particular majesty.

It would be of interest to make mention of the point that the earliest
Verses revealed onto the noble and pure heart of the Noble Prophet (S)
on the "Mountain of Light" (Jabal al-Nur) and at the "Cave of Hira"
reveal the exalted significance of the pen:

***"Recite! In the Name of your Lord Who has created [the world of
existence]. He has created man from a clot [a piece of thick coagulated
blood]. Recite! And our Lord is the Greatest Who has taught man by the
pen. He has taught him that which he knew not"***[^3]***.***

The most interesting point is that an illiterate person recited such
Words bearing testimony to the truth that the Holy Qur’an is but Divine
Revelation.

Some Qur’anic exegetes maintain that the Arabic word qalam ("pen,
calamus") herein connotes the pen by which archangels record Divine
Revelation or the records of human deeds, though the contextual meaning
of the blessed Verse in question is broader in scope and such
interpretation may be considered as one of its senses.

Likewise

***"what they write"***

is also broad in its semantic implications encompassing whatever is
recorded of treading the path of guidance and the intellectual, moral,
and practical developments of mankind without being restricted to
recording Divine Revelation or human deeds.

The blessed Verse 2 treats of the object of the oath, saying that owing
to Divine Graciousness, you are not insane, namely those who unfoundedly
allege that your are insane are blind in their hearts failing to behold
all these Divine Blessings and Bounties conferred upon you, e.g. the
Bounties of great intellect and insight, trustworthiness, sincerity,
knowledge, Prophetic Call, and infallibility.

They are insane who falsely allege that the possessor of intellect par
excellence is insane and thereby distance from the guide and leader of
mankind through posing such unfounded allegations.

The blessed Verse 3 is saying that Great and Everlasting Divine Rewards
are in store for you, since you persevere on the Straight Path against
such unfounded claims and even set your hopes on their deliverance and
salvation without experiencing exhaustion consequent to your endeavors
made on the path. The Arabic adjectival form mamnun derives from m-n-n
("sever") connoting endless and everlasting Rewards.

The blessed Verse 4 presents another depiction of the Noble Prophet (S),
saying that he possesses great and marvelous nobilities of character,
unrivalled purity and sincerity, and indescribable patience,
perseverance, steadfastness, and forbearance.

He calls people unto obedience to God Almighty, worships Him more than
anyone else, forbid people of committing vices, exercises forbearance,
providing those harming and hurting him with admonition.

He invokes God Almighty to forgive the sins of those who slander him. He
prays to God Almighty to bestow His Guidance upon those who hit him with
rocks and cast hot ashes on his head. He is the focal point of love and
the springhead of mercy. The Arabic word khuluq, cognate with khilqat
("creation") connotes the inherent purity of heart which becomes the
second nature of man.[^4]

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 5-7
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَتُبْصِرُ وَيُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِأَييِّكُمُ الْمَفْتُونُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَن ضَلَّ عَن سَبِيلِهِ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ
بِالْمُهْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. You shall see before long and they shall see as well,***  
***6. Which of you is afflicted with insanity.***  
***7. Your Lord is the Best Knower of him who has gone astray from His
Path and He is the Best Knower of those who are guided.***

the blessed Verses 5 and 6 serve as Divine Consolations to His Messenger
(S) against his foes, saying that you and they shall see soon which of
you is insane. The Arabic past participial form maftun, cognate with
fitna ("affliction") herein connotes

***"afflicted with insanity."***

They ascribed such unfounded accusations unto him so that Allah’s
servants may distance themselves from you, but people are capable of
intellection and they will acquaint themselves with your teachings in
time.

Then, it will be manifest that such noble teachings have been revealed
unto your pure and brilliant heart by God Almighty and it will be known
that He bestowed you a great capacity for intellection as well as great
knowledge.

Furthermore, you measures and stances and the rapid spread of the
Islamic faith in future will reflect that you are the great source of
intellect and insight and insane are those bats standing against sun
shine and most assuredly such truths shall be further clarified on the
Day of Resurrection.

The blessed Verse 7 lays further emphasis on supporting the Noble
Prophet (S), saying:

***"Your Lord is the Best Knower of him who has gone astray from His
Path and He is the Best Knower of those who are guided."***

The point is that God Almighty is Omniscient of His Path and thereby the
Noble Prophet (S) is assured that he is on the Path of Guidance and his
foes are in error.

It is narrated through a sound transmission chain that when the Quraysh
noticed that the Noble Prophet (S) accorded precedence to ‘Ali (as) over
others, they talked evil of the latter saying that Muhammad was
afflicted with insanity because of him. Thus, the Chapter in question
was revealed in which God Almighty took an oath that the Noble Prophet
(S) was not insane.

Further,

***"those who have gone astray from His Path"***

alludes to the Qurayshi foes of the Noble Prophet (S) who uttered such
unfounded claims.

The clause

***"He is the Best Knower of those who are guided"***

alludes to ‘Ali (as).[^5]

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 8-11
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا تُطِعِ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدُّوا لَوْ تُدْهِنُ فَيُدْهِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُطِعْ كُلَّ حَلَّافٍ مَّهِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَمَّازٍ مَّشَّاءٍ بِنَمِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. So obey you not the deniers.***  
***9. They wish that you compromised with them, so that they would
compromise with you [a compromise adulterated by deviation from the
Straight Path].***  
***10. And obey not everyone who swears much and is a liar or is
worthless.***  
***11. One very inquisitive of other people’s faults, a slanderer,***

Making mention of the Noble Prophet’s (S) nobilities of character in the
preceding blessed Verses, his foes’ vices are being treated herein such
that a comparison of the two may shed further light on the question,
enjoining him not to follow those who deny God Almighty, His Messenger
(S), the Day of Resurrection, and the Islamic faith, since they are
alluring and erring people transgressing all the Bounds set by the Truth
as following such erring people entails but error and misfortune.

The blessed Verse 9 makes mention of their efforts to make the Noble
Prophet compromise with them, saying that they wish that you made
compromise with them so that they act likewise. Making compromise herein
connotes neglecting some of Divine Commands for their sake.

Qur’an exegetes maintain that the blessed Verse was revealed when the
chiefs of Mecca called the Noble Prophet (S) to follow the beliefs of
their ancestors, namely polytheism and idolatry, but God Almighty
forbade him to obey them.[^6]

It is also reported that Walid ibn Mughayra, one of the prominent
chieftains of Quraysh, offered many possessions to the Noble Prophet (S)
and swore that if he forwent his Prophetic Call, the possessions would
be his.[^7]

The tone of the blessed Verses in question as well as the material
incorporated in historical sources clearly reflect that when the blind
hearted polytheists noticed the rapid dissemination of the Islamic
faith, they made attempts to make compromise with the Noble Prophet (S)
and urge him to act likewise, as the followers of falsehood acted
accordingly down the centuries, offering great possessions, worldly
exalted positions, and beautiful women at times and thereby compared the
Noble Prophet (S)’s exalted spirit with their limited and worthless
ambitions.

The Noble Prophet (S) is enjoined many a time in the Holy Qur’an t0
accord no attention to their deviations and empty promises. The blessed
Verse 10 enumerates the vices committing each of which leads to
disobedience to God Almighty, warning him against following anyone who
takes many an oath and is worthless.

The Arabic intensive adjectival form hallaf is applied to one who takes
many oaths for any significant or insignificant matter and it such
people are usually insincere in taking oaths.

The Arabic adjectival form

***mahin ("worthless, lowly"),***

cognate with mahana ("worthlessness, lowliness"), is taken by some
Qur’an exegetes to imply thoughtless, lying, or evil people.

The blessed Verse 11 provides further depiction of such people saying
that they are very inquisitive and slandering. The Arabic intensified
adjectival form hammaz, deriving from h-m-z ("backbite, slander") is
applied to one who indulges in slandering others. The Arabic phrase
mashsha’ bi-namim is applied to one who goes about slandering and
backbiting people and thereby causes discord and enmity. The intensive
forms indicate going to extremes in committing such vices.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 12-14
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّنَّاعٍ لِّلْخَيْرِ مُعْتَدٍ أَثِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عُتُلٍّ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ زَنِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَن كَانَ ذَا مَالٍ وَبَنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. One going to extremes in hindering the good, wrong doing,
sinfulness,***  
***13. Moreover vengeful, avaricious, coarse in manners, and
notorious.***

***14. May it never come that you follow him owing to his affluence and
offspring.***

It is incumbent upon believers to disclose all the aspects of the foes
so that such disclosure may lead to the people’s salvation.
Approximately ten characteristics are enumerated in these blessed Verses
such that if someone has one of these vices, it is incumbent upon
believers to distance from them, let alone those possessing all of these
vile traits.

Thus, the blessed Verse 12 enjoins people to distance from one who makes
many an effort to hinder the good and he is wrong doing and sinful. Such
person not only does no righteous good deed, but also impedes other from
doing good deeds. Furthermore, he transgresses Divine Bounds and rights
bestowed upon people by God Almighty and his soul is adulterated by all
sins such that committing sins is his second nature.

The blessed Verse 13 is saying that such person is gluttonous and
notorious. He intends to avail himself of everything but impedes others
from the same. Some Qur’anic exegetes maintain that the Arabic
adjectival form ‘utull is applied to one who is bad tempered, vengeful,
coarse in manners, and shameless.

The Arabic intensive adjective zanim is applied to someone whose descent
is unbeknownst connoting "born out of wedlock."

The Arabic phrase

***ba‘d dhalik ("moreover, besides, furthermore")***

indicates that these two vices are more abominable that the preceding
ones, as suggested by some of the Qur’an exegetes. It is narrated from
the Noble Prophet (S) as saying that ‘utull indicates grave disbelief
and zanim is applied to one who is avaricious in his disbelief.[^8]

At any rate, God Almighty makes such depiction of the liars and their
vices, seemingly unparalleled elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an, reflecting
the vile characteristics of the opponents of the Islamic faith, the Holy
Qur’an, and the Noble Prophet (S). Such people were liars, worthless,
inquisitive, slanderous, disobedient, sinners, and of unbeknownst
descent. They may not be expected to be otherwise.

The blessed Verse 14 is a warning saying:

***"May it never come that you follow him owing to his affluence and
offspring."***

The Noble Prophet (S) indubitably never followed them, but theses
blessed Verses lay emphasis on the point that so long as his doctrines
and practices are not revealed to everyone, friends and foes are not
expected to do accordingly.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 15-16
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِ آيَاتُنَا قَالَ أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَنَسِمُهُ عَلَى الْخُرْطُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. When Our Verses are recited unto him, he says: "Tales of the
ancients."***  
***16. We shall brand him on the snout!***

The former blessed Verse reflects the reaction of such people with such
worthless traits against Divine Signs, saying:

***"When Our Verses are recited unto him, he says: ‘Tales of the
ancients.’"***

It is under such vile pretext that they distance from Divine Signs and
thereby consigns them to oblivion and seduces others to deviate from the
Straight Path; as a consequence of which it is incumbent upon the
believers to refrain from following such people. It further completes
forbidding the believers to follow them.

The latter blessed Verse unveils one of the torments to be inflicted on
this group, saying that you shall behold before long that We shall brand
them on the snout! Such eloquent expression reflects their utmost
humility, since the Arabic word khurtum implies a reference to pigs and
elephants.

It is worthy of note, however, that the word nose connotes magnanimity
in the Arabic tongue. There is an idiom in the Persian language saying:
"rub one’s nose against the ground" connoting humiliating someone.

Furthermore, animals are branded but their snouts are not branded even.
Such eloquent blessed Verses indicate that God Almighty humiliates such
vain, disobedient, and wrong doing people and disgraces them before
everyone such that others may take a lesson out of their dire fate.

The history of the Islamic faith bears witness to the same such that
such obdurate opponents confronting the dissemination of the Islamic
faith were so humiliated and disgraced that their humiliation and
disgrace were unparalleled. Furthermore, further disgrace and humility
are in store for such people on the Day of Resurrection.

It is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) as saying:

*"Do you want me to inform you of your most vicious people amongst you?
Those who go to extremes in slandering and backbiting, cause discord
amongst friends, and find faults with innocent people."*[^9]

According to another Prophetic tradition, the Noble Prophet (S) enjoined
his companions to refrain from quoting him when the quote causes
suspicion in any of his companions, since he would like to meet them
with a pure heart.[^10]

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 17-20
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا بَلَوْنَاهُمْ كَمَا بَلَوْنَا أَصْحَابَ الْجَنَّةِ إِذْ
أَقْسَمُوا لَيَصْرِمُنَّهَا مُصْبِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَسْتَثْنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَطَافَ عَلَيْهَا طَائِفٌ مِّن رَّبِّكَ وَهُمْ نَائِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَصْبَحَتْ كَالصَّرِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. Indeed, We have tried them as We tried the people of the garden
when they swore to pluck the fruits of the garden in the morning
[without the poor being aware of it],***  
***18. Without leaving anything aside.***  
***19. Then, a [nightly] torment was afflicted on all of their garden
while they were asleep.***  
***20. So, the garden became black by the morning like a pitch dark
night.***

In vein with the discussion raised in the preceding blessed Verses
concerning the vain affluent who owing to their affluence and children
turn away from everything, the blessed Verses in question serve as an
allusion to some affluent people who had a verdant garden, but they trod
the path of perdition due to their obduracy. The story was seemingly
well-known at the time, hence the allusion to the story.

The blessed Verse 17 is saying that we tried them as we did the owners
of the garden. Qur’an exegetes are not unanimous regarding the location
of the garden, whether it was in the Yemen close to the populous city of
San‘a, or in Ethiopia, amongst the Children of Israel, or in Syria or in
Ta’if, though the majority of the exegetes maintain that it was in the
Yemen.

According to the story, the garden belonged to a believing old man who
made use of its revenues to meet his needs and gave away the rest in
charity. Nonetheless, after his demise, his children said that they were
further entitled to the revenues since they had numerous children
failing to follow their father’s practice of expending the surplus on
charitable means.

Thus, they intended to deprive the needy of the produce and their dire
fate is reflected in these blessed Verses, saying that we tried them
when they swore to pick the fruits early in the morning unbeknownst to
the needy.

The blessed Verse 18 is saying that they did not leave anything for the
needy. Such decision reflects that they did not act according owing to
their need, but they thereby reflected their niggardliness and weak
belief, since inasmuch as one happens to be in need, he may allocate a
portion of the produce of a lucrative orchard to the needy.

The blessed Verse 19 proceeds to say that when they were asleep at
night, they were afflicted by an encompassing Divine torment, such that
a deadly lightning and a burning fire consumed the verdant orchard and
darkened it like pitch black nights leaving behind but some ashes.

The Arabic word ta’if, cognate with tawaf ("circumambulation") denotes
one who circumambulate something and at times connotes some affliction
inflicted on someone at night. The Arabic word sarim denotes
"separating" but herein connotes "pitch black night; fruitless tree;
black ashes."

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 21-25
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَنَادَوْا مُصْبِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنِ اغْدُوا عَلَىٰ حَرْثِكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ صَارِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانطَلَقُوا وَهُمْ يَتَخَافَتُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَن لَّا يَدْخُلَنَّهَا الْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكُم مِّسْكِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَغَدَوْا عَلَىٰ حَرْدٍ قَادِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. Then, they called out one to another as soon as the morning
broke.***  
***22. [Saying:] "Go to your tilth in the morning, if you would pluck
the fruits."***  
***23. So they departed, conversing in secret low tones [saying]:***  
***24. "No poor man shall enter upon you into it today."***  
***25. And they went in the morning with a strong intention, thinking
that they have power [to prevent the poor taking anything of the fruits
therefrom].***

The blessed Verse 21 is saying that at any rate the owners of the
garden, imagining that the fruits of their orchard are ripe to be
picked, called onto one another. The blessed Verse 22 says that they
asked each other to proceed if they intend to pick their fruits. The
Arabic word aghdu, cognate with ghadwa, implies the break of the day and
the word breakfast is applied to the food eaten in the morning.

The blessed Verse 23 is saying that they proceeded toward their orchard
whispering onto one another.

The blessed Verse 24 says that they said onto one another:

*"Be careful lest a man in need approaches you!"*

They whispered onto each other lest the needy might hear them and ask
them for some meager amount of fruit to quench their hunger. The needy
seemingly expected some fruit every year owing to the charity of their
father. Nonetheless, such niggardly and unworthy children moved so
furtively that no one learns that it was time to pick up fruits.

The blessed Verse 25 is saying that that proceeded toward their orchard
at day break with all their might to turn away from the needy. The
Arabic word hard connotes impeding wrathfully. Thus, they raged at the
expectations of the needy and made up their minds to exercise all their
might to ward off their requests. The Arabic word is also applied to the
years when there is no precipitation.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 26-30
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا رَأَوْهَا قَالُوا إِنَّا لَضَالُّونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ نَحْنُ مَحْرُومُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَوْسَطُهُمْ أَلَمْ أَقُل لَّكُمْ لَوْلَا تُسَبِّحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا سُبْحَانَ رَبِّنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَلَاوَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. But when they entered the garden and beheld it, they said:
"Indeed, we have gone astray."***  
***27. [Then they said:] "Nay! We are totally deprived of
everything!"***  
***28. The wisest among them said: "Did I not tell you: why do you not
glorify Allah.***  
***29. They said: "Glorified is Our Lord! Verily, we were
wrong-doers."***  
***30. Then, they turned to each other, blaming one another.***

These blessed Verses proceed with the story of the owners of the orchard
as mentioned in the preceding blessed Verses. Aspiring to pick up their
fruits unbeknownst to the needy, they intended to impede them from
availing themselves of Divine Bounties.

They departed at daybreak, unaware of the lightning that had turned the
orchard into ashes when they were asleep at night time. The blessed
Verses reflect that when they beheld their orchard, they found it in
such a mess that they thought it were not their orchard and they had
lost their way.

The Arabic plural adjectival form

***dhallun ("the astray")***

may connote that they had seemingly lost their way to the orchard or to
the Truth, as suggested by some Qur’an exegetes, though the former sense
seeming further befitting herein.

The blessed Verse 27 reflects that they regarded themselves as the true
needy who aspired to deprive those in need from the produce. Their
attempt at such impediment led to their deprivation from the material
gains as well as the spiritual blessings accrued through expending in
Cause of Allah and helping those in need.

The blessed Verse 28 is saying that the wisest of them at the time said:

"Did I not ask you to glorify Allah and remember His Majesty and refrain
from disobeying Him and give thanks by helping the needy by expending
your possessions. However, you failed to hearken to my words and met
such dire fate.

The blessed Verse reflects that one of them believed in God Almighty and
warned them against niggardliness and avarice, but others failed to
listen to him. However, following the incident he reproached them with
further convincing logical arguments.

According to the blessed Verse 29, they experienced a rude awakening and
confessed to their sins, saying that God Almighty is glorified and they
were indubitably wrong doers and wronged themselves as well as others.
The Arabic word awsat in the preceding blessed Verse connotes one who is
moderate in terms of reason and sensibility.

The interrogative clause

***"Why do you not glorify God Almighty"***

alludes to the point that all righteous good deeds stem from belief in
God Almighty, knowing and glorifying Him. However, some exegetes
maintain that the Arabic verbal noun tasbih herein connotes giving
thanks for the Bounties.

The blessed Verse 30 reflects that the brothers addressed each other and
censured one another. Apparently, while confessing to his flaws, each of
them tried to hold others accountable and severely rebuked others
regarding others as the main cause of the calamity as he was not that
unaware of God Almighty and justice.

That is the fate of all the wrong doers who get entangled with Divine
torment, confessing to their sins but holding others responsible for
their own afflictions. Nonetheless, it is goes without saying that they
are all accountable for the misdeeds and vices.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 31-33
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا طَاغِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَسَىٰ رَبُّنَا أَن يُبْدِلَنَا خَيْرًا مِّنْهَا إِنَّا إِلَىٰ
رَبِّنَا رَاغِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَٰلِكَ الْعَذَابُ ۖ وَلَعَذَابُ الْآخِرَةِ أَكْبَرُ ۚ لَوْ كَانُوا
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. They said: "Woe to us! We were disobedient.***  
***32. We hope that our Lord will [forgive us and] give us in exchange
something better. Truly, we turn to our Lord.***  
***33. Such is Divine chastisement, but truly that of the Hereafter is
greater if they but knew.***

The blessed Verse 31 is saying that when they noticed the depth of their
dire fate, they cried:

*"Woe unto us!"*

They had previously confessed to their wrong doing, since wrong doers
may acknowledge the principle, though he may do wrong owing to being
overwhelmed by his concupiscent desires. Au contraire, the disobedient
never follow the rules nor does he acknowledge it. Wrong doing may
herein connote doing wrong to oneself and disobedience may imply
transgressing the rights of others.

It is worthy of note, however, that when arabs face a grave affliction,
they say

***wayla ("woe").***

According to the blessed Verse 32, upon such rude awakening and
confessing to their sins, they turned toward God Almighty saying that
may their Lord forgive their sins and provide them with a better
orchard, since they have turned towards Him, set their hopes on His Pure
Essence, and invoke Him to render them Assistance in their hardships. It
is narrated in some traditions that they sincerely repented and God
Almighty pardoned them and provided them with a better orchard.

The blessed Verse 33 draws a general conclusion saying that thus is
Divine torment and that in the hereafter is more severe than that if but
they knew. Furthermore, the story reflects that there is an intimate
relationship between committing sins and being deprived of Divine
Sustenance and Provision.

In this vein, it is narrated from Imam Baqir (as) as saying:

*"Man at times commits a sin and is thereby deprived of his Divine
Provision."*

Then, the noble Imam (as) recited the blessed Verse in question.[^11] It
is narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas as saying that the relationship between
committing sins and being deprived of Divine Provision is crystal clear
such that God Almighty makes mention of the same in the Chapter in
question.[^12]

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 34-38
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَنَجْعَلُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ كَالْمُجْرِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ لَكُمْ كِتَابٌ فِيهِ تَدْرُسُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لَكُمْ فِيهِ لَمَا تَخَيَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. For the God fearing are gardens abounding in Bounties with their
Lord.***  
***35. Shall We then treat the believers like the disbelievers?***  
***36. What is the matter with you? How do you judge?***  
***37. Or do you have a book wherein you learn,***  
***38. What you choose belongs to you.***

The accounts of the good and the evil are juxtaposed in the Holy Qur’an
such that such comparisons may help people with a better understanding
of their fates. Such method is quite impressive in terms of education.

Likewise, following an account of the dire fate of the owners of the
orchard in the preceding blessed Verses, mention is made of the exalted
position of the God fearing and the Bounties in store for them.

The blessed Verse 34 is saying:

***"For the God fearing are gardens abounding in Bounties with their
Lord."***

Such gardens abound in whatever imaginable Bounty.

However, some polytheists and the vain affluent claiming that they are
quite at comfort in this world and will enjoy the same state in the
Hereafter are addressed in the blessed Verse 35 saying:

***"Shall We then treat the believers [obedient to Allah] like the
disbelievers?"***

The following blessed Verse says:

***"What is the matter with you? How do you judge?"***

Anyone sound in mind readily acknowledges that the fates the just and
the wrong doer, the obedient and the sinners, the sacrificing and the
vain are not on a par before God Almighty Whose Acts are Wise and
Well-Measured. Such vain people imagine that the world and the Hereafter
belong to them.

The blessed Verse 37 further adds that if your reason failed to lead you
to such understanding, could you produce any argument to substantiate
your claim. Do you have a book to learn something from it?

The blessed Verse 38 says:

***"Does your choice belong to you?"***

Do you expect wrong doers like you to be on a par with the believing
Muslims? Your false claim is neither reasonable nor is it mentioned in
any authoritative book.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 39-41
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ لَكُمْ أَيْمَانٌ عَلَيْنَا بَالِغَةٌ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ ۙ
إِنَّ لَكُمْ لَمَا تَحْكُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلْهُمْ أَيُّهُم بِذَٰلِكَ زَعِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ لَهُمْ شُرَكَاءُ فَلْيَأْتُوا بِشُرَكَائِهِمْ إِن كَانُوا
صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***39. Or have you oaths from Us, reaching to the Day of Resurrection
that yours will be what you choose?***  
***40. Ask them which of them will guarantee such thing?***  
***41. Or have they partners whom they associate in partnership with
Allah who intercede with Allah on their behalf? Then, let them bring
their partners if they are truthful!***

The blessed Verse 39 is saying that you may not produce logical and
narrational arguments as to the veracity of your claims. Have we made a
covenant with you which is valid to the Day of Resurrection that
justifies what entails your benefits?

Who may claim to have made a covenant with God Almighty that He obeys to
his inclinations and He unconditionally provides him with privileges
such that sinners be ranked with believers?

The blessed Verse 40 proceeds with posing such questions to them and
thereby leaves no room for such unfounded justifications, saying:

*"Ask them which of them will guarantee that God Almighty will provide
them with whatever they wish?"*

It is in the last stage of such strange investigation that the blessed
Verse 41 inquires whether they have objects of worship who intercede
with God Almighty on their behalf and render them support. If they are
true in their claims, they may present them.

Could they produce any argument to substantiate that such worthless and
inanimate objects are associated with God Almighty in partnership?

Thus, the blessed Verses in question lead us to the conclusion that to
substantiate their claim as to being a on a par with or even superior to
believers, they have to make recourse to one of the four means: to
provide arguments based on reason, heavenly Scriptures, Divine Covenant,
or intercession and testimony of intercessors and witnesses. Their
claims are unfounded since they may not provide affirmative answers to
such questions.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 42-43
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يُكْشَفُ عَن سَاقٍ وَيُدْعَوْنَ إِلَى السُّجُودِ فَلَا
يَسْتَطِيعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَاشِعَةً أَبْصَارُهُمْ تَرْهَقُهُمْ ذِلَّةٌ ۖ وَقَدْ كَانُوا
يُدْعَوْنَ إِلَى السُّجُودِ وَهُمْ سَالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***42. Remember the Day when the shin shall be laid bare out of fear and
they shall be called to prostrate themselves, but they shall not be able
to do likewise.***  
***43. Then, their eyes will be cast down and ignominy will cover them.
They used to be called to prostrate themselves, while they were healthy
and good; however, they lack such power any longer.***

The idiomatic expression

***"the shin shall be laid bare" (yukshafu ‘an saq-in)***

connotes desperation. It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that the
mouths shall be sealed on that Day; one shall be totally enwrapped in
fear; eyes shall stare; and souls shall reach the throats.[^13]

The blessed Verse 42 is saying:

***"Remember the Day when the shin shall be laid bare out of fear and
they shall be called to prostrate themselves, but they shall not be able
to do likewise."***

Some Qur’anic exegetes maintain that the expression implies fear and
gravity of the matter, since it was common practice amongst the Arabs to
lay their shins bare against hard tasks and make their utmost effort to
remove the impediments.

Everyone shall be called to prostrate themselves and show humbleness
before God Almighty on the Day of Resurrection. Believers shall
prostrate themselves, but sinners shall be unable to do likewise, since
the vices deeply rooted in them in this world shall reveal themselves
impeding them to prostrate themselves before Divine Pure Essence. In
this vein, it is narrated from Imam ‘Ali (as) that Divine Light shall be
unveiled on the Day of Resurrection.

Impressed by its Majesty and Glory, believers shall prostrate
themselves, though hypocrites shall be unable to do likewise.[^14]

The blessed Verse 43 is saying that then, their eyes will be cast down
out of shame and regret and ignominy and disgrace will totally enwrap
them. Having been tried at the Divine Tribunal, their eyes will be cast
down and humility enwraps them.

The blessed Verse proceeds to say that they used to be called to
prostrate themselves, while they were healthy and good; however, they
lack such power any longer and thus reflect their arrogance and
disobedience on the Day of Resurrection.

How may they prostrate themselves on that Day? It is needless to say
that people are called in this world to prostrate themselves through
listening to ritual including congregation prayer calls. The Qur’anic
Verses as well as the traditions narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) and
the Infallible Imams (as) bear witness to such call addressed to all
mankind.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 44-45
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَذَرْنِي وَمَن يُكَذِّبُ بِهَٰذَا الْحَدِيثِ ۖ سَنَسْتَدْرِجُهُم
مِّنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُمْلِي لَهُمْ ۚ إِنَّ كَيْدِي مَتِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***44. Then, leave Me Alone with those who belie this. We shall lead
them to torment in time from directions they know not.***  
***45. And I will grant them a respite, since My Plans are well-measured
and precise.***

Addressed to the Noble Prophet (S), the blessed Verse 44 says:

*"Then, leave Me Alone with those who belie this Word, namely the Holy
Qur’an, so that I chastise them."*

In such strong Warning, the All-Invincible Allah is asking His Messenger
(as) to leave Him Alone with such obdurate and disobedient deniers so
that He afflicts them by the torments which they deserve.

We must bear in mind that such Words are uttered by the Omnipotent Lord.
It is also worthy of note that such Warning entails consolation and
support for the Noble Prophet (S) and the believers against the
conspiracies of the enemies of the Islamic faith. The blessed Verse
further adds that God Almighty shall lead them to torments before long
while they shall be caught unaware.

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) as saying that committing sins and
leading comfortable lives serve as tokens of Divine torments to be
inflicted in time.[^15] Belying the Holy Qur’an entails grave torments,
since God Almighty asks His Messenger to leave them to Him.

In the blessed Verse 47, God Almighty says that He will grant them a
respite and He will not hastily inflict them with torments, since His
Plans are well-measured and His torments are excruciating.

The expression

***"I will grant them a respite" (umli lahum)***

implies that God Almighty never hastily inflict wrong doers with
torments, since one who makes haste is afraid of losing opportunities.

However, the Omnipotent Lord never loses opportunities to fulfill His
Will. At any rate, it is a warning to all wrong doers and the
disobedient against vanity caused by security and leading comfortable
lives, but they have to expect Divine grave torments to be inflicted
upon them at any time.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 46-47
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ تَسْأَلُهُمْ أَجْرًا فَهُم مِّن مَّغْرَمٍ مُّثْقَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ عِندَهُمُ الْغَيْبُ فَهُمْ يَكْتُبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. Or is it that you ask them a wage so that they are heavily
burdened with debt?***  
***47. Or that they are aware of the unseen so that they can write it
down and pass it onto others?***

Resuming the investigations on the wrong doings of the polytheists and
sinners, the blessed Verses in question pose two more questions:

***"Or is it that you ask them a wage so that they are heavily burdened
with debt? Or that they are aware of the unseen so that they can write
it down and pass it onto others?"***

In other words, if they refrain from listening to you under the pretext
that acting likewise entails bearing heavy costs and they cannot afford
them, they are lying since you, like other Prophets, expect no
remuneration for imparting your Prophetic Call.

The Arabic word maghram, cognate with gharama, implies the losses
incurred without having committed any wrong doing. The Arabic word
mathqal, derived from th-q-l, implies heaviness and gravity. Thus,
beliers are denied of further pretexts.

The blessed Verse 47 proceeds with the discussion by asking: "Or that
they are aware of the unseen so that they can write it down and pass it
onto others?" They claim that such secrets reveal that they are on a par
with the believers.

It is a remote possibility to which disbelievers may take recourse. It
is in this vein that the Holy Qur’an rejects their unfounded claims as
per which they say that they have access to the invisible world through
soothsayers and the like of them and they are thereby aware of the
secrets of the unseen and they may write them down and pass them onto
others.

Thus, they falsely claim that they are on a par with the believers or
even superior to them. They apparently produced no such claims and the
question is rather rhetorical. Some Qur’anic exegetes maintain that it
is an allusion to the Preserved Tablet (lawh mahfuth) and predestination
is herein intended by "writing," though such possibility is too remote,
since they never claim to have predestination and the Preserved Tablet
under their sway.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 48-50
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْبِرْ لِحُكْمِ رَبِّكَ وَلَا تَكُن كَصَاحِبِ الْحُوتِ إِذْ نَادَىٰ
وَهُوَ مَكْظُومٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّوْلَا أَن تَدَارَكَهُ نِعْمَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِ لَنُبِذَ بِالْعَرَاءِ
وَهُوَ مَذْمُومٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاجْتَبَاهُ رَبُّهُ فَجَعَلَهُ مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. Thus, wait patiently for the Command of your Lord and be not like
the Companion of the Fish [Jonah], when he made haste in invoking us to
inflict his people with chastisement and was*** ***entangled with the
chastisement of abandonment of priorities (tark ula) when he cried out
unto Lord while he was in deep sorrow.***  
***49. Had not a Grace from his Lord reached him, he would indeed have
been cast out [of the stomach of the fish] while he was to be
blamed.***  
***50. But, his Lord chose him and made him one of the righteous.***

The obduracy and insensibility of the polytheists and the enemies of the
Islamic faith imbued the Noble Prophet’s (S) heart at times such that he
was on the verge of cursing them. God Almighty consoles His Messenger
and bids him to be patient and wait for Divine Command to pave the path
for his and his companions’ victory and the total defeat of his enemies.

He is asked to make no haste and be aware that the respites accorded to
them are a kind of chastisement in time. Thus, the Muslims’ victory is
intended by Divine Command (hukm rabbika). Some Qur’an exegetes,
however, maintain that the blessed Verse is bidding the Noble Prophet
(S) to be patient and remain steadfast in imparting the Divine Message.

The blessed Verse forbids the Noble Prophet (S) to be like Jonah (as)
who made haste in invoking God Almighty to inflict his disobedient
people with torment and was thereby entangled with the chastisement for
abandoning priorities calling onto God Almighty while he was in the
stomach of the fish and his heart was imbued with sorrow.

The same invocation is reflected elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^16]:

***"But he cried through the darkness, saying: 'there is no god, but You
Alone."***

Thus, Jonah (Dhu ’l-Nun) called unto his Lord from the shadows saying:

***"Glorified are You! Truly, I have been of the wrong doers,"***

thereby confessing to having abandoned the priorities and invoking God
Almighty for forgiveness.

It is worthy of note that the Arabic past participial for makthum,
derived from k-th-m, denotes throat and the Arabic kathm siqa’ is used
in the sense of tying the mouth of the leather bottle after its being
filled.

The Arabic present participial form kathim is applied to those who
suppress their intense anger and sorrow. The word kathm may also connote
confinement, thus makthum may herein imply being imbued with anger and
sorrow or being confined in the stomach of the fish, though the former
sense seems to better fit the context.

The blessed Verse 49 is saying that had Divine Bounty and Grace not
reached him, he would have been cast out of the stomach of the fish
while he was worthy of being blamed. It is mentioned elsewhere in the
Holy Qur’an[^17] that finally Jonah was cast on a desert, termed as
‘ara’, while his repentance had been accepted by God Almighty and he was
granted Divine Grace and he was never blameworthy.

Thus, the blessed Verse 50 is saying that his Lord chose him and made
him one of the righteous and vested him once more with the obligation of
guiding his people. He returned to his people and they all believed in
him and were granted Divine Bounties for quite some time.

Surah al-Qalam – Verses 51-52
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن يَكَادُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَيُزْلِقُونَكَ بِأَبْصَارِهِمْ
لَمَّا سَمِعُوا الذِّكْرَ وَيَقُولُونَ إِنَّهُ لَمَجْنُونٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هُوَ إِلَّا ذِكْرٌ لِّلْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. Those who disbelieve would almost cause your death with their
eyes when they hear this Qur’an and they say: "He is insane!"***  
***52. But this Qur’an is but a Reminder to all the worlds.***

The closing Verses of the Chapter resumes the point mentioned in the
opening of the Chapter regarding the false ascription of insanity to the
Noble Prophet (S) by his enemies, saying the disbelievers would almost
cause his death with their eyes upon hearing the Qur’anic Verses and
falsely claim that he is insane.

The Arabic verbal form la-yuzliqunaka, derived from z-l-q ("tumble down,
fall down") denotes that they would make you slip, namely cause your
death. There are some Qur’an exegetes maintaining that upon hearing the
Majestic Qur’anic Verses, the Noble Prophet’s (S) enemies get into such
rage and look daggers at him as if they would intend to make him slip
and destroy him.

Some hold that the blessed Verse makes a reference to the evil eye in
which some people believe and say that some eyes have certain secret
powers through which they may cause ailment and death. Some also
maintain that the expression connotes wrathful looks, though such light
headed people are unaware of the truth and accord contradictory
ascriptions to him.

The last blessed Verse of the Chapter is saying that this Qur’an is but
an awakening and a reminder to the worlds whose teachings and warnings
are enlightening, its illustrations are meaningful, its encouragements
and glad tidings are promising to the spirit and all in all it awakens
the neglectful and reminds them of their obligations.

How one may falsely claim that the Messenger of Allah is insane? The
Arabic word dhikr denotes reminder as the Holy Qur’an serves as a
Reminder to all. However, some Qur’an exegetes take it in the sense of
sharaf ("eminence, dignity, glory, honor") holding that the Holy Qur’an
is a source of eminence to all the world, though the former sense seems
to better fit into the context.

*O Lord! Protect us from the evil of evil doers and the enemies’
deceits!*

*O Lord! Grant us steadfastness and forbearance in whose light we may
obtain Your Satisfaction!*

*O Lord! Bestow upon us the capacity of making use of Your Bounties
prior to their being substituted by deprivation consequent to
ingratitude!*

*Amen! O Lord of the worlds!*

[^1]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 387.

[^2]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 330.

[^3]: 96:1-5

[^4]: Numerous traditions and narratives may be found in exegetic and
historical sources concerning the moral nobilities of the Prophet (S),
e.g. his forgiving, love, kindness, sacrifice, and fear of God Almighty
treating which lies beyond our exegetic discussions. However, mention
may be made of a tradition narrated from Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) as saying
that his father, the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as), had
provided him with details on the Noble Prophet’s (S) nobilities of
character. Some of these nobilities will be mentioned hereunder. The
Noble Prophet (S) was of good tempered and of a good disposition. He
always smiled. He was never rough, cruel, aggressive, and vile of
speech. He was not a flatterer nor did he found faults with others. He
never left anyone in despair but whoever came unto him returned with
satisfaction. He neither entered into disputes nor was he prolix in
speech nor did he reproach anyone. He was neither inquisitive nor did he
uttered any words unless he had set his hopes on Divine Rewards. His
speech was so impressive that others were silent and they never uttered
a word unless he became silent. People never entered into disputes
before him. If a stranger who did not know him talked coarsely asking
for something, he exercised patience and toleration and said unto his
companions to meet the demands of the needy. He never interrupted anyone
unless he stopped talking. (Ma‘ani al-Akhbar, p. 83) Without such moral
nobilities and excellences, those backward pre-Islamic Arabs with their
coarseness and inflexibility would never embrace the Islamic faith, but
they would abandon him. It would be befitting to revive such Islamic
moral nobilities and all Muslims be a beam of light reflecting the Noble
Prophet’s (S) moral excellences. Numerous Islamic traditions have been
narrated in this respect as to the Noble Prophet (S) and the obligations
incumbent upon all Muslims, though for the sake of brevity, we content
ourselves with making mention of a few traditions. It is narrated from
the Noble Prophet (S), saying: "It is my Prophetic Call to perfect moral
excellences". (Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 333) Thus, one of the goals
behind the Prophetic Call is to perfect moral nobilities. According to a
prophetic tradition, it is through moral excellences and the believers
attain to such degree that they worship God Almighty at night and fasts
during the day. (Majma‘ al-Bayan, ibid.) According to another Prophetic
tradition, nothing shall be rewarded on the Day of Resurrection like
good temper (ibid.). It is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) that the
most beloved of you before God Almighty are those who are of good temper
and disposition, those who are humble, associate with others and people
are also willing to associate with them and the most detested of you
before God Almighty are the slanderers who separate the brethren and are
inquisitive to find faults with the sinless (ibid.). It is also narrated
from the Noble Prophet (S) that above all, fear of God Almighty and
having a good disposition leads people to Paradise. (Safinat al-Bihar,
vol. 1, p. 410) It is narrated from Imam Baqir (as) that the best of the
believers are those who excel in faith through possessing noble
excellences. (Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 8, p. 50) It is narrated from Imam
‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (as) as saying that the Noble Prophet said: "it
is incumbent upon you to improve your nobilities, since they lead you to
Paradise and refrain from possessing an evil tempter, since it leads to
the Fire.” (Ruh al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 108) The traditions narrated in
this respect clearly reflect that possessing a good temper is the key to
Paradise, leading to Divine Satisfaction, serving as a token of the
power of faith, and on a par with daily and nightly prayers and
devotions. Traditions narrated in this respect abound in Islamic
sources. The author of Tafsir al-Mizan devotes approximately 27 pages
(vol. 6, p. 183) to the Noble Prophet’s (S) moral virtues, excellences,
and nobilities as reflected in his biographical accounts. Further
traditions and details in this respect are to be found in tradition
sources.

[^5]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 334, where Tabarsi narrates the
tradition on the authority of a transmission chain attested in the Sunni
sources.

[^6]: Fakhr Razi’s exegetic work, vol. 30, p. 85; Maraghi’s exegetic
work, vol. 29, p. 31.

[^7]: Tafsir Qurtubi, vol. 10, p. 671.

[^8]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^9]: Usul Kafi, vol. 2, Bab al-Hamir ("Chapter on Conscience"),
tradition 1.

[^10]: Abu Da’ud’s Sunan; Tirmidhi’s Sahih; Tafsir fi Hilal al-Qur’an.

[^11]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalay, vol. 5, p. 395, tradition 44.

[^12]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 20, p. 37.

[^13]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^14]: Ibid, vol. 5, p. 397.

[^15]: Tafsir Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^16]: 21:87

[^17]: 37:49


