Surah al-Haqqa, Chapter 69
==========================

**(The Inevitable)**

**Section (juz’) 29**

**Number of Verses: 52**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

The blessed Chapter, revealed in Mecca, has 52 Verses. The designation
of the Chapter derives from the opening Verse denoting the inevitable.
The blessed Chapter mainly treats of Resurrection, its attributes, and
three designations of it, the Inevitable (al-haqqa), the Striking Hour
(al-qari‘a), and the Event (al-waqi‘a), and those of the Hell, the
Paradise, and the people of the Hell.

The Merit of Reciting the Chapter
---------------------------------

It is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) as saying that one who recites
Surah al-Haqqa, the burden of his sins shall be lessened.[^1]

It is narrated from Imam Baqir (as) that it is incumbent upon Muslims to
recite Surah al-Haqqa many a time, since its recitation in ritual
obligatory and supererogatory prayers serves as a token of believing in
God Almighty and His Messenger (S) and whoever recites it, his faith
shall be intact until he meets his Lord’s Countenance,[^2] provided that
he acts upon his religious obligations.

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 1-3
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَاقَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا الْحَاقَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الْحَاقَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. The Inevitable [Day]!***  
***2. What an Inevitable Day it is.***  
***3. And what will make you know what the Inevitable is?***

The Arabic word al-haqqa, cognate with haqq ("truth"), implies something
which is inevitable. The word is a designation of the Day of
Resurrection, since it is something truly Inevitable. The majority of
Qur’an exegetes maintain that the word implies the Day of Resurrection,
since it is indubitable inevitable.

The similar designation, the Event is also attested in Chapter 56 and
the blessed Verse 16 of the Chapter in question. They all reflect the
inevitability of that Great Day. The expression "the Inevitable" implies
the Greatness of that Day. Likewise, it is used in common usage when it
is said that so and so is such a man, namely the description of his
humanity is indescribable.

The expression

***"what an Inevitable Day it is"***

lays further emphasis on the Greatness of the Events to happen on that
Great Day, such that the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) is
addressed by saying that he is unaware of the qualities of that Day. It
is true, since the prisoners in this world like us are incapable of
understanding the Events to occur on the Day of Resurrection in the same
manner that understanding the affairs of this world in incomprehensible
to the fetus in the mother’s womb.

Some Qur’an exegetes maintain that the word al-haqqa implies the
torments with which obdurate sinners and the vain disobedient are
inflicted of a sudden. It is worthy of note, however, that the
contextual meaning of following Verses stand in further harmony with the
excruciating and destructive torments inflicted upon the peoples of ‘Àd,
Thamud, Lot, and Pharaoh.

In his exegetic work, ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim also says that the word serves as
a warning against sending down Divine torments like the one mentioned
regarding the people of Pharaoh elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^3]:

***"So Allah saved him from the evils that they plotted against him,
while an evil torment (haqq) encompassed Pharaoh’s people."***[^4]

Surah al-Haqqa – Verse 4
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ وَعَادٌ بِالْقَارِعَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. Thamud and ‘Àd peoples denied Divine destructive torment!***

The blessed Verse in question treats of the dire fates of the people who
denied the Day of Resurrection and sending down Divine torment, saying
that the peoples of Thamud and ‘Àd belied Divine destructive torments.

Surah al-Haqqa – Verse 5
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا ثَمُودُ فَأُهْلِكُوا بِالطَّاغِيَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. As for Thamud, they were destroyed by an incontrollable
torment!***

the people of Thamud inhabited a mountainous region between Hijaz and
Syria. Prophet Salih was Divinely appointed to call them onto obedience
to God Almighty, though they never believed and rose against him and
even asked him to send down the promised torment if he was true in his
Prophetic Call.

Then, a destructive lightning was sent down on them. Their firmly built
palaces and mansions trembled in a few moments and destroyed them all
and their dead bodies were cast on the ground. It is worthy of note that
the Holy Qur’an mentions an incontrollable torment as the cause behind
their destruction.

Such incontrollable torment (al-taghiya) is also mentioned as

***"earthquake" (rajfa)***

in 7:78,

***"lightning" (sa‘iqa)***

in 41:13, and

***"loud cry" (sayha)***

in 11:67 which all imply the same meaning, since lightning is
accompanied by loud noises and makes the stricken place tremble and it
is an uncontrollable torment.

Surah al-Haqqa – Verse 6
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا عَادٌ فَأُهْلِكُوا بِرِيحٍ صَرْصَرٍ عَاتِيَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. And as for ‘Àd, they were destroyed by a furious violent gale!***

The blessed Verse proceeds with the dire fate of the people of ‘Àd who
inhabited the land of Ahqaf in the Yemen in the Arabian Peninsula. They
were tall of stature and robust and had verdant lands and fertile
gardens. Their Prophet was Hud (as).

They were so disobedient that God Almighty sent them an excruciating
torment, as mentioned in these blessed Verses, and caused their
perdition.

The blessed Verse is saying:

*"And as for ‘Àd, they were destroyed by a furious, violent, and
venomous gale.”*

The Arabic word sarsar is applied to cold, harsh, and venomous gales.
The three meanings are mentioned by Qur’an exegetes and the word may
imply their entirety. The Arabic feminine adjectival form ‘atiya,
deriving from ‘-t-w ("to be raging"), denotes raging (of storms and
gales) and uncontrollable, disobedient to the norms of regular winds and
breezes rather than disobedient to God Almighty.

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 7-8
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَخَّرَهَا عَلَيْهِمْ سَبْعَ لَيَالٍ وَثَمَانِيَةَ أَيَّامٍ حُسُومًا
فَتَرَى الْقَوْمَ فِيهَا صَرْعَىٰ كَأَنَّهُمْ أَعْجَازُ نَخْلٍ
خَاوِيَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَلْ تَرَىٰ لَهُم مِّن بَاقِيَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. Which Allah imposed the [raging gale] on them for seven nights and
eight days in succession and had you been there you would have seen
those men lying overthrown and dead, as if they were hollow trunks of
date palms!***  
***8. Do you see anyone of them remaining?***

These blessed Verses make another depiction of the destructive gale,
saying that God Almighty made it predominant over such people for seven
nights and eight days consecutively. The Arabic adverb of manner husuman
denotes destroying the remnants of something and at times it connotes
cauterizing the wound.

The contextual meaning of the blessed Verse 7 reflects that the raging
gale shattered eradicated the prosperous habitation of such great people
in seven nights and eight days consecutively in the manner of a rotten
and hollow trunk of a palm tree.

The similitude is of interest since it implies their high stature as
well as their being eradicated and the hollowness and vulnerability
against Divine torments, such that the harsh gales could easily move
them. The Arabic adjectival form khawiya originally denotes empty and it
is employed in the sense of hungry people, the stars devoid of rain
(according to pre-Islamic Arabs), and empty walnuts.

The blessed Verse 8 poses a question:

***"Do you see anyone of them remaining?"***

There is no trace of the people of ‘Àd and the ruins of their prosperous
habitations, majestic edifices, and fertile farms.

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 9-10
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَاءَ فِرْعَوْنُ وَمَن قَبْلَهُ وَالْمُؤْتَفِكَاتُ بِالْخَاطِئَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعَصَوْا رَسُولَ رَبِّهِمْ فَأَخَذَهُمْ أَخْذَةً رَّابِيَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. And Pharaoh and those before him and the inhabitants of the
shattered cities [of the people of Lot] who had committed grave
sins.***  
***10. And they disobeyed their Lord’s Messenger, so He inflicted them
with a strong chastisement.***

Following a reference made to the dire fate of the peoples of ‘Àd and
Thamud, the blessed Verses in question make mention of other peoples
like those of Pharaoh, Lot so that the awakened may take lessons of
them, saying that Pharaoh and those before them and the inhabitants of
the shattered habitations (the people of Lot) had committed grave sins.

The Arabic word khati’a denotes mistake and error and it herein connotes
different sins like polytheism, disbelief, wrong doing, and corruption.
The plural nominal form mu’tafikat (sg. mu’tafika) implies revolution
and undergoing drastic changes and it herein alludes to the habitations
of the people of Lot which were shattered owing to a severe earthquake.

The phrase

***"before him" (min qablihi)***

alludes to the peoples antedating Pharaoh, like that of Shu‘ayb and
tyrants like Nimrod (Namrud).

The blessed Verse 10 is saying that they rose against their Lord’s
Messenger (as) as a consequence of which God Almighty inflicted them
with a severe torment. The people of Pharaoh rose against Prophet Moses
(as) and Aaron.

The inhabitants of Sodom rose against Prophet Lot (as). Likewise, other
peoples disobeyed their Prophets (as) and each of them were inflicted
with a different kind of severe torment: the people of Pharaoh were
drowned in the Nile which was the source of life, blessing, and
prosperity in their land; the people of Lot with a strong earthquake
followed by a downpour of rocks leading to their perdition.

The Arabic word rabiya, cognate with riba’ ("usury money, interest"),
denotes increase and surplus and it herein connotes a very strong and
severe torment.

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 11-12
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا لَمَّا طَغَى الْمَاءُ حَمَلْنَاكُمْ فِي الْجَارِيَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِنَجْعَلَهَا لَكُمْ تَذْكِرَةً وَتَعِيَهَا أُذُنٌ وَاعِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. When the water rose beyond its limits, We carried you on the
floating Ark.***  
***12. That We might make it an admonition for you and that it might be
retained by the retaining ears.***

The blessed Verses allude to the fate of the people of Noah (as) and
their excruciating torment, saying:

*"When the water overflew its banks, we embarked you on the Ark."*

The water burst such that leaden clouds enwrapped the sky and heavy
showers of rain were sent such that torrents were seemingly pouring down
from the sky. Fountains appeared on the earth as well. Thus, everything
was drowned, the gardens, farms, palaces, and the mansions of the
disobedient people. The believers were only saved by embarking upon the
Ark with Prophet Noah (as).

The verbal form

***hamalnakum ("we carried you")***

alludes to our ancestors, since had they not been saved, we would not
have come into being.

The blessed Verse 12 makes a reference to the main goal behind such
chastisements, saying:

***"That We might make it an admonition for you and that it might be
retained by the retaining ears."***

In other words, God Almighty never willed to take vengeance, but the
goal behind their being inflicted with torments is to lead people on the
path of spiritual growth such that they tread the path of development
and perfection and attainment to union with the desired object.

The Arabic verbal form

***ta‘iyaha ("retain it")***

derives from w-‘-a originally denoting preserving something in the
heart, but owing to semantic generalization, any vessel was termed as
wa‘a, since it contains something. The verbal form is herein used in the
sense of the ears listening to the truths and preserving them. In other
words, one may at times hears something undesirable by one ear and the
undesirable utterance instantly goes out of the other.

The idiomatic expression "it goes into one ear and out the other"
implies the same sense in colloquial expressions. However, one may at
times reflect upon something and preserve it in his heart and make use
of it as the lamp shedding light on his life. The latter sense is
intended herein.

Finally, it is narrated in many authoritative tradition and exegetic
sources from the Noble Prophet (S) as saying that he invoked God
Almighty to make ‘Ali’s (as) ears listen to the truths and preserve
them.

Imam ‘Ali (as) is reported as saying:

*"Thereafter I never consigned to oblivion whatever I heard from Allah’s
Messenger (S), but I remembered his words at all times."*[^5]

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 13-15
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ نَفْخَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحُمِلَتِ الْأَرْضُ وَالْجِبَالُ فَدُكَّتَا دَكَّةً وَاحِدَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَوْمَئِذٍ وَقَعَتِ الْوَاقِعَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. Then, as soon as the Trumpet shall be blown with one
blowing.***  
***14. And the earth and the mountains shall be removed and crushed with
a single crushing.***  
***15. Then, on that Day shall the Event befall.***

Resuming the opening blessed Verses treating of the Day of Resurrection,
the blessed Verses in question discuss the evens of such great
Resurrection by moving and awakening expressions familiarizing man with
the greatness of the events to befall in future.

The blessed Verse 13 is saying that

***"as soon as the Trumpet shall be blown with one blowing."***

As mentioned above, it is reflected in the Holy Qur’an that the end of
this world and the beginning of the world to come shall be of a sudden
accompanied by a very loud sound which is intended by

***nafkha sur ("blowing of Trumpet"),***

deriving from blowing in the trumpet to marshal the army in alertness
and dispatching them to their resting place by two different sounds: one
for their rest and sleep and the other to be marshaled whereby they move
in lines toward their garrisons and elsewhere.

The blessed Verse reflects that the end of this world and the beginning
of the one to come against Divine Omnipotence is as easy as blowing in a
trumpet and all the inhabitants of the heaven and the earth die of a
sudden through one single Command and they will be raised and prepared
to receive the Rewards and Chastisements of based on Record of deeds
through another Command.

The qualities of the Trumpet, the manner of blowing in it, the times of
blowing, and the interval between them were copiously treated above
under 39:68, but it would solely suffice herein to make mention that the
Trumpet shall be blown into twice: one for death and the other for being
raised.

Qur’an exegetes are not unanimous concerning the reference herein to the
former or the latter, since the some of the following blessed Verses
stand in further conformity with the former and some with the latter.
Generally speaking, these blessed Verses stand in further conformity
with the former, i.e. blowing into the Trumpet to put an end to this
world.

The blessed Verse 14 is saying that

***"when the earth and the mountains shall be removed and crushed with a
single crushing."***

The Arabic word dakk denotes smooth land, but since leveling it requires
crushing, it connotes severe crushing. Nonetheless, according to some
lexicographical sources, the Arabic word literally denotes crushing and
demolishing and since they entail leveling, the word connotes such
sense.

At any rate, the word herein implies severe crushing of the mountains
and uneven pieces of land such that they are demolished and leveled
instantly.

The blessed Verse 15 is saying that

***"on that Day, a great event shall befall in the world and
Resurrection shall be actualized.***

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 16-17
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَانشَقَّتِ السَّمَاءُ فَهِيَ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَاهِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمَلَكُ عَلَىٰ أَرْجَائِهَا ۚ وَيَحْمِلُ عَرْشَ رَبِّكَ فَوْقَهُمْ
يَوْمَئِذٍ ثَمَانِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. And the heavens shall be rent asunder, for that Day it shall be
frail and shall collapse.***  
***17. And the angels shall be on the sides of the heaven [and shall be
prepared for assignments], and eight angels shall, on that Day, bear the
Throne of your Lord above them.***

The blessed Verse 16 is saying that not only the mountains and the earth
shall be shattered, but the heavens shall be rent asunder and be frail.
Such awe inspiring even shall affect celestial spheres and bodies, since
they shall be shattered, scattered, and rent asunder in spite of their
previous firmness.

It is mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^6]:

*"Then, when the heaven shall be rent asunder and it shall be rosy like
molten oil."*

In other words, the earth and the heaven shall be destroyed and instead
another world, far better, exalted, and perfect, shall be established on
the ruins.

The blessed Verse 17 says:

***"And the angels shall be on the sides of the heaven."***

The Arabic nominal form arja’ is the plural form of raja’ denoting
"side." The singular nominal form malak ("angel") connotes plurality, as
if on that Day, the angels shall be prepared like agents surrounding a
field to receive orders to fulfill some assignment. They seemingly stand
in lines surrounding the heavens expecting the Commands of the Truth.

The blessed Verse proceeds to say that

***"eight angels shall, on that Day, bear the Throne of your Lord above
them."***

Such bearers of the Divine Throne are not explicitly specified to be
angels or otherwise, but the contextual meaning of the blessed Verse
reflects that they are angels, though it is not specified whether they
are eight angels or eight small or large groups of them.

According to Islamic traditions, the bearers of the Divine Throne are
four angels or four groups of them, but the number shall be twofold on
the Day of Resurrection. In this vein, it is narrated from the Noble
Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) that now they are four in number,
though they shall be reinforced by a twofold increase thus making eight
of them.[^7]

What is the Divine Throne and who are these angels?

The Arabic word

***‘arsh ("throne")***

does not herein denote a royal and hence material throne, but as it was
mentioned above on the explanation of the word, it connotes the
constituents of the world of existence as the Throne of Divine
Sovereignty whose affairs are being fulfilled by the angels.

It would be of interest to make mention of a tradition as per which the
eight bearers of Divine Throne on the Day of Resurrection will be four
angels from the first ones and four from the last ones. The first four
consist of Prophets Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus (as) and the last
ones are Muhammad (S), ‘Ali, Hasan, and Husayn (as).[^8]

The expression may reflect their exalted rank of intercession with God
Almighty for the first and the last time, though interceding with God
Almighty shall be on the behalf of those deserving the same; however,
such interpretation reflects the semantically broad scope of the word

***"Throne."***

Now, if the eight bearers of the Divine Throne be eight groups, it may
be the case that groups of angels and those of the Prophets and Friends
of God Almighty be vested to fulfill the task. Thus, the affairs of the
Day of Resurrection shall be vested with the angels and the Prophets,
though they shall all rest on Divine Command.

It is needless to say, however, that the events to befall on the Day of
Resurrection may not be precisely known to us let alone the affairs of
the bearers of the Divine Throne on that Day to us, the inhabitants of
this limited and shadowy world. It would suffice to say that we merely
behold the reflections from afar in the light of Divine Signs and
Verses, though the Truth about such affairs shall be perceived on that
Day.

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 18-24
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَئِذٍ تُعْرَضُونَ لَا تَخْفَىٰ مِنكُمْ خَافِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِيَمِينِهِ فَيَقُولُ هَاؤُمُ
اقْرَءُوا كِتَابِيَهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي ظَنَنتُ أَنِّي مُلَاقٍ حِسَابِيَهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهُوَ فِي عِيشَةٍ رَّاضِيَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُطُوفُهَا دَانِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا أَسْلَفْتُمْ فِي الْأَيَّامِ
الْخَالِيَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. That Day shall everyone be brought to Divine Threshold, not a
secret of you shall be veiled.***  
***19. Then, as for him who shall carry his Record in his right hand
shall say [happily and proudly]: "Here! Read my Record!***  
***20. Certainly, I did believe that there shall be the Resurrection Day
and I shall meet my Record of Deeds!"***  
***21. So he shall be in a life, well-pleasing.***  
***22. In a lofty Paradise,***  
***23. The fruits in bunches whereof shall near at hand.***  
***24. Eat and drink at ease for the deeds you did in days past!***

It was mentioned above under the preceding blessed Verses that

***"blowing into the Trumpet"***

shall occur twice.

Upon the first blowing, all animate entities shall die and the world of
existence shall perish; though it shall be upon the second that a new
world shall be created and mankind and angels shall be revived.

As mentioned above, the opening of the blessed Verses reflect the first
blowing where as the close thereof is indicative of the second.
Proceeding with the same issue, the blessed Verses in question open by
saying that on that Day, you shall be all brought before God Almighty
and none of our deeds shall be concealed.

The passive verbal form

***tu‘radhun ("you shall be presented")***

derives from ‘-r-dh denoting present or show something in commercial
transactions or otherwise.

It is worthy of note that men and other creatures are permanently before
Divine Threshold, though it shall be reflected with further clarity on
the Day of Resurrection. For instance, Divine Sovereignty over the world
of existence is everlasting, though such Sovereignty shall be in utmost
clarity on that Day.

The clause

***"not a secret of you shall be veiled"***

may reflect that the secrets shall be revealed on that Day, as it is
mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^9]:

***"The Day when all the secrets shall be revealed,"***

thus disclosing all secret deeds, characters, and intentions.

Some Qur’an exegetes maintain that such event shall be even far greater
than the shattering of the mountains and rending asunder of celestial
spheres and bodies, since it shall be the Day of utter disgrace for the
evil doers and unrivaled honor and glory for the believers, when men
shall appear with disclosed secrets and intentions and nothing shall be
concealed from anyone on that Day. It may so make a reference to Divine
Omniscience on that Day. God Almighty knows best.

Thus, the blessed Verse 19 says:

***"Then, as for him who shall carry his Record in his right hand shall
say [happily and proudly]: "Here! Read my Record!"***

He is seemingly quite happy that he is granted innumerable Bounties and
Guidance.

He is totally grateful and utters

***"Praise be to Allah."***

Summarizing his greatest glory, in the blessed Verse 20 he says:

***"Certainly, I did believe that there shall be the Resurrection Day
and I shall meet my Record of Deeds!"***

The Arabic past verbal form

***thanantu ("I did certainly believe")***

reflects that such person is saying that he has been rewarded Divine
Bounties for his certitude regarding the Day of Resurrection.

It is true that belief in reckoning of the deeds on the Day of
Resurrection imbues man with the spirit of fearing God Almighty and
feeling the responsibility vested with him. It is the most significant
factor in man’s spiritual growth.

Some of these Divine Rewards are enumerated in the following blessed
Verse 21:

***"So he shall be in a life, well-pleasing."***

Everything is included in the blessed Verse, though further
clarification is to be found in the blessed Verse 22:

***"In a lofty Paradise…"***

so exalted that it is unimaginable, unseen, and unheard.

The blessed Verse 23 says:

***"The fruits in bunches whereof shall near at hand,"***

by which it is intended to say that there shall be no toil in picking
the fruits, nor shall be any impediment to approaching the fruitful
trees. All Divine Bounties shall be accessible to the people of
Paradise. The Arabic word qutuf denotes picked fruit.

The blessed Verse 24 includes an affectionate address to the people of
Paradise by God Almighty, saying:

***"Eat and drink at ease for the deeds you did in days past!"***

The point is that all these great Divine Bounties are well-measured
bestowed upon people for their deeds done in this world and sent in
advance. It is noteworthy of such insignificant deeds entail such
Rewards in the light of Divine Graciousness and Mercy.

It is reflected in numerous traditions that the blessed Verse 19
concerns Imam ‘Ali or him and his followers, though it is one of the
obvious implications of the blessed Verse whose contextual meaning may
not be restricted in semantic scope.

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 25-29
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِشِمَالِهِ فَيَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي
لَمْ أُوتَ كِتَابِيَهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ أَدْرِ مَا حِسَابِيَهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا لَيْتَهَا كَانَتِ الْقَاضِيَةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنِّي مَالِيَهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلَكَ عَنِّي سُلْطَانِيَهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. But as for him who shall be given his Record in his left hand, he
shall say: "I wish that I had not been given my Record!***  
***26. And that I had never known how my Account is!***  
***27. "Would that it had been my end!***  
***28. "My wealth has not availed me;***  
***29. "My power has gone from me!"***

The preceding blessed Verses treated of the people of the right hand
(ashab yamin) whose record of deeds shall be given to their right hands
proudly calling the people on the Day of Resurrection, requesting them
to read their records, and finding their abode in the everlasting
Paradise. Nonetheless, the blessed Verses in question treat of their
opposites, i.e. the people of the left hand. A comparison between the
two groups may shed further light on their situations.

The blessed Verse 25 is saying that one whose record of deeds will be
given in his left hand will say:

*"I wish I had never been given my record of deeds!"*

According to the following blessed Verse, he will say:

*"I wish I had never been aware of my reckoning."*

It is in the blessed Verse 27 that he says:

***"Would that it had been my end!"***

He intends to say that thus he could put an end to his dire fate. Such
person, upon witnessing that all his past vices are disclosed, cries
regretfully on that Day of Disclosure (yawm al-buruz), the Day of
Uncovering (yawm al-thuhur) and wishes that he could totally sever his
ties with his vicious past. He wishes that God Almighty would put an end
to his miserable life and thereby deliver him from such ignominious
fate.

The same theme is also reflected elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^10]:

***"We have warned you against an imminent torment; the Day when man
shall see that [the record of his deeds] which his hands have sent forth
and the disbeliever shall say: "Woe unto me! Would that I were dust [and
never a man]!"***

According to the blessed Verses 28 and 29, he will say:

***“[Not only] has my wealth not availed me, but also my power has gone
from me!"***

In short, neither wealth nor high positions shall be of any avail on
that Day, since such miserable creatures shall stand with utmost
ignominy and disgrace before Divine Just Tribunal. There shall be no
source of aspiration, nor any means of deliverance from such dire fate.

The Arabic noun sultan used in the blessed Verse 29 is taken by some
Qur’an exegetes in the sense of an argument leading to victory, namely
the people of the left hand shall not be able to produce an argument to
justify their past deeds before Divine Threshold.

Some exegetes also maintain that sovereignty and rule are not intended
by sultan herein, since all the people who set foot in Hell were not
rulers and sultans, but the word is indicative of checking one’s self
and having control over one’s life. At any rate, the blessed Verses in
question serve as lessons for those relying on wealth and positions
despite having been entangled with vanity, neglect, and sins.

*O Lord, do not chastise us for our deeds!*

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 30-37
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذُوهُ فَغُلُّوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ الْجَحِيمَ صَلُّوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ فِي سِلْسِلَةٍ ذَرْعُهَا سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعًا فَاسْلُكُوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ كَانَ لَا يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَحُضُّ عَلَىٰ طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَيْسَ لَهُ الْيَوْمَ هَاهُنَا حَمِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِنْ غِسْلِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّا يَأْكُلُهُ إِلَّا الْخَاطِئُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. [It shall be said:] "Seize him and fetter him;***  
***31. Then, throw him into Hell.***  
***32. "Then, fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy
cubits!"***  
***33. He used not to believe in Allah, the Most Great,***  
***34. And urged not people to feed the poor.***  
***35. So no intimate friend has he here on this Day to protect
him,***  
***36. Nor any food except pus and blood.***  
***37. None shall eat the food except the sinners.***

Resuming the treatment of the state of the people of left hand who
receive their record of deeds in their left hand and moan and wish they
had been dead, the blessed Verses in question make a reference to some
of their torments on the Day of Resurrection. According to the blessed
Verse 30, the angels of torment are commanded to seize and fetter him.

The Arabic verbal form

***ghuluhu ("fetter him")***

derives from gh-l-l ("fetter, shackle"). The angels are ordered in the
following blessed Verse to throw him into hellfire.

The blessed Verse 32 says:

***"Then, fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy
cubits!"***

The Arabic nominal for silsila denoting chain is cognate with tasalsul
denotes trembling and shivering, since chains tremble and move.

The expression

***"seventy cubits"***

may connote multiplicity and multitude, since the number seventy
oftentimes implies large quantity and massive amount. It may have been
used in its literal sense. At any rate, on that Day, sinners shall be
shackled by such long chains thereby enwrapping them.

Some Qur’an exegetes maintain that such long chains are not for
individual sinners but each group will be fettered by one chain. Such
chastisement following a reference to shackles and fetters stands in
further conformity with the preceding blessed Verses.

The Arabic word dhira‘ denotes the length of finger tips to the elbow
which equals approximately half a meter. Such natural unite of
measurement was used by Arabs.

Nonetheless, some exegetes hold that such dhira‘ is different from
commonly used units, such that the former is applied to far lengthier
units and all the people of the Hell shall be fettered by the same. It
is worthy of note, once again, that the affairs of the Day of
Resurrection may not be fully depicted by us, the inhabitants of this
world, though they are dimly depicted by Qur’anic Verses and traditions.

The Arabic adverbial form thumma herein reflects that following being
thrown into Hell, the sinners shall be entangled with a chain measuring
seventy cubits as another chastisement for them whose causes are
enumerated in the following two blessed Verses, namely 33 and 34,
saying:

***"He used not to believe in Allah, the Most Great, and urged not
people to feed the poor."***

Despite being called by Messengers to believe in Allah, they belied them
and thereby had severed their ties with their Maker.

The blessed Verse 34 is saying that they did not urge people to feed the
needy and thus they had severed their ties with creatures. Thus, the
main cause of their misery lies in the severance of ties with the
Creator and the Creation.

The expression explicitly reflects that the majority of religious
obligations, devotions, and injunctions may be summarized in the twain,
thereby indicating the extraordinary significance of feeding the poor
and the dependence of such great and humane act upon faith. In this
vein, it is said that disbelief in the worst of beliefs and
niggardliness is the worst of vices.

It is worthy of note that it is said:

***"he did not urge others to feed"***

rather than he did not feed, reflecting that firstly, feeding one in
need may never solve the problems of the needy, but others are supposed
to be urged to act likewise such that it turns into a customary practice
to feed the poor and those in need; secondly, one may not afford to feed
the needy but he may be capable of urging others to act accordingly;
thirdly, the niggardly are not only unwilling to offer others some of
their possessions, but they are uninterested in other people’s
liberality and generosity.

The blessed Verses 35 and 36 say:

***"So no intimate friend has he here on this Day to protect him, nor
any food except pus and blood."***

It is noteworthy that their deeds and chastisements stand in total
conformity. It is owing to severing their ties with their Maker that
they may not find any intimate friends there. Likewise, they are fed but
pus and blood, since they refrained from feeding the needy in this world
but they ate the most delicious food themselves.

In his Mufradat, Raghib says that the Arabic word ghislin denotes the
water by which the disbelievers wash their bodies in Hell, but it is
commonly accepted that the word is applied to the pus and blood oozing
from the bodies of the people of Hell and Raghib might have intended the
same.

The word

***ta‘am ("food")***

stands in conformity with the same sense.

The blessed Verse 37 says:

***"None shall eat the food except the sinners."***

Some exegetes maintain that the Arabic word khati’ is applied to one who
intentionally commits vices, but mukhatti’ is one who intentionally or
inadvertently commits evil deeds. Thus, such food served in Hell is for
those who intentionally disobey God Almighty and tread the path of
polytheism, disbelief and niggardliness.

In this vein, Sa‘sa‘a ibn Suhan, a companion of Imam ‘Ali (as), is
reported as saying:

*"An Arab came unto ‘Ali (as) inquiring about the meaning of the blessed
Verse*

***"None shall eat the food except the sinners,"***

*though instead of*

***khati’un ("sinners"),***

*he said khatun ("walker, wayfarer").*

*Thus, he inquired:*

*"All people walk, but shall they be served the same food by Allah?"*

*The Noble Imam (as) replied smilingly:*

*"O Arab! The accurate form is khati’un ("sinners").*

*The Arab asked:*

*"You are true. O Commander of the Faithful! Allah never chastises those
who have not sinned."*

*The Noble Imam turned toward Abu al-Aswad who was a man of letters and
said:*

*"Non-Arabs have converted to the Islamic faith. Take measures so that
they may improve their knowledge of Arabic. Thus, Abu al-Aswad
introduced nominative, accusative, and genitive markers (raf‘, nasb,
jarr).*[^11]

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 38-43
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِمَا تُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا لَا تُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هُوَ بِقَوْلِ شَاعِرٍ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا بِقَوْلِ كَاهِنٍ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. So, I swear by whatever you see,***  
***39. And by whatever you see not,***  
***40. That this Qur’an is the word of a noble Messenger.***  
***41. It is not the word of a poet. Little is that you believe!***  
***42. Nor is it the word of a soothsayer. Little is that you
remember!***  
***43. But this is the word sent down by the Lord of the worlds.***

Resuming the discussions mentioned in the preceding blessed Verses
regarding Resurrection and the fates of the believers and disbelievers,
the blessed Verses in question clearly treat of the Holy Qur’an and
Prophetic Call, so that the discussions on Prophetic Call and
Resurrection complement each other.

The blessed Verses 38 and 39 say:

***"I swear by whatever you see and by whatever you see not."***

It is commonly held that the Arabic particle la in such instances are
non-lexical and emphatic. Instances of swearing by Allah’s Name and
otherwise abound in the Holy Qur’an.

The clauses

***"what you see and what you see not"***

are of a broad semantic scope embracing whatever is seen or not seen by
mankind. In other words, it encompasses all the world of "intuitive
perception" and the "unseen."

Qur’an exegetes have suggested other possibilities regarding the
exegesis of the twain blessed Verses, e.g.

***"what you see"***

and

***"what you see not"***

make references to the world of creation and the Creator, outward and
inward Bounties, mankind and angels, bodies and spirits, or this world
and the Hereafter. However, as it was mentioned above, the broad
semantic range of the twain impedes the restriction of its contextual
meaning.

Therefore, the visible and the invisible are embraced by the oath,
though its reference to God Almighty is rather a remote possibility,
since juxtaposition of the Creator and the creation would rather be
unbefitting, particularly owing to the fact that the Arabic particle ma
is applied to insensible beings.

It is worthy of note, however, that the expression clearly reflects that
many a thing may not be seen by the outward eyes. Modern science
supports the argument as per which intelligible constitute a limited
number of entities and what lies beyond the horizon of perception, e.g.
colors, sounds, tastes, and waves, exceed further in terms of number.

Astronomers maintain that approximately five thousand celestial bodies
are visible, though the invisible bodies exceed billions in number. The
sound waves audible to man are limited, but there are thousands of sound
waves inaudible to mankind. The colors perceptible to us are seven in
number, though it is a proven fact that innumerable color spectra of
ultraviolet and infrared imperceptible to human eyes.

Likewise, the world is imbued with innumerable microscopic organisms
thousands of which are contained in a drop of water. It would be quite
unfortunate to be confined in the perceptible world unaware of or
belying what lies beyond perception. The world of spirits, proven by
rational and even experiential proofs, constitutes an expanse far
greater than our physical world. Thus, how may one confine himself
within the perceptible world?

The blessed Verse 40 treats of the apodosis of such great and unique
oath, saying that this Qur’an is the word of a noble Messenger (S). The
Arabic word rasul herein indubitably connotes the Noble Prophet of the
Islamic faith (S) rather than Gabriel, since the following blessed Verse
in clearly indicative of such implication.

We know that the Holy Qur’an is the Word of God Almighty, but the Noble
Prophet (S) is the one who imparted it, hence the emphasis laid on his
Prophetic Call. Thus, the Divine Message is conveyed by the Noble
Prophet of the Islamic faith (S).

The blessed Verse 41 is saying that this Qur’an is not the word of a
poet, though little is that you believe.

The next blessed Verse says:

***"Nor is it the word of a soothsayer. Little is that you remember!"***

These two blessed Verses refute the unfounded ascriptions to the Noble
Prophet (S) by the polytheists and opponents in alleging that he is a
poet and the Qur’anic Verses are poetry. They also claimed at times that
he was a soothsayer intending to say that he was in contact with jinn
and devils to whom they revealed the secrets of the unseen by words
embellished by rhythm and rhyme.

By such unfounded claims they meant that the Qur’an contained
intelligence regarding the unseen and it was adorned with rhythmical
sentences. They were unaware of the fact that the words of the Noble
Prophet (S) and those of soothsayers and poets were essentially
different in nature.

It is also noteworthy that the clauses

***"Little is that you believe!"***

and

***"Little is that you remember!"***

herein ensure those who witness Divine Revelation through its clear
tokens but call it poetry and poetry and fail to believe in it.

The blessed Verse 43 lays particular emphasis on the same by saying that
this Qur’an is revealed by the Lord of the worlds, hence it is neither
poetry, nor soothsaying, nor the product of the Noble Prophet’s (S)
thought, nor the word of Gabriel, but it is Divine Revelation sent down
unto the pure heart of the Noble Prophet (S).

There are eleven Qur’anic attestations of the same theme with slight
variations. It is also worthy of note that the Holy Qur’an was revealed
in time, since the Arabic word tanzil implies the Revelation of the Holy
Qur’an in time in its entirety within a period of twenty three years
following its Revelation in its entirety unto the Noble Prophet’s (S)
heart on the night of Ordainment (qadr) wherewith Divine Injunctions
were imparted to the people through the Noble Prophet of the Islamic
faith (S).

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 44-47
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ تَقَوَّلَ عَلَيْنَا بَعْضَ الْأَقَاوِيلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَأَخَذْنَا مِنْهُ بِالْيَمِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ لَقَطَعْنَا مِنْهُ الْوَتِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا مِنكُم مِّنْ أَحَدٍ عَنْهُ حَاجِزِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***44. And if he had forged a false saying concerning Us,***  
***45. We would have certainly seized him,***  
***46. And We would have certainly cut off his artery,***  
***47. And none of you could have withheld Us from [chastising] him nor
could he render him support.***

The Arabic verbal form

***taqawwala ("he had forged a saying")***

connotes false ascription of words. Watin the life artery and if it is
severed, man will die instantly.

***"Seizing by the right hand"***

connotes power, since the right hand is stronger than the left hand. The
point raised herein is that when God Almighty mentions such Words about
His Messenger, others are supposed to take lessons and stand in awe as
to their words and deeds.

At any rate, resuming the discussions on the Holy Qur’an, the four
blessed Verses in question (44-47) produce original evidence as to the
originality of the Holy Qur’an as Divine Revelation, saying that had the
Noble Prophet (S) had forged false sayings concerning God Almighty, He
would have certainly seized him forcefully severing his life artery and
no human being would have been able to impede the same nor could have
anyone render him aid.

The Arabic nominal form hajizin is the plural for of hajiz ("impediment,
obstacle").

Surah al-Haqqa – Verses 48-52
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ لَتَذْكِرَةٌ لِّلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّا لَنَعْلَمُ أَنَّ مِنكُم مُّكَذِّبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ لَحَسْرَةٌ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ لَحَقُّ الْيَقِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَبِّحْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. And this is a Reminder for the God fearing.***  
***49. And We know that there are some amongst you that belie it,***  
***50. And it shall entail regret for the disbelievers.***  
***51. And it is an absolute truth with certitude.***  
***52. Thus, glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most Great.***

The blessed Verse 48 further emphasizes that the Holy Qur’an is
certainly some admonition to the God fearing, since they are prepared to
be absolved of their sins and tread the path of Truth, since they seek
the Truth. However, those who have not attained to such degree of
fearing God Almighty may never avail themselves of Qur’anic teachings.
The profound and extraordinary impression engendered by the Holy Qur’an
serves as further evidence of its veracity.

The blessed Verse 49 is saying that God Almighty is All-Aware that some
people belie Divine Revelation, though such obdurate denial may never
affect its veracity, since the God fearing and seekers of Truth are
reminded by it and notice the reflection of Divine Signs in it and
thereby tread steadfastly on the Path of Allah.

Thus, in the same manner that availing oneself of some brilliant light
requires opening one’s eyes, one is supposed to open up his heart in
order to avail oneself of the Light of the Holy Qur’an.

The blessed Verse 50 is saying that the Holy Qur’an shall lead to the
disbelievers’ regret. They belie it today, but tomorrow, on the Day of
Emergence or Day of Disclosure, which is the Day of Regret, they shall
comprehend that they have lost such great Bounty owing to their obduracy
and have thereby caused so many excruciating torments for themselves.
They shall compare the exalted positions of the believers and their
disgrace and shall regret, biting their own hands in a rage.

The same motive is attested elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^12]:

***"And remember the Day when the wrong doer shall bite at his hands,
saying: ‘Would that I had taken a path with the Messenger.’"***

Impeding others from falsely imagining that entertaining doubts or
belying of the opponents have a touch of certainty on their side, the
blessed Verse 51 says:

***"And it is an absolute truth with certitude."***

The Arabic term

***haqq al-yaqin ("absolute truth")***

is regarded by some Qur’an exegetes as a genitive construction denoting
reference to oneself, since the Truth is the essence of certitude (‘ayn
al-yaqin) and vice versa; as it is said masjid al-jami‘ ("mosque of
congregation") and yawm al-khamis ("the fifth day, i.e. Thursday") which
are instances of appositive genitive (idhafa bayaniyya).

However, it would be further befitting the contextual meaning to say
that it is an instance of the relation between the qualified and the
qualifier. In other words, the Holy Qur’an is Absolute Certitude.
Certitude consists of different degrees, at times engendered by rational
arguments, an instance of which is some smoke observed from afar
engendering the certitude as to the existence of fire, despite not
having seen the fire per se.

This is termed knowledge by certitude (‘ilm al-yaqin). We may at times
approach the fire and perceive its flames through our visual sense and
thereby reinforce our certitude, which is termed the essence of
certitude (‘ayn al-yaqin).

We may even approach further and touch the flames and thereby attain to
a higher degree of certitude, termed haqq al-yaqin ("absolute truth").
Now, the blessed Verse in question is saying that the Holy Qur’an is of
the last type of certitude, i.e. absolute truth, though it is denied by
those blind in their hearts.

The blessed Verse 52 which is the closing Verse of the Chapter is saying
that thus, glorify your Lord the Greatest and glorify him of any defect
or flaw. It is worthy of note that the Holy Qur’an is depicted by four
Attributes: it is sent down by the Lord of the Words; it is a Reminder
for the God fearing; it leads disbelievers to regret their lost
opportunities; and it is the absolute Truth. They address everybody, the
God fearing, the disbelievers, and those close to God Almighty
respectively.

Now, let us turn toward a few traditions concerning the greatness and
significance of glorification.

According to a Prophetic tradition:

*"One of the most loved words before God Almighty is to say: 'Praise be
to my Lord Who is Glorified."*[^13]

It is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) as saying:

*"One who glorifies God Almighty thirty times a times, He will remove
seventy kinds of afflictions from him the least of which is
poverty.*[^14]

In this vein, the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) is reported
as saying:

*"Saying 'Glorified is Allah' fills half of the scale of deeds, saying
'Praise be to Allah' brims the scale of deeds, and saying 'Allah is the
Greatest' fills the distance between the heaven and the earth."*[^15]

It is narrated from Allah’s Messenger (S) as saying:

*"One who utters 'Glorified is the Great Allah and Praised is He' makes
a palm tree grow for him in Paradise."*[^16]

It is also narrated from Allah’s Messenger (S) on the authority of
‘À’isha that Allah’s Messenger (S), before his demise, repeatedly
uttered:

*"O Lord! Glorified are You! I praise You and ask You for
forgiveness."*[^17]

[^1]: Tafsir Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the blessed Chapter in question.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: 40:45

[^4]: ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim’s exegetic work, vol. 2, p. 383.

[^5]: Tafsir Qurtubi, vol. 10, p. 6743; Abu al-Futuh Razi’s exegetic
work as well as others, e.g. Majma‘ al-Bayan, Ruh al-Bayan, Ruh
al-Ma‘ani, and al-Mizan, under the blessed Verses in question. The
tradition is quoted by Ibn Maghazili Shafi‘i. (Islamiyya edition, p.
265) In this vein, 16 traditions are to be found in Ghayat al-Maram on
the authority of Sunni and Shi‘i transmitters. In his Tafsir al-Burhan,
Muhaddith Bahrani, on the authority of Muhammad ibn ‘Abbas, reports that
30 traditions have been narrated in this vein through Sunni and Shi‘i
transmission sources. It is the great merit of the great leader of the
Islamic faith, Imam ‘Ali (as), that he was the treasury of the Noble
Prophet’s (S) secrets and the inheritor of his knowledge in its
entirety. Consequently, following the sad demise of Allah’s Messenger
(S), his proponents and opponents found in him a safe haven upon
encountering scholarly issues in the Muslim community and asked him to
provide them with solutions whose accounts are reported in details in
historical sources.

[^6]: 55:37

[^7]: ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim’s exegetic work, vol. 2, p. 384.

[^8]: Tafsir Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 346.

[^9]: 86:9

[^10]: 78:40

[^11]: Jalal al-Din Suyuti, Tafsir Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 263.

[^12]: 25:27

[^13]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 1, p. 466.

[^14]: Saduq’s Amali, p. 55.

[^15]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 309.

[^16]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 1, p. 459.

[^17]: Muslim’s Sahih, vol. 1, p. 351.


