Surah Nuh, Chapter 71
=====================

**(Noah)**

**Section (juz’) 29**

**Number of Verses: 28**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

The blessed Chapter, revealed in Mecca, has 28 Verses and depicts the
ongoing struggle of the Truth against Falsehood and treats of the
stratagems to be employed by the followers of Truth.

The Merit of Reciting the Chapter
---------------------------------

It is narrated from the Noble Prophet of the Islamic Faith (S) as
saying:

*"One who recites Surah Nuh shall be ranked amongst the believers
enwrapped by the light of Prophet Noah’s Call."*[^1]

Summary of the Account of Noah (as). The detailed account of Prophet
Noah (as) is attested in Chapters 7, 11, 23, 26, 54, and 71, though it
is most elaborated in Chapter 11, Verses 25-49.

His people claimed that he was in error;

***("The leaders of his people said: 'Indeed, we see you in plain
error"***[^2]***);***

they mocked him at all times;

***("And when those who disbelieved see you, they take you not except
for mockery"***[^3]***);***

they called him light-headed and insane;

***("insane and scatterbrained"***[^4]***).***

However, the Prophet (as) still provided them with guidance. Like other
Prophets (as), he acted upon his Prophetic call by calling people unto
monotheism, obedience to the Divinely appointed leader, and fear of God
Almighty.

He began by warning his people against disobedience to God Almighty and
imparted his Prophetic call to all people, though confronted with their
obduracy, he cursed them;

***("And Noah said: 'My Lord! Leave not one of the disbelievers on the
earth!"***[^5]***).***

Noah (as) is the only Prophet whose term of Prophetic call (950 years)
is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an. He is the only Prophet (as) whose
family and people disobeyed him. He also lived the longest lifespan.

Ordered by God Almighty, he built the Ark to rescue all animals and
serve as a means of human deliverance from the tempest, hence the
designation the second father of mankind (Àdam Abu al-Bashar al-Thani).

He was also the first Messenger of Allah upon whom the Book was revealed
and he was appointed to impart his Prophetic call to the world (ulu
al-‘azm).[^6] God Almighty had the earth drowned owing to his curse. He
was the only Prophet (as) whose followers did not exceed ten in number
after the passage of 950 years.

Surah Nuh – Verses 1-3
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحًا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ أَنْ أَنذِرْ قَوْمَكَ مِن
قَبْلِ أَن يَأْتِيَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي لَكُمْ نَذِيرٌ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاتَّقُوهُ وَأَطِيعُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. We sent Noah to his people and We said: "Warn your people before
there comes to them an excruciating torment."***  
***2. He said: "O my people! I am a plain warner unto you,***  
***3. "That you should worship Allah, refrain from disobeying Him, and
obey me."***

As mentioned above, the blessed Chapter in question treats of Noah’s
(as) Prophetic call thereby providing those who tread the Path of God
Almighty with points of interest concerning calling people unto the
Truth, particularly while confronting obdurate peoples.

Opening with Prophethood, the blessed Verse 1 says:

***"We sent Noah to his people and We said: 'Warn your people before
there comes to them an excruciating torment.'"***

Such excruciating torment may be this worldly or otherworldly. Both
kinds of torment are further befitting, though the torments in this
world better fit the context herein. The Prophets (as) were both warners
and bearers of glad tidings, but the emphasis laid on warning is owing
to the fact that it oftentimes entails stronger effects, in the same way
that emphasis is laid on warning and chastisement the world over in
order to guarantee law enforcement.

According to the second blessed Verse, Prophet Noah (as) was the first
Prophet upon whom Divine Scriptures had been revealed and his Prophetic
call addressed the world. Upon receiving Divine Command, he went to his
people and said that he was a plain warner to them.

The blessed Verse 3 is saying that the goal of his Prophetic call was to
urge people to worship God Almighty alone, fear Him, and obey his
commands which were Divine Commands.

Prophet Noah (as) thus summarized his Prophetic call: worship the One
God, Fear Him, Obey His Commands and Injunctions imparted which
consisted of doctrines, moral principles, and Divine Law. At any rate,
following the Prophets (as) is consequent to believing in monotheism,
fear of God Almighty, obeying the Prophet (as), and believing in
Resurrection.

Surah Nuh – Verse 4
-------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَغْفِرْ لَكُم مِّن ذُنُوبِكُمْ وَيُؤَخِّرْكُمْ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ
مُّسَمًّى ۚ إِنَّ أَجَلَ اللَّهِ إِذَا جَاءَ لَا يُؤَخَّرُ ۖ لَوْ
كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. "He will forgive you of your sins and respite you to an appointed
term. But, when the term of Allah comes, it cannot be delayed, if you
but knew."***

Believing in God Almighty and doing righteous deeds entail absolution of
sins, longevity, and warding off afflictions.

There are two appointed times for man, one which may be postponed
through worshipping and fearing God Almighty and it may be precipitated
by committing vices and sins and the other is the irrevocable appointed
time (ajal mussama).

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that longevity and death are due to
beneficence and committing sins respectively and there are few people
who live a natural life or die a natural death.[^7] People are
encouraged in this blessed Verse to answer to the Divine Call and be
absolved of their sins.

It is worthy of note that the noble dictum "Islam covers and obliterates
what precedes it" is not exclusive to the Islamic faith but is prevalent
in all Divine and monotheistic religions. The blessed Verse proceeds to
say that God Almighty will respite you to an appointed time and will
prolong your lifetime and will ward off the torment from you.

The point is that when the Divine, inevitable, and irrevocable appointed
time comes, it may not be postponed, though some people are unaware of
it. The topic in question may be further clarified by an illustration.

Man is physically incapable of enjoying an everlasting life and even if
all bodily organs function properly, they, particularly the heart, will
stop functioning through exhaustion. Nonetheless, following sanitary
rules and taking timely precautions may prolong human lifetime, though
failing to act upon such rules may seriously shorten it.

The blessed Verse in question clearly reflects that committing sins
entails shortening of lifetime, since it is said that if you believe and
fear God, He will prolong your life and postpone your death. Taking the
severe blows inflicted upon human body and soul by committing sins, the
point in question becomes further facile to comprehend.

The point is accorded particular emphasis in Islamic traditions. A
detailed discussion regarding conditional and irrevocable appointed
terms may be found above under 6:2. Now, let us turn toward three
traditions narrated concerning the consequences of committing sins and
worshipping God Almighty.

1. It is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) saying:

*"If you intend to prolong your lifetime, maintain your blood ties
[namely take good care of your relatives, and if you wish that God
maintains your health, pay alms in abundance."*[^8]

2. It is narrated from Imam Baqir (as) as saying:

*"Maintaining blood ties entails five advantages: acceptance of deeds
[before God Almighty], affluence, warding off afflictions, convenience
in the reckoning of one’s deeds [on the Day of Resurrection], and
longevity."*[^9]

3. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*"The deeds of those who tell the truth are accepted. One who entertains
good intentions will receive increase in his Provision. He who does good
to his family will be granted longevity."*[^10]

Surah Nuh – Verses 5-9
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي دَعَوْتُ قَوْمِي لَيْلًا وَنَهَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمْ يَزِدْهُمْ دُعَائِي إِلَّا فِرَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنِّي كُلَّمَا دَعَوْتُهُمْ لِتَغْفِرَ لَهُمْ جَعَلُوا
أَصَابِعَهُمْ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَاسْتَغْشَوْا ثِيَابَهُمْ وَأَصَرُّوا
وَاسْتَكْبَرُوا اسْتِكْبَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ إِنِّي دَعَوْتُهُمْ جِهَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ إِنِّي أَعْلَنتُ لَهُمْ وَأَسْرَرْتُ لَهُمْ إِسْرَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. He said: "O my Lord! I have called my people unto you night and
day,***  
***6. "But all my calling added nothing but to their flight from
truth.***  
***7. And every time I called unto them to believe in You that You might
forgive them, they thrust their fingers into their ears, covered
themselves up with their garments, persisted in their denial, and
magnified themselves in arrogance.***  
***8. "Then, I called to them openly to believe in and serve You.***  
***9. And I proclaimed to them in public and I have appealed to them in
private.***

Proceeding with the account of Prophet Noah’s (as) Prophetic Call unto
his people, he is quoted in the blessed Verses in question as
complaining to his Lord. His words are quite instructive and may be
great advantages to all propagators of religious doctrines.

The Prophet (as) is quoted as saying that he called his people unto God
Almighty and he spared no efforts in providing them with guidance,
though his call was of no avail and added nothing but to their flight
from truth.

It is a source of surprise that calling toward something may entail
flight from it. Nonetheless, taking into account the fact that obdurate
enemies of truth, upon hearing the calls of the men of God, deny the
truth and such denial makes them further distance from God Almighty and
reinforces their disbelief and hypocrisy.

The same theme is treated elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^11]:

***"And We send down of the Qur’an that which is a healing and a mercy
to those who believe and it increases the wrong doers nothing but
loss."***

According to the Glorious Qur’an, the Divine Revelation is a guide to
the God fearing[^12], since human heart must entertain at least a
flicker of fear of God Almighty so that it may pave the path for the
acknowledgement of the truth. It is the stage of the spirit of seeking
the truth and preparedness for acknowledging Divine Truth.

The blessed Verse 7 quotes Prophet Noah (as) as saying that whenever he
called unto them to believe in God Almighty so that He might forgive
their sins, they thrust their fingers in their ears, covered themselves
with their garments, persisted in their denial and disbelief, and their
vanity waxed.

They thrust their fingers in their ears in order not to hear the truth
and covering themselves with their garments implies that they made
further attempts not to listen to the true call and thereby kept
themselves from looking at the Noble Prophet Noah (as).

They made attempts to impede themselves from hearing his words and
looking at him. It is quite surprising that such people had reached such
extent of animosity against the truth such that they deprived themselves
from seeing, hearing, and thinking.

The blessed Verse reflects that Prophet Noah (as) untiringly strove in
his long life to call his people unto embracing faith.

It is also indicative of one of the most significant factors behind
their misfortune, namely their arrogance and vanity, since they regarded
it far below their league to obey a man, be he Allah’s Messenger, whose
hear was imbued with knowledge and fear of God Almighty. Such vanity and
arrogance have at all times served as impediments to treading the path
of Truth and the adverse consequence thereof are reflected throughout
history in the lives of the disbelievers.

In the blessed Verses 8 and 9, Prophet Noah (as) proceeds with his
invocations before Divine Threshold, saying that he called his people to
monotheism and worshipping God and called them in public with a loud
voice to believe in Allah.

He was not content with his public calls, but he expressed the truth of
monotheism and belief in God Almighty in private as well. It lies in
human nature that when he treads the path of falsehood such that
corruption is rooted in his heart and turns into his second nature, he
will be indifferent toward the calls of the men of God and clear Divine
Calls.

Not only the people of Prophet Noah (as) thrust their fingers in their
ears and wrapped themselves with their garments to deprive themselves of
Truth, but also there were people at the time of the Noble Prophet of
the Islamic faith (S) that upon hearing his sweet voice when reciting
Qur’anic Verses made such clamor and havoc that they impeded others from
hearing him.

According to a Qur’anic blessed Verse[^13]:

***"And those who disbelieve say: 'Listen not to this Qur’an and make
noise in the midst of its recitation so that you may overcome.'"***

In this vein, it is narrated in the account of the bloody battle at
Karbala’ that when the lord of the martyrs, Imam Husayn (as), intended
to provide the foes with guidance and thereby wake them up, they created
such havoc that people could barely hear him.[^14]

Similar form of confrontation are to be witnessed today when we notice
that the followers of falsehood have created such atmosphere with
harmful recreations, devastating kinds of music, narcotics, and the like
that people, particularly the youth, may not be able to hear the sweet
voice of the men of God and the blessed Qur’anic Verses.

Surah Nuh – Verses 10-14
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُلْتُ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفَّارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرْسِلِ السَّمَاءَ عَلَيْكُم مِّدْرَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُمْدِدْكُم بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَيَجْعَل لَّكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ
وَيَجْعَل لَّكُمْ أَنْهَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا لَكُمْ لَا تَرْجُونَ لِلَّهِ وَقَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ خَلَقَكُمْ أَطْوَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. "I said [unto them]: 'Ask forgiveness from your Lord since He is
Oft-Forgiving.***  
***11. 'So that he sends Bountiful rain unto you in abundance,***  
***12. 'And give you increase in affluence and offspring and bestow upon
you verdant gardens and rivers."***  
***13. What is the matter with you that you do not believe in Divine
Glory.***  
***14. While He has created you in stages.***

In these blessed Verses, Prophet Noah (as) proceeds with his impressive
guidance addressing his obdurate and disobedient people by encouraging
them and bearing glad tidings to them and promising them that if they
desist from committing sins and disbelief, God Almighty will grant them
His Bounties and Graciousness.

Addressing his Lord, he is saying that he asked them to ask their
Oft-Forgiving Lord for forgiveness of their sins. The blessed following
Verse reflects that He not only absolves them of their sins, but upon
turning toward him they will be granted Bountiful rain from the heaven
in abundance and thus they will be granted abundant material and
spiritual Bounties.

The Arabic adverbial form

***midraran ("showering abundant rain")***

derives from d-r-r denoting to flow plentifully.

It is noteworthy that the blessed Verse s saying that abundant rain will
be sent to you from the heaven, but as it will be the rain of Divine
Mercy, it will entail neither devastation nor harm, but it will lead to
verdure and abundance everywhere.

The blessed Verse 12 is saying that He will increase your affluence and
offspring and will bestow verdant gardens and rivers upon you. Thus,
five great material Bounties, timely, plentiful, and fruitful rain and
rivers, and one great spiritual Bounty, absolution from the impurities
of disbelief and disobedience, are promised to them. Believe in and
fearing God Almighty, as reflected in the Holy Qur’an, entail prosperity
in this world and the Hereafter.

According to a number of traditions, upon turning away from Prophet
Noah’s (as) call, such obdurate people were entangled with famine; a
large number of their offspring were destroyed; most of their women
became sterile. Prophet Noah (as) said unto them that if they believed
their afflictions would be removed, but they paid him no heed and
persisted in their obduracy and disobedience such that the final torment
was sent to them and cause their total perdition.

Surah Nuh – Verses 15-16
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَوْا كَيْفَ خَلَقَ اللَّهُ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَ الْقَمَرَ فِيهِنَّ نُورًا وَجَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ سِرَاجًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. Know you not how Allah has created the seven heavens one above
another?***  
***16. And has made the moon a light therein, and made the sun a
brilliant lamp?***

Against the obdurate polytheists, Prophet Noah (as) produced his logical
and meaningful arguments in the preceding blessed Verses to make them
acquainted with the depth of their being so that they may experience the
material realm. He called them to behold and examine the Divine Signs in
the great world of creation and intended to familiarize them with the
spiritual realm.

Beginning with the heaven, he asks:

***"Know you not how Allah has created the seven heavens one above
another?"***

The Arabic verbal noun tibaq denotes comparison and contrast at times
implies being laid on top of something and also harmony and accord
between two things; both latter senses are herein intended. The former
reflects that the seven heavens are created one above another as
mentioned above in the exegesis regarding the seven heavens.

An exegesis worthy of note is that whatever is observed by armed and
unarmed eyes concerning the celestial bodies constitutes the first
heaven on which six other heavens are created one above the other,
defying modern science, though man may be able to discover those
surprising and vast realms one after the other in future.

The seven heavens were treated in details above under 2:29.

The blessed Verse 16 says that God Almighty has made the moon a light
therein, and made the sun a brilliant lamp. It is true that billions of
brilliant celestial bodies, far more brilliant than the suns and moon in
our solar system exist in the seven heavens, but the latter two are of
significance in our life since they give light in the day and at night
respectively.

The Arabic word

***siraj ("lamp")***

implying the sun and the word

***nur ("light")***

reflect that the light of the sun are engendered from within in the
manner of a lamp, but that of the moon is from without, since it is a
reflection of the former.

Thus, the word nur, which is broader in its semantic domain, is applied
herein. Such different expressions are reflected elsewhere in the Holy
Qur’an. Further details in this respect were mentioned under 10:5.

Surah Nuh – Verses 17-20
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ أَنبَتَكُم مِّنَ الْأَرْضِ نَبَاتًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ يُعِيدُكُمْ فِيهَا وَيُخْرِجُكُمْ إِخْرَاجًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ بِسَاطًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِّتَسْلُكُوا مِنْهَا سُبُلًا فِجَاجًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. And Allah has brought you forth from the earth.***  
***18. Then He will return you into it, and bring you forth.***  
***19. And Allah has made for you the earth a wide expanse,***  
***20. That you may go about therein in broad roads and its valleys and
reach your desired destination.***

The blessed Verse 17 turns, once again, toward the creation of man,
saying:

***"Allah has brought you forth from the earth."***

The employment of inbat denoting "to germinate, cause to sprout, make
grow, cultivate" applied to man reflects that man was created from dust
and all his nourishment by which he grows comes from the earth,
directly, like vegetables, seeds, and fruit, or indirectly, like meat;
furthermore, there exist many a similarity between man and plants and
many a laws as to nourishment, growth, and reproduction also apply to
mankind. Such expression is quite meaningful reflecting that in terms of
Guidance, the Lord is not only an Instructor, but also He is like a
Gardener who places the seeds of plants in the required environment so
that their potentialities may come into view.

The blessed Verse 18 treats of Resurrection, a complicated issue to the
polytheists and disbelievers, saying that He will return you to the
earth from which you grew and he brings you forth once again. In other
words, man is from dust and will return to it.

The One who was All-Able to create you from dust is Omnipotent to revive
you after having been turned into dust. Such transfer from Divine Unity
to Resurrection is quite interestingly reflected in the blessed Verses
in question bearing witness to the intimate interrelation between the
twain.

Thus, Prophet Noah (as) produces arguments as to Divine Unity and
Resurrection to convince the disbelievers to pay heed to the system of
creation.

The blessed Verse 19 further treats of the Sings of Divine Unity in this
vast world, saying:

***"Allah has made for you the earth a wide expanse."***

It is not that rough and uneven to impede rest and travel, not that soft
to impede movement, not that hot to cause inconvenience, not that cold
to impede a comfortable life. Besides, all the requirements of life are
available on its expanse.

The blessed Verse 20 is saying that man may travel through the valleys.
The vast expanse of the earth allows man to pass through vast paths and
valleys and reach his desired destinations. The Arabic word fijaj is
applied to a valley located between two mounts and also to vast roads.

Thus, Prophet Noah (as) herein alludes to Divine diverse Bounties on the
earth as well as human body and life serving as arguments proving Divine
Unity and Resurrection. However, such warnings, tidings, and logical
arguments may not impress such obdurate people, as they persisted in
their denial and disbelief whose consequences are to follow in the
following blessed Verses.

Surah Nuh – Verses 21-22
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ نُوحٌ رَّبِّ إِنَّهُمْ عَصَوْنِي وَاتَّبَعُوا مَن لَّمْ يَزِدْهُ
مَالُهُ وَوَلَدُهُ إِلَّا خَسَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَكَرُوا مَكْرًا كُبَّارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. [Having despaired of guiding them] Noah said: "My Lord! They have
disobeyed me and followed those whose wealth and children availed them
of no increase but loss.***  
***22. "And they have plotted a mighty plot.***

Having made his utmost efforts for hundreds of years, he noticed that
his people, except for a few, persisted in polytheism, idolatry, error,
and corruption. Thus, he despaired of providing them with guidance and
turned toward Divine Threshold invoking God Almighty to chastise them.

As reflected in the blessed Verses in question, Prophet Noah (as) said:

*"O Lord! They disobeyed me and followed one whose affluence and
offspring availed him of no increase but loss."*

Reference is here made of the leaders of his people whose only
privileges consisted of affluence and offspring, though they rendered no
service to the community, failed to be humble against their Creator, and
employed their means to further plunge into corruption, error, vanity,
and disobedience.

Taking a glance at the history of mankind, we witness that many a leader
of different peoples were like them whose sole privileges rested in
amassing unlawful possessions and fathering unworthy offspring and left
no stone unturned to disobey God Almighty and His Messengers (as) and to
impose their false beliefs upon the deprived who led their lives in
bondage.

The blessed Verse 22 is saying that such leaders who were in error and
led others astray employed vile stratagems. The Arabic intensified
adjectival form kubbar, cognate with kibr ("arrogance, vanity"), is here
in employed indefinitely and implies that they had planned satanic
stratagems and ploys to lead people astray and impede them from
acknowledging Noah’s (as) Prophetic call.

The nature of such stratagems and ploys is unknown, but they seemingly
concerned idolatry, since as per certain traditions, idolatry was
unprecedented before Noah (as) and his people were its progenitors.

It is reported that between the times of Adam (as) and Noah (as), there
were righteous people in whom people were interested. Satan and his
followers took advantage of such interest and urged them to fashion
sculptures of those righteous men.

The prospective generations consigned to oblivion the historical context
of sculpturing such figures and imagined that such righteous figures
were supposed to serve as objects of worship. Thus, they preoccupied
themselves with worshipping them and the wrong doing arrogant thereby
led them to servitude and bondage and aforesaid vile ploys worked.

Surah Nuh – Verses 23-25
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لَا تَذَرُنَّ آلِهَتَكُمْ وَلَا تَذَرُنَّ وَدًّا وَلَا
سُوَاعًا وَلَا يَغُوثَ وَيَعُوقَ وَنَسْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ أَضَلُّوا كَثِيرًا ۖ وَلَا تَزِدِ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا ضَلَالًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِّمَّا خَطِيئَاتِهِمْ أُغْرِقُوا فَأُدْخِلُوا نَارًا فَلَمْ يَجِدُوا
لَهُم مِّن دُونِ اللَّهِ أَنصَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. "And they said: 'You shall not leave your gods: you shall leave
neither Wadd, nor Suwa‘, nor Yaghuth, nor Ya‘uq, nor Nasr.***  
***24. "And indeed they led many astray. And [O Allah]: Grant no
increase to the wrong doers save error."***  
***25. [At last] because of their sins they were all drowned and were
made to enter Hellfire and they found none to help them save Allah.***

As reflected in the blessed Verse 23 their chiefs asked them to neither
abandon their gods and idols nor to acknowledge Noah’s (as) Prophetic
call to monotheism, worshipping an imperceptible god. They laid
particular emphasis on five idols: Wadd, Suwa‘, Yaghuth, Ya‘uq, and Nasr
and bade them not to desist from worshipping them.

In the blessed Verse 24, Noah (as) says:

***"O Lord! These vain and astray leaders led many people astray. O
Lord! Grant the wrong doers no increase but error."***

It is noteworthy that increasing error for the wrong doers and tyrants
implies their deprivation from Divine Grace which leads them to misery.
It may also connote some chastisement as a consequence of their wrong
doing thereby God Almighty deprives them of the light of faith
substituting it with disbelief.

It is noteworthy that error and disbelief are consequences of their
misdeeds, though their entanglement with error and disbelief is
attributed to God Almighty, since all the acts of His creatures are
within His Command and it is not in contradiction with Divine Wisdom
concerning belief, disbelief, guidance, and error, as such instances do
not impede free will.

Finally, the blessed Verse 25 is indicative of the final Words of God as
per which they were drowned consequent to having committed sins and they
were made to enter the Fire.

They found none but Him to render them assistance against Divine Wrath.
The contextual meaning of the blessed Verse in question reflects that
having been drowned they immediately were made to enter the Fire. It is
a source of surprise that they were made to immediately leave water and
enter the Fire which is that of purgatory, since a number of Qur’anic
Verses reflect that some people will be chastised in purgatory
posthumously.

According to some traditions, "grave" may be either a Garden in Paradise
or a pit in Hell. It may also be indicative of the Fire on the Day of
Resurrection, but since Resurrection shall indubitably come before long,
the Arabic passive verbal form

***udkhilu ("they were made to enter")***

appears in the past tense.[^15]

Some Qur’an exegetes have also suggested that reference is herein made
to the Fire in this world, such that God Almighty willed that a Fire
appeared in the midst of the tempest and devoured them.[^16]

Surah Nuh – Verses 26-27
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ نُوحٌ رَّبِّ لَا تَذَرْ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ
دَيَّارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكَ إِن تَذَرْهُمْ يُضِلُّوا عِبَادَكَ وَلَا يَلِدُوا إِلَّا
فَاجِرًا كَفَّارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. And Noah said: "O Lord! Leave not one single disbeliever on the
earth!***  
***27. "Since if You leave them, they will mislead Your servants, and
they will beget none but the wicked and the disbelieving.***

Resuming his complaints to God Almighty from his people, Noah curses
them, saying:

***"O Lord! Leave not one single disbeliever on the earth!"***

He uttered these words when he had totally been despaired of guiding
them. He had made his last attempts to call them to monotheism, though
only a few believed in him. The Arabic prepositional phrase

***‘ala ’l-ardh ("on the earth")***

reflects that Prophet Noah’s (as) call as well as the following tempest
and the torment were worldwide. The Arabic word dayyar, cognate with dar
("house, abode") implies one who dwells in a house. The word is also
employed to imply general negation, as in "There is no soul in the
house."

In the blessed Verse 27, Prophet Noah (as) produces arguments to
substantiate his curse, saying

***"Since if You leave them, they will mislead Your servants,"***

reflecting that the curses of the Prophets (as), like that of Noah (as),
did not spring from wrath, hatred, and vengeance, but he cursed his
people after the passage of nine hundred and fifty years of imparting
his Prophetic Call and forbearance and it was consequent to his total
despair that he uttered the curse.

How did Prophet Noah (as) notice that they were not prone to believe in
God Almighty, but they led God’s servants astray and their offspring
will be corrupt and they will lead others to error and corruption?

Some have suggested that God Almighty had granted him the knowledge of
the unseen, though some have suggested that it had been thus revealed
unto Noah (as), as reflected in the Holy Qur’an[^17]:

***"And it was revealed to Noah (as): 'None of your people will believe
except those who have already believed. Therefore, be not sorrowful
owing to what they used to do.'"***

The same theme is to be found in numerous traditions.[^18] It has been
also suggested that Noah (as) had thus inductively concluded by taking
into account the natural courses of the event, since his people had been
called by his impressive expressions, though they failed to believed and
he could not set his hopes on guiding them; furthermore, no suggestions
could stand against Qur’anic Verses and traditions.

The Arabic word fajir is applied to one who commits vile deeds. The
Arabic intensive present participial form kaffar denotes going to
extremes in disbelief. The difference between the twain rests in
practical and doctrinal aspects respectively, as it is reflected in the
blessed Verses in question that Divine torments are based on Wisdom.

The prospective generations of a corrupt people who lead others to error
and corruption will be jeopardized by their vile deeds. Such people are
not entitled to live according to Divine Wisdom and they will be
entangled with afflictions such as tempest, lightning, and earthquake,
hence their effacement from the face of the earth, as the tempest
obliterated Noah’s (as) vile and wrong doing people from the face of the
earth.

Granted that such Divine Law is not particular to any specific time and
place, we are supposed to bear in mind that Divine torments are in store
for the corrupt people who lead others astray and whose offspring are
disobedient and disbelievers, since there is no exception to the Law and
it is a Divine Tradition that such vile people meet their dire fate.

The Arabic clause

***yudhdhilu ‘ibadaka ("they mislead Your servants")***

may suggest the scarcity of those who believed in Prophet Noah’s (as)
Prophetic call in such long time, though it may also imply that the
deprived are forced by their wrong doing leaders to follow their
beliefs.

Surah Nuh – Verse 28
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيَّ وَلِمَن دَخَلَ بَيْتِيَ مُؤْمِنًا
وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَلَا تَزِدِ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا
تَبَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. "O Lord! Forgive me and my parents and all those who enter my
home as believers and all the believing men and women. And to the wrong
doers grant no increase but perdition!"***

In the closing blessed Verse, Prophet Noah (as) thus invoked God
Almighty:

***"O Lord! Forgive me and my parents and all those who enter my home as
believers and all the believing men and women. And to the wrong doers
grant no increase but perdition!"***

Invoking God Almighty for forgiveness reflects that he is saying that he
spent hundreds of years in incessantly imparting his Prophetic call and
forbore all the hardships in the Cause of Allah, though he had to invoke
God Almighty to forgive him since he might had had neglected some
priority (tark ula).

The invocation reflects that Noah (as) did not regard himself as totally
free from blame. Such friends of God Almighty, after making some many
efforts in Allah’s Cause still think that they might have made mistakes,
but, unlike people who within their small capacities magnify themselves
to the extent that they regard God Almighty obliged to grant them His
Grace, Allah’s friends are never entangled with vanity and egotism.

Prophet Noah (as) actually invoked God Almighty to forgive some people:
himself, lest he had neglected some priority, his parents as a token of
his gratitude for their troubles, for all those few who believed in his
Prophetic call and embarked the Ark which was his home, and finally for
all believing men and women in the world down the centuries, thus
establishing his ties with all the believers worldwide and at all times.
Nonetheless, he accords particular emphasis to the destruction of the
wrong doers, implying that they deserved such torment.

It is worthy of note that Qur’an exegetes are not unanimous concerning
the precise sense of the Arabic nominal form bayt in this context, but
different exegetes have suggested four senses: private home, mosque,
Noah’s Ark, his religion.

It is narrated in this vein from Imam Sadiq (as) as saying that the word
bayt herein implies

***"guardianship" (wilaya),***

namely whoever enters it he enters the Prophets’ homes.[^19] It is
narrated from Imam Ridha (as) that the mosque at Kufa was Noah’s abode
and those who entered his home are in fact those who enter the mosque at
Kufa.[^20] According to a tradition, Imam Husayn (as) did not slay some
of the foes at Karbala’, saying that he would not slay the foes whose
offspring would include the believers.[^21]

Finally, the story of Prophet Noah (as) possesses copious reflection in
Arabic and Persian literature and particular emphasis has been accorded
to the tempest and his Ark as a means of deliverance for the
believers.[^22] It is also worthy of note that his name designates that
he invoked God Almighty and lamented for many years so that his people
might be impressed and believe in God Almighty.

*O Lord! When the tempest of Your Wrath comes, deliver us by the Ark of
Your Mercy and that of the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) and
his Ahl al-Bayt (as).*

It is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) as saying:

*"My Ahl al-Bayt are like Noah’s Ark, whoever embarks it will find
salvation and whoever denies it will be destroyed."*[^23]

[^1]: Tafsir Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 359.

[^2]: 7:60

[^3]: 21:36

[^4]: 54:9

[^5]: 71:26

[^6]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, tradition 32391.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 5, p. 140.

[^8]: Safinat al-Bihar, p. 599.

[^9]: Usul Kafi, tradition no. 3.

[^10]: al-Khisal, p. 42.

[^11]: 17:82

[^12]: 2:2

[^13]: 41:26

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 45, p. 8.

[^15]: Fakhr Razi’s Tafsir, vol. 30, p. 145.

[^16]: Abu al-Futuh Razi’s Tafsir, vol. 11, p. 280.

[^17]: 11:36

[^18]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 428.

[^19]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 429.

[^20]: Tafsir Nur, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^21]: Mawsu‘a Kalimat al-Imam Husayn, p. 505.

[^22]: For further details, see the relevant references, e.g. A‘lam
Qur’an; Farhang-i Qisas-i Qur’an; Dihkhuda’s Lughatnama, s.v. Nuh; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 11.

[^23]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a; al-Gadir; Kanz al-‘Ummal; Ihqaq al-Haqq;
‘Abaqat al-Anwar; and other tradition sources.


