Surah al-Jinn, Chapter 72
=========================

**(The Jinn)**

**Section (juz’) 29**

**Number of Verses: 28**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

The blessed Chapter, revealed in Mecca, has 28 Verses. The designation
of the Chapter reflects that it mainly treats of invisible creatures,
the jinn, their belief in the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S),
the Holy Qur’an, and Resurrection, and the groups of believers and
disbelievers amongst them. The closing Verses concern the knowledge of
the unseen unknown to all beings besides God Almighty.

The Merit of Reciting the Chapter
---------------------------------

It is narrated from the Noble Imam Sadiq (as) as saying:

*"One who recites Surah al-Jinn many a time will never suffer from the
evil eye, magic, and ploys of the Jinn and magicians but will accompany
Muhammad (S). O Lord! I believe in none besides him and I will never
turn toward anyone but him.*[^1]

Reciting the blessed Chapter would be a prelude to the awareness of its
contextual meaning and applying it to one’s life.

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 1-2
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ أَنَّهُ اسْتَمَعَ نَفَرٌ مِنَ الْجِنِّ فَقَالُوا
إِنَّا سَمِعْنَا قُرْآنًا عَجَبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَهْدِي إِلَى الرُّشْدِ فَآمَنَّا بِهِ ۖ وَلَنْ نُشْرِكَ بِرَبِّنَا
أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. Say: "It has been revealed unto me that a group [of jinn] listened
to me. Then, they said: 'We have heard a wondrous Qur’an,***  
***2. 'That guides to the Straight Path. Thus, we have believed in it
and we shall never associate anything with our Lord [in worship].***

### Occasion of Revelation

It is reported that the Noble Prophet (S) departed Mecca for the bazaar
of ‘Ukkath in Ta’if, aiming to call unto people to convert to the
Islamic faith, though it was of no avail. On his way back to Mecca, he
stayed for the night at a vale called Jinn where he recited Qur’anic
Verses.

A group of the jinn heard him and converted to Islam and returned to
other jinn to propagate the faith.[^2] Another occasion of Revelation is
reported on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas as per which the Noble Prophet
(S) was reciting Qur’anic Verses while performing his morning canonical
prayers.

Upon hearing the Qur’anic Verses, a group of the jinn, engaged in
investigating the reasons lying behind the disconnection of heavenly
messages, said that the same was the reason. They returned unto other
jinn and called them to convert to Islam.[^3]

Having said the above, now let us turn to the exegesis of the Qur’anic
Verses.

The first blessed Verse says:

***"Say: 'It has been revealed unto me that a group [of jinn] listened
to me. Then, they said: 'We have heard a wondrous Qur’an."***

The clause

***"It has been revealed"***

reflects that the Noble Prophet (S) had not seen the jinn in person, but
his awareness of their listening to the Qur’anic Verses had derived from
Divine Revelation. It is noteworthy that the blessed Verse in question
clearly indicates that the jinn possess reason, understanding,
perception, and linguistic knowledge, and they feel the responsibility.

They attend to the differences between "wondrous" Words and ordinary
speech. Addressed by the Qur’anic Verses, they feel the obligation to
propagate the Word of Truth. The aforesaid points reveal some of the
characteristics of these invisible living creatures, though further
characteristics of theirs will be mentioned below in the same
discussion.

The jinn had a reason to regard the Holy Qur’an as

***"wondrous Words,"***

since the Holy Qur’an is wondrous in terms of tone, impressiveness, and
significance.

The Noble Prophet (S) who was Divinely appointed to impart the Message
was an illiterate person from amongst the illiterate people. Such Words,
in terms of their outward and inward aspects, are wondrous and different
from any other speech. Thus, the jinn confessed to the Inimitability of
the Holy Qur’an.

The blessed second Verse is saying that the jinn proceeded to discuss
further points, as reflected the following blessed Verses in twelve
clauses opening with the Arabic emphatic conjunction an.

The blessed Verse is saying that the jinn said that the Holy Qur’an
leads everyone to the Straight Path; thereby we believe in it and
associate nothing with our Lord in worship. It is worthy of note that
the Arabic nominal form rushd encompasses a comprehensive and broad
semantic scope including any privilege. The word denotes a straight,
even, and clear path leading t happiness and perfection.

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 3-5
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ تَعَالَىٰ جَدُّ رَبِّنَا مَا اتَّخَذَ صَاحِبَةً وَلَا
وَلَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ كَانَ يَقُولُ سَفِيهُنَا عَلَى اللَّهِ شَطَطًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا ظَنَنَّا أَن لَّن تَقُولَ الْإِنسُ وَالْجِنُّ عَلَى اللَّهِ
كَذِبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. 'And that He, exalted is the Majesty of our Lord, has taken
neither a wife nor a child.***  
***4. 'And that the foolish amongst us uttered against Allah unworthy
words.***  
***5. 'And we thought that men and jinn would not utter a lie against
Allah.***

Following making mention of their belief in God and negating any kind of
polytheism, the jinn thus proceeded with Divine Attributes, saying:

*"Exalted is the Majesty of our Lord and Glorified is He of any
similitude to the creatures and any defect and He has never adopted any
wife or child.”*

The Arabic nominal form jadd is a polysemous word whose numerous senses
include: majesty; intensity; seriousness; share, lot; and becoming new.
In terms of etymology, according to Raghib in his Mufradat, the root
denotes "sever, cut off."

The connotations

***"majesty"***

is owing to the fact that any majestic being is separated from others.
Likewise, other denotations and connotations of the word may be taken
into account; for instance, the word denotes "grandfather" owing to his
exalted rank or his advanced years.

At any rate, the connotation of

***"majesty"***

is consistent with lexicographical sources and its applications.

It is also worthy of note that the jinn herein lay particular emphasis
on the point that God Almighty has adopted neither a wife nor a child,
which seemingly implies the negation of the superstitious beliefs held
by the Arabs in that they maintained that angels were fathered by god
and born of his wife adopted from amongst the jinn.

The same theme is reflected in the exegesis of another Qur’anic
Verse[^4]:

***"And they have invented a kinship between Him and the jinn."***

The blessed Verse 4 says:

***"[They said that they confessed] that the foolish amongst us uttered
unworthy words against Allah."***

The Arabic word safih may connote a collective sense in that some of the
foolish amongst the jinn maintained that god had married and had
fathered children. They had deviated from the Path of Truth by uttering
such unworthy words and associating partners with God in worship.

Many a Qur’anic exegete maintain that the word herein alludes to Iblis
who following disobedience to Divine Commands attributed false
ascriptions to God Almighty and even objected the Divine Command as to
Adam’s (as) prostration before Him and regarded it insensible and deemed
himself superior to Adam (as).

Since Iblis had been a jinni, all the believing jinn express their
hatred for him and consider his words to be unfounded. He was seemingly
a scholar and an ascetic, but scholars who fail to act upon their
knowledge and the ascetics who are vain and deviant clearly represent
the foolish.

The Arabic word shatat implies going to extremes, hence its application
to untrue words. Thus, a high bank of rivers relatively far from water
is called shatt.

The blessed Verse 5 says:

***"We thought that men and jinn would not utter a lie against
Allah."***

The blessed Verse may be a reference to this group’s blind imitation of
others in associating partners, wives, and children to God Almighty,
saying that they blindly acknowledged such beliefs owing to their
optimism as they never imagined that mankind and the jinn dare to utter
such lies against God Almighty; however, consequent to their
investigations and comprehension of the truth and having believed in it,
they are now aware of such unworthy imitation and hence they confess to
their mistakes and the deviation of the polytheists from amongst the
jinn.

Surah al-Jinn – Verse 6
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ كَانَ رِجَالٌ مِّنَ الْإِنسِ يَعُوذُونَ بِرِجَالٍ مِّنَ
الْجِنِّ فَزَادُوهُمْ رَهَقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. 'And there were men amongst mankind who took shelter with the
males amongst the jinn, but they increased them in their error and
disobedience.***

The blessed Verse in question is saying that some men sought refuge in
the male jinn and their error and disobedience to God were thereby
increased. The Arabic root z-h-q etymologically denotes "to cover by
using force" and since error, sins, disobedience, and fear overwhelm
human heart and soul and thereby cover them, hence the connotation of
the word.

The clause

***"but they increased them in their error and disobedience"***

reflect that superstitions engender decadence in thought, fear, and
error.

It is worthy of note that the blessed Verse indicates that male and
female jinn exist, since the blessed Verse says:

***"there were men amongst mankind who sought refuge in the males
amongst the jinn."***

However, the contextual meaning of the blessed Verse is broad in its
semantic scope such that it includes all instances of men seeking refuge
in the jinn and the aforesaid superstition bear testimony to the same.
There existed numerous soothsayers amongst the Arabs who claimed that
they were able to solve many a problem by taking recourse to the jinn
and predict the future.

In this vein, it is narrated from Allah’s Messenger (S) that whoever
goes to a sorcerer, a soothsayer, or a liar and acknowledges their words
certainly disbelieves in all Divine Scriptures.[^5]

It is also narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) that who acknowledges the
words of a soothsayer or an astrologer disbelieves what is revealed to
Allah’s Messenger (S).[^6]

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 7-8
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُمْ ظَنُّوا كَمَا ظَنَنتُمْ أَن لَّن يَبْعَثَ اللَّهُ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا لَمَسْنَا السَّمَاءَ فَوَجَدْنَاهَا مُلِئَتْ حَرَسًا شَدِيدًا
وَشُهُبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. 'And they thought as you thought that Allah would not send any
Messenger.***  
***8. 'And we have sought to reach the heaven, but found it filled with
stern guards and blazing arrows.***

Proceeding with relating the words of the believing jinn who other jinn
to convert to the Islamic faith in different ways, the blessed Verse
says:

*"And some men, like you, imagined that God Almighty would not appoint
anyone to the Prophetic call [after Moses (as) and Jesus (as)] and
thereby belied the Holy Qur’an and the Prophetic call of the Noble
Prophet of the Islamic faith (S). However, it was through listening to
the blessed Verses of this Divine Scripture that we clearly noticed its
veracity. Beware of disbelieving in God Almighty, like the polytheist
men, and meet their dire fate.”*

The blessed Verse warns the polytheists that the jinn employ such line
of argument and reach such conclusion and it is expected that men also
awaken and believe in the Noble Prophet (S) and the Holy Qur’an.

The blessed Verse 8 makes a reference to the believing jinn who make
mention of one of the proofs of the veracity of their words,
comprehensible to all the jinn in the natural world, saying:

***"We have sought to reach the heaven, but found it filled with stern
guards and blazing arrows."***

The Arabic word lams herein connotes search and quest and the nominal
form haras is the plural form of haris ("guard").

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 9-10
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا كُنَّا نَقْعُدُ مِنْهَا مَقَاعِدَ لِلسَّمْعِ ۖ فَمَنْ
يَسْتَمِعِ الْآنَ يَجِدْ لَهُ شِهَابًا رَصَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا لَا نَدْرِي أَشَرٌّ أُرِيدَ بِمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَمْ أَرَادَ
بِهِمْ رَبُّهُمْ رَشَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. 'And we used to sit there in stations to eavesdrop, but any who
intends to eavesdrop now will find a shooting star watching him in
ambush.***  
***10. '[Having said that] we know not whether evil is intended for the
inhabitants of the earth or whether their Lord wills to Guide them.***

Revelation of the Holy Qur’an had its impressions in the heavens. Before
the Revelation, the jinn used to eavesdrop the heavenly messages, but
they were thereafter impeded from doing likewise; as a consequence of
which they say that formerly they would sit in the heaven to eavesdrop
and receive heavenly messages and imparted them to their friends, though
whoever intends to act likewise will find meteors targeting him in
ambush.

What crosses one’s mind is that drastic alterations were made in the
world following the Prophetic call of Allah’s Messenger (S) and the
Revelation of the Holy Qur’an, since they were formerly able to
eavesdrop, but no one is able to do likewise now.

The blessed Verses in question reflect that the dark age of ploys,
soothsaying, and deception is over and the night has ended and the sun
of Divine Revelation and the Prophetic call has risen. The Arabic word
shihab lexically denotes flame, though it connotes the blazing flames
emerging in straight lines in the heaven, namely shooting stars and
meteors.

According to scientific research, meteors are small pieces of stone
moving without the atmosphere of the earth. Upon approaching the earth,
they gravitate toward it rapidly.

When they enter the atmosphere, namely the condensed gaseous later
surrounding the earth, they turn into fireballs owing to the intensity
of friction against it and the resulting incandescence turns into ashes
scattering on the face of the earth.

It is recurrently reflected in the Holy Qur’an that meteors are arrows
shot at devils aiming at eavesdropping in the heavens. Detailed
discussions are to be found above under 15:18 and 37:10, though they are
not reflected herein for the sake of brevity.

At any rate, the Arabic nominal form rasad implies preparedness for some
occurrence and lying in ambush. The word is at times a present
participial form employed in the sense of one waiting in ambush.

According to the blessed Verse 10, they further say that having taken
into account the circumstances, they do not know whether such
eavesdropping reflects that some bad intention is in store for the
people on the earth or God Almighty is thereby willing to lead them to
the Path of Guidance.

In other words, they have no idea whether it preludes afflictions to be
inflicted by God Almighty or their Guidance. Nonetheless, the believing
jinn are supposed to have comprehended that forbidding eavesdropping,
simultaneous with the Noble Prophet’s (S) prophetic call, preludes
guiding people and consigning to oblivion soothsaying and like
superstitious beliefs.

It is but the proclamation of the end of a dark period and the outset of
a luminous one. However, the jinn were attached to eavesdropping and
still failed to believe that such impediment entail Blessings and
Bounties, but it is crystal clear that relying on eavesdropping,
soothsayers in pre-Islamic times had a great impact in leading the
people astray.

It is worthy of note, however, that Guidance is herein ascribed to God
Almighty, but evil, used in passive voice, is not attributed to Him,
reflecting that the good and Guidance comes from God Almighty and evil
and corruption come from people themselves consequent to their misuse of
Divine Bounties and the Blessings of Creation.

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 11-12
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا مِنَّا الصَّالِحُونَ وَمِنَّا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ ۖ كُنَّا
طَرَائِقَ قِدَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا ظَنَنَّا أَن لَّن نُّعْجِزَ اللَّهَ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَن
نُّعْجِزَهُ هَرَبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. 'And there are amongst us some that are righteous and some
impious; we are groups having different ways.***  
***12. 'And we are certain that we cannot overcome Allah’s Will on the
earth nor can we flee His Omnipotence.***

The blessed Verses in question reflect that the believing jinn, having
acknowledged Divine Revelation, perceive their weakness, free choice,
and Divine Majesty and Omnipotence.

The blessed Verse 11, resuming the believing jinn’s speech on the
occasion of calling those in error amongst them, is thus quoting them:

***"And there are amongst us some that are righteous and some impious;
we are groups having different ways."***

The blessed Verse may allude that the existence of Iblis amongst the
jinn may create in some the false impression that evil, corruption, and
mischief are in their nature, impeding them to avail themselves of the
Light of Guidance.

The believing amongst the jinn thereby reflect that they are also free
to choose, since there are righteous and impious ones amongst them.
Therefore, they are prepared by nature to find Guidance. Respecting
others may lead to further receptivity of propagation though which the
group may be paved for guidance and perfection.

The blessed Verse rectifies our assumptions concerning the jinn, since
the word jinn connotes mischief, corruption, deviation, and error for
some people; though the fact is that there exist different groups of the
jinn, righteous and impious. The Arabic word qidad denotes "severed,
separate" connoting different, separate groups.

The blessed Verse 12 reflects that the believing jinn proceed to warn
others by saying:

***"And we are certain that we cannot overcome Allah’s Will on the earth
nor can we flee His Omnipotence."***

In other words, it would be quite unfounded to claim that one may flee
Divine chastisement by escaping to some point on the earth or in the
heavens. Thus, the former clause makes a reference to escaping Divine
Omnipotence by resorting to some place on the earth, though the latter
implies escaping from the earth and the heaven.

Another possibility is also suggested as per which the former implies
that it would be impossible to overcome the Lord and the latter reflects
that it would be impossible to flee from Divine Justice. Thus, when
there is no way to overcome God Almighty nor to flee from Him, there
remains no other choice but to submit to His Just Command.

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 13-15
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا لَمَّا سَمِعْنَا الْهُدَىٰ آمَنَّا بِهِ ۖ فَمَن يُؤْمِن
بِرَبِّهِ فَلَا يَخَافُ بَخْسًا وَلَا رَهَقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا مِنَّا الْمُسْلِمُونَ وَمِنَّا الْقَاسِطُونَ ۖ فَمَنْ
أَسْلَمَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ تَحَرَّوْا رَشَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا الْقَاسِطُونَ فَكَانُوا لِجَهَنَّمَ حَطَبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. 'And when we heard the Guidance of the Holy Qur’an, we believed
therein and whoever believes in his Lord shall have no fear, either of a
decrease or injustice.***  
***14. 'And that some amongst us are Muslims and some are disobedient.'
And whoever embraces Islam has opted for the Straight Path.***  
***15. And as for the disobedient, they shall be firewood for Hell.***

The believing jinn proceed to say:

***"When we heard the Guidance of the Holy Qur’an, we believed in
it,"***

intending to say that if they call others unto the Guidance of the Holy
Qur’an, they have already acted upon the same; thus, they do not call
others to something which they have already neglected.

The consequence of believing in God Almighty is expressed in a terse
clause, saying:

*"Whosoever believes in his Lord shall fear neither decrease nor
injustice.”*

The Arabic word bakhs implies decrease stemming from injustice and the
word rahaqa connotes to cover by force.

Some Qur’an exegetes maintain that the distinction lying between the
twain is that the former implies that nothing shall be decreased from
their righteous good deeds and the latter reflects that nothing shall be
added to their sins and vices.

Some also hold that the former implies decrease in righteous good deeds
and the latter is used in the sense of hard task. At any rate, the
contextual meaning of the blessed Verse in question reflects that no
matter whether the deeds are significant or otherwise, the believing
shall be granted the Rewards without any increase or decrease. It is
true that Divine Justice is not restricted to the believing, but since
disbelievers do no righteous good deeds, they are not mentioned herein.

The blessed Verse 14 provides further explanation as to the believers’
and the disbelievers’ fates:

***"And that some amongst us are Muslims and some are disobedient."***

The present participial form

***qasit ("just distributor"),***

derived from the root q-s-t ("distribute or divide justly"), made from
the fourth form of the root, if‘al, implying transitivity, connotes
administration of justice, though used in its trilateral form, as
appearing herein, implies disobedience and digression from the Path of
Truth.

The blessed Verse proceeds to say:

***"And whoever embraces Islam has opted for the Straight Path,"***

proceeding toward Divine Guidance and Rewards.

The blessed Verse 15 adds:

***"But as to the disobedient, they shall be firewood in Hell."***

It is worthy of note that the verbal form

***aslama ("believed"),***

in preceding blessed Verse, stands in contrast with qasit (herein:
"disobedient") in the blessed Verse in question, implying that faith
impedes man from plunging into disobedience, as the disbelieving are
certainly adulterated with disobedience and wrong doing.

It also implies that the true believers may never be adulterated with
disobedience.

In this respect, it is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) as saying:

*"A true believer is one from whose part people are assured of the
security of their life and property."*[^7]

According to another Prophetic tradition,

*"Muslim is one from whose hands and tongue other are rest assured.*[^8]

The Arabic clause

***"They have sought the Straight Path" (taharru rashadan),***

appearing at the close of the previous Verse, implies that the believing
proceed toward Guidance attentively and intentionally rather than
blindly, and their most cherished Reward lies in attaining to the Truth
thanks to which, they may avail themselves of all Divine Bounties;
whereas the worst misfortune of the disobedient is that they shall be
firewood in Hell, inwardly set ablaze.

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 16-17
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَن لَّوِ اسْتَقَامُوا عَلَى الطَّرِيقَةِ لَأَسْقَيْنَاهُم مَّاءً
غَدَقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِّنَفْتِنَهُمْ فِيهِ ۚ وَمَن يُعْرِضْ عَن ذِكْرِ رَبِّهِ يَسْلُكْهُ
عَذَابًا صَعَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. If they [the jinn and mankind] persevere on the path [of faith],
We shall surely bestow upon them water in abundance.***  
***17. It is intended that We try them thereby. And whoever turns away
from the Reminder of his Lord, He will afflict him with an increasing
and severe torment.***

The blessed Verses in question seemingly proceed with the believing jinn
talking with their people. Nonetheless, some Qur’an exegetes maintain
that they are Divine Words inserted in between the words of the jinn,
though the parenthetical statement bears particular similarity to the
tone of the preceding blessed Verses, reflecting the words of the
believing jinn and taking into account the contextual meaning, being not
the words of the jinn sounds a remote possibility.

At any rate, the preceding blessed Verses treat of their Rewards granted
in this world, saying:

***"If they [the jinn and mankind] persevere on the path [of faith], We
shall surely bestow upon them water in abundance";***

in other words, God Almighty sends down His rain of Mercy upon them and
makes the life giving springs available to them. Where there exists
water in abundance, everything may be found copiously and thereby they
are granted different kinds of Bounties.

In this vein, it is narrated from the Noble Imam Sadiq (as) as saying:

*"If people be steadfast with regard to our guardianship, they shall be
granted knowledge in abundance."*[^9]

The Arabic nominal form ghadaq implies abundant water. Emphasis is laid
many a time in the Holy Qur’an on the point that faith and fear of God
Almighty are not only sources of spiritual blessings, but they also
entail abundance of material provision, flourishing, and prosperity.

It is worthy of note that the blessed Qur’anic Verse reflects that
steadfastness in faith, rather than the faith per se, entails abundant
Bounties, since fleeting faith may not lead to such Bounties. In other
words, steadfastness in faith and fear of God are of significance in
which many people are weak.

Making a reference to the truth lying herein, the blessed Verse 17
proceeds to say that God Almighty tries them with abundance of Bounties
to see whether the increase in the Bounties leads to their vanity and
neglect or it entails awakening, gratitude, and according further
attention to God Almighty.

Thus, it is clear that such abundance serves as a means of Divine Trial
and it is noteworthy that such Trial is far harder and more complicated
than that of torments, since the former naturally causes weakness,
indolence, neglect, and indulgence in the pleasures of the flesh through
which man turns away from God Almighty and paves the ground for satanic
temptations.

Thos who remember God Almighty at all times may merely preserve
themselves from the undesirable consequences of increase and abundance
of Bounties, since such people preserve their hears from satanic
temptations through remembering God Almighty at all times.

Thus, the blessed Verse proceeds to say that whoever turns away from the
remembrance of God Almighty shall suffer severe and ever increasing
torments.

The Arabic root s-‘-d denotes "climb, ascend" and it also connotes
"mountain pass." Since, climbing such passes entails hardships, the
Arabic cognate word sa‘d implies vicissitudes and hardships.

Thus, many a Qur’anic exegete have provided the exegesis as to which the
Arabic word in question implies severe torment, as reflected elsewhere
in the Holy Qur’an[^10]:

***"I shall oblige him to face a severe torment."***

The expression may also connote the increase of such torment, in that
the blessed Verses in question reflect the nexus between faith and fear
of God and increase in Bounties on the one hand and the link between
such increase and Divine Trials on the other.

The blessed Verses also treat of the relationship between turning away
from remembering God Almighty at all times and the severe and ever
increasing torments.

The same themes are attested elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an, instances of
which include:

***"But whoever turns away from remembering Me, for him is a life of
hardship and WE shall raise him up blind on the Day of
Resurrection"***[^11]***;***

***"When he [Solomon (as)] saw it placed before him, he said: "This is
by the Grace of my Lord to test me whether I am grateful or
ungrateful"***[^12]***;***

***"Know that your possessions and your offspring are but a trial and
that surely with Allahis a great Reward"***[^13]***.***

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 18-19
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ الْمَسَاجِدَ لِلَّهِ فَلَا تَدْعُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ لَمَّا قَامَ عَبْدُ اللَّهِ يَدْعُوهُ كَادُوا يَكُونُونَ
عَلَيْهِ لِبَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. The mosques are for Allah [Alone]. Therefore, invoke not anyone
along with Allah.***  
***19. And when the servant of Allah [i.e. Muhammad (S)] stood up
invoking Him in prayer, a group made round him a dense crowd.***

The Arabic nominal form masajid is the plural form of masjid, literally
denoting "place of prostration."

In this respect, it is narrated from the Noble Imam Sadiq (as) say
saying:

*"Since the Jews and the Christians associated partners with God
Almighty in their places of worship, God Almighty decreed that Muslims
are not supposed to associate anyone with God Almighty in worship in
Muslims’ places of prostration [namely the mosques] and God Almighty
curses the one who shows disrespect at the mosques."*[^14]

Quoting the believing jinn in calling others unto monotheism, the
blessed Verse 18 says:

***"The mosques are for Allah [Alone]. Therefore, invoke not anyone
along with Allah."***

The Arabic plural nominal form masajid indicate places where believers
prostrate themselves before God Almighty whose most perfect instance is
Masjid al-Haram [literally: the Sacred or Holy Mosque]. Other instances
include other mosques, though in its broader semantic domain, it is
applied to all the places where the believers establish their prayers
and prostrate themselves before God Almighty.

In this vein, it is narrated from the Noble Prophet as saying:

*"The earth in its entirety serves as my place of prostration and
purification [namely tayammum: "ritual purification with sand, soil, or
dust, allowed when water is unavailable"]."*[^15]

Thus, the blessed Verse in question provides a response to the Arab
polytheists and the like of them who had turned Ka‘ba to an idol temple.
It also reflects the erring Christians who had resorted to trinity
worshipping three gods in their churches. The Holy Qur’an is saying that
all the places of worship belong to God Almighty and any other object of
worship may not be worshipped.

Reference is also made herein to interceding with the Noble Prophet and
Divine Guides. Such intercession stands in no contradiction to the truth
of monotheism nor to Qur’anic Verses, but it lays emphasis on monotheism
and the truth that all things come from God Almighty.

Intercession and invoking the Noble Prophet (S) to intercede with the
believers for Divine Mercy is recurrently attested in the Qur’anic
Verses, though some people who have been remote from Islamic teachings
and the Qur’anic Verses unfoundedly deny any kind of intercession,
referring to a number of the Qur’anic Verses, including the blessed
Verse 18:

***"The mosques are for Allah [Alone]. Therefore, invoke not anyone
along with Allah."***

They falsely claim that the blessed Verse in question implies that the
believers are not supposed to intercede with anyone for Divine Forgiving
of the sins.

The point is that the blessed Verse is in no way related to their
unfounded claim, but it makes a reference to refuting polytheism in
sense that some people err in associating objects of worship with God
Almighty and invoking them for granting them bounties. In other words,
invoking objects of worship besides God Almighty and regarding them as
independent and willful entails polytheism.

The preposition

***ma‘a ("with")***

in the negative imperative sentence

***"Invoke not anyone along with Allah,"***

implies that nothing is supposed to be associated with God Almighty in
worship nor should anything besides Him be regarded as an independent
source of willful acts.

However, invoking Divinely appointed Prophets to intercede with God
Almighty on people’s behalf for Forgiveness or bestowal of Bounties is
not only allowed herein, but Some Qur’anic Verses call the Noble Prophet
(S) to act likewise and others are at times called to intercede with the
Noble Prophet for Divine Forgiveness.

In this respect, mention may be made of two Qur’anic Verses:

***"Take alms from their possessions in order to purify them and
sanctify them with it and invoke Allah for them, since your invocations
are a source of security for them"***[^16]***;***

***"O our father! Ask Forgiveness [from Allah] for our sins, as we were
sinners. He [Ya‘qub] said: 'I will ask my Lord for forgiveness for
you"***[^17]***.***

Thus, interceding with God Almighty on behalf of the believers is
explicitly mentioned in the Holy Qur’an. Discussions on intercession are
to be found above under 2:48 and 5:35.

Making reference to the great effects created by reciting the Qur’anic
Verses by the Noble Prophet (S) in his worships, the blessed Verse 19 is
saying that when Allah’s servant, Muhammad (S) stood up invoking Him in
prayer, a group made round him a dense crowd.

The Arabic nominal form libadh denotes something whose constituent
elements are condensed, though it herein implies the strange assembly of
the believing jinn to listen to the Qur’anic blessed Verses in their
first encounter with the Holy Qur’an as well as the extraordinary
impression of the Noble Prophet’s (S) prayers upon them.

Two further exegeses have also been suggested for the blessed Verse in
question. Firstly, the believing jinn reflect the Noble Prophet’s (S)
companions, though limited in number in Mecca, who got together in
crowds to listen to him. Thus, the jinn are instructed to proceed
immediately toward the Islamic faith.

According to the other suggestion, the Arab polytheists surrounded the
Noble Prophet (S) when he was engaged in establishing his prayers and
reciting the Qur’anic Verses in order to deride and harm him. However,
the latter exegesis does not befit the intention of those from amongst
the jinn who intended to call others unto faith, but it befits one of
the two preceding meanings.

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 20-22
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَدْعُو رَبِّي وَلَا أُشْرِكُ بِهِ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي لَا أَمْلِكُ لَكُمْ ضَرًّا وَلَا رَشَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي لَن يُجِيرَنِي مِنَ اللَّهِ أَحَدٌ وَلَنْ أَجِدَ مِن
دُونِهِ مُلْتَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. Say: "I invoke only my Lord and I associate none as partners
along with Him."***  
***21. Say: "It is not in my power to cause you harm nor to bring you to
the Straight Path."***  
***22. Say: "None can protect me from Allah’s chastisement [if I disobey
Him], nor can I find refuge except in Him.***

To further solidify the pillars of monotheism and reject any kind of
polytheism, as reflected in the preceding blessed Verses, the blessed
Verses in question order the Noble Prophet to say:

*"I invoke only my Lord and I associate none as partners along with Him.
It does not lie within my capacity to inflict any harm upon you nor may
I lead you to the Straight Path. None may protect me from Allah’s
chastisement [if I disobey Him], nor can I find refuge except in Him."*

Thus, the blessed Verses reflect total obedience before Divine
Threshold. On the other hand, they reject any kind of extremist beliefs
as to the Noble Prophet (S), as despite his quite exalted rank before
God Almighty, he may not seek any refuge from His torment except in Him,
let alone the useless idols.

Furthermore, these blessed Verses put an end to the irrelevant pretexts
and expectations of obdurate people from the Noble Prophet (S) who
requested him to work Divine Acts. These Qur’anic Verses clearly prove
that intercession is dependent upon Divine Will.

The Arabic nominal form multahad, deriving from l-h-d, literally denotes
a lateral hole or niche, though it herein connotes a safe haven and
place of refuge. It is also suggested that the word is applied to a box
wherein precious things are placed and locked.

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 23-24
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا بَلَاغًا مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَرِسَالَاتِهِ ۚ وَمَن يَعْصِ اللَّهَ
وَرَسُولَهُ فَإِنَّ لَهُ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّىٰ إِذَا رَأَوْا مَا يُوعَدُونَ فَسَيَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ أَضْعَفُ
نَاصِرًا وَأَقَلُّ عَدَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. [Mine is] but imparting Allah’s Messages and whoever disobeys
Allah and His Messenger, Hellfire shall be in store for him where he
shall dwell forever.***  
***24. The disbelievers’ disobedience will continue until they see that
which they are promised. Then they shall know whose helpers shall be
more feeble and of less in terms of number.***

As reflected in the blessed Verse 23, the Noble Prophet (S) is saying
that it is his obligation to impart the Divine Message.

The theme is recurrently attested in the Qur’anic Verses, an instance of
which is:

***"It is Our Messenger’s obligation to convey [the Message]
clearly"***[^18]***.***

Concerning the distinction between balagh ("imparting") and risala
("mission"), it is suggested that the former is applied to imparting the
fundamentals of religion (usul), whereas the latter connotes conveying
the secondary principles of religion (furu‘).

However, it is also suggested that the former reflects imparting Divine
Commands and the latter implies execution of the Commands, though they
seemingly imply the same meaning and lay emphasis on each other, as
reflected in numerous Qur’anic Verses wherein both terms have been
employed in the same sense, e.g.

***"I convey unto you the Messages of my Lord" (uballighukum risalat-i
rabbi;***[^19]***).***

It is noteworthy that the blessed Verse 23 closes by warning people that
whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger (S), Hellfire shall be in store
for him wherein he shall dwell forever. The blessed Verse clearly
indicates that only the polytheists and the disbelievers, rather than
all sinners, shall enter Hellfire.

The blessed Verse 24 proceeds to say:

***"The disbelievers’ disobedience will continue until they see that
which they are promised. Then they shall know whose helpers shall be
more feeble and of less in terms of number."***

Different exegeses have been suggested concerning the clause

***"which they are promised,"***

in that the torment in this world or both worlds is intended herein,
though it seems befitting that reference is herein made to the general
sense of the words, in that the increase and the decrease in the number
of the helpers and the weakness and strength thereof further befits this
world.

Thus, some Qur’an exegetes maintain that the blessed Verse implies the
explicit increase in the power of the Muslims in the battle of Badr.
Numerous traditions reflect that the blessed Verse in question makes a
reference to the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (AS; may our souls be his
ransom).

Therefore, the tone of the blessed Verse clearly indicates that the
enemies of the Islamic faith recurrently bragged about their power and
their large number regarding the Muslims as weak and feeble. Thus, the
Holy Qur’an consoles the believers and bears them glad tidings that they
shall be finally victorious and defeat shall be in store for the
enemies.

The history of the Prophets (as), particularly the biographical accounts
of the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) reflect the manner in
which large numbers of the disbelievers, despite their power against the
few believers, despaired and were defeated. The same theme is clearly
reflected in the Qur’anic Verses concerning the Children of Israel and
the Pharaoh, Goliath (Jalut) and Saul (Talut), and those regarding the
battles of Badr and Ahzab.

Surah al-Jinn – Verses 25-28
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ أَدْرِي أَقَرِيبٌ مَّا تُوعَدُونَ أَمْ يَجْعَلُ لَهُ رَبِّي
أَمَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَىٰ غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا مَنِ ارْتَضَىٰ مِن رَّسُولٍ فَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِن بَيْنِ
يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ رَصَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِّيَعْلَمَ أَن قَدْ أَبْلَغُوا رِسَالَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ وَأَحَاطَ بِمَا
لَدَيْهِمْ وَأَحْصَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ عَدَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. Say: "I know not whether what is promised to you is near or
whether my Lord will appoint for it a term.***  
***26. "He is the Omniscient of the unseen and He reveals to none His
unseen secrets."***

***27. Except to a Messenger whom He has chosen and then He makes a band
of watching guards to march before him and behind him.***

***28. [Allah] protects them till He sees that they have imparted the
Messages of their Lord. And He surrounds all that which is with them and
He keeps a record of all things.***

The Qur’anic attestations of the Arabic imperative verbal form

***qull ("Say!")***

exceed three hundred in number, followed by responses, potential
questions, and taking stances against the unbefitting expectations and
illusions.

Since it is reflected in the preceding blessed Verses that the derision
and disobedience of such people continues until Divine torment, as
promised to them, sill be sent down, the question as to the term of the
promise is raised.

As suggested by the Qur’an exegetes regarding the occasion of the
Revelation of the blessed Verses in question, some of the polytheists,
e.g. Nadhr ibn Harith, raised the same question following the Revelation
of the preceding blessed Verses, the Holy Qur’anic Verses in question
provide a response, saying:

***"Say: 'I know not whether what is promised to you is near or whether
my Lord will appoint for it a term.'"***

The knowledge of the appointed term solely belongs to the Pure Essence
of God Almighty and He thus willed it to be unknown to His servants,
such that it may serve as a means of Trial for the people, since had
they been aware of its closeness or remoteness, the Trial would have
been of less effect.

The Arabic nominal form amad denotes time, though according to Raghib’s
Mufradat, the Arabic word zaman connotes the beginning and the end, but
amad is solely applied to the end of something in terms of temporality.
It is also suggested that abad and amad are semantically similar, though
their distinction lies in that the former is applied to infinite time,
but the latter implies a limited span of time, however long it may be.

At any rate, the same theme is attested many a time in the Qur’anic
Verses, as per which whenever the Noble Prophet (S) was asked regarding
the time of the Resurrection, he would say that solely God Almighty is
Omniscient of the unseen.

According to a Prophetic tradition, once Gabriel, disguised as a
Bedouin, appeared before the Noble Prophet (S) and raised a number of
questions including the time of the Resurrection. The Noble Prophet (S)
replied that the one whom he was asking was no more knowledgeable than
the questioner.

The Arab repeated his question even louder to which the Noble Prophet
(S) replied:

*"Woe unto you! The Day of Resurrection shall arrive. What have you done
for that Day?"*[^20]

The blessed Verse 27 proceeds the discussion by suggesting a general
rule concerning the knowledge of the unseen, saying that God Almighty is
the Omnipotent of the Unseen, but He does not grant the Knowledge of the
Secrets to anyone, unless, according the following blessed Verse, He
appoints a Messenger and be content with him.

Thus, He grants him the knowledge of the unseen through Revelation.

A precise study of different Qur’anic Verses clearly reflect that there
are two categories of Qur’anic Verses treating of the knowledge of the
unseen: those in which such knowledge is particular to God Almighty
negating the same of others besides Him, e.g.

***"And with Him are the keys of the unseen, none knows them but
He"***[^21]***;***

***"Say: 'None in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except
Allah, nor may they perceive when they shall be
resurrected"***[^22]***;***

***"If I had the knowledge of the unseen, I should have secured for
myself an abundance of wealth and no evil should have touched
me"***[^23]***;***

***"Say: 'The unseen belongs to Allah Alone"***[^24]***.***

The second category of the Qur’anic Verses clearly indicate that the
Friends of God Almighty are to some extent aware of the unseen, e.g.

***"Nor will Allah disclose to you the secrets of the unseen, but Allah
chooses of His Messengers whom He wills"***[^25]***.***

Regarding the miracles wrought be the Noble Prophet Jesus (as), the Holy
Qur’anic Verse[^26] reads:

***"I inform you of what you eat and what you store in your houses."***

Taking into account the exception reflected in the following blessed
Verse, it is clear that God Almighty grants His Chosen Messengers (as)
partial knowledge of the unseen.

Further, numerous Qur’anic Verses concern the knowledge of the unseen,
e.g.

***"The Romans have been defeated in the nearest land and they after
their defeat will be, before long [in a few years],
triumphant"***[^27]***;***

***"He Who has given you the Qur’an will certainly bring you back to the
place of return [i.e. Mecca]"***[^28]***;***

***"You shall enter Masjid al-Haram, if Allah wills in utmost
security"***[^29]***.***

The Divine Revelation sent down onto Allah’s Messengers (as) is actually
a kind of the knowledge of the unseen left at their disposal.

Then, how could one say that they are unaware of the unseen when Divine
Revelation is sent onto them? Furthermore, numerous traditions indicate
that the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) and the Infallible Imams
(as) were to some extent aware of the unseen and imparted the same at
times.

For instance, it is reported in the account of the conquest of Mecca
that Hatib ibn Abi Balti‘a wrote a letter to the people of Mecca and
asked a certain woman by the name of Sara to hand it to the Meccan
polytheists and thereby informed them of the imminent attack of the
Muslim army. She concealed the letter in her hair and departed for
Mecca.

The Noble Prophet dispatched Imam ‘Ali (as) and some other Muslims to
encounter her at a station called the garden of Khakh and seize Hatib’s
letter addressed to the Meccan polytheists. Upon facing them, she
totally denied the claim, but finally confessed and handed them the
letter. The details of the account and its transmission chains are to be
found above in Chapter 60 (Surah al-Mumtahana).

Another instance of such knowledge of the unseen is reported in the
account of the battle of Mu’ta and the martyrdom of Ja‘far and some
other Muslim military commanders as simultaneously imparted to the
Muslims by the Noble Prophet (S) in Medina. There are many similar
instances in the Noble Prophet’s (S) biographical accounts.[^30]

Predictions of many an event are to be found in the Nahj al-Balagha,
reflecting that Imam ‘Ali (as) was aware of such secrets of the unseen,
an instance of which is to be found in the thirteenth sermon treating of
the Basrans’ vices, saying:

*"It is as if I see that Allah’s torments have come down upon you from
the heaven and the earth and you have all drowned. The apex of your
mosque is obvious like the breast of the ship in water."*

Numerous such predictions by the Noble Imam (as) are to be found in
other narrations recorded in the Sunni and the Shi‘i sources an instance
of which include: he informed Hujr ibn Qays that he would be forced to
curse him following his demise;[^31] concerning Marwan, he said that
advanced in years, he would carry the banner of error;[^32] Kumayl ibn
Ziyad said unto Hajjaj that the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali
(as) had informed him that Hajjaj would slay the Noble Imam (as);[^33]
concerning the Kharijis of Nahrawan, he said that more than ten people
from the Noble Imam’s (as) adherents would not fall and more than ten
people from the Kharijis would not be saved;[^34] while passing by the
land of Karbala’, he informed Isbagh ibn Nubata of the burial place of
Imam Husayn (as);[^35] numerous narrations have been transmitted in
Fadha’il al-Khamsa from the Sunni sources regarding the extraordinary
scope of Imam ‘Ali’s (as) knowledge, making mention of them all will
entail prolixity.[^36]

Numerous traditions have been narrated from the Ahl al-Bayt (as)
concerning the Infallible Imams’ (as) knowledge of the unseen, amongst
which mention may be made of the following: Kafi, vol. 1, different
chapters, in which such knowledge is explicitly mentioned or implied.

Twenty two traditions are to be found in volume 26 of Majlisi’s Bihar
al-Anwar. Generally speaking, the traditions concerning the Noble
Prophet’s (S) and the Infallible Imams’ (as) knowledge of the unseen are
transmitted on a recurrent basis.

Now, it remains to establish some harmony between the Qur’anic Verses
and the traditions proving or negating the knowledge of the unseen
granted to others. There exist different ways to achieve such goal.

One of the most well-known ways to reconcile the twain is to suggest
that the knowledge of unseen attributed to God Almighty is essential and
independent. Consequently, others have not independent knowledge of the
unseen and their partial knowledge is granted them by God Almighty
through His Grace.

In other words, the knowledge of the unseen bestowed upon others is
merely secondary. The blessed Verse in question serves as evidence to
the same argument, as per which God Almighty informs no one of the
secrets of the unseen except for the Messengers (as) with whom God
Almighty is satisfied.

Such implication is suggested in the Nahj al-Balagha, as per which while
informing others of the events to happen in future, predicting the
Mongol invasion of the Islamic lands, one of his companions inquired:

*"O Command of the Faithful! Do you possess knowledge of the unseen?"*

The Noble Imam replied smilingly:

*“It is not the knowledge of the unseen, but I have learned it from a
knowledgeable source [namely the Noble Prophet (S)]."*[^37]

Many a scholars have approved of such method of coincidence of the
seemingly different sources.

The secrets of the unseen fall into two categories: those particular to
God Almighty unknown by others, e.g. the time of Resurrection; and those
imparted by God Almighty to His Messengers (as) and Friends, as
reflected in the Nahj al-Balagha under the above mentioned sermon:

***"The knowledge of the unseen solely rests in the knowledge of [the
time of] Resurrection and what is mentioned in the Qur’anic
Verse***[^38]***: 'Allah, with Him is the knowledge of the Hour, He
sends down the rain and knows that which is in the wombs. No one knows
what he will earn tomorrow, and no person knows in what land he will
die.'"***

To further expound the meaning of the blessed Qur’anic Verse, the Noble
Imam (as) added:

*"God Almighty is All-Aware of what is in the wombs, whether it is a
male or a female, homely or comely, generous or niggardly, fortunate or
unfortunate, a dweller of the Hell or a dweller of Paradise… These
constitute the knowledge of the unseen, unknown to anyone, but God
Almighty. Such knowledge is different from what God Almighty taught His
Messenger (S) and he imparted the same unto me."*[^39]

Some people may obtain some knowledge concerning sending down the rain
and the like, but the precise and detailed Knowledge solely rests with
His Divine Pure Essence. Likewise, we are unaware of the details of
Resurrection, but our knowledge as to the same is quite partial. Such
partial knowledge is reflected in certain traditions narrated from the
Noble Prophet (S) and the Infallible Imams (as) concerning the birth or
the end of life of certain people.

Another way to reconcile the twain is to suggest that the secrets of the
unseen are recorded in two places, the Preserved Tablet (luh mahfuth),
the Treasury of Knowledge possessed only by God Almighty Alone which is
not subject to any alteration nor is it shared by anyone else besides
Him; and the Tablet of Effacement and Affirmation (mahw wa ithbat) which
is the knowledge as to the requirements of the time rather than the
complete cause (‘illat tamma), hence its changeability. What others
besides God Almighty are unaware concerns the latter.

In this respect, it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) as saying:

*"God Almighty possesses some Knowledge not shared by anyone, and He
possesses some Knowledge imparted to His Angels and Messengers (as),
such [the latter] knowledge is imparted to us."*[^40]

It is narrated from Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (as) as saying:

*"Had there been no Qur’anic Verses, I would have been aware of the past
and the events to happen to the Day of Resurrection."*

Someone inquired:

*"Which Verse do you mean?"*

He replied:

*"God Almighty says that Allah effaces whatever He wills and He
established on its basis what He wills and with Him is the Mother of the
Book [the Preserved Tablet]."*[^41]

It is noteworthy that the classification of sciences in the aforesaid
method of reconciliation is based on its inevitability or lack of the
same, though the quantity of knowledge is intended in the preceding
method.

The next method suggests that God Almighty is in actuality All-Aware of
all the secrets of the unseen, but such knowledge is not shared by His
Messengers (as) and friends, unless He imparts them to them and such
imparting solely rests on His Permission and Satisfaction.

Therefore, the blessed Verses and the traditions reflecting that they
are unaware of such secrets allude to the lack of knowledge in actuality
and those claiming to know the same allude to its potentiality.

Likewise, one may ask another to carry a letter and give it to someone
else. He carrier is unaware of the contents of the letter, though he may
open it and obtain knowledge of the same.

In such cases, the writer of the letter may give him the permission to
read it or he may not grant such permission. Such method is
substantiated by the traditions recorded in the Kafi in a chapter
entitled "The Imams are taught what they intend to know (Inna al-a’imma
idha sha’u an ya‘lamu ‘ulimu)."

In this vein, it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) as saying:

*"When the Imam intends to know something, God Almighty teaches
him."*[^42]

Such method of reconciliation solves many a problem with regard to the
knowledge possessed by the Noble Prophet (S) and the Noble Imams (as).

For instance concerning the reason lying behind their consumption of
some poisoned food or water, whereas it is not allowed that one
jeopardizes one’s life when he is aware of the danger, it may be
suggested that in such cases the Noble Prophet (S) or the Imams (as)
were not allowed to acquire knowledge as to the secrets of the unseen.

Likewise, it may be an expediency that they be unaware of something or
it may be some trial through which they attain to perfection.

In this respect, it is reported in the account of the "night of the
stay" (laylat al-mabit) that Imam ‘Ali (as) slept in the Noble Prophet’s
(as) bed in lieu of him, though, as reported by the Noble Imam (as), he
was unaware that the Qurayshi polytheists had intended to attack the
Noble Prophet at dawn in which case he could have been martyred or saved
his life.

It is in such case that the Imam (as) is not allowed to be aware of the
secret so that the Divine Trial be actualized. Had the Imam been aware
of jeopardizing his life while sleeping in the Noble Prophet’s (S) bed
in lieu of him and he could not be so proud of embarking upon such
valiant act and the Qur’anic Verses and the traditions concerning such
sacrifice would not have been that justified. Therefore, willful
knowledge serves as a solution to all such problems.

Another method of reconciliation may be suggested for the knowledge of
the unseen, though it is applicable to some of these traditions, in that
these traditions addressed an audience with different backgrounds.

Those who were prepared to acknowledge the Infallible Imams’ (as)
knowledge of the unseen were introduced to the truth, but those who
opposed the question or were feeble of faith and of quite limited
capacity were introduced to what was not too strong for their early
stomachs.

For instance, it is reported in a narration that Abu Basir and some of
the eminent companions of Imam Sadiq (as) had attended at a session when
the Noble Imam (as) entered in rage and took his seat saying that it was
surprising that some people entertained the false impression that the
Imams (as) possessed the knowledge of the unseen, but the fact is
otherwise; only God Almighty is Omnipotent of the unseen.

He had intended to punish his maid servant, but she fled and he did not
know in which of the rooms she was hiding.[^43]

The transmitter of the tradition says that when the Noble Imam departed
the session, he and some other companions of his went to his house and
said unto him:

*"May we be your ransom! You said thus regarding your maid servant, but
we know that you are well-versed in many a science; however, we make no
mention of the knowledge of the unseen."*

Then, the Noble Imam (as) enlightened them in that respect reflecting
his knowledge of the secrets of the unseen.

It is crystal clear that some of the people attending the session were
not intellectually prepared to perceive the exalted rank of the Imam
(as). Further, it is worthy of note that these five methods do not stand
in contradiction, but all of them are true and applicable.

There are, however, other methods by which the partial knowledge of the
unseen as possessed by the Imams (as) and the leaders of the Muslim
community may be proven.

Firstly, it is known that the scope of their mission was not limited to
any specific place and time, but it was universal and everlasting. Now,
how such an individual could be appointed to fulfill a universal mission
through merely his own limited time and place? How could one appointed
as the ruler of a vast region be unaware of it and succeed in the
fulfillment of his mission?

In other words, the Noble Prophet (S) and the Infallible Imams (as) were
vested with imparting and implementing Divine Laws such that they may
meet the demands of all mankind in any place and at any time, and the
successful fulfillment of such mission requires at least some partial
knowledge of the secrets of the unseen.

Secondly, if we take into account three Qur’anic Verses, we will notice
that they shed light on the question of the Noble Prophet’s (S) and the
Infallible Imams (as) knowledge of the secrets of the unseen:

1. Regarding Àsif ibn Barkhiya who brought the queen of Sheba’s throne
to Solomon (as) in the twinkling of an eye, the Holy Qur’an[^44] says:

***"One with whom was the knowledge of the Book said: 'I will bring it
to you within the twinkling of an eye.' Then, when Solomon (as) noticed
that it was placed before him, he said: 'This is by the Grace of my
Lord."***

According to another Qur’anic Verse[^45]:

***"Say: 'Sufficient as a witness between me and you is Allah and those
too who have knowledge of the Book."***

It is narrated in numerous traditions, recorded in the Sunni and the
Shi‘i sources, on the authority of Abu Sa‘id Khudri that he asked
Allah’s Messenger (S) concerning the meaning of

***"one who has knowledge from the Book (alladi ‘indahu ‘ilm-un min
al-kitab),"***

to which he replied:

*"He was the trustee of my brother, Solomon, son of David."*

I inquired about

***"and one with him is the knowledge of the Book (wa man ‘indahu ‘ilm
al-kitab),"***

to which he replied:

*"He is my brother, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib."*[^46]

It is worthy of note that

***"knowledge from the Book"***

concerns Àsif which is partial knowledge and

***"knowledge of the Book"***

concerns ‘Ali (as) which is general knowledge; thus the difference
between Àsif and ‘Ali (as) in terms of their ranks is clarified.

Further, the blessed Qur’anic Verse[^47]:

***"We have sent down unto you the Book as an exposition of
everything"***

clearly reflects that one who possesses knowledge as to the secrets of
such Book is supposed to know the secrets of the unseen.

It serves as evidence as to the possibility of the knowledge of the
secrets of the unseen by Allah’s friends through Divine Command. Further
discussions on the knowledge of the unseen are to be found above under
6:50, 59; 7:188.

The last blessed Verse of the Chapter, Verse 28, makes mention of the
reason lying behind the presence of such guardians:

***"[Allah] protects them till He sees that they have imparted the
Messages of their Lord. And He surrounds all that which is with them and
He keeps a record of all things."***

Actual Knowledge is herein intended by the Arabic word

***‘ilm ("knowledge").***

In other words, the blessed Verse is not saying that God Almighty did
not know something about His Messengers (as) but He gained the Knowledge
thereafter, since Divine Omniscience is Infinite, Pre-Eternal, and
Everlasting.

The blessed Verse is saying that such Divine Knowledge may be actualized
in the world of existence in some objective form, namely His Messengers
(as) actually convey their Prophetic Calls and provide mankind with the
Final Argument.

*O Lord! Bestow upon us the Blessings of inward knowledge and obedience
to You!*

[^1]: Tafsir Burhan, vol. 4, p. 390; other traditions have been narrated
in this respect.

[^2]: ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim’s Tafsir; Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 19.

[^3]: Bukhari’s Sahih; Muslim’s Sahih; Ahmad ibn Hanbal’s Musnad; Fi
Hilal al-Qur’an, under the blessed Verse in question. For the sake of
brevity, other reported occasions are Revelation is not mentioned here.

[^4]: 37:158

[^5]: Ibn Mahbub’s Mashyakha and Sara’ir.

[^6]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, al-Mu‘tabar; Allama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha’;
Shahid al-Awwal and Shahid al-Thani, Sharh Lum‘a.

[^7]: Tafsir Ruh al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 195.

[^8]: Usul Kafi, vol. 2, the chapter on the believer (mu’min).

[^9]: Tafsir Majma‘ al-Bayan; Tafsir Safi; Tafsir Burhan, under the
blessed Verse in question.

[^10]: 74:37

[^11]: 20:124

[^12]: 27:40

[^13]: 8:28

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 72, p. 355.

[^15]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 2, p. 970.

[^16]: 9:103

[^17]: 12:97-98

[^18]: 5:92

[^19]: 7:62

[^20]: Tafsir al-Maraghi, vol. 29, p. 105.

[^21]: 6:59

[^22]: 27:65

[^23]: 7:188

[^24]: 10:20

[^25]: 3:179

[^26]: 3:49

[^27]: 30:2-3

[^28]: 28:85

[^29]: 48:27

[^30]: Ibn Athir, al-Kamil, vol. 2, p. 237.

[^31]: Mustadrak al-Sahihayn, vol. 2, p. 358.

[^32]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 5, p. 30.

[^33]: Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, vol. 5, pt. 3, p. 325.

[^34]: Haythami, Majma‘, vol. 6, p. 241.

[^35]: Riyadh al-Nasar, vol. 2, p. 222.

[^36]: Fadha’il al-Khamsa, vol. 2, pp. 231-253.

[^37]: Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon 128.

[^38]: 31:34

[^39]: ibid.

[^40]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 26, p. 160. Numerous similar traditions have
been recorded in the same source.

[^41]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 2, p. 512.

[^42]: Kafi, the aforesaid chapter, tradition no. 3. Similar traditions
are to be found in the same chapter.

[^43]: Usul Kafi, vol. 1, the chapter on Rarities as to the Unseen (Bab
Nadir-un fihi Dhikr al-Ghayb), tradition no. 3.

[^44]: 27:40

[^45]: 13:43

[^46]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 3, pp. 280-281; Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol.
2, p. 523.

[^47]: 16:89


