Surah al-Muzzammil, Chapter 73
==============================

**(The One Wrapped in Garment)**

**Section (juz’) 29**

**Number of Verses: 20**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

The blessed Chapter, revealed in Mecca, has twenty Verses. The tone of
the Chapter clearly reflects its similarities to other Meccan Chapters.
The majority of the blessed Verses of the Chapter in question indicate
that when the Noble Prophet (S) had declared his Prophetic call, his
opponents rose to confront and belie him. Thus, the Noble Prophet (S)
was Divinely commanded to show tolerance to them.

The occasion of the Revelation of the blessed Chapter is reflected in
some of the traditions according to which upon receiving the earliest of
the Revelations, he was stood in awe. He came to Khadija, complained
from physical discomfort and rested for a while.

He bade his wife to wrap him in a garment when Gabriel revealed the
blessed Verse

***"O you wrapped in garment!"***

unto him.[^1]

The Merit of Reciting the Chapter
---------------------------------

According to a Prophetic tradition:

*"Whoever recites Surah al-Muzzammil, he will not face hardships in this
world and the Hereafter."*[^2]

Other traditions have been narrated concerning the recitation of the
blessed Chapter, though for the sake of brevity, mention is not herein
made of them. It is worthy of note, however, that such merits and
blessings are dependent upon acting upon religious obligations.

Surah al-Muzzammil – Verses 1-5
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الْمُزَّمِّلُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُمِ اللَّيْلَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نِّصْفَهُ أَوِ انقُصْ مِنْهُ قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ زِدْ عَلَيْهِ وَرَتِّلِ الْقُرْآنَ تَرْتِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا سَنُلْقِي عَلَيْكَ قَوْلًا ثَقِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. O you wrapped in garment!***  
***2. Stand [in prayer] all night, except a little.***  
***3. Half of it or a little less than that,***  
***4. Or a little more. And recite the Qur’an slowly and
meditatively.***  
***5. Since, We shall send down unto you a weighty Word.***

The tone of the opening Verses of the blessed Chapter reflects that the
Noble Prophet (S) is Divinely called unto steadfastness and preparedness
for an immense obligation acting upon which requires spiritual growth.

The blessed Verses say:

***"O you wrapped in garment! Stand in prayer all night, except a
little. Half of it or a little less than that or a little more and
recite the Qur’an meditatively with utmost clarity and eloquence."***

It would be of interest to note that the Noble Prophet is herein
addressed as:

***"O you wrapped in garment!"***

rather than

***"O Messenger!"***

or

***"O Prophet!"***

reflecting that it would be befitting to rise up, grow spiritually, and
prepare oneself for embarking upon such great mission, rather than
leading the life of a recluse. He is urged to rise at night, since his
foes are asleep at the time and people desist from following their daily
routines, hence further preparedness for meditation and spiritual
growth.

Likewise, he is urged to recite the Holy Qur’anic Verses, since they
include all the required lessons in this respect. Recitation of the
blessed Verses is the best means of strengthening one’s faith,
steadfastness, fear of God Almighty, and spiritual growth.

The Arabic word tartil denotes "regularity, articulation, and being
well-ordered," though it herein implies articulate, eloquent, and
meditative recitation of the Qur’anic Verses, reflecting upon their
meanings and impacts on one’s life.

It goes without saying that such recitation of the Qur’anic Verses may
easily lead man toward spiritual growth, moral nobilities, and fear of
God Almighty. Some Qur’an exegetes maintain that establishing canonical
prayers is herein intended, since a major part of such prayers lies in
reciting Qur’anic Verses.

The clause

***"stand at night" (qum al-layl)***

is contrasted with "sleeping," though it does not solely denote standing
up.

The point is that the different expressions denoting the spans of time
spent in nightly vigilance actually implies "choice"; thus, the Noble
Prophet (S) is free to choose to stay awake half of the night or
sometime more or less, devoting his nightly vigilance to the recitation
of the Qur’anic Verses.

Firstly, mention is made of all night, except for a little, then the
time span is reduced to half of the night and then to less than half.

Some exegetes hold that choosing amongst two thirds, half, and a third
of the night is herein intended, as the closing Verse

***"Your Lord knows that you stand [to pray at night] a little less than
two thirds of the night, or half the night, or a third of the night"***

reiterates the same statement.

It is worthy of note that the last Verse clearly reflects that the Noble
Prophet (S) was not alone in

***"standing at night",***

but a group of the believers accompanied him in such spiritual growth
and had recognized him as their model in this respect.

Some Qur’an exegetes maintain that

***"Stand [in prayer] all night, except a little"***

bids the Noble Prophet to stand in prayer all nights except for some of
them. According to this view, there is no exception in terms of the
nightly spans of time, rather some nights is hereby intended.

Nonetheless, such interpretation is not seemingly accurate taking into
account the single nominal form

***"night" (layl)***

and the clause

***"half or less than that."***

Different exegetes suggest different interpretations for

***"weighty Word"***

as they address different aspects of the question. However, the weight
of the Word seemingly implies that the Holy Qur’an, from different
aspects, is herein intended. The Holy Qur’anic Verses are weighty in
terms of contents, meaning, and their impacts on the believers’ hearts.

The same theme is reflected elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^3]:

***"Had We sent down this Qur’an on mountains, you would have seen them
humbling themselves and rent asunder."***

Such

***"weight"***

connotes the warnings, promises, obligations, hardships resulting from
the propagation of the Prophetic call.

The

***"weight"***

alludes to the weight in the scales of deeds and their accounts on the
Day of Resurrection and finally the burden of complete implementation of
such plans.

Inasmuch as the recitation of the Holy Qur’anic Verses is convenient and
delightful, though acting upon their contents is hard, particularly on
the threshold of the Prophetic call, when his milieu was imbued with the
dark clouds of ignorance, idolatry, and superstitions.

It was at that time that his obdurate and merciless foes were hand in
hand against him and his companions, though they sought assistance from
Qur’anic teachings, establishment of nightly prayers, and seeking
closeness to the Pure Essence of the Lord and thereby succeeded in
overcoming all hardships and carrying such heavy burden.

According to the exegetic work, Atyab al-Bayan, the

***"weighty word"***

implies the proclamation of the Noble Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib’s (as)
caliphate and imamate, obliging him to confront so many obdurate foes.

Accordingly, the Holy Qur’an is not herein intended, since it is said

*"Recite the Qur’an so that you may receive the weighty word in future.
Thus, the Holy Qur’an precedes the weighty word."*[^4]

Some traditions have been narrated from the Infallible Imams (as)
concerning of the word tartil, each of which addresses one of the
aspects of the question.

It is narrated from the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) that
tartil herein reflects articulate recitation, unlike the hasty
recitation of poetry and scattering the same like sand.

One is supposed to recites the Verses in a manner that he may strike the
hardened hearts and awaken them, without necessarily aiming at reaching
the end of the Chapter [namely, it is significant to comprehend the
meaning of the Verses].[^5]

In this vein, it is narrated from the Noble Imam Sadiq (as) as saying

*"The Holy Qur’an is not supposed to recite the Qur’anic Verses hastily,
but they should be recited articulately. Whenever you come to a Verse
treating of Hell, stop your recitation and invoke God Almighty for
forgiveness. But, when you come to a Verse treating of Paradise, stop
your recitation and invoke God Almighty to grant you Paradise [and
prepare yourself for the same]."*[^6]

It is also reported that the Noble Prophet recited the blessed Verses
discretely and articulately with a sweet voice.[^7]

Further Qur’anic Verses and traditions[^8] treat of the same
significance reflecting that the blessed Qur’anic Verses are not
supposed to be recited as if they are devoid of meaning, but in reciting
them, particular attention is to be accorded to all the issues deepening
their impacts on the reciters and the listeners.

It should be borne in mind at all times that Qur’anic Verses are Divine
Messages and it is incumbent upon the believers to act upon their
contents.

It is unfortunate that many a Muslim have consigned such truth to
oblivion and have contented themselves with reciting the mere words and
completing the Chapters and the Holy Qur’an in its entirety, without
according the least attention to the goals behind their Revelation and
the Divine Messages imparted by them.

It is true that Qur’anic Words deserve attention and reciting them
entails Divine Blessings, but it should be borne in mind that reciting
the words is a prelude to the comprehension of their contents.

It is noteworthy that the blessed Verses in question reflect that
significance of nightly vigilance, establishing nightly prayers, and the
recitation of the Qur’anic Verses when the neglectful are asleep.

As mentioned above, praying at night and particularly at dawn immensely
impacts the purity of the soul leading to spiritual growth, purity and
awakening of the heart, strengthening the faith and will power, and
solidifying the pillars of the fear of God Almighty in human heart and
soul, such that man clearly witnesses them upon his first trial.

Thus, praying at night is accorded particular attention in the Qur’anic
Verses and the traditions narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) and the
Infallible Imams.

In this respect, it is narrated from the Noble Imam Sadiq (as) as
saying:

*"Three things include Divine particular blessings: nightly prayers,
feeding those who take fast at the time of breaking it, and visiting
Muslim brethren."*[^9]

According to another tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) concerning
the blessed Qur’anic Verse

***"Righteous deeds efface the impressions of evil deeds,"***

he said:

*"Nightly prayers efface the sins committed in the day."*[^10]

A detailed discussion treating of the same topic is to be found above,
under 17:79, where ten traditions of interest were also quoted.

Surah al-Muzzammil – Verses 6-7
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ نَاشِئَةَ اللَّيْلِ هِيَ أَشَدُّ وَطْئًا وَأَقْوَمُ قِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لَكَ فِي النَّهَارِ سَبْحًا طَوِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. Your nightly prayers are certainly stronger and more
steadfastly.***  
***7. And you make prolonged and steadfast efforts by day.***

The blessed Verses in question further treat of the nightly prayers and
the spiritual growth engendered by the nightly recitation of the blessed
Qur’anic Verses.

They actually further support the preceding blessed Verses by saying
that such Divine Command as to the nightly prayers and the recitation of
the Verses entails stronger and more steadfast prayers and spiritual
growth.

The Arabic nominal form nashi’a denotes "occurrence," though three
connotations are suggested for its contextual meaning herein: the night
hours occurring consecutively or particularly the late hours of the
night and the break of the day; the nightly standing in prayers and the
recitation of the Qur’anic Verses, in which respect it is narrated from
the Imam Baqir (as) and the Imam Sadiq (as) that standing late at night
to perform nightly prayers is herein intended,[^11] and according to
another tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) concerning the exegesis
of the blessed Verse in question, rising from the bed with no intention
but to pray to God Almighty is herein intended;[^12] the word implies a
spiritual state of sublime exaltation engendered in the heart at such
hours at night whose impressions on human soul is of further profundity
and lasting.

It is worthy of note, however, that the last two connotations are
correlative and the twain are implied herein.

The Arabic adverbial form wata’an implies setting foot and also
agreement. The Arabic adverbial clause ashaddu wata’an connotes the
hardship and the trouble in standing at night for nightly vigilance and
prayers.

It may also imply the strong and lasting impressions made in human soul
in the light of such prayers. At any rate, the latter sounds further
befitting. It may also suggest further harmony experienced on such
occasions amongst human heart, vision, and hearing actualized at the
time of prayers.

The Arabic comparative adjectival form aqwama, cognate with qiyam
("rising") denotes "firmer; more straight." The Arabic passive present
verbal form qila herein implies remembrance of God Almighty and
recitation of the Holy Qur’an.

It is worthy of note that the blessed Verse in question is amongst those
Verses that express most eloquently the merits of praying at night and
at daybreak when the mind is not so preoccupied with worldly affairs and
it may thereby purify and foster human soul. It is herein reflected that
human soul is particularly prepared to worship God Almighty and be
engaged in reflection and remembering Him.

The blessed Verse 7 reflects that it is owing to the fact that you
persevere in your abundant efforts during the day, since you are
occupied at all times with guiding people, imparting your Divine
Message, and finding solutions to the lives of the individuals and the
society; therefore, you do not find adequate opportunities to devote
yourself to worshipping God Almighty and you may spend the night in
prayer.

Another suggested exegesis, which is of more interest and stands in
further harmony with the preceding and the following blessed Verses, is
that since you have to carry the heavy burdens of you obligations, you
may strengthen your soul by your nightly prayers and obtain the required
preparedness for embarking upon such great endeavors.

The Arabic nominal form sabh denotes movement and it is also applied to
swimming, since the latter entails frequent movements. The human society
is seemingly likened to a boundless ocean in which many people are
drowning.

The waves move toward different directions in the agitated ocean and
wondering barks seek a safe haven. The Noble Prophet of the Islamic
faith (S) is the only rescue guard and the Holy Qur’an is the only
rescue boat in the ocean. Such great swimmer is supposed to prepare
himself for such enormous mission that lies in imparting the Divine Call
during the day.

Surah al-Muzzammil – Verses 8-10
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ وَتَبَتَّلْ إِلَيْهِ تَبْتِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبُّ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ فَاتَّخِذْهُ
وَكِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَقُولُونَ وَاهْجُرْهُمْ هَجْرًا جَمِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. And remember the Name of your Lord and solely attach your heart to
Him,***  
***9. The Lord of the east and the west. There is not god but He.
Therefore, take Him Alone as your Guardian and the Disposer of your
affairs.***  
***10. And be patient with what they say and keep away from them
befittingly.***

Following the Divine Command as to rise at night in prayer and brief
reference made to the profound impressions of prayers, mention is made
of five complementary Commands, saying:

***"Remember the Name of your Lord."***

It goes without saying that the mere remembrance of His Name is not
herein intended, rather reference is made to according attention to the
point that verbal remembrance serves as a prelude to the remembrance of
the heart purifying the soul and fostering the tree of intuitive
knowledge and fear of God Almighty in the heart.

The Arabic nominal form rabb herein indicates that whenever one utters
His Sacred Name, one is supposed to pay heed to the boundless Bounties
and ongoing fostering of human soul.

Different stages of remembering God Almighty are mentioned by one of the
exegetes: the first state is remembering His Name, as reflected in the
blessed Verse in question; the second stage is to remember His Pure
Essence in one’s heart, as reflected in 7:203:

***"And remember your Lord within yourself, humbly and with fear; the
third stage transcends that of Divine Lordship to the Divine Attributes
of His Beauty and Glory signified by Allah,”***

as indicated in 33:41:

***"O you who believe! Remember Allah with much remembrance."***

Thus, such ongoing remembrance undergoes different stages of development
and the one who remembers Him is transported to the zenith of
perfection.[^13]

The second Command is saying:

*"Attach your heart unto God Almighty, sever all the aspirations from
anything besides Him, and sincerely rise to pray to Him."*

The Arabic imperative verbal form tabattal denotes

***"sever the ties!"***

Mary (as) is called Baul since she did not marry. Fatima (as) is also
called Batul since she was different from and superior to other women at
the time in terms of deeds, conduct, and knowledge such that she had
reached the stage of severance from all things besides Allah.

The verbal for herein implies the state in which man whole heartedly
turns toward God Almighty, severing his ties from whatever exists
besides Allah. Thus, such man is absorbed in devotion to God Almighty
and performs all his deeds solely for Him Alone.

In this respect, it is narrated from the Noble Imam Sadiq (as) that the
verbal form herein implies the state of humbleness at the time of
praying to God Almighty.[^14]

It is narrated from the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) as
saying:

*"There is neither asceticism nor separation in Islam."*

The tradition implies that turning away from the world as practiced by
the Christian monks does not exist in the Islamic faith, since they do
not marry and abandon all social activities, but a true Muslim devotes
himself wholeheartedly to God Almighty while living at the heart of the
society. It is narrated from the Infallible Imams (as) that the verbal
form in question implies stretching one’s hands while establishing
canonical prayers.

However, it is crystal clear that it reflects one of the manifestations
of devotion and severing one’s ties from all besides God Almighty.[^15]
It is noteworthy that such remembrance of God Almighty and devotion to
Him are the great sources used by the men of God in fulfilling their
enormous obligations aiming at guiding the people.

The blessed Verse 9 treats of the third Command:

***"The Lord of the east and the west besides Whom there is no other
God. Take Him Alone as your Guardian and the Disposer of your
affairs."***

It is worthy of note that following the stages of remembering God
Almighty and devotion, the third stage is to put one’s trust totally in
God Almighty, the Lord of the east and the west. In other words, the
world of existence in its entirety is subservient to His Sovereignty and
Lordship. He is the only God to be worshipped.

The blessed Verse supports putting one’s trust totally in God Almighty,
since in the wide expanse of the world of existence, man may solely rely
on Him as the Disposer of all the affairs, since He is the only
Sovereign, Fosterer, and Bountiful Lord Worthy of being worshipped.

Mention is made of the fourth and the fifth Commands in the blessed
Verse 10:

***"Be patient with what they say and keep away from them
befittingly."***

Thus, reference is made of the states of patience and separation, since
the path of calling people unto the Truth abounds in the foes’ slander
and harassment. The gardener is supposed to bear the stings of the
thorns in order to pick up flowers.

Thus, one is supposed to be indifferent to the foes and keep away from
them at times in order to ward off their evil actions and give them
lessons. It is worthy of note, however, that such separation does not
entail leaving incomplete education, propagation, and calling people
unto God Almighty.

The blessed Verses in question provide the Noble Prophet of the Islamic
faith (S) and all those people following in his footsteps a series of
comprehensive and perfect rules, urging them to derive their inspiration
from praying to God Almighty at night and at day break and foster the
tree by remembering God Almighty at all times, devotion, total reliance
on Him, patience, and at times keeping away from the foes. What an
interesting and comprehensive set of rules!

The expression

***"the Lord of the east and the west"***

makes a reference to His Sovereignty and Lordship over all the world of
existence. The same expression is used in common parlance when we say so
and so rules over the east and the west, namely he rules over the whole
globe rather than the points of the east and the west.

***"Befitting separation" (hijr jamil),***

as mentioned above, connotes keeping away out of empathy and calling
people unto the Truth.

It is an educational method employed at certain times which stands in no
disharmony against the question of jihad at other times, since each of
them have their own proper places. In other words, such separation does
not entail indifference, as it is a kind of paying attention. Some have
mistakenly regarded the blessed Verse in question as abrogating those of
jihad.

The late eminent scholar, Tabarsi, in his Majma‘ al-Bayan (under the
blessed Verse in question) states that the blessed Verse reflects that
the propagators of the Islamic faith and the callers to the Holy Qur’an
are supposed to be patient in the face of hardships and associate with
people with toleration and a good disposition, such that the hearts of
the audiences sooner welcome their words.

Surah al-Muzzammil – Verses 11-14
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَذَرْنِي وَالْمُكَذِّبِينَ أُولِي النَّعْمَةِ وَمَهِّلْهُمْ قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لَدَيْنَا أَنكَالًا وَجَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَطَعَامًا ذَا غُصَّةٍ وَعَذَابًا أَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَرْجُفُ الْأَرْضُ وَالْجِبَالُ وَكَانَتِ الْجِبَالُ كَثِيبًا
مَّهِيلً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. And leave Me Alone to deal with the beliers, those who are in
possession of good things of life. And grant them respite for a little
while.***  
***12. With Us are fetters and the [Hell] Fire.***  
***13. And a food that chokes and an excruciating torment.***  
***14. On the Day when the earth and the mountains will be in violent
shake and the mountains will be a heap of sand.***

The blessed Verse 11 is addressed to the Noble Prophet (S) urging him to
leave the records of the deeds of such arrogant sinners with Him. The
preceding blessed Verse made a brief reference to the harassments of the
enemies of the Islamic faith.

The blessed Verses in question harshly attacks them by severe warnings
against the torments awaiting them in this world and the Hereafter.
Thus, they are urged to revise their evil deeds.

The early Muslims contemporaneous with the Noble Prophet (S) are also
consoled against the harsh attacks by the enemies urging them to
persevere and remain steadfast by saying:

***"Leave the affluent beliers unto Me and grant them respite for a
short while."***

In other words, God Almighty is saying that the Noble Prophet is not
supposed to confront them, but to leave them to Him, such that they
avail themselves of a brief respite so that they may heed the ultimatum
and reveal their nature and carry the burdens of further sins. Divine
excruciating torments await them.

It is recorded in the history of Islam that the Muslims gained power
before long and inflicted severe blows upon their enemies at the battles
of Badr, Hunayn, and Ahzab. The arrogant enemies died before long and
met their dire fate of Divine torments in the purgatory and those of the
Hereafter are not too remote from them.

The Arabic phrase

***ul-i ’l-ni‘ma ("possessors of bounties")***

herein implies the arrogance and neglect stemming from affluence leading
the affluent oftentimes to entanglements. The history of the Prophets
(as) and the Qur’anic Verses reflect that the affluent are the foremost
enemies of the faith, though they are supposed to precede others in
welcoming the call of the Truth as a token of their gratitude for the
Divine Bounties granted them.

The blessed Verse 12 proceeds with further explicit warnings saying:

***"With Us are fetters and the [Hell] Fire."***

The Arabic plural nominal form ankal denotes heavy chains. The word
lexically denotes feebleness and weakness, since the shackles and
fetters binding the feet, the hands, and the neck impede movement and
entail weakness, the word is employed in the sense of chains, fetters,
and shackles. The point is that such affluent but disobedient people
availed themselves of unrestrained indulgence in worldly pleasures, but
bondage and Hellfire awaits them in the Hereafter.

The blessed Verse 13 adds that such disobedient people shall be given

***"a food that chokes and an excruciating torment."***

They had palatable food in this world and indulged in the pleasures of
the flesh, whereas a food that will choke and painful torments will be
in store for them in the world to come. The severity of such torments is
known to no one but God Almighty. In this respect, it is narrated that a
Muslim was reciting the blessed Verse in question once while the Noble
Prophet (S) listened to him.

The reciter of the Verse cried out of a sudden and lost
consciousness.[^16] It is also reported that the Noble Prophet (S) was
reciting the blessed Verse and had the same experience.[^17] Such people
will choke on the food in Hell.

The same theme is reflected elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^18]:

***"No food will there be for them but a poisonous thorny plant."***

It is also mentioned in the blessed Verses 43 and 44 that the sinners
shall feed on the tree of Zaqqum, the same bitter and poisonous plant of
a foul smell.

The blessed Verse 14 concerns the day when such torments shall be
inflicted on the sinners, saying:

***"On the Day when the earth and the mountains will be in violent shake
and the mountains will be a heap of sand."***

The Arabic nominal form kathib denotes "dune, sand hill." The Arabic
nominal form mahil implies pouring something soft like sand and flour on
something else, though it herein connotes something which is never fixed
and permanent.

The blessed Verse reflects that the mountains shall disintegrate on the
Day of Resurrection such that they turn into soft sand in which feet
sink. Concerning the mountains on the threshold of the Resurrection,
there are different Qur’anic expressions all of which reflect that they
disintegrate and change into soft soil and sand. Further details may be
found above under 20:105.

Surah al-Muzzammil – Verses 15-16
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَيْكُمْ رَسُولًا شَاهِدًا عَلَيْكُمْ كَمَا
أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ رَسُولًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعَصَىٰ فِرْعَوْنُ الرَّسُولَ فَأَخَذْنَاهُ أَخْذًا وَبِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. We have sent unto you a Messenger to be a witness over you as We
did send a Messenger to Pharaoh.***  
***16. But Pharaoh disobeyed the Messenger and We chastised him
severely.***

The Noble Prophet (S) witnesses the deeds in this world and bears
witness to the same on the Day of Resurrection.

The blessed Verse 15 compares the Noble Prophet’s (S) call and the
animosity of the Arab chiefs against him and the rise of the Prophet
Moses (as) against the people of the Pharaoh, saying:

***"We have sent unto you a Messenger (S) to be a witness over you
[whose obligation is to guide you and watch over your deeds] as We did
send a Messenger (as) to Pharaoh [to guide him and his people and watch
over their deeds]."***

Thus, the Qur’anic Verses and the traditions reflect that the Noble
Prophet (S) and the Infallible Imams (as) witness all our deeds.
Fulfillment of the call entails supervision and the Noble Prophet (S)
supervises all the deeds of his community and bears witness to the same.

The blessed Verse 16 is saying that Pharaoh rose against the Messenger
of Allah (as) and God Almighty inflicted severe torments on him. Neither
his enormous army, nor his vast realm, nor his power, nor the
possessions of his people could impede Divine torments and they were all
drowned in the raging waves of the Nile in which they took pride. Now,
you are far inferior to them in terms of means and number. How could you
be deceived by your meager means and number?

The Arabic nominal form wabil originally denotes heavy shower, but it
connotes any heavy and severe thing, particularly torments. The blessed
Verse in question implies the severity of the torment that it showers
upon the sinners like a heavy downpour of rain. Disobedience to the
commands of Allah’s Messenger entails torments and entanglements.

Surah al-Muzzammil – Verses 17-19
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ تَتَّقُونَ إِن كَفَرْتُمْ يَوْمًا يَجْعَلُ الْوِلْدَانَ
شِيبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّمَاءُ مُنفَطِرٌ بِهِ ۚ كَانَ وَعْدُهُ مَفْعُولًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هَٰذِهِ تَذْكِرَةٌ ۖ فَمَنْ شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِ
سَبِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. Then, how can you avoid the chastisement, if you disbelieve a Day
that will make the children grey-headed?***  
***18. On such Day the heaven will be cleft asunder and His Promise
shall certainly be accomplished.***  
***19. This is a warning and whoever wills, he may take a Path toward
his Lord.***

The Arabic plural nominal form wildan, whose singular form is walid, is
applied to newly born infants. The Arabic plural nominal form shiyb,
whose singular form is ashyab, denotes the grey-headed and the old. Two
meanings may be suggested for the blessed Verse 17:

1. The severity of the Day of Resurrection shall be such that the newly
born infants grow old.

2. That Day shall be so long that the children grow old.

At any rate, the blessed Verse is addressed to the disbelievers
contemporaneous with the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S), warning
them that if you disbelieve, how will you be untouched by the Divine
severe torments that make the children grow old?

The torments which shall be inflicted upon the sinners on that Day shall
be so severe, harsh, and horrible that "they shall make the children
grow old."

It is reported that some of the horrible afflictions in this world may
instantly make people grey-headed. The blessed Verse is saying that even
if you happen not to be entangled with the torments in this world, like
Pharaoh and his people, what will you do with the torments which shall
be inflicted upon the disobedient on the Day of Resurrection?

The blessed Verse 18 further depicts that horrible Day, saying:

***"On such Day the heaven will be cleft asunder and His Promise shall
certainly be accomplished."***

Many a Qur’anic Verses treat of the incidents that shall happen on the
last day in this world and the Hereafter including horrible explosions
and severe earthquakes and spontaneous alterations.

The blessed Verse in question briefly deals with the same saying that
the heaven and the celestial bodies with their enormous greatness shall
not stand the colossal incidents to occur on that Day; how the weak and
vulnerable man shall be able to impede such incidents? The Arabic
nominal form infitar denotes cleaving asunder.

The blessed Verse 19 makes a reference to the foregoing warnings,
saying:

***"This is a warning and whoever wills, he may take a Path toward his
Lord."***

Whoever intends to find guidance and attain to everlasting happiness may
opt for the path leading to his Lord. Treading such path nonchalantly is
not regarded as a merit, since the merit lies in that man chooses the
path willfully. At any rate, God Almighty has provided man with the
path, vision, and the shining sun so that man be able to choose the
straight path and obey Divine Commands willfully.

Different exegeses have been suggested by Qur’an exegetes concerning the
clause

***"This is a warning."***

Some suggest that reference is made to the admonitions in the preceding
blessed Verses. Some maintain that mention is made of the Chapter or the
Holy Qur’an in their entirety.

Some also hold that reference may be made to the Divine Command as to
establishing nightly canonical prayers, as reflected in the opening
Verses of the blessed Chapter, addressed to the Noble Prophet, though
the clause in question is generalizing it to the entire Muslim
community. Thus, the word path (sabil) mentioned in the following clause
as well implies nightly canonical prayers as a significant path leading
to the Lord.

Finally, the blessed Verses in question warn the arrogant beliers
intoxicated by affluence and bounties against four excruciating
torments: shackles and fetters, burning Fire, rough, choking, and deadly
food, and different kinds of torments contrasted with the bounties in
this world, availing oneself of boundless freedom, comfortable life,
palatable food, and comfort in different forms. Since they availed
themselves of all these bounties at the price of wrong doing, arrogance,
neglect, and disobedience to God Almighty, they shall have such dire
fate on the Day of Resurrection.

Surah al-Muzzammil – Verse 20
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّكَ يَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ تَقُومُ أَدْنَىٰ مِنْ ثُلُثَيِ
اللَّيْلِ وَنِصْفَهُ وَثُلُثَهُ وَطَائِفَةٌ مِنَ الَّذِينَ مَعَكَ ۚ
وَاللَّهُ يُقَدِّرُ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ ۚ عَلِمَ أَنْ لَنْ
تُحْصُوهُ فَتَابَ عَلَيْكُمْ ۖ فَاقْرَءُوا مَا تَيَسَّرَ مِنَ
الْقُرْآنِ ۚ عَلِمَ أَنْ سَيَكُونُ مِنْكُمْ مَرْضَىٰ ۙ وَآخَرُونَ
يَضْرِبُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ يَبْتَغُونَ مِنْ فَضْلِ اللَّهِ ۙ وَآخَرُونَ
يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۖ فَاقْرَءُوا مَا تَيَسَّرَ مِنْهُ ۚ
وَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتُوا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَقْرِضُوا اللَّهَ قَرْضًا
حَسَنًا ۚ وَمَا تُقَدِّمُوا لِأَنْفُسِكُمْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ تَجِدُوهُ
عِنْدَ اللَّهِ هُوَ خَيْرًا وَأَعْظَمَ أَجْرًا ۚ وَاسْتَغْفِرُوا
اللَّهَ ۖ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. Your Lord knows that you and also a group of those with you stand
[in prayer] at night a little less than two thirds of the night, or half
the night, or a third of the night. And Allah measures the night and the
day. He knows that you are unable to [precisely] measure it, so He
granted you Mercy. Therefore, recite the Qur’an as much as may be
convenient to you.***

***He knows that there will be some amongst you who fall sick, others
travel [for earning a living], yet others fight in Allah’s Cause.
Therefore, recite as much of the Qur’an as may be convenient to you, and
perform canonical prayers and give alms, and lend Allah a goodly loan
[expend in His Cause]. And [know that] whatever good deeds you send
before you for yourselves, you shall find it with Allah, better and
greater in Reward. And seek Forgiveness of Allah as Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Gracious.***

The blessed Verse in question warns Muslims against being arrogant by
doing good deeds like establishing nightly prayers, recitation of the
Qur’anic Verses, and helping the poor, since they still need to invoke
God Almighty to forgive their sins.

The blessed Verse herein reflects that shedding tears at night in
prayer, doing jihad in the day, helping the poor, recitation of the
Qur’anic Verses, going on business trips, and doing good righteous deeds
are to be accompanied by seeking Divine Forgiving of one’s sins. The
preceding Verses urged Muslims to stand in prayer third, half, or two
thirds of the night.

The blessed Verse in question is saying that calculating such
measurements is hard lying beyond your abilities; as a consequence of
which God Almighty forgives you, but you may stand in prayer, establish
canonical prayers, and recite the Qur’anic Verses as much as they are
convenient to you, particularly when you are sick or you are on some
journey.

It is narrated from the Noble Imam Ridha (as) as saying:

*"Recite the Qur’an to the extent of your humbleness and purity
heart."*[^19]

Traveling for commerce and that aiming at jihad are juxtaposed in the
blessed Verse, though the former is this worldly and the latter is
otherworldly. It is narrated that if a merchant remembers God Almighty
at all times and refrains from fraud, hoarding, selling less than the
due measure, and selling at an unlawful higher price, is like a warrior
setting foot in the battle field to kill the enemy and safeguard
security.[^20]

Recitation of the Qur’anic Verses is not a religious obligation, but it
is highly recommended herein such that the Divine Command as to the same
is reiterated twice and is thus accorded particular attention. It is
worthy of note that Divine Commands are harmonious with human capacities
and they never entail hardships.

It is in this vein that the sick are supposed to perform ritual ablution
with soil or sand (tayammum) in lieu of water and they may establish
their canonical prayers in the manner convenient to them. The sick are
not supposed to take fast, but they should help the poor by paying a
certain amount of money or give them a specified amount of goods as a
token of atonement (kaffara).

The blessed Verse is saying that God Almighty is All-Aware that you may
not make precise calculations; as a consequence of which He forgives
your mistakes. The point is that Divine Obligations are convenient to
man and they never entail hardships.

The Arabic clause taba ‘alaykum (literally: "He has turned unto you"),
according to the majority of Qur’an exegetes, suggests lightening the
obligation rather than repenting of one’s sins. It may also be suggested
that upon the removal of the obligation, no sin may be committed and it
equal Divine Forgiving.

Mention is made of four other Commands at the close of the blessed Verse
thereby completing the plan as to self purification, saying:

*"Establish canonical prayers; pay alms, lend Allah a goodly loan
through expending in His Cause and know that whatever good deeds you
send forth for yourselves shall be Rewarded by Allah most befittingly;
invoke God Almighty for Forgiveness as He is the Oft-Forgiving, the Most
Gracious."*

These four Obligations, namely establishing canonical prayers, paying
alms and expending in Allah’s Cause, invoking God Almighty for
Forgiveness, and Recitation of the Qur’anic Verses and reflecting upon
them, as mentioned above, constitute a perfect plan aiming at self
purification and spiritual growth bearing indubitable impressions on
believers at any time, particularly on the threshold of the Islamic
faith.

Establishing prayers herein implies the obligatory canonical prayers
performed five times a day. By alms, paying the obligatory canonical
alms is herein intended. Further, lending God Almighty a goodly loan
(qardh al-hasana) connotes the supererogatory expending in Allah’s
Cause.

The expression

***"lending Allah a goodly loan"***

is the most noble expression imaginable in this respect, since God
Almighty is the Owner of all the Possessions and He is not expected by
no means to request others to lend Him a loan, but He hereby urges the
believers to expend and make sacrifices in His Cause and obtain merits
by doing such noble deeds and tread the path of spiritual growth and
attain perfection.

It is noteworthy that making mention of invoking God Almighty for
Forgiveness, as mention at the close of such Divine Commands may reflect
that by acting upon such Commands, man may not feel that he is perfect
and God Almighty owes them something, but he is supposed to regard
himself neglectful at all times and turn toward Him, since no one is
able to praise Him most befittingly.

Some Qur’an exegetes maintain that laying emphasis on these Command
reflects that the believers may not imagine that lightening the
Obligations as to praying to God Almighty and reciting the Qur’anic
Verses at night does not apply to other religious obligations, since the
latter stand the way they are, namely other religious obligations are
not subject to any decrease or lightening.[^21]

*O Lord! Grant us all the Blessing of standing in prayers at night, the
recitation of the Holy Qur’an, and treading the path of spiritual growth
in the light of the Heavenly Light!*

[^1]: Ruh al-Ma‘ani, vol. 28, p. 101; Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 6,
p. 276.

[^2]: Tafsir Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 375.

[^3]: 59:21

[^4]: Tafsir Atyab al-Bayan, vol. 13, p. 249.

[^5]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question; Usul Kafi,
the chapter on the articulate recitation of the Qur’an (bab tartil
al-Qur’an).

[^6]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, ibid.; Usul Kafi, ibid.; Nur al-Thiqalayn, under
the blessed Verse in question.

[^7]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^8]: For instance, Usul Kafi; Nur al-Thiqalayn; Durr al-Manthur; and
other tradition and exegetic sources.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 87, p. 143.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 378.

[^12]: Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 448, tradition 16.

[^13]: Fakhr Razi’s exegetic work, vol. 30, p. 177.

[^14]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^15]: Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 450, tradition 27, narrating from
the Noble Imam Baqir (as).

[^16]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^17]: Ruh al-Ma‘ani, vol. 29, p. 107.

[^18]: 88:6

[^19]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^20]: Tafsir Durr al-Manthur.

[^21]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 20, p. 156.


