Surah al-Mudaththir, Chapter 74
===============================

**(The One Reposing in Bed)**

**Section (juz’) 29**

**Number of Verses: 56**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

This Chapter, revealed in Mecca, has 56 Verses. It was indubitably
revealed in Mecca, though there exists no unanimity as to being the
earliest of the Chapters revealed to the Noble Prophet (S), or it
followed Chapter 96 (Surah al-‘Alaq) in the sequence of Revelation.

However, according attention to the contents of these two Chapters (74,
96) reflects that the latter was revealed on the threshold of the
Prophetic call, but the former concerns the time when the Noble Prophet
(S) was Divinely appointed to call the general public, when the
clandestine call had come to its end.

Therefore, some of the Qur’an exegetes maintain that Chapter 97 was the
earliest of the Chapters revealed on the threshold of the Prophet
Revelation of the Noble Prophet (S), but Chapter 74 was the earliest of
the Chapters revealed following his call to the general public.

At any rate, the nature of the Meccan Chapters, mainly calling people to
turn toward the origin and the return, confrontation with polytheism,
and warning the beliers against Divine torment, is explicitly reflected
in the blessed Chapter in question.

The Merit of Reciting the Chapter
---------------------------------

It is narrated from the Noble Imam Baqir (as) that whoever recites Surah
al-Mudaththir in their obligatory canonical prayers, God Almighty shall
make them accompany the Noble Prophet (S) and shall grant them his
elevated degree, and they shall not be entangled with misfortune and
pain in this worldly life. Further traditions have been narrated from
the Noble Prophet (S) and the Infallible Imams (as), though for the sake
of brevity, mention is not herein made of them.

It goes without saying that the mere recitation of the words of the
blessed Chapter may not result in such great consequences, but one is
supposed to accord attention to the contents and most precisely act upon
them.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 1-2
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الْمُدَّثِّرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُمْ فَأَنذِرْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. O you reposing in bed!***  
***2. Arise and warn [the world]!***

Different occasions of Revelation have been reported in Qur’an exegetic
sources for the blessed Chapter in question, though for the sake of
brevity, mention is not herein mentioned of them. However, the Noble
Prophet (S) is undoubtedly addressed in these Verses, though no explicit
reference has been made to him therein, but it is reflected in the
contents.

The opening two blessed Verses say:

*"O you reposing enveloped in bed covers! Arise and warn the world
[against Divine torment, since the time of rest and repose has passed
and the time of rising and propagation of the Islamic faith have
arrived]!”*

The particular emphasis laid on the Noble Prophet (S) as both a bearer
of glad tidings (bashir) and a warner (nadhir) is owing to the truth
that warning the people, particularly on the threshold of the Prophetic
call, made significant contributions to awakening the neglectful souls.

Concerning the reason lying behind urging him to embark upon his
Prophetic call while he reposed in bed, some Qur’an exegetes hold that
the Arab polytheists assembled on the threshold of pilgrimage to Mecca
and some of them, e.g. Abu Jahl, Abu Sufyan, Walid ibn Mughayra, and
Nadhr ibn Harith, consulted as to the manner of providing replies to the
questions raised by non-Meccan pilgrims who had heard scattered material
regarding the Prophetic call of the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith
(S).

Following holding many a conference, they came to the conclusion that
they had better call him a magician (sahir), since the consequences of
magic include causing separation between couples and fathers and sons,
and the Noble Prophet (S) had acted accordingly through his Prophetic
call.

Having heard such words, the Noble Prophet (S) was deeply saddened and
returned home morbidly and reposed in his bed. Then, the blessed Verses
in question were revealed calling him to arise and struggle against
them. Other suggested interpretations make mention of the same call to
rising and guiding the society.

It would be of interest to know that the Arabic imperative clause
fandhir

***("Warn!")***

makes no reference to the object of such warning, since it reflects the
generality of the act. In other words, he is urged herein to warn the
people against idolatry, polytheism, disbelief, wrong doing, corruption,
Divine torment, the reckoning on the Day of Resurrection, and the like.

In this respect, it is narrated from the Noble Imam Sadiq (as) that the
blessed Verse means

***"shorten your clothes!" (thiyabaka faqsir).***[^1]

Some Qur’an exegetes also maintain that reference is herein made to
wives, since it is reflected elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^2]:

***"They are garments for you and they are your garments."***

In other words, you maintain the dignity of each other and you are the
adornments of one another. All these interpretations may be intended by
the blessed Verse, reflecting the truth that Divinely appointed leaders
may be charismatic when they are unadulterated and people be certain as
to their fear of God Almighty. It is in the same vein, that the Command
as to chastity follows that of rising and warning.

In the course of the third Injunction, the blessed Verse 5 says:

***"Keep away from impurities and what entails Divine torment."***

The generalization of the meaning of the Arabic word

***rujz ("impurity")***

has led to different interpretations for the same: idols, any kind of
sin, vice, mammonism as the sources of any wrong and sin, Divine torment
as the consequence of polytheism and committing sins, and anxiety and
apprehension.[^3]

The term is also applied to any kind of sin and polytheism, idolatry,
satanic temptations, vices, and Divine torment leading to apprehension
and deviation from the Straight Path. The comprehensive meaning of the
blessed Verse includes any deviation and vice leading to Divine Wrath in
this world and the Hereafter.

The Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S), as reflected in his
biographical accounts acknowledged by friends and foes, is indicative of
his keeping away from vices, though the point is accorded emphasis
herein.

The fourth Injunction is intended by the blessed Verse 6, saying:

*"Give not a thing in order to have more nor consider your deeds of
obedience to Allah as a favor to him."*

The contextual meaning of the blessed Verse includes any kind of
expecting obligation from God Almighty and the people because of good
deeds. One is not supposed to expected indebtedness from God Almighty
for struggling in His Cause, since He did favors to individuals by
granting them such exalted degrees.

Likewise, God’s servants are not supposed to think highly one one’s good
deeds, but they should at all times bear in mind their neglect and the
truth that worshipping God Almighty is a great Divine Blessings.

In other words, your rising, warning, propagation of monotheism, making
mention of Divine Glory and Majesty, purity of garments, and abstaining
from sins are not sources of regarding God Almighty indebted to you nor
should you think highly of them, but you are supposed to keep in mind
that they are Divine Blessings for which you should be grateful and be
absorbed in His Love such that you underestimate such great deeds.

In technical terms, omission of objects of a relation is indicative of
generality which in this case includes the torments in this world and
the Hereafter as well as the evil consequences of vices.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 3-7
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَبَّكَ فَكَبِّرْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَثِيَابَكَ فَطَهِّرْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالرُّجْزَ فَاهْجُرْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَمْنُن تَسْتَكْثِرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِرَبِّكَ فَاصْبِرْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. And magnify your Lord!***  
***4. And purify your garments!***  
***5. And keep away from impurities.***  
***6. And give not a thing in order to have more.***  
***7. And be patient for the sake of your Lord!***

Five significant Injunctions are revealed unto the Noble Prophet (S)
following his call to rise and warn. These injunctions serve as models
for the people.

The first injunction concerns monotheism:

***"Only magnify your Lord, your possessor and fosterer. Whatever you
possess is granted by Him.***

Laying emphasis on the word

***rabb ("Lord")***

which precedes the imperative verbal form kabbir ("magnify") indicates
exclusivity and reflects the question of monotheism substantiated by an
argument in such brief clause. It is so interesting and meaningful that
the Qur’anic clause is so terse and concise.

The mere utterance of

*"Allah is the Greatest"*

is not intended, though such utterance is an implication reflected in
the traditions as well, but the utterance is intended to say that the
believers are supposed to magnify their Lord in terms of belief, words,
and practice. God Almighty is supposed to be regarded as possessing the
Attributes of Beauty and glorified of any defect.

He is too Glorious to be describable. It is narrated from the Ahl
al-Bayt that

*"Allah is the Greatest"*

intends to say that God Almighty is far Superior to be described and
comprehended by mankind. Therefore, uttering such clause is far
comprehensive than glorification which merely includes being glorified
of any kind of defect.

Proceeding with the question of monotheism, the blessed Verse 4 includes
the second Injunctions as to purity from impurities, saying:

***"Purify your clothes."***

The word

***"clothes"***

may herein serve as a metaphor for human deeds, since the deeds are
likened to clothes as the outward appearance reflects the inward beliefs
and feelings. Some also maintain that the word "clothes" herein
indicates heart and soul, namely purify you heart from impurities. Where
the clothes are supposed to be cleansed, the one who wears them is
accorded precedence.

Some have also held that the word denotes the outward clothes, since
their purity constitutes the most significant token of character,
education, and culture. Pre-Islamic Arabs hardly accorded attention to
keeping away from impurities and their clothes were generally unclean.
It was quite common, as in the case of those entangled in the age of
ignorance, to wear quite long garments, such that their garments were
soiled out of being dragged while they walked.

The blessed Verse 7 makes a reference to the last Injunction, saying:

***"Be patient for the sake of your Lord!"***

Once more, we are faced with a comprehensive meaning of patience and
steadfastness against the ignorant polytheists’ and the enemies’ abuses.

The blessed Verse is urging the believers to be steadfast in obedience
to Allah’s Commands and be patience in struggling against concupiscent
desires and the enemies of the faith. Patience is indubitably the basis
and the safeguard of all the aforesaid plans. It is principally the best
means of propagating the faith and guiding people.

Thus, patience is accorded attention is many a Qur’anic Verse.

As reflected in the Nahj al-Balagha, it is narrated from the Commander
of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) as saying:

*"Patience and steadfastness in the cause of the faith is like the head
against the body.”*

Therefore, patience and steadfastness serve as the most significant of
the plans of the Prophets (as) and the men of God. The more they faced
hardships, the more they grew patient.

Regarding the Rewards of the patient, the Noble Prophet (S) is reported
as saying:

*"Allah says that whenever I inflict some afflictions upon my servants’
bodies, property, or children, they face them patiently and I cannot
measure their deeds nor may I open up their record of deeds."*[^4]

Having been inquired regarding faith, Allah’s Messenger (S) replied:

*"Half of faith lies in patience."*[^5]

In this respect, it is narrated from Imam ‘Ali (as) as saying:

*"Ward off sorrows through good certitude and patience."*[^6]

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 8-10
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا نُقِرَ فِي النَّاقُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَذَٰلِكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَوْمٌ عَسِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ غَيْرُ يَسِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. When it shall be blown into the Trumpet.***  
***9. That Day shall be a Hard Day,***  
***10. Far from convenient for the disbelievers.***

Proceeding with the Injunction as to the rise and warning reflected in
the preceding blessed Verses, those in question open with a particular
and eloquent emphasis, saying:

*"When it shall be blown into the Trumpet that Day shall be a Hard Day,
far from convenient for the disbelievers.”*

It is noteworthy that the Arabic nominal form naqur, derived from n-q-r,
denotes strike so as to pierce something. The cognate form minqar is the
birds’ beak thereby they may pierce objects. Consequently, the Trumpet
whose sound is so loud as if it pierces the ears and penetrates into the
brain is termed naqur.

It is explicitly reflected in the Qur’anic Verses that the Trumpet shall
be blown into twice in the last moment of this world and the beginning
of the Resurrection Day, the first of such extraordinarily awe inspiring
and shocking sounds is that of death and the latter is that of awakening
and life encompassing the world over.

These two sounds are also terms the first and the second sounds of the
Trumpet. The blessed Verse in question treats of the second sound
whereby the Resurrection shall be established and the hardship of such
Day for the disbelievers.

A detailed discussion on the Trumpet and its sound is to be found above
under 39:68. At any rate, the blessed Verses in question reflect the
truth that many a hardship shall await the disbelievers upon blowing
into the Trumpet. That Day shall be so excruciating and agonizing that
the strongest men shall be brought to their knees.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 11-15
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَرْنِي وَمَنْ خَلَقْتُ وَحِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْتُ لَهُ مَالًا مَّمْدُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَنِينَ شُهُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَهَّدتُّ لَهُ تَمْهِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ يَطْمَعُ أَنْ أَزِيدَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. Leave Me Alone with the one whom I created alone.***  
***12. I granted him abundant possessions.***  
***13. And children to be by his side [serving him].***  
***14. And prepared all the means of life for him.***  
***15. He still desires further increase.***

As reflected above, the disbelievers were collectively warned, though
the blessed Verses in question particularly make reference to the most
influential amongst them by eloquently and decisively warning them,
saying:

***"Leave me Alone with the one whom I created alone.”***

The blessed Verses in question allude to Walid ibn Mughayra Makhzumi,
one of the most notorious chiefs of Quraysh. An occasion of Revelation
is mentioned in many an exegetic sources, e.g. Majma‘ al-Bayan, Fi Hilal
al-Qur’an, al-Mizan, and those by Qurtubi and Maraghi.

It is also mentioned that whatever service rendered to the people,
irrespective of spiritual ones, e.g. propagation of the Islamic faith
and guiding them or expending in Allah’s Cause, are not supposed to be
compensated by reminding people of them or desiring further increase in
possessions granted by God Almighty, since such undesirable acts render
the good deeds ineffective.

In this respect, it is mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^7]:

***"O you who believe! Do not render in vain your expending in Allah's
Cause by reminders of your generosity or by abuse.”***

The Arabic negative imperative verbal form la tamnun deriving from m-n-n
herein implies any word reflecting the significance of something granted
someone else. T

hus, its relation with the question of

***"desiring further increase" (istikthar)***

is clarified. Man is supposed to regard his services meager without
expecting any remuneration, rather than desire increase which will lead
to rendering in vain the righteous good acts. In this vein, the theme of
the blessed Verse is reflected in some of the traditions that one is not
supposed to grant anyone anything if he desires further increase in
return.[^8]

Regarding the exegesis of the blessed Verse in question, it is narrated
from the Noble Imam Sadiq (as) as saying:

*"Do not overestimate the good deed done in Allah’s Cause."*

The tradition reflects one of the implications of the universal meaning
of the blessed Verse.[^9]

The Arabic adverb of manner wahidan may either modify the Creator or the
created.

The former possibility allows two suggestions:

*"Leave Me Alone with him so that I severely chastise him,"*

or:

*"I created him alone and granted him all these Bounties, but he showed
ingratitude.”*

The latter possibility may also entail two interpretations either
alluding to the point that in his mother’s womb and upon his birth, he
was alone, without any possessions or children, but such Bounties were
granted him later on; or it may make a reference to the point that he
regarded himself and his father unique and unrivaled amongst the
Arabs.[^10] However, the first of these four interpretations sound
further befitting.

The blessed Verse 12 says:

***"I granted him abundant possessions."***

The Arabic past participial form mamdud originally denotes "stretched,
expanded," though it herein implies the abundant possessions or
expansion in temporal and spatial terms. It is also suggested that he
possessed numerous gardens and farms and plenty of money and gold. The
word implies all these senses, but they were of not avail to him owing
to his showing ingratitude and confronting Allah and His Messenger (S).

The blessed Verse 13 alludes to the large number of people at his
disposal, saying:

***"And children to be by his side [serving him]."***

They were with their father at all times, since they were neither
pressed for means of life nor had they to leave their father behind and
depart for a remote place. It is reported in a number of traditions that
he had ten children.

The blessed Verse 14 makes a reference to other Bounties bestowed upon
him, saying:

***"And prepared all the means of life for him."***

The Bounties bestowed upon him included healthy body, possessions,
healthy children, and social prestige. The Arabic word tamhid, derived
from m-h-d, originally denotes preparing a place, like a cradle, for the
child, though it connotes all means and opportunities of life in terms
of convenience, promotion, prestige, and generally speaking all the
Bounties of life and the means of achievement and success.

The blessed Verse 15 is saying that in lieu of prostrating himself
before God Almighty for all these Bounties, he showed ingratitude and
desired further Bounties:

***"He still desires further increase."***

Reference is not only made to Walid ibn Mughayra, since all mamonists
are alike in that their thirst may never be quenched and even if the
entire world happens to fall into their share, they expect to possess
more. The point is that worldly possessions all fall into the shares of
men and the distribution depends on Divine Will rather than human
knowledge and skills.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 16-17
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا ۖ إِنَّهُ كَانَ لِآيَاتِنَا عَنِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَأُرْهِقُهُ صَعُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. It shall never be thus, since he opposes Our Àyat [Verses, Signs,
proofs].***

***17. I shall soon oblige him to climb the summit of life [then, I
shall thrust him downwards.***

The disbelieving stranger is harshly rejected in the blessed Verse 16:

***"I shall never be thus, since he opposes Our Àyat."***

The disbeliever was fully aware that the Holy Qur’an is neither the word
of the jinn nor that of mankind, but it possesses strong roots, fruitful
branches, and unparalleled appeal. However, he regarded it as magic and
its bearer a magician.

The Arabic adverb of manner

***‘anidan ("obdurately")***

implies willful opposition and animosity, when one comprehends the
truthfulness of something, but he rises against it. Walid was the
personification of such obdurate animosity. The Arabic past verbal form
kana implies progressiveness, in that he bore animosity against the
truth at all times, rather than temporarily.

The blessed Verse 17 makes a terse reference to his dire fate:

***"I shall soon oblige him to climb the hard to pass summit of life and
then I shall thrust him downwards.***

The Arabic verbal form sa-urhiquhu, derived from r-h-q ("to cover
fiercely") connotes overburdening and afflicting one with different
torments. The Arabic nominal form sa‘ud denotes a place climbed by
someone and the Arabic verbal noun su‘ud is employed in the sense of
climbing. Since climbing summits is hard, it implies any kind of hard
task. Consequently, some exegetes maintain that it herein connotes
Divine torment.

The blessed Verse may allude to the torments inflicted upon Walid in
this world, since it is reported in historical sources that having
reached the summit of achievements in his personal and social life, he
fell down such that he recurrently lost his possessions and
offspring.[^11]

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 18-25
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ فَكَّرَ وَقَدَّرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ قُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ نَظَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ عَبَسَ وَبَسَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَدْبَرَ وَاسْتَكْبَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالَ إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ يُؤْثَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا قَوْلُ الْبَشَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. He thought and plotted [against the Qur’an].***  
***19. So let him be cursed: how he plotted [against the Truth]!***  
***20. And once more let him be cursed: how he plotted [to employ his
satanic stratagem]!***  
***21. Then he cast a glance.***  
***22. Then, he frowned and hastened;***  
***23. Then he turned away [from the Truth] and was arrogant.***  
***24. Then, he said: "This is nothing but appealing magic like that of
the ancients,***  
***25. "This is nothing but the word of a human being!***

The blessed Verses in question provide further details regarding Walid
ibn Mughayra Makhzumi whom God Almighty had bestowed abundant
possessions and offspring, but he rose against the Noble Prophet of the
Islamic faith (S), striving to belie the Noble Prophet (S) and the Holy
Qur’an by resorting to ploys.

It goes without saying that thinking is basically good, provided that it
be in line with the Truth. One hour spent on intellection entails the
merits of worshipping God Almighty for one year or more, since that one
hour may totally alter the course of human fate. Nonetheless, if it be
employed in the cause of disbelief, corruption, and vices, it will be
reprehensible. Walid’s thoughts fall into the second category.

The Arabic verbal form qaddara herein implies that he devised his
vicious ploys.

The blessed Verses 19 and 20 say:

***"So let him be cursed: how he plotted [against the Truth]! And once
more let him be cursed: how he plotted [to employ his satanic
stratagem]!"***

Concerning the occasion of the Revelation of the blessed Verse in
question, Qur’an exegetes maintain that Walid intended to unify the
polytheists urging them to disseminate false accusations against the
Noble Prophet (S).

When it was suggested to call the Noble Prophet (S)

***"the poet,"***

he refused. He further rejected his being called a soothsayer or a
lunatic.

Finally, the polytheists suggested that the Noble Prophet be called a
magician and he accepted such false attribution, since he falsely
imagined that magicians were in the habit of severing the bonds of
friendship and establishing friendly ties between former opponents. He
thought that such things had appeared upon the emergence of the Islamic
faith and the Holy Qur’an.

Thus, he embarked upon investigation and reflection, as reflected by the
terse Qur’anic expression:

***"He thought and devised his ploys."***

Other polytheists made suggestions, but it was Walid who reflected upon
the idea and made the choice. Such expression, particularly its
reiteration, reflects that he was an expert in devising such evil plots,
such that his ideas were a source of surprise.

The blessed Verses 21-25 say:

***"Then he cast a glance [to make sure that everything was in order.
Then, he frowned and hastened; then he turned away [from the Truth] and
was arrogant. Then, he said: 'This is nothing but appealing magic like
that of the ancients, this is nothing but the word of a human being
[rather than Divine Revelation]!"***

Thus, following persistent investigations and devising satanic ploys
against the Holy Qur’an, he uttered his final words and notwithstanding
all the stratagems employed by such mastermind of the age of ignorance
and polytheism, he inadvertently extolled the Qur’an, reflecting that it
was so unprecedentedly appealing that all hearts might be impressed by
it.

He held that the Holy Qur’an engenders magical impressions bewitching
the hearts. Since the Holy Qur’an bears no resemblance to the sorcerers’
art, but its logical, rhythmical, and well-measured words clearly
indicate that it is Divine Revelation whose source is Divine Omniscience
encompassing all beauties consistently and coherently.

The Arabic past verbal form ‘abasa denotes that he frowned. The past
verbal form basara both implies hastened and frowned or grimaced. The
second sense of basara would be in line with ‘abasa, though intending
the former meaning would imply making hasty decisions for choosing a
false "label" for the Holy Qur’an.

The verbal form yu’tharu is used in the sense of relating a tale from
the ancients as their vestige. However, some hold that it is cognate
with ithar denoting choosing and deeming as precedent.

According to the former sense, Walid is saying that this magic is like
what is reported from the ancients, but as per the latter sense, he is
saying that magic is something that impresses the hearts owing to its
sweetness and appeal, hence its precedence over any other thing by the
people.

It is worthy of note that the blessed Verse includes an implied
confession as to the Inimitability of the Holy Qur’an, since it bears no
likeness to the extraordinary tasks performed by sorcerers.

The language of the Holy Qur’an is imbued with dignity, spirituality,
and unparalleled appeal, such that if Walid had been true in his claim
as to it being the words of mankind, others would have been able to
produce the like of it.

It is well-known that the Holy Qur’an many a time calls other to try to
produce the like of it, though none of the obdurate enemies well-versed
in the Arabic tongue have failed to produce the like or even something
inferior to it. The miracle of the Holy Qur’an lies in its
inimitability.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 26-30
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَأُصْلِيهِ سَقَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا سَقَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا تُبْقِي وَلَا تَذَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوَّاحَةٌ لِّلْبَشَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْهَا تِسْعَةَ عَشَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. I will cast him soon into Hell.***  
***27. And you are unaware of the Hell.***  
***28. Hellfire neither spares nor leaves anything [unconsumed].***  
***29. It totally alters the skin!***  
***30. Over it are appointed nineteen angels of torment.***

The preceding blessed Verses treated of the denial of the Holy Qur’an
and the Prophetic call of Muhammad (S) by one of the chiefs of the
polytheists. The blessed Verses in question make a reference to his
horrible chastisement on the Day of Resurrection, saying that God
Almighty will cast him soon into Hell burning him in the Fire.

The Arabic nominal form saqar denotes alteration and melting down under
the scorching heat of the sun. It is one of the attributes of the Hell,
frequently mentioned in the Qur’anic Verses. The attribute alludes to
the frightening torments awaiting the people of Hell. It is also
suggested that it is the name of one of the horrible and lower stages of
Hell.

Treating of the severity of the torments in store for the people of
Hell, the blessed Verse 27 poses a question:

***"What do you know about saqar?"***

The question indicates that the torments in it will be so severe that
they are imaginable in the same manner that the significance and the
greatness of the Bounties in Paradise are unimaginable.

The blessed Verse 28

***"Hellfire neither spares nor leaves anything [unconsumed]"***

may reflect that unlike the worldly fire that affects one part of the
body leaving other parts unscathed, for instance it affects the body
leaving intact the soul, Hellfire consumes man in its entirety leaving
nothing behind.

It is also suggested that Hellfire neither takes the life of the people
of Hell nor does it keep them alive, but they are entangled at all times
in a state between life and death, as reflected elsewhere in the Holy
Qur’an:

***"There he will neither die nor live"***[^12]***;***

***"We shall burn them in Fire such that their skins shall be roasted
through, We shall make other skins grow that they may taste the
chastisement"***[^13]***.***

The blessed Verse 29 provides another depiction of such burning Fire of
Divine Wrath:

***"It totally alters the skin"***

such that it shall be visible from afar. The Arabic clause lawwahatun
li-’l-bashar indicates that the Fire blackens the complexion blacker
than the dark of the night.

The Arabic nominal form bashar herein implies complexion or it may serve
as an instance of synecdoche alluding to mankind. The Arabic feminine
present participial form lawwaha, cognate with lawh ("tablet") implies
becoming clear and apparent, though it also connotes altering and making
changes.

The blessed Verse 30,

***"Over it are appointed nineteen angels of torment"***

reflects that they are not appointed to be compassionate, but they are
supposed to severely chastise them.

Although the blessed Verse solely makes mention of the number

***"nineteen"***

without any explicit reference to the angels appointed to inflict
chastisement, but the following Verse clearly reflects that the angels
in charge of inflicting chastisement is intended herein.

It is worthy of note that we human beings are bounded by the
restrictions of the mundane world, are not fully aware of the precise
nature of Resurrection, Paradise, and Hell, but what our knowledge
consists of generalities. Thus, it is reported in traditions that each
of these nineteen angels is so powerful that it may easily cast a large
tribe into Hell.

The frailty of the thoughts of people like Abu Jahl is reflected herein
that upon hearing the blessed Verse in question, he said derisively unto
the Quraysh tribe:

*"May your mothers mourn your death! Do you not hear what the man is
saying?"*

Pointing at the Noble Prophet (S), he said:

*"He is saying that nineteen guardians guard the Hell, though each of
the guardians may not be overcome by ten brave men of your large
tribe."*[^14]

These light headed enemies of the Islamic faith intended to impede the
Light of Truth and rescue themselves from imminent perdition through
such derisive remarks.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verse 31
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا جَعَلْنَا أَصْحَابَ النَّارِ إِلَّا مَلَائِكَةً ۙ وَمَا
جَعَلْنَا عِدَّتَهُمْ إِلَّا فِتْنَةً لِّلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
لِيَسْتَيْقِنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ وَيَزْدَادَ الَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا إِيمَانًا ۙ وَلَا يَرْتَابَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ ۙ وَلِيَقُولَ الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِم مَّرَضٌ
وَالْكَافِرُونَ مَاذَا أَرَادَ اللَّهُ بِهَٰذَا مَثَلًا ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ
يُضِلُّ اللَّهُ مَن يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَن يَشَاءُ ۚ وَمَا يَعْلَمُ
جُنُودَ رَبِّكَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۚ وَمَا هِيَ إِلَّا ذِكْرَىٰ لِلْبَشَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. And We have set none but angels as guardians of the Fire. And We
have fixed their number only as a trial for the disbelievers, in order
that the people of the Book may arrive at a certainty [that the Holy
Qur’an is the Divine Book, since the same number is attested in the
Bible] and that the believers may increase their faith, and that no
doubt may be left for the people of the Book and the believers; further
[the number nineteen made] those in whose hearts is a disease and the
disbelievers may say: "What Allah intends by this example?" Thus, Allah
leads astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. And none may know
the hosts of your Lord but He. And this is nothing else than a reminder
to mankind.***

As reflected in the preceding blessed Verses, God Almighty appointed
nineteen angels (or nineteen groups) as the guardians of Hell and it led
to controversy amongst the polytheists and the disbelievers. Some of
them derided such words and few of them imagined that they could easily
overcome them.

The blessed Verse in question, the longest one in the Chapter, responds
to them and sheds further light on the point:

***"We have set none but angels as guardians of the Fire."***

Such angels are so powerful and in the Qur’anic terms ghalath and
shidad, i.e. stern and strict, that all sinners shall be feeble and week
before them.

The blessed Verse proceeds to say

***"We have fixed their number only as a trial for the disbelievers."***

The trial aimed at two things: firstly, they derived the number
nineteen, whereas any other number could engender the same question.

Secondly, they regarded the number nineteen to be few and said
derisively that they could appoint ten people against each of them and
thereby overcome them. They were unaware of the truth that the angels
are so powerful that according to the Holy Qur’an, a number of them
sufficed to send the people of Lot (as) to perdition by totally
destroying their prosperous cities.

Further, the preceding blessed Verses treated of the points lying behind
the number of the guardians of Hell; however, the blessed Verse in
question adds:

***"So that the people of the Book may arrive at a certainty."***

In this respect, it is narrated that the Noble Prophet (S) was asked by
his companions regarding the number of the guardians of Hell.

He replied:

*"Allah and His Messenger (S) know better."*

Gabriel was sent down and revealed unto him that they were nineteen
angels appointed as the guardians of Hell.[^15]

The people of the Book did not protest against the number which reflects
that they had found the number in line with their Scriptures. Thus, they
arrived at further certitude as to the Prophetic Call of Allah’s
Messenger (S). Besides, the believers’ faith was further firmly
established.

Thus, the blessed Verse proceeds to say:

***"[the aim was] that the believers may increase their faith."***

Further emphasis is laid on the three goals: the faith of the people of
the Book, that of the believers in the Islamic faith, and the trial of
the polytheists and disbelievers:

***"that no doubt may be left for the people of the Book and the
believers; further [the number nineteen made] those in whose hearts is a
disease and the disbelievers may say: 'What Allah intends by this
example?"***

Regarding

***"those in whose hearts is a disease,"***

some Qur’an exegetes hold that the hypocrites are hereby intended, since
the Qur’anic expression alludes to them, an instance of which is

***"In their hearts is a disease and Allah has increased their
disease"***[^16]***.***

Nonetheless, further investigation of the Qur’anic instances of the
expression reflects that it does not solely include the hypocrites, but
it encompasses all the disbelievers who take a belligerent stance
against the Qur’anic Verses.

The blessed Verse further says:

***"Thus, Allah leads astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. And
none may know the hosts of your Lord but He."***

The aforesaid remarks clearly reflect that Divine Will as to guiding
some people and leading some others astray is well-measured. Those who
are in error deserve no better than that and those obedient to Allah
deserve such Guidance.

In other words, God Almighty does not intend to harm some people by
leading them astray, but error is the disbelievers’ chastisement. Put
the case that a thief breaks into your home and you lock the doors.
Confining him does not entail leading him astray, but it aims at
chastising him.

What should be borne in mind regarding God Almighty leading some people
astray, as reflected in a number of the Qur’anic Verses, that the Arabic
word idhlal denotes abandoning someone, implying that God Almighty
abandons those who do not deserve to be guided; the similitude of which
is a farmer who abandons the rotten seeds but keeps the good ones and
paves the ground for their growth.

The closing clauses of the blessed Verse read:

***"And none may know the hosts of your Lord but He. And this is nothing
else than a reminder to mankind."***

The nineteen guardians of Hell does not reflect the total number of the
hosts of the Lord, but the number of the latter are so large that
according to some of the traditions, the earth and the heaven are filled
with them, such that there is no spot in the entire world of existence
unless there is an angel glorifying God Almighty there.

For further details in this respect, one may refer to elevated words of
Imam ‘Ali as recorded in the first sermon of the Nahj al-Balagha.

Different suggestions have been made by Qur’an exegetes concerning the
antecedent of the pronoun

***hiya ("this, it")***

in

***wa ma hiya illa dhikra li-’l-bashar ("And this is nothing else than a
reminder to mankind.")***

Some maintain that the hosts of the Lord some of whom are the guardians
of Hell are the antecedent.

Some hold that

***saqar ("Hell")***

is the antecedent.

There are some exegetes who believe that reference is made to the Holy
Qur’an. Although they all lead to awakening, reminder, and awareness,
but the first suggestion is more in line with the tone of the Verse,
since the aim is to state the truth that if God Almighty has selected
hosts, it does not reflect that He cannot chastise all the enemies and
sinners Himself, but they all serve as a reminder, awakening, and
according attention to the seriousness of Divine torment.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 32-34
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا وَالْقَمَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّيْلِ إِذْ أَدْبَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالصُّبْحِ إِذَا أَسْفَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. It is not what they imagine! By the moon!***  
***33. And the night when it withdraws,***  
***34. And by the dawn when it brightens.***

Different oaths have been taken in the blessing Verses in question in
order to lay emphasis on raising the dead on the Day of Resurrection,
Hell, and the torments awaiting the disbelievers there, saying:

***"It is not as they imagine. By the moon!"***

The Arabic negative emphatic adverb kalla is employed to reject the
words uttered by the other party.

It is also used at times to negate the following words. It herein
negates the disbelievers’ unfounded belying of Hell and its torments as
well as their derision of the number of the angels guarding Hell, as
mentioned in the preceding blessed Verses.

An oath is taken to the moon, since as one of the greatest of Divine
Signs, it is of significance in terms of creation, regular rotation,
brightness, beauty, and the lunar phases used as the standard for
preparing calendars.

The blessed Verses 33 and 34 say:

***"By the night when it withdraws! And by the dawn when it
brightens!”***

These three oaths are related and complementary, since it is common
knowledge that the moon shines at night and its light is overshadowed by
sunshine such that it is hardly visible during the day. Night is serene
and peaceful, when the lovers of the Truth may invoke their beloved and
share their secrets.

However, the dark night would be of interest when it withdraws and the
bright dawn approaches. The day break offers a beacon of the end of the
dark night. It is the most delightful and the most beautiful ecstatic
experience when the heart brims with light and purity. It is noteworthy
that the three oaths stand in harmony with the Light of Guidance (the
Holy Qur’an), withdrawal of the shadows of polytheism and idolatry, and
the daybreak of monotheism.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 35-37
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهَا لَإِحْدَى الْكُبَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَذِيرًا لِّلْبَشَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِمَن شَاءَ مِنكُمْ أَن يَتَقَدَّمَ أَوْ يَتَأَخَّرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***35. It [the frightful incidents on the Day of Resurrection] is but
one of the greatest issues.***  
***36. A warning to all mankind,***  
***37. To any of you that chooses to go forward or to lag behind [namely
proceed or not to proceed toward Guidance].***

The blessed Verses in question treat of the objects of the oaths and
frightening incidents on the Day of Resurrection, Hell, and the angels
of torment indubitably constitute significant issues. The Arabic
adjectival form kubar denotes "great, significant."

The antecedent of the pronoun in innaha is either

***saqar ("Hell")***

or

***junud ("Lord’s Host"),***

or all the incidents to occur on the Day of Resurrection; the greatness
of each and every of them is crystal clear.

The blessed Verse 36 proceeds to say that the goal behind the creation
of Hell is not seeking revenge, but it serves as a warning to mankind
against the frightening torment in store for the disbelievers, the
sinners, and the enemies of Truth.

The blessed Verse 37 lay further emphasis on the point, saying that the
warning is not particular to a specific group but it addresses all
mankind, to anyone who opts for taking precedence by proceeding toward
doing good righteous deeds and obedience to Allah, and to those who
intend to lag behind. Good for those who takes precedence and woe unto
those who intend to lag behind.

Some Qur’an exegetes also maintain that precedence and lagging behind
herein reflects proceeding or not proceeding toward Hellfire. Some also
hold that taking precedence indicates human self and its development and
growth or its decadence and lagging behind.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 38-45
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ رَهِينَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا أَصْحَابَ الْيَمِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي جَنَّاتٍ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا سَلَكَكُمْ فِي سَقَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا لَمْ نَكُ مِنَ الْمُصَلِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ نَكُ نُطْعِمُ الْمِسْكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُنَّا نَخُوضُ مَعَ الْخَائِضِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. Every person is a pledge for what he has earned,***  
***39. Except those on the Right [whose records of deeds are given to
their right hand as a token of their faith and fear of God
Almighty].***  
***40. In Gardens they will ask,***  
***41. the sinners [inquiring]:***  
***42. "What has caused you to enter Hell?"***  
***43. They will say: "We were not of those who used to offer the
prayers,***  
***44. "Nor we used to feed the poor;***  
***45. "And we used to talk falsehood with vain talkers.***

Proceeding with the discussion raised in the preceding blessed Verses
concerning Hell and the dwellers of Hell, the blessed Verse 38 says:

***"Every person is a pledge for what he has earned."***

The Arabic nominal form rahina, derived from r-h-n ("pledge") denotes
the pledge provided as a guarantee against the loan. It sounds as if all
human existence is a pledge against the fulfillment of his obligations,
such that when he fulfils them, he will be set free, otherwise, he will
remain in bondage.

Thus, the blessed Verse 39 adds:

***"Except those on the Right [whose records of deeds are given to their
right hand as a token of their faith and fear of God Almighty],"***

who are free from such bondage since they have broken the shackles and
fetters of bondage through faith and doing good righteous deeds as a
consequence of which they freely enter Paradise.

Qur’an exegetes disagree on the meaning of

***"the people on the right."***

Some maintain that it makes a reference to those whose records of deeds
are given to their right hand. Some hold that they are the believers who
have committed no sins at all. Some others believe that a reference is
made to the angels.

However, the Qur’anic evidence reflects the first suggestion – those who
have faith and have done good righteous deeds and their few sins are
overshadowed by their good righteous deeds, as reflected elsewhere in
the Holy Qur’an[^17]:

***"The good deeds remove the evil deeds."***

Their good deeds efface their evil deeds, or they freely enter Paradise,
or the reckoning of their deeds shall be quite easy, as reflected
elsewhere in the Glorious Qur’an[^18]:

***"Then as for him who will be given his record in his right hand, he
shall receive an easy reckoning."***

Qurtubi, the Sunni Qur’an exegete of repute narrates from Imam Baqir
(as) as saying:

*"We and our adherents are*

***"the people of the right hand"***

*and whoever regards our Ahl al-Bayt as enemies, he shall be in the
bondage of his deeds."*[^19]

The blessed Verses 40-42 say:

***"In Gardens they will ask, the sinners [inquiring]: "What has caused
you to enter Hell?"***

The blessed Verses clearly reflect that the ties between the people of
Paradise and those of the Hell shall not be totally severed, as the
former may witness the dire fate of the latter and converse with them.

In the blessed Verses 43-45, the sinners respond to the question posed
by the people of the right hand by confessing to their four grave sins:

***"They will say: "We were not of those who used to offer the prayers,
nor we used to feed the poor; and we used to talk falsehood with vain
talkers."***

Had they offered their prayers, they would have remembered God Almighty
forbidding them from committing evil deeds and calling them unto the
Divine Straight Path. They confess that they did not feed the poor,
seemingly implying that they refrained from attending to the urgent
necessities and requirements of the needy, with respect to clothes and
accommodation.

Qur’an exegetes maintain that reference is herein made to the obligatory
alms, since failing to pay the supererogatory alms may not entail ending
up in Hell, emphasizing that some of the Qur’anic Verses revealed in
Mecca addressed the issue of paying alms, though the details and
specifications of the same, particularly its concentration in the Muslim
treasury (bayt al-mal) were specified in Medinan Verses.

They also confess that they used to associate with the followers of
falsehood and whenever they heard some words against the Truth or upon
being notified of some session aiming at the dissemination of falsehood,
they joined them acknowledging their denial of Truth and derived please
from deriding the words of Truth.

The verbal form

***nakhudhu ("we entered"),***

derived from kh-w-dh, originally denotes entering water and moving in
it, though it is also applied to getting adulterated by impurities. The
word is used in the Holy Qur’an in the sense of engaging oneself in
unfounded and false affairs.

Mention is herein made of attending meetings held for deriding Divine
Verses, anti-Islamic propaganda, dissemination of heresy, obscene jokes,
and taking pride and deriving pleasure from the sins committed, slander
and sportive vain talks. The blessed Verse in question mainly refers to
attending the meetings held for destabilizing faith in God Almighty,
sacrilege, and dissemination of disbelief.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 46-48
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُنَّا نُكَذِّبُ بِيَوْمِ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّىٰ أَتَانَا الْيَقِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا تَنفَعُهُمْ شَفَاعَةُ الشَّافِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. "And we used to belie the Day of Recompense at all times,***  
***47. "Until there came to us the death."***  
***48. Therefore, no intercession of intercessors will be of any avail
to them.***

The blessed Verses 46-47, the sinners confess that their sins included
the denial of the Day of Reckoning at all times, until their death came
unto them. It goes without saying that denial of the Day of Resurrection
which is the Day of Reckoning destabilizes all Divine and ethical
values, particularly when it continues to the end of life.

It is worthy of note that the blessed Verses in question clearly reflect
that the disbelievers are obliged to observe the primary and the
secondary principles of religion, and the four injunctions, namely
establishing ritual prayers, paying religious obligatory alms,
refraining from attending the meetings held by the followers of
falsehood, and believing in the Day of Resurrection significantly
contribute to human guidance and spiritual growth.

Thus, those who truly establish obligatory ritual prayers, pay alms,
believe in the Day of Resurrection, and refrain from following falsehood
shall not be cast into Hell. It goes without saying that establishing
prayers entails worshipping God Almighty and it solely rests on faith.
Thus, making a reference to it reflects believing in God Almighty and
obedience to His Command.

It may be said that these four pillars begin with monotheism and end in
Resurrection, encompassing the relations amongst the Creator, the
created, and one’s self. The majority of Qur’an exegetes maintain that
death is herein intended by "certitude," since the believers and the
disbelievers believe in its certainty.

Man may doubt anything, but death, as it is reflected elsewhere[^20] in
the Holy Qur’an:

***"And worship your Lord until there comes unto you the certainty (of
death)."***

However, some hold that certainty herein indicates the awareness
obtained posthumously as to purgatory and Resurrection. Such exegesis is
somehow in line with the former.

The blessed Verse 48 makes a reference to the dire fate of this group
saying:

***"Therefore, no intercession of intercessors will be of any avail to
them."***

Neither the intercession of Allah’s Messengers (as) and Imams (as), nor
that of angels, nor the true believers, nor the martyrs, nor the
righteous shall be of any avail to them, since intercession requires the
right ground, and the disbelievers have totally destroyed such ground.
It is like pure water by which a feeble sapling is irrigated. Now, when
the sapling happens to be dead, such pure water may not give a new life
to it.

It was mentioned above in the discussion devoted to intercession[^21]
that the Arabic word shafa‘a derives from the root sh-f-‘, originally
denoting "attach something to something else," connoting that the person
for whom it is interceded is supposed to have traversed some part of the
way, though he has faced hardships, vicissitudes, and impediments. Thus,
he is interceded with to bear him assistance to traverse the remaining
distance.

It is noteworthy that the blessed Verse in question once again
emphasizes the question of intercession and the diversity of the
intercessors interceding with the believers at Divine Threshold. It also
serves as a harsh response to those belying the principle of
intercession.

It lays further emphasis on the point that intercession is not
unconditional; in other words, it is not a green light to committing
sins, but may lead to spiritual growth such that he prepares the
required ground for being interceded with him. The ties of such person
are not supposed to be totally severed from God Almighty and His
friends.

It is also worthy of note, however, that the blessed Verse in question
is not saying that intercessors intercede with such people, but it
reflects that they cease to intercede with them as intercession shall be
of no avail to them and Allah’s friends may never perform vain deeds.

The blessed Verses in question and some other Qur’anic Verses indicate
that there shall be different kinds of intercessors interceding with God
Almighty on the behalf of the true believers. The numerous traditions
transmitted in the Shi‘i and Sunni sources reflect that such
intercessors shall intercede on behalf of those sinners who have
prepared the required ground for intercession.

Reference may be made here to such different intercessors:

1. The Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith, as reflected in the Prophetic
tradition:

*"I shall be the first intercessor in Paradise."*[^22]

2. All the Prophets (as) shall be intercessors on the Day of
Resurrection, as per another Prophetic tradition:

*"The Prophets shall intercede on behalf of all those who sincerely
testify to Divine Unity and take them out of Hell."*[^23]

3. Angels shall be amongst the intercessors on the Day of Resurrection,
as reported in the Prophetic tradition:

***"The Angels, Allah’s friends, and the martyrs shall be permitted on
that Day to intercede."***[^24]

4-5. The Infallible Imams (as) and their followers shall also intercede
on behalf of true believers.

In this respect, Imam ‘Ali (as) is narrated as saying:

*"We and our friends shall intercede [on behalf of true
believers]."*[^25]

6-7. The religious scholars and the martyrs shall be among the
interceders, as it is reflected in the Prophetic tradition:

*"On the Day of Resurrection, the Prophets (as), then the scholars, then
the martyrs shall be intercessors."*[^26]

According to another Prophetic tradition:

*"The martyr’s intercession on behalf of seventy people from amongst his
family shall be accepted."*[^27]

As per another tradition recorded in ‘Allama Majlisi’s Bihar
al-Anwar[^28], their intercession on behalf of seventy people shall be
accepted.

8. According to Imam ‘Ali (as), the Holy Qur’an shall be an intercessor
on the Day of Resurrection.[^29]

9. The intercession of those believers who are advanced in years shall
be accepted.

In this vein, it is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) as saying:

*"When man reaches the age of ninety [having proceeded on the path of
faith], God Almighty shall forgive his past and future sins and his
intercession on behalf of his family shall be accepted."*[^30]

10. Prayers and devotions shall be intercessors as well, as it is
narrated from Allah’s Messenger (S) as saying:

*"Fasting and the Qur’an shall intercede on behalf of the servants [of
Allah] on the Day of Resurrection."*[^31]

11. Some traditions reflect that God Almighty shall intercede on behalf
of the sinners, as it is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) as saying:

*"The Prophets, the angels, and the believers shall intercede on the Day
of Resurrection and God Almighty shall say:*

*'I am to intercede as well."*[^32]

12. It is reflected in a number of traditions that the good righteous
deeds, like something for whose preservation man has made attempts,
shall intercede on behalf of man on the Day of Resurrection.[^33]

Numerous traditions have been transmitted concerning intercession, a few
of which were mentioned above. It would fruitful to reiterate that there
are certain conditions for intercession without which it may not be
accepted by God Almighty.

In this vein, the blessed Verses in question clearly indicate that the
intercessions of all intercessors shall be of no avail to some of the
disobedient. It is of significance to pave the required ground for the
acceptance of intercession, since intercession on behalf of some people
may not be of any avail.[^34]

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 49-51
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا لَهُمْ عَنِ التَّذْكِرَةِ مُعْرِضِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَأَنَّهُمْ حُمُرٌ مُّسْتَنفِرَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَّتْ مِن قَسْوَرَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. Then, why do they turn away from the reminder?***  
***50. As if they were frightened wild asses,***  
***51. Fleeting from lions.***

The blessed Verses in question proceeds with the dire fate of the
sinners and the people of Hell clearly reflecting that such obdurate
disbelievers’ are afraid of hearing the word of Truth and any reminder
and admonition.

The blessed Verse 49 asks:

***"Then, why do they turn away from the reminder?"***

Is it not surprising that they reject the cure of the Holy Qur’an?

The blessed Verses 50 and 51 say:

***"As if they are frightened wild asses fleeting from lions [or
hunters]."***

The Arabic nominal form humur the plural of himar, denoting "ass,"
though it herein connotes "wild ass," taking the contextual meaning of
the blessed Verse into account which includes "lions" or "hunters." In
other words, the nominal form encompasses a broad semantic scope
including the domestic and wild kinds of asses.

The Arabic nominal form qaswara, derived from the root q-s-r ("vanquish,
overcome") is an attribute of lion, though it is also taken to imply
"archer" and "hunter" as well. However, the former sense is more
befitting herein.

It is said that the wild ass is strikingly afraid of the lion, such that
upon hearing the lion’s roar, it fleets away madly, particularly upon
noticing a lion’s approach, they scatter away surprisingly. The animal
is afraid of anything owing to its wildness, let alone its ferocious
enemy, the lion.

At any rate, the blessed Verses in question reflect a very eloquent
expression of the polytheists’ fear of the life giving Qur’anic Verses.
These polytheists are herein likened to wild asses, devoid of
understanding that owing to their wildness, they are afraid of anything,
whereas they hear nothing but the reminder aiming at their awakening.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verses 52-55
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ يُرِيدُ كُلُّ امْرِئٍ مِنْهُمْ أَنْ يُؤْتَىٰ صُحُفًا مُنَشَّرَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا ۖ بَلْ لَا يَخَافُونَ الْآخِرَةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّهُ تَذْكِرَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ شَاءَ ذَكَرَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. Nay, everyone of them desires that he should receive separate
letters [from God Almighty].***  
***53. Nay! But it [The Qur’an] is but a reminder [to them].***  
***54. But whoever desires may find admonitions in it,***  
***55. So whoever desires may receive admonitions!***

The blessed Verses in question say that notwithstanding their dire
ignorance, they are so arrogant that they expect to receive separate
letters from God Almighty. The Arabic nominal form suhuf is the plural
of sahifa implying a page which is turned over.

The same theme is to be found elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an:

***"And even then we will put no faith in your ascension until you bring
down for us an epistle that we would read"***[^35]***;***

***"We shall not believe until we receive the like of that which the
Messengers of Allah had received"***[^36]***.***

Therefore, each of them expected to be an Arch-prophet and some Book be
revealed unto them by God Almighty from the heaven. The point is that
even if such Book had been revealed unto them, they would not have
surely believed.

According to some traditions, Abu Jahl and some other people from
Quraysh said:

*"O Muhammad! We will not believe in you unless you bring us some Book
from the heaven opening with: 'From God, the Lord of the worlds to so
and so son of so and so' clearly specifying that we believe in
you."*[^37]

Thus, the following blessed Verse further says that it is not like what
they say, since the Heavenly Book being revealed unto them and the like
of which are nothing but pretexts. They truly do not fear the Hereafter.

Had they been afraid of the torments in the Hereafter, they would not
have resorted to such pretexts, denial of the Prophetic Call of Allah’s
Messenger (S), and derision of Divine Verses and the number of the
angels of torment in the Hereafter.

The consequences of belief in the Hereafter and their effects in
refraining from committing sins and purification from different kinds of
grave sins are clearly reflected herein. The truth is that belief in the
Day of Resurrection and the recompense of deeds lead to spiritual growth
such that the arrogant, the irresponsible, and the wrong doing may turn
into committed, God fearing, humble, and just people.

The blessed Verses 54 and 55 once again emphasize that what they imagine
concerning the Holy Qur’an is untrue. The Holy Qur’an is a Reminder and
whoever desires may find admonitions in it. The Qur’an is the Guide unto
the Straight Path and provides man with insight and sun light, such that
man may find his path unto Truth.

Surah al-Mudaththir – Verse 56
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَذْكُرُونَ إِلَّا أَن يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ ۚ هُوَ أَهْلُ التَّقْوَىٰ
وَأَهْلُ الْمَغْفِرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. And no one may receive admonition unless Allah wills. And He is
the One, deserving that mankind should stand in awe of Him, and He is
the One Who forgives [sins].***

The closing blessed Verse of the Chapter says that receiving admonitions
from the Qur’an is totally dependent upon Divine Will and Blessing. In
other words, the disobedient may not receive admonitions unless God
Almighty wills.

Besides the aforementioned exegesis, namely man may not proceed on the
Path of Guidance unless he puts his trust in Divine Blessing and invokes
Him to bestow His Blessings on him, other exegeses may be suggested for
the blessed Verse. Unless there be not any attraction on behalf of the
beloved, the unfortunate lover’s efforts shall be of no avail (two lines
of poetry).

It is worthy of note that Divine Aid is bestowed upon those who have
prepared the required ground for such bestowal of Blessings.

Further, the blessed Verse 55,

***"So whoever desires may receive admonitions!"***

may create the wrong impression in some people that everything is
totally dependent upon human will.

The blessed Verse 56 removes such wrong interpretation by saying that
notwithstanding man’s free choice, his will is dependent upon Divine
Will, prevailing in the world of existence and creation. In other words,
human free choice is dependent upon Divine Will and God Almighty may
deprive him of his free choice at any time.

The blessed Verse in question is saying that they never believe unless
God Almighty wills to make them believe and we know that God Almighty
never makes anyone believe or disbelieve. Thus, the first two exegeses
sound more befitting herein.

The blessed Verse closes by saying that

***"He deserves that mankind should stand in awe of Him, and He is the
One Who forgives sins."***

It is befitting that Allah’s servants fear His torments, associate any
partners in worshipping Him, and set their hopes on His Forgiveness. The
blessed Verse alludes to the states of fear, hope, Divine torment, and
Divine Forgiveness, providing further support for the preceding blessed
Verse.

Concerning the exegesis of the blessed Verse in question, it is narrated
from the Noble Imam Sadiq (as) as saying:

*"Allah says that He is Worthy of being feared such that My servant does
not associate any partner with Me in worship and if My servant refrains
from associating any partner with me in worship, I shall make him enter
Paradise."*[^38]

Within the knowledge of the present author, all Qur’an exegetes hold
that the nominal form taqwa;

***("fear [of God Almighty]")***

is herein employed in the accusative case, saying that God Almighty
deserves that His servants refrain from polytheism.

However, it may be taken in the nominative case, implying that He
neither does wrong nor act unwisely. The most exalted of the degrees of
taqwa belongs to God Almighty and that of servants is nothing but a
feeble flame of His Infinite taqwa, though the word in nominative case
rarely refers to God Almighty.

The blessed Chapter opened with an Injunction as to warning and
obligation and it closes with calling the believers to fear of God
Almighty and the Promise of Forgiveness.

Thus, we invoke at His Threshold with utmost humbleness:

*"O Lord! Make us of those who fear You and bestow Your Forgiveness upon
us! O Lord! We may not succeed unless You grant us Your Favors and
Blessings. Bestow Your Blessings upon us!”*

[^1]: Tafsir Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^2]: 2:187

[^3]: Raghib’s Mufradat.

[^4]: Tafsir Ruh al-Ma‘ani, vol. 29, p. 120.

[^5]: Ibn Hadid’s Commentary on the Nahj al-Balagha.

[^6]: Kanz al-Fawa’id, vol. 1, p. 140.

[^7]: 2:264

[^8]: Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 5, p. 454; Tafsir Burhan, vol. 4, p. 400.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Fakhr Razi’s, Maraghi’s, Qurtubi’s, and Zamakhshari’s exegetic
works under the blessed Verse in question.

[^11]: Tafsir Maraghi, vol. 29, p. 131.

[^12]: 87:12

[^13]: 4:13

[^14]: Majma‘ al-Bayan and other exegetic sources, under the blessed
Verse in question.

[^15]: Tafsir Maraghi, vol. 29, p. 134.

[^16]: 2:10

[^17]: 11:114

[^18]: 84:7-8

[^19]: Tafsir Qurtubi, vol. 10, p. 6878.

[^20]: 15:99

[^21]: 2:48

[^22]: Muslim, Sahih, vol. 2, p. 130.

[^23]: Ahhmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 3, p. 12.

[^24]: Ibid., 5, p. 43.

[^25]: Saduq, Khisal, p. 624.

[^26]: Ibn Maja, Sunan, vol. 2, p. 1443.

[^27]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 15.

[^28]: vol. 100, p. 14

[^29]: Nahj al-Balagha, sermon 176.

[^30]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 2, p. 89.

[^31]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 174.

[^32]: Bukhari, Sahih, vol. 9, p. 149.

[^33]: Ibn Shahrashub, Manaqib, vol. 2, p. 14.

[^34]: For further details, see above under 2:48.

[^35]: 17:93

[^36]: 6:124

[^37]: The exegetic sources, e.g. those by Qurtubi and Maraghi.

[^38]: Tafsir Burhan, vol. 4, p. 405.


