Surah al-Saff, Chapter 61
=========================

**(The Rank)**

**Section 28(juz’)**

**Number of Verses: 14**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

The blessed Chapter, revealed in Medina, has fourteen Verses. The
designation of the Chapter derives from the Arabic word saff attested in
the fourth Verse. The blessed Chapter mainly treats of the superiority
of the Islamic faith over other Divine religions and the obligation of
jihad in Allah’s Cause and supporting Allah’s Messengers.

Besides the blessed Chapter in question, Chapters 57 (Surah al-Hadid)
and 59 (Surah al-Hashr) opens with

***sabbaha ("glorifies"),***

Chapters 62 (Surah al-Jum‘a) 64 (Surah al-Taghabun) with

***yusabbihu ("glorifies"),***

Chapter 17 (Surah al-Isra’) with

***subhana ("glorified"),***

and Chapter 87 with the imperative

***sabbih ism-i rabbika ("Glorify the Name of your Lord").***

The Merit of Reciting the Chapter
---------------------------------

According to a tradition narrated from the Noble Prophet of the Islamic
faith (S), whoever recites the Chapter of Jesus, namely the Chapter of
the Rank, Prophet Jesus will salute him and as long as he is alive in
this world, Jesus will invoke God Almighty to absolve the reciter of his
sins and he will be his friend of the Day of Resurrection.

It is narrated from Imam Baqir (as) that whoever recites the Chapter of
the Rank in his obligatory and supererogatory prayers and pursues the
recitation of the Chapter, God Almighty will rank him with the angels
and His Messengers. It is worthy of note, however, that such ranks will
be in store for those who act upon Qur’anic Injunctions.

Surah al-Saff - Verse 1
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَبَّحَ لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ وَهُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies
Allah. And He is the Omnipotent, the All-Wise.***

According to the Islamic worldview, all the world of existence enjoys
perception and glorifies God Almighty.

It is noteworthy that the One Who is the Omnipotent and the All-Wise is
deserves to be glorifies

***("And He is the Omnipotent, the All-Wise").***

It is mentioned above that the blessed Chapter deals with faith, Divine
Unity, and knowing God Almighty. According attention to the physical and
spiritual glorification of all beings and the wondrous system
predominating over them which serves as the best proof for the Existence
of the Omnipotent and the All-Wise Creator strengthens the pillars of
faith in believers and paves the path for obeying the Injunction as to
the jihad in Alla’s Cause.

Surah al-Saff - Verse 2
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لِمَ تَقُولُونَ مَا لَا تَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***2. O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not act upon
it?***

Rebuking those who do not stand on their own words, the blessed Verse is
asking them:

***"O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not act upon
it?"***

Although the blessed Verses were revealed concerning the jihad and
desertion from the Battle of Uhud, but the Occasions of Revelation never
restrict the broad contextual meanings of the blessed Verses.
Consequently, any vain word deserves censure and rebuke, be it in terms
of steadfastness in battlefield or any other positive and constructive
act.

According to Imam Sadiq (as), the blessed Verse, among other issues,
alludes to failure to keep one’s word, saying that a believer’s promise
is like a vow, though expiation is not required for it.[^1]

Surah al-Saff - Verse 3
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَبُرَ مَقْتًا عِندَ اللَّهِ أَن تَقُولُوا مَا لَا تَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. Most detestable it is with Allah that you say what you do not act
upon it.***

The Arabic word maqt denotes abomination and odiousness. Faith is to be
accompanied by action and sincerity, otherwise it will deserve censure
and rebuke. Some people utter empty words in friendly get-togethers but
they fail to act upon their words when it is necessary to take action.

One of the significant tokens of true believers is that their words and
deeds are totally in harmony and the more one distances from such
principle, the more he distances from faith.

It is in this vein that in his epistle to Malik Ashtar, Imam ‘Ali (as)
said unto him:

*"Refrain from making promises and failure to keep you word, since such
failure will lead to severe wrath by God Almighty and the people as it
is said in the Holy Qur’an:*

***"Most detestable it is with Allah that you say what you do not act
upon it."***[^2]

Surah al-Saff - Verse 4
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الَّذِينَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِهِ صَفًّا
كَأَنَّهُم بُنْيَانٌ مَّرْصُوصٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. Indeed, Allah loves those who fight in His Cause in ranks as if
they were an iron structure.***

The Arabic word bunyan denotes construction. The word marsus is cognate
with rasas denoting lead. The phrase bunyan marsus connotes a
construction resembling lead in terms of solidity. The criticism
mentioned in the preceding Verse may be addressed to those who were
engaged in sloganeering but failed to act upon such slogans. Thus, God
Almighty is saying that Divine Wrath is in store for those who did not
act upon their words but those who act upon their words and loved by
Him.

Therefore, the blessed Verse is saying that God Almighty loves those who
wage war in His Cause like a construction of iron and a stronghold of
steel.

Thus, the form of battle is of no significance, but what is important is
that such war should be in Allah’s Cause through perfect unity and
solidity the similitude of which is a construction built of lead or
iron. It is mentioned in ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim exegetic work that the blessed
Verse is saying that warrior waging war in Allah’s Cause form ranks like
a construction which is never subject to ruin.[^3]

Surah al-Saff - Verse 5
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ مُوسَىٰ لِقَوْمِهِ يَا قَوْمِ لِمَ تُؤْذُونَنِي وَقَد
تَّعْلَمُونَ أَنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ ۖ فَلَمَّا زَاغُوا
أَزَاغَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ ۚ وَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ
الْفَاسِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. Remember when Moses (as)said unto his people: "O my people! Why do
you annoy me while you know certainly that I am the Messenger of Allah
to you? Therefore when they turned away from the path of Truth, Allah
turned their hearts away [from the path]. And Allah guides not the
people who are disobedient to Him.***

The Arabic verbal form

***zagha ("deviated")***

is cognate with zigh connoting deviation from the path of Truth.

Man is spiritually inclined toward treading the Straight Path, but it is
his concupiscence that deters him from doing so.

Making a reference to Prophet Moses' (as) people, the blessed Verse is
saying that despite having observed so many miracles and proofs
regarding his Prophetic Call, they failed to obey him, but they annoyed
him to such an extent that they regarded his miracles as magic and
ascribed forging lies by him despite the fact that they were certain of
his Prophetic Call.

Thus, complaining from his own people, Prophet Moses (as) is saying:

*"O people! Why do you annoy me so much when you know that I am Allah’s
Messenger sent unto you for your guidance? You are supposed to obey me
if you follow your reason so that you may be saved.”*

Nonetheless, the people of Moses (as) failed to persevere in the
Straight Path of Divine Unity and deviated from it such that owing to
their evil deeds, God Almighty made their hearts turn away from the Path
of Truth, since God Almighty never guides those who disobey His
Messengers. Thus, it is reflected the blessed Verse that there is no
affliction worse that being deprived of Divine Justice and one’s heart
be turned away from the Path of Truth.

Surah al-Saff - Verses 6-7
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ يَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ إِنِّي
رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُم مُّصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيَّ مِنَ
التَّوْرَاةِ وَمُبَشِّرًا بِرَسُولٍ يَأْتِي مِن بَعْدِي اسْمُهُ
أَحْمَدُ ۖ فَلَمَّا جَاءَهُم بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ قَالُوا هَٰذَا سِحْرٌ
مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ وَهُوَ
يُدْعَىٰ إِلَى الْإِسْلَامِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ
الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. Remember when Jesus (as), son of Mary, said: "O Children of
Israel! Verily, I am the Messenger of Allah unto you, acknowledging the
Torah which came before me and giving glad tidings of a Messenger to
come after me, whose name shall be Ahmad. But when he came to them with
clear proofs, they said: "This is plain magic."***

***7. And who does more wrong than the one who forges a lie against
Allah while he is being invited to embrace the Islamic faith? And Allah
guides not the people who are wrong-doers.***

The blessed Verse 6 is saying:

*"O Muhammad (S)! Remember when Jesus (as), son of Mary, said: 'O
Children of Israel [namely the Jews following Moses (as)]! I am Allah’s
Messenger sent unto you. I believe in Moses (as) acknowledging his
Prophetic Call and bearing glad tidings to you that a Prophet (S) will
come after me with a perfect religion and his token is that his name is
Ahmad, namely praised in words and deeds or the Messenger (S) who will
praise God Almighty.”*

The name Ahmad may reflect that he was Divinely appointed to praise God
Almighty by the recitation of His Ninety-Nine Names such that people may
known Him through His Most Beauteous Attributes, since it is not known
whether other Prophets did not make Him known unto people through the
same number of Names each of which reflect one of the Divine Attributes.

Narrating on the authority of his father, Muhammad ibn Mat‘am says that
the Noble Prophet (S) said that he had names such as Ahmad, Muhammad,
Mahi, through whom God Almighty effaces disbelief, Hashir, namely under
whose banner people would be resurrected, and ‘Àqib, i.e. the last of
the Prophets not to be followed by any other Prophet.[^4]

According to a tradition narrated concerning the Noble Prophet’s (S)
Ascension (mi‘raj), God Almighty addressed the Noble Prophet of the
Islamic faith (S) several times by the name Ahmad which may possibly
given rise to the saying that his name is Ahmad in the heavens and
Muhammad (S) on the earth.

It is narrated from Imam ‘Ali (as) that the Noble Prophet of Islam (S)
has ten names five of which, namely Muhammad, Ahmad, ‘Abd Allah, Yasin,
and Nun, are attested in the Holy Qur’an.[^5] The foregoing brief
discussion reflects that one of the most well-known names of the Noble
Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) is Ahmad.[^6]

The blessed Verse closes with

***"But when he came to them with clear proofs, they said: "This is
plain magic."***

The antecedent of the pronoun

***"them" (hum)***

is possibly the Seal of the Prophets (S) who had many proofs and
miracles and Prophet Jesus (as) had formerly make known his name and
tokens, but the Prophet Muhammad’s (S) miracles were regarded as magic
by his people saying that it was plain magic.

The antecedent of the pronoun may be Prophet Jesus (as) who performed
miracles like raising the dead, curing the blind, and making pigeons out
of mud and giving life to it, but the Jews regarded his miracles as
magic. People are habitually inclined through concupiscent desires to
turn away from the Truth and turn toward Falsehood, as a consequence of
which they failed to obey the Prophets and their chiefs knew that
people’s obeying the Prophets would entail damages to their
chieftainship.

In order to waive their obligations, they denied the prophets and
regarded their miracles as magic.

Thus, God Almighty censures such people and asks them in the blessed
Verse:

*"And who does more wrong than the one who forges a lie against Allah
while he is being invited to embrace the Islamic faith? And Allah guides
not the people who are wrong-doers."*

The point is that the Prophets call people unto Islam, namely Guidance,
in which the people’s physical and spiritual health lies.

Those who deny the Prophets are the worst of people since they not only
wrong themselves and deprive themselves of happiness, and have contented
themselves to stay with disbelieving and irreligious people and their
bestiality without taking any step toward happiness, but also when man
fails to seek Guidance and wrongs himself, God Almighty will not guide
him.

Such wrongdoers wrong people as well since they impede them from being
guided. God Almighty will never guide such people since wrong-doers are
not subject to being guided.

Surah al-Saff - Verses 8-9
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرِيدُونَ لِيُطْفِئُوا نُورَ اللَّهِ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَاللَّهُ
مُتِمُّ نُورِهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. They intend to extinguish the Light of Allah with their mouths
[namely their empty words and slanders]. But Allah will bring His Light
to perfection even though the disbelievers dislike it.***

***9. He it is Who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the Religion
of Truth to make it triumphant over all religions even though the
polytheists dislike it.***

The enemy is pre-occupied at all times with extinguishing the Divine
Light of Guidance. Allah’s Religion is Light, namely it leads to
knowledge, growth, treading the path toward Allah and Happiness. The
stratagems and devices of the enemies aiming at confrontation with the
Truth is fruitless and of no avail.

Thus, in order to reflect that the enemies of the Truth may not efface
Divine Religion, the blessed Verse 8 presents a similitude saying that
they intend to put out the Divine Light with their mouths, but God
Almighty perfects His Light despite the disbelievers dislike it.

Disbelievers in their attempts are resembled to those who intend to
extinguish the shining sun by blowing with their mouths. They are like
bats imagining that if they close their eyes and seek refuge in the
shadows may confront with the Spring of Light. The history of Islam is a
clear proof as to the veracity of such Great Qur’anic Prediction, since
from its emergence onward, numerous plots and stratagems have been
demised by the enemies.

Such stratagems include mockery, harming, and hurting through economic
and social sanctions, waging wars in the battlefields, e.g. those of
Uhud, Ahzab, and Badr; domestic plots by hypocrites; casting discord
amongst the ranks of the Muslims; occupation of Jerusalem as the first
place toward which Muslims stood in their prayers; division of vast
Muslim lands into more than forty countries; making Muslims change their
course; making the youth sever their ties from their ancient culture;
dissemination of evil deeds and moral corruption; deviation from the
pure Islamic doctrines by the youth, military, political, and political
colonialism.

As God Almighty wills, the Divine Light has daily broadened its scope
and the dissemination of the Islamic faith has been ever on the
increase. Statistics suggest that despite the common endeavors made by
Zionists, Crusaders, and materialists of the East, the Muslim population
is on the increase the world over.

The Qur’anic Verse is saying that they intend at all times to put out
the Divine Light, but Divine Will is otherwise. It is the eternal
miracle of the Holy Qur’an.

It is worthy of note that such theme is to found twice in the Holy
Qur’an, though the clause

***"they intend to extinguish"***

is reflected in two forms in the Arabic original: yuriduna an
yutfi’u[^7] and yuriduna li-yutfi’u[^8].

In his Mufradat, Raghib Isfahani says that the former and the latter
connote extinguishing without or with preparation respectively; namely,
whether or not they make preparations, they fail to put out the Divine
Light.

Therefore, the blessed Verse 9 lays further emphasis by saying that He
is the One who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the Religion of
Truth in order to make the Islamic religion predominate all other
religions, even though the polytheists disfavor it.

The expression

***"He sent His Messenger with Guidance and the Religion of Truth"***

symbolizes the triumph of the Islamic faith, since such triumph is
essentially based on Guidance and the Religion of Truth. The Islamic
faith and the Holy Qur’an are the Divine Light and Light manifests
itself everywhere and at all times and results in triumph; nonetheless,
the polytheists' and the disbelievers' dislike may not impede the path
in the least.

It would be of interest to know that the blessed Verse 9 is reiterated
thrice with minor alterations in the Holy Qur’an[^9], but it should be
borne in mind that such reiteration and emphasis belongs to when the
Islamic faith had not totally prevail the Arabian Peninsula let alone
the other regions of the world.

The Holy Qur’an laid great emphasis on the question at the time and made
such great prediction. Finally, the Islamic faith prevailed in terms of
logic and practical advancement in contrast to other religions, made the
enemies retreat from vast regions in the world substituted them and it
is still spreading in the world.

It is noteworthy that the final stage of such spread to us will be
realized upon the arrival of Imam Mahdi (May our souls be sacrifices to
him) since these Verse indicate that great arrival. Further discussions
on the contextual meaning of the blessed Verse 9, superiority in terms
of logic or might, and it relation to Imam Mahdi’s (as) arrival were
mentioned above under 7:23.

It is narrated in consecutively transmitted traditions that the triumph
of the Islamic faith over other Divine religions will realize upon Imam
Mahdi’s (as) arrival.[^10]

It is narrated on the authority of ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim Qumi that the
religion of Muhammad (S) will be complete upon the arrival of the Riser
from the Prophet’s (S) descendants such that God Almighty alone shall be
worshipped. In this vein, it is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) that
as the earth will have been brimming over with injustice, justice will
be administered the world over upon his arrival.

Surah al-Saff - Verses 10-13
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا هَلْ أَدُلُّكُمْ عَلَىٰ تِجَارَةٍ
تُنجِيكُم مِّنْ عَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَتُجَاهِدُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ
بِأَمْوَالِكُمْ وَأَنفُسِكُمْ ۚ ذَٰلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ
تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَيُدْخِلْكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن
تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ وَمَسَاكِنَ طَيِّبَةً فِي جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ ۚ
ذَٰلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُخْرَىٰ تُحِبُّونَهَا ۖ نَصْرٌ مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَفَتْحٌ قَرِيبٌ ۗ
وَبَشِّرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. O you who believe! Shall I guide you to a trade that will save
you from the excruciating torment on the Day of Resurrection?***

***11. Believe in Allah and His Messenger and fight in the Cause of
Allah with your wealth and your lives. That will be better for you, if
you but know!***

***12. Thus, He will forgive you your sins and admit you into Gardens
under which rivers flow and pleasant dwellings in the everlasting
Paradise. That is verily a great deliverance.***

***13. And also another bounty which you love, help from Allah and a
near victory. And O Prophet (S) give glad tidings to the believers.***

The triumph of the Islamic faith over other religions was promised in
the preceding blessed Verse but there are three prerequisites in this
respect:

1. The Perfect and Universal Law is the Holy Qur’an, a Light perfected
by God Almighty, and no one is able to put out such Light.

2. The existence of the Infallible Leader who is Imam Mahdi (as), the
Remainder of Allah and the Divine Treasure.

3. Preparedness on the part of the people which is reflected in these
blessed Verses.

Therefore, one of the significant goals of the blessed Chapter is to
call people unto the Islamic faith and jihad in Allah’s Cause and the
blessed Verses in question lay emphasis on these two principles through
the expression of a delicate similitude that encourages man to make such
Divine moves and such incentive is the prerequisite for the triumph of
the Islamic faith over all religions as discussed in the preceding
blessed Verses.

The blessed Verse 10 is asking:

***"O you who believe! Shall I guide you to a trade that will save you
from the excruciating torment on the Day of Resurrection?"***

Even though faith and jihad are among absolute obligations, but the
question is posed as a commercial offer rather than an injunction and
the offer is intermingled with expressions reflecting the Infinite
Graciousness of God Almighty. The blessed Verse 10 asks the question but
without expecting any answer, when the audience is according attention
to the question elaborates on the lucrative transaction.

The blessed Verse 11 is saying:

***"Believe in Allah and His Messenger and fight in the Cause of Allah
with your wealth and your lives. That will be better for you, if you but
know!"***

God Almighty is indubitably in no need of such lucrative trade, but all
the interests will belong to the believers.

Thus, the blessed Verse closes by saying that

***"It is the best for you if you know.”***

It is worthy of note that addressed to the believers, the blessed Verse
calls upon them to have faith and wage jihad in Allah’s Cause.

The expression may reflect that nominal and superficial faith is
insufficient, but what is significant is profound and sincere faith as
the fountainhead of sacrifice and jihad. Making mention of believing in
God Almighty and His Messenger may further elaborate the faith briefly
mentioned in the opening of the preceding Verse.

It is noteworthy that belief in the Prophet (S) is not different from
that in God Almighty in the same manner that waging jihad in Allah’s
Cause with one’s life may not be different from that with one’s
property, since waging any war requires financial means.

Some believers are able to wage jihad in two respects and some may be
able to support jihad by their property and provide the logistics. Some
are only able to wage jihad in Allah’s Cause by their lives and they are
prepared to sacrifice them.

However, the point is that triumph rests on the accompaniment of these
two types of jihad. The precedence of jihad by one’s possessions in the
blessed Verse does not suggest that jihad by one’s life bears further
significance, but it suggests that such type of jihad is the prelude,
since the path to jihad is paved through the provision of the required
funding.

The blessed Verses 12 and 13 are saying that if you do so, God Almighty
will forgive your sins and you will be admitted to the Gardens of
Paradise beneath whose trees rivers flow where you will reside in
pleasant dwellings in everlasting Paradise. This is a great success.

The blessed Verses treat of the forgiving of the sins by God Almighty in
terms of the Rewards in the hereafter, since man is above all
preoccupied with his sins and when he finds certainty as to the
forgiving of his sins, he will be free from preoccupation. The
expression suggests that the first Divine Reward granted to the martyrs
fallen in His Cause is that all their sins will be forgiven.

Now a question arises that forgiving of one’s sins includes what is due
to God (haqq Allah) Almighty or it also includes what is due to people
(haqq al-nas). The absolute contextual meaning of the blessed Verse
suggests generality, though granted that God Almighty vested people with
waiving their own rights, some scholars have entertained doubts as to
the generality of the contextual meaning of the blessed Verse in
question.

Therefore, the blessed Verses in question treat of two types of faith,
believing in God Almighty and His Messenger (S), two types of jihad,
through life and possessions, and two types Rewards in the Hereafter,
forgiving of sins and being admitted to the everlasting Paradise.

The blessed Verse 13 deals with two types of Divine Bounties in this
world:

***"And also another bounty which you love, help from Allah and a near
victory."***

Such trade is quite lucrative since it constitutes triumph over the
enemies and Divine Bounties and Graciousness. That is why the Holy
Qur’an terms it as the great triumph.

It is in this vein that the believers receive the glad tidings:

***"And O Prophet (S) give glad tidings to the believers."***

It is narrated that when the Noble prophet secretly met with some
Medinans on the Night of ‘Aqabih and they pledged him their allegiance,
‘Abd Allah ibn Rawaha said unto him that the Noble Prophet (S) may ask
for any condition for God Almighty and himself to which the Noble
Prophet (S) replied that the condition for his Lord was that they may
never associate any partners to Him, but for himself, he asked them to
defend him in the same manner that they defend themselves and their
possessions.

‘Abd Allah inquired about the remuneration for such obligations to which
the Noble Prophet replied that their remuneration would be Paradise.
‘Abd Allah said that the transaction was quite lucrative and it would be
totally irrevocable.[^11] It is worthy of note, however, that the
triumph promised in these blessed Verses repeatedly fell into the share
of the Muslims in logical terms as well as in battlefields.

Qur’an exegetes present different exegeses as to the contextual meaning
of the "near triumph." Many exegetes maintain that the conquest of Mecca
is hereby intended. Some maintain that it alludes to the conquest of
Persian and Rome. Some also hold that it indicates all Muslim conquests
which happened briefly between conversion to the Islamic faith and the
battles waged by the Muslims.

Since all the believers down the centuries, rather than solely the Noble
Prophet’s (S) Companions are addressed herein, the clause

***"help from Allah and a near victory"***

is quite broad in its application serving as glad tiding to them all,
though it clearly designated the conquest of Mecca upon the Revelation
of the blessed Verses in question.

It is mentioned in the closing sections of Nahj al-Balagha that meeting
with someone who pretended to be a strict Muslim and repeatedly spoke
ill of worldly possessions, Imam ‘Ali (as) said:

*"You've erred, since the world is a great capital for those who are
awake and aware."*

Then, the Imam (as) elaborated on his statement saying that the world is
the trading house of Allah’s friends.[^12] The world is likened
elsewhere to the farm of the hereafter. It is in the trading house of
the world that man sells the merchandise being granted to him by God
Almighty to Him at the highest price and thereby receives the greatest
Bounties in exchange for some insignificant merchandise.

In this vein, thus it is narrated from Imam ‘Ali (as):

*"Your price is Paradise, do not sell yourselves cheaply."*[^13]

According to another tradition narrated from Imam ‘Ali (as), he said
that he was the same lucrative trade leading to deliverance from
excruciating torment as mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

***"Shall I guide you to a trade that will save you from the
excruciating torment on the Day of Resurrection?"***

Surah al-Saff - Verse 14
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كُونُوا أَنصَارَ اللَّهِ كَمَا قَالَ
عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ لِلْحَوَارِيِّينَ مَنْ أَنصَارِي إِلَى اللَّهِ ۖ
قَالَ الْحَوَارِيُّونَ نَحْنُ أَنصَارُ اللَّهِ ۖ فَآمَنَت طَّائِفَةٌ
مِّن بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَكَفَرَت طَّائِفَةٌ ۖ فَأَيَّدْنَا الَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا عَلَىٰ عَدُوِّهِمْ فَأَصْبَحُوا ظَاهِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***14. O you who believe! Be you helpers in the Cause of Allah as said
Jesus, son Mary to the disciples: "Who are my helpers in the Cause of
Allah? The disciples said: "We are Allah’s helpers. Then a group of the
Children of Israel believed and a group disbelieved. Therefore, We
provided those who believed Assistance against their enemies and they
became triumphant.***

The disciples of Prophet Jesus (as) were twelve in number whose names
are mentioned in available Gospels.

The Arabic word

***hawari ("disciple")***

derives from the root h-w-r which denotes to wash, to whiten. The
designation is owing to their white clothes and pure hearts or that they
were inwardly pure and called upon others to be the same.

Imam Sadiq (as) is narrated as saying:

*"Our followers are our disciples. The disciples of Jesus (as) failed to
bear him assistance against the enemies and the Jews, but our followers
render us help. They are tortured, sent into exile, or they fall martyrs
in our cause and God Almighty will grant them good Rewards in exchange
for so many afflictions that they tolerate for our sake."*[^14]

The closing Verse of the blessed Chapter lays further emphasis on jihad
that serves as the focal point of the Chapter.

However, the question is treated differently which bears more
significance than the Rewards of Paradise and its Bounties as the
blessed Verse is saying:

***"O you who believe! Be you helpers in the Cause of Allah."***

They help in the Cause of Allah Who is the Origin of all the powers and
to Whom all return. He is the Lord whose Power is Infinite and
Invincible.

It is surprising that God Almighty calls upon His servants to render
help in His Cause which is an unequalled glory; though the contextual
meaning of the blessed Verse suggests rendering assistance to the Noble
Prophet (S) and the Islamic faith, but the blessed Verse embraces
wondrous Graciousness and Mercy.

To suggest that treading such path is not unprecedented, a historical
illustration is mentioned herein by saying that in the same manner that
Jesus (S), son of Mary, asked his disciples:

***"Who are my helpers in the Cause of Allah?"***

The disciples most proudly replied:

***"We are Allah’s helpers."***

Thus, they rose up to confront the enemies of Truth. Some of the
Children of Israel believed and joined the disciples and some
disbelieved. Thus God Almighty provided those who believed Assistance
against their enemies and they finally triumphed over them.

You are the disciples of Prophet Muhammad (S) and take pride in that you
are Allah’s helpers. In the same manner that the disciples of Jesus (as)
triumphed over the enemies, you will become triumphant and the glory of
this world and the world to come will be in store for you.

[^1]: Kafi, vol. 2, p. 363.

[^2]: Nahj al-Balagha, Epistle 53.

[^3]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^4]: Tafsir Manhaj al-Sadiqin.

[^5]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, Tafsir Durr al-Manthur.

[^6]: Tafsir Furqan; Ahmad-i Maw‘ud-i Injil.

[^7]: 9:32

[^8]: 61:8

[^9]: 9:33; 48:38; 61:9

[^10]: Tafsir Burhan; Tafsir Safi, Majma‘ al-Bayan, Nur al-Thiqalayn and
other sources.

[^11]: Tafsir Fi Hilal al-Qur’an, vol. 8, p. 87.

[^12]: Nahj al-Balagha, Aphorism 131.

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 132.

[^14]: Tafsir Kaz al-Daqa’iq.


