Surah al-Jum‘a, Chapter 62
==========================

**(Friday)**

**Section (juz’) 28**

**Number of Verses: 11**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

The Chapter, revealed in Medina, has eleven Verses. One of the
fundamental goals of the Chapter is to encourage the Muslims to
congregate for the weekly establishment of the Friday prayer.

The Chapter opens with the glorification of Allah and the Prophetic Call
and proceeds to suggests that the Muslims are not supposed to be like
the Jews to whom the Torah was granted but they failed to act upon it.

The Muslims are suggested to leave everything aside upon hearing the
call to the prayers and hasten toward the remembrance of Allah,
otherwise they deserve to be censured. It is enjoined that the blessed
Chapter be recited in the first prayer unit on Friday night.

The Merit of Reciting the Chapter
---------------------------------

Numerous traditions have been narrated concerning the recitation of the
Chapter independently or as a part of daily prayers.

It is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) that whoever recites the
Chapter, God Almighty will bestow ten good qualities upon him throughout
the Muslim lands as many as the number of those who establish or fail to
establish the Friday congregational prayer.[^1]

It is also narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that it is incumbent upon each
and every believer following the Imams to recite Surah al-Jum‘a and

***"Glorify the Name of your Most Exalted Lord" (sabbih ism rabbika
al-a‘la)***

on Friday night and Surah al-Jum‘a and Surah al-Munafiqin at Friday
noon. Thus, he has followed Allah's Messenger (S) in his actions and God
Almighty will reward him with Paradise provided that he also acts upon
Qur’anic Injunctions.[^2] Such Rewards are in store for him.

Surah al-Jum’a - Verse 1
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسَبِّحُ لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ الْمَلِكِ
الْقُدُّوسِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَكِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies
Allah, the Sovereign, the Holy, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.***

The preceding Chapter opened with

***"glorify" (sabbih)***

and the blessed Chapter in question opens with

***"glorifies" (yusabbih)***

to reflect that glorification was, is, and will be for God Almighty.
Glorification of God Almighty is the basis of all true Islamic beliefs
and doctrines. The blessed Chapter, opening with the glorification of
God Almighty, makes a reference to some of the Divine Attributes of His
Beauty and Glory as well as His Most Beauteous Names.

Such reference is the prelude of the prospective discussions. The
blessed Verse is saying that whatever is in the heavens and whatever is
on the earth glorify God Almighty at all times and thereby physically
and spiritually glorify Him of all defects and shortcomings.

He is the Lord Who is the Owner, the Sovereign, and free from all
defects. He is the Sovereign, the Holy.

Thus, emphasis is laid on His Ownership, Sovereignty, and being from any
wrong-doing or defect, since the Arabic word

***malik ("sovereign")***

connotes the innumerable wrong-doings of the sovereigns which are
unholy, but such adverse connotations are all purified by the employment
of the word

***quddus ("holy").***

On the one hand, emphasis is laid on might and knowledge as the pillars
of the state. As it will be mentioned below, such attributes are closely
connected with the prospective discussions hereunder reflecting that the
selection of the Divine Attributes in different Qur’anic Verses follow a
certain order and a particular interrelation.

It is worthy of note that elaborate discussions are to be found above
under 17:44 and 24:41.

It is narrated from the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) that
whenever a servant utters

*"Glorified is Allah" (subhan Allah)*

whatever is beneath the Divine Throne will accompany him in his
glorification and tenfold Rewards will be granted to the servant
uttering such glorification; whenever he utters

*"Praise be to Allah" (al-hamdu li-’llah),*

God Almighty will grant him all the Bounties in this world until he
meets with God Almighty when the Bounties in the Hereafter will be
granted to him.[^3]

Glorification of God Almighty is a kind of showing gratitude unto Him.

The Holy Qur’an is saying that whenever triumph falls into your share,
glorify God Almighty

***("Whenever the Help of Allah and the conquest comes unto you. And you
see that the people convert to Allah's religion in multitudes. So
glorify the praises of your Lord and invoke Him for Forgiveness. Indeed,
He is the One Who accepts the repentance and the One Who
forgives."***[^4]***).***

Glorification of Allah is the atonement for the words uttered or heard
at gatherings.

It is narrated from Allah's Messenger (S) that upon his return from
gatherings, he uttered the formula

*"Glorified are You, their Lord, and in Your praise" (subhanaka
Allahumma wa bi-hamdika)*

saying that it was the atonement for the gathering (innahu kaffara
al-majlis).

Glorification of Allah is a means of salvation.

Concerning the Prophet Jonah (Yunus; AS), the Holy Qur’an says:

***"Had he not been from amongst them who glorify Allah. He would have
verily remained inside its belly [the fish] until the Day of
Resurrection"***[^5]***.***

It is narrated that when man utters

*"Glorified is Allah,"*

all the angels salute him (sallu ‘alayhi kullu malakin).[^6]

According to another tradition, while prostrating himself in his prayers
and at other times, Imam Sadiq (as) repeated the formula

*"Glorified is Allah"*

and at times he repeated it five hundred times.[^7]

According to the religious worldview, man is not the only being that
praises and worships God Almighty, but all creatures worship Him at all
times. Asked by a certain man to work a miracle, the Noble Prophet (S)
took a handful of sand from the ground and the sound of the praises by
the sand was heard upon the Noble Prophet's (S) request and Allah's
Permission.[^8]

The Noble Prophet (S) once said:

*"There are many a mount better than their riders, since they praise God
Almighty more than their riders."*

Allah's Messenger (S) forbade beating animals since they glorify God
Almighty.[^9]

Several points deserve attention is terms of the glorification by the
creatures in the world of existence:

1. The Holy Qur’an regards the glorification by the Creatures to be out
of knowledge and understanding;

***("Each one knows verily their prayer and
glorification,"***[^10]***).***

2. Everyone may not understand the glorification by other creatures;

***("Though you understand not their glorification,"***[^11]***).***

3. The glorifications by creatures are different.

Imam Sajjad (as) narrates from the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali
(as), that he said:

*"Birds glorify God Almighty each morning invoking Him to provide them
with their daily sustenance.”*[^12]

It is worthy of note that according to the religious worldview, the
world of creation glorifies God Almighty

***("Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth glorify
Allah").***

It is noteworthy, however, that in terms of existential glorification,
there exists no difference amongst the creatures of the heavens and the
earth, including inanimate beings, plants, animals, birds, and man. The
other point is that glorification is supposed to be based on certain
criteria and reasons.

Glorification solely belongs to the One who possesses Sovereignty,
Holiness, Might, and Wisdom;

***("Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies
Allah, the Sovereign, the Holy, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.").***

Surah al-Jum’a - Verse 2
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي بَعَثَ فِي الْأُمِّيِّينَ رَسُولًا مِّنْهُمْ يَتْلُو
عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِهِ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَابَ
وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَإِن كَانُوا مِن قَبْلُ لَفِي ضَلَالٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***2. He it is Who sent amongst the unlettered ones a Messenger from
amongst themselves to recite unto them His Verses, to foster them and
absolve them of polytheism and discord, and teach them the Heavenly Book
and Wisdom. And indeed, they had been formerly in manifest error.***

This blessed and significant Verse treats of Divine Unity and Attributes
as well as the Prophetic Call of the Prophet of the Islamic faith (S)
interrelated with Divine Might, Wisdom, and Holiness, saying that He is
the One Who appointed a Messenger from amongst the unlettered to recite
His Verses unto them and purify them in the light of the recitation of
these Verses from any kind of polytheism, error, and corruption and also
teach them the Book and Wisdom, though they were formerly in manifest
error.

It is worthy of note that the Prophetic Call, whose characteristics may
not be interpreted but through inimitability reflect Divine Glory and
Existence, saying that God Almighty is the One Who appointed the
Messenger (S) and created such masterpiece in the process of Creation.

The Arabic plural noun umiyyin whose singular form is ummi
("unlettered," attributed adjective from the nominal form umm "mother),
denoting that the noble Prophet (S) did not receive any schooling but
what he learned from his mother.

Some scholars maintain that the word ummi connotes "from Mecca," since
Mecca was called "the mother of dwelling places" (umm al-qura).
According to a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as), the people of
Mecca had neither Scriptures nor a Divinely appointed leader, hence the
designation ummi was Divinely attributed to them.[^13]

It is noteworthy that the blessed Verse is saying that the Noble Prophet
of the Islamic faith (S) is from the same unlettered people such that
the significance and greatness of his Prophetic Call be reflected and it
may also demonstrate the veracity of his Call, since the Holy Qur’an, a
Book with such profound and great contents and an exalted culture like
the Islamic culture may not be the fruit of human thought, let alone an
unlettered person who had not received any formal education.

The Light shines from the shadows. It is a verdant and luxurious orchard
in the heart of the desert. It is a plain miracle and a manifest proof
reflecting the veracity of his Call.

The blessed Verse in question summarizes the goal of the Prophetic Call
in three sections: one is of the preliminary aspect, namely the
recitation of Divine Verses; the two other sections, i.e. purification
of the soul and teaching the Book and Wisdom constitute two great final
goals.

The Noble Messenger of Allah (S) was appointed to foster and educate
people in terms of knowledge, ethics, and practice such that by means of
the two wings, they may soar into the sky of happiness and proceed on
the path toward Allah and attain to proximity with Him. It is also
worthy of note that three out of four Qur’anic Verses give the
precedence to self purification and one Verse gives the precedence to
teaching over fostering good qualities.

The point reflects that the two affect each other. Ethics is gendered by
knowledge in the same manner that knowledge is gendered by ethics. The
point refers to the originality of fostering good qualities. It is
noteworthy, however, that rue sciences are hereby intended rather than
those in the attire of sciences.[^14]

The difference between the Book and Wisdom may be in that the former
implies the Holy Qur’an and the latter alludes to the sayings and
teachings of the Noble Prophet (S) termed as sunna ("tradition"). The
word Book may also connote Islamic Injunctions and Wisdom may make a
reference to its philosophy and secrets.

The phrase

***"manifest error"***

tersely alludes to the Arabs in pre-Islamic times and the error that had
cast its shadow on their societies. They were in plain error since they
fashioned idols out of stone and wood and resorted to such inanimate
objects in time of need. They interred their daughters alive and even
took pride in such villainy saying that thus they did not let aliens lay
their hands on them.

Their worshipping rituals included clapping and whistling around the
House of Ka‘ba which was even circumambulated by stark naked women. All
kinds of superstitions prevailed over their thought.

They took pride in waging war and shedding blood and plunder and
regarded women as worthless merchandise on whom they gambled. Women were
deprived of the most basic human rights. Hatred and enmity passed from
fathers to their children as a consequence of which shedding blood and
slaughter were quite common.

The Noble Prophet (S) came unto them and delivered them out of the
shadows of error through the Book and Wisdom. Educating such people and
saving them from error and leading them unto the Straight Path is one of
the glories of the Islamic faith and one of the manifest miracles of our
eminent Prophet (S).

Surah al-Jum’a - Verses 3-4
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآخَرِينَ مِنْهُمْ لَمَّا يَلْحَقُوا بِهِمْ ۚ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ
الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَن يَشَاءُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ ذُو الْفَضْلِ
الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. And a Messenger unto another group who have not yet joined them.
And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.***

***4. That is Allah's Grace which He bestows on whom He wills and
regards worthy of it. And Allah is the Owner of Mighty Grace.***

The Prophetic Call of the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) is not
only addressed to his contemporaries but it embraces all men from
different races and regions and no one is able to impede the
dissemination of the Islamic faith in future.

The blessed Verse is saying that he is appointed to proclaim his
Prophetic mission unto other believers who have not joined former
converts yet. Later generations were fostered through the teachings of
the Noble Prophet (S) and used the pure springhead of the Holy Qur’an
and Muhammadan traditions (sunna) as they were also embraced by the
great Prophetic Call.

Thus, the blessed Verse in question includes all the peoples from Arabs
and non-Arabs who came into being following the Noble Prophet's (S)
Companions.

It is narrated that upon the recitation of the blessed Verse, the Noble
Prophet (S) was asked regarding the identity of such people.

The Noble Prophet (S) put his hand on Salman's shoulder, saying:

*"If faith happens to be on the star of Thuraya, proverbial for being
farthest from the earth, men from this group, namely Persian, will
attain to it.*[^15]

Since such things all spring from Divine Might and Wisdom, the blessed
Verse 3 closes by saying that He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.

The blessed Verse 4 makes a reference to such great Divine Grace, namely
the Noble Prophet's (S) Prophetic Call and his teachings, saying:

***"That is Allah's Grace which He bestows on whom He wills and regards
worthy of it. And Allah is the Owner of Mighty Grace."***

It is worthy of note, however, that the expression

***"on whom He wills"***

does not imply that God Almighty bestows His Grace and Mercy upon
everyone without measure, but His Will is accompanied by His Wisdom, as
it is reflected in the first Verse of the blessed Chapter in question by
the Divine Attributes All-Mighty and All-Wise.

Elaborating on such Divine Great Grace, the Commander of the Faithful,
Imam ‘Ali (as) in his Nahj al-Balagha says:

*"Look at the Divine Graces bestowed upon this community when His
Messenger (S) was appointed to proclaim his Prophetic Call unto them and
thereby unified them. Behold that such Great Bounty was bestowed upon
all of them and the rivers of His Graces flow onto them and the true
religion with its Blessings embraced them. They are embraced by such
Bounties and live happily thereby."*[^16]

Surah al-Jum’a - Verse 5
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ الَّذِينَ حُمِّلُوا التَّوْرَاةَ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَحْمِلُوهَا
كَمَثَلِ الْحِمَارِ يَحْمِلُ أَسْفَارًا ۚ بِئْسَ مَثَلُ الْقَوْمِ
الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ
الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. The similitude of those who were entrusted with the Torah, but who
subsequently failed in it, is as that of a donkey which carries huge
burden of books [though they fail to understand them]. How bad is the
example of the people who deny Allah's Àyat ("Verses, Signs"). And Allah
guides not the people who are wrong-doers.***

The preceding Verses treated of the Prophetic Call, but the blessed
Verse in question deals with the Jews who could recognize the Noble
Prophet (S) on the basis on their Scripture, the Torah, but they were
too obstinate to acknowledge his Prophetic Call. The Arabic word asfar
is the plural form of sifr connoting a book that reveals the truth.[^17]

The Torah consists of different books each of which, termed sifr,
resembles a Qur’anic Chapter. The blessed Verse criticizes the Jews but
it also alludes to the Muslims warning them against hearing the Qur’anic
Verses but failing to act upon them.

According to some traditions, the Jews said that Muhammad's Prophetic
Call was not addressed to them. Thus, the blessed Verse 4 is warning
them that had you had read your Scripture carefully and have acted upon
it, you would not have said such words, since the Torah bears the glad
tidings of the Prophetic Call of the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith
(S).

The blessed Verses 5 and 6 are saying that those upon whom the Torah was
sent and they were entrusted with it but failed to understand and act
upon it resemble a donkey carrying the burden of books, but it may
merely feel the burden. It is not different for it to carry rocks and
wood or books containing the most precise secrets of Creation and the
most fruitful lessons for a better life.

Such obstinate people contented themselves contented themselves with the
recitation of the Torah without reflecting upon its contents and acting
upon them, the similitude of such people is the animal proverbial for
ignorance. It is the most telling similitude for those who claim to know
something but fail to act upon their pretended knowledge, since they
carry the burden of knowledge without being blessed by its blessings.

Those who deal with the words of the Holy Qur’an without being aware of
it contents and fruitful lessons are like those mentioned herein. It is
a warning to the Muslims to be aware such that they do not end up like
the Jews.

Such Great Divine Bounty is not for merely keeping at home without
reading it and reflecting upon it or pass beneath it before traveling or
send it with a mirror to a new home. Thus, they degrade their Scripture
to such extent. Their utmost efforts may be to recite it beautifully and
commit it to heart without any reflection in their individual and social
live through reflecting upon its Verses and acting upon its Injunctions.

The similitude proceeds to say that the people who denied Divine Verses
and Signs will have a dire fate. Such people are likened to donkeys
since they denied Divine Verses and Signs by their words and deeds.

It is in a similar vein that we read elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^18]
concerning the Jews:

***"Is it that whenever there came unto you a Messenger against your
concupiscent desires, you turned arrogant? Some [of the Messengers] you
denied and some you slew.”***

The blessed Verse 5 closes with a terse sentence:

***"And Allah guides not the people who are wrong-doers."***

It is true that Guidance is Divine Work, but it requires a certain
background, which is the spirit of seeking the Truth that should be
engendered by man and wrong-doers are far from it.

Finally, it would be of interest to read some traditions concerning the
Jewish schlars and others who failed to act upon their knowledge:

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that the preaching and admonitions
of the scholars who fail to act upon their knowledge are effaced from
the hearts in the same manner that rain drops fail to stay on rocks.

It is narrated from Imam Sajjad (as) that it was mentioned in the Bible
that a scholar who failed to act upon his knowledge would not accrue
anything but disbelief and being far from God Almighty.

In Mizan al-Hikma it is narrated from the Imam that a scholar who fails
to act is likened to a candle from whose light other benefit but he
perishes himself.[^19]

Surah al-Jum’a - Verses 6-8
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ هَادُوا إِن زَعَمْتُمْ أَنَّكُمْ
أَوْلِيَاءُ لِلَّهِ مِن دُونِ النَّاسِ فَتَمَنَّوُا الْمَوْتَ إِن
كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَتَمَنَّوْنَهُ أَبَدًا بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ ۚ وَاللَّهُ
عَلِيمٌ بِالظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّ الْمَوْتَ الَّذِي تَفِرُّونَ مِنْهُ فَإِنَّهُ مُلَاقِيكُمْ
ۖ ثُمَّ تُرَدُّونَ إِلَىٰ عَالِمِ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ
فَيُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. Say: "O you Jews! If you pretend that you are friends of Allah, to
the exclusion of other people, then long for death if you are truthful
[so that you may receive the Rewards apportioned by Allah for His
Friends].***

***7. But they will never long for it, because of what they have done
before [e.g. distortion of the Scripture and concealment of the Noble
Prophet's (S) virtues]. And Allah is All-Aware of the wrong-doers.***

***8. Say: [O Prophet (S)!] "Indeed, the death from which you flee will
surely meet you, then you will be sent back to [Him], the Omniscient of
the unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of what you have
done."***

The Jews regarded themselves as the chosen nation and expected
preferential treatment.

They even claimed to be the sons of God and at times considered
themselves as His intimate friends, as it is reflected the Holy
Qur’an[^20]:

***"And the Jews and the Christians says: "We are the children of Allah
and His loved ones [even if they intended a figurative sense of the
word]."***

Treating of such unfounded ambitions entertained by those to whom the
Scripture had been sent though they failed to act upon it, the Holy
Qur’an is asking the Noble Prophet (S) to say unto them that if they
imagined to be God's friends and different from other people and they
were true in their claims, then they could yearn for death, since
friends yearn for meeting their friends.

We know that the spiritual meeting with God Almighty will happen on the
Day of Resurrection when the mundane veils will be cast and the dust of
concupiscent desires subside.

Then, man may see the beauteous countenance of the beloved and set foot
in His proximity and find his way into the Friend's Confines. If they
are true in their claims to be His intimate friend, why are they
immersed in the mundane life and are fearful of death. Entertaining such
fear reflects that their claims are unfounded.

The blessed Verse 7 makes a reference to the main cause of their fear of
death, saying that because of what they have already done, they never
yearn for death. However, God Almighty is All-Aware of the wrong-doers.
The point is that man fears death because of two reasons.

Firstly, he does not believe in the Hereafter and regards death as a
monster of non-existence and the shadows of perdition. In such case, it
would be natural to fear death and flee from non-existence. Secondly,
one may believe in the Hereafter, but he is fearful to attend the Great
Tribunal on the Day of Resurrection because of the evil deeds committed
in this world. Since the Jews believed in the Day of Resurrection and
the hereafter, they were afraid of death owing to their evil deeds.

The Arabic plural noun

***thalimin ("wrong-doers")***

covers a broad semantic range encompassing all the evil deeds committed
by the Jews ranging from slaying the eminent Prophets sent by God
Almighty for their guidance to their accusations, transgression of
bounds and rights, plundering people's possessions, and all ethical
corruptions.

The blessed Verse 8 is saying that entertaining such anxiety and fear
may not solve any problems, since death is in store for all human
beings.

Thus, the Holy Qur’an says:

***"Say: [O Prophet (S)!] "Indeed, the death from which you flee will
surely meet you, then you will be sent back to [Him], the Omniscient of
the unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of what you have
done."***

The law of death is one of the most general and all-encompassing laws of
this world.

The eminent Prophets and the Archangels all die and nothing shall remain
but the Pure Divine Essence, as it is reflected in the Holy Qur’an[^21]:

***"Whatever is on the earth will perish and the Countenance of your
Lord full of Majesty and Glory shall remain forever."***

Death, attending the Divine Just Tribunal and taking care of the records
of the past deeds are of the certain laws of this world and God Almighty
is All-Aware of all His servants' intentions and deeds. Thus, the only
way to put an end to such fear is to purify ones heart from sinful
impurities and refraining from committing evil deeds. One whose record
is clean will not fear of the audition of his records.

Thus, Imam ‘Ali (as) says:

*"By Allah! The son of Abu Talib [i.e. ‘Ali (as)] loves death more than
his mother's breast*[^22]*”*

and when the most wretched Ibn Muljam struck him a blow on his head and
thereby split it, he cried:

*"By the Lord of the Ka‘ba, I was saved."*

He elsewhere says that death is sweeter than honey [particularly for the
friends of God Almighty who are virtuous and are close unto Him].

Surah al-Jum’a - Verse 9
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا نُودِيَ لِلصَّلَاةِ مِن يَوْمِ
الْجُمُعَةِ فَاسْعَوْا إِلَىٰ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ وَذَرُوا الْبَيْعَ ۚ
ذَٰلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. O you who believe! When the call is proclaimed for the Friday
prayer, hasten toward the remembrance of Allah and leave off business.
That is better for you if you did but know!***

Friday is accorded particular attention in the Islamic faith and many a
tradition reflect such significance. It is narrated from the Noble
Prophet (S) that Friday is the lord of the days of the week and
possesses the most elevated rank before God Almighty.[^23] Friday is the
day of helping the deprived and the poor and it is narrated that Muslim
are supposed to expend alms on Friday.[^24] The Lord of the Age, the
Twelfth Imam (as) will end his Occultation and will arrive on
Friday.[^25]

The Noble Prophet (S) says:

*"God Almighty renders good deeds many folds and effaces evil deeds on
Friday and promotes the ranks of the believers, wards off afflictions,
and answers the prayers of the believers on Friday.*[^26] *Whoever
visits the tomb of his parents or either of them, his sins shall be
forgiven and his name will be recorded with the righteous.*[^27] *Other
traditions have also been narrated in tradition sources regarding the
merits of Friday.”*

It is worthy of note that the preceding blessed Verses treated of
concise discussions on Divine Unity, Prophetic Call, the Hereafter, and
criticism of the Mammonist Jews and the blessed Verse in question deal
with one of the most significance obligations of the Muslims that is of
great significance and constitutes one of the main goals behind the
Revelation of the blessed Chapter in question and it is the Friday
prayer and some of its laws.

The blessed Verse above all addresses all Muslims saying:

***"O you who believe! When the call is proclaimed for the Friday
prayer, hasten toward the remembrance of Allah and leave off business.
That is better for you [than trade] if you did but know!"***

The passive verbal form nudiya ("is called") connotes prayer call, since
there is no call in the Islamic faith but that to establishing prayers.
Thus, upon hearing the prayer call, it is incumbent upon Muslims to
leave off trade and hasten toward the remembrance of God Almighty.

The clause

***"That is better for you" (dhalikum khayrun lakum)***

connotes that the establishment of Friday prayer and leaving off
business at that time entails significant benefits for the Muslims if
they truly reflect upon it, since God Almighty is Needless of others and
is Most Gracious toward all people. It also alludes to the philosophy
and the benefits of the Friday prayer.

It is noteworthy, however, that leaving off trade encompasses any
activity interfering with the remembrance of God Almighty. Another point
worthy of note is that the Arabic word jum‘a originally denotes
congregation which ad hoc connotes the congregation of people for the
establishment of the Friday prayer; though the connotation of the word
is not restricted to what is mentioned.

It goes without saying that spreading on the earth and seeking daily
sustenance are not obligatory acts but they are regarded as the
permission to do the same. However, some Qur’anic exegetes maintain that
the expression that procurement of daily sustenance after the
establishment of the Friday prayer entails Divine Satisfaction and
Blessings. It is narrated that the Noble Prophet (S) visited the
marketplace after the establishment of the Friday prayer.

The imperative sentence

***"Hasten toward the remembrance of Allah" (wa ’dhkuru ’llah
kathiran)***

denotes that man is supposed to remember God Almighty against the
abundant Blessings bestowed upon him.

Some Qur’anic exegets maintain that the word

***"remembrance" (dhikr)***

herein connotes "thought, reflection" (fikr) as it is narrated that one
hour of thinking is better than one year of worshipping.[^28]

There are some exegetes who hold that the Injunction reflects keeping
God Almighty in mind while trading and refraining from transgressing the
principles of truth and justice. Nonetheless, it is crystal clear that
the contextual meaning of the blessed Verse is quite broad in the
semantic range and encompasses all these interpretations.

It is also certain that the spirit of "remembrance" is "thought" without
which it is devoid of meaning and what leads to salvation is the
remembrance intertwined with thought at all times. Remembering God
Almighty at all times basically makes it penetrate into the depth of
soul and eradicates the roots of ignorance and negligence as the main
causes of all sins, and set man on the path of salvation and
deliverance.

Surah al-Jum’a - Verse 10
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا قُضِيَتِ الصَّلَاةُ فَانتَشِرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَابْتَغُوا مِن
فَضْلِ اللَّهِ وَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا لَّعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. Then when the prayer is ended, you are free to disperse through
the land and seek Allah's Bounty and remember Allah much that you may be
saved.***

Worldly possessions are Divine Bounties in Qur’anic terms. Thus, the
blessed Verse is saying that after the establishment of the Friday
prayer, return to your trade and procuring revenue.

The Noble Prophet (S) is narrated as saying that whoever devotedly
remembers God Almighty in the marketplace and place of trade while
people neglect their obligations and merely attend to their business.
Such person devotedly attending to the remembrance of God Almighty will
receive the Rewards one thousand virtuous good acts and will be granted
with Divine Forgiveness.[^29]

The blessed Verse is saying that when the prayer comes to an end, you
are free to disperse in the land, invoke God Almighty for bestowing His
Bounties upon them, and remember Allah at all times so that you may
attain to salvation.

The injunctive

***"Seek Allah's Bounty"***

and similar Qur’anic expressions oftentimes connote seeking daily
sustenance and engagement in trade and business, but it is clear that
the semantic range of such expressions are broad and trade and business
are included in it. Therefore, some Qur’anic exegetes maintain that such
expressions connote visiting the ailing and the believer and gaining
knowledge.

Surah al-Jum’a - Verse 11
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا رَأَوْا تِجَارَةً أَوْ لَهْوًا انفَضُّوا إِلَيْهَا وَتَرَكُوكَ
قَائِمًا ۚ قُلْ مَا عِندَ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ مِّنَ اللَّهْوِ وَمِنَ
التِّجَارَةِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ خَيْرُ الرَّازِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. And when they see some merchandise or some amusement, they
disperse headlong to it and leave you standing [while reciting your
sermon]. Say: "That which Allah has [of Bounties and Blessings] is
better than any amusement or merchandise! And Allah is the Best of
providers."***

According to the exegetic sources, once the Noble Prophet (S) was
reciting the sermons of the Friday prayer when a caravan of tradesmen
entered Medina while beating their drums. Most of the Muslims left the
Noble Prophet (S) leaving his sermon unfinished. It was on that occasion
that the blessed Verse was revealed to censure their unworthy act.

The blessed Verse merely criticizes the Muslims for leaving the Noble
Prophet rather than leaving the sermon and the prayer incomplete.
Showing disrespect to the Divinely appointed leader is worse than
leaving the sermon and the prayer incomplete. The blessed Verse,
addressed to the Noble Prophet (S), is saying that what is with God
Almighty is better than amusement and trade and God Almighty is the Best
Provider.

The Blessings and Rewards that will fall into the shares of the Muslims
for their attending the Friday prayer, listening to the Noble Prophet's
(S) sermons and admonitions, and the spiritual education derived from
them are not to be compared with anything else and if they fear that
their daily sustenance be severed, they are wrong since God Almighty is
the Best Provider.

The adverb of manner

***qa’iman ("standing")***

reflects that the Noble Prophet (S) recited the sermons of the Friday
prayer while he was standing. In this vein, it is narrated on the
authority of Jabir ibn Samura that he never saw the Noble Prophet to
recite the sermons while sitting and whoever says that he seated while
reciting the sermons, reject his claim.[^30]

### The Significance of the Friday Prayer

Fore and foremost, the blessed Verse in question reflects the
significance of the establishment of the Friday congregation prayer as a
religious obligation.

The Muslims are hereby commanded to hasten toward the remembrance of God
Almighty upon hearing the Friday prayer call and leave any trade or
interfering activity such that when people are entangled with food
shortage and a caravan enters for the purpose of trade from which they
may meet their demands, they are not allowed to turn toward it but it is
incumbent upon them to continue the establishment of the Friday
congregation prayer.

Such injunction receives recurrent emphasis in Islamic traditions,
including a sermon narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) by the proponents
and opponents of its transmission according to which the Noble Prophet
(S) says:

*"The establishment of the Friday congregation prayer is a Divine
Obligation and whoever degrades or denies it in my lifetime or after my
demise, God Almighty will lead him to misfortune and will never grant
His Blessing upon him. Behold that his prayers, alms giving, pilgrimage
to Mecca and his virtuous good deeds will not be accepted by God
Almighty unless he repents such evil deed."*[^31]

It is narrated from Imam Baqir (as) that the establishment of the Friday
prayer is an obligation and standing behind the Infallible Imam (as) for
the establishment of the Friday congregation prayer is an obligation and
if a man fails to establish the Friday congregation prayers for three
weeks without any excuse, he has neglected an obligation and no one
neglects three obligations without any excuse unless he is a
hypocrite.[^32]

It is narrated from Allah's Messenger (S) that one who joins the Friday
congregation prayer out of faith and for Allah, his sins will be
forgiven and he will proceed with a new life.[^33] According to a
Prophetic tradition, in his Ascension the Noble Prophet of the Islamic
faith (S) noticed that angels invoked God Almighty to forgive the sins
committed by those Muslims who perform the Friday major ablution (ghusl)
and establish the Friday congregation prayer.[^34]

Numerous traditions have been narrated in this vein, but for the sake of
brevity, merely another tradition will be narrated herein.

Once the Noble Prophet (S) was inquired:

*"O Allah's Messenger! I have repeatedly prepared myself to go on
pilgrimage to Mecca but I have failed to do so."*

The Noble Prophet replied:

*"It is incumbent upon you to establish the Friday prayer, since it is
the pilgrimage to Mecca for the needy."*

The tradition reflects that many Blessings of the pilgrimage to Mecca
may be received through the establishment of the Friday congregation
prayer.[^35]

It is worthy of note, however, that failing to establish the Friday
congregation prayer has been severely censured and those failing to
establish it are regarded as hypocrites when it is an individual
obligation (wajib ‘ayni), namely at the time of the Infallible Imam (as)
assuming the leadership of the Muslim community.

However, at the time of Occultation of the Twelfth Imam (as), it is an
optionally incumbent duty (wajib takhyiri; opting between the
establishment of the Friday congregation prayer or the noon congregation
prayer) in which case failing to establish it is not reprehensible in
case its establishment be neither degraded nor denied.

It is noteworthy that the majesty of the establishment of the Friday
congregation prayer and its great significance are still the same.
Jurisprudential sources may be consulted for further treatment of the
subject.

Finally, it should be borne in mind that the blessed Chapter opens with
the Prophetic Call of the Noble Prophet of the Islamic faith (S) and it
closes with the abandonment of the Noble Prophet (S) serving as a
warning to the believers.

[^1]: Majma‘ al-Bayan; Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn.

[^2]: Majma‘ al-Bayan; Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn.

[^3]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 10, p. 30.

[^4]: 110:1-3

[^5]: 37:143-144

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 4, p. 177.

[^7]: Wafi, vol. 2, p. 157.

[^8]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 13, p. 96. The tradition is to found in some
other sources.

[^9]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn.

[^10]: 24:41

[^11]: 17:44

[^12]: Tafsir al-Mizan; Tafsir Burhan. The tradition is to be found in
other exegetical and tradition sources.

[^13]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^14]: Tafsir Nur al-Qur’an, vol. 7; Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan; Tafsir
Nimunih under the blessed Verse in question.

[^15]: Tabarsi's Majma‘ al-Bayan; ‘Allama Tabataba’i's al-Mizan;
Suyuti's Durr al-Manthur; Zamakhshari's Kashshaf; Qurtubi's and
Maraghi's exegetic works; Sayyid Qutb's Fi Halal al-Qur’an; Bukhari's
Sahih.

[^16]: Nahj al-Balagha, sermon 192 (Khutba Qasi‘a).

[^17]: Raghib's Mufradat.

[^18]: 2:87

[^19]: For other traditions narrated in this respect, please refer to
tradition sources.

[^20]: 5:18

[^21]: 55:26-27

[^22]: Nahj al-Balagha, sermon 5.

[^23]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 5, p. 17.

[^24]: Ibid, p. 67.

[^25]: Kamal al-Din, p. 164.

[^26]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 5, p. 63.

[^27]: Ibid, Friday Prayer (salat al-jum‘a), p. 245.

[^28]: Tafsir Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 289.

[^29]: Tafsir Majma‘ al-Bayan.

[^30]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^31]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 5, p. 7, the Chapter on the Necessity of
the Friday Prayer (Bab Wujub Salat al-Jum‘a), tradition 28.

[^32]: Ibid, vol. 5, p. 4.

[^33]: Ibid.

[^34]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 6, p. 91.

[^35]: Ibid, p. 5, tradition 17.


