Part 7: Glimpses of the Imam’s life
===================================

I have pointed out many incidents in the previous sections which show
the love of Imam (a) to the Book of Allah and Prophetic Practice
(*Sunnah*). He always engaged himself in following the two.

His peace treaties and battles were in accordance with commandments of
holy Quran. He behaved with his friends and enemies as ordered by holy
Quran and Prophetic Practice.

Let me quote the following excerpts of the Imam’s character, which are
narrated by great Muslim historians.

Constitution of His Government
------------------------------

The following letter was written to Malik Ashtar Nakhai. I would request
the readers to read this letter of Imam ‘Ali (a) carefully because Imam
(a) has explained the constitution of Islam in this letter.

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

These are the orders issued by the creature of Allah, ‘Ali, the son Abu
Talib (a) to Malik, the son of Ashtar when he appointed Malik as the
Governor of Egypt to collect Zakat there, to combat the enemies of Islam
and Egypt, to work for the welfare of its people and to look after its
prosperity.

Be it known to you, O Malik, that I am sending you as Governor to a
country, which in the past has experienced both just and unjust rule.
Men will scrutinize your actions with a searching eye, even as you need
to scrutinize the actions of those before you, and speak of you even as
you did speak of them. The fact is that the public speaks well of only
those who do good. It is they who furnish the proof of your actions.
Hence the richest treasure that you may covet should be the treasure of
good deeds. Keep your desires under control and deny yourself that which
you have been prohibited, for by such abstinence alone you will be able
to distinguish between what is good and what is not.

Develop in your heart the feeling of love for your people and let it be
the source of kindliness and blessing to them. Do not behave with them
like a barbarian, and do not appropriate to yourself that which belongs
to them. Remember that the citizens of the state are of two categories.

They are subject to infirmities and liable to commit mistakes. Some
indeed do commit mistakes. But forgive them even as you would like God
to forgive you. Bear in mind that you are placed over them, even as I am
placed over you. And then there is God even above him who has given you
the position of governor in order that you may look after those under
you and to be sufficient unto them. And remember you will be judged by
what you do for them.

Do not set yourself against God, for neither do you possess the strength
to shield yourself against His displeasure, nor can you place yourself
outside the pale of His mercy and forgiveness. Do not feel sorry over
any act of forgiveness, nor rejoice over any punishment that you may
mete out to anyone. Do not rouse yourself to anger, for no good will
come out of it.

Do not say: “I am your overlord and dictator, and that you should,
therefore, bow to my commands,” as that will corrupt your heart, weaken
your faith in religion and create disorder in the state. Should you be
elated by power, or feel in your mind the slightest symptoms of pride
and arrogance, then look at the power and majesty of the divine
governance of the Universe over which you have absolutely no control. It
will restore the sense of calmness and affability. Beware! Never put
yourself against the majesty and grandeur of God and never imitate His
omnipotence; for God has brought low every rebel of God and every tyrant
of man.

Let your mind respect through your actions the rights of God and the
rights of man, and likewise, persuade your companions and relations to
do the same. For, otherwise, you will be doing injustice to yourself and
to humanity. Thus both man and God will become your enemies. There is no
hearing anywhere for one at war with God until he repents and seeks
forgiveness. Nothing deprives man of divine blessings or excites divine
wrath against him more easily than oppression. Hence it is, that God
listens to the voice of the oppressed and waylays the oppressor.

Maintain justice in administration and impose it on your own self and
seek the consent of the people, for the discontent of the masses
sterilizes the contentment of the privileged few and the discontent of
the few loses itself in the contentment of the many. Remember, the
privileged few will not rally round you in moments of difficulty: they
will try to side-track justice, they will ask for more than what they
deserve and will show no gratitude for favors done to them. They will
feel restive in the face of trials and will offer no regret for their
shortcomings. It is the common man who is the strength of the state and
of religion. It is he who fights the enemy. So live in close contact
with the masses and be mindful of their welfare.

Keep at a distance he who exposes the weakness of others. After all, the
masses are not free from weaknesses. It is the duty of the ruler to
shield them. Do not bring to light that which is hidden, but try to
remove those weaknesses, which have been brought to light. God is
watchful of everything that is hidden from you, and He alone will deal
with it. Cover up the faults of the public to the best of your ability
and God will not disclose your faults to the public gaze. Loosen the
tangle of mutual hatred between the public and the administration and
remove all those causes, which may give rise to strained relations
between them. Protect yourself from every such act as may not be quite
correct for you. Do not make haste in seeking confirmation of tale
telling, for the taleteller is a deceitful person appearing in the garb
of a friend.

Never take counsel of a miser, for, he will vitiate your magnanimity and
frighten you of poverty. Do not take counsel of a coward also for he
will weaken your resolutions. Do not take counsel of the greedy too, for
he will instill greed in you and turn you into a tyrant. Miserliness,
cowardliness and greed deprive man of his trust in God.

The worst counselor is he who has served as a counselor to unjust rulers
and shared their crimes. So, never let men who have been companions of
tyrants or shared their crimes be your counselors. You can get better
men then these, men gifted with intelligence and foresight, but
unpolluted by sin, men who have never aided a tyrant in his tyranny or a
criminal in his crime. Such men will never be a burden to you.

On the other hand, they will be a source of help and strength to you at
all times. They will be friends to you and strangers to your enemies.
Choose such men alone for companionship both in private and in public.
Even among these, show preference for those who have a habitual regard
for truth however trying to you at times their truth may prove to be,
and who offer you no encouragement in the display of tendencies, which
God does not like His friends to develop.

Keep close to you the upright and the God-fearing and make clear to them
that they are never to flatter you and never to give you credit for any
good that you may not have done: for, the tolerance of flattery and
unhealthy praise stimulates pride in man and makes him arrogant.

Do not treat the good and bad alike. That will deter the good from
doing, and encourage the bad in their bad pursuits. Recompense everyone
according to what they deserve. Remember that mutual trust and good will
between the ruler and the ruled are bred only through benevolence,
justice and service. So, cultivate goodwill amongst the people; for,
their goodwill alone will save you from troubles. Your benevolence to
them will be repaid by their trust in you, and your ill-treatment by
their ill will.

Do not disregard the noble traditions set by our forbearers, which have
promoted harmony and progress among the people; and do not initiate
anything which might minimize their usefulness. The men who had
established those noble traditions have had their reward; but
responsibility will be yours if they are discarded. Try always to learn
something from the experience of the learned and the wise, and
frequently consult them in state matters so that you might maintain the
peace and goodwill, which your predecessors had established in the land.

Remember that the people are composed of different classes. The progress
of one is dependent on the progress of every other; and none can afford
to be independent of the other. We have the army formed of the soldiers
of God, we have our civil officers and their establishments, our
judiciary, our revenue collectors and our public officers. The general
public itself consist of Muslims and Zimmis and among them are merchants
and craftsmen, the unemployed and the indigent. God has prescribed for
them their several rights, duties and obligations. They are defined and
preserved in the Book of God and in the traditions of His Prophet.

The Army, by the grace of God, is like a fortress to the people and
lends dignity to the state. It upholds the prestige of Faith and
maintains the peace of the country. Without it the state cannot stand.
In its turn, it cannot stand without the support of the state. Our
soldiers have proved strong before the enemy because of the privilege
God has given them to fight for Him; but they have their material needs
to fulfill and have therefore to depend on the income provided for them
from the state revenue.

The military and civil population who pay revenue, both need the
co-operation of others-the judiciary, civil officers and their
establishment. The Qazi administers civil and criminal law; the civil
officers collect revenue and attend to civil administration with the
assistance of their establishment. And then there is the class of the
poor and needy, whose maintenance is an obligation on the other classes.

God has given appropriate opportunity of service to one and all; and
then there are the rights of all these classes over the administration
which the administrator has to meet with an eye to the good of the
entire population, a duty which he cannot fulfill properly unless he
takes personal interest in its execution and seeks help from God.
Indeed, it is obligatory on him to impose this duty on himself, and to
bear with patience the inconveniences and difficulties incidental to his
task.

Be Particularly mindful of the welfare of those in the army who in your
opinion, are staunchly faithful to their God and Prophet and loyal to
their chief, and who in the hour of passion can restrain themselves and
listen coolly to sensible remonstrance, and who can succor the weak and
smite the strong, whom violent provocation will not throw into violent
temper and who will not falter at any stage.

Keep yourself in close contact with families of established reputation
and integrity and with a glorious past, and draw to yourself men brave
and upright in character, generous and benevolent in disposition; for
such are the select of the society.

Care for them with the tenderness with which you care for your children,
and do not talk before them of any good that you might have done to
them, nor disregard any expression of affection, which they show in
return; for, such conduct inspires loyalty, devotion and goodwill.
Attend to every little want of theirs not resting content with what
general help that you might have given to them, for sometimes, timely
attention to a little want of theirs brings them immense relief. Surely
these people will not forget you in your own hour of need.

It behooves you to select for your commander-in-chief one who imposes on
himself, as a duty, the task of rendering help to his men, and who can
excel in kindness every other officer who has to attend to the needs of
men under him, and look after their families when they are away from
their homes; so much so, that the entire army should feel united in
their joys and in their sorrows.

This unity of people will give them added strength against the enemy.
Continue to maintain a kindly attitude towards them so that they might
feel ever attached to you. The fact is that the real happiness of
administrators and their most pleasant comfort lies in establishing
justice in the state and maintaining affectionate relations with the
people. Their sincerity of feeling is expressed in the love and regard
they show to you, on which alone depends the safety of the
administrators.

Your advice to the army will be of no avail, unless and until you show
affection to both men and officers, in order that they might not regard
the government as an opposite burden or contribute to its downfall.

Continue to satisfy their needs and praise them over and over again for
the services they have rendered. Such an attitude, God willing will
require the brave to braver actions and induce the timid to deeds of
bravery.

Try to enter into the feelings of others and do not foist the mistake of
one another and do not grudge dispensing appropriate rewards. See to it
that you do not show favors to one who has achieved nothing but merely
counts on his family position; and do not with-hold proper reward from
one who has done great deeds simply because he holds a low position in
life.

Turn to God and to His Prophet for guidance whenever you feel uncertain
regarding your actions. There is the commandment of God delivered to
those whom He wishes to guide aright: “O people of faith! Obey God and
obey His Prophet and obey those who hold authority over you. And refer
to God and His Prophet whenever there is difference of opinion among
you.” To turn to God is in fact to consult the Book of God; and to turn
to the Prophet is to follow his universally accepted traditions.

Select for your chief judge one from the people who is by far the best
among them-one who is not obsessed with domestic worries, one who cannot
be intimidated, one who does not err too often, one who does not turn
back from a right path once he finds it, one who is not self-centered or
avaricious, one who will not decide before knowing the full facts, one
who will weigh with care every attendant doubt and pronounce a clear
verdict after taking everything into full consideration, one who will
not grow restive over the arguments of advocates and who will examine
with patience every new disclosure of fact and who will be strictly
impartial in his decision, one whom flattery cannot mislead or one who
does not exult over his position. But it is not easy to find such men.

Once you have selected the right man for the office, pay him handsomely
enough, to let him live in comfort and in keeping with his position,
enough to keep him above temptation. Give him a position in your court
so high that none can even dream of coveting it and so high that neither
back biting nor intrigue can touch him.

Beware! The utmost care should be exercised in his selection: for it is
a high office, which adventurous self-seekers aspire to secure and
exploit in their selfish interests. For the selection of your chief
judge, give careful consideration to the selection of other officers.
Confirm them in their appointments after approved apprenticeship and
probation. Never select men for responsible posts either out of any
regard for personal connections or under any influence, for that might
lead to injustice and corruption.

Of these, select for higher posts men of experience, men firm in faith
and belonging to good families. Such men will not fall an easy prey to
temptations and will discharge their duties with an eye on the abiding
good of others. Increase their salaries to give them a contented life. A
contented living is a help to self-purification. They will not feel the
urge to tax the earnings of their subordinates for their own upkeep.
They will then have no excuse either to go against your instructions or
misappropriate state funds.

Keep a watch over them without their knowledge. Perchance they may
develop true honesty and true concern for public welfare. But whenever
any of them is accused of dishonesty, and the guilt is confirmed by the
report of your secret service, then regard this as sufficient to convict
him. Let the punishment be corporeal and let that be dealt with in
public at an appointed place of degradation.

Great care is to be exercised in revenue administration to ensure the
prosperity of those who pay the revenue to the state; for it is on their
prosperity depends the prosperity of others, particularly the prosperity
of the masses. Indeed, the state exists on its revenue. You should
regard the proper upkeep of the land in cultivation as of greater
importance than the collection of revenue, for revenue cannot be derived
except by making the land productive.

He who demands revenue without helping the cultivator to improve his
land, inflicts unmerited hardship on the cultivator and ruins the State.
The rule of such a person does not last long. If the cultivators ask for
reduction of their land tax for having suffered from epidemic or drought
or excess of rains or the barrenness of the soil or floods damaging
their crops, then, reduce the tax accordingly, so that their condition
might improve.

Do not mind the loss of revenue on that account for that will return to
you one day manifold in the hour of greater prosperity of the land and
enable you to improve the condition of your towns and raise the prestige
of your state. You will be the object of universal praise. The people
will believe in your sense of justice. The confidence, which they will
place in you in consequence will prove your strength, as they will be
found ready to share your burdens.

You may settle in land any number of people but discontent will overtake
them if the land is not improved. The cause of the cultivator’s ruin is
the rulers who are bent feverishly on accumulating wealth at all costs,
out of fear that their rule might not last long. Such are the people who
do not learn from examples or precedents.

Keep an eye on your establishment and your scribes; and select the best
among them for your confidential correspondence, such among these as
possess high character and deserve your full confidence, men who may not
exploit their privileged position to go against you, and who may not
grow neglectful of their duties, and who in the drafting of treaties may
not succumb to external temptation and harm your interests, or fail to
render you proper assistance and to save you from trouble, and who in
carrying out their duties can realize their serious responsibilities,
for he who does not realize his own responsibility can hardly appraise
the responsibilities of others.

Do not select men for such work merely on the strength of your first
impressions of your affection or good faith; or as a matter of fact, the
pretensions of a good many who are really devoid of honesty and good
breeding may cheat even the intelligence of rulers. Selection should be
made after probation which should be the test of righteousness.

In making direct appointments from people, see to it that those selected
possess influence with the people and who enjoy the reputation of being
honest; for such selection is agreeable both to God and the Ruler. For
every department of administration, let there be a head, whom no trying
task might cause worry and no pressure of work annoy.

And remember that every weakness of anyone among your establishment and
scribe, which you may overlook, will be written down against you in your
scroll of deeds.

Adopt useful schemes placed before those engaged in trade and industry,
and help them with wise counsels. Some of them live in towns, and some
move from place to place with their ware and tools and earn their living
by manual labor. Trade and industry are sources of profit to the state.
While the general public are not inclined to bear the strain, those
engaged in their professions take the trouble to collect commodities
from far and near, from land and from across the sea, and from mountains
and forests and naturally derive benefits.

It is this class of peace-loving people from whom no disturbance need be
feared. They love peace and order; indeed they are incapable of creating
disorder. Visit every part of the country and establish personal contact
with this class, and enquire into their condition. But bear in mind that
a good many of them are intensely greedy and are inured to bad dealings.

They hoard grain and try to sell it at a high price; and this is most
harmful to the public. It is a blot on the name of the ruler not to
fight this evil. Prevent them from hoarding; for the Prophet of God
(pbuh) had prohibited it. And see to it that trade is carried on with
utmost ease, that the scales are evenly held and that prices are so
fixed that neither the seller nor the buyer is put to a loss. And if,
inspite of your warning, should any one go against your commands and
commit the crime of hoarding, then inflict upon him a severe punishment.

Beware! Fear God when dealing with the problem of the poor who have none
to patronize them, who are forlorn, indigent and helpless and are
greatly torn in mind victims to the vicissitudes of Time. Among them
there are some who do not question their lot in life and who not
withstand their misery, do not go about seeking alms.

For God’s sake, safeguard their rights; for on you rests responsibility
of protecting their interests. Assign for their upliftment, a portion of
the state exchequer (*Baitul-maal*), wherever they may be, whether close
at hand or far away from you. The rights of the two should be equal in
your eye. Do not let any preoccupation slip them from your mind; for no
excuse whatsoever for the disregard of their rights will be acceptable
to God. Do not treat their interests as of less importance than your
own, and never keep them outside the purview of your important
considerations, and mark the persons who look down upon them and of
whose condition they keep you in ignorance.

Select from among your officers such men as are upright and God-fearing
and who can keep you properly informed of the condition of the poor.
Make such provisions for these poor people as shall not oblige you to
offer an excuse before God on the Day of Judgment; for, it is this
section of people more than any other which deserves benevolent
treatment.

Seek your reward from God by giving to each of them what is due to him
and enjoin on yourself as a sacred duty the task of meeting the needs of
such aged among them as have no independent means of livelihood and are
averse to seeking alms. And it is the discharge of this duty that
usually proves very trying to rulers, but is very welcome to societies,
which are gifted with foresight. It is only such societies or nations
who truly carry out with equanimity their covenant with God to discharge
their duty to the poor.

Meet the oppressed and the lowly periodically in an open conference and,
conscious of the Divine Presence there, have a heart-to-heart talk with
them, and let none from your armed guard or civil officers or members of
the police or the Intelligence Department be by your side, so that the
representative of the poor might state their grievances fearlessly and
without reserve.

For I have heard the Prophet of God say that no nation or society in
which the strong do not discharge their duty to the weak will occupy a
high position. Bear with composure any strong language which they may
use, and do not get annoyed if they cannot state their case lucidly,
even so, God will open for you His door of blessings and rewards.
Whatever you cannot afford to give, make that clear to them with utmost
sincerity.

There are certain things, which call for prompt action. Accept the
recommendations made by your officers for the redress of the grievances
of the clerical staff. See to it that petitions or applications
submitted for your consideration are brought to your notice the very day
they are submitted, however much your officers might try to intercept
them. Dispose the day’s work that very day, for the coming day will
bring with it its own task.

And then do not forget to set apart the best of your time for communion
with God, although every moment of yours is for Him only, provided it is
spent sincerely in the service of your people. The special time that you
give to prayer in the strict religious sense is to be devoted to the
performance of prescribed daily prayers.

Keep yourself occupied with prayers during the day and in the night and
to gain perfect communion, do not as far as possible, let your prayers
grow tiresome. And when you lead in congregation prayer, do not let your
prayer be so lengthy as to cause discomfort to the congregation or raise
in them the feeling of dislike for it or liquidate its effect: for in
the congregation there may be invalids and also those who have to attend
to pressing affairs of their own.

When I had asked of the Prophet of God on receiving an order to proceed
to Yemen, how I should lead the people over there in prayer, he said,
“Perform your prayers even as the weakest among you would do; and set an
example of consideration to the faithful.”

Alongside of the observance of all that I said bear one thing in mind.
Never for any length of time keep yourself aloof from the people, for to
do so is to keep oneself ignorant of their affairs. It develops in the
ruler a wrong perspective and renders him unable to distinguish between
what is important and what is not, between right and wrong, and between
truth and falsehood.

The ruler is after all human; and he cannot form a correct view of
anything, which is out of sight. There is no distinctive sign attached
to truth, which may enable one to distinguish between the different
varieties of truth and falsehood. The fact is that you must be one of
the two things. Either you are just or unjust. If you are just, then you
will not keep yourself away from the people, but will listen to them and
meet their requirements.

On the other hand, if you are unjust, the people themselves will keep
away from you. What virtue is there in keeping aloof? At all events
aloofness is not desirable especially when it is your duty to attend to
the needs of the people. Complaints of oppression by your officers or
petitions for justice should not prove irksome to you.

Make this clear to yourself that those immediately about and around you
will like to exploit their position to covet what belongs to others and
commit acts of injustice. Suppress such a tendency in them. Make a rule
of your conduct never to give even a small piece of land to any of your
relations. That will prevent them from causing harm to the interests of
others and save you from courting the misappropriation of both God and
man.

Deal justice squarely regardless of the fact whether one is a relation
or not. If any of your relations or companions violates the law, mete
out the punishment prescribed by law however painful it might be to you
personally; for it will be all to the good of the State. If at any time
people suspect, that you have been unjust to them in any respect,
disclose your mind to them and remove their suspicions. In this way,
your mind will become attuned to the sense of justice and people will
begin to love you. It will also fulfill your wish that you should enjoy
their confidence.

Bear in mind that you do not throw away the offer of peace, which your
enemy may himself make. Accept it, for that will please God. Peace is a
source of comfort to the army; it reduces your worries and promotes
order in the state. But beware! Be on your guard when peace is signed;
for, certain types of enemies propose terms of peace just to lull you
into a sense of security only to attack you again when you are off your
guard.

So you should exercise the utmost vigilance on your part, and place no
undue faith in their protestations. But, if under the peace treaty you
have accepted any obligations, discharge those obligations scrupulously.
It is a trust and must be faithfully upheld and whenever you have
promised anything, keep it with all the strength that you command, for
whatever difference of opinion might exist on other matter, there is
nothing so noble as the fulfillment of a promise.

This is recognized even among the non Muslims, for they know the dire
consequences which follow from the breaking of covenants. So never make
excuses in discharging your responsibility and never break a promise,
nor cheat your enemy. For, breach of promise is an act against God, and
none except the positively wicked acts against God.

Indeed divine promises are a blessing spread over all mankind. The
promise of God is a refuge sought after, even by the most powerful on
earth; for there is no risk of being cheated. So, do not make any
promise from which you may afterwards offer excuses to retract; nor do
you go back upon what you have confirmed to abide by; nor do you break
it, however galling it may at first prove to be. For it is far better to
wait in patience for wholesome results to follow than to break it out of
any apprehension.

Beware! Abstain from shedding blood without a valid cause. There is
nothing more harmful than this, which brings about one’s ruin. The blood
that is willfully shed shortens the life of a state. On the Day of
Judgment it is this crime for which one will have to answer first. So,
beware! Do not wish to build the strength of your state on blood; for,
it is this blood, which ultimately weakens the state and passes it on to
other hands. Before me and my God no excuse for willful killing can be
entertained.

Murder is a crime, which is punishable by death. If on any account the
corporeal punishment dealt by the state for any lesser crime results in
the death of the guilty, let not the prestige of the state stand in any
way of the deceased’s relations claiming blood money.

Do not make haste to do a thing before its time, nor put it off when the
right moment arrives. Do not insist on doing a wrong thing, nor show
slackness in rectifying a wrong thing. Perform everything in its proper
time, and let everything occupy its proper place. When the people as a
whole agree upon a thing, do not impose your own view on them and do not
neglect to discharge the responsibility that rests on you in
consequence.

For, the eyes of the people will be on you and you are answerable for
whatever you do to them. The slightest dereliction of duty will bring
its own retribution. Keep your anger under control and keep your hands
and tongue in check. Whenever you become angry try to restrain yourself
or else you will simply increase your worries.

It is imperative that you study carefully the principles, which have
inspired just and good rulers who have gone before you. Give close
thought to the example of our Prophet Muhammad (peace be on him), his
traditions, and the commandments of the Book of God and whatever you
might have assimilated from my own way of dealing with things.

Endeavor to the best of your ability to carry out the instructions which
I have given you here and which you have solemnly undertaken to follow.
By means of this order, I enjoin on you not to succumb to the prompting
of your own heart or to turn away from the discharge of duties entrusted
to you.

I seek the refuge in the Almighty and His unlimited sphere of blessings,
and invite you to pray with me that He may give us together the grace to
surrender willingly our will to His will, and to enable us to acquit
ourselves well before him and His creation; so that mankind might
cherish our memory and our work survives. I seek of God the culmination
of His blessings and pray that He may grant you and me His grace and the
honor of martyrdom in His cause. Verily, we have to return to Him. I
invoke His blessings on the Prophet of God and his pure Progeny.

Ali and the Public Treasury
---------------------------

Imam ‘Ali (a) was very careful regarding Muslim wealth. He always
considered Muslim treasury as the property of Muslims only and he never
used it for his personal purpose.

We have seen in the incident of Aqeel how he did not give even a single
dirham more to his own brother.

Have a look at the following incidents in addition those mentioned
above:

Haroon ibn Antara narrates from his father that he saw Imam ‘Ali (a) at
a place called Khoornaq in winter. He was wearing old clothes and was
shivering in cold. He asked the Imam:

“O Master of faithful! Allah has allotted to you and your family a share
from the Muslim treasury. In spite of this, why didn’t you get a warm
blanket to protect yourself from cold?”

Imam ‘Ali (a) replied: “I am not ashamed of saying that I brought this
simple blanket from Medina.”[^1]

Imam ‘Ali (a) never resided in the Ruler’s Palace at Kufa. He lived in a
small house with unplastered walls and gave shelter to the poor in Darul
Imarah (royal quarters). He sold his sword many times to buy clothes and
feed the poor. Uqbah ibn al-Qama narrates that he saw Imam ‘Ali (a)
eating a dry piece of bread. He asked: “O Master of faithful! Do you eat
dry bread?”

Imam replied: “O Abul Junoob! The Prophet used to eat bread even drier
than this. His clothes used to be coarser than mine. If I leave the way
of the Prophet, it is possible that I will get separated from him.”[^2]

Ibn Athir narrates that some wealth was brought to Imam ‘Ali (a) from
Isfahan. Imam ‘Ali (a) divided it into seven parts and took a draw to
decide who would be the first to get the share.[^3]

Yahya ibn Musailaima narrates that Imam ‘Ali (a) made Amr ibn Musailaima
the governor of Isfahan. He came back to Imam ‘Ali (a) after some time
with a lot of wealth. This wealth included some water skins filled with
honey and butter.

Umme Kulthum, Amirul Momineen’s daughter sent a message to Amr to send
the butter and honey, which he had brought along to her.

Amr sent two bags to her. Imam ‘Ali (a) began counting the wealth on the
next day. He found that two bags were missing. He asked Amr about them
and Amr kept quiet. Imam ‘Ali (a) told him to reply for the sake of
Allah. He said: “I had sent two bags to your daughter.” Imam ‘Ali (a)
ordered the bags to be brought back from home. When they were brought to
him, the content worth three dirhams was less in them. He bought honey
and butter worth three dirham and added to the bags. Then he distributed
them among eligible persons.

Sufyan says that Imam ‘Ali (a) neither built palaces nor usurp the right
of any one.

It is narrated that Imam ‘Ali (a) had sold his sword and said: “If I had
four dirhams, I would not have sold my sword.”

Imam ‘Ali (a) did not buy provisions from a shopkeeper who knew him
well. He used to put a seal on the bag of containing barley flour. He
used to say that he liked to eat only that food, which was completely
pure according to his knowledge. He did not like eating food whose
purity was doubtful.[^4]

Humility and Justice of Ali (a)
-------------------------------

Ibn Athir Shobi narrates: Imam ‘Ali’s (a) armor got lost somewhere and
he found it with a Christian. He brought that Christian to the court of
Qazi Shurai and began debating with him in the Qazi’s presence. Imam
‘Ali (a) said that the armor belonged to him, which was neither sold nor
gifted by him.

Shurai asked the Christian: “What have you got to say regarding the
claim of Amirul Momineen (a)?

The Christian said: “This armor is mine and Amirul Momineen (a) is
lying.’

Shurai turned to Imam ‘Ali (a) and asked: “Do you have any proof?”

Imam ‘Ali (a) smiled and said that he did not have any proof. Shurai
handed the armor to the Christian. He went away with the armor and
returned after walking a few steps and said: “I bear witness that it is
the decision of the prophets. Amirul Momineen (a) brought me to the
court in spite of having power. His judge gave a verdict against him and
he accepted the decision silently. This armor belongs to Amirul Momineen
(a).” Then he recited the formula of faith and became a Muslim.

Dr. Taha Husayn writes: Imam ‘Ali (a) did not buy provisions from a
shopkeeper of his acquaintance so that the shopkeeper does not favor him
because of his being a ruler. He used to carry loaves of bread on his
back at night and distribute it among the poor secretly. They never knew
who supplies food to them at night. When he was martyred, the poor came
to know who their nocturnal helper was.

Imam ‘Ali (a) did not become satisfied until he fulfilled his duty of
helping people in religious matters. He used to lead congregational
prayers. He used to teach them through his words and deeds. He used to
feed poor and needy. He used to search for the needy and fulfill their
needs. He used to separate from the people and involve himself in
worship alone. He offered the midnight prayer and rested only after a
major part of the night had passed.

Again he used to go to the mosque before the darkness disappeared. He
used to call out to the people who were sleeping, for prayer. In this
way he kept himself occupied in Allah’s worship all night. He used to
remember Allah while he was alone and when he addressed the public. He
used to encourage people to question him about religious matters.

He used to remain careful in his words and deeds regarding equity in
distribution of wealth. He also was careful regarding equity in
distribution whenever someone asked for something. One day two women
came to him and expressed their helplessness. Imam ‘Ali (a) ordered them
to be given clothes and food for they were needy. He also gave them some
money. One of them asked for more as she was an Arab and the other woman
was not.

Imam ‘Ali (a) handed over a little dust to her and said: “I don’t know
whether Allah has given more excellence to someone because of anything
except obedience and piety.”[^5]

Analysis of ‘Ali’s General Policies
-----------------------------------

The People who are unaware of the truth and excellence of Imam ‘Ali (a)
are of the opinion that Umar ibn Khattab was far better than Imam ‘Ali
(a) in politics even though Imam ‘Ali (a) had more knowledge than him.

Abu ‘Ali Sina and followers of his school have this opinion and their
argument is that Imam ‘Ali (a) did not get success in the field of
politics because he confined himself to the boundaries of Islamic law.
He considered general requirements in wars, peace treaties and common
policies.

On the other hand, Umar considered general requirements and resorted to
personal exertions. He used to go for Express Text (*Nass*) if the
situation demanded and used to deceive his enemies. He used to use his
whip excessively and forgive criminals in certain situations. The
practice of Imam ‘Ali (a) was completely different from this. He never
made changes to the texts of Shariah. He did not believe in personal
exertions (*Ijtihaad*). He performed all worldly actions according to
religious commandments. He used to control everyone with a single rod.
He used to follow the book of Allah and Prophetic Practice (*Sunnah*) in
all matters. He did not consider it lawful to oppose Shariah for the
sake of worldly gains.

The example of his worldly politics is that a person wanted to kill him
and he had expressed this desire in public. However, when this person
was brought in the court of Imam ‘Ali (a), he ordered that he could not
punish anyone before he committed a crime.

Here is an example of his religious policies. A person convicted of
theft was brought in the court of Imam ‘Ali (a). Imam ‘Ali (a) said: “I
would not charge him because of doubt; without a proof or confession.”

Imam ‘Ali (a) did not appoint any hypocrite as a governor. He considered
Muawiyah ibn Abi Sufyan a hypocrite and did not stand him even for a
moment.

He was advised by Mughaira ibn Shoba and other such politically-minded
persons that he should not have any conflict with Muawiyah at that
moment and dismiss him once the government has stabilized.

But Imam ‘Ali (a) said: “I cannot bear a hypocrite like Muawiyah ruling
an Islamic province. Then too I would not consider any deceit lawful in
this matter.” Talha and Zubair paid allegiance to Imam ‘Ali (a) and then
broke their oaths. They came to Imam ‘Ali (a) and took his permission to
perform Umrah. Imam ‘Ali (a) asked them to promise that they would not
divide the Muslims. When they promised, Imam ‘Ali (a) permitted them to
go.

Imam ‘Ali (a) did not force them to stay in Medina only because of
doubt.

Imam ‘Ali (a) always worked for the benefit of principles of justice.
The period of his rule was short but the world got to see the picture of
a divine government with their own eyes. People could see the picture of
a functioning government based on divine politics in accordance with
Quran in the mosque of Kufa.

Some of his Golden Sayings
--------------------------

1. When this world favors somebody, it lends him the merits of others,
and when it turns its face away from him it snatches away even his own
excellences and fame.

2. A time will come after me when there would be nothing more concealed
than truth and nothing more explicit than falsehood. Many people will
swear falsely by Allah. Good deeds will be considered bad and vice
versa.

3. Maintain such relations with people that they cry after you are dead
and remain eager to meet you when you are alive.

4. Beware of an honest person who is hungry and a dishonest person whose
stomach is full.

5. Two kinds of people will be damned on my account; those who form an
exaggerated opinion about me and those who under-estimate me because
they hate me.

6. Keep away from hypocrites because they are misguided and they
misguide others.

7. Fulfilling wishes cannot be done without three things viz. it should
be considered a small act so that it is proved great, it should be
hidden so that it comes out on its own and it should be done soon so
that it gives happiness.

8. Keep away from all those acts which are liked by the doer for himself
and not for other Muslims. Keep away from all those deeds, which are
done in solitude and cannot be done openly. Keep away from all those
acts about which when a person is asked, he denies or seeks pardon.

9. A person who does good is better than that deed and a person who does
evil is worse than that deed.

10. Patience is of two kinds: patience over what pains you, and patience
against what you covet.

11. A leader should educate himself before teaching others and should
learn etiquettes before preaching them to others.

12. The world and the hereafter are opposed to each other. They are two
separate things. Either a person loves this world or he loves the
hereafter. The world and the hereafter are like east and west. If a
person gets nearer to one, he moves far away from the other.

13. A companion of a king is like a person riding a lion. People envy
him but he knows very well what he is riding.

14. If a person respects his self, he does not value his desires.

15. Justice has one form and injustice has many forms. Hence it is easy
to adopt injustice instead of adopting justice. Justice is like a target
of a sharp shooter and injustice is like a missed aim. Hitting the
target requires a lot of effort and it is quite easy to miss the aim.

16. The world makes people forget about other things. When a person
acquires one thing, he becomes greedy about other things.

17. You are living in the age where goodness is turning back and
falsehood is moving forward.

Glance at different classes of people. You will find beggars complaining
about their poverty and you will find rich who deny the bounties of
Allah. You will find such misers are miserly in giving rights of Allah.
You will find disobedient ones who are deaf when it comes to listening
at advices. May Allah’s curse be on those who preach good but do not act
upon it and those who preach abstinence from evil but do not act upon
it.

18. The tongue of a believer is behind his heart and the heart of a
hypocrite is behind his tongue. A believer thinks well before speaking.
He speaks only if the words are worth speaking. He keeps quiet if the
point is not good. A hypocrite speaks whatever comes to his mind. He
does not care about whether a statement is beneficial for him.

19. By Allah! Muawiyah is not cleverer than me but he is a betrayer and
deceives others.

His will to Imam Hasan (a)
--------------------------

Upon his return from Siffeen, he made the following will and testament
to his son, Imam Hasan (a), whose main points are as follows:

After praise to Allah and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s) let it be known to
you that decay of health, passing away of time and nearness to death
have made me realize that I should give more thought to my future (next
world) and to my people, advise them more and spend more time in
equipping them mentally to face this world. I felt that my own sons and
my near ones have as much right to utilize my experiences and knowledge,
all the ups and downs of life, all the realities of life and the
hereafter.

I decided, therefore, to spend more time and to prepare you for your
future. This was neither selfishness nor self-esteem, nor any mental
luxury of giving away advices, but it was the sincere desire of making
you see the world as I found it, looking at the realities of time as I
looked at them, and doing the right thing at the right time and the
right place as it should be done, which made me write down these advices
to you. You will not find anything but truths and realities in them.

My dear son, you are a part my body and soul. Whenever I look at you I
feel as I am looking at myself. If any calamity happens to you, I feel
as if it has happened to me. Your death will make me feel as if it was
my own death. Your affairs are like my own affairs. Therefore I commit
these advices to you. I want you to pay attention to them and to guard
them so that they may remain in your life (to personally guide you).

My first and foremost advice to you, my son, is to fear Allah. Be His
obedient servant. Keep His thought always fresh in your mind. Be
attached to and carefully guard the rope, which connects you to Him
(Islam). Can any other connection be stronger, more durable and more
lasting than this to command greater respect and consideration or to
replace it?

Accept good advices and refresh your mind with them. Adopt piety and
kill inordinate desires with its help. Build your character with the
help of sincere faith in religion and Allah. Subjugate your self-willed,
obstinate and refractory nature with the vision of death, make it see
the mortality of life and of all that it holds dear, to realize the
actuality of misfortunes and adversities, the changes of circumstance
and times, and compel it to study the histories of past people.

Persuade it to see the ruined cities, the dilapidated palaces and
decaying signs and relics of fallen empires and past nations. Then
meditate over the activities of those people over what all they have
done, when they started their careers; where, when and how they were
actually brought to an end; where are they now? What have they actually
gained out of life, and what was their contribution to human welfare. If
you carefully ponder over these problems, you will find that each one of
these people parted with all that they cherished and loved and are now
in a solitary abode alone and unattended, and you will also be like
them.

Be sure to provide well for your future abode. Do not lose eternal
blessings for the sake of worldly pleasures.

Do not talk about things you do not know. Do not speculate and pass
judgment over subjects, which you are not in a position to form an
opinion about. Give up when there is a possibility of your going astray.
It is better to give up the quest than to advance forward facing
uncertain dangers and unforeseen risks.

Fight, whenever required, to defend the cause of Allah. Do not be afraid
that people will laugh at you, censure your action or slander you.
Fearlessly and broadly help truth and justice. Bear patiently the
sufferings and face bravely the obstacles, which come your way when you
try to uphold them. Adhere to the cause of truth and justice whenever
you find them. Try to be well-versed in Islamic jurisprudence and
theology, and acquire a thorough knowledge of the laws of this religion.

Develop patience against sufferings, calamities and adversities. This
virtue of patience is one of the highest values of morality and nobility
of character, and is the best habit one can develop. Trust in Allah and
let your mind seek His protection in every calamity and suffering. You
will thus entrust yourself and your affairs to the Best Trustee and to
the Mightiest Guardian. Do not seek help and protection from anybody but
Allah. Reserve your prayers, your requests, your solicitations and your
entreaties to Him and Him alone because to grant as well as to withhold
lies in His and only in His power. Ask as much of His favors and seek as
much of His Guidance as often as you can.

Try to understand my advices, ponder over them deeply; do not take them
lightly and do not turn away from them. The best knowledge is that which
benefits the listener. Knowledge, which does not benefit anyone, is
useless to learn or remember.

My dear son, when I realized that I was getting old and when I felt that
weakness and feebleness were gradually creeping over me, I hastened to
advise you on the best ways of leading a noble, virtuous and useful
life. I hated the idea that either death overtakes me before I tell you
all I want to tell or my mental capacities, like my body strength, fall
prey to deterioration. I convey all this knowledge to you, otherwise
inordinate desires, temptations and inducements may influence you, or
adverse changes of times and circumstances may drag you into their mire,
and I would leave you like an unbroken and untrained colt.

A young and fresh mind is like virgin soil, which allows things sown in
it to grow verdantly and to bear luxuriantly. Therefore, I have made use
of early opportunity to educate and train you, before your mind loses
its freshness, before it gets hardened and warped, before you start
facing life unprepared for the encounter, and before you are forced to
use your decisions and discretions without gaining advantages of
cumulated traditions, collected knowledge and experiences of others.

These advices and counsels that I give will save you from the worry of
acquiring knowledge, gathering experiences and soliciting others for
advice. Now you can easily make use of all the knowledge men acquired
with great care, trouble and patience; things which were hidden and
which only experiences and sufferings could bring to light are made
easily available to you through these advices.

My dear son! Though the span of my life is not as large as that of
others who have passed away before me, I took great care to study their
lives. Assiduously I went through their activities, I contemplated over
their deliberations and deeds, I studied their remains, relics and
ruins; and I pondered over their lives so deeply that I felt as if I had
lived and worked with them from early ages of history down to our times.

I know what did good and what brought harm to them. Sifting the good
from the bad, I am concentrating within these pages the knowledge that I
gathered. Through these advices I have tried to show you the value of
honest living and high thinking, and the dangers of a vicious and sinful
life. I have covered and guarded every aspect of your life since it is
my duty as a kind, considerate and loving father.

From the very beginning I wanted to help you develop a noble character
and prepare you for the life, which you will have to lead. I wanted to
train you to grow up to be a young man with a noble character, an open
and honest mind, and a clear and precise knowledge of things around you.
Originally my desire was only to teach you the Holy Book thoroughly, to
make you understand its intricacies, to impart you with the complete
knowledge of His Orders and interdictions and not to leave you at the
mercy of the knowledge of other people.

But after having succeeded in this task, I felt nervous that I may leave
you untrained and uneducated in those subjects which themselves are
subject to so much confusion and so many contradictions; whose
confusions have been worse confounded by selfish desires, warped minds,
wicked ways of life, and sinful modes of thinking. Therefore, I have
noted down, in these lines, the basic principles of nobility, piety,
truth and justice.

You may feel they are overbearing and harsh, but my desire is to arm you
with this knowledge instead of leaving you unarmed to face the world
where there is every danger of loss and damnation. As you are a noble,
virtuous and pious young man, I am sure you will receive Divine Guidance
and Succor. I am sure He will help you to achieve your aim in life. I
want you to promise yourself to follow my advices carefully.

Remember my son, the best advices are those which tell you to fear
Allah, to confine yourself to the performance of those duties which have
been incumbent upon you by Him, and to follow the footsteps of your
ancestors (The Holy Prophet and Imam ‘Ali), and your pious relatives.
Verily they carefully scanned their thoughts and deeds, as you must try
to do. This kind of deliberation made them take from life what was
really the best and forsake that which was not incumbent upon them.

If your mind refuses to accept my advices and you persist to try own
experiments, then you are at liberty to arrive at your conclusions, but
only after carefully studying the subject and acquiring the knowledge
necessary for such decisions. You must not allow uncertainties and
doubts to poison your mind and skepticism or irrational likes and
dislikes to affect your views. Remember that before you start thinking
about a problem, seek guidance from the Lord and beseech Him to give you
a lead in the right direction; avoid confusion in your ideas and do not
let disbelief (about the truth of the teachings of religion) take hold
of your mind, because one will lead you towards agnosticism, and other
towards error and sin.

When you are thus prepared to solve any problem and you are sure that
you posses a clear mind, a sincere and firm desire to reach the truth,
to say the correct thing and to do the correct deed, then carefully go
through the advices that I am leaving you. If your mind is not as clear
and free from doubts as you wish it to be, then you will be wandering in
the wilderness of uncertainties and errors like a camel suffering from
night blindness. Under these circumstances it is best that you give up
the quest, because with such limitations, none can ever reach the truth.

My dear son, carefully and very carefully remember these sayings of
mine, that the Lord, Who is the Master of death, is also the Master of
life. The Creator is the Annihilator. And the One who annihilates has
the power to bring everything back to existence again. The One who sends
you calamities is the One who will bring you safe out of them.

Remember that this world is working under laws ordained by Him and it
consists of the sum total of actions and reactions, causes and effects,
calamities and reverses, pains and pleasures; and reward and punishment;
but this is not all which the picture depicts; there are things in it
which are beyond our understanding, things which we do not and cannot
know and things which cannot be foreseen and foretold.

For instance, the rewards and punishments of the Day of Judgment:
Remember that your lack of understanding is due to the insufficiency of
your knowledge. Remember that when you came into this world your first
appearance was that of an ignorant, uneducated and unlearned being, then
you gradually acquired knowledge. There are several things (in this
world), which were beyond your knowledge, which perplexed and surprised
you and about which you did not understand “why” and “how”; gradually
you acquired knowledge about some of those subjects and in future, your
knowledge and vision may further expand. Therefore, the best thing for
you to do is to seek guidance of One Who has created and Who maintains
and nourishes you. You must fear His Wrath as well as His punishments.
Your requests and solicitations should be to Him alone; you should be
afraid of Him and nobody else.

Be it known to you, my son, that nobody has given mankind such detailed
information about Allah (His mercy, His kindness, His glory, His might
and His power) as our Holy Prophet (S). I advise you to have faith in
his teachings, to make him your leader and to accept his guidance for
your salvation. Thus advising you, I have done the best that I can do as
a sincere and loving adviser, and I assure you, however you may try to
find a better way for your good, you will not find any superior to the
one advised by me.

Remember my son that had there been any other God, beside the One, he
would have also sent his messengers and prophets and they would have
pointed out to mankind the domain and glory of this second god and you
would have also seen them. But no such incident ever took place. He is
one God whom we all should recognize and worship. He has explained
Himself. Nobody is a partner to Him in His domain, might and glory. He
is eternal, has always been and shall remain when every other thing will
disappear into nothingness and there shall be no end to His existence.

His glory and His Existence is so supreme, pre-eminent, transcendent,
incomparable and excellent that it is beyond the grasp of minds and
intellects. None can understand or visualize Him. When you have accepted
these truths and realities, your behavior so far as His orders and
interdictions are concerned, should be that of a person who realizes
that this status, power and position is nothing when compared to that of
his Lord, who wants to gain His favor through Prayers and obedience who
fears His Wrath as well as His punishments, and Who is absolutely in
need of His help and protection. Remember my son, that God has not
ordered you to do anything but that which is good and which propagates
and distributes goodness, and He has not interdicted you from anything
but that which is bad and will bring about bad effects.

My Dear son, through this message of mine, I have explained everything
about this world, how fickle and quick changing is its attitude, how
short-lived and evanescent is everything that it holds or offers, and
how fast it changes its moods and its favors. I have also explained
about the life to come; the pleasures and blessings provided there are
the everlasting peace, comfort and happiness arranged for in the heaven.
I have given enough examples of both aspects of life, before and after
death, so that you may know the reality and lead life on the basis of
that knowledge.

The Truth is that people who have carefully studied the conditions of
life and the world pass their days as if they know that they are
travelers who have to leave a place which is barren (practically a
desert with the extreme scarcity of food and water), unhealthy and
uncongenial and they have to go towards lands which are fertile,
healthy, congenial and where there is abundant provision of all comforts
and pleasures. They have eagerly taken up the journey, happy in the hope
of future blessings and peace.

They have willingly accepted the sufferings, troubles and hazards of the
way, parting of friends, scarcity of food and comfort during the
pilgrimage so that they may reach the journey’s end and a happy place.
They do not refuse to bear any discomfort and do not grudge any
expenditure on the way (giving out alms and charities), and helping the
poor and needy. Every step which they put forward towards their goal,
however tiring and exhausting it may be, is a happy event of their
lives.

On the contrary the condition of those people, who are staying in
fertile and happy regions and who have to undertake a journey, knowing
full well that the journey is going to end in an inhospitable, arid and
unfertile land: can anything be more loathsome to them than this
journey? How they would hate to leave the place where they are and to
arrive at the place, which they so much hate, and which is so dismaying,
dreadful and frightening.

My dear son, so far as your behavior with other human beings is
concerned, let your ‘self’ act as scales to help you judge its goodness
or wickedness. Do unto others as you wish others to do unto you.
Whatever you like for others, and whatever you dislike to happen to you,
spare others from such happenings. Do not oppress and tyrannize anyone
because you surely do not like to be oppressed and tyrannized. Be kind
and sympathetic to others, as you certainly desire others to treat you
kindly and sympathetically.

Whatever habits you find objectionable, and loathsome in others, abstain
from developing those traits of character. If you are satisfied or feel
happy in receiving a certain kind of behavior from others, you may
behave with others exactly in the same way. Do not speak about them in
the way that you do not like others to speak about you. Do not speak on
the subject about which you know little or nothing, and if you at all
want to speak on anything or about anyone of whom you are fully aware
then avoid scandal, libel and aspersion, as you do not like yourself to
be scandalized and libeled in the same manner.

Remember, son, that vanity and conceit are forms of folly, these traits
will bring to you serious harm and will be a constant source of danger
to you. Therefore, lead a well-balanced life (neither be conceited nor
suffer from inferiority complex), and exert yourself to earn an honest
living. But do not act like a treasurer for somebody.

And, whenever you receive guidance of the Lord to achieve the things you
desire, do not get proud of your achievement but be humble and
submissive to Him and realize that your success was due to His mercy and
favor.

Remember, my son, that before you is a long and arduous journey (life).
The journey is not only very long, exhausting, laborious and onerous,
but the route is mostly through dismal, dreary and deserted regions,
where you will be sadly in need of refreshing, renovating and enlivening
aids and you cannot dispense with such provisions as to keep you going
and to maintain you till the end of your journey, the Day of Judgment.

But remember that you do not overload yourself (do not entrust yourself
with so many obligations and duties that you cannot honorably fulfill
them or with such luxurious life as to be wicked and vicious) because if
this load is more than what you can conveniently bear, your journey will
be very painful and toilsome. If you find yourself around poor, needy
and destitute people who are willing to carry your load for you as far
as the Day of Judgment, consider this to be a boon, engage them and pass
burden on to them, (distribute your wealth amongst the poor, destitute
and needy - help others to the best of your ability and be kind and
sympathetic to human beings).

Thus, relieve yourself of the heavy responsibility and liability of
submitting an account on the Day of Reckoning of how you have made use
of His favors (of health, wealth, power and position). Thus you may
arrive at the end of your journey, light and fresh, and may have enough
provision for you there (reward for having done your duty to man and God
in this world). Have as many weight carriers as you can (help as many
people as you can) so that you may not miss them when you very badly
need them (when your sins of commission and omission will be balanced
against your good deeds.

You must have enough good deeds to turn the scales in your favor).
Remember that all you give out in charities and good deeds are like
powerful loans, make use of your wealth and power in such a way that you
get all that back on the day when you will be poor and helpless (The Day
of Judgment). Be it known to you, my son, that your passage lies through
an appalling dreadful valley (death or grave) and the journey is
extremely tiring and arduous.

Here a man with light weight is far better than an overburdened person
and one who can travel fast will pass through it quicker that none whom
encumbrance forces to go slow. You shall have to pass through this
valley. The only way out of it is either in the Heaven or in the Hell;
(there is no other way out of it and no possibility of retracing one’s
step). Therefore, it is wise to send your things there before you,
pre-arrange for the place of your stay before you reach there; because
after death there is no repentance and no possibility of coming back to
this world to undo the wrong done by you.

Realize this truth, my son, that the Lord Who owns and holds the
treasures of the heaven and the earth has given you permission to ask
and beg for them, and has promised to grant your prayers. He has told
you to pray for His favors that they may be granted and to ask for His
blessings that they may be bestowed. He has not appointed guards to
prevent your prayers from reaching Him.

Nor there is any need for anybody to intercede before Him on your
behalf. If you go back upon your promises, if you break your vows or
start doing things that you have repented from, He will not immediately
punish you, neither He refuses you His favors and grants in haste; and
if you repent once again He neither taunts you nor betrays you, though
you may fully deserve both, but He accepts your repentance and forgives
you.

He never grudges His forgiveness nor refuses His mercy; on the contrary
He has decreed repentance as a virtue and pious deed. The Merciful Lord
has ordered that every evil deed of yours will be counted as one and a
good deed and pious action will be rewarded tenfold. He has left the
door of repentance open. He hears you whenever you call Him. He accepts
your prayers whenever you pray to Him.

You beg of Him to grant you your heart’s desires; you lay before Him the
secrets of your heart; you tell Him about the calamities that have
befallen you and misfortunes, which face you and beseech His help to
overcome them. You invoke His help and support in difficulties and
distress. You implore Him to grant you a long life and sound health; you
pray to Him for prosperity you request of Him such favors and grants
that none but He can bestow and award.

Think that by simply granting you the privilege of praying for His
favors and mercies, He has handed over the keys of His treasures to you.
Whenever you are in need, you pray and He confers His favors and
blessings.

But some times when you find that your requests are not immediately
granted, you need not be disappointed. Because grant of prayers often
rests with the true purpose and intention of the implorer. Sometimes the
prayers are delayed because the Merciful Lord wants you to receive
further rewards patiently bearing calamities and sufferings and still
believe sincerely in His help. Thus, you may be awarded better favors
than you requested. Sometimes your prayers are turned down, and this is
also in your interest; because you often, unknowingly, ask for things
that are really harmful to you.

If your requests are granted, they will do more harm than good, and many
of your requests may be such that if granted they will result in your
eternal damnation. Thus, the refusal to accede to your solicitations is
a blessing in disguise for you. But very often your requests, if they
are not really harmful in this world or in the hereafter, may be delayed
but they are granted in quantities much more than you had asked for,
bringing more blessings than you could ever imagine.

So you should be very careful in asking Allah for His favors; only pray
for such things which are really beneficial to you, and these benefits
are lasting and in the long run they do not end in harm. Remember, my
dear son, that wealth and power (If you pray for them) are such things
that they will not always be with you and may bring harm to you in the
Hereafter.

Be it known to you, my son, that you are created for the next world and
not for this. You are born to die and not to live forever. Your stay in
this world is temporary. You live in a place, which is subject to decay
and destruction. It is a place where you will have to be busy getting
ready for the next world. It is a road (to the next world) on which you
are standing. Death is following you. You cannot run away from it.
However hard you may try to avoid it, it is going to catch you sooner or
later. Therefore, take care that it may not catch you unaware and
unprepared and no chance is left to you to repent the vices and sins
committed and undo the harm done by you. If death catches you unaware,
you are eternally dammed.

Therefore, my son, always keep three things in mind; death, your deeds
and actions and the Hereafter. In this way you will always be ready to
face death and it will not catch you unaware.

My dear son, do not be carried away and do not be lured by the
infatuations of worldly people in this vivacious life and its pleasures.

Do not be impressed by the sight of their acute struggle to possess and
own this world. God has very mercifully explained to you everything
about this world, not only the Merciful Lord but this world has told you
everything; it has disclosed to you its mortality; it has openly
declared its weakness, its shortcomings and its vices.

Remember that these worldly people are barking dogs, and hungry and
ferocious beasts. Some of them are constantly barking at others. Their
mighty lords massacre the poor and weak. Their inordinate desires and
their greed have such a complete hold over them that you will find some
of them like animals tamed and tied with the rope round their feet and
neck. (They have lost freedom of thought and cannot come out of the
enslavement of desire and habit). There are others whom wealth and power
have turned mad.

They behave like unruly beasts, trampling, crushing and killing their
fellow beings and destroying things around them. The history of this
world is merely a record of such incidents, some big and some small; the
difference is of might, but the intensity is the same. These people have
lost the balance of their minds. They do not know what they are doing
and where they are going; scan their activities and study their ways of
thinking as you find them confused and irrational.

They appear like cattle wandering in the dreary desert, where there is
no water to drink and no food to eat, no shepherd to care for them and
no guardian to look after them. What has actually happened to them is
that the vicious world has taken possession of them; it is dragging them
wherever it likes and is treating them as if they are blind because it
has really blindfolded them against divine lights of true religion.

They are wandering without true aims and sober purposes in the wonderful
show that the world has staged for them; they are fully drunk with the
wine and pleasures amassed around them. They take this world to be their
god and nourisher. The world is playing with them and they are playing
with it, and have forgotten and forsaken everything else.

But the nights of enjoyment and pleasures won’t last forever for
anybody; the dawn of realities will break sooner or later. The caravan
of life will surely reach its destination one day. One, who has nights
and days acting as piebald horses for carrying him onward to his
journey’s end, must remember that though he may feel as if he is enroute
to his destination, every day is carrying him a step further in his
journey towards death.

Be it known to you, my son, that you cannot have every wish of yours
granted, you cannot expect to escape death; and you are passing through
your days of life as others before you have done. Therefore, control
your expectations, desires and cravings; be moderate in your demands;
earn your livelihood through scrupulously honest means; be concentrated
with what you get honestly and honorably; go slow and do not let your
desires drive you madly, because there are many desires which will lead
you to disappointments and loss.

Remember that everyone who prays for a thing will not always get what he
prays for, and everyone who controls his desires, has self respect and
does not pray for things, will not always remain unlucky or
disappointed. So, do not bring down your self-respect; do not be mean
and submissive. Do not subjugate yourself through these vile and base
traits, though they may appear to make it possible for you to achieve
your heart’s desires because nothing in this world can compensate for
the loss of self-respect, nobleness of mind and honor.

Take care, my son, and be careful not to make yourself a slave for
anybody. God has created you a free man. Do not sell away your freedom
in return for anything. There is no actual gain and real value in
benefits that you derive by selling your honor and self-respect or by
subjugating yourself to disgrace, insults and indignities. There is no
real good wealth and power that is acquired by foul means. Beware my
son, that avarice and greed may not drive you to destruction and
damnation. If you can succeed in having nobody as your benefactor but
God, then try your best to achieve this nobleness of character because
He will grant you your share whether or not you try to gather around you
donors, patrons and benefactors.

Remember that the little given to you by God is going to be more useful,
serviceable, honorable and respectable than what is granted by man in
copious and abundant quantities. What can a man give but part of that
which God has granted him?

The losses that you suffer because of your silence can be easily
compensated, but the losses, which arise out of excessive and loose talk
are difficult to requite. Do you not see that the best way of guarding a
bay is by closing its mouth?

*To guard what you already possess is better than to ask for what others
possess.*

*The bitterness of disappointment, deprivation and poverty is actually
sweeter than the disgrace and humiliation of begging.*

*Returns of hard but respectable work, though small in quantity, are
better than the wealth acquired through sin and wickedness.*

*Nobody can guard your secrets better than you.*

*Often a man tries his best to acquire a thing, which is the most
harmful to him. Often one does himself the worst harm.*

*One who talks too much makes most mistakes.*

*One who often thinks and reflects develops foresight and vision.*

*By socializing with good people you will develop goodness in your
character, and by avoiding the company of wicked persons you will
abstain from wickedness.*

*Livelihood acquired by foul means is the worst form of livelihood.*

*To oppress a weak and helpless person is the worst form of tyranny and
wickedness.*

*If your kindness or indulgence is going to bring forth cruel results
then severity or strictness is real kindness.*

*Often, medicating results in disease; sometimes diseases prove to be
health preservers.*

*Often you obtain warnings and advices from the people who are fit to
warn and advise you, and often you will come across advisers who are not
sincere.*

*Do not rely on vain hopes because vain hopes are assets of idiots and
fools.*

*Wisdom is the name of the trait of remembering experiences and making
use of them. The best experience is one, which gives the best warning
and advice.*

*Take advantage of opportunities before they turn their backs upon you
(make hay while the sun shines).*

*All who try cannot succeed.*

*Those who die will not come back.*

*The worst form of folly is to waste the opportunities of life as well
as to lose salvation.*

*For every action there is a reaction.*

*Shortly you will get what has been destined.*

*There is an element of risk and speculation in every trade as well as
danger of loss.*

*Often small returns prove as beneficial as big profits.*

*An accessory or accomplice who insults you and a friend who has not
formed a good opinion of you will not be of any help or use to you.*

*Treat those with consideration and kindness over whom you have power
and authority.*

*Do not run the risk of endangering yourself through irrational,
unreasonable and extravagant hopes.*

*Take care and do not be fooled by flattery.*

*Do good to your brother when he is doing harm to you. When he declines
to recognize the kinship, befriend him, help him and try to maintain
relations. If he is miserable and refuses to give you monetary help, be
generous and support him financially. If he is harsh and cruel, be kind
and considerate to him. If he harms you, accept his excuses. Behave as
if he is a master and you are a slave and he is a benefactor and you are
a beneficiary. But be careful that you do not thus behave with
undeserving and mean persons.*

*Do not develop friendship with the enemy of your friend, otherwise your
friend will turn into an enemy.*

*Advise your friends sincerely and to the best of your ability though he
may not like it.*

*Keep a complete control over your temper and anger, because such
control produces good results at the end.*

*Be mild, pleasant and lenient with he who is harsh, gross and strict
with you. Gradually he will turn to your way of behavior.*

*Grant favor and be considerate with your enemy, because you will thus
gain either one or the other of the two kinds of victories: (one rising
above your enemy, the other of reducing intensity of his enmity).*

*If you want to cease relations with your friend, do not break off
totally, let your heart retain some consideration (if not love) for him,
so that you will still have (at least) some regard for him if he comes
back.*

*Do not disappoint a person who holds a good opinion of you, and do not
make him change his opinion.*

*Under the impression that you, as a friend, can behave as you like, do
not violate the rights of your friend, because when deprived he will no
longer remain your friend.*

*Do not ill-treat members of your household (wife, children and
dependants), and do not behave with them as if you are the worst
tempered and the most cruel man alive.*

*Do not run after one who tries to avoid you.*

*The greatest achievement of your character is that the enmity of your
brother against you dare not overcome the consideration and friendship
you feel towards him, and his ill-treatment cannot over balance your
kind treatment to him.*

*Do not get too worried and depressed over oppressions and cruelties,
because whoever oppresses or tyrannizes you is in reality doing harm to
himself.*

*Never ill-treat a person who has done good unto you.*

*Know it well, son, that there are two kinds of livelihood: one which
you are searching for and the other which wants you (which has been
destined for you); it will reach you even if you do not try to obtain
it.*

*To be submissive, humble and begging when one is powerless and poor,
and to be arrogant, oppressive and cruel when in power and opulence are
two ugly traits of human character.*

*Nothing in this world is really useful and beneficial unless it has
some utility and benefit in the next world. If you want to lament over
things, which you have lost in this world, then worry about the loss of
things, which had immortal value for you.*

*The past and almost all, which was in your possession during the past
is not with you now. You may thus rationally come to the conclusion that
the present and all which is in your possession now will also leave
you.*

*Do not be like a person on whom advices have no effect; they require
punishment to correct them. Sensible and reasonable men acquire
education and culture through advice; brutes always accept correction
through punishment and chastisements.*

*Overcome your sorrows, worries and misfortunes through hard work and
patience and faith in the Merciful Lord. One who gives up a straight
path, honest and rational ways of thinking and working will harm
himself.*

*A friend is like a relative and a true friend is one who speaks well of
you even behind your back.*

*Inordinate desires have close relations with misfortunes and
calamities.*

*Often close relatives behave more distantly than strangers and often
those strangers help you more than your nearest relatives.*

*Poor is he who has no friends. Whoever forsakes truths finds that his
path of life has become narrow and troublesome.*

*He who wants to retain his prestige and position, through contentment
and honesty, will find them lasting assets.*

*The strongest relation is one between man and God.*

*One who does not care for you is your enemy.*

*If there is a danger of death or damnation in achievement of an object
then your safety lies in your failure to achieve it.*

*Weaknesses and shortcomings are not things to talk about.*

*Opportunities do not repeat themselves.*

*Sometimes very wise and learned persons fail to achieve the object they
aim for, and foolish and uneducated people attain their purposes.*

*To sever your relations with ignorant and uneducated people is itself
like keeping company with wise and learned persons.*

*Whoever trusts this world is betrayed by it, and whoever gives it
importance and exalts its position is disgraced and humiliated by it.*

*Every arrow of yours will not hit the bull’s eye (every scheme will not
succeed).*

*With a change of status and position your condition will also change.*

*Before ascertaining the conditions of a route, find out what kind of
persons will accompany you.*

*Instead of inquiring about the condition of a home, in which you are
going to live, try to find out what kind of people your neighbors are.*

*Do not introduce ridiculous topics in your talk even if you have to
repeat sayings to others.*

*Divide and distribute work amongst your servants, so that you can hold
each one responsible for the work entrusted to him. This is a better and
smoother way of carrying on work, than giving them an opportunity to
throw work on somebody else.*

*Treat your family with love and respect, because they act as wings with
which you fly, and as hands, which support you and fight for you. They
are the people whom you turn to in trouble and in need.*

*My dear son, after having given you these advices, I entrust you to the
Lord. He will help, guide and protect you in this world and Hereafter. I
pray and beseech Him to take you under His protection in both the
worlds.*

Ali (a) in the verses of Holy Quran
-----------------------------------

There are a number of verses in holy Quran praising Imam ‘Ali (a).
According to Ibn Abbas, Almighty Allah revealed three hundred and sixty
verses regarding him. The following verses perfectly fit the life of
Imam ‘Ali (a).

1.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَمَن يُطِعِ اللَّهَ وَالرَّسُولَ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ
أَنْعَمَ اللّهُ عَلَيْهِم مِّنَ النَّبِيِّينَ وَالصِّدِّيقِينَ
وَالشُّهَدَاء وَالصَّالِحِينَ وَحَسُنَ أُولَـئِكَ رَفِيقاً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever obeys Allah and the Apostle, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favors from among the prophets and the truthful
and the martyrs and the good, and a goodly company are they!***[^6]

2.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إِنَّ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ثُمَّ اسْتَقَامُوا
تَتَنَزَّلُ عَلَيْهِمُ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ أَلاَّ تَخَافُوا وَلاَ
تَحْزَنُوا وَأَبْشِرُوا بِالْجَنَّةِ الَّتِي كُنتُمْ تُوعَدُونَ.
نَحْنُ أَوْلِيَاؤُكُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الآخِرَةِ
وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِي أَنفُسُكُمْ وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا
تَدَّعُونَ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(As for) those who say: Our Lord is Allah, then continue in the right
way, the angels descend upon them, saying: Fear not, nor be grieved, and
receive good news of the garden which you were promised. We are your
guardians in this world’s life and in the hereafter, and you shall have
therein what your souls desire and you shall have therein what you ask
for.***[^7]

3.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَأَمَّا مَنْ خَافَ مَقَامَ رَبِّهِ وَنَهَىٰ النَّفْسَ عَنِ
الْهَوَىٰ. فَإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَىٰ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And as for him who fears to stand in the presence of his Lord and
forbids the soul from low desires, then surely the garden- that is the
abode.***[^8]

[^1]: Aqqad, Abqariyat al-Imam ‘‘Ali, Pg. 13 and Al-Kamil Ibn Athir

[^2]: Abbas Mahmood al-Aqqad, Abqariyat al-Imam ‘‘Ali, Pg. 20

[^3]: Al-Kamil fit Tarikh, Vol. 3, Pg. 200-202

[^4]: Al-Kamil fit Tarikh, Vol. 3, Pg. 203

[^5]: Al-Fitnah al-Kubra ‘‘Ali wa Banuh, Pg. 109

[^6]: Surah Nisa 4:69

[^7]: Surah Fussilat 41:30-31

[^8]: Surah Naziyat 79:40-41


