Preface
=======

Respected Readers,

Scholars have compiled books on the subject of Imamate and Caliphate in
every age and articles have been written like seasons of a year, one
after another.

Shahristani has rightly mentioned in *Al-Milal wan Nahl* that the
conflict in Muslim nation (Ummah) regarding the matter of Caliphate
exceeds those on any other issue.

I have discussed a lot about issues, which are causes of misfortune of
Muslims in my previous books and by the grace of Allah, a group of
Muslims has benefited much by these books. One of the reasons of their
satisfaction is that I myself followed blind faith for a long period of
my life and I was not able to speak out the questions in my mind. Then
Almighty Allah showered His mercy on me and took me out of the trap of
blind faith and granted me recognition of truth. He eliminated barriers
from my path and removed curtains from my eyes, so that I could see the
truth.

Therefore it becomes my duty to safeguard this truth as a part of
thanksgiving and that I should make maximum use of my pen, tongue and
hands in this matter.

Hence this book is written by way of thanksgiving for this bounty. As
you have waited for this book for a long time, I thank you for the same.
Many people were upset with me for writing this book but those who love
justice have always encouraged me in this pursuit.

The people who are angry with me did not even refrain from accusing me
of being a foreign agent. But inspite of discouraging conditions, I
busied myself in writing and made up my mind that every accusation can
be borne, but truth cannot be denied.

The book, *Black Thursday* is a story of a grievous incident that
occurred hundreds of years ago. However, the Islamic Ummah (nation)
feels the pain of this incident even today and it will continue to do so
forever.

You are requested to recollect that horrible incident when the last
prophet Muhammad (S) was in the final days of his worldly life. The
Prophet appointed Usamah ibn Zaid as the commander of his army and
ordered Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and other Companions to join the army,
but the three delayed the departure of army saying that the Prophet was
not keeping well. The mother of faithful, Ayesha, was giving them
reports from time to time.

She kept her father informed of every event, because she wanted him to
lead the congregational prayer in Medina so that the foundation of his
Caliphate may be laid.

The Prophet was in severe pain and when he saw people making a
commotion, he inquired about the matter. He was told that Abu Bakr is
leading the congregation.

When he heard this, he forgot all his pains and taking support of Imam
‘Ali (a) and Abbas, went to the mosque and moved Abu Bakr behind and led
the prayer himself.

By leading the prayer himself, the Prophet completely destroyed the
foundation of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate. The chief of the prophets expressed
his anger over delay in the departure of Usamah’s army.

A grievous incident occurred during those days in Medina. It was
Thursday. The Prophet was in severe pain and the people who had stopped
the departure of Usamah’s army were present in his house and they
visited him during his sickness. Umar was in the forefront of this
group.

The Prophet asked for pen and paper, so that he could write something
whereby the community may be saved from misguidance after him. He said:

*I leave behind among you two heavy things – the book of Allah and my
Ahl al-Bayt. If you hold onto them, you would not get deviated after me.
The two will not separate from each another till they meet me at the
cistern of Kauthar.*

Umar disobeyed the Prophet’s order, saying that the Book of Allah
(Quran) was enough for them. He also said that Muhammad was talking
‘rubbish’. The Prophet got angry at this and ordered them to leave the
place. The Prophet’s order was disobeyed in his life itself. What have
been done to his sayings after he passed away?

Umar’s statements cannot be proved as good intention or personal
exertion (Ijtihaad) in any manner.

The description of this incident and justifications by Ahl al-Sunnah
scholars are very weak. To prove their weakness, I would like to put
forward excerpts from Allamah Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin’s books,
*An-Nass wal Ijtihaad* and *Al-Murajaat.*

Tradition of Pen and Paper (Qirtaas)
------------------------------------

Compilers of traditions and historians have recorded the incident as
follows:

Let us start the discussion with Bukhari’s version:

Bukhari has narrated through his chain of narrators that Abdullah ibn
Masood narrated from Ibn Abbas that the Prophet was in his last moments
and many people had gathered in his house at that time.

The Prophet said, “I want to write a will for you so that you will never
go astray after me.”

Umar said, “The Prophet is affected by pain. We have the Quran with us
and the Book of Allah is sufficient for us.”

The people objected to Umar. Some of them demanded that pen and paper be
given to the Prophet so that he may write the will, which would save
people from going astray, while others supported Umar. When the noise
increased, the Prophet ordered the people to leave him alone.

Abdullah ibn Masood narrates that Ibn Abbas used to say: The greatest
catastrophe was that the people didn’t allow the Prophet to write the
will by opposing one another and shouting loudly. This tradition is also
recorded by Imam Muslim Nishapuri in his *Sahih Muslim* at the end of
‘the book of Testaments’.

It is also narrated by Ahmad ibn Hanbal from Ibn Abbas. Apart from this,
countless narrators and historians have recorded this incident.

Most narrators considered the words, *‘Innan nabiyya layahjuru’* (the
Prophet is talking nonsense) offensive and replaced them with *‘innan
nabiyya qad ghalaba alaihil waj-u’* (the Prophet is overcome by pain)
meaning the Prophet is affected by pain. However the fact is that Umar
had called the Prophet’s words, ‘rubbish’.

The narrators who came later on, considered this word offensive and
replaced it. Refer to *Kitabus Saqifah,* a book by Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn
Abdul Aziz Jauhari which tries to prove this point.

Many people had gathered at the Prophet’s house when he was at his death
bed. Umar ibn Khattab was one of them. The Prophet ordered that ink and
paper be brought to him to enable him to write something for the people
that they do not go astray after him.

Upon this, Umar said a few words, which meant the Prophet is affected by
pain and ‘we have the Quran with us’. ‘The Book of Allah is sufficient
for us’. The people gathered in the house started opposing each other.
Some of them wanted that paper and ink be given to the Prophet while
others supported Umar. When the commotion increased, the Prophet ordered
everyone to leave the place.

From the words of Jauhari, it is clear that the phrase, ‘the Prophet is
affected by pain’ is an explanation of the original statement of Umar.
The fact is that Umar had rejected the Prophet’s words saying that they
were ‘rubbish’.

Hence we see that when narrators relate this incident along with the
word ‘rubbish’, their sectarian link does not permit them to openly
write about the person who called the Prophet’s words ‘rubbish’ and who
attacked his mental state.

When they reach this incident, they leave its explanation incomplete,
instead of covering every detail.

Bukhari writes in chapter ‘Jawaizul Wafd’ of section ‘Kitabul Jihad was
Sair’: Ibn Abbas narrated: It was Thursday. Oh! What a bad day it was!
Saying this, he broke into tears and cried so much that tears flowed
continuously from his eyes. Then he said: This was the day when the
Prophet’s affliction increased. The Prophet said: Bring paper and pen to
me, to enable me to make a will for you that people do not go astray
after me.

People started quarreling over this point, which is not acceptable in
the Prophet’s presence. They said that the Prophet was talking rubbish.
The Prophet ordered the people to leave him alone. Before passing away,
the Prophet made three wills – first was to banish Polytheists from
Arabian Peninsula, secondly, they should continue to send delegations
like he did and he (the narrator) had forgotten the third one.

Of course the third forgotten thing was the same, which the Prophet
wanted to write in his will, so that people do not go astray after him.
It was nothing but the Caliphate of Amirul Momineen, ‘Ali (a).

Political conditions forced the narrators to ‘forget’ this point.
Similarly, a Mufti of Hanafi sect, Shaykh Abu Sulaiman Dawood narrates a
tradition. This tradition is also recorded by Muslim in *Sahih Muslim*
at the end of the ‘Book of Testaments’ from Saeed ibn Jubair and Ibn
Abbas in a different way:

Ibn Abbas said: “It was Thursday. Oh! What a bad day it was!” Then he
started to weep and tears flowed on his cheek like a garland of pearls.

After that Ibn Abbas narrates that the Prophet said: “Bring me ‘paper
and ink’ or ‘slate and ink’ to enable me to make a will so that people
do not go astray after me.” The people said that the Prophet was talking
‘rubbish’. (Refuge of Allah!)[^1]

If we go through tradition books and analyze this catastrophic incident,
we come to know that the first to call the Prophet’s words ‘rubbish’,
was Umar. He uttered this sentence first and then his followers
supported him.

You have already gone through the words of Ibn Abbas in the first
tradition. The people gathered at the house started opposing one
another. Some of them demanded that pen and paper be given to the
Prophet so that he writes the will, while others supported Umar. It
means they also said that the Prophet is talking rubbish.

Tibrani narrates from Umar in another tradition that when the Prophet
fell sick he said, “Bring me pen and paper to enable me to write a will
so that people will never go astray after me.” The women behind the
curtain said, “Don’t you hear what the Prophet is saying?” Umar said,
“You are like the women of Prophet Yusuf’s time. When the Prophet falls
sick, you rinse your eyes with tears and when he is healthy, you mount
upon his head.”

The Prophet said, “Mind it, women are much better than you.”[^2]

We can conclude from this incident that the Companions did not obey the
Prophet. If they had done so, they would have been secure from
deviation. The Companions should have obeyed the Prophet’s order, not
only they disobeyed him, they also gave a harsh reply that ‘the Book of
Allah is sufficient for us.’ This reply implies that the Prophet was not
at all aware of what status the Book of Allah had for the people. It
implies, as if these Companions had better knowledge of its benefits as
compared to the Prophet.

They should have stopped here at least and should not have attacked the
mental state of the Prophet. They should have avoided saying that the
Prophet was talking rubbish. They should not have hurt the Prophet by
uttering these words.

The Prophet was in the last moments of his life. Was it good to hurt him
in this condition? They bade farewell to him by telling him such hurting
words. It was as if they had not gone through the open declaration of
the Book of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ
فَانتَهُوا.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whatever the Apostle gives you, accept it, and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back. (59:8)***

While accusing the Prophet of talking rubbish they had forgotten this
verse of holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ. ذِي قُوَّةٍ عِندَ ذِي الْعَرْشِ
مَكِينٍ. مُطَاعٍ ثَمَّ أَمِينٍ. وَمَا صَاحِبُكُم بِمَجْنُونٍ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most surely it (the Quran) is the Word of an honored messenger, the
processor of strength, having an honorable place with the Lord of the
Dominion, one (to be) obeyed, and faithful in trust. And your companion
is not gone mad. (81:19-22)***

Didn’t the people, who called words of the Prophet, ‘rubbish’, read this
verse?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ. وَمَا هُوَ بِقَوْلِ شَاعِرٍ
قَلِيلاً مَا تُؤْمِنُونَ. وَلاَ بِقَوْلِ كَاهِنٍ قَلِيلاً مَا
تَذَكَّرُونَ. تَنزِيلٌ مِّن رَّبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most surely, it is the Word brought by an honored Apostle, and it is
not the word of a poet; little is it that you believe; nor the word of a
soothsayer; little is it that you mind. It is a revelation from the Lord
of the worlds. (69:40-43)***

Didn’t the people who rejected the words of the Messenger read this
verse?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَالنَّجْمِ إِذَا هَوَى. مَا ضَلَّ صَاحِبُكُمْ وَمَا غَوَى. وَمَا
يَنطِقُ عَنِ الْهَوَى. إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ وَحْيٌ يُوحَى. عَلَّمَهُ
شَدِيدُ الْقُوَى.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I swear by the star when it goes down. Your companion does not err,
nor does he go astray; nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but
revelation that is revealed, the Lord of Mighty Power has taught him.
(53:1-5)***

There are countless such verses in Quran, which clearly imply that the
Prophet does not talk nonsense. Apart from this, common sense dictates
that it is not possible for the Messenger to talk rubbish.

It is a fact that Companions knew that the Prophet was going to clarify
the matter of ‘Ali’s Caliphate. He was going to pen down all
announcements he had made regarding the Caliphate of Imam ‘Ali (a).
Hence Umar and his followers interrupted the conversation of Allah’s
Messenger. This is not a product of our imagination. Umar himself
confessed thus to Abdullah ibn Abbas.[^3]

If we ponder over the Prophet’s words: “Bring me paper and pen to enable
me to write such a will for you that you don’t go astray after me,” and
the tradition of two weighty things (*Thaqlayn*): “I leave behind among
you two heavy things. If you hold unto them tightly, you will never go
astray – one is the Book of Allah and second is my progeny”, the aim of
Allah’s Messenger becomes clear.

Why didn’t the Prophet force the writing of the will?
-----------------------------------------------------

The Prophet asked for paper and pen at his death bed so that he could
give the tradition of two weighty things (*Hadith Thaqlayn*) a written
form.

A question arises here as to why the Prophet didn’t force the writing of
the will without caring for what the people were saying? Why didn’t he
write the will on any other day from Thursday to the day of his passing
away i.e. Monday? Why did he drop the idea?

The correct answer to this is that it was the statement of Umar and his
greedy followers, which hurt the Prophet badly. He dropped the idea of
writing the will because there was no use of it after hearing such
words. If he had written it, it could have led to violence and
differences.

If the Prophet had written the will, these people would have said, “This
will does not hold any importance, for it was written when the Prophet
was talking rubbish.”

Would the people who dared to call the Prophet’s words ‘rubbish’ in
front of him have accepted the will later on?

If the Prophet had remained firm on his decision and written the will,
these people would have tried to prove the will as rubbish through any
means. Many books would have been written to prove that it was nonsense.
Debates would have been held and all possible means would have been
tried to prove the will useless.

That is why the wise Messenger of Allah decided not to write the will,
so that people do not get the chance to ridicule his Prophethood.

Also the Messenger of Allah knew that Imam ‘Ali (a) and his followers
will do as intended in his will, whether it was in written form or not.
If he had written the will for those who had opposed, they would not
have obeyed it at all.

The Incident of Pen and Paper (Qirtaas) and Interpretations of Ahl al-Sunnah scholars
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When Allamah Sayyid Abdul Husain Sharafuddin Amili wrote the exegesis of
the tradition of ‘Pen and Paper’ and sent it to Allamah Shaykh Salim
al-Bashari, the Rector of Al-Azhar University, Egypt, the latter replied
to him with interpretations and justifications of Ahl al-Sunnah scholars
and also his personal observations.

I present his words for the readers here: When the Prophet (S) ordered
them to bring an inkpot and a piece of paper, he probably did not mean
to write anything. He simply wanted to test their fidelity and
obedience.

Of all the Companions who had gathered in the house, Umar al-Farooq
alone was blessed with divine guidance and could understand the real
purpose behind the Prophet’s request. He therefore prohibited them from
supplying the Prophet (S) with writing materials and they complied with
the prohibition.

This prohibition by Umar al-Farooq should, therefore, be regarded as a
favor and one of the special privileges conferred on him by Allah. This
is the answer given by some eminent scholars.

But, to be fair, this answer is incompatible with the words of the
Prophet, “You will never astray thereafter,” which was the condition of
the command (“Bring to me writing materials”). In other words, the
Prophet was saying, “If you bring to me an Inkpot and a piece of paper
and I write for you a document, you will never go astray thereafter.”

In view of this, it is obviously incorrect to say that the purpose of
his request for writing materials was simply to test his Companions.
Words of a prophet, as a rule, must be free from faults, and certainly
it was better for them to supply him pen and paper than to refuse it.
Moreover, the said answer is open to objection from other points of
view, and they should have offered some other excuse.

What they could say at the most was that his command for bringing
writing materials was not a peremptory one which would have been
instantly obeyed and which was not open to examination or revision, that
he who examined it was guilty of disobedience and insubordination.

On the other hand, it was a suggestion which was open to consultation,
for the Companions would often seek from the Prophet (S) explanation or
revision of some of his commands, particularly, Umar, who believed
himself to be more competent to weigh the pros and cons and to judge the
merits and demerits of a command or instruction than others and was
blessed with inspiration from Allah, the High.

He wanted to save the Prophet, who was already suffering from pain, from
further discomfort that would have resulted from writing the proposed
document. Umar, therefore, considered it advisable not to supply the
Prophet (S) with an Inkpot and a piece of paper.

Perhaps he was also afraid that the Prophet (S) might write such
commands that would be beyond them to obey or comply with and they
would, therefore, deserve punishment, because whatever he would write
down would be imperative and final and would not leave any scope for
examination and interpretation by others.

Perhaps he was also afraid of the hypocrites objecting to the propriety
of the document and censuring it, because the Prophet (S) had written it
in a state of illness, and this would have created a big scandal. He
therefore remarked, “The Book of Allah is sufficient for us,” in view of
the words of Allah, the Most High:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَا فَرَّطْنَا فِي الكِتَابِ مِن شَيْءٍ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We have not neglected anything in the Book. (6:38)***

And also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***This day have I perfected for you your religion. (5:3)***

As if Umar was sure that the nation would not go astray because Allah
had perfected for her the faith and had completed His favor on her, so
the proposed document was unnecessary!

These are the replies and you can see how unsound they are! The words of
Prophet (S): “You will never go astray,” indicate that his command for
supply of writing materials was a firm, final and compulsory command,
not open to examination, revision or consultation.

It is without doubt, an incumbent duty to make all possible efforts for
compliance with that which guarantees safety from error and deviation.
The Prophet’s feeling displeased on their disobeying his command and
asking them to get out is a proof that the purpose of his command was
its compulsory compliance and not reflection or consultation upon it.

They may ask why the Prophet (S) did not write down the proposed
document in spite of the opposition by Companions, if writing thereof
was incumbent on him, just as he did not give up the communication of
the Divine Message in spite of strong opposition of infidels. In reply
to this, I would say that the writing of the document was not incumbent
on the Prophet (S).

But it does not mean that it was not incumbent on the Companions to
supply him with ink and paper when the Prophet (S) commanded them to do
so, especially when he had also explicitly told them that it would save
them from deviation forever and lead them to perpetual guidance.

The execution of an order, as a principle, is incumbent on the person or
persons ordered to do something, and not on one who issued the order,
especially so when the benefit of executing the order is going to accrue
solely to the person or persons ordered to do a thing. The point of
discussion, therefore, is whether or not it was incumbent on the
Companions to supply him with writing material; it was not incumbent on
the Prophet to write down the document.

Even if it was incumbent on the Prophet (S), it was no longer binding on
him after their refusal to obey and their disparaging remark, “he has
talked nonsense.” Had he written the document in spite of all this; it
would have resulted in nothing but scandal and caused insurrection.

Some others have offered the excuse that Umar failed to understand how
the proposed document would save every individual in the nation from
deviation and that not a single person would go astray after the writing
of the proposed document.

From the words, “You will never go astray,” he understood that the
entire nation would not go astray and that deviation from the right path
would not extend to the nation as a whole after the writing of the
document.

He already knew that the entire nation would never go astray and,
therefore, he thought that writing the document was unnecessary. He
thought that the purpose of the Prophet (S) was only to take further
precaution out of his extremely merciful nature and that his command for
supply of writing material was not authoritative and obligatory but open
to consultation and revision.

It was the urge of his extraordinary mercy and clemency that made him
demand writing materials for writing a document for our further
safeguard from deviation. It was this impression that prompted Umar to
pass that remark and to prohibit the supply of writing materials.

These are the various excuses offered for the hasty remark and action of
Umar and his supporters. But on careful consideration all these excuses
appear to be faulty and unreasonable, because the Prophet’s words, “You
will never go astray,” clearly indicate that his command was obligatory
and not optional or open to consultation. His displeasure at the
disparaging remark and their disobedience proves that they were guilty
of omission of an obligatory duty.

The correct and the best answer would, therefore, be that the
disparaging remark and refusal to supply the Prophet (S) with writing
materials was ill-advised, indecorous and unbecoming the Companions. It
was a sudden slip on their part and a rare lapse which we do not find to
be reasonable. May Allah guide those who have deviated from the right
path.

You have read the letter of Shaykhul Azhar (Rector of Al-Azhar
University), and seen how the Allamah has negated the stance of Umar in
clear words.

In reply to this letter, Allamah Abdul Husain Sharafuddin Amili has
further exhausted the proof and proved the truth as follows:

“It befits men of your learning and discretion to acknowledge the truth
and to speak what is right. You have contradicted the various excuses
and explanations offered by your Sunni scholars for the disparaging
remark passed by the Companions and their non-compliance with his
request for writing materials. There are still some aspects of those
excuses and explanations which have not been examined. I will offer a
few comments thereon and leave the matter to your own learned judgments.

In their first explanation, they have said that perhaps the Prophet (S)
did not mean to write anything when he ordered them to bring an inkpot.
His only purpose behind the order was to test their fidelity and
obedience. In addition to what you have said in contradiction of this
explanation, I have to point out that the remark was passed and his
command was disobeyed at the time when he was under the pangs of death
and was shortly to breathe his last, as is clearly stated in the
tradition.

It was, therefore, an occasion for apology and forgiveness or admonition
and warning, and certainly not for testing his Companions. It was time
for him to make a will in respect of all important matters and give
final advice to his nation. A person under the pangs of death does not
indulge in jokes, jests or display of humor in any other form.

He is fully occupied with his own soul, his own important affairs of his
relations, friends and nation, especially if the person on the deathbed
is a Prophet. And why would he test their fidelity from his deathbed
when he did not test it in a state of health throughout his life?”

Moreover, his words, “Get up and leave me,” addressed to them when noise
and nonsense increased and the quarrel developed, clearly indicate that
he was displeased with them. Had the prohibition been right, he would
have certainly appreciated their prohibition and expressed his
satisfaction therein.

He who examines the various aspects of the tradition and carefully
considers their remark, “The Messenger has talked nonsense,” will be
convinced that they knew that what he was going to write was distasteful
for them, and that is why they caused him severe mental pain by the
disparaging remark and bitter quarrel and confusion in his presence. On
recollecting this event, Ibn Abbas wept bitterly and called it a great
misfortune, which also proves the explanation to be groundless.

The second explanation, that Umar was blessed with divine guidance and
could rightly judge the merits and demerits of a thing and had
inspiration from Allah, the High, is not worth paying attention to,
because this would imply that Umar was right in prohibiting the supply
of writing materials and not the Prophet (S) in demanding writing
materials, and that the inspiration he had was truer and more
appropriate than the divine revelation which governed all the utterances
of the True and Trusted Prophet (S).

They have explained that Umar felt pity for the Prophet (S) and wanted
to save him from further inconvenience that would have resulted from
writing the proposed document while he was ill and in pain. But you
(whom Allah has gifted with right judgment) know that the writing of the
document would have afforded pleasure and satisfaction to the Prophet
(S), cooled his heart and delighted his eyes, and made him immune from
deviation of his followers.

His order ought to have been carried out and not ignored. When it was
his aim to have ink and paper, he had also ordered them to supply him
with these things, nobody should have refused to obey him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَمَا كَانَ لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلاَ مُؤْمِنَةٍ إِذَا قَضَى اللَّهُ
وَرَسُولُهُ أَمْراً أَن يَكُونَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ مِنْ أَمْرِهِمْ
وَمَن يَعْصِ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ ضَلالاً مُّبِيناً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And it behoves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Apostle have
decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Apostle, he surely
strays off a manifest straying. (33:36)***

Moreover, the opposition by Umar and his supporters in such an important
matter and their making noise and quarreling in the presence of Prophet
was more troublesome and painful than writing the proposed document,
which would have protected his nation forever from going astray. And how
could he, who would not like to see the Prophet inconvenienced with
writing a document, dare to oppose him and give him a sudden shock by
his words, “he has talked nonsense”?

They have also said that Umar thought that it was better not to supply
him with ink and paper. It is a queer, wonderful and very farfetched
explanation. How could the refusal to supply the Prophet (S) with
writing materials in spite of his explicit command be better than
compliance with his command? Did he believe that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.) issued orders the omission or abandonment of which was better
than commissioning thereof or compliance therewith?

Still more astonishing is the explanation that Umar was afraid lest the
Prophet (S) might write down commands which might be impossible for the
people to obey and the omission of which might make them liable to
punishment. Why was he afraid when the Prophet (S) had given the
assurance, “You will never go astray after that?”

Had he better knowledge of consequences of the document than the Prophet
(S)? Was he more anxious about the welfare of nation, and had he more
sympathy and compassion for the nation than the Prophet? Surely not!

They have also said that Umar was afraid that hypocrites would reject
and censure the document written in a state of illness, and it would
therefore create a scandal and cause impiety and insurrection. You know
that this was impossible, because the Prophet (S) had said, “You will
never go astray,” which means that the document would have been a source
of safety to the nation from deviation.

How could it then be cause of scandal and censure by hypocrites? And if
he was really afraid that hypocrites would question the document’s
propriety and censure it, why did he sow the seed of rejection and
censure by raising an objection and prohibiting the supply of writing
material, and passing the remark, “he has talked nonsense”?

While interpreting his words, “the Book of Allah is sufficient for us,”
they have referred to the Quranic verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَا فَرَّطْنَا فِي الكِتَابِ مِن شَيْءٍ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We have not neglected anything in the Book. (6:38)***

And also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***This day have I perfected for you your religion. (5:3)***

The Reference is incorrect, because the two verses neither signify that
the nation is secured forever from deviation nor guarantee the guidance
of the nation to the right path. How could, on the basis of these
verses, the indifference to the proposed document or disregard thereof
be permissible?

If the mighty Quran had been the cause of protection of the nation
against deviation, there would not have been in this nation the present
deviation and dispersion, the extinction of which appears to be almost
impossible.

In their last justification of Umar, they have said that he did not
understand from the Prophet’s command that the proposed document would
protect every individual in the nation against deviation. What he
understood was that the document would prevent them from general consent
of the nation on error or deviation from the right path, and he already
knew that there would never be general consent in the nation on error or
deviation whether the document was written or not, and that is why he
objected to the supply of writing materials that day and offered
resistance.

To what you have stated in contradiction of this, I have to add that
Umar was not so deficient in intelligence as to be unable to understand
the request demanding writing materials, which was quite clear to
everybody, and from which every urban and rustic person could understand
that had the document been written, it would have been the cause of
securing every individual in the nation from error and deviation. This
is the meaning which first occurs to every mind on hearing the
tradition.

Umar certainly knew that the Messenger (s.a.) was not afraid of the
general consent of his nation on error or deviation from the right path,
because he had often heard the Prophet (S) say: “There will not be a
general consent in my nation on deviation, and there will not be a
general consent in my nation on error;” and also his words, “There will
always be in my nation, a group of people who will adhere to truth and
support it;” and the words of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الأَرْضِ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them. (24:55)***

He had read in Quran and also heard from the Prophet (S) many other
verses to the effect that all Muslims, without any exception, will never
concur on error and deviation. In the face of these stipulations, no one
can believe that it occurred to Umar or any other person that the
Prophet (S) had ordered them to supply him with writing materials
because he had the fear of the entire nation going astray. It was
according to the fitness of things that Umar should have understood from
the demand for writing materials what occurs to the minds of others and
not that which is contradicted by precise verses of the Quran and
genuine traditions of the Prophet (S).

Moreover, the displeasure of the Prophet (S) expressed in the words,
“Get up and leave me,” is a proof of their committing the sin of
omitting what was one of their obligatory duties and being guilty of
disobeying his command for supply of writing material.

Had the disparaging remark by Umar and his prohibition of the supply of
writing materials been due to some misunderstanding, as claimed by some
of his advocates, the Prophet (S) would have removed his
misunderstanding and fully explained to him the purpose of his writing a
document. He could also compel him and his supporters to fetch writing
materials and write down the document in spite of their opposition.

But the Prophet (S) neither tried to remove the misunderstanding nor
exercised any compulsion on them. He simply ordered them to get out;
because he knew that the disparaging remark and non-compliance with his
command were based, not on any misunderstanding, but motivated by some
other consideration.

The bitter weeping and restlessness of Ibn Abbas on remembering the
unfortunate event is the strongest proof of the correctness of our
statement.

In fact, this unfortunate event admits no excuse. Had it been a mere
excess or an occasional lapse on the part of the Companions, as you have
said, it would have been treated lightly; although, this event alone
proved to be a universal and crashing calamity. Verily, to Allah we
belong and to Him we must return. There is neither might nor power but
in Allah, the High and Mighty.

The fact is that those people didn’t accord importance to Express Text
(*Nass*) and acted on their personal judgments.

If an act committed against Express Text (*Nass*) can be called
jurisprudence, then they were real jurists.

However, in this case, Express Text (*Nass*) of Allah and His Messenger
is different and the jurisprudence of the leaders is different.

Shaykhul Azhar replied to the above explanation in the following words:

“You have surrounded the advocates of Umar and his supporters from all
sides, blocked all their routes and left them no alternative, having
raised a wall between them and their desire. What you have stated leaves
no room for misunderstanding, and there appears to be no reason to doubt
the veracity of your deductions.”

We follow that jurisprudence, which is within the limits of Express
Texts (*Nusoos*) and we are not ready to accept any such thought as
jurisprudence, which is against Express Text (*Nass*).

The Purpose of book, *Radhiyato Yaumil Khamees* is not to dig out all
the hostilities of the past.

The Purpose of writing this book is to present the correct form of
history so that human beings can go from wrong views to the fountain of
truth and reach the place of guidance.

We invite all Muslims of the world to come and search for the correct
teachings of religion and try to obtain the truth, which was preached by
the Prophet.

If we allow the Prophetic Practice (*Sunnah*) and teachings to
illuminate our way, we will never be misguided.

We need to obey the Prophet (S). We do not need the jurisprudence of any
Zaid and Bakr because it is possible for jurists to commit mistakes and
it is not possible for a personality like the Prophet to commit a
mistake.

No one can give an excuse later on that they were born centuries after
an incident and they remained far away from the soul of Islam.

Hence I once again request the readers not to stop our endeavors in
spite of these conditions, because the West is bent on destroying us,
and day by day we are becoming its victims.

Did you ever wonder what the basic cause of our weakness is?

I think the basic cause of our weakness is that we have never tried to
understand Islam in a correct way. We have assumed and adopted those
views as Islam, which are in accordance with our desires and thoughts.
If we had adopted the right soul of Islam, these wolves could never have
overpowered us.

Respected Readers,

I have not written this book to earn fame or to gain titles. The main
purpose of this book is to present a correct version of history to all
because majority of human beings are unaware of it. The cause of this
ignorance is that truth was concealed in every age and its beautiful
face was always covered with a veil. In every age wine was made as water
and the distorted and ugly face of truth was made beautiful using
various techniques.

Therefore the majority is unaware of difference between right and wrong
and distinction between a good and bad leader could not be made.

In such circumstances, I trusted Allah and tried to present the facts. I
hope that Allah will make this book a beacon of light for those who are
in search of truth and make it an illuminated candle in darkness.

I pray to Allah to grant me the bounty of recognition and include me
among those who have got recognition and keep away from the disease of
ignorance. I pray that He forgives my mistakes for He is All-Hearing and
He accepts from us.

***Our Lord! Accept from us; surely Thou art the Hearing, the Knowing,
and turn to us (mercifully), surely Thou art the Oft-returning (to
mercy), the Merciful.***

For the sake of the Prophet and his Purified Progeny. May Allah bless
Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad.

[^1]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. 2, Pg. 222. This tradition is also narrated by
Imam Ahmad in Musnad, Vol. 1 Pg. 355. It is also narrated by other
narrators.

[^2]: This tradition is narrated by Imam Bukhari from Ubaidullah bin
Utbah bin Masood who has narrated from Ibn Abbas and Imam Muslim has
also narrated it.

[^3]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 3, Pg. 140, Egypt.


