Part 2 .1: A Probe into Saqifah 1
=================================

Abu Bakr
--------

The Outcome of earlier discussion is that Imam ‘Ali (a) was rightful to
Caliphate immediately after the Prophet, because he had deep relations
with the Prophet of Islam and Islam itself. Islam as well as the Prophet
of Islam considered him worthy of Caliphate and Imamate.

Imagine if people had presented the following proofs in support of
‘Ali’s candidature in Saqifah of Bani Saada:

(1) ‘Ali was most proximate to the Prophet.

(2) ‘Ali was raised under the Prophet’s care.

(3) He was responsible for returning possessions of the people kept with
the Prophet as trusts after the latter migrated.

(4) The Prophet made him his brother.

(5) He was the Prophet’s son-in-law.

(6) The Prophet’s progeny would continue from ‘Ali.

(7) He was the commander of the Prophet’s army in all battles.

(8) He is to Prophet as Haroon was to Moosa.

(9) He is the gate of the city of knowledge.

(10) He is the gate of the house of wisdom.

(11) He is the reflection of the virtues of prophets.

(12) He is a part of the light of the Prophet.

(13) He is the son of parents who raised the Prophet.

(14) He was born in holy Kaaba.

(15) He never worshipped idols.

(16) His love is compensation of the messengership of the Holy Prophet
(S).

(17) He was a proof of truthfulness of Islam in imprecation ceremony
(*Mubahila*).

(18) He is one of the pure members of the cloak of purity.

(19) He has complete knowledge of the Book.

(20) He bought divine pleasure in exchange of his life.

If it had been the case and Muslims had elected him for leadership, they
would not have faced such deviations and the history of Islam would have
been written with gold. Dr. Taha Husayn had mentioned correctly in the
following words:

“‘Ali is worthy of Caliphate without any doubt due to his proximity to
the Prophet and Islam, his sacrifices, his perfect character, attachment
with religion, knowledge of Quran and Prophetic Practice
(*Sunnah*).”[^1]

Ibn Hajar Asqalani narrates the important virtues of Imam ‘Ali (a) in
the following words:

“‘Ali ibn Abi Talib was the first to accept Islam according to most
scholars. He was raised up under the Prophet’s care and was not
separated from him at any time. He participated in all battles except
the Battle of Tabuk as on this occasion he remained in Medina on the
Prophet’s order. And the Prophet had said: ‘O ‘Ali! Aren’t you pleased
that you are to me as Haroon was to Moosa?’”

Imam ‘Ali (a) was the commander of the army in most battles. When the
Prophet was making Companions, brothers of each other, he made Imam ‘Ali
(a) his brother. There are countless virtues of Imam ‘Ali (a). Ahmad ibn
Hanbal says: “There is no Companion except Imam ‘Ali (a) for whom so
many traditions praising his virtue are present.”[^2]

Some scholars say that the reason behind so many traditions narrating
the virtues of Imam ‘Ali is that the Umayyads had tried every means to
conceal them. Hence the narrators thought that it was their religious
responsibility to publish the virtues of Imam ‘Ali (a). The sky has
never witnessed a scholar like Imam ‘Ali (a). The Prophet had announced
in the Battle of Khaiber: Tomorrow I shall hand the banner to a person
who loves Allah and His Messenger and they too love him. Allah will
grant victory at his hands. On the next day, the Prophet handed over the
banner to Imam ‘Ali (a). Umar used to say: This was the only day when I
desired leadership. The Prophet handed over the verses of Surah Baraat
to ‘Ali (a) to preach. He said that the verses of Quran can only be
preached either by him or by someone who is from him.

Also, the Prophet had said: ‘Ali is my successor in this world and in
the hereafter.

The Prophet had gathered ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain in a cloak and
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيراً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.***[^3]

Imam ‘Ali (a) covered himself with a cloak and slept on the Prophet’s
bed to save his life during the night when the latter migrated to
Medina.

The Prophet used to tell Imam ‘Ali (a): You are the chief of all
believers after me.

The Prophet ordered the doors of all houses opening inside the mosque to
be closed permanently except that of Imam ‘Ali (a). Imam ‘Ali (a) was
allowed to pass from the mosque any time as there was no other way for
him to pass by.

The Prophet ordered a pulpit to be made out of camel saddles. Then he
raised the hand of Imam ‘Ali (a) in front of thousands of people and
announced: “‘Ali is the master for whom I am the master.”

The Prophet called ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain when the following
verse of holy Quran was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«فَمَنْ حَاجَّكَ فِيهِ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ
تَعَالَوْاْ نَدْعُ أَبْنَاءنَا وَأَبْنَاءكُمْ وَنِسَاءنَا وَنِسَاءكُمْ
وَأَنفُسَنَا وأَنفُسَكُمْ ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَل لَّعْنَةُ اللَّهِ
عَلَى الْكَاذِبِينَ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and
our women and your women and our near people and your near people, then
let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the
liars.”***[^4]

He prayed: O Lord! These are my Ahl al-Bayt. Imam Tirmidhi narrates from
Imran ibn Haseen a tradition of the Prophet: “Ultimately what do you
want from ‘Ali? ‘Ali is from me and I am from ‘Ali without any doubt. He
is the chief of all believers after me.”

Now the same question arises. Why was Imam ‘Ali (a) kept away from
Caliphate in spite of so many virtues?

We will have to study the events in the Prophet’s last moments and after
he passed away. We must also remember that Imam ‘Ali (a) was busy all
the time in the burial of the Prophet after he passed away. On the other
hand, the politically inclined people left his body and gathered in
Saqifah of Bani Saada and established their Caliphate.[^5]

According to Umar, one of the reasons behind keeping Imam ‘Ali (a) away
from Caliphate is that Arabs could not bear to see both prophethood and
Caliphate in a single family.

To summarize this incident, the Prophet passed away in 11 A.H. and Imam
‘Ali (a) became involved in his burial. The political waves were flowing
all around outside the Prophet’s house. The topic of Caliphate was the
most favorite one.

Saad ibn Abu Ubadah reached Saqifah of Bani Saada along with the chiefs
of Aws and Khazraj tribes. Umar and Abu Ubaidah were discussing the
issue of Caliphate in the mosque. Other groups were busy holding
discussions at different places.

When Abu Bakr heard the news of the Prophet’s passing away, he came to
the Prophet’s house from Sunh locality. He saw Umar standing at the door
with his sword unsheathed. He was threatening people saying: “I shall
kill whoever says that the Prophet has passed away. The Prophet hasn’t
passed away. He has gone to the heaven like Prophet Isa. He will return
after some days and cut off the nose and ears of hypocrites.”

As a result of this heartrending tragedy, Umar had apparently lost his
senses. Suddenly someone informed him about the activities prevailing in
Saqifah. This same person who had lost his senses suddenly became
conscious and sent a person to Abu Bakr. The person told Abu Bakr that
Umar wanted to seek advice from him in an extremely serious matter.

As soon as Abu Bakr got the news, he came out of the house. Then both of
them went to Saqifah of Bani Saada. Over there, chiefs of Aws and
Khazraj tribes were bent upon declaring Saad ibn Ubadah as their Caliph.

However in such a case, Imam ‘Ali (a) did what he should have done. He
remained busy with the Prophet’s burial.

Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle was aggrieved because of his passing away. He
wanted to pay allegiance to Imam ‘Ali (a) in this state but Imam ‘Ali
(a) rejected it straightaway saying that the Prophet’s body was not even
buried and he could not accept Caliphate at such a moment.

Abu Sufyan ibn Harb came to Imam ‘Ali (a) thrice and asked him to take
hold of Caliphate. He had said: “If you want I can fill up the streets
of Medina with troops in order to end this unpleasant rule.” However,
Imam ‘Ali (a) rejected him straightaway saying: “How come you have
become a well-wisher of Islam? You want to play the role of a
Caliph-maker?”

Even though Helpers had arranged the meet at Saqifah, they failed to
gain any benefit from there. A small account of this probe is as
follows:

The people of Aws and Khazraj tribes gathered in Saqifah of Bani Saada.
Saad ibn Ubadah was one of them.

Saad was sick and could not speak loudly. He had appointed one of his
sons to speak for him. Hence his son spoke out to public loudly whatever
Saad wanted to say. Saad said:

“O Helpers (Ansar)! You hold a high rank in religion. No tribe in entire
Arabia has a virtue, which you people have. The Prophet preached the
worship of Allah and asked people to keep away from idols in Mecca for a
number of years. All the tribes except a few people opposed him.
Almighty Allah has given you this honor. Allah sent His Prophet to you
and chose you to help the religion.

You proved tough before the enemies of religion and you presented more
sacrifices for the sake of Islam than any other tribe. Allah’s Messenger
remained pleased with you till he passed away. Strengthen yourselves.
You are more rightful to kingship than anyone else.”

This news reached Umar, the man who had lost his senses due to grief of
the Prophet. Immediately he came to the door of the Prophet’s house and
called Abu Bakr and they set out for Saqifah. Abu Bakr announced over
there:

“We, Emigrants were the first to accept Islam and we are from the clan
of the Prophet. You all are helpers of Allah and our brothers according
to Book of Allah. You are our partners in religion and we love and honor
you more than others. You have always made sacrifices and I expect
sacrifice from you even now. You have Abu Ubaidah and Umar ibn Khattab
in front of you. You may pay allegiance to whomever you wish. According
to me, both of them are worthy of it.”

Umar and Abu Ubaidah said that it was not possible for anyone to take
the post of Caliph in the presence of Abu Bakr. And that the latter was
more rightful for it. At this moment, Habbab ibn Mundhir stood up from
the Helpers and said:

“O Helpers! Maintain your unity. It was your land where worship of Allah
was done freely. You only had given refuge to Allah’s Messenger. You had
helped him and after migration, the Prophet came to you only…In spite of
this, if these people do not agree with your rule then there should be a
leader each for both the groups.”

Umar said that it was not possible. When Bashir ibn Saad of Khazraj
sensed that the Helpers are trying to surrender the leadership to Saad
ibn Ubadah, he remembered the ancient enmity between Aws and Khazraj
tribes. He did not like Saad as leader because Saad was from Aws and he
thought that the leadership would go to Aws. He thought that this would
be something to boast of, for the progeny of Aws, which could be a cause
of weakness of Khazraj and he knew that kingship cannot come to his
tribe. He thought that it was better to hand it over to an Emigrant
instead of letting it fall into the hands of Aws tribe.

With this in mind, he stood up and announced: “O Helpers! It is true
that we have served Islam. However, we must keep this fact in mind that
we did Jihad only for the sake of pleasure and obedience of Allah and
His Messenger.

Muhammad belonged to the tribe of Quraish and hence only the latter has
the right to his inheritance. Fear Allah and keep away from fighting
them.”

Abu Bakr stood up and said: “Umar and Abu Ubaidah are present here. You
may pay allegiance to whomever you like.”

Both said: “By Allah! How can we command you? You extend your hand so
that we may pay allegiance.”

Abu Bakr stretched his hand and Basheer ibn Saad paid him allegiance
even before Umar and Abu Ubaidah.

Habbab ibn Mundhir stood up and called out: “O disobedient one! O enemy
of the community, Basheer! You have done this out of jealousy. The tribe
of Aws thought that if they remained behind Khazraj in paying
allegiance, Khazraj will become dearer to the rulers. Hence Usaid ibn
Khuzair from Aws also paid allegiance and then the entire tribe followed
suit.

Saad ibn Ubadah was carried to his house on a bed. He did not pay
allegiance as long as he lived. Later he went to Syria and was murdered
there during the last days of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate. It was alleged that
some jinn had shot him dead with arrows at night; however, reporters say
that it was the wicked Khalid ibn Walid.

Sometime after this allegiance, Baraa ibn Aazib came to the Prophet’s
house and saw that the Prophet was not yet buried. He announced: “I have
seen with my own eyes that Umar and Abu Ubaidah are forcing each
passer-by to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr.”[^6]

Analysis of the Incidents at Saqifah
------------------------------------

We have already probed into the incident of Saqifah entirely. The
character of Umar in these events is clear to all who are not blind.

1. We want to know the reason why Umar did not come to the Prophet’s
house for presenting condolences. Even if he had no interest in ‘Ali and
his progeny, he should at least come to comfort his own daughter
(Hafasah) who was widowed recently. He could have also got the honor of
participating in the burial of the Prophet.

2. If he didn’t want to condole the aggrieved family, why didn’t he go
inside to call Abu Bakr when he got the news of Aws and Khazraj?

3. Why did he send someone else to call Abu Bakr instead of going in
himself ? Why did he wait for Abu Bakr outside?

4. There were many Companions gathered in the house of the aggrieved
family. Why Umar chose to seek advice only from Abu Bakr?

5. Was the presence of Abu Bakr inside the house and waiting of Umar at
the door a coincidence or it was preplanned?

6. What was the decision taken by Umar and Abu Ubaidah before Abu Bakr
arrived?

7. Abu Bakr had narrated the virtues of Emigrants. Were all Emigrants
included in those virtues or only Umar and Abu Ubaidah?

8. Abu Bakr had narrated two reasons to prove Emigrants’ right to
Caliphate.

A. They were the first to accept Islam

B. They were from the Prophet’s clan

If the two above mentioned reasons are criteria for Caliphate, who is
more eligible for Caliphate than Imam ‘Ali (a)? The reasons are:

1. He was the first to accept Islam

2. He was nearer in relation to the Prophet than Abu Bakr

Then why Imam ‘Ali (a) was not appointed Caliph as per the standard put
forward by Abu Bakr?

9. If Caliphate is the right only of Emigrants why Abu Bakr selected
only two persons from them, viz. Umar and Abu Ubaidah?

Can anyone give the reason for this selection? Was this selection
without preference?

10. If it was necessary to appoint a Caliph from Emigrants, Abu Bakr
could have advised the Helpers to elect any one from Emigrants as the
leader. Why didn’t he do that?

11. What was the logic behind putting forward only two names out of so
many Emigrants?

12. Why did Umar and Abu Ubaidah reject the offer of Abu Bakr? Why did
they prefer the leadership of Abu Bakr? What is the logical reason
behind it?

13. Were all links in Saqifah procedure joined coincidently or
everything was preplanned? It is absolutely necessary for students of
History to know the answers of these questions.

14. Was there any relation between the events at Saqifah and army of
Usamah? Did the discussion held between Umar and Abu Ubaidah in the
mosque had any relation to Saqifah?

Two persons accompanied Abu Bakr to Saqifah. Didn’t the friendship of
these three persons prove beneficial in Saqifah?

15. Where were other Emigrants when only a few people had gathered at
Saqifah to appoint a Caliph?

16. The enmity of Aws and Khazraj popped out in Saqifah. Was it a
coincidence or was it backed by a preplanned conspiracy?

17. If some conspiracy was involved in the creation of this dispute,
would you like to probe into it?

18. Was the election of Caliph more important than the Prophet’s burial?

19. Couldn’t Abu Bakr ask the Muslims to wait till the Prophet was
buried?

Why was he in such a hurry that he left the Last Prophet who was also
his son-in-law, behind, without burying? He could have at least waited
till the burial. Did he not express his lack of love for his son-in-law
by hastening so much?

20. Is there any link between the complex events at Saqifah, the
tradition in which the Prophet asked for pen and paper and the incident
of Usamah’s army? It is necessary for the students of history to know
the answers of above mentioned questions also. I personally believe that
Umar played a central role in all these events. He was the one who had
discussed the issue with Abu Ubaidah earlier and drafted a plan. He
called Abu Bakr to accomplish it. After this, these main characters of
Islamic history finalized a plan on way to Saqifah.

This is the reason why Abu Bakr was putting forward the names of these
two persons and vice versa.

Did the entire Muslim Ummah made them their representative and send them
to Saqifah? The fact is that not even a part of the Ummah was present in
Saqifah.

Who gave the permission to this small group to decide the future of the
entire Ummah?

It is a fact that when Abu Bakr was called, no advice regarding the
leadership of Islam was taken from any Muslim before or after that. It
is impossible to neglect the whole incident of Saqifah calling it a
coincidence. It was a thing planned a long time ago. One in which the
role of Umar is exposed.

Another reason for denial of Caliphate to Ali
---------------------------------------------

You have already read the incident of passing away of the Prophet and
the Caliphate of Abu Bakr. Why Imam ‘Ali (a) was denied Caliphate?

One important reason behind it is given by Hafiz in the following words,
which we quote here for our readers who prefer justice:

Imam ‘Ali (a) had intricate relations with Quraish. Quraish had severe
envy for Imam ‘Ali (a) because he had killed their chiefs in battles. He
had weakened their hold. He had demeaned their honor. The envy could not
be removed from their hearts even after accepting Islam.

Just imagine that if you have been a disbeliever for a year or two (God
forbid!) and your brother or son was killed in a battle against Islam
and later you become a Muslim. However, will all the strained relations
and hatred be eliminated immediately? Would you embrace the person who
killed your brother or son? It is really difficult! It is possible only
when you have accepted Islam from the depths of your heart.

However, in contrast to this, most Arabs accepted Islam either under
compulsion or to gain something.

Many of them had recited the formula of Faith (*Kalimah*) to safe their
lives, while others had done it to demean the tribes with whom they had
enmity. You must remember that a number of disbelievers were killed in
battles by Imam ‘Ali (a) and other Muslims. However, the heirs of those
disbelievers held only Imam ‘Ali (a) responsible for their death. They
used to consider Imam ‘Ali (a) as their enemy and killer of their
relatives.

Their hearts were not cleansed even after accepting Islam. The fire of
hatred for Imam ‘Ali (a) blazed in their hearts. They were always ready
to take revenge from Imam ‘Ali (a). By denying Caliphate, they had taken
the first installment of their revenge and they expressed it whole
heartedly in Kerbala. The family of Imam ‘Ali (a) was martyred in
Kerbala despite their thirst and hunger only to revenge this.[^7]

If the Islamic Ummah had any feeling of justice, it should have
postponed the issue of Caliphate and allegiance till the Prophet’s
burial. Any person who has a heart will be moved on knowing that people
did not attend the funeral of that great personality, whose Caliphate
and succession was planned by them. No one came to offer condolence to
his near and dear ones. Why did the love and friendship end as soon as
the Prophet passed away?

Imam ‘Ali (a) loved the Prophet very much and he fulfilled his
obligation. He gave preference to the Prophet’s funeral over gaining
political power. The politically motivated people took the advantage of
this. Imam ‘Ali (a) always liked peace treaties and understanding. The
greatness of Imam ‘Ali’s peaceful character can be seen from the fact
that he did not fight the Caliphate structured in Saqifah. He observed
silence for the safety Islam and holy Quran. He sacrificed his correct
decisions for the benefit of Islamic Ummah.

Imam ‘Ali (a) describes this policy of peace in *Nahjul Balagha* as
follows:

Almighty Allah was made Muhammad the admonisher of all the worlds. When
he passed away the Muslims fought with each other for his Caliphate.

By Allah! I had never thought that Arabs will take Caliphate away from
the family of the Prophet. I had never thought that people would leave
me and appoint someone else as their leader. When I saw people paying
allegiance to a person, I did not oppose them forcefully because I knew
that if I did so, most people will leave Islam…

In such conditions, I thought that I should bear personal loss in order
to safeguard Islam.[^8] I did not want to take the kingdom for a short
time and cause permanent loss to Islam. The loss of Islam was more
hurting to me than loss of my rule.”

What can be a better proof of Imam ‘Ali’s peace-loving nature than the
fact that he objected to the three caliphs during their rule only in
religious matters.

History of the universe will fail to present such a peace-loving person
like Imam ‘Ali (a) because he sacrificed his rights and those of his
wife for the sake of benefit of Islam. Lady Fatima Zahra was denied
inheritance of her father, Fadak, which was gifted to her by her father.
In spite of this, Imam ‘Ali (a) did not let peace let go off his hands.
Apart from this, during the early days of Abu Bakr’s Caliphate, it was
seen that Umar came to the house of Imam ‘Ali (a) along with his
followers. They stood at the door and brought wood to burn down his
house. Is it possible to stop the people from talking about these
historical incidents?[^9]

Incident of Fadak
-----------------

The brief account of Fadak is that it is a hamlet of Hijaz, near Medina.
Jews inhabited it for hundreds of years, and as the land was very
fertile, Jews used to cultivate it.

In 7 A.H., the people of Fadak surrendered their land to the Prophet.
Fadak was now a personal property of the Prophet. Almighty Allah says in
Surah Hashr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَمَا أَفَاء اللَّهُ عَلَى رَسُولِهِ مِنْهُمْ فَمَا أَوْجَفْتُمْ
عَلَيْهِ مِنْ خَيْلٍ وَلاَ رِكَابٍ وَلٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يُسَلِّطُ
رُسُلَهُ عَلَى مَن يَشَاء وَاللَّهُ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whatever Allah restored to His Apostle from them, you did not
press forward against it any horse or a riding camel, but Allah gives
authority to His apostles against whom He pleases, and Allah has power
over all things.***[^10]

The Prophet had sowed seven date seeds in Fadak and gifted the entire
Fadak property to his daughter, Lady Fatima Zahra. It was used by Lady
Sayyada only after it was gifted to her. After the Prophet’s passing
away, Abu Bakr made Imam ‘Ali (a) and Fatima his political victims and
confiscated Fadak. Fadak was used by the family of Prophet Muhammad (S)
before. The letter of Imam ‘Ali (a) is a proof of this seizure of land.
He had mentioned in that letter as follows:

“It was the only land owned by us under the sky. Even then people looked
at it with greedy eyes. The other party did not feel ashamed while
snatching it away. Allah is the best judge.”[^11]

Lady Fatima Zahra was sole legal owner of that property. It was
necessary for the Caliph to leave the Prophet’s gift untouched. If the
Caliph had any legal dispute in this matter he should have filed a suit
and allowed it to remain in the custody of Lady Sayyada.

The strangest point in this case is that Abu Bakr always believed that
Fadak was not Lady Sayyada’s property and that it was the property of
Muslims. Hence he seized this land on the first day of his rule. Lady
Sayyada was claimant in this case and Abu Bakr the defendant.

The cataclysm of this incident is that the opposition party was the
judge. It is clear that the petition was against Abu Bakr or at least
against Muslim Ummah led by Abu Bakr. In both cases, Abu Bakr was
defendant and he had no right to adjudicate this case whatsoever.

Fadak in Various Hands
----------------------

Before describing the details of Fadak, it is necessary to mention that
Fadak was a public property during the rule of Abu Bakr and Umar.

During Uthman’s rule, the entire property was handed over to Marwan ibn
Hakam. O God! Can anyone tell us if what Uthman did was right?

Ahl al-Sunnah scholars present the character of Abu Bakr as an example
here. We must ask them why Uthman did not follow Abu Bakr and acted
differently. Which of the two Caliphs was right in this matter?

When Fadak was under the custody of the Prophet’s daughter, Muslim Ummah
could not bear to see it. Now when it came under the custody of Marwan,
why are people quiet? Abu Bakr had said that Fadak is not the personal
property of any Muslim. It belongs to the entire Muslim Ummah.

When Muawiyah ibn Abu Sufyan came to power, he divided Fadak into three
parts. A third was given to Marwan ibn Hakam, a third to Amr ibn Uthman
ibn Affan, the son of Uthman and a third was given to his son, Yazid ibn
Muawiyah ibn Abu Sufyan.

When Marwan came to power after Yazid, he did what the third Caliph had
done by disassociating his other two partners and seized the entire
property.

Afterwards Fadak became the property of his son, Abdul Aziz. When Umar
ibn Abdul Aziz came to power, he handed over Fadak to Fatima’s progeny.
When Umar ibn Abdul Aziz died, Yazid came to power from Bani Umayyah. He
seized Fadak from Fatima’s progeny and handed it over to Marwan’s
progeny. Fadak remained with Marwan’s progeny till the end of Umayyad
rule.

When the Umayyad rule ended, the Abbasid Caliph, Abul Abbas Saffah
handed over Fadak to Fatima’s progeny.

Mansoor Dawaniqi took it back from Fatima’s progeny. After that, his
son, Mahdi returned it to Fatima’s progeny. It was seized again by Hadi
and Rashid. Mamoon Rashid the Abbaside gave it back and Mutasim snatched
it away later.

Historians haven’t narrated what happened after that.

It proves that Fadak was like a toy for the rulers. They used to hand it
over to whomever they wished and seized it whenever and whatever part of
it they liked. The writings of Mamoon Rashid at the time of returning
Fadak back are enlightening, for he has explained about the inheritors
of Fadak in detail.

Mamoon Returns Fadak
--------------------

The Historian, Balazari narrates what Mamoon Rashid wrote. In 210 A.H.,
Mamoon gave order that Fadak be returned to its legal owners. He wrote
the following to his governor Qathm ibn Ja’far in Medina:

“Amirul Momineen holds a high religious position in front of Allah as
the successor of his last messenger. This position and nearness demands
that he should follow Allah’s Messenger in actions. He should obey the
Prophet’s orders and make sure that he gives the possession of things
gifted by the Prophet to their original owners.

That the Prophet gifted Fadak to his daughter, Lady Fatima Zahra is as
daylight, without any doubt.

Hence Amirul Momineen suggests that Fadak be returned to its original
owners. Amirul Momineen should seek nearness of Allah through this act.
Also he wants to become a follower of the Prophetic Practice (*Sunnah*)
through this justice.”

Mamoon then ordered his clerks to enter it in official records.

“After the Prophet’s passing away, it was announced every year during
Hajj: Whoever has something granted to by the Prophet they should come
forward and take it. In spite of this, why was the Prophet’s daughter
kept away from her right?

Mamoon Rashid had written to his slave, Mubarak Tabari that the entire
property of Fadak should be returned to Fatima’s progeny. The help of
Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn Zaid ibn ‘Ali ibn Husain ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib
and Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn Husain ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib must be taken in this matter. Arrangements must be made to
increase the yield.”

The above letter was written in 210 A.H.[^12]

Judgment Regarding Fadak
------------------------

“So many calamities befell me; that if they had fallen upon days they
would have turned into nights.” (From the Lamentation of Fatima Zahra)

Allah’s Messenger was granted Fadak by Allah, which he gifted to his
daughter upon divine commands and Lady Fatima utilized its income during
the Prophet’s lifetime. After the Prophet’s passing away, Abu Bakr
dismissed all the servants from Fadak and usurped it. Lady Zahra went to
Abu Bakr when she got this news and demanded her right.

Abu Bakr presented an astounding tradition in reply. He said that the
Prophet has said: “We prophets neither inherit nor leave any
inheritance. Whatever we leave behind is charity.”

The Tradition of Non-Inheritance and Holy Quran
-----------------------------------------------

Only narrator of this tradition is Abu Bakr. A similar tradition is
narrated also by Abu Bakr only. After the Prophet’s passing away, people
had difference of opinion as to where should he should be buried. At
that moment, Abu Bakr said that the Prophet has said: “All prophets were
buried at the place they passed away.” While the historian, Tabari says
that there are numerous prophets who were buried at places different
from where they had passed away.

Lady Zahra did not accept the tradition of non-inheritance because if
the Prophet’s progeny does not inherit, the Prophet should have told his
daughter that she would not inherit him. Abu Bakr’s words mean that the
Prophet did not inform his heir and secretly conveyed this fact to a
person who had no relation with it. This tradition of non-inheritance
was not heard by Imam ‘Ali (a) because if he had done so, he would have
never allowed his wife to demand her right. Also why did the Prophet
tell this important thing only to Abu Bakr? Why didn’t he inform other
Muslims also?

Tradition of Non-Inheritance is against Holy Quran
--------------------------------------------------

The stand of Lady Fatima was strong regarding above mentioned tradition
of non-inheritance. She had rejected this tradition saying that it was
against holy Quran.

1. Almighty Allah says in holy Quran: Allah enjoins you concerning your
children:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«يُوصِيكُمُ اللَّهُ فِي أَوْلاَدِكُمْ لِلذَّكَرِ مِثْلُ حَظِّ
الأُنثَيَيْنِ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Male shall have the equal of the portion of two females.***[^13]

2. Almighty Allah has said regarding the inheritance of everyone as
follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَلِكُلٍّ جَعَلْنَا مَوَالِيَ مِمَّا تَرَكَ الْوَالِدَانِ
وَالأَقْرَبُونَ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And to every one We have appointed heirs of what parents and near
relatives leave.***[^14]

Readers are requested to pay attention to the phrase, “and to everyone.”
It is explicitly said in this tradition regarding inheritance of
“everyone.”

Refer to all the verses regarding inheritance, but you won’t find a
single verse stating that people have their heirs while prophets do not.
If there is a verse denying inheritance of the prophet it should be
brought forward. I challenge the whole world till Judgment Day to bring
forward such a verse.

Three parts of the tradition of non-inheritance are as follows:

1. Prophets do not inherit anyone

2. The progeny of prophets does not inherit them

3. Whatever prophets leave behind is charity

Holy Quran rejects all the three points of this tradition.

Almighty Allah says in holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَوَرِثَ سُلَيْمَانُ دَاوُودَ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Sulaiman was Dawood’s heir.***[^15]

If a prophet cannot be the heir of anyone, how Prophet Sulaiman can be
the heir of Prophet Dawood?

This proves that the first point of this tradition is incorrect.

Also the Almighty Allah has mentioned in the verse that Prophet Sulaiman
became the heir of Prophet Dawood.

Hence Sulaiman (a) became the heir of a prophet. If the second point of
the above mentioned tradition is correct that there is no heir for a
prophet, how could someone inherit prophet Dawood? Why wasn’t his
property given as charity? Hence this single verse has proved all three
parts of the tradition of non-inheritance incorrect.

The supplication of Prophet Zakariya (a) is mentioned in Quran as
follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي وَهَنَ الْعَظْمُ مِنِّي وَاشْتَعَلَ الرَّأْسُ
شَيْباً وَلَمْ أَكُن بِدُعَائِكَ رَبِّ شَقِيّاً. وَإِنِّي خِفْتُ
الْمَوَالِيَ مِن وَرَائِي وَكَانَتِ امْرَأَتِي عَاقِراً فَهَبْ لِي مِن
لَّدُنكَ وَلِيّاً. يَرِثُنِي وَيَرِثُ مِنْ آلِ يَعْقُوبَ وَاجْعَلْهُ
رَبِّ رَضِيّاً. يَا زَكَرِيَّا إِنَّا نُبَشِّرُكَ بِغُلَامٍ اسْمُهُ
يَحْيَى لَمْ نَجْعَل لَّهُ مِن قَبْلُ سَمِيّاً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He said: My Lord! Surely my bones are weakened and my head flares
with hoariness, and, my Lord! I have never been unsuccessful in my
prayer to Thee. And surely I fear my cousins after me, and my wife is
barren, therefore grant me from Thyself an heir. Who should inherit me
and inherit from the children of Yaqoob, and make him, my Lord, one in
whom Thou art well pleased. O Zakariya! Surely We give you good news of
a boy whose name shall be Yahya: We have not made before anyone his
equal.***[^16]

Read the above mentioned verse repeatedly. Prophet Zakariya has asked
for an heir and the Almighty Allah granted him one and selected a name
for him.

If there is no inheritance for prophets, why Prophet Zakariya asked for
an heir from Allah?

Even if he asked for it, why didn’t Allah silence him saying: “You are a
prophet? What are you saying? There is no inheritance for a prophet. You
should not ask for an heir.”

If there are no heirs of prophet, why the Almighty Allah granted him one
and selected a name for him?

Lady Sayyada recited the above mentioned verse and rejected the
tradition of non-inheritance. However, Abu Bakr refused to restore her
rights in spite of it.

Finally Lady Sayyada said: “Now mount your Caliphate after putting a
bridle to it. I will meet you on Judgment Day. Allah will arbitrate on
that day and the liar will be at loss.

O son of Abu Qahafa! Does the Book of Allah say that you can become the
heir of your father while I cannot do so? You are talking strange
things.

Have you left the Book of Allah purposely? Didn’t you hear the words of
Allah: Relatives are inheritors of each other in the Book of Allah? Did
Allah reveal a verse regarding non-inheritance of my father? Or you say
that people of two communities cannot inherit each other? If yes, didn’t
I and my father belong to the same community? Are you aware of general
and particular matters of holy Quran more than my father and my cousin?”

After presenting these proofs and verses of holy Quran, Lady Sayyada
noticed that they had no effect on the Caliph. She became annoyed and
returned home crying.

She knew it before that the Caliph would not return Fadak to her. She
went there only to exhaust the argument. She proved it to the world that
when her father had intended to write a tradition a few days ago, it was
the same group, which had said that they do not need a tradition and the
Book of Allah was sufficient for them. When she recited the verse of
holy Quran, they replied to her by narrating a tradition.

Hence Lady Sayyada proved to the world that those who had rejected the
tradition earlier were now rejecting the verses of holy Quran also. She
knew it before that she won’t get her right back because the people who
could snatch the Caliphate of her husband a few days before could also
seize Fadak from her.

Tradition of non-inheritance and demands of Express text and Reason
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Let us view the tradition narrated by Abu Bakr in the light of the
Prophet’s life history.

Allah’s Messenger never excepted himself from the commandments of the
pure law of Shariah.

1. It would be wrong to say that a prophet should neither offer prayer
nor observe fast (God forbid!).

It would be wrong because a prophet cannot be exempted from the
commandments of Shariah. Therefore, as a prophet is not exempted from
prayer, fast and other Islamic commandments, he can also not be exempted
from the commandment of Islam regarding inheritance.

2. Wasn’t there a political aim behind rejecting a simple Islamic
commandment in the case of Fadak?

3. Was Abu Bakr trying to suppress his political rival, Imam ‘Ali (a)
and his family by denying inheritance to Lady Sayyada?

4. Is this matter linked to political economics?

Was it intended to deprive Imam ‘Ali (a) and his family from the
leftover bread also?

5. Was it intended to weaken Imam ‘Ali (a) financially and stop him from
contesting for the post of Caliphate?

6. Was it intended to consider those people apostate who rejected the
Caliphate of Abu Bakr and bar them from benefits, from Zakat and attack
them? Was this reasoning behind usurping Fadak? Did they fear that if
Fadak remains in possession of ‘Ali, he would help their rivals
financially?

7. Was it intended to demean the honor of the progeny of Muhammad by
usurping Fadak? Did they intend to show it to the people that the
Prophet himself had deprived his people from inheritance?

Did they try to prove that those people who have no right of inheriting
the prophet had no right to Caliphate?

8. Were many people involved in seizing Fadak?

9. Even if the tradition narrated by Abu Bakr is considered valid, is it
applicable only for the Prophet or to all the prophets?

10. Why did the Prophet want to keep his loving daughter away from his
inheritance?

11. Did the Prophet fear that his daughter and son-in-law will misuse it
after him (God forbid)?

12. If yes, why did he hand it over to his daughter?

13. Did this apprehension arise because she had misused it during the
Prophet’s lifetime?

14. If yes, when and how did it happen?

Allamah Ibn Abil Hadid Mutazali has narrated a beautiful debate on this
matter between the Chief Qazi and the ensign of guidance (*Alamul Huda*)
Sayyid Murtuza. The former rejected inheritance of prophets while the
latter tried to prove it.

The stand of Chief Qazi was that the inheritance of prophets mentioned
in holy Quran is regarding their knowledge and virtues and not regarding
their property.

Sayyid Murtuza’s stand was that inheritance is regarding wealth and land
first. And this relation is true. Its relation with knowledge and
virtues can be metaphorical. As per the principle of holy Quran,
metaphorical meanings are accepted only when the real meanings are in
effect. What is wrong in a prophet inheriting worldly things? There is
nothing wrong logically as well as according to Shariah. It is not
possible to discard the real meaning and accept the metaphorical. Even
if we accept the statement of Chief Qazi that the inheritance of
prophets is in relation to knowledge and virtues instead of material
things, it would mean that the Prophet’s progeny are inheritors of his
knowledge and virtues.

If the Prophet’s progeny are inheritors of his knowledge and virtues how
could the Caliphate of Abu Bakr be legal in the presence of these
personalities.[^17]

Fadak as a Gift
---------------

Lady Sayyada demanded Fadak because it had been gifted to her. Imam ‘Ali
(a), Hasan, Husain and Umme Aiman were witnesses from Lady Sayyida’s
side.

However, the Caliph rejected all witnesses and said: “The course of
testimony is not complete because ‘Ali is Sayyada’s husband, Imam Hasan
and Imam Husain are her sons and Umme Aiman is her slave.”

The fact is that this proof is complete in all aspects.

Refer to the following verse of Surah Aale Imran to know how strong
‘Ali’s proof was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«شَهِدَ اللَّهُ أَنَّهُ لاَ إِلٰـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ وَالْمَلاَئِكَةُ
وَأُوْلُواْ الْعِلْمِ قَائِمَاً بِالْقِسْطِ لاَ إِلٰـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, and (so do) the
angels and those possessed of knowledge, maintaining His creation with
justice; there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise.***

In this verse, Almighty Allah includes Himself, His angles and the just
ones as witnesses of His unity (*Tauheed*).

Scholars who prefer justice are witness of Tauheed (Monotheism) and Imam
‘Ali (a) should be listed foremost among the just ones because the
Prophet has said regarding ‘Ali’s knowledge: “I am the city of knowledge
and ‘Ali is its gate.”

As far as justice is concerned, the sky has not witnessed a just person
like ‘Ali. If Imam ‘Ali (a) is a witness to Tauheed (Monotheism), why
can’t he be the witness in the matter of Fadak? It is strange that we
accept Imam ‘Ali’s testimony in the matter of Tauheed (Monotheism) and
reject it in the matter of Fadak. Imam ‘Ali (a) is not only a witness to
Tauheed but also a witness to the prophethood of the Prophet as
mentioned in Surah Raad by Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ لَسْتَ مُرْسَلاً قُلْ كَفَىٰ بِاللَّهِ
شَهِيداً بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَمَنْ عِندَهُ عِلْمُ الْكِتَابِ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who disbelieve say: You are not a messenger. Say: Allah is
sufficient as a witness between me and you and whoever has knowledge of
the Book.***

According to the correct interpretation, the phrase “whoever has
knowledge of the book” implies Imam ‘Ali (a).

This verse proves that Imam ‘Ali (a) is the witness of the prophethood
of Prophet Muhammad (S).

Now the question arises as to why the person who testified to the
prophethood of the Prophet could not be allowed to testify in the matter
of Fadak?

The Branch Testifies to the Root
--------------------------------

The testimony of Imam Hasan and Husain was rejected saying that the
branch is testifying for the root. i.e. the testimony of Imam Hasan and
Husain is not acceptable as they were sons of Lady Sayyada.

The incident of Prophet Isa’s birth and the problem of Lady Maryam are
present in holy Quran. When people started taunting Lady Maryam for the
birth of a child, her new-born son had testified to his prophethood and
the chastity of his mother.

If the testimony of children in favor of their parents is not
acceptable, why Allah made Prophet Isa (a) testify to the chastity of
his mother? If this formula is accepted, what will happen to all
traditions narrated by Ayesha regarding her father? There were four
persons present in front of the Caliph. One of them was the claimant
herself and other three were witnesses. Refer to the incident of
Mubahila (imprecation ceremony) to know how reliable the testimony of
these persons is.

Testimony of Mubahila
---------------------

When Christian scholars rejected the prophethood of Prophet Muhammad,
the Almighty Allah revealed the verse of Mubahila and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«فَمَنْ حَاجَّكَ فِيهِ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ
تَعَالَوْاْ نَدْعُ أَبْنَاءنَا وَأَبْنَاءكُمْ وَنِسَاءنَا وَنِسَاءكُمْ
وَأَنفُسَنَا وأَنفُسَكُمْ ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَل لَّعْنَةُ اللّهِ
عَلَى الْكَاذِبِينَ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and
our women and your women and our near people and your near people, then
let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the
liars.***[^18]

When this verse was revealed, the Prophet went to Imam ‘Ali’s house and
covered Imam ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain with his cloak and prayed:
“O Allah! These are my Ahl al-Bayt.”

The Prophet set out for Mubahila along with these personalities only.
When the Christian scholars saw their illuminated faces, they agreed to
pay Jizyah Tax and kept away from Mubahila.

This incident proves that these personalities are witnesses for entire
Islam and even the Christians respected their testimony.

Sometime after the incident of Mubahila, these four personalities went
to the Caliph. One of them was claimant while remaining four were
witnesses.

The human mind would be surprised that the Caliph of Muslims rejected
the testimony of those personalities whom Almighty Allah had made
witnesses of truthfulness of entire religion of Islam.

Also it is enough to say regarding the Caliphate of these personalities
that Allah has revealed the following verse for them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيراً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! And to purify you a (thorough) purifying.***[^19]

It was obligatory on Abu Bakr to accept the testimony of Lady Sayyada
without any hassle because it is a well-known incident that a Bedouin
had argued with the Prophet regarding a she-camel. Both of them said
that the she-camel was their property. When the Bedouin asked the
Prophet for a witness, Khuzayma ibn Thabit came forward and testified.
Later on, Khuzayma was asked why he had testified without knowledge.

He replied: We also testify to the prophethood and revelation of
Muhammad even though we have not seen archangel Jibraeel with our eyes.
When we can testify to the prophethood without seeing it, why can’t we
testify in favor of the Prophet for a single she-camel? The Prophet
declared the testimony of Khuzayma right and gave him the title of the
owner of two testimonies (*Dhul Shahadatain*).

It would have been better for Abu Bakr if he had accepted the testimony
of Lady Sayyada like the Bedouin had done. On the other hand, Lady
Sayyada did not ask Abu Bakr for witness regarding his tradition of
non-inheritance even though she had rejected this tradition.

It was not at all appropriate for Abu Bakr to reject the witness of the
great truthful one (Siddiq Akbar) like Imam ‘Ali (a). Umme Aiman was the
Prophet’s nurse, who served Islam and the Messenger of Islam all her
life; then why was her testimony rejected?

Inconsistency in actions of the Muslim Caliph
---------------------------------------------

The stand of Abu Bakr regarding inheritance is really strange:

1. He let the Prophet’s sword, slippers and turban remain with Imam ‘Ali
(a) and did not argue with him regarding these items.

2. Also the Prophet had handed over his sword and a ring to Imam ‘Ali
(a) in his last moments. Abu Bakr did not demand these things.

If the sword and ring were not taken by the Caliph because they were the
gifts then Fadak was also a gift. Why was he so particular in
confiscating Fadak only?

3. Lady Fatima had kept the dress of the Prophet, which he was wearing
at the time of his demise. Abu Bakr did not ask for this dress also?

4. The wives of the Prophet also were not asked to vacate their houses.

5. The governor of Bahrain, Alla ibn Hadhrami sent some goods to the
Caliph from Bahrain. Jabir Ibn Abdullah told the Caliph: “The Prophet
had promised that he would give me a part from it. Now that the Prophet
has passed away and you are the Caliph of Muslims, you should give that
part to me.” Abu Bakr did not demand any witness from him and granted
the requested part of goods to him only by trusting his words.[^20]

Wasn’t the Chief of the ladies of Paradise as truthful as Jabir?

6. When the goods from Bahrain were received by the Caliph, Abu Bashir
al-Maazni came to him and said: “The Prophet had promised me a part of
the goods from Bahrain.” On hearing this, Abu Bakr handed him three
handfuls of the wealth.

Students of History are amazed that when a common Companion of the
Prophet demanded something, his testimony was accepted. On the other
hand, when the daughter of Allah’s Messenger demanded her right, she was
asked to bring witnesses. The height of oppression is that the testimony
of those witnesses was rejected. The Prophet’s daughter who was the
Chief of the ladies of Paradise was sent back empty-handed.

If the tradition of non-inheritance is accepted, many complications will
arise. According to this tradition, it would not be legal to bury the
Prophet in his own house because after the Prophet’s passing away, all
his property would be considered charity and the property of all
Muslims. Now the Prophet will have no relation with his house. Then how
could he be buried in a house, which is not his?

It is strange that Abu Bakr has himself narrated another tradition that
prophets are buried at the same place where they pass away. When
prophets pass away at a place, should that place be considered their
property or charity?

If this property is considered charity, it will not be appropriate to
bury prophets there. If it is appropriate to bury the prophet, it would
be necessary to accept that whatever prophets leave behind is not
charity.

Now another question arises here. Wasn’t Abu Bakr aware of the conflict
between these two traditions?

Further explaining it, we can say that Abu Bakr narrated the tradition:
A prophet is buried at the place where he passes away.

Now a prophet can pass away only at one of the two places:

1. Either at his own property

2. Or at the property of someone else

If a prophet dies at his own property, it is not appropriate to bury him
at that place because it has become charity.

If a prophet dies at the property of someone else, it would not be
possible to bury him there at all because that place belongs to someone
else.

Hence if the tradition of non-inheritance is considered correct, where
would the prophet be buried?

The Place where the Prophet was buried belonged to him and it was turned
into charity after he passed away. Then how did Abu Bakr get the right
to make a will that he should be buried beside the Prophet? If we
suppose that the room belonged to the Prophet and it was considered his
property even after his demise, one should take the permission of owner
before entering it. Did Abu Bakr take the permission from the Prophet in
his life to get himself buried beside the Prophet’s grave?

Or did the Prophet himself say that the first Caliph should be buried
beside him?

All these problems arise if we accept the tradition of non-inheritance.
It is strange that Ahl al-Sunnah commentators have tried their best to
prove that the inheritance of prophets is regarding their knowledge
only. Till today, we are not able to understand how knowledge and
virtues could be inherited? If it is so, a son of a scholar must also be
a scholar and a son of every illiterate person will be illiterate. It is
wrong socially and psychologically that Abu Bakr acted upon a tradition
whose only narrator was he himself.

While doing so he forgot the strong Islamic tradition whose authenticity
was known to him also: that the Prophet had said, “Fatima is a part of
me. Whoever hurts her has hurt me and whoever hurts me has hurt
Allah.”[^21]

Abu Bakr should have remembered the incident of Abul Aas ibn Rubai while
denying Lady Sayyada her right.

This Incident is narrated by historian Ibn Athir as follows: Abul Aas
ibn Rubai ibn Abdul Aza ibn Abdul Shams was included among the prisoners
of war in the battle of Badr. He was the husband of Zainab bint Khadija.

All prisoners of Mecca were released after paying compensation. Zainab
bint Khadija sent a necklace as compensation for the release of her
husband. This necklace was gifted by her mother, Lady Khadijatul Kubra.
When the Prophet saw this necklace, he recollected the memories of Lady
Khadija and was moved. He told the Muslims: If possible release the
husband of Zainab and return the compensation also. Before the conquest
of Mecca, once it so happened that Abul Aas was going to Syria carrying
trade goods belonging to him as well as other people of Mecca. On the
way he had a clash with Muslim army and the latter took all his goods
away. He returned to his wife Zainab bint Khadija at night.

When Allah’s Messenger was going to offer prayer at dawn, Zainab called
out: “O people! I have given refuge to Abul Aas ibn Rubai.”

The Prophet requested Muslims that they return the goods of Abu Aas if
possible. He said that it was only desirable, so there would not be any
punishment if the goods were not returned.

The people said: “O Messenger of Allah! We submit before your wish and
we will return his goods.” So the Muslims returned all the goods of Abul
Aas including his walking stick.[^22]

We have seen that Muslims returned the spoils of war to Abul Aas for the
sake of the Prophet’s foster-daughter, Zainab; even though they had the
right to those goods. Even if Abu Bakr had thought that there was no
inheritance for Lady Sayyada, keeping in mind the incident of Abul Aas,
he should have preferred the pleasure of Lady Sayyada over everything.

Was this act of Abu Bakr in accordance to the Prophetic Practice
(*Sunnah*)?

Another Face of the Saqifah Regime
----------------------------------

Amirul Momineen (a) says:

“Beware! By Allah, the son of Abi Qahafa (Abu Bakr) dressed himself with
it (the Caliphate) and he certainly knew that my position in relation to
it was the same as the position of the axis in relation to the
hand-mill. The flood water flows down from me and the bird cannot fly
upto me. I put a curtain against the Caliphate and kept myself detached
from it.

Then I began to think whether I should assault or endure calmly the
blinding darkness of tribulations wherein the grown up are made feeble
and the young grow old and the true believer acts under strain till he
meets Allah (on his death). I found that endurance thereon was wiser. So
I adopted patience although there was pricking in the eye and
suffocation (of mortification) in the throat. I watched the plundering
of my inheritance till the first one went his way but handed over the
Caliphate to Ibnul Khattab after himself.”

Then he quoted al-Aasha’s verse:

“My days are now passed on the camel’s back (in difficulty) while there
were days (of ease) when I enjoyed the company of Jabir’s brother
Hayyan.”[^23]

“It is strange that during his lifetime he wished to be released from
Caliphate but he confirmed it for the other one after his death. No
doubt these two shared its udders strictly among themselves.”

The Caliphate which Abu Bakr had received due to the efforts of Umar was
returned to the latter.

Before nominating Umar, Abu Bakr had called Uthman ibn Affan and Abdur
Rahman ibn Auf. He discussed the matter of nominating Umar with them and
asked for advice in this matter. Abdur Rahman ibn Auf said: “Whatever
you think in this matter is much better.” Abdur Rahman knew that even
during the Caliphate of Abu Bakr, the central role was played by Umar
only. Uthman ibn Affan replied: “His inner self is much better than his
outer one and there is no one like him around us.”

We know that Uthman was absolutely correct because the second Caliph has
played a wonderful role in establishing the government of Saqifah.

We don’t know whether both of them gave their advice from their hearts
or just for the sake of respecting the Caliph’s decision.

Will of the first Caliph regarding Umar
---------------------------------------

Finally Abu Bakr asked Uthman to write down the nomination of Umar as
Caliph.

Historians have recorded that Uthman was writing down as Abu Bakr
dictated. Abu Bakr lost consciousness before mentioning the name of
Umar. Uthman wrote Umar’s name of his own. When Abu Bakr regained
consciousness, Uthman said that he had written the name of Umar. Abu
Bakr approved it and appreciated Uthman a lot.

1. We could not understand till date why Uthman himself wrote Umar’s
name in the will of some other person?

2. Will this act be included in his friendship?

3. If we suppose that Abu Bakr died in this state of unconsciousness,
would the will of Abu Bakr be considered legal?

4. Why was the opinion of only two persons out of the entire Muslim
Ummah taken regarding Umar’s nomination?

5. What was so special about these two personalities?

6. It is said that Abu Bakr appointed his successor for the benefit of
Muslim Ummah. Didn’t the Prophet think of the benefit of Muslim Ummah
like him?

7. Abu Bakr willed at his death-bed and it was accepted. However, when
the Prophet had intended to do so, people said that he was talking
rubbish.

8. After a few centuries later, if a person points out that Abu Bakr has
willed at his death-bed in the state of illness and he was talking
rubbish, will he be considered as a friend of Islam or its enemy? Muslim
Ummah should also decide what that person should be called who used
similar words for the Prophet.

9. Abu Bakr and Umar believed that the Prophet had not appointed anyone
as his successor. Similarly, if Abu Bakr would not have appointed his
successor, wouldn’t this act have been considered as per the Prophetic
Practice (*Sunnah*)?

10. What was the problem in taking the views of Emigrants and Helpers
regarding the Caliphate of Imam ‘Ali (a)?

The simple and true answer to all these questions is that Umar played a
central role in nomination of Abu Bakr as Caliph.

Hence Abu Bakr was obliged to nominate Umar after his death.

Shura (Consultation)
--------------------

Till when the second went his way (of death) he put the matter (of
Caliphate) in a group and regarded me to be one of them. But good
Heavens! What had I to do with this “consultation”? Where was any doubt
about me with regard to the first of them that I was now considered akin
to these ones? But I remained low when they were low and flew high when
they flew high. One of them turned against me because of his hatred and
the other got inclined the other way due to his in-law relationship and
this thing and that thing.[^24]

Ibn Athir Umar ibn Maymun narrates the event of Shura as follows:

When Umar was fatally injured, people asked him to appoint a successor.
He said: “Whom should I appoint? If Abu Ubaidah had been alive, I would
have appointed him. I would then have told the Lord that I have
appointed a person whom the Prophet had called trustworthy in his
Ummah.”

“If Saalim Huzaifah’s freed slave had been alive, I would have appointed
him as my successor and told the Lord that I have appointed such a
person as my successor whom the Prophet called a great lover of
Allah.”[^25]

We also accept that Umar would have indeed appointed Abu Ubaidah as
Caliph if the latter were alive. He would have nominated Abu Ubaidah
because the latter supported him in Saqifah and not because he was
trustworthy. If it had been the case, the number of Rightly-guided
Caliphs would have become five instead of four.

The student of History is astounded at this narration. People requested
Umar not to leave them without a leader after his death. However it is
strange that the same was not asked from the Prophet!

According to Ahl al-Sunnah point of view, the Prophet was not concerned
about the future of Ummah, hence he left the selection of Caliph at the
discretion of the Ummah. He did not care about the bloody battles
resulting out of it and division of Ummah into numerous sects.

May Allah bless the two Shaykhs (Abu Bakr and Umar) who handled the
situation in time and saved the Ummah from possible destruction. If Abu
Ubaidah and Saalim were really capable why didn’t Umar appoint them in
Saqifah? He should have paid allegiance to Abu Ubaidah and then asked
the people to follow him because the Prophet had called him trustworthy.

Or he should have sworn allegiance to Saalim and said that this person
is a great lover of Allah.

The Prophet had called Abu Ubaidah a “trustworthy person of Ummah” and
no such title was given to Abu Bakr. Then how could allegiance be paid
by a more virtuous to a less virtuous one? If it was not possible to do
so in Saqifah, Umar could have requested Abu Bakr when the latter was
nominating the former to appoint Abu Ubaidah in his stead because he was
a “trustworthy person of Ummah.”

Also Umar had expressed his desire that he would have appointed Saalim
as his successor if the latter were alive.

Abu Bakr had narrated a tradition in Saqifah because of which Helpers
backed off: “The imams will be from Quraish.”

Did Salim belong to Quraish?

If not, why Umar expressed his desire to appoint him as Caliph?

If Saalim did not belong to Quraish, the desire of Umar shows that it is
not necessary for a Caliph to be from Quraish. If it is not necessary
for a Caliph to be from Quraish, were the stands of both the caliphs
contradicting each other? If that is so, which of them is correct?

Saalim was to be nominated as Caliph because he loved Allah very much.

It proves that the right to Caliphate is for one who loves Allah
greatly.

Did the following tradition slip out of Umar’s mind at that time? It is
narrated in *Sahih Muslim* that the Prophet said: “Tomorrow I shall hand
over the banner to a person who would be a real man. He loves Allah and
His Messenger and they too love him. Allah will grant victory at his
hands.”[^26]

The Prophet has depicted the virtue of Imam ‘Ali (a) in this tradition
that he loves Allah and His Messenger and they too love him. The
tradition regarding Saalim was that he loves Allah but no tradition
proves that he too is loved by Allah. Saalim loved Allah very much while
Imam ‘Ali (a) loved Allah and was also loved by Allah. Then why didn’t
Umar nominate Imam ‘Ali (a) as his successor?

By the way, Umar selected a committee that included Imam ‘Ali, Uthman,
Saad ibn Abi Waqqas, Abdur Rahman ibn Auf, Zubair ibn Awwam and Talha
ibn Ubaidullah. He told them: “After my death, you all take three days’
time to decide who would be the Caliph. Suhaib would lead the prayers
during this time. A Caliph must be appointed on the fourth day. My son,
Abdullah ibn Umar would participate in the committee as an advisor but
there is no place for him in Caliphate.” Then Umar called Abu Talha
Ansari and told him: “Bring along fifty men to keep a strict vigil on
this committee till one of them is appointed as the leader.”

Then he called Miqdad ibn Aswad and told him: “Gather these members at a
place after my burial for election of a leader. If one of them rejects
the appointment of a leader, cut off his head. If two persons disagree,
kill both of them and if the committee is divided into two groups such
that there are three persons on both sides, let my son, Abdullah ibn
Umar take the decision. If they do not accept the decision of my son,
you should support the decision of the side supported by Abdur Rahman
ibn Auf and kill the other party.”

Readers are requested to pause for a moment and note that Umar ordered
that the Caliph should be appointed after his burial. Had the Caliph
done the same at the time of the Prophet’s demise?

According to Islamic history, the holy body of Allah’s Messenger was
still in the house when the activities of Saqifah started.

Umar considered election of a Caliph more important than the Prophet’s
burial. Then why didn’t he consider appointment of Caliph more important
at the time of his death?

It was a simple remark. Let us come back to history. When Umar died,
Suhaib lead his funeral Prayer. When Umar was buried, Miqdad gathered
the members of committee. Talha was not present in them.

Shura Procedure
---------------

The operations of Shura started. Abdur Rahman ibn Auf said: “Is there
any of you who would back off from Caliphate and prefer someone else?”
No one answered. Abdur Rahman said that he would back off. Uthman
thanked him and others also showed their pleasure at this act. Imam ‘Ali
(a) was sitting quietly and watching everything. Abdur Rahman asked him:
“O Abul Hasan! What is your opinion?” Imam ‘Ali (a) said: “You should
promise me that you would always prefer right, not succumb to your
desires and instead work for complete benefit of Islam.”

“Abdur Rahman promised Imam ‘Ali (a) to do so.”[^27]

After a long discussion, Abdur Rahman ibn Auf told Imam ‘Ali (a): “I pay
allegiance to you on a condition that you will follow the book of Allah,
The Prophetic Practice (*Sunnah*) and the practice of Abu Bakr and
Umar.”

Imam ‘Ali (a) replied: “I will follow only the book of Allah, the
Prophetic Practice (*Sunnah*) and my personal exertions (Ijtihaad).”

Then Abdur Rahman ibn Auf turned to Uthman and said: “I pay allegiance
to you on a condition that you will follow the Book of Allah, the
Prophetic Practice (*Sunnah*) and the practice of Abu Bakr and Umar.”
Uthman accepted all the three conditions.

Abdur Rahman ibn Auf made this offer to Imam ‘Ali (a) three times but
the latter refused to follow the practice of Abu Bakr and Umar every
time.

When Abdur Rahman was assured that Imam ‘Ali (a) would not follow the
practice of Abu Bakr and Umar, he paid allegiance to Uthman and said:
“Peace be upon you! O master of faithful!”

At this, Imam ‘Ali (a) said: “I know why the responsibility of selecting
a Caliph was handed to you and you have acted on the predetermined plan
exactly.”[^28]

A Few Questions
---------------

A few questions arise at this moment:

1. Did Abdur Rahman pay allegiance to Uthman unintentionally or it was
planned in advance?

2. Was the purpose of including “practice of Abu Bakr and Umar” as a
condition a way to prevent Imam ‘Ali (a) from becoming a Caliph or
something else was intended?

Before considering these questions, it is necessary to discuss two
important issues at Shura:

1. The historian, Tabari writes: When Umar was at his death-bed, he
remembered Abu Ubaidah and Saalim very much. He expressed his desire
again and again that if they were alive he would have appointed one of
them as Caliph. A group of Companions had come to meet him. Imam ‘Ali
(a) was among them. Umar told the people: “I wanted to make such a
person a leader who would show you the right path.” Saying this he
pointed to Imam ‘Ali (a).

“Then I fell asleep and dreamt that a person has entered a garden and
planted a few saplings in it. He plucked the flowers grown on plants. I
interpreted this dream that Umar would die soon.

How can I carry your burden now alive or dead? Therefore appoint a
Caliph after me from this group of people for whom the Prophet has given
glad tidings of Paradise.

Saad ibn Zaid ibn Umar ibn Nufayl was also one of them. However I do not
include him among the candidates for Caliphate. I feel that the rule
should go to either Uthman or ‘Ali.

If ‘Ali becomes the ruler he would be humorous. However he is capable of
restoring the rights of the people.”[^29]

[^1]: Al-Fitnah al-Kubra Uthman bin Affan, Pg. 102-103

[^2]: Ibn Hajar Asqalani, Al-Isabah fi Tamiz al-Sahaba, Vol. 2, Pg.
501-502

[^3]: Surah Ahzaab 33:33

[^4]: Surah Aale Imran 3:61

[^5]: Keeping this incident in mind, Rumi, the mystic says: “Since the
Companions were having love for the world they left the Prophet
unshrouded.” Abu ‘‘Ali Qalandar Panipati has praised ‘‘Ali (a) saying:
“An Imam who on the day of the passing away of the Prophet left the
caliphate and sat down to mourn the Messenger of Allah (S).”

[^6]: Abdul Fattah Abdul Maqsood, Al-Imam ‘‘Ali bin Abi Talib, Vol. 1,
Pg. 149

[^7]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 3, Pg. 283, Egypt

[^8]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha

[^9]: Abdul Fattah Abdul Maqsood, Al-Imam ‘‘Ali bin Abi Talib Vol. 1,
Pg. 216

[^10]: Surah Hashr 59:6

[^11]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 4, Pg. 28, Letter no.
45

[^12]: Balazari, Futuhul Buldan, Pg. 46-47

[^13]: Surah Nisa 4:11

[^14]: Surah Nisa 4:33

[^15]: Surah Naml 27:12

[^16]: Surah Maryam 19:6

[^17]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 4, Pg. 78-103

[^18]: Surah Aale Imran 3:61

[^19]: Surah Ahzaab 33:33

[^20]: Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 3, Pg. 180

[^21]: The above mentioned tradition is discussed in Sahih Bukhari

[^22]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fit Tarikh, Vol. 2, Pg. 93-94

[^23]: Nahjul Balagha, Shiqshiqiya Sermon

[^24]: Nahjul Balagha, Shiqshiqiya Sermon

[^25]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fit Tarikh, Vol. 3, Pg. 34

[^26]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. 2, Pg. 224

[^27]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fit Tarikh, Vol. 3, Pg. 35-36

[^28]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 1, Pg. 50-67

[^29]: Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wal Muluk, Vol. 2, Pg. 34-35


