Part 2 .2: A Probe into Saqifah 2
=================================

Umar’s Opinion about Shura Members
----------------------------------

2. Another historian writes that once Umar summoned Talha, Zubair, Saad,
Abdur Rahman, Uthman and ‘Ali and said:

“O Zubair! What kind of person you are! One day you are a human being
and another, a devil. O Talha! What kind of a person you are? The
Prophet was angry with you because of your words till he passed away. It
was because of you only the verse prohibiting marriage with the wives of
the prophet was revealed.”

According to another tradition, Umar said: “O Talha! Aren’t you the same
person who said, ‘I will marry the wives of Muhammad after his demise?
Allah has not made Muhammad more rightful to the daughters of our uncles
more than us.’ Because of your audacity, Allah revealed this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَمَا كَانَ لَكُمْ أَن تُؤْذُوا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ وَلاَ أَن تَنكِحُوا
أَزْوَاجَهُ مِن بَعْدِهِ أَبَداً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You should not give trouble to the Apostle of Allah, nor that you
should marry his wives after him ever.***[^1]

Shaykh Abu Uthman says that if the character of those personalities was
such, why Umar said on his death-bed that the Prophet was pleased with
them all his life?

Then Umar turned to Saad ibn Abi Waqqas and said: “You are the leader of
the group of persons who turn away. You are a hunter and play with bow
and arrow. What is the relation of tribe of Zahra with Caliphate?”

Then he looked at Abdur Rahman ibn Auf and said: “A person is not
eligible to Caliphate if he has weaknesses as much as you. By the way,
what is the relation of Zahra with Caliphate?”

Turning to ‘Ali he said: “If you had not been humorous, by Allah, you
were most rightful to Caliphate. By Allah! If you become the ruler you
will lead the people on the right path.”

Looking at Uthman, he said: “I can see that the Quraish will make you
the ruler. You will impose Bani Umayyah and Bani Muit over the people
and hand over to them the Muslim public treasury.”[^2]

‘Ali’s protest in Shura Meeting
-------------------------------

Imam ‘Ali (a) raised his voice of protest before the members of Shura in
order to prove his right to Caliphate. He said: “I hold witness Allah
unto you, Who is aware of your every truth and lie.

1. Is there anyone here except me whose brother has been granted two
wings in Paradise by Allah?

2. Is there anyone here except me whose uncle is the chief of martyrs?

3. Is there anyone here except me whose wife is the chief of the ladies
of the worlds?

4. The Prophet considered my sons as his own. Is there anyone here
except me as such?

5. Is there anyone here except me whose sons are chiefs of the youth of
Paradise?

6. Is there anyone here having more knowledge of the holy Quran than me?

7. Is there anyone here for whom the verse of purification was revealed?

8. Is there anyone here who has seen archangel Jibraeel?

9. Was the announcement of, “Of whomsoever I am the master…” made for
anyone except me?

10. Was anyone, except me, made by the Prophet his brother?

11. Is there anyone who has conquered the Battle of the Ditch
(*Khandaq*) except me?

12. Is there anyone who has been honored with the title of ‘Haroon of
Muhammad’, except me?

13. Is there anyone except me who is called a believer by Allah in ten
verses of holy Quran?

14. Is there anyone here except me who slept on the bed of the Prophet
on the night of migration?

15. Is there anyone here except me such that angels stood by his side in
the Battle of Uhad?

16. Is there anyone here except me such that the Prophet passed away in
his lap?

17. Is there anyone here except me who has given the funeral bath to the
Prophet after his demise; shrouded and buried him?

18. Is there anyone here except me who possesses the weapon, banner and
ring of the Prophet?

19. Is there anyone here except me whom the Prophet had made to climb
his shoulders to break the idols?

20. Did the voice from heaven call out for anyone except me: “If there
is a sword, it is Zulfiqar; if there is a brave youth, it is ‘Ali.”?

21. Is there anyone here except me who has shared a roasted bird with
the Prophet?

22. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “You are
my standard-bearer in this world and the hereafter.”?

23. Is there anyone here except me who has acted upon the verse of
‘Najwa’ (consultation)?[^3]

24. Is there anyone here except me who has received the honor of being
the Prophet’s shoe-mender?

25. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet had said: “I
love you more than the entire creation. You are most truthful after me?”

26. Is there anyone here except me who earned a hundred dates by pulling
out a hundred buckets of water from well and then shared them with the
Prophet?

27. Is there anyone here except me who was saluted by three thousand
angels in Badr?

28. Is there anyone here except me who is the first Muslim?

29. Is there anyone here except me whose house was visited by the
Prophet in the end while leaving the city and first when he came back?

30. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “You are
my first testifier and first one to meet me at the cistern of Kauthar?”

31. Is there anyone here except me whose family members were taken along
by the Prophet to Mubahila?

32. Is there anyone here except me who has paid Zakat in the state of
Ruku (genuflection) and Allah has revealed the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمْ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
الَّذِينَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاَةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ
رَاكِعُونَ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Only Allah is your Guardian and His Apostle and those who believe, those
who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow?

33. Is there anyone here except me for whom Surah Dahr was revealed?

34. Is there anyone here except me for whom Allah has revealed the
verse?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«أَجَعَلْتُمْ سِقَايَةَ الْحَاجِّ وَعِمَارَةَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ
كَمَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ وَجَاهَدَ فِي سَبِيلِ
اللّهِ لاَ يَسْتَوُونَ عِندَ اللَّهِ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***What! do you make (one who undertakes) the giving of drink to the
pilgrims and the guarding of the Sacred Mosque like him who believes in
Allah and the latter day and strives hard in Allah’s way? They are not
equal with Allah.***[^4]

35. Is there anyone here except me who was taught a thousand such
statements, of which each is the key to a thousand other statements?

36. Is there anyone here except me to whom the Prophet whispered and
made the people quiet by saying: “I haven’t whispered to him but Allah?”

37. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “You and
your Shias will be successful on Judgment Day?”

38. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “One who
thinks that he loves me and harbors malice for ‘Ali is a liar?”

39. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “If a
person loves my part he has loved me and a person who has loved me has
loved Allah”? The Prophet was then asked who his part was. The Prophet
replied: “They are ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain.”

40. Is there anyone here except me to whom the Prophet said: “You are
the best man after the prophets.”

41. Is there anyone here except me whom the Prophet has made a criterion
of right and wrong?

42. Is there anyone here except me whom the Prophet took under his
cloak?

43. Is there anyone here except me who took the food of the Prophet to
the cave of Hira?

44. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “You are
my brother, vizier and my companion from my family.”

45. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “You
preceded them in Islam, you are superior to them in actions and have
more forbearance than them.”

46. Is there anyone here except me who killed Marhab, the Jew?

47. Is there anyone here except me who uprooted the gate of Khaiber,
which used to be handled by forty persons at a time?

48. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “Abusing
him is abusing me?”

49. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “O ‘Ali!
Your destination, Paradise is linked with my destination, Paradise?”

50. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “You will
be on the right side of the divine throne on Judgment Day and Allah will
make you wear two clothes – one of them would be green and other red?”

51. Is there anyone here except me who offered prayer seven years before
Muslims started to pray?

52. Is there anyone here except me whose love is considered as love of
Prophet and whose enmity is considered as enmity of Prophet by the
Prophet himself?

53. Is there anyone here except me the preaching of whose Wilayat
(mastership) was made obligatory by Allah on the Prophet?

54. Is there anyone here except me whom the Prophet called ‘Leader of
believers’ (Yasoobil Momineen)?

55. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “I will
send to you one whom Allah has tested for faith.”?

56. Is there anyone here except me whom the Prophet made to eat the
pomegranate of Paradise?

57. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “I was
granted what I asked from the Lord and whatever I ask from the Lord for
myself, I ask it for you also.”?

58. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “You will
remain steadfast on the commandments of Allah, fulfill the promise of
the Lord, be just in distribution of wealth and have a high rank near
Allah.”?

59. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “You are
superior to this Ummah like a sun is to the moon and moon to all the
stars.”?

60. Is there anyone here, except me, whose friends are given tidings of
Paradise and enemies are given tidings of hell?

61. Is there anyone here except me for whom the Prophet said: “People
are from different trees and you and me are from a single tree.”?

62. Is there anyone here except me whom the Prophet has called, ‘Master
of Arabs’?

63. Is there anyone here except me who has hosted archangel Jibraeel?

64. Is there anyone here except me who has preached Surah Baraat?

65. Is there anyone here except me who will distribute Paradise and
Hell?

The committee members replied in negative to each question.

“When you know these virtues of mine, do not leave the right and follow
the wrong.”

However, Abdur Rahman ibn Auf and his Companions deprived Imam ‘Ali (a)
of Caliphate.

Analysis of Shura Gathering
---------------------------

You have read the views of Umar regarding Shura and its members. He has
expressed his views regarding all the members openly. Umar had selected
a committee with a limited number of members while a committee with lots
of members was required in order to find a solution of this crucial
issue.

1. Umar had restricted the functioning of this committee. He had limited
the freedom of thought in it.

2. The hands of this committee were tied up and the guards were ordered
to kill whoever objected to the majority view immediately.

3. If the committee got divided into two equal sides, the side supported
by Abdur Rahman ibn Auf was to be preferred. Why should the opinion of
Abdur Rahman ibn Auf be given preference?

4. Was the opinion of Abdur Rahman ibn Auf considered as final verdict
because he had supported Umar’s nomination by Abu Bakr?

5. Is there any proof in holy Quran and traditions, which indicates that
it is obligatory to kill one who opposes Abdur Rahman ibn Auf?

6. Allah says regarding killing of a believer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَمَن يَقْتُلْ مُؤْمِناً مُّتَعَمِّداً فَجَزَاؤُهُ جَهَنَّمُ خَالِداً
فِيهَا وَغَضِبَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَلَعَنَهُ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُ عَذَاباً
عَظِيماً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his punishment is hell;
he shall abide in it, and Allah will send His wrath on him and curse him
and prepare for him a painful chastisement.***[^5]

If the chastisement of a common believer is such, what will be the
punishment of killing a companion of the Prophet and those Companions
with whom the Prophet was pleased till he passed away, as Umar himself
admitted?

7. Ahl al-Sunnah often say that the Prophet said: “My Companions are
like stars. You will be guided if you follow any of them.”

Wasn’t this tradition in the mind of Umar and that dispute between them
was not harmful for Ummah? Why did he order killing of those stars who
opposed?

8. Is it legal to kill a person if he has a different opinion in any
religion or society of the world?

9. Was Abdur Rahman ibn Auf a criterion of right and wrong that it was
made obligatory to severe the head of a person who opposed him?

10. Umar believed till the time of his death that appointment of Caliph
was not Prophetic Practice (*Sunnah*) and that it was the practice of
Abu Bakr to appoint a Caliph. Why did he leave the Prophetic Practice
and follow the practice of Abu Bakr?

11. The Quran has ordered us to follow the Prophet and to keep away from
deviating from his path. In spite of this, what were the reasons,
because of which they did not follow the Prophet’s way?

12. Why was Caliphate limited to six persons only, and why no capable
person could be found in the entire Muslim Ummah?

13. It is said that the Prophet was pleased with all of them when he
passed away. It is difficult to accept this statement as Umar himself
said regarding Talha ibn Ubaidullah: “The Prophet remained angry with
you for one of your statements till he passed away.” When such people
were included in the committee, how can it be said that they were
selected because of the pleasure of the Prophet?

14. Even if we suppose that the Prophet was pleased with all of them,
doesn’t it mean that the Prophet was angry with the entire Ummah with
the exception of these six?

15. If the answer is no, what can be the reason for limiting the
Caliphate to six persons when the Prophet was pleased with thousands of
people?

16. Umar accepted that Saeed ibn Amr ibn Nufayl was eligible for
Caliphate. Then why wasn’t he included in the committee?

17. The second Caliph remarked that ‘Ali was humorous. Did anyone else
also make such a remark?

18. Was Umar the only person to examine the life of Imam ‘Ali (a)? Was
the life of Imam ‘Ali (a) away from the view of others?

If not, then why didn’t others notice this flaw?

We should also remember these words of Ibn Abbas: “‘Ali (a) so awe
inspiring that we could not begin conversation with him out of fear.”

19. Was the service to Islam done by all members of the committee
equally? If not, why Umar made them stand in a single row?

20. Were not some members related to each other?

21. If yes, could they support their relative in an unfair manner or
not?

22. Isn’t it a fact that Talha was from Abu Bakr’s tribe, Bani Tameem,
which had sour relations with Imam ‘Ali (a)?

23. Saad ibn Abi Waqqas and Abdur Rahman ibn Auf belonged to Bani Zahra
and they had very close relations with Bani Umayyah. Hamna bint Sufyan
was Saad ibn Abi Waqqas’ mother and a close relative of Uthman. Could it
then be expected that Saad ibn Abi Waqqas would leave his relatives and
support ‘Ali for Caliphate? Umme Kulthum bint Uqbah was the wife of
Abdur Rahman ibn Auf. She was Uthman’s sister. Could it be expected that
Abdur Rahman ibn Auf would leave his brother-in-law and support someone
else in this crucial matter?

24. Even if we consider the remarks of Umar regarding Imam ‘Ali (a)
correct, is it fair to deny Caliphate to a person only because of his
humor?

25. We have read the narration of the historian, Tabari that Umar had
said that ‘Ali will guide people to the right path. If this statement is
correct what was the reason for making the selection of ‘Ali doubtful?
Also the promptness shown in the meeting of Shura is also worth
noticing.

26. Abdur Rahman showed his cunning and backed off from Caliphate so
that no one can object to him. The point is whether this decision was a
spontaneous or a preplanned one?

27. Didn’t Abdur Rahman appoint his near relative after backing off?

28. Wasn’t the appointment of Uthman because of family relations?

29. Abdur Rahman ibn Auf had put forward three conditions for Caliphate
viz. following Quran, the Prophetic Practice and practice of the two
Shaykhs (Abu Bakr and Umar). Why was the practice of two Shaykhs
included as a condition in addition to Quran and Prophetic Practice?

30. If the practice of two Shaykhs is a part of holy Quran and Prophetic
Practice (*Sunnah*) why was it mentioned separately?

31. If it is not a part of Quran and Prophetic Practice (*Sunnah*) why
was it included as a condition for Caliphate?

32. There are numerous such incidents in books of History where the
stand of Abu Bakr was different from that of Umar. Now if their
successors were to follow their practice how would they decide the
issues in which there was difference between the practices of the two?
Whose practice should one prefer in such issues? There are numerous
incidents where the practice of Umar was different from that of the
Prophet.

Some Personal Exertions of Umar
-------------------------------

1. The Prophet and Abu Bakr used to give equal grants to all Muslims.
Even Abu Bakr did not differentiate between those who were first in
accepting Islam and common Muslims. However Umar did exactly opposite of
this and stopped giving equal grants to all Muslims. He fixed different
amounts for different people.[^6]

Umar had a strange nature. At times he used to get angry with Islam and
at other times he used to love abusive language. Hence his character was
not at all fit for Caliphate. The pages of History are full of incidents
depicting Umar’s harsh nature.

1. A person came to him and said: “So and so person has done injustice
to me. Please give me justice.”

Umar whipped him hard and said: “When Umar is idle, you don’t come. When
he is busy with affairs of Muslims, you come here with your complains!”

The person went away groaning in pain. After sometime Umar summoned him
again and handed him the whip and said: “Take revenge from me.”

The person said: “I forgive you for the sake of Allah and for your
sake.”

Umar said: “Forgive me either for the sake of Allah or for my sake.”

The person said: “I forgive you for the sake of Allah.”

Umar said: “Now you can go.”[^7]

The justice of Farooq was affiliated to his harsh nature where
petitioners sometimes had to bear punishment instead of getting justice.

2. Umar had made Noman ibn Adi ibn Nufaila the governor of Meesan
province. A few days later, someone recited a poem to Umar praising
Noman. Umar wrote to Noman saying that he has taken the post of latter
back and asked him to return soon.

He came back and said: “By Allah! I never touched wine or women. It was
just a poetic effect in those lines.”

Umar said: “That is right, but you will not work for my government
henceforth.”

3. A person from Quraish was appointed as governor by Umar. Umar got to
hear a stanza of a poem written in his praise as follows:

“Make me take a sip such that my bones become soaked and make Ibn Hisham
have a cupful of it.”

Umar summoned him after hearing these lines. The poet was very crafty.
Umar asked whether he had written those lines.

He answered in affirmative and asked whether he had heard the lines
following it. Umar replied in negative. Then the poet recited the lines:

“Make me drink honey mixed in rainwater for I do not like to drink
wine.”

Umar was impressed with his presence of mind and asked him to continue
with his duties.

4. Umar asked a few questions from a governor regarding the holy Quran
and Shariah. The governor gave satisfying answers and Umar asked him to
continue with his duties. While returning he said: “I had a dream,
please interpret it for me.” Umar asked him to narrate his dream. He
said: “I saw the sun and moon fighting each other. They had an army
each.” Umar asked: “From which side did you participate?” He said that
he had participated from the side of moon.

Umar said: “I strip you of your post for Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ آيَتَيْنِ فَمَحَوْنَا آيَةَ
اللَّيْلِ وَجَعَلْنَا آيَةَ النَّهَارِ مُبْصِرَةً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We have made the night and the day two signs, then We have made
the sign of the night to pass away and We have made the sign of the day
manifest.***[^8]

5. A peace treaty was signed between the Prophet and Suhail ibn Amr at
Hudaybiya. One of the conditions was: If a person from Mecca comes to
Muslims, they would return him and if a person from Muslims comes to
Mecca, he would not be returned.

Umar got angry when the Prophet accepted this condition. He went to Abu
Bakr and protested there. Then he came and sat near the Prophet and told
him: “Why do you want to disgrace us?”

The Prophet said that he was Allah’s Messenger and would not disobey
Allah.

Umar became infuriated and got up from there saying: “By Allah! If my
supporters had been present I would not have borne this disgrace.”[^9]

Once Umar was walking in the city along with Abdur Rahman ibn Auf at
night when he saw some people drinking wine. He told Abdur Rahman: “I
know them.” He summoned them in the morning and asked: “Why were you
drinking wine at night?”

One of them asked: “Who told you?”

Umar said: “I saw you drinking wine at night.” The person asked: “Didn’t
Allah order you to keep away from spying?” Umar forgave him.

Inconsistency between the practice of the Prophet and Umar
----------------------------------------------------------

We have already discussed the difference of opinion of Umar in
distributing grants and at the time of the treaty of Hudaybiya. Only a
handful of contradictions are mentioned here otherwise:

We need a ship to sail in this boundless sea.

1. The Prophet made an agreement with Jews of Khaiber after the battle
that they would look after Khaiber orchards and have fifty percent share
in the harvest. This practice continued during the Prophet’s and Abu
Bakr’s time. Umar took away these orchards and land, and exiled all of
them.

2. The Prophet had conquered the valley of Qura and had signed a similar
agreement with Jews of that place.

Umar exiled all of them to Syria during the time of his Caliphate and
grabbed all their lands.[^10]

Mutual differences between the practice of Abu Bakr and Umar
------------------------------------------------------------

We have already discussed a few differences in previous sections. Some
more contradictions are mentioned here as examples. We ask the scholars
that when there were differences in the practice of Abu Bakr and Umar,
how could one follow the practice of ‘the two Shaykhs’? How could it be
made a condition for Caliphate?

1. Uyyana ibn Husn and Iqra ibn Hubais went to Abu Bakr and said: “O
Caliph of Prophet! We have barren land with us. It is not possible to
cultivate it. If you give us fertile land we will work hard and benefit
from it.”[^11]

Abu Bakr asked the opinion of the people gathered there. The people
approved the decision of giving them the land. Abu Bakr granted him the
land and asked the witnesses to sign the papers. However Umar was not
present at that time. Umar met them on the way and asked what those
papers were? They said that they were papers of the land granted to
them. Umar took the papers from them and tore them up saying: “The
period during which the Prophet used to attract you was a disgrace for
Islam. Today Islam has progressed by the grace of Allah and there is no
need to win your hearts now!”

They came back to Abu Bakr and complained about Umar’s behavior. By that
time Umar had reached the place and he asked Abu Bakr angrily: “Is the
land given to these people your personal property or that of all
Muslims?”

Abu Bakr said: “It is the property of all Muslims.” Umar asked: “Then
why did you give it to them without the permission of the entire Muslim
Ummah?” Abu Bakr said that he had taken the opinion of the people
assembled there before granting them the land.

Umar asked: “Is every Muslim eligible to give the right advice?”[^12]

2. The difference between the practice of Abu Bakr and Umar can be made
explicit in the incident of Malik ibn Nuwairah

Incident of Malik ibn Nuwairah
------------------------------

It is the saddest event in the history of Islam and Khalid ibn Walid
committed many social and religious blunders in it.

1. Khalid ibn Walid attacked Malik ibn Nuwairah without the Caliph’s
permission.

2. The act of Khalid was wrong according to Shariah.

3. Khalid ordered the killing of Malik in words which can be compared to
‘treachery’, which is strictly prohibited in Islam.

4. Khalid married Malik’s widow even before his dead body was laid to
rest. The law of chastity and Islamic Shariah do not permit this.
However Abu Bakr forgave all his crimes. On the other hand, Umar
disliked this act of Khalid. When he was appointed as Caliph, he
dismissed Khalid. This incident can be summarized as follows:

Ibn Athir writes: When Khalid became free of fighting Fuzara, Asad and
Bani Tai, he turned to Batah. Malik ibn Nuwairah and his clan lived in
this area. Some followers of Khalid backed off and said that the Caliph
had not ordered them to attack. They said that the Caliph had ordered
them that when they were free from Buzakha; they should wait for the
next order. Khalid told them: “I am your leader and Malik has been
trapped by me. If you don’t want to come I would take the army of
Emigrants along with me.”

Abu Bakr had advised his army to recite the call for prayer (*Adhan*) at
any place they halt. If the opponents also do the same, do not trouble
them. If they do not say Adhan they should be attacked. If they say
Adhan they should be asked about Zakat. If they say that Zakat is
obligatory, do not trouble them. If they say otherwise, attack them.

Khalid reached this place along with his army and recited the call for
prayer (*Adhan*). The tribe of Malik also said the Adhan in reply. This
was testified by Abu Qatadah, a soldier of Khalid.

Khalid’s army attacked the Muslims, swords were unsheathed and battle
began from both the sides. The people of Malik’s tribe asked the
attackers: “Who are you?” The attackers replied: “We are Muslims.” The
people of Malik’s tribe said: “We are also Muslims. Then why should we
fight?” Khalid’s army asked them to put their weapons down and the
people of Malik’s tribe did so. Then Khalid ordered his army to arrest
all the people of Malik’s tribe and they were summoned. Malik ibn
Nuwairah was also brought along. His wife came to meet him in Khalid’s
court. She was a beautiful woman and Khalid looked at her greedily.
Malik told his wife: “If you hadn’t come, we would have been saved. Now
Khalid has seen you with his greedy eyes and I know that he would kill
me in order to acquire you.”

It was a cold and a dark night and the prisoners were shivering. Khalid
signaled a caller and the latter called out loudly: “Warm up your
prisoners!” but as translated according to the dictionary of Bani
Kinana, it meant “Kill your prisoners.” Khalid’s soldiers got up and
killed all the pious Muslims of that tribe.

The bodies of the martyred were still lying on the ground that Khalid
married Malik’s widow. On seeing this, Abu Qatadah came to Medina and
informed Abu Bakr of this incident. Upon this, Umar said: “The sword of
Khalid has become extravagant. He should be dismissed and punished
severely.”

Abu Bakr said: “He misinterpreted and committed a mistake. Khalid is
‘the sword of Allah’. Do not object to Khalid.” Khalid came to Medina
after a few days and asked Abu Bakr to forgive him. Abu Bakr forgave him
and legitimized his marriage.

Malik’s brother, Mutammam ibn Nuwairah came to Abu Bakr and said: “My
brother was martyred by Khalid and my people were brought to Medina
unlawfully. I want Khalid to be punished as per Shariah and the
prisoners should be released.”

Abu Bakr released the prisoners immediately and gave compensation of
Malik’s death from Muslim treasury instead of punishing Khalid.

Mutammam ibn Nuwairah always recited elegies in the memory of his
brother. His elegies have a great literary value in Arabic literature
even today.[^13]

Analysis of the Incident of Malik
---------------------------------

1. The attack was carried out without the Caliph’s permission.

2. The soldiers were ordered by Caliph that they should say Adhan and if
the opponents also recited Adhan, they should not fight. Then they were
supposed to ask regarding Zakat. If the opponents considered it
obligatory, they should not be troubled.

Then what was the fault of Malik and his tribe? They said Adhan and
offered prayer as witnessed by Abu Qatadah, a companion of Prophet. In
spite of this, they were martyred. Why so?

3. Khalid had used an ambiguous statement to order their killing and it
meant, “Warm up your prisoners”, but according to the parlance of Bani
Kinana, it meant: “Kill your prisoners!” Khalid thought that he would
order the killing of prisoners by this statement. However if the Caliph
gets angry he would say that he had ordered them to be warmed up to save
himself. He could then say that he did not order killing of prisoners
and that the soldiers misinterpreted his words. He could thus prove his
innocence in the whole incident.

4. If Khalid had doubted their faith even after seeing them praying and
saying Adhan he should have sent them to Medina to the Caliph. Who had
given him the right to eliminate them?

5. The body of the husband lay while Khalid married the widow. This act
of Khalid is worth condemnation at all costs. It is permitted neither by
Islam nor by human nature!

6. Umar considered Khalid guilty and worthy of severe punishment. Then
why did Abu Bakr forgive such a grave crime of Khalid?

7. Even Khalid had confessed his crime in front of the Caliph and asked
for forgiveness, but the Caliph forgave him. Is there any clause in
Islamic Shariah, which states that if a person confesses his guilt in
front of the Caliph and pleads mercy, he should be exempted from legal
penalty?

8. Is personal exertion (Ijtihaad) allowed in the presence of Express
Text (*Nass*)?

This was the reason why Imam ‘Ali (a) had refused to follow the practice
of Abu Bakr and Umar.

9. The act of Abu Bakr also proves that Khalid was guilty because he
immediately released the prisoners and paid compensation of Malik’s
death from Muslim treasury. We do not understand why the treasury of
Muslims was made to bear the burden of Khalid’s sin? After this
incident, Abu Qatadah swore that he would not join Khalid’s army. He
returned to Medina after witnessing this oppression and related the
entire incident to Abu Bakr. He said that he had stopped Khalid from
killing Malik but Khalid did not heed his words. He accepted the
suggestions of those Bedouins who had no other intention except to
plunder.

After hearing Abu Qatadah, Umar also said that it is obligatory to
punish Khalid.[^14] When Khalid returned to Medina, Umar told him: “O
enemy of your own life! You attacked a Muslim and killed him unlawfully
and took his wife away. This is clear fornication. By Allah! We would
stone you to death.”

Historians have written that when Umar came to power, he gathered the
surviving members of Malik’s family and ordered Muslims to return their
plundered belongings as soon as possible. He even returned those women
who were sold as slave-girls and some of them were even pregnant. Those
women were returned to their previous husbands.

Also Khalid is the same person who murdered Saad ibn Ubadah in Syria at
night and then spread rumors that he was killed by Jinns.

Khalid had committed a similar blunder during the Prophet’s lifetime.
The Prophet prayed: “O Lord! I am aloof from this act of Khalid.”

Because of these feats, Khalid was dismissed by Umar from the post of
commander.

Ibn Athir writes that as soon as Umar came to power, he wrote to his
commander, Abu Ubaidah and ordered him to take charge of Khalid’s army.
He dismissed Khalid and ordered Abu Ubaidah to take the turban off
Khalid’s head and distribute his wealth.[^15]

We can conclude from the above incidents that the practice of Abu Bakr
and Umar was not consistent as regards religion and the world. Hence
Imam ‘Ali (a) had refused to follow it, because he knew that the basis
of Islamic rule is Quran and Prophetic Sunnah and nothing else was
required. ‘Ali was not like the modern-day politician who is ready to
accept any condition for the sake of gaining power.

On the other hand, Uthman accepted all conditions but History proves
that he neither followed the Quran and Prophetic Practice (*Sunnah*) nor
the practice of Two Shaykhs (Abu Bakr and Umar).

Yet Another (third) Face of Saqifah Uthman ibn Affan
----------------------------------------------------

“Till the third man of these people stood up with heaving breasts
between his dung and fodder. With him his children of his grand-father,
(Umayyah) also stood up swallowing up Allah’s wealth like a camel
devouring the foliage of spring, till his rope broke down, his actions
finished him and his gluttony brought him down prostrate.

At that moment, nothing took me by surprise, but the crowd of people
rushing to me. It advanced towards me from every side like the mane of
the hyena; so much so that Hasan and Husayn were getting crushed and
both the ends of my shoulder garment were torn. They collected around me
like the herd of sheep and goats. When I took up the reins of
government, one party broke away and another turned disobedient while
the rest began acting wrongfully as if they had not heard the word of
Allah saying:

***“That abode in the hereafter, We assign it for those who intend not
to exult themselves in the earth, nor (to make) mischief (therein); and
the end is (best) for the pious ones.”***[^16]

Yes, by Allah, they had heard it and understood it but the world
appeared glittering in their eyes and its embellishments seduced them.
Behold, by Him who split the grain (to grow) and created living beings,
if people had not come to me and supporters had not exhausted the
argument and if there had been no pledge of Allah with the learned to
the effect that they should not acquiesce in the gluttony of the
oppressor and the hunger of the oppressed, I would have cast the rope of
Caliphate on its own shoulders, and would have given the last one the
same treatment as to the first one. Then you would have seen that in my
view this world of yours is no better than the sneezing of a goat.”[^17]

Uthman came to power after the death of Umar due to the special favor of
Abdur Rahman ibn Auf.

As soon as he came to power, he appointed his relatives, Bani Umayyah
and Bani Muit to crucial posts. Most of them had fought with the Prophet
and Islam earlier. Their hearts were filled with the teachings of
Umayyah ibn Abdus Shams, Harb, Abu Sufyan and Muawiyah instead of
Islamic teachings.

Uthman took the services of the enemies of Islam like Marwan ibn Hakam
etc. in Islamic government. In this way teachings of Islam were diluted.

The Umayyad rule had sowed the seeds of crime and hypocrisy. People’s
greed for wealth increased during their rule. Mutual hatred and jealousy
between different tribes and clans appeared in place of Islamic ideas of
rewarding the right and punishing evil.

I do not want to discuss the abominable effects of Umayyad rule in
Arabia. I would limit the discussion to the allegiance of Uthman to
expose the favors done to Bani Umayyah and because of these favors, this
unknown clan esteemed itself. I would like to discuss how they cleared
their way for future? It is necessary to discuss in brief, Bani
Umayyah’s enmity with Islam.

Bani Umayyah’s enmity with Islam Battle of Badr
-----------------------------------------------

The Battle of Badr is a talking picture of Bani Umayyah’s enmity with
Islam. Hanzala ibn Abi Sufyan ibn Harb ibn Umayyah ibn Abdush Shams, the
brother of Muawiyah was killed in this battle.

Among the near relatives of Uthman, present in Badr were Aas ibn Saeed
ibn Aas, Ubaidah ibn Saeed ibn Aas, Walid ibn Uqbah ibn Rubai ibn Abdush
Shams, the uncle of Muawiyah ibn Abi Sufyan and the brother of his
mother, Hind. Shaybah ibn Rubai ibn Abdush Shams, Uqbah ibn Muit who was
the step-father of Uthman. All these Umayyads were killed in the battle.
Also many Umayyads were held captives. Abul Aas ibn Rubai ibn Abdul Uzza
ibn Abdush Shams and Harth ibn Wajza ibn Abi Umar ibn Umayyah ibn Abdush
Shams topped the list. Muawiyah’s brother, Amr ibn Abi Sufyan, the
son-in-law of Uqbah ibn Abi Muit was also one of the captives.

A companion of Abu Sufyan advised him to pay ransom for the release of
his son. Abu Sufyan said: “Should the people of my household be killed
and we pay ransom also? One of my sons, Hanzala is killed and now should
I strengthen Muhammad economically by paying ransom for my second son?
Never mind, I will not pay the ransom.” A Muslim named Saad ibn Noman
ibn Akala had come along with his son for Umrah. Abu Sufyan held them
captive in place of his son. He said that he would pay the ransom of his
son from the money he gets from Muslims for the release of this person.
The couplets of Abu Sufyan are famous in this regard.

The maternal grandfather of Muawiyah was killed in the battle of Badr.
His daughter, Muawiyah’s mother, Hind used to sing the following elegy
in the memory of her late father.

Today world is rotating against us and there is no way for us to control
this rotation.

O Abu Sufyan! Take my message to the master. If I meet him some day I
would condemn him.

Bani Umayyah had suffered huge losses of life and wealth in the Battle
of Badr. As a result, the flames of hatred shot up in their hearts. They
were always on a lookout to revenge Badr. Abu Sufyan was among the most
deadly enemies of the Prophet. He mobilized infidels of Quraish for a
new battle and appointed four representatives to join other Arabs with
him. Amr ibn Aas was one of them. Abu Sufyan took an army of infidels
with him for the Battle of Uhad. He had taken women along with him to
cheer the soldiers. Muawiyah’s mother, Hind, Khalid ibn Walid’s sister,
Fatima bint Walid and wife of Amr ibn Aas, Raita bint Munabbah were also
included. These women cheered the soldiers by playing tambourine and
they sang elegies for the dead.

When Hind passed by Wahshi, she told him: “O Abu Dusma! Calm down my
emotions and I would set you free.”

Khalid ibn Walid was leading a cavalry wing. Abu Sufyan was carrying the
statues of Laat and Uzza. Hind followed him singing songs to the tune of
tambourine. Some lines are quoted as follows:

We are the daughters of the stars. We walk on soft carpets. If you fight
today we would hug you and spread the carpet for you. If you turn your
backs today we would leave you and would not be related to you in any
way.

Amr ibn Aas also sang martial songs in the Battle of Badr and cheered
the infidels.

The tables turned in the Battle of Uhad because of the blunder of Muslim
archers. Khalid ibn Walid attacked the Muslim army. Muslim soldiers
stumbled, rows were torn apart and many brave Muslims were martyred.
Amir Hamza, the Prophet’s uncle was one of them.

After the battle, Muawiyah’s mother misbehaved with the bodies of
martyrs. She ordered the ears and nose of the martyrs to be cut off and
wore a garland made of them. Still the fire of revenge in her heart did
not calm down and she tore apart Hamza’s chest and chewed at his liver.
She climbed a mountain and said: “Today we have taken revenge of Badr.
Today I have taken revenge of my father, brother and uncle.”

Halis ibn Zuban narrates that he saw Abu Sufyan in Uhad. He was hitting
the body of martyr Hamza and saying: “Enjoy the taste of my beatings.”

While returning, Abu Sufyan announced: “Next year, we would fight with
you at the place of Badr once again.”

After this, Abu Sufyan tried to wipe out Islam and the Messenger of
Islam by all possible means. As a result of Abu Sufyan’s efforts, the
Battle of the Ditch (Khandaq) was fought. Abu Sufyan conspired with the
Jews of Medina to destroy the Muslim center of holy Medina.

Abu Sufyan was the one to send Amr ibn Aas and Abdullah ibn Abi Rubai as
representatives to King Negus to get the migrants of Abyssinia expelled.

Finally when Umayyads failed to wipe out Islam by all means, they
devised another plan to do so. They thought that they should become
Muslims and gain dual benefits. Firstly, they could save their lives and
secondly they would become strong enough to hit Islam with a strong
blow. According to their plan, if it was not possible to take revenge
from Islam from outside they should try to harm Islam and the Messenger
of Islam from inside. Accordingly they put their plan into action at the
time of the conquest of Mecca.

Faith of the Umayyads
---------------------

The leader of Meccan infidels became a Muslim after the conquest of
Mecca. The incident is narrated as when the Prophet reached the
outskirts of Mecca with a huge army, Quraish was not prepared for the
attack. Abu Sufyan petitioned Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle, to take him to
the Prophet. When Abbas took him to the Prophet, the latter said: “O Abu
Sufyan! Hasn’t the time come for you to testify to the oneness of
Allah?”

Abu Sufyan replied: “May my parents be sacrificed for you! I have
realized today that if these idols were gods, they would have helped us
out.” After that, the Prophet said: “Woe unto you! Hasn’t the time come
for you to testify to my prophethood?”

Abu Sufyan replied: “May my parents be sacrificed for you! You are such
a respectful and kind person. I do not have a doubt regarding this in my
heart.”[^18]

After accepting Islam, Abu Sufyan apparently controlled his emotions of
infidelity. He stopped worshipping idols in public and accepted the new
religion. However, at times, he used to express his hidden feelings
unintentionally.

After the conquest of Mecca, a person named Harth ibn Hisham told Abu
Sufyan: “If I had considered Muhammad a Messenger, I would have followed
him sincerely.” Abu Sufyan told him: “I don’t want to say anything
because the walls also have ears. If I say anything now, this stone will
also testify against me.”[^19]

The above discussion proves that Abu Sufyan was a hypocrite. If he were
a true Muslim, he would have answered back the infidel.

Abu Sufyan’s wife, Hind also accepted Islam under compulsion after the
conquest of Mecca. When the Prophet took allegiance from women, he said:
“Promise me that you would not kill your children.” Upon this, Hind
said: “We raised them and you killed them in Badr.” The Prophet said:
“Promise me that you won’t commit fornication.” Hind said: “Does a free
woman commit fornication?” When the Prophet heard her instant replies,
he looked at Abbas and smiled.

The like of Bani Umayyah, as regards enmity with Islam, is not found
anywhere. Uthman was from Bani Umayyah and the members of this clan,
young and old were filled with enmity of Islam. Marwan’s father, Hakam
used to make fun of the Prophet by mimicking him and he was exiled from
Medina to Taif.

Balazari writes: Hakam ibn Umayyah was the uncle of Uthman. He was the
Prophet’s neighbor during the period of ignorance. He was the worst
neighbor of the Prophet. He used to trouble the Prophet a lot even after
accepting Islam and he made fun of the Prophet at his back by mimicking
him.

Once the Prophet was sitting in the house of one of his wives. He saw
that person mimicking him. He came out and said: “He and his children
shall not live with me.” The Prophet exiled him to Taif along with his
children. When Uthman came to power, he called his uncle back to
Medina.[^20]

Ibn Abi Sarah was a trusted friend of Uthman. He initially acted as a
scribe of revelation, but when he made distortions, the Prophet
announced that he should be compulsorily killed. Walid ibn Abi Muit, the
step-brother of Uthman held a high status during Uthman’s reign. He was
sent to Bani Mustaliq to collect taxes. He went to this tribe and
returned without meeting its members. He told the Prophet that those
people wanted to kill him. He said: “Fortunately, I escaped alive from
there.”

The Prophet had intended to attack them.

During this time, a respectable person from this tribe came to the
Prophet and said: “You representative had come to us. When we came to
know of his arrival, we came forward to welcome him but he returned
without meeting us.”

Almighty Allah revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِن جَاءكُمْ فَاسِقٌ بِنَبَأٍ
فَتَبَيَّنُوا أَن تُصِيبُوا قَوْماً بِجَهَالَةٍ فَتُصْبِحُوا عَلَى مَا
فَعَلْتُمْ نَادِمِينَ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! If an evil-doer comes to you with a report, look
carefully into it,*** ***lest you harm a people in ignorance, then be
sorry for what you have done.***[^21]

Almighty Allah has called the step-brother of Uthman a ‘hypocrite’ in
holy Quran.

Abu Sufyan and his followers were called ‘Tulqa’ (freed slaves) by other
Muslims. Muslims used to say regarding Muawiyah: “He is the son of the
leader of infidels, Abu Sufyan and a dear one of Hind, the
liver-eater.”[^22]

Zubair ibn Bakr narrates from Mughaira ibn Shoba: “One day Umar asked
me: Have you ever seen something with a single eye?” I said: “No.”

Umar said: “By Allah! Bani Umayyah would make Islam one-eyed like you.
Then they would make Islam completely blind. No one would know from
where Islam came and where it went away.”

Bukhari writes in *Sahih:* A person asked the Prophet: “Would we be
asked about the acts we performed during the period of ignorance?”

The Prophet said: A person who has performed good deeds after accepting
Islam will not be asked about his previous deeds. If a person commits
bad deeds even after accepting Islam, he will be asked about his
previous as well as new deeds.[^23] The policy of Uthman was purely
based on nepotism. He had opened the treasury of Muslims to Bani
Umayyah.

Favors Granted to Bani Umayyah
------------------------------

Uthman gave two hundred thousand dinars to Marwan ibn Hakam. He had
given two hundred thousand dinars to Ayesha, the daughter of Marwan as
wedding gift. Also he bestowed many properties to Marwan.

The situation worsened so much that the treasurer of Muslim treasury
resigned. The above mentioned grant was one of the smallest. As soon as
he came to power, he granted a hundred thousand dirhams to Abu
Sufyan.[^24]

He gave a slip of a hefty amount to one of his relatives and sent him to
the treasurer. The treasurer was an honest man. He refused to withdraw
such a huge amount. Uthman asked the treasurer again and again to grant
the amount to that person but the treasurer refused to budge.

Uthman condemned him saying: “What is your status here? You are just a
treasurer.” He replied: “I am the treasurer of the wealth of Muslims and
not your personal treasurer.” Then he brought the keys of the treasury
and placed them on the Prophet’s pulpit.[^25]

Balazari narrates this incident in detail as follows: Abdullah ibn Arqam
was the treasurer of the Muslim treasury. Uthman wanted to withdraw an
amount of a hundred thousand dirhams. Abdullah ibn Usaid ibn Abil Aas
came to Uthman from Mecca at that moment. Uthman granted Abdullah three
hundred thousand dirhams and a hundred thousand dirhams to each of his
Companions.

The treasurer refused to grant the said amount. Uthman said: “You are
the treasurer of our treasury. You don’t have any right to refuse.”

The treasurer said: “I am the treasurer of the wealth of Muslims and not
your personal treasurer. I submit my resignation now.” He took the keys
of treasury and placed them on the pulpit of the Prophet and resigned
from his job.

Uthman granted him three hundred thousand dirhams in order to please
him, but the latter rejected it.

Incidents of Uthman’s generosity became public and people developed
hatred against him as a result of it. After some days, a rumor
circulated that an expensive necklace present in the Muslim treasury was
gifted to a relative by Uthman. People felt bad and protested against
Uthman much. Uthman became angry at this protest and announced: “We
would meet our expenses from Muslim treasury only and don’t care about
any person’s jealousy.” Ammar ibn Yasir said: “By Allah, I am not
pleased with this act.”

Uthman said: “O immoral man! How dare you challenge me?” Then he ordered
the police to arrest him.

Ammar was arrested and beaten up so badly that he fell down unconscious.
He was taken to the room of Lady Umme Salma. He laid there unconscious
for the entire day and missed his Zuhr, Asr and Maghrib prayers. When he
regained consciousness, he performed ablutions and offered prayer and
said: “Praise be to Allah! For the first time in my life, I have been
beaten up for the sake of Allah’s religion.”

Lady Umme Salma or Ayesha took out the dress and slipper of the Prophet
and told the people in the mosque: “O People! These are the dress and
slippers of the Prophet. This dress has not even become old and you have
changed his practice (*Sunnah*).”

Uthman had to bear shame as a result of this incident and he could not
afford a reply.[^26]

If this incident is authentic, it means that Uthman has committed two
mistakes:

1. Bani Umayyah was granted the wealth of Muslims in an unlawful manner.

2. A great companion of the Prophet was made to face severe atrocities.

Uthman’s generosity was beyond compare. He permitted Marwan ibn Hakam to
use all the Khums money collected from Africa region and granted three
hundred thousand dirhams to his son, Harith.

He gave three hundred thousand dirhams to Abdullah ibn Khalid ibn Usaid
Amawi and gave a hundred thousand dirhams to each person present in his
delegation.

He allotted six hundred thousand dirhams to Zubair ibn Awwam.

He bestowed a hundred thousand dirhams to Talha ibn Ubaidullah.

He gifted a hundred thousand dirhams to Saeed ibn Aas.

Saeed ibn Aas married off his four daughters. Each daughter was granted
a hundred thousand dirhams from Muslim treasury. Balazari writes about
these incidents in the following words: Muslim army conquered Africa in
27 A.H. and got a lot of wealth as war booty. The Khums (one-fifth part)
of this wealth was given to Marwan ibn Hakam. Also Africa was conquered
under the leadership of Abdullah ibn Saad ibn Abi Sarah who was a
foster-brother of Uthman. The commander bought all the Khums in return
of a hundred thousand dirhams. Later on, he requested Uthman to write
off this debt and the latter obliged him.

The camels of Zakat were brought to Medina. Uthman gave all the camels
to Harith ibn Hakam ibn Abil Aas.

Uthman appointed Hakam ibn Aas to collect Zakat from Bani Qazaya. He
collected three hundred thousand from them. This entire amount was given
to Hakam.

Harith ibn Hakam ibn Abil Aas was given three hundred thousand dirhams.

Zaid ibn Thabit Ansari was given a hundred thousand dirhams.

Abu Zar could not bear to see this and he recited the following verse of
holy Quran in public:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«وَالَّذِينَ يَكْنِزُونَ الذَّهَبَ وَالْفِضَّةَ وَلاَ يُنفِقُونَهَا
فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ فَبَشِّرْهُم بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ. يَوْمَ يُحْمَى
عَلَيْهَا فِي نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ فَتُكْوَى بِهَا جِبَاهُهُمْ وَجُنوبُهُمْ
وَظُهُورُهُمْ هَـذَا مَا كَنَزْتُمْ لأَنفُسِكُمْ فَذُوقُواْ مَا
كُنتُمْ تَكْنِزُونَ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(As for) those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it in
Allah’s way, announce to them a painful chastisement, On the day when it
shall be heated in the fire of hell, then their foreheads and their
sides and their backs shall be branded with it; this is what you hoarded
up for yourselves, therefore taste what you hoarded.***[^27]

Marwan complained to Uthman about this act of Abu Zar. Uthman ordered
Abu Zar to desist from that act.

Abu Zar said: “Does Uthman want me to desist from reciting the Book of
Allah? By Allah! I can bear the displeasure of Uthman for the sake of
Allah.”

You have seen the economic policy of Uthman. Pause for a moment here,
then read about the economic policy of Imam ‘Ali (a) as opposed to this.

Monetary Policy of Imam ‘Ali
----------------------------

The Incident of Aqeel is sufficient to prove the justice of Imam ‘Ali
(a).

This incident was narrated by Aqeel himself in the court of Muawiyah ibn
Abi Sufyan when he reached there after running away from Imam ‘Ali’s
justice. He said: “I was involved in severe debts. So I took my children
to my brother, ‘Ali. The poverty was visible on the faces of my children
and their faces had become red with hunger.

My brother, ‘Ali asked me to come in the evening. I came to him in the
evening along with my son. He kept the child away from me and called me
near him. I thought that he would give me a bag full of wealth but he
caught my hand and kept it over red hot iron. I fell down on my back
like a bull is thrown on the ground by the butcher.”[^28]

This incident is narrated by Imam ‘Ali (a) himself in one of his
sermons:

“By Allah, I certainly saw (my brother) Aqeel fallen in destitution and
he asked me a saa (about three kilograms in weight) out of your (share
of) wheat, and I also saw his children with disheveled hair and a dusty
countenance due to starvation, as though their faces had been blackened
by indigo. He came to me several times and repeated his request to me
again and again. I heard him, and he thought I would sell my faith to
him and follow his tread leaving my own way.

Then I (just) heated a piece of iron and took it near his body so that
he might take a lesson from it, then he cried as a person in protracted
illness cries with pain and he was about to get burnt with its branding.
Then I said to him, ‘Moaning women may moan over you, O’ Aqeel. Do you
cry on account of this (heated) iron which has been made by a man for
fun while you are driving me towards the fire which Allah, the Powerful,
has prepared for (a manifestation of) His wrath? Should you cry from
pain, but I should not cry from the flames?’”[^29]

The life of Imam ‘Ali (a) is a perfect example of truthfulness and
respect of human life.

We know that Imam ‘Ali (a) hated Khawarij very much. He considered them
misguided. Then also his behavior with them is described as good. It is
described in the words of Dr. Taha Husayn in the following incident:

Harith ibn Rashid Sami Khariji came to Imam ‘Ali (a) and said: “By
Allah! I would neither obey you nor offer prayer behind you.” Imam ‘Ali
(a) neither showed his displeasure nor did he punish him. Imam ‘Ali (a)
offered him to debate with him and said: “Discuss the matter with me so
that truth becomes manifest.” The person promised to come the next day
and Imam ‘Ali (a) accepted it.[^30]

Have a look at the behavior of Imam ‘Ali (a) with a Khariji and the
behavior of Uthman with Ammar. You can see for yourself the difference
between ‘Ali and Uthman?

Uthman showered Muslim wealth not only on his relatives but also famous
persons of that time. Uthman gave six hundred thousand to Zubair ibn
Awwam and a hundred thousand dirhams to Talha ibn Ubaidullah and freed
him of all of his debts.

He continued to favor his relatives much. On the other hand, common
Muslims died of hunger and severe poverty as most of the wealth of
Muslim treasury was given to Bani Umayyah and their relatives and the
real destitute were deprived of it.

Wealth of Some Famous Persons
-----------------------------

Masoodi has narrated a picture of the wealth of the upper class during
Uthman’s time as follows:

A group of Companions had become extremely rich during this time. They
bought immense property and constructed majestic palaces on it. Zubair
ibn Awwam constructed a palace for himself in Basra, which remained in
the same condition in 332 A.H. also. Traders and rich persons used to
stay over here.

He had also constructed magnificent palaces in Egypt, Kufa and
Alexandria and scholars are aware of his other properties.

Fifty thousand dinars cash was recovered from the house of Zubair after
his death. He had also left behind a thousand horses and a thousand
slave-girls.

Talha ibn Ubaidullah had also constructed splendid palaces in Kufa. He
used to earn a thousand dinars daily from the sale of his crops. Other
historians have narrated a higher figure. He used to earn much more than
this from other parts of Iraq. He had constructed a unique palace in
Medina using teak.

Abdur Rahman ibn Auf Zuhri had also constructed a tall and vast palace.
His stable always had a thousand horses. He had a thousand camels and
ten thousand goats. He had four wives at the time of his death and each
of them inherited 84000 dinars.[^31]

You have seen a slight image of these ‘people of Paradise’. When the
ruler himself is extravagant in spending the Muslim wealth, how can we
expect the subject to be patient? How can we expect the governors of
that time to keep away from washing hands in this flowing water?

Uthman not only gave cash to Bani Umayyah but also gave them huge
properties. It is possible that the followers of Uthman i.e. Ahl
al-Sunnah and Motazela would say that he had granted those lands to make
them inhabited.

Shias say that this reason is wrong because it was not even employed by
Uthman. It is a case where the defendant is passive and the witness is
active. Shias can also ask why those properties were given only to Bani
Umayyah? Were they specialist in this matter?[^32]

After this description by Dr. Taha Husayn, it would be absolutely
correct to say that there were two consequences of the economic policy
of Uthman, each worse than the other:

1. Wealth of Muslims was spent in an unlawful manner

2. As a result, a new class of rich came into being whose only intention
was to usurp the rights of others and increase their wealth. This class
was ready to obey the worst ruler for the sake of wealth. They also had
another peculiarity that it was ready to welcome all rulers who are
hazardous to Muslims but beneficial to them in order to protect their
wealth.

This class of people was on the forefront in opposing Imam ‘Ali (a)
during the time of his Caliphate. They did so in order to protect their
wealth.

You have seen the basis of the economic policy of Uthman. Let us have a
look at some of his other governmental policies.

[^1]: Surah Ahzaab 33:53

[^2]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 3, Pg. 170

[^3]: O you who believe! When you consult the Apostle, then offer
something in charity before your consultation; that is better for you
and purer; but if you do not find, then surely Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful. (Surah Mujadila 58:12)

[^4]: Surah Taubah 9:19

[^5]: Surah Nisa 4:93

[^6]: Abdul Fattah Abdul Maqsood, Al-Imam ‘‘Ali bin Abi Talib, Vol. 2,
Pg. 9-10

[^7]: Abdul Fattah Abdul Maqsood, Al-Imam ‘‘Ali bin Abi Talib, Vol. 1,
Pg. 200

[^8]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 3, Pg. 98, Surah Bani
Israel 17:12

[^9]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fit Tarikh, Vol. 3, Pg. 30

[^10]: Balazari, Futuhul Buldan, Pg. 36

[^11]: These people belonged to the group of ‘Muallafatul Quloobuhum’,
that is those who had some inclination to Islam, but had as yet not
become Muslims. So the Holy Prophet (S) had allotted to them a share
from Islamic funds with the hope that they will eventually embrace the
Faith.

[^12]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 3, Pg. 108, First
Edition

[^13]: Al-Kamil fit Tarikh, Vol. 2, Pg. 242-243

[^14]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 4, Pg. 184

[^15]: Al-Kamil fit Tarikh, Vol. 3, Pg. 293

[^16]: Surah Qasas 28:83

[^17]: Nahjul Balagha, Shiqshiqya Sermon

[^18]: Tarikh Ibn Khaldun, Vol. 2, Pg. 234

[^19]: Sirah Ibn Hisham, Vol. 4, Pg. 33

[^20]: Balazari, Ansaab al-Ashraaf, Vol. 5, Pg. 22

[^21]: Surah Hujurat 49:6

[^22]: Dr. Taha Husayn, ‘‘Ali wa Banuh, Pg. 155

[^23]: Sahih Bukhari Vol. 8, Pg. 49

[^24]: Dr. Taha Husayn, Al-Fitnah Al-Kubra, ‘‘Ali wa Banuh, Pg. 94

[^25]: Abdul Fattah Abdul Maqsood, Al-Imam ‘‘Ali bin Abi Talib, Vol. 2,
Pg. 20-21

[^26]: Dr. Taha Husayn, Al-Fitnah al-Kubra “Uthman bin Affan”; Balazari,
Ansaab al-Ashraaf, Vol. 5, Pg. 48

[^27]: Surah Taubah 9:34

[^28]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha

[^29]: Nahjul Balagha, Sermon no. 221

[^30]: Al-Fitnah al-Kubra ‘‘Ali wa Banuh, Pg. 125

[^31]: Masoodi, Murujuz Zahab, Vol. 2, Pg. 222

[^32]: Dr. Taha Husayn, Al-Fitnah al-Kubra Uthman bin Affan, Pg. 193-194


