Part 3: Caliphate of Amirul Momineen
====================================

*Praise be to Allah for His favor. The right returned to its owner.*  
 (Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib)

Imam ‘Ali (a) was supported by divine help. He remained patient in spite
of troubles. Even though he saw his right being usurped, he did not turn
away from working for the benefit of Muslims. He did not fight the three
caliphs keeping in mind the well-being of Islam. He used to give his
precious advices in the interest of Islam wherever required.

It was natural that after Uthman’s murder, Imam ‘Ali (a) should have
presented himself for Caliphate and have tried all possible means for
it. However Imam ‘Ali (a) was such an elevated personality that he did
not try to gain Caliphate in such a situation also even though Islamic
Ummah was forcing him to take charge. Imam ‘Ali (a) did not require
Caliphate, instead the Caliphate required Imam ‘Ali (a).

Tabari narrates the story of Caliphate of ‘Ali as follows: Emigrants and
Helpers gathered after Uthman’s murder. Talha and Zubair were also among
them. All of them came to Imam ‘Ali (a) and told him: “We want to pay
allegiance to you.”

He replied: “I don’t want your kingdom and I don’t care whom you
appoint.”

They said: “We would not appoint anyone, except you.”

Imam ‘Ali (a) rejected their offer. After that, Emigrants and Helpers
came to Imam ‘Ali (a) a number of times and requested him to take
charge.

On 18th Zilhajj, Imam ‘Ali (a) had gone to the market. People surrounded
him and requested him to take the charge of Caliphate.

Imam ‘Ali (a) broke himself away from them and went to the orchard of
Bani Amr ibn Mabdhool. There was a high wall surrounding this orchard.
Imam ‘Ali (a) ordered Abi Amr ibn Umar ibn Mohsin to shut the gate. The
people had gathered outside the gate and they were knocking it.

When the door opened, the crowd of Emigrants and Helpers surged in.
Talha and Zubair again requested Imam ‘Ali (a) to take Caliphate and
requested him to stretch his hands so that they could pay allegiance to
him.

One of Talha’s hands was paralyzed and when he paid allegiance, Habib
ibn Zuaib said: “The allegiance began with a paralyzed hand!”[^1]

After taking allegiance from the people, Imam ‘Ali (a) delivered a
sermon explaining the features of his rule as follows:

Almighty Allah has revealed the book of guidance. He has narrated good
and evil in it. You should accept the good and shun evil and fulfill
your duties.

“O servants of God! Fear Allah for His servants and cities. You will be
interrogated regarding them. You will be asked about your animals
also.”[^2]

This sermon of Imam ‘Ali (a) has a few statements but he explained all
the rights and duties of the subjects. History proves that Imam ‘Ali (a)
did not have any greed for power. He rejected the offer to take the
charge of government. When the insistence of people increased, he said:

“Leave me and seek someone else. We are facing a matter which has
(several) faces and colors, which neither hearts can stand nor
intelligence can accept. Clouds are hovering over the sky, and faces are
not discernible. You should know that if I respond to you, I would lead
you as I know and would not care about whatever one may say or
abuse.”[^3]

In spite of this, when people continued to insist, Imam ‘Ali (a)
accepted this religious duty and shocked the people by saying: “I am
responsible for every statement of mine. Piety does not allow those who
have learnt a lesson to have a doubt. Bear it in mind that your test has
begun from today in the same way as it was during the early days of
Islam.

I swear by one who appointed the Prophet, you will have to face severe
tests and you will be sieved using a filter of examination. The whip of
death will overpower you, till the mean ones among you become elevated
and the elevated among you become mean. Those who are left behind move
ahead and those who move ahead will be left behind.”[^4]

Imam said the above because he knew that people had stopped respecting
truth and started worshipping wealth. Hence they would not be able to
bear a just government and would cease to benefit as a result. They
would then oppose him but will not be able to dismiss him by writing a
letter.

Imam had depicted the picture of people’s insistence and his rejection
in the following words: “You drew out my hand towards you for
allegiance, but I held it back and you stretched it but I contracted it.
Then you crowded over me as thirsty camels crowd at the watering holes,
so much so that shoes were torn, shoulder-cloths fell away and the weak
got trampled”[^5]

This is also explained in another sermon by him as follows:

“At that moment, nothing took me by surprise, but the crowd of people
rushing to me. It advanced towards me from every side like the mane of
the hyena; so much so that Hasan and Husain were getting crushed and
both ends of my cloak were torn. They collected around me like a herd of
sheep and goats. When I took up the reins of government, one party broke
away and another turned disobedient while the rest began acting
wrongfully.”[^6]

[^1]: Tarikh al-Umam wal Muluk, Vol. 5, Pg. 152-153

[^2]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 3, Pg. 157

[^3]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 2, Pg. 170

[^4]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 1, Pg. 90

[^5]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 3, Pg. 181

[^6]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 1, Pg. 67


