The Issue of Predestination and Free Will
=========================================

One of the issues which is directly related to the issue of the justice
of the Creator is the question of predestination or free will.

According to the fatalists (those who believe in predestination), a
human being has no choice whatsoever in his or her actions, behaviour or
words and the movement of his organs are just like the predestined
movements of the parts of a machine.

Thus, the question arises, how does this opinion relate to Divine
Justice? And perhaps because of this, the previously-mentioned group of
the *Ash’arites*, deny intellectual good and evil and have accepted
predestination. Their belief in predestination is a denial of justice.
Why? Because when one accepts predestination, justice makes no sense.

In order to further clarify this point, we are obliged to study several
subjects with care:

Why Believe in Predestination?
------------------------------

All people, within their being, sense that they are free to make
decisions. For examples, whether or not to give a loan to such and such
a friend or whether or not to drink a glass of water placed before
oneself. If another person commits an error in relation to this person,
this second can forgive or not forgive the error. Everyone can tell
between a hand which shakes because of illness or old age from a hand
which one purposefully causes to shake.

In spite of the fact that the issue of free will is a general human
sense, why do some people follow the school of the fatalists?

There are several important factors that can affect a human:
environment, education, propaganda, social culture and without doubt,
the thoughts of a person. Sometimes, even one’s economic position can
provide a motive for why a human being acts a certain way.

The totality of these cause one to assume that a person does not have
free will, but rather that the external and internal factors join hands
and force us to make a decision and that if these factors did not exist,
we would not be forced with these problems.

These are things which can be called ‘the environmental determinants,’
‘economic determinants,’ ‘educational determinants’ and predestination
are among the factors considered to be important by the school of
fatalists.

The Main Error of the Fatalists
-------------------------------

But those who think this way have forgotten an important point and that
is that the discussion is not about motives and defective causes, but
rather the discussion is about complete causes.

In other words, no one can deny the role played by the environment,
culture and economics in the thoughts and acts of a human being. The
discussion is that with all of these motives, the final decision still
remains with us.

Because we clearly sense that even in an erroneous system, one which
rebels against God’s Commands like the monarchical system of the past -
which had laid the groundwork for deviation - we were not obliged to
deviate and go to the centers of corruption.

Thus, one must distinguish between and separate out defective causes
from complete causes. A great many people who live in comfort or have
been nurtured in a deviated culture or they inherited unsuitability, at
any rate, have separated their way from that of others, and have either
arisen or revolted against their environment. If every human being was
supposed to be the child of his or her environmental culture and the
propaganda of the times, no real or basic revolution would ever take
place in the world. Everyone would have to adapt to his or her
environment and never build a new one.

All of these show that the above-mentioned factors do not make one’s
destiny; one’s principle or main fate is determined by one’s own will
power.

For instance, if we were to decide to fast on a very hot summer day,
despite our body needing water, we would be doing so in order to obey
God’s commands while denying our own needs. It is possible, on the other
hand, that others follow their body’s request for water and not fast.
Thus, all motives which cause one’s destiny exist within the human
being’s free will.

The Social and Political Factors for Belief in Fatalism
-------------------------------------------------------

The truth is that the issue of predestination and free will has been
misused throughout history. A series of factors have increased the
belief in fatalism and the denial of free will of the human being. Among
them:

### 1. Political Factors

Many of the despotic and selfish politicians in order to extinguish the
fire of revolution among the deprived and in order to assure the
continuation of their illegal rule (for every rule of regime which
oppresses the people and denies people their rights is illegal from the
point of view of Islam*)* convinced the people through all the means
available to them that they have no free will, that predestination and
predetermination of history holds our destiny in its hands. If one group
rules and another is ruled, this is a rule of fate and the destiny of
history!

It is clear how this kind of thinking can silence people and aid the
policies of colonialism whereas according to our intellect and our
Divine Law, destiny and fate lies in our own hands and fate and destiny
in the sense of predestination and predetermination does not exist.
Divine fate and destiny is determined through our action, desire,
willpower, faith, effort and endeavour.

### 2. Psychological Factors

Lazy, indifferent and lethargic individuals exist who most often meet up
with defeat in life. They never desire to admit the bitter truth that
their laziness or errors have caused their defeat. Thus, in order to
avoid confronting themselves with their deficiencies and developing
themselves into better people, they turn to fatalism and they think that
their sin is a result of coercive fate so that they find a false sense
of security. They say: “What can be done? We were blackened from the
beginning. It will not be whitened even with the water of Zamzam or
Kawthar. We are extremely talented and make great efforts, but
unfortunately, we have no luck.”

### 3. Social factors

Some people want to be free to be able to follow their carnal desires
and commit every sin which is to their liking, at the same time, they
want to somehow convince themselves that they are not sinners and they
want to deceive society that they are sinless!

It is here that they turn to fatalism as their justification that we
have no free will -- neither to choose nor avoid these sins. But they
know well that all of these are lies and even those who make such claims
and raise such issues know that they are baseless but their pleasures
and passing fantasies do not allow them to admit this truth. Thus, in
order to build a healthy society, we must struggle against this
fatalistic way of thinking. We must realize these are tools used in the
hands of colonialism and exploitation and an instrument to deceitfully
justify defeat and the factor which causes corruption to increase in a
society.

Reasons for Belief in Free Will
-------------------------------

### 1. The Collective Conscience

Philosophers and divine scholars give different reasons for free will of
the human being. The clearest reason given by the supporters of free
will: The ‘universal’ or ‘collective’ conscience of human beings.

That is, no matter what we deny, we cannot deny the reality that in all
human societies, including both the worshippers of God and the
materialists, East and West, ancient and modern, wealthy and poor,
developed or underdeveloped, of whatever culture, all without exception,
agree that a law should rule human beings and that human beings are
responsible before the law and people who disobey the law must be
punished.

In other words, the rule of law, the responsibility of individuals
before it and the punishment of those who disobey the law are things
which all intelligent people agree with and it was only primitive tribes
who did not officially recognise these three things.

The fact that we explain this as the general conscience of human beings
of the world is the clearest proof of the existence of free will in
human beings and the fact that they have free choice.

How can it be accepted that a human being be obliged in their actions
and that they have no freedom of choice but are still responsible before
the law? And, that when a law is broken, the person must be tried and
asked why they did – or did not – commit a certain action. If proven
guilt, that person is sent to prison or even, depending upon the crime,
executed. This is exactly as if we were to punish stones which slide
down a mountain causing a landslide on a mountain road which results in
the death of one or more human beings.

It is true that a human being differs from a stone, but if we deny free
will and choice in a human being, the difference between a human being
and a stone will not be relevant in this instance - as both will be the
victims of fate.

A stone, following the law of gravity, falls upon the roadside and a
human being who murders another, is the victim of another factor of
fate. Thus, the logic of those who believe in predetermination allows
for no distinction to be made between a stone and a human being from the
point of view of result as neither the stone nor the human acted
according to their own free will. Why should the human be tried and not
the stone?

We are at a crossroads. We either have to deny the existence of the
common conscience of all of the people of the world and consider the
courts, punishment of those who disobey the law to be ridiculous and
useless and even oppressive or we have to deny the beliefs of the
fatalists. Obviously the latter is preferable.

It is interesting to note that those who believe in the school of
fatalism, and give reasons for their belief, when they are faced with a
real life situation, they act according to free will!

For instance, if a person aggresses against them, or annoys or bothers
them, they take this person to court and do not rest at ease until that
person is punished.

Well, if it is really true that a person has no choice or free will,
what is all of this commotion and court and trial about?
At any rate, this common conscience of the intelligent beings of the
world is a living idea for the reality that human beings have accepted
the existence of free will in the depths of their being and have always
been loyal to that. They cannot live without the belief in free will for
even one day. This belief has caused the wheels of social and individual
programs to progress.

A great Iranian philosopher, Khawjeh Nasir al-din Tusi, in discussing
predestination and free will says in one short sentence in his book,
“Kitab Tajrubaah bih al- ‘Aqa’id*:*” ‘*Our necessary under-standing and
conscience tells us that we are responsible for all of our deeds*.”

### 2. Justice

That which we have said above was about the contradiction between the
school of predestination and the common conscience of the intelligent of
the world, both from the point of view of supporters of religion and
people who do not at all accept religion.

But from the point of view of religion thought, there is another sure
reason for recognising the falsity of the school of fatalism. (And if
fatalism were to be believed, religion as we know it, would have to be
altered).

How can we reconcile the Justice of God which we proved in previous
lessons with the school of fatalism? How is it possible that God oblige
someone to do an evil deed? Then punish him because he did it. This does
not agree with any kind of logic!

Thus, by accepting the school of fatalism, spiritual rewards,
punishments, heaven and hell are meaningless as well as ‘scroll of
deeds’, ‘questioning’, ‘Divine reckoning’, ‘reprimanding the evil doers
in the Qur’an’, ‘encouragement and praise for those who do good’, all of
these lose their meaning. Because according to the school of fatalism,
neither the good doers nor the evil doers have a choice.

In addition, in religion, one of the first issues we encounter is ‘duty’
or ‘responsibility’, but does ‘duty’ or ‘responsibility’ make any sense
if a person has no choice?

Can we tell a person whose hands involuntarily shake not to shake their
hands? Or can we tell a person who is falling down a steep mountain to
stand still? It is because of this that Imam ‘Ali, peace be upon him,
says in a famous tradition (Usul al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 119) that the
school of fatalism is a school of idol worship whose followers are
members of Iblis’ party:

“These words of idol worshipping brothers, enemies of God, members of
Iblis’ part.”

The Middle Way
--------------

### 1. The Opposite of Fatalism

Of course, opposing the belief in fatalism, which is one kind of an
extreme, is the school of ‘conferring’, which is at the other extreme.

Those who accept this school believe that God created us and then put
everything at our disposal and that, in general, He is not responsible
for anything that we do and in this way, we are completely independent
in choosing what we do.

Doubtlessly, this belief does not agree with monotheism because
monotheism has taught us that God rules the entire world and nothing is
beyond His control. Even our free will and free choice cannot be beyond
His realm, otherwise duality or polytheism would, of necessity, result.

In other words, we cannot believe in many gods, one, the great Creator
of the universe and the others, the human beings who are free to do
whatever they wish, completely free and independent - even God cannot
affect what they wish to do!

### 2. The School of the Middle Way

What is important is that we know human beings have freedom of choice
and free will at the same time we know God to be the Ruler over all
persons and deeds.

The fine point to recognise here is that we should not imagine that
there is a contradiction between the two. The fact is that we can accept
His Justice and Rule over the entire universe of existence as well as
freedom and responsibility of His servants - and this is that very thing
which is known as the middle way (the way which is between two
extremes).

Let us clarify this with an example as the issue is a very complicated
one. Let us assume that there is an electric train that is being driven
by a train driver. A strong electric cable has been placed along the
line of the train and the train is connected with a link to this
electric cable. The electricity is passed to the locomotive in such a
way that if for just one moment, the electricity to the locomotive
stops, the whole train will stop. Without doubt, the train driver is
free.

He can stop wherever he wants and he can move at his own speed. But in
spite of all of this freedom, the person who is sending the electricity
can, at any moment, make the train stop because all of the train’s power
and strength is through that electric cable. The person who holds the
key to the electrical cable is in charge.

When we note this example with care, we see that one can have freedom,
choice and responsibility (the train driver), while one is completely at
the disposal of the power of another (the electric cable operator) and
these two concepts do not contradict each other.

God has given us physical power or strength and from moment to moment,
it continues and if it is cut off for even a moment, and our connection
with Him be cut off, we would be destroyed.

If we can do anything it is because we have strength which He has given
us and it continues moment by moment and even our freedom and choice is
also from Him. That is, He willed that we be free and by making use of
this great Divine Kindness, one can transform one’s self.

Thus, at the same time that we have free choice and free will, we are in
His grasp and we will never move beyond His realm. At the same time that
we have strength and power, we are dependent upon Him and without Him,
we will be destroyed. This is what “The Middle Way” means. Neither have
we recognised any creature to be equal to God (which would result in
polytheism) nor do we believe creatures are obliged to act according to
a set destiny (which would result in oppression). We have learned this
lesson from our pure Imams, peace be upon them (Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, p.
121). Whenever they were asked, “Does anything exist between fatalism
and conferring?”

They said, “Yes. More extensive than the distance between heaven and
earth.”

The Holy Qur’an and Free Will
-----------------------------

The Holy Qur’an states this issue directly and proves the free will of
human beings and there are hundreds of verses which talk about free
will.

All of the verses which relate to commanding virtue and preventing vice
are all proof of the free will of human beings because if a person was
destined to do so, commanding them to do so would make no sense.

All of the verses which speak of blame and reproach against the evil
doers and praise for the good doers are proof of free will because if
one was destined to do whatever one did, blame or praise would make no
sense.

All of the verses which speak about the questioning on the Day of
Judgement and the Judgement in that Court and then the rewards and
punishments and heaven and hell are proof of free will because if one
was to assume that everything was predestined then questioning, judging,
rewards and punishments would all be oppressive.

Some explicit verses of the Qur’an which say that a human being is
responsible for his or her deeds are:

***“Every soul will be (held) in pledge for its deeds.” (Surah
Muddathir, 74: 38).***

***“(Yet) in each individual in pledge for his deeds.” (Surah At-Tur,
52: 21).***

***“We showed him the Way: whether he be grateful or ungrateful (rests
on his will).” (Surah Al-Insaan, 76:3).***

***“But you will not except as God wills…” (Surah Al-Insaan, 76:30).***

Guidance and Error are in God’s Hands
-------------------------------------

### 1. Means of Guidance

A traveller has an address in his hand. He meets you and asks you to
help him find the address. You have two choices before you:

First, to go with him and complete your good deed by a accompanying him
to his destination and then say goodbye and leave him.

Second, indicate with your hand and giving various signs guide him
towards his destination.

It is evident that in both cases, you have guided him towards his
destination but there is a difference between these two; the second one
is just telling which way to go and the first, is taking one to one’s
destination. The Holy Qur’an and Traditions of Islam mention both ways.

On the other hand, sometimes guidance only has a legal quality to it,
i.e., formed by means of laws and rules. Whereas, sometimes it has an
instinctive quality, i.e., by means of facilities provided by creation
like the guidance of an embryo to becoming a complete human being and
both of these ways are mentioned in the Holy Qur’an and the Traditions.
By clarifying the means of guidance (and, naturally, the point opposite
it, leading astray or error), we return to the main discussion.

We read in many of the verses of the Holy Qur’an that guidance and
leading astray is God’s work. Doubtlessly, the ‘indication of the way’
comes from God. Why? Because He sent the Prophet and sent a heavenly
Book to show people the way.

But ‘reaching the goal’ through coercion or force clearly does not agree
with free will and choice. However, because all power and strength which
is necessary to reach one’s goal is given to us by God and it is He Who
gives us success upon this way, this sense of guidance is also from God.
That is, preparation of the equipment and the preliminaries and
providing them is at the disposal of humanity.

### 2. The Question of God’s Guidance

Now, an important question arises and that is that we read in many
verses of the Holy Quran:

***“God guides whom He wills and misleads whom He wills.”*** ***(Surah
Ibrahim, 14: 4).***

Some people, without considering other verses of the Holy Qur’an, and
the interpretation which one verse has relative to others, immediately,
upon seeing this verse, object and say, “If God guides whom He will and
misleads whom He wills, what are we supposed to do in the middle?”

The important point is that the verses of the Holy Qur’an must always be
studied in relation to each other in order to understand them in truth.
Here we will recall several other verses about guidance and leading
astray so that you can study them in relation to the above verse:

***“God will establish in strength those who believe, with the Word that
stands firm in this world and in the hereafter; but God will leave, to
stray, those who do wrong: God does what He wills” (Surah Ibrahim,
14:27).***

***“Thus does God leave to stray such as transgress and live in doubt.”
(Surah Al-Mu’min, 40:34).***

***“And those who strive in our (Cause), We will certainly guide them to
Our paths: for verily God is with those who do right.” (Surah
Al-Ankabut, 29: 69).***

As we see, God’s will is not inexplicable. He neither gives the success
of guidance to a person nor does He deny a person success. Those who
undertake the jihad upon God’s Way, war with their difficulties and show
strength and firmness of purpose, have been promised guidance and this
is justice.

But those who create oppression and suppression and those who take steps
towards extravagance, doubt, injustice and causing temptation in hearts,
God takes away their possibility of guidance. Their hearts, as a result
of these deeds, are darkened and they will not be able to succeed in
reaching the station of wellbeing. This is how the Creator leaves the
results of our deeds in our own hands and this is justice.

God’s Knowledge
---------------

The last point which we feel should be mentioned here in the discussion
of predestination and free will is the excuse used by some fatalists as
knowledge of the eternal of God.

They say, “Does God know that so and so at such and such an hour on such
and such a day will kill someone or will drink an alcoholic beverage?”

If we say, “He does not know,” we have denied God’s knowledge. And if we
say, “Yes, that person must do this, otherwise God’s knowledge will be
imperfect,” then, in order to preserve God’s knowledge, a person is
obliged to sin and obey God!

But the fact is, this excuse was fabricated in order to cover over the
sins they wanted to commit but they have forgotten the fact that we say
that God knew from eternity whether we would be inclined towards free
will and choice and will obey or sin. That is, our will or choice was
also part of God’s knowledge. Thus, if we are obliged to sin, God’s
knowledge will become ignorant.

Allow us to put forth some questions on this point to clarify them.
Assume that a teacher knows that a lazy student will fail at the end of
the year and the teacher is one hundred percent sure of this fact
because of years of experience as a teacher.

When the student fails, can the student take the teacher to task and
say: “Your knowledge and what you foresaw caused me to fail.”?

Or, let us assume that there is a sinless and pure person and he knew of
a murder which would take place on such and such a day and interferes to
prevent it, does the knowledge of this pure person take away the
responsibility of the criminal, obliging the criminal to commit the
crime?

Or, assume that a new machine has been invented which can predict the
occurrence of an event several hours before it happens and it can say
that so and so at such and such an hour in such and such a place will
commit such and such an act. Does this oblige that person to do this?

In summary, God’s knowledge never obliges anyone to do anything.


