The Role of Women in Islam
==========================

The most important and most emphasized role for women mentioned in
Islamic sources is that of wife and mother, but the role of woman in
Islam is by no means limited to this. Women may be entrepreneurs, as was
Khadijah, the first wife of Prophet Muhammad (S) and the first convert
to Islam. They may also take a strong political stand even leading to
martyrdom, as did Fatimah, the daughter of Prophet Muhammad (S), wife of
Imam 'All and mother of Imams Hasan and Husayn, peace be with all of
them. Some positions, however, such as leading prayers for men, are
considered inappropriate for women.

Westerners often assume that because social relations between men and
women are restricted in Islamic societies in ways that seem strange to
them, that Muslim women are not socially and politically active. The
following anecdote reported by W. Morgan Shuster regarding events in
Tehran in 1911 provides some indication of how mistaken this assumption
is.

With the dark days when doubts came to be whispered as to whether the
Mejlis would stand firm [against Russian threats], the Persian women, in
their zeal for liberty and their ardent love for their country. .
supplied the answer. Out from their walled courtyards and homes marched
three hundred of that weak sex, with the flush of undying determination
in their cheeks. They were clad in their plain black robes with the
white nets of their veils dropped over their faces. Many held pistols
under their skirts or in the folds of their sleeves. Straight to the
Mejlis they went, and, gathered there, demanded of the President that he
admit them all. What the grave deputies of the Land of the Lion and the
Sun may have thought at this strange visitation is not recorded. The
President consented to receive a delegation of them. In his
reception-hall they confronted him, and lest he and his colleagues
should doubt their meaning, these cloistered Persian mothers, wives and
daughters exhibited threateningly their revolvers, tore aside their
veils, and confessed their decision to kill their own husbands and sons,
and leave behind their own dead bodies, if the deputies wavered in their
duty to uphold the liberty and dignity of the Persian people and
nation.20

This is not an isolated incident. Women in Muslim societies are and
always have been active in social and political affairs, even if they
have rarely taken publicly visible leadership roles. A careful reading
of the Qur'an shows that this is no historical accident. God directly
addresses women through the revelation of the Qur'an by assuring them
that their deeds will not go unrewarded, and by offering as exemplars
women who have courageously taken positions in unfavourable social
conditions, not however, to secure their own rights or interests, but in
obedience to God. Thus Mary, peace be with her, is rebuked by her people
for having the child Jesus ('a) out of wedlock. She agreed to have the
child when visited by the angel out of obedience to God. In response to
the taunts directed against her, Mary offers no excuses but points to
the child prophet, who miraculously speaks to them.21 The wife of
Pharaoh refuses to obey her husband and king in his idolatry because of
her acceptance of the message of the Prophet Moses ( a).22

The primary roles accorded to women in Islam are those of wife and
mother, and it is precisely these roles with which feminists are most
uncomfortable. Feminists are concerned with liberating\* women from
expectations that they should marry and have children. They see progress
for women in terms of employment opportunities, income, opportunities to
experiment with non- traditional sexual relations and political power.
Although Islam does not bar women from wealth and power, it places
greater emphasis on marriage and the family. It seems that this accords
with the interests of the vast majority of the women of the world. Al-
though they are not averse to wealth and power, their primary concerns
tend to centre around marriage and the family. Islam dignifies these
primary concerns while feminism tends to undermine them

Of course, the most important role for woman in Islam is no different
that that assigned to men-servant of God. It is as servants of God that
Muslim women and men take on the roles of mothers and fathers and wives
and husbands, buyers and sellers, teachers and pupils, workers and
employers, etc.


