Islamic Opposition to the Philosophical Attitude of Feminism
============================================================

The moral values espoused by feminists, whether equality feminism or
gynocentric feminism, are not values supported by Islam. In feminism the
goal is absolute freedom to choose to live as one pleases without
interference of social customs or regulations assigning specified roles
to men and women. Justice in Islam means everything being in its proper
place, not absolute equality, let alone feminine superiority in all
areas. The determination of justice in Islam requires the wisdom and
insight that result from study of and living according to the patterns
set by the Holy Prophet (S) and Imams ( 'a).

Philosophical thought in Islam, like all the aspects of Islamic culture,
is a reflection of tawhid. All things are seen as having an underlying
unity as effects of God as ultimate cause, or as modes of His
self-disclosure. Reason is championed as a vehicle for understanding
tawhid. Feminist philosophical thought, on the other hand, moves in the
opposite direction. Instead of searching for some underlying unity in
being or causation or appearance and reality, feminism is occupied with
the discovery of conflict; feminism sees hidden forms of subjugation
lurking beneath virtually every text, every theory, every social or
cultural phenomenon. It displaces the idea of a harmony between the
masculine and feminine with outrage against the oppression of the female
through gender differentiation. Reason itself is considered a tool of
oppression, and reliance on reason is disparagingly called
logo-centrism.'

The ideal of the philosopher in Islamic culture is of one who has gained
victory over the wiles of his base soul through the employment of the
intellect. The intellect dominates over the soul of the philosopher, who
thereby loses interest in what is considered desirable by worldly
standards. The ideal of the feminist thinker one finds in feminist
writing is of a woman who is preoccupied with her own experiences and
who uses those experiences to uncover the roots of women's oppression in
gender differences which she overcomes through an effort of desire
unconstrained by patriarchy.

The ideal of Islam is nearness to God, and social relations are governed
by a spirit of obedience to God, in which justice is conceived as a
proper balance that satisfies the demands of moral conscience, social
custom, and the explicit commands of God. In feminism, by contrast, all
of theology is subordinated to its program of liberation, in which the
ideal is a social freedom that makes its own absolute moral claims on
behalf of equality and the abolition of gender based differences in
social role, that demands a revolution in social customs, and that
rejects the explicit commands of God.


