Islamic Opposition to Feminist Political Theory
===============================================

Islamic political theory sees injustice in terms of rebellion against
God. It is because rulers usurp authority for the satisfaction of their
own desires instead of submitting to the divine will that they
perpetrate injustices on other people, their own subjects and their
neighbours. The sin against God is primary, and this is expressed in
injustice to others. This political view is magnified in Shi'i theology.
The dispute over the caliphate arises because some were unwilling to
submit to the choice of God for leadership. All accept that 'Ali ( 'a)
was designated for some sort of leadership role, but the supporters of
other choices for caliph refused to accept this designation or its
extension to the realm of politics. With this refusal, for whatever
reason, a spirit of something quite foreign to the complete submission
required by Islam is displayed. The primary sin is that of disobedience
to God. The injustices done in the violent attempts to hold power are
the natural consequence of this sin.

Feminist political theory, on the other hand, sees the primary sin in
the subjection of women to male authority. All other social injustice is
interpreted on the basis of this, and the elimination of any
subordination of women to men is seen as the key to the elimination of
all other forms of injustice. Islam aims at bringing the human ever
nearer to the divine. Thus, the aim of the political order, in Islam, is
the creation of an environment conducive to the worship of and obedience
to God through which proximity to Him is gained. This requires the
establishment of a condition of social harmony and balance in which each
component of society, its institutions, practices, cultural forms,
discourse and individual members, each find their fitting place to
approach divinity in complete submission.

The aim of the political order in feminism, by contrast, never gets
beyond freedom to violate the constraints of traditional gender roles,
forming relationships and even communities without any form of
hierarchy, subordination, or gender differentiation such as is found in
the families of virtually all cultures.


