The Misuse of Islam for the Oppression of Women
===============================================

Islam has been and continues to be misused as an instrument for the
oppression of women. This happens in various ways. Sometimes men take
advantage of the position of women in Muslim societies to deny women
opportunities that should be protected were Islam properly practiced.
The dictates of Islam against injustice to women are simply ignored, and
Islam itself is falsely used as an excuse for this. An example of this
is the way the Taleban in Afghanistan misuse precepts of sexual
segregation to deny women educational opportunities and access to health
and other facilities. Another way women are oppressed in Islam is when
the letter of the law is observed but its spirit is violated. Instances
of this are too many to even begin giving examples. These are issues
that need to be addressed by men and women in Muslim societies today.

Because of the abuses that exist, feminists argue that Islamic law
should be changed, but there are other ways to fight abuse. More
attention needs to be paid to the spirit of Islamic teaching, Islamic
law should not be seen as a framework within which one can get away with
whatever one likes with impunity. Muslims need to be just as careful
about the need to mould themselves according to the ideals taught by
Islam as they are careful about conformity to its legal injunctions. The
feminists seem to share the same blindness as those who use Islamic law
as a pretext to oppress women, neither can see beyond the law to Islamic
values and ideals.

The issue is addressed in some detail by Shahid Mutahhari who recognizes
the problem and describes it as follows:

These cruelties are the outcome and an offshoot of a wrong conception of
Islam, which, according to them, says: "A woman must bear such cruelties
like a terminal cancer patient." This has created an impression of Islam
which is more harmful than any of the evil propaganda against our
faith.32

Shahid Mutahhari calls for the organization of Islamic women's movements
in order to oppose the injustices done to women in Muslim society:

In our country we are in need of a women's movement, but we need a pure
Islamic movement and not a dark and gloomy European movement.33


