Muslim Women's Movements
========================

Struggles for the elimination of oppression of women based on an
acceptance of Islam may be termed Islamic women's movements. In the
modern period, Islamic women's movements arose as a reaction against
feminism, although they concerned themselves primarily with the
improvement of the conditions of women in Muslim societies.

It is not always clear whether organizations and individuals base their
struggle for the improvement of the conditions of women on Islam or on a
feminist ideology disguised as acceptance of Islam. Nor is this a black
and white distinction. It appears that a considerable number of Muslim
women influenced by feminist ideas sincerely believe that the proper
interpretation of Islam is one that calls for absolute equality (i.e.,
identity) of rights for men and women and the elimination of all
distinctions based on sex found in Islamic law as traditionally
interpreted. On the other hand, other Muslim women may sincerely but
incorrectly believe that there are no valid arguments within Islamic
jurisprudence for reform of the traditional interpretation of the law.
So, among Muslim women's movements, as opposed to explicitly secularist
feminist movements, we will find some to be firmly grounded on an
attempt to be guided by God's final revelation as taught by His chosen
Holy Prophet, Muhammad (S), while others will attempt to manipulate the
teachings of Islam for their own agendas, whether these are feminist or
traditionalist agendas, and there will be much grey area between pure
faith and hypocrisy, as there always is in matters of religion.

Feminists have taken note of the great popular support for Islam among
women in Muslim countries. Some have responded by calling the Muslim
women foolish or duped. This seems to be the attitude of Leila Ahmed.
She claims that women are attracted to the moral ideals of Islam and are
unaware that the legal ramifications of Islamic law put women at a
disadvantage. This is an incredible hypothesis, to say the least. It is
hard to imagine a Muslim woman who has not heard that Islam has
different rules of inheritance for sons and daughters, let alone one who
is unaware of sex based differences in the marriage laws.

Some feminists have admitted that the Islamic movement has actually
improved the status of women, regardless of whether improvement is
judged by feminist or other standards. Haleh Afshar admits that the
revival of Islam after the victory of the Islamic Revolution has been
"almost literally a God-send" in the context of which Iranian women have
fought "against their political, legal and economic marginalization....
Throughout, their arguments have been anchored in the teachings of
Islam, the Koranic laws and the traditions and practices of the Prophet
of Islam."34 Afshar's attitude appears to be that if Islamic rhetoric
can be used to win feminist objectives, this can justify compromises
with Islam. Ziba Mir-Hosseini seems to agree:

I argue that, contrary to what the early literature contends, and what
remains implicit in the later wave, the impact of the revolution on
women has been emancipator, in the sense that it has paved the way for
the emergence of a popular feminist consciousncss.35

Mir-Hosseini, like Afshar, seems to think that it may be worthwhile
making compromises with Islam in order to achieve feminist objectives.
She

refers to all women's movements as feminist, regardless of whether they
are based on feminist ideology or Islam, although she offers the
following conclusion about the indigenous 'feminism\* she sees emerging
in Iran:

This process has inadvertently been nurturing an indigenous 'feminism'
which is as much rooted in Iranian family structures as it is in the
interaction of Islamic and Western ideals of womanhood. It could emerge
only after challenging and rejecting the state-sponsored and Western-
inspired 'feminism' of the Pahlavis, as well as the liberal- leftist
feminism of 1970's women's liberation, and yet in the process
assimilating some of the features of both.36

We can only pray that Muslim women's movements comprising both Muslim
women and Muslim men will continue to advance in their struggle against
injustice and will continue to provide an alternative to feminism, in
which the family is strengthened rather than undermined in loving
obedience to the Most Merciful of the Merciful


