A Brief History of Feminism
===========================

Feminism Distinguished from Other Women's Movements

Women have been oppressed ever since the invention of human sin, and for
nearly as long they have been engaged in the attempt to free themselves
from oppression. The attempts made to end the injustices done to women,
particularly when these injustices are institutionalized, may be called
women's movements. In this sense, Islam may be considered a women's
movement, because it includes a divinely ordained program for the
eradication of injustice done to women. Western women, however, usually
fail to recognize Islam as a women's movement, and they restrict the
term 'women's movement' to the products of Western culture designed to
change the status of women in society.

The industrial revolution of the nineteenth century and the gradual
process of urbanization brought women together in the labor force
outside the framework of the family, whereas in agrarian society, women
worked with family members. At the same time, women were excluded from
politics. The rights of man proclaimed by the French Revolution were
limited to males. During the Enlightenment, women began to demand
'emancipation', freedom from dependency on men, educational opportunity
and political rights.

Feminists would go on to make more radical claims, including among the
most prominent of these: legalized abortion on demand, free love or
sexual liberation, complete equality with men and the abolition of
differentiation of the roles of the sexes. Feminism is often defined as
a movement seeking full equality of rights with men, but it is important
to emphasize that the equality of rights sought by feminists goes far
beyond equality under the law. Feminism aims at the eradication of any
difference in social roles based on gender difference, and this is what
distinguishes it from other women's movements.2 Nevertheless, the
feminist movement includes within its ranks writers and activists who
differ on many fundamental issues in philosophy, politics and morals.
What unites them is the social ideal of the elimination of traditional
gender roles. Feminism may thus define as a branch of the women's
movement that aims at the elimination of traditional gender roles.
However, confusion exists about the use of the term 'feminism', for
there are writers who fail to distinguish feminism from the more general
women's movement.

The focus of attention in what follows will be on feminist philosophy
(including political philosophy) and feminist theology, however, among
the important feminist writings there are also works on psychoanalysis,
jurisprudence and literary criticism.


