Feminism and Socialism
======================

Perhaps the first use of the term 'feminism' was in the early nineteenth
century by the socialist, Charles Fourier (1772-1837). The followers of
another early socialist, Henri de Saint-Simon (1760-1825), introduced
the androgyny principle, according to which there was a mixed male and
female being at the beginning of history. (Muslims will find it amusing
to learn that Saint-Simon's disciples went to Turkey to seek the female
savior after having lost hope of finding a truly free woman in Europe.

Socialist feminists advocated the abolition of any division of labour
along sex specific lines, and called for quotas whereby half of all the
positions in every field of employment are to be filled by women.

With the domination of Marxism among the various forms of socialism,
socialist feminism also came to be dominated by Marxist feminism, first
elaborated in 1844 by Friedrick Engels in Der Ur- sprung der Familie
(The Origin of the Family). In this work Engels demands the abolition of
the family, uniform integration of men and women into the labour force
and the communal raising of children in order to achieve equality among
all people and an end to the domination of one person over another.
Although socialism has lost popularity in recent years and Marxism, in
particular, seems on the verge of extinction, a political left continues
to survive, even in America, especially in academia. As the academic
left has also welcomed feminism, so too, Marxist ideas continue to find
expression in the writings of important feminist leaders.

Perhaps the most notable lesson feminists have learned from Marxists is
their polemical style. Articles on feminism, even those printed in such
reputable works as the Encyclopedia of Ethics and the Routledge
Encyclopedia of Philosophy do not merely describe the work of feminists,
they actively advocate the abolition of traditional gender roles for the
sake of the liberation of women. Like Marxists, feminists have also
adopted an ideologically charged rhetoric with which to declaim their
analyses and polemics. Often the language used is directly inspired by
Marxist terminology, even when Marxism is itself explicitly rejected.

More orthodox Marxist and socialist feminists argue that the oppression
of women has its roots in the class system, and that the system must be
overturned in order to liberate women. Feminist critics of Marxist
feminism have argued that the labour of women through housework is
exploited by men regardless of the class system, so that the class
analysis is insufficient and must be supplemented by an analysis of
exploitation based on gender.


