Feminist Philosophy
===================

Certainly the most famous of feminist philosophers of the twentieth
century was Simone de Beauvoir (1908-1986). In 1949 she published Le
Deuxidme Sexe (The Second Sex) in which she elaborated an
existentialist/Marxist analysis of the relations between men and women.
As existentialist thought emphasizes the radical freedom of the
individual to arbitrarily choose his essence, de Beauvoir makes the
dramatic claim that one's gender is also a matter of choice. To the
extent that biology would seem to indicate otherwise, she finds biology
degrading. Biology gives men a freedom from reproductive processes that
women lack, so she sees femininity as an obstacle to being truly human.
Later feminists have criticized de Beauvoir for her disparagement of
female anatomy and for advocating that women take men's roles in
society. Nevertheless, it is generally acknowledged that her work set
out what would become major themes of later feminist writing: the
difference between sex and gender (biological and social sexual
characteristics), concern with autobiography seen as a political
statement, and the need to draw upon various disciplines in the analysis
of gender roles.

While de Beauvoir's feminism has much in common with the existentialism
of Jean Paul Sartre, more recent feminists have drawn from the
philosophies of Michael Foucault and Jacques Derrida to apply the
methods of genealogical analysis and deconstruction to issues pertaining
to gender, including women's roles in society, women's psychology, and
the political oppression of women. Feminists, however, have not merely
made use of philosophical trends for their own purposes, they have also
elaborated positions in virtually all the major areas of philosophy.
Hence, there are feminist readings of the history of philosophy,
feminist philosophy of science, feminist epistemology, feminist social
and political philosophy, feminist ethics and even feminist ontology.
The Society for Women in Philosophy was founded in 1972 whose journal,
Hypatia, publishes articles on feminist philosophy.

In the history of philosophy, feminists have concerned themselves with
two major projects. First, a number of works have been written that aim
to disclose bias against women or gender stereo- types in the writings
of Western philosophers from Plato and Aristotle to John Rawls.
Descartes has been a particular target of these sorts of critique.3
Second, there has been an attempt to emphasize the importance of women
philosophers throughout history. A major accomplishment in this program
was the publication of Mary Ellen Waith's three-volume A History of
Women Philosophers'4

Feminist philosophy of science and epistemology has for the most part
sought to refute claims to the objectivity of science and knowledge, and
to identify gender bias in the works of scientists and philosophers.
Modeled on the Marxist idea that culture is a superstructure that
reflects class interests, feminist 'standpoint theories' advocate the
idea that a specifically feminine view of the world is possible when
science is practiced from a woman's perspective.5 A current topic of
debate in feminist philosophy of science and epistemology is whether
emphasis on the uniqueness of the female perspective implies relativism
or a denial of objective truth.

Feminist approaches to ethics place a strong emphasis on politics. They
are more concerned with power than goodness, and often provide criticism
of the ways in which traditional ethics con- tributes to the
subordination and oppression of women. Allison Jagger, for example,
suggests that feminist ethics should provide guides to action that will
subvert the subordination of women.6

Lesbian feminists have proposed a feminist ethics based on the
proposition that women cannot enter a relationship with men without
becoming victims of subjugation, and that lesbian communities should
construct their own ethics on the basis of a quest for freedom and
self-identity rather than the good, and choice rather than duty.7
Lesbians have played an important role in the feminist movement, and
although not all feminists are advocates of lesbianism, lesbianism is
generally condoned by feminists as an implication of the attack on
traditional gender roles'

Feminists have also been critical of those who have proposed a
particularly feminine ethics. For example, the renowned moral
psychologist, Carol Gilligan, has proposed that an ethics of care is
more suitable to explain the moral development of girls than the ethics
of justice used by her mentor, Lawrence Kohlberg, to explain the moral
development of boys. Feminists respond that Gilligan places too much
emphasis on the virtue of caring for women because this may serve to
support rather than undermine established gender differentiation.8
Likewise, feminists reject the feminine ethics proposed by ethicists who
focus on the moral insights to be gained through an examination of
maternal relationships. Feminists argue that by giving primacy to
women's roles as mothers feminine ethics fails to encourage women to
gain the traits necessary to overturn patriarchy and gender bias.

An important part of the feminist polemic is the insistence that
traditional gender roles based on sexual differences is wrong, that
patriarchy is a form of oppression and subjugation of women, that women
have been unjustly marginalized and ignored, that women's rights have
been violated. So, there is a moral demand in feminism for the
subversion of patriarchal social arrangements, for the rewriting of
history, for the critique of every element of culture dominated by a
male perspective, including (to mention but a few) art, psychology,
theology and ethics itself.


