Feminist Political Theory
=========================

Feminist political thought begins with Marxism. According to Marx and
Engels, it is the class system that lies at the source of all
oppression, and the family is a social institution reflective of that
oppressive system. The call for the abolition of the family is
inseparable from the call for the abolition of the capitalist system and
its replacement by communism.

While some feminists have endorsed a more or less orthodox Marxist view
of the family, others have sought to place gender roles at the
foundation of their political thought. Instead of seeing the family as a
reflection of the underlying capitalist system of production, they view
capitalism as a result of the oppressive nature of patriarchy. Kate
Millet, an activist in the 'Women's Liberation Movement' of the late
1960's, accordingly claimed that the most entrenched oppressive
structure in human society is not capitalism, but male dominance.

The development of feminism is often divided into three waves, each of
which is associated with a characteristic type of political demand. The
first wave is said to include the emancipation and socialist movements
of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In addition to Engels'
The Origin of the Family (1884) and Mill's The Subjection of Women
(1869), the writings and speeches of the Russian born American
anarchist, Emma Goldman (1869-1940), are included among the major
philosophical statements of feminist thought in this period, which is
sometimes extended to include de Beauvoir's work, as well. Feminism is
thus foremost a social and political movement, and it is not surprising
to find that its core philosophical expressions take the form of social-
political philosophy.

The feminism of the 1960's and 70's is called 'second-wave'. It is
characterized by the radicalization of the movement. While first-wave
feminists called for an end to legal discriminations against women so
that there would be no legal difference between the status of men and
women, second-wave feminists came to view the concepts of male and
female social roles to be bound up with patriarchy and called for the
elimination of both.

The third-wave feminism of the 1980's and 90's is marked by a rejection
of any sort of essentialism. Earlier feminists had made general
pronouncements about women, their exploitation and how they should go
about liberation. Third-wave feminists argued that a natural implication
of the rejection of traditional ideas about gender is the realization of
the diversity of feminine types among women of different races, classes,
nationalities and sexual orientations. Third-wave feminists promote a
vision of liberation in which there is a wide ranging plurality rather
than any single ideal of the liberated woman. Liberation is seen as
diversity in the options available for sexual relations and gender
roles.

Another division of types of feminism is fourfold: liberal, radical,
socialist and post-modernist. Liberal feminism has its roots in the
writings of Mary Wollstonecraft (1757-1797) and John Stuart Mill
(1806-1873) who demanded equal rights for women. In the 1960's liberal
feminists in the United States fought for women's rights to abortion on
demand, support for working mothers, the universal availability of
childcare centers, and greater representation in government, business
and the academy. This led to calls

for 'affirmative action', legal measures to promote the hiring of women
and minorities in order to redress past injustices done to them. While
liberal feminists emphasize the common humanity of men and women as a
basis for equality of rights, radical feminists celebrate the
differences between the experiences of men and women. They argue that
women's experiences have been suppressed and that as a result all
aspects of culture, from literature and science to politics and law,
betray the biases of and in favour of male sensibilities. Socialist
feminism has been discussed already, and post-modernist feminism seems
to be another term for third-wave feminism.


