Feminist Theology
=================

Feminist theology began to establish itself in the 1970s. During that
decade the journal Concilium was launched to promote feminist theology,
the first conferences were held to discuss feminist theology in the
U.S., the World Council of Churches held a conference in Berlin on
sexism, and Mary Daly published Beyond God the Father.''9

Like liberation theology, to which it is closely linked both
historically and theoretically, feminist theology draws upon and
criticizes Marxist thought. Religion is interpreted in such a way that
its primary function is seen as liberation, liberation of the poor in
liberation theology and of women in feminist theology. Feminist theology
may be divided into moderate and radical tendencies. The moderate
tendencies advocate reinterpretations of the established religions to
purge them of what are considered sexist or androcentric elements. The
radical tendencies advocate a rejection of patriarchal religious thought
in favour of the worship of one or more goddesses or even witchcraft.

One of the areas of scholarship to which moderate feminists have devoted
their attention is the history of the Church. Feminists such as
Elisabeth Schussler Fiorenza argue that the early Christians were
egalitarians, but that as the Church hierarchy developed, bias against
women became institutionalized, and infected many subsequent theological
discussions.10

The method employed by Schussler Fiorenza is broadly sociological, and
draws upon liberation theology. The conclusions reached are relatively
moderate: the feminist critique is to lead to Church reform. More
radical conclusions are drawn by feminists who rely more on
psychoanalytic methods. Following C. G. Jung, feminists such as Christa
Mulack hold that the unconscious, which is associated with the feminine,
is primary, and that male dominated religion has suppressed the feminine
in favour of the male. On this view, the Hebrew Prophets are seen as
rebels against "the Great Goddess". Feminist theologians who concentrate
on psychology tend to reject equality feminism in favour of a feminism
in which the feminine is paramount, or gynocentric feminism. They also
tend to reject Christianity rather than call for its reform. While the
majority of feminist theologians appear to be comparatively moderate,
the radicals constitute a very influential minority. The most famous
feminist theologian, a radical advocate of gynocentric feminism
sometimes referred to as the 'foster mother of feminist theology', is
the former Catholic nun, Mary Daly. She was the first American woman to
earn a doctorate in Catholic theology at the University of Fribourg (in
1963). Her first major work, The Church and the Second Sex.11 echoes
many of the ideas of Simone de Beauvoir, but applies them to Church
history and theology. She calls for Church reform and a reinterpretation
of Christianity along the lines of equality feminism. Her most famous
work, however, is Beyond God the Father.12 In this work Daly argues that
the Christian concept of God is irredeemably andro-centric, and she
coins the often quoted slogan of feminist theology, "If God is male,
then the male is God."13 The male dominance in Christian thought is
further demanded by Trinitarian doctrine, according to which the male
Christ is

'God the Son', the second person of the Trinity, and the first person of
the Trinity is 'God the Father'. Instead, Daly proposes that God be
considered in a non-personal manner as the ground of all being, as
taught by Paul Tillich. Daly's next major work, Gyn/Ecologv,14 makes a
complete break from Christianity with the rejection of God in favour of
the Goddess and the glorification of witchcraft as the esoteric
knowledge of an earlier matriarchal culture. She also reasserts her
advocacy of lesbianism and rejection of the complementarity of the
masculine and the feminine. This was followed by the publication of an
even more radical work. Pure Lust15 in which lust is turned into a
virtue through which 'complete empowerment' is to be achieved.

Perhaps the most famous French feminist who has written on theology is
Luce Irigaray. She writes from a post-modernist perspective critical of
equality feminism. Her ideal is not a society in which gender
differences are eliminated, but one in which a new femininity emerges
from the experiences of women freed from male domination. Liberation has
theological implications. Like Mary Daly, she opposes Christianity for
its masculine conception of God, particularly as expressed in the
concept of the Trinity. Although she argues that women need religion and
divinity, the idea of God presented in the Judeo-Christian religions is
rejected. Respect for God is possible as long as no one realizes that He
is a mask concealing the fact that men have taken sole possession of the
divine, of identity, and of kinship. Once we give this whole issue the
attention and serious consideration it deserves, however, it becomes
obvious that God is being used by men to oppress women and therefore,
God must be questioned and not simply neutered in the current
pseudo-liberal way.16

She claims that only a "God in the feminine gender" can maintain women's
freedom and fulfillment "as individuals and as members of a
community."17

While most feminist theologians do not advocate the goddess theologies
suggested by Daly and Irigaray, they are moderate only in comparison to
extreme views such as these. So-called moderate feminist theologians
accept much of the general orientation of feminism: the rejection of
gender complementarity, the acceptance of 'non-traditional families'
consisting of homosexual partners with or without children and unwed
mothers with children, and a hermeneutic based on the attempt to uncover
gender bias. They advocate the rewriting of religious texts in such a
way that all masculine references to God are replaced by neuter or
masculine and feminine references, so that where the Bible refers to God
as "our Father", the feminists replace this by "our Mother and Father".
While this may seem superficial, moderate feminist theologians tend to
interpret the basic message of Christianity as a call to struggle for
liberation, particularly, the liberation of women from male domination,
which entails the dismantling of the traditional family.


