The Conflicting Ideals of Islam and Feminism
============================================

While feminism rejects any sort of complementarity of the sexes, Islam
emphasizes it through the accentuation of different social roles for men
and women. Feminism is critical of the institution of marriage because
it leads to the subordination of women, while Islam strongly recommends
marriage for both men and women, and the marriage institution in Islam
is one in which husbands and wives have clearly distinct
responsibilities and duties. The leadership role for men is taken for
granted in Islam, while it is considered oppression by feminists.

Traditional Islamic thought has celebrated the hierarchical structure of
the universe as a pointer toward the divine, and has seen echoes of this
in the relationship of mind and body, spirit and psyche, king and
subject, master and slave, and man and woman. This does not mean that
Islam condones all such relationships as found in traditional societies,
but it does mean that relationships of subordination and hierarchy are
not for that very reason to be considered evil, as feminists hold they
are. According to Elisabeth Moltmann-Wendel, the "crux of patriarchal
theology" is "the dominance implied in the relationship between mind and
body: will over the unconscious, history over nature, man over woman,,18
Rosemary Reuther displays the same attitude: "Sexual symbolism is
foundational to the perception of order and relationship that has been
built up in cultures. The psychic organization of consciousness, the
dualistic view of the self and the world, the hierarchical concept of
society, the relation of humanity and nature, and of God and
creationâ€”all these relationships have been modeled on sexual dualism.'"
As Hauke points out, "The implicit supposition here is that
subordination and inferiority are identical and that they signify
'division' and 'rape.19

Islam is the obedient subordination of man to God. In his submission to
God, however, man is not oppressed by God, but perfected. While
feminists consider the condition of women to be better when they have
more choices, because they hold that the good is the free expression and
satisfaction of free ranging desire, the good in Islam is viewed as the
annihilation of the self with its desires in divinity. This divine
encounter is approached through the attainment of virtue and the
conquest of the illicit desires of the self.


