Complementarity, the Family and Sexuality
=========================================

Islam has been condemned by Europeans for its acceptance of human
sexuality and sensuality and for its repression of the same. When
Victorian morals dominated Europe, Islam was seen as a naughty religion
offering its believers promises of sensual delight in the afterlife.
When European morals changed and Freudian ideas had been popularized,
Islam was condemned for the limitations it places on sexual relations.
In feminist writing, both attitudes are expressed. To a certain extent,
this may be due to different ideas about sexuality current among
feminists. Some feminists, for example, consider prostitution a
legitimate form of labour, and prefer the term 'sexual worker', while
other feminists consider prostitution and the 'sex industry' as
manifestations of the degradation of women at the hands of the
patriarchic system. Some feminists call for changes in Islamic societies
so that women may be given more sexual license, while others call for
greater restrictions to be placed upon men.

Islam clearly recognizes and accepts human sexuality. Sexual pleasure in
itself is not considered evil, as it is in some Christian texts.
Nevertheless, Islam places strict constraints on sexual behaviour. These
constraints differ for men and women. Men are permitted to have more
than one wife simultaneously, while women are not permitted to have more
than one husband at any one time. It must be admitted that Muslim men
sometimes abuse this and other permissions granted them by Islamic law
to do injustice to women. Feminists conclude from this that Islamic law
is oppressive to women. However, in the context of the laws governing
sexual relations in other societies, whether liberal, communist or
Christian, some men also take advantage of the opportunities they find
there to oppress women. Should we then conclude that all laws governing
sexual relations are oppressive to women? Even if a society were
constructed in which there were absolutely no laws governing sexual
relations, some men would still oppress women, probably even more than
they do in Muslim societies. The problem would seem to reside not in the
law, but in the morals of those who would abuse it for selfish purposes.

With all the freedoms and rights granted to women in the US, the claim
that women are better off than they were earlier is dubious. Statistics
show that more women live in poverty than before. Divorce has been made
easy, and custody of children is normally awarded to mothers, while the
support that could be provided by other family members has been
undermined with the erosion of the family.

Islamic law functions to preserve the family structure through
patriarchal hierarchy in which a base line of duties toward women is
clearly drawn. Furthermore, there is considerable room for women to
maneuver within the framework of Islamic family law to prevent their
husbands from arbitrarily divorcing them or remarrying. This seems far
better for women than the Western customs in which the average duration
of marriage is five years and in which it is common for men to keep
mistresses.


