[The Main Schools of Islamic Thought]
=====================================

Peripatetic (*mashsha'i* ) philosophy (*hiktna* ) in the Islamic world
had gained considerable importance between the ninth and twelfth
centuries. The peripatetic system which came to have considerable
significance within both Islamic and Western philosophy had been
established by Ibn Sina.1 His book*Mantiq al-mashriqiyyin* (Logic of the
Orientals) not only deals with logical differences between him and
Aristotle, but also includes a reference to other works of his own in
which he claims to have gone in an entirely different direction from
that of other peripatetic (*mashsha'i* ) thinkers. A highly influential
attack on the role of philosophy as part of Islam was subsequently
carried out by al-Ghazali in his*Tahafut al-faldsifa* (The Incoherence
of the Philosophers). Al-Ghazali argued that the peripatetic
philosophers (especially Ibn Sina) present as truths such theses as are
either faithdenying (*kufr* ) or innovatory (*bid'a* ). In spite of his
anti-philosophical leanings, closer inspection of many of his texts
reveals that he himself continued to adhere to many of the leading
principles of Ibn Sina's thought. Further, in common with many other
opponents of philosophy, he had a high regard for logic (which was
regarded as a tool of philosophy rather than as part of it) and insisted
on the application of logic to organized thought about religion. Some
opponents of philosophy such as Ibn Taymiyya went even so far as to
criticize logic itself.2 As a result of such criticisms, peripatetic
philosophy went into a sharp decline in the Sunni world after the
twelfth century. But it still continued as part of a variety of
philosophical approaches among Shi'i circles, where it combined with
elements of illuminationist (*ishraqi* ) philosophy, and developed into
more and more complex theoretical systems.

The*Ishraqi* school of philosophy originated with Shihabuddin Suhrawardi
whose basic premise was that knowledge is available to man not through
ratiocination alone, but through illumination resulting from the
purification of one's inner being. He founded a school of philosophy
which is mystical but not necessarily against logic or a limited use of
reason. He criticized Aristotle and the Muslim Peripatetics on logical
grounds, before setting out to expound the doctrine of ishraq3 This
doctrine was based not on the refutation of logic, but on transcending
its categories through an illuminationist knowledge based on immediacy
and presence, or what Suhrawardi himself called 'knowledge by presence'
(*al-'ilm al-huzuri* ), in contrast to conceptual knowledge (*al-'ilm
al-husuli* ) which is the ordinary method of knowing based on concepts.4

It was these two trends that Mulla Sadra tried to mix with the Shi'i
kalam. Mulla Sadra's metaphilosophy was based on existence (*wujud* ) as
the sole constituent of reality; it rejected any role for quiddities
(*mahiyya* ) or essences in the external world. Existence was for him at
once a single unity and an internally articulated, dynamic process, the
unique source of both unity and diversity. From this fundamental
starting point, Mulla Sadra was able to find original solutions to many
of the logical, metaphysical and theological difficulties which he had
inherited from his predecessors.


