[Mulla Sadraâ€™s Intellectual Journey]
====================================

Mulla Sadra, as a student at Isfahan, had been taught by or came under
the influence of such thinkers as Mir Muhammad Baqir Astarabadi (Mir
Damad), Shaikh Baha uddin Amuli (Shaikh Bahai) and Mir Abul Qasim
Findiriski.5 The new school of theosophical Shi'ism founded by Sadra,
was partly a continuation of the 'School of Isfahan' founded by these
three scholars.

Mir Damad, whose poetic*nom deplumewas 'Ishraq'* , is also referred to
as the 'Third Master' (after Aristotle and al-Farabi). He was recognized
as a jurist, a mystic and a philosopher. However, it was principally as
a philosopher that Mir Damad distinguished himself.7 *Kitab al-Qabasat*
is Mir Damad's most significant philosophical work and it consists
often*qabas* ('a spark of fire') and three conclusions.7 Its central
theme is the creation of the world and the possibility of its extension
from God.8 In it, Mir Damad engaged in the age-old debate over the
priority of 'essence' (*mahiyya* ) over 'existence' (*wujud* ). He
ultimately decided on the priority of essence, a position that was later
fundamentally disputed by his distinguished pupil Mulla Sadra.

Like Mir Damad, Mir Abul Qasim Findiriski, who had also taught Mulla
Sadra, was deeply influenced by the*mashsha'i* philosophy. He also wrote
on*Irfan* (gnosticism). He outlined a whole theory of visionary
experience, which presupposes the idea of 'spiritual senses' the senses
of*alam al-misal* which were later emphasized by Mulla Sadra.9

In his major work*al-Hikma al-mutaliya fi- 'l-asfdr al- 'aqliyya
al-arba'a* (The Transcendent Wisdom Concerning the Four Intellectual
Journeys), known popularly as***Asfar*** , Mulla Sadra confesses to the
shift from his teachers' position:

In the earlier days I used to be a passionate defender of the thesis
that the quiddities are the primary constituents of reality and
existence is conceptual, until my Lord gave me spiritual guidance and
let me see His demonstration. All of a sudden my spiritual eyes were
opened and I saw with utmost clarity that the truth was just the
contrary of what the philosophers in general had held... As a result [I
now hold that] the existences (*wujudat* ) are primary realities, while
the quiddities are the 'permanent archetypes' (*a'ydn thabita* ) that
have never smelt the fragrance of existence.10

By taking the position of the primacy of existence, Mulla Sadra was able
to answer the objections of Ibn Rushd and the illuminationists by
pointing out that existence is accidental to quiddity in the mind, in so
far as it is not a part of its essence. An implication of Mulla Sadra's
theory of reality and existence being identical is that existence is one
but graded in intensity; to this he gave the name*tashkik al-wujud*
(systematic ambiguity).11

According to Sadra, existence can be conceived of as a continual
unfolding of existence, which is thus a single whole with a constantly
evolving internal dynamic. Reality to him is ever-changing.

The imagined 'essence' gives things their identities. It is only when
crucial points are reached that one perceives this change and new
essences are formed in our minds, although change has been continually
going on. Due to this 'infinite diversification', the so-called realm of
'immutable

essences' does not exist for Mulla Sadra.12 Time, in his view, is the
measure of this process of renewal; it is not an independent entity
where events take place. Rather, it is a dimension exactly like the
three spatial dimensions - the physical world thus is a spatio-temporal
continuum.

This theory permitted Mulla Sadra to give an original solution to the
problem of the eternity of the world which had continually pitted
philosophers against theologians in Islam. In his system, the world is
eternal as a continual process of the unfolding of existence but since
existence is in a constant state of flux due to its continuous
substantial changes, every new manifestation of existence in the world
emerges in time. The world, that is, every spatio-temporal event from
the highest heaven downwards, is thus temporally originated, although as
a whole, the world is also eternal in the sense that it has no beginning
or end, since time is not something existing independently within which
the world in turn exists. Sadra conceived*hikma* (wisdom) as 'coming to
know the essence of beings as they really are', or as 'a man's becoming
an intellectual world corresponding to the objective world'.

Philosophy and mysticism, hikma and Sufism, are for him two aspects of
the same thing. To engage in philosophy without experiencing the truth
of its content confines the philosopher to a world of essences and
concepts, while mystical experience without the intellectual discipline
of philosophy can lead only to an ineffable state of ecstasy. When the
two go hand in hand, the mystical experience of reality becomes the
intellectual content of philosophy.

The characteristic features, or rather objectives of Mulla Sadra's
'transcendental philosophy' are thus described by James Morris:

[A] condition of intrinsic finality, completion, fulfillment, and inner
peace (compatible with the most intensive activity); a unique sense of
unity, wholeness, and communion (with no ultimate separation of subject
and object); a distinctive suspension (or warping or extension) of our
actual perceptions of time and space;

where nature is involved, a vision of all being as essentially alive (in
a way quite different from our usual distinction of animate and
inanimate entities); a sense of profound inner freedom and liberation
(or, negatively stated, the absence of anxiety, guilt or regret); a
perception of universal, nonjudgmental love or compassion, extending to
all beings; a paradoxical sense of 'ek-stasis' or standing beyond and
encompassing the ongoing flow of particular events (including the
actions of one's 'own' body).13

Sadra appears to be a man 'fundamentally concerned both with the
dialectical interplay between experience and transcendence and a journey
towards it, a journey which not just Muslims were making, but the whole
of humanity14 . M He was not only the one who brought about a synthesis
of traditional and rational knowledge and so was the most notable among
the philosophers of the Shiraz school, but he was in effect, a reviver
of rational sciences. In the words of Nasr:

[Mulla Sadra], by coordinating philosophy as inherited from the Greeks
and interpreted by the Peripatetics and Illuminationists before him with
the teachings of Islam in its exoteric and esoteric aspects succeeded in
putting

Gnostic doctrines of Ibn 'Arabi in logical dress. He made purification
of the soul a necessary basis and complement of the study of Hikmat,
thereby bestowing on philosophy the practice of ritual and spiritual
virtues which it had lost in the period of decadence of classical
civilization. Finally, he succeeded in correlating the wisdom of the
ancient Greek and Muslim sages and philosophers as interpreted
esoterically with the inner meaning of the Qur'an.15

Sadra laid the basis for what was effectively a new theosophical school
of Shi'ism which combined within it elements of various existing systems
to form a synthesis whose influence helped inspire renewed debates
within Twelver Shi'ism.16


