[Mulla Sadraâ€™s Philosophy In Subcontinent]
==========================================

When Mulla Sadra and the earlier generation of Iranian scholars were
debating fundamental issues of philosophy in the manner we have
outlined, India had already experienced under Akbar (d. 1605) an
official shift towards the patronage of the rational sciences at the
expense of Muslim theology. It was prescribed that only such sciences as
arithmetic, agriculture, household management, rules of governance,
medicine, etc., should comprise the educational curriculum.17

There was a stress on reason ('aql) which was to be given precedence
over traditionalism (*taqlid* ).18 This open stress on rationalism was
in some respects remarkable for the time. The chief proponent of the
rational attitude during this period was Abul Fazl.19 Among the two
important functions which Abul Fazl assigns to a just ruler (*kar giya*
) one-is that such a sovereign 'shall not seek popular acclaim through
opposing reason (*'aql* )'.20 The large number of Persian Shi'i
emigrants to Akbar's India included physicians like Hakim Abul Fath
Gilani along with his two brothers, Hakim Humam and Hakim Lutfullah
Hakim Ali, and a technologist like Shah Fathullah Shirazi, and the turn
towards rationalism could probably have also owed a little to their
arrival. We have the (admittedly late) testimony of Azad Bilgrami that
it was Fathullah Shirazi who introduced the works of Iranian rationalist
thinkers like Muhaqqiq Dawwani,21 Mir Sadruddin, Mir Ghiyasuddin Mansur
and Mirza Jan in India. He would not only himself teach these works but
under his influence they were introduced in the curriculum of the
seminaries of higher education.22 Most of these Shi'i migrants, it
appears, were the followers of the Akhbari fiqh which was the most
popular among the Shi'as in North India during the Mughal period.23 This
school rejected the legitimacy of independent legal reasoning and held
that in the absence of the twelfth Imam, who was in occultation,
state-related functions could not be carried out in his name by the
clergy.24

Conducive ground for the penetration of Iranian philosophical ideas
might also have been prepared by the visit of Mulla Sadra's teacher, Mir
Findiriski to India during the reign of Shahjahan.25 Findiriski (d.
1640-41), during his stay, is said to have been attracted to Indian
Yogic practices and to have written*Muntakhab Jog* , an anthology
of*Yoga Vashishtha* . He also wrote*Usui al-fusul* , a treatise on
Hinduism which unfortunately does not survive. He was the most notable
intellectual link between the tradition of Islamic philosophy of Iran
and the movement for the translation of Sanskrit texts into Persian in
India.26

The legacy of the*ma'qulat* (reason) favoured during the reign of Akbar
was carried forward by such noted scholars as Abdus Salam Lahori, Abdus
Salam Dewi, Shaikh Daniyal Chaurasi and ultimately Mulla Qutbuddin
Sihalawi, the father of Mulla Nizamuddin, the first rector of the
Farangi Mahal seminary.27 Another rationalist scholar in the Mughal
court was Mulla Shafi'ai Yazdi Danishmand Khan, the employer of the
famous Francois Bernier.

The hikmat traditions as they developed in Iran appear to have secured
easy acceptance in the Mughal Empire during the reign of Shahjahan. An
example can be given of Mulla Mahmud Faruqi of Jaunpur, a peripatetic

scholar who had been a student of Mir Damad at Shiraz. He was not only
invited to the Mughal court but counted Prince Shah Shuja and Shaista
Khan amongst his pupils.28 A contemporary of Mulla Sadra, he joined the
Mughal court in 1640. Very soon, we find him taking part in a debate
with Mulla Abdul Hakim Siyalkoti, a scholar who had written a number of
glosses and commentaries on the works of Mulla Sharif Juzjani, Sa'duddin
Taftazani and Mulla Jalaluddin Dawwani.29

The author of*Dabistan-i Mazahib* (c. 1653), during the same reign,
records the names of two scholars who had obtained training in the
philosophical traditions of Iran. Hakim Dastur of Isfahan received
training under 'Mir Baqir Damad, Shaikh Bahauddin Muhammad Mir Abul
Qasim Findiriski and other such scholars of Shiraz'.30 Another was Hakim
Kamran who, he says, was addressed by Mir Findiriski as 'brother'.31
Settled in the regions of Lahore and Agra respectively these scholars
might have also come into contact with Sadra' s views which were
creating a stir during the same period in Shiraz. Of the famous Sarmad,
who probably arrived in India from Iran in early 1640s, it is distinctly
stated by the same author, apparently on the basis of what Sarmad told
him himself, that he had studied 'under the sages of Iran, such as Mulla
Sadra and Mir Abu'l Qasim Findiriski and others'.32 How much his turn to
mysticism was influenced by their teaching should be an interesting
theme to pursue.

Evidence for the transmission of Mulla Sadra's ideas and his
'Transcendental Wisdom' and rationalism to India comes from what we
learn about commentaries written on him in India. Mulla Nizamuddin
Sihalwi (fl. 1700) of the Farangi Mahal tradition is credited with the
formulation of the curriculum for instruction known as*Dars-i Nizami*
.33 It was designed to direct the Student to the most difficult and
comprehensive books on a subject, so that the pupil was forced to think.
This curriculum has been criticized for placing too much emphasis on the
rational sciences. According to Robinson, it 'stipulates no specific
bias and insists on no particular books'.34

Mulla Nizamuddin wrote a commentary on Mulla Sadra's*Sharh-i Hidatayat
al-Hikma* (a book which expounds his transcendental philosophy) and
introduced this work in his syllabus, the darsi nizdmi.35 This
commentary is now popularly known as Sadra. Within a few years of the
compilation of Nizamuddin's work, Mulla Hasan Farangi Mahali (d.
1794-95), a famous logician of the same school of thought, wrote his own
commentary on Mulla Sadra's Hikmat, which was also taught in various
Indian seminaries of the eighteenth century. Similarly, 'Alim Sandilvi
Farangi Mahali, the founder of the Khairabad School, compiled his own
commentary of Mulla Sadra's Hikmat.36

Mulla Sadra appears to have been noticed by Shah Abdul Aziz Dihlavi as
well. A commentary written by the Shah,*Sharh-i Mulla Sadra* , is
preserved in the Maulana Azad Library, Aligarh.37 The Sadra was also
introduced in the curriculum of the*Shi'a madrasas* of*Awadh* and till
as late as the 1960s formed part of the curriculum at*Sultdn-ul Madaris*
a well-known Shi'i seminary at Lucknow. It is, however, quite
interesting to note that with the growing influence of the*Usuli fiqh*
after Dildar Ali Nasirabadi Ghufranma'ab' (1753-1820), the influence of
Sadra in the*Shi'i* seminaries in North India declined. According to the
Usulis thinkers like Mulla Sadra, who followed a mystical philosophy,
were heretics.38 Presently, Mulla Sadra and his works are hardly known
or remembered in either the Shi'i or the Sunni institutions of North
India.

It thus appears that within a few decades of the death of Mulla Sadra
(d. 1640), he began to receive notice from the scholarly circles in
India and interest in his philosophy continued to be displayed at least
up till the second half of the twentieth century. This shows that
despite the conventional Shia-Sunni divide, India and Iran yet belonged
to a largely common intellectual region. It is difficult, however, to
get an answer to the question as to how far Sadra's larger vision was
integrated or adopted in Indo-Muslim thought - whether it was just
noticed and docketed to be taught, or also endorsed fully in spirit.


