Chapter Nine: Al-Farabi
=======================

Life and works
--------------

What little information there is about the life of Abu Nasr al-Farabi
comes mostly from medieval Arabic biographers whose writings date from
the fourth/tenth to the seventh/ thirteenth centuries. The earliest
account in Ibn al-Nadim’s (d. 380/990) Kitab al-fithrist gives only
minimal information about al-Farabi’s life; later accounts add to these
bare bones extensive lists of his writings, information about his
teachers and pupils and a few anecdotes of dubious reliability.
Al-Farabi was probably of Turkish origin, born around 257/870 in Farab
in Turkestan. Although the details of his early education are murky, he
is reported to have studied logic in Baghdad under the Christian
scholars Yuhanna ibn Haylan (d. 910) and Abu Bishr Matta (d. 940), one
of the translators of Aristotle’s works into Arabic.

Since the School of Baghdad was the principal there in the Arabic world
to the philosophical and medical tradition of Alexandria, al-Farabi’s
connection with these teachers forged one of the earliest links between
Greek philosophy and the Islamic world.Al-Farabi himself is listed as
the teacher of Yahya ibn Adi (d. 974), another of the important
Christian translators and a noted logician in his own right. Al-Farabi
is also reported to have taught logic to the grammarian Ibn al-Sarraj,
who in turn instructed al-Farabi in the science of Arabic grammar (Ibn
Abi Usaybi ‘ah (1965): 606; Zimmermann, Introduction to al-Farabi
(1981a): cxviiicxxii).

Although there are numerous anecdotes told about al-Farabi’s subsequent
life and death by the later biographers, their historical accuracy is
suspect.Al-Frarabi appears to have left Baghdad for Syria in 330/942,
travelling to Aleppo and Damascus, and perhaps also to Egypt, between
339/942 and 337/948. He then returned to Damascus, where he died in
339/950.

From the lists of writings provided by the medieval biographers,
al-Farabi’s philosophical output appears to have been enormous, with
over one hundred works being credited to him (Walzer (1965): 780).

If these lists are accurate, only a small portion of al-Farabi’s
writings has survived.

Many of these have only recently become available in modern editions, so
the interpretation of al-Farabi’s work is continually being revised. By
far the largest part of al-Farabi’s writings is dedicated to logic and
the philosophy of language.

Indeed, al-Farabi’s logical acumen is mentioned as the basis of his
great renown by a number of the medieval biographers, and the
philosopher and historian Ibn Khaldun (732/1332-808/1406 claimed that it
was principally because of his logical achievements that al-Farabi was
dubbed the “second teacher” (al-mu ‘allim al-thani), second, that is,
only to Aristotle himself (Nasr (1985): 359-60). Apart from his logical
writings, which include both independent treatises and commentaries on
Aristotle, al-

Farabi also wrote extensively on political philosophy and the philosophy
of religion, which he treated as a branch of political philosophy, on
metaphysics and on psychology and natural philosophy. 4

Logic, phIilosophy of language and epistemology
-----------------------------------------------

Al-Farabi’s writings on logic and the philosophy of language include
both loose commentaries on the Aristotelian Organon and independent
treatises. In the former category al-Farabi produced a full set of
epitomes of the Organon, including, as had been the custom since the
days of the Alexandrian commentators, Porphyry’s Isagoge and Aristotle’s
Rhetoric and Poetics (al-Farabi 1959; 1986-7). He also wrote a great
commentary (sharh) on the De interpretation (al-Farabi 1960a; 1981a).
His epitomes are not detailed efforts at exegesis of the Aristotelian
texts, or mere summaries of them, but take their overall organization
and inspiration from Aristotle while developing personal interpretations
of Aristotelian logic and the school tradition that had developed from
it. Of his more personal writings, the Kitab al-huruf (“Book of Letters”
al-Farabi 1969b) and Kitab alalfaz al-musta‘malah fi’l-mantip (“Book of
Utterances Employed in Logic”, al-Farabi 1968a) are also devoted in
large part to logical and linguistic topics, emphasizing the need to
understand the relationship of philosophical terminology to ordinary
language and grammar. 5

One of the overriding concerns of al-Farabi’s logical writings is to
delineate precisely the relationship between philosophical logic and the
grammar of ordinary language. The historical reality of the importation
of philosophy into Arabic from a foreign language and culture, that of
ancient Greece, and the attendant difficulties created by the need to
invent a philosophical vocabulary in Arabic, had made this issue of
paramount importance for the earliest Arabic philosophers, including
al-Farabi’s own teachers and pupils. In addition to this, they including
al-Farabi’s own teachers and pupils. In addition to this, the linguistic
focus of much of Aristotelian logic produced territorial disputes with
the practitioners of the indigenous science of Arabic grammar, who were
concerned that the philosopher’ interest in Greek logic was nothing but
an attempt to substitute the grammar of Greek for the grammar of Arabic
Al-Farabi’s logical and linguistic writings represented one of the most
systematic efforts to harmonize these competing approaches to the study
of language.

Throughout his linguistic writings, al-Farabi upholds a conception of
logic as a sort of universal grammar that provides those rules that must
be followed in order to reason correctly in any language whatsoever.

Grammar, on the other hand, is always confined to providing the rules
established by convention for the use of the particular language of a
particular culture. As al-Farabi puts it in a well-known passage from
his Ihsa’al-‘ulum (“Catalogue of the Sciences”), “this art (of logic) is
analogous to the art of grammar, in that the relation of the art of
logic to the intellect and the intelligible is like the relation of the
art of grammar to language and expressions. That is, to every rule for
expressions which the science of grammar provides us, there is a
corresponding (rule) for intelligible which the science of logic
provides us” (al-Farabi (1968b): 68).

By arguing in this way that logic and grammar are two distinct,
rule-based sciences, each with its own proper domain and subject matter,
al-Farabi strives to establish logic as an autonomous philosophical
study of language that complements, rather than conflicts with,
traditional grammatical science. But though logic and grammar remain
distinct and autonomous sciences, al-Farabi also holds that the logician
and the philosopher are dependent upon the grammarian for their ability
to articulate their doctrines in the idiom of a particular nation. Hence
“the art of grammar must be indispensable for making known and alerting
us to the principles of the art (of logic)” (al-Farabi (1987): 83; Black
(1992): 48-56). Al-Farabi’s Kitab al-alfaz is one attempt to implement
this co-operation of logic with grammar. It illustrates, however, the
extent of indendence from conventional grammatical constaints that the
logician still retains in al-Farabi’s scheme. For while the text opens
with a declaration of the need to classify Arabic Particles along
logically perspicuous lines, it goes on to make the bold assertion that
the classification of particles offered by the Arabic grammarians
themselves is inadequate for this purpose, thereby forcing al-Farabi to
borrow the underlying grammatical theory from the works of Greek
grammarians, a declaration hardly likely to appease the champions of
Arabic grammatical theory (al-Farabi (1968a): 48; Black (1992): 77-83).

The Kitab al-huruf shows another facet of al-Farabi’s approach to the
philosophy of language. It opens with an extended classification of
Arabic particles in relation to the Aristotelian categories. The
discussions of individual particles in turn explore the relation between
popular uses of these terms in non-philosphical Arabic and the
modifications they undergo when they are transformed into technical
philosophical terms (al-Farabi (1969b): 61-130; see Druart (1987b) for a
study of al-Farabi’s treatment of jawhar (“substance”).

The second part of the texts presents a discussion of the origins of
language, the history of philosophy, and the relations between
philosophy and religion. One of its purposes is to situate the more is
to situate the more abstract linguistic discussion into a historical and
anthropological context, explaining how language itself originates and
branches out into popular and technical forms. The theme of the
relations between philosophy and religion is also cast in linguistic
terms. Religion is viewed as the expression of philosophical truth in
popular language, using the tools provided by the logical arts of
rhetoric and poetics. There is also a normative side to this discussion,
in so far as it lays out the ideal scenario for the development of a
philosophical vocabulary from ordinary language, and for the
establishment of a religion suitable for translating the fruits of that
philosophy back into popular terms. In passages that are meant to evoke
the historical reality of Islam’s encounter with Greek philosophy,
al-Farabi also identifies and ranks a variety of possible deviations
from the ideal development pattern, in which neither the philosophy not
the religion of a nation springs from its indigenous linguistic and
logical development; they are instead imported from another culture
(ibid.: 131-61). In the third and final part of the kitab al-huruf
al-Farabi returns to the theme of phlosphical terminology, offering an
elaborate classification of interrogative particles, their uses in
different types of philosophical inquiry and their relations to the
types of explanations offered by Aristotle’s four causes (ibid.:
162-266).

Although a large proportion of al-Farabi’s logical output is dedicated
to logical linguistic topics, he also made important contributions to
the formal aspects of logic, such as syllogistics, the theory of
demonstration and related epistemological issues. A predominant strand
in al-Farabi’s logic and epistemology is the adoption of a hierarchical
interpretation of the syllogistic arts (including rhetoric and poetics),
in which demonstration is identified as the proper method of philosophy,
and all communication. This strand is most evident in those writings
where al-Farabi is echoing the logical theory of the Alexandrian
commentators, although it is also closely linked to al-Farabi’s personal
teaching that religion is a popular imitation of philosophy whose tools
are the non-demonstrative arts (Black (1990): 1-19, 31-51, 63-71,
78-94). An One important facet of this interpretation is al-Farabi’s
analysis of the certitude in terms of what we would now call
second-order knowledge, arguing that certitude comprises both (1) a
belief that the truth to which we have assented cannot be otherwise; and
(2) a belief, in addition to this, that no other belief that the one
held is possible. (Al-Farabi adds that this process can in fact go on ad
infinitum.) Certitude, in short, requires no merely out knowing that
something is the case but also our knowledge that we know it (al-Farabi
(1986-7), 4:20). Having defined certitude in this way, al-Farabi is able
to free it from its traditional modal interpretation, thereby allowing
for the existence of both necessary certitude, in which what one
believes to be the case cannot be otherwise at any time; and
non-necessary certitude, which is certitude “only at some (particular)
time”.

Necessary certitude requires an object which exists necessarily and
immutably; non-necessary crtitude does not: “Necessary certitude and
necessarily certain is necessarily existent” (ibid. 22).

Despite this broadening of the notion of certitude, al-Farabi holds with
Aristotle that demonstration in the strictest sense pertains only to
matters that can be known with necessary certitude. But al-Farabi has
none the less added a new dimension to the theory of demonstration that
takes account of the subjective element within certitude - one’s
awareness of and knowledge that one knows - as well as the more
traditional objective element rooted in the necessity and immutability
of the object known.

Psychology and philosphy of mind
--------------------------------

With the exception of his Risalah fi’l-‘aql (“Treatise on the
Intellect”), al-Farabi left no indendent treatises on philosophical
psychology and the philosophy of mind. His views on these topics are
contained in his metaphysical and political writings. The most detailed
presentation of his views on the human soul occurs in the Madadi’ ara’
ahl al-madinah al-fadilal (“Principles of the Opinions of the People of
the Virtuous City”), where al-Farabi adopts an Aristotoelian approach to
psychology. The soul’s principal faculties are identified as the
nutritive, sensitive, imaginative and rational; they are ordered
hierarchically to one another, and within each there are “ruling” and
“subordinate” elements. Al-Farabi does not separate the common sense off
as a distinct faculty, but treats it simply as the ruling faculty within
the sensible soul “in which everything that is apprehended by (the five
senses) is collected” (al-Farabi (1985): 166-9). Nor does al-Farabi have
any doctrine of “internal senses” The kitab al-buruf shows another facet
of al-Farabi’s approach to the philosophy of language. 6 It opens with
an extended classification of Arabic particles in relation to the
Aristotelian categories. The discussions of individual particles in turn
explore the relations between popular uses of these terms in
non-philosophical Arabic and the modifications they undergo when they
are transformed into technical philosophical terms (al-Farabi (1969b):
61-130; see Druart (1987b) for a study of al-Farabi’s treatment of
jawhar (“substance”).

The second part of the text presents a discussion of the origins of
language, the history of philosophy, and the relations between
philosophy and relation. One of its purposes is to situate the more
abstract linguistic discussions into an historical and anthropological
context, explaining how language itself originates and branches out into
popular and technical forms. The theme of the relations between
philosophy and religion is also cast in linguistic terms.

Religion is viewed as the expression of philosophical truth in popular
language, using the tools provided by the logical arts of rhetoric and
poetics. There is also a normative side to this discussion, in so far as
it lays out the ideal scenario for the development of a philosophical
vocabulary from ordinary language, and for the establishment of a
religion suitable for translating the fruits of the philosophy back into
popular terms. In passages that are meant to evoke the historical
reality of Islam’s encounter with Greek philosophy, al-farabi also
identifies and ranks a variety of possible deviations from the ideal
development pattern, in which neither the philosophy nor the religion of
a nation springs from its indigenous linguistic and logical development;
they are instead imported from another culture (ibid.: 131-61). In the
third and final part of the Kitab al-huruf al-Farabi returns to the
theme of philosophical terminology, offering an elaborate classification
of interrogative particles, their uses in different types of
philosophical inquiry and their relation to the types of explanations
offered by Aristotle’s four causes (ibid: 162-226).

Although a large proportion of al-Farabi’s logical output is dedicated
to linguistic topics, he also made important contributions to the more
formal aspects of logic, such as syllogistics, the theory of
demonstration and related to the status of tools for non-philosophical
communication.

This strand is most evident in those writings where al-Farabi is echoing
the logical theory of the Alexandrian commentators, although it is also
closely linked to al-Farabi’s personal teaching that religion is a
popular imitation of philosophy whose tools are the non-demonstrative
arts (Black (1990): 1-19, 31-51, 63-71, 78-94). An to unify his
treatment of the common sense, imaginative and memorative faculties, and
he does not mention anything like the faculty that Ibn SIna (Avicenna)
will later call “estimation” (wahm). 10 Like Aristotle, he locates the
physiological seat of the common sense and the imagination in the heart,
a tradition that later internal sense philosophers will modify in the
light of Galenic physiology, placing the organs of these faculties in
the brain. As for the appetitive activities of the soul, al-Farabi views
them as intimately tied to the activities of the corresponding cognitive
powers which give rise to them. Thus, for every cognitive
faculty-sensation, imagination and reason-an a petition towards the
objects perceived naturally supervenes upon their acts of all sensible
and rational voluntary acts, but it does not serve to explain the actual
arousal which the soul controls the body, enabling it to seek what the
soul perceives as desirable, and to flee what it perceives as harmful.

Al-Farabi’s view of the imaginative faculty deserves special attention
because of the role assigned to imagination in prophecy and divination.
According to al-Farabi, imagination (takhayyul, equivalent to
Aristotle’s phantasia) is a retentive and a judgmental faculty,
responsible both for the retention of the images of sensible things
after they have absented themselves from the senses and for exercising
control over them by composing and dividing them to form new images
(ibid.: 168-9). To these two functions al-Farabi, also adds a third
function, that of imitation (muhakah), using the Arabic term equivalent
to mimesis as it had been used in Aristotle’s Poetics. By means of this
ability, the imaginative faculty is able to represent objects with the
images of other objects, and thereby to extend its representative
ability beyond the depiction of sensible qualities to encompass the
imitation of bodily temperaments, emotions and desires, and even
immaterial realities (ibid.: 211-19). This mimetic ability of the
imagination provides the psychological underpinnings of al-Farabi’s
claim in his logical writings that the art of poetics has as its goal
the evocation of acts of imagination, takhyil. In the context of
psychology, al-Farabi also employs it to explain prophecy and
divination. To understand this explanation, however, one must first
understand al-farabi’s conception of the rational faculty and the
process of intellectual cognition.

Al-Farabi’s account of the faculties and stages which characterize
intellectual cognition belongs to a tradition of interpreting
Aristotle’s de anima that goes back to the Greek commentators. Within
this tradition, Aristotle’s rather loose descriptions in DE anima, 3.4
and 5 of an intellect which “becomes all things” and an intellect “which
makes all things” are given the standard labels “potential” and “agent”
intellect. 11 The potential intellect is identified as a faculty within
the individual human soul; the agent intellect, however, is treated as
an immaterial, eternal substance that functions as the efficient, moving
cause of human intellection, enabling universal concepts to be
abstracted from sensible images.

In addition to the potential and agent intellects, this tradition also
identified a variety of distinct stages between potency and
actualization within the human intellect and affixed them with own
labels. In al-

Farabi’s psychology, this development yieds four different meaning for
the term “intellect” (‘aql):12 (I) the potential intellect (al-‘aql
bi’l-quwwah); (2) the actual intellect (al-‘aql bi’l-fi’l); (3) the
acquired intellect (al-‘aql al-mustafad); and (4) the agent intellect
(al-‘aql al-fa’al). Following Alexander of Aphrodisias, al-Farabi
identifies the potential intellect as a pure disposition for abstracting
the forms or quiddities of the object to be known from their
corresponding sensible images. As this potential intellect comes to
acquire intelligible concepts, it passes from pure potency into
actuality, and thus becomes the second type of intellect, an actual
intellect. The process of actualizing intelligible is of course a
gradual one, which has at its goal the acquisition of all the
intelligible and all the sciences available to human knowledge. When
eventually the intellect reaches this goal (which probably only few
individuals can achieve), it loses all remaining tinges of potency, and
thus is rendered pure form and pure actuality.

Since on Aristotelian principles anything is intelligible to the degree
that it is form and actuality, only at this point does the intellect
realize its full capacity for selfcontemplation.

This, then, marks the attainment of the third stage of intellect, the
acquired intellect. At this stage, by virtue of having become fully
actualized, the individual human intellect attains a rank akin to that
of the other immaterial intellects, including the agent intellect, and
becomes one or similar in species with them. As a consequence, it is now
able to contemplate not only itself and the intelligible it has acquired
from material things, but also the agent intellect and the other
separate, immaterial substances (al-Farabi (1985) 196-207, 240-5;
(1948): 12-32 and (1973): 215-20; see also Davidson (1972): 134-54;
Jolivet (1977).

This last consequence of the doctrine of the acquired intellect is
upheld, with only minor variations, in all of al-Farabi’s extant
discussions of intellectual cognition, and it is implied by the
eschatological theories of his political philosophy (discussed under
“Practical Philosophy” below). But mention must be made of the
conflicting evidence provided by later philosophers such as Ibn Tufayl,
Ibn Bajjah, and Ibn Rushd (Averroes), who tell us that in a commentary
on Aristotle’s Nichomachean Ethics al-Farabi repudiated the possibility
of a direct cognitional union or “conjunction” (ittisal) with the agent
intellect (see Pines (1972)).

More precisely, according Averroes al-Farabi rejected the ontological
transformation that the doctrine appeared to require, that is, its
assertion that, through intellectual development, a generable and
corruptible mortal human being could become and eternal and
incorruptible separate intellect (Ibn Rushd (1953): 433, 481, 485). How
al-Farabi would have reconciled this claim with the doctrines expressed
in his surviving works, and whether it represents al-Farabi’s mature and
considered view on the matter, must remain an open question, however,
given the lamentable loss of the Nichomachean Ethics commentary itself.

Against the backdrop of al-Farabi’s teachings on the acquired and agent
intellects, and on the imaginative faculty, the psychological aspects of
his theory of prophecy can now be outlined. According al-Farabi,
prophecy in its various manifestations is the result of an interaction
between the intellect and the mimetic capacities of the imaginative
faculty. What makes prophetic knowledge unique is not its intellectual
content per se, for that belongs equally to the philosopher and the
prophet: true prophecy, like the true religion based upon it, is a
symbolization and imitation of the selfsame truths known demonstratively
and intellectually in philosophy? But all prophets possess, in addition
to their intellectual capacities, the gift of an especially keen
imaginative faculty. This gift allows their imaginations to receive an
influx or emanation of intelligible from the agent intellect, an
emanation that is normally reserved for the intellectual faculty alone.
Since by its nature the imagination cannot, however, receive abstract
intelligible as abstract, the prophet exploits the mimetic abilities of
the imagination to represent these intelligible in concrete, symbolic
form. In this way, what is normally available only to the select few who
can attain the level of the acquired intellect can be communicated by
the prophet, under the guise of sensory images, to a much wider,
non-philosophical public (al-Farabi (1985): 210-27, 240-7; see also
Rahman (1958), Walzer (1962), Macy (1986), Daiber (1986b).

Metaphysics
-----------

Al-Farabi’s metaphysical teachers have posed certain interpretive
difficulties to modern scholars, not only because of the attribution to
him of the works mentioned above which are now generally believed to
reflect Avicenna teaching but also because of the ambiguity of the
attitude he takes in his authentic writings towards Aristotelian and
Neo-Platonist metaphysics. Recent scholarship has shown that al-Farabi
very carefully avoids mentioning Neo-Platonistemanation metaphysics in
his accounts of Aristotelian philosophy, and that, with the exception of
the Kitab al-jam ‘(“Harmonization of the Opinions of Plato and
Aristotle”, al-Farabi (1960b), he never treats the spurious Theology of
Aristotle as an authentic work. The most observations is that recently
proposed by Druart, arguing that al-Farabi personally upheld the
emanation cosmology central to Neo-Platonism, even while he recognized
that it was not Aristotelian.

Emanation was, in short, adopted to fill in the lacuna that al-Farabi
felt had been left by Aristotle’s failure to complete his account of the
part of metaphysics that comprises theology or divine science, in which
the causal relations between divine and natural being is set forth
(Druart 1987a).

Viewed from this perspective, al-Farabi’s emanation theories form an
integral part of his contribution to the discussion within Islamic
philosophy of the nature and scope of metaphysics and its relation to
natural philosophy. Al-Farabi’s influence on subsequent developments in
this area is attested to in a well-known episode from Avicenna’s
autobiography, in which Avicenna relates how he had read Aristotle’s
Metaphysics forty times and yet still remained confused as to its
purpose.

Only after chancing upon a copy of al-Farabi’s opusculum Fi aghrad
al-Hakim fi kitab al-huruf (“On the Aims of Aristotle’s Metaphysics”)
was his perplexity finally dissolved. Although Avicenna does not make
explicit exactly how al-Farabi’s exceedingly short treatise resolved his
mental impasse, it appears that Avicenna was impressed by al-Farabi’s
remarks regarding the relationship between Aristotle’s Metaphysics and
the science of theology or “divine science” (al-‘ilm al-ilahi).

For al-Frabi opens his treatise by noting that while Aristotelian
metaphysics is often described as “divine science”, the text is in fact
dedicated to the study of being and its principles and properties, not
to the study of divine, separate substances. Al-Farabi observes that
many readers have been confused by this point, expecting the entire text
to be about God, the soul and the intellect, and finding that these
topics are all but missing, save from book lambda (Gutas (1988):
238-42). Al-Farabi then proceeds to outline conception properties of
being qua being. He affirms that theology is indeed a part of this
science, not as its primary subject but rather only to the extent that
“God is a principle of absolute being” (al-wujud al-mutlaq) (al-Farabi
(1890): 34-7, Trans. In Gutas (1988): 240-2).

In these corrections of what he takes to be the previous misreading of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics, al-Farabi affirms that divine science is indeed
an important part of metaphysics, while acknowledging that only a very
small portion of Aristotle’s text - a single book-is devoted to the
topic. Perhaps this is why al-Farabi declared at the end of his Falsafah
Aristutalis (“Philosophy of Aristotle”) that “we do not possess
metaphysical science” (1961a): 133; (1969a): 130; cf. Druart (1987a):
35). But major doctrine of Neoplatonic metaphysic known to al-Farabi,
the theory of emanation has as its focal point divine beings and their
causal links to the sublunar world. And it is this doctrine that
provides the metaphysical foundations for al-Farabi’s two most important
personal works, al-Madinah al-fadilah and al-Siyasah almadaniyyah (“The
Political Regime”), also known as the Mabadi’ al-mawjudat (“Principles
of Beings”) in virtue of its metaphysical parts.

The theory of emanation espoused by al-Farabi in these works rests upon
the twin pillars of Ptolemaic geocentric cosmology and the metaphysics
of the divine. The framework of emanation is provided by cosmology. The
universe is viewed as a series of concentric spheres: the outermost
sphere, called the first heaven; the sphere of the fixed stars; and the
spheres of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus Mercury, and fainally,
the Moon. The mechanics of emanation as a theory of sources. In its
basic premise it represents a radical departure from Aristotle, for whom
God was not an efficient cause of the very existence (wujud) of all
other beings, but only the first cause of motion in the universe. Many
of the properties of al-

Farabi’s emanational God are Aristotelian, however: God is one,
immaterial, eternal, and acts of necessity. Most importantly, however,
God is characterized by the activity of self-contemplation; there is an
overflow or emanation (fayd) from God of a second intellect. The second
intellect, like God, is characterized by the activity of
selfcontemplation; but it must, in addition to this, contemplate God
himself. By virtue of its thinking of God, it generates yet a third
intellect; and by virtue of its selfcontemplation, it generates the
celestial sphere that corresponds to it, the first heaven. Al-Farabi
then repeats this dyadic pattern of emanation for each sphere in the
cosmology and its corresponding intellect, arriving at a total of ten
intellects other than God. 13 The terminus of the emanation process is
our own sublunary world, whose corresponding intellect is none other
than the agent intellect familiar from Aristotle’s De anima (al-Farabi
(1985):88-107; (1964)47-8, 52-3).

Through its culmination in the agent intellect, al-Farabi’s adoption of
the Neo-Platonist metaphysics of emanation provides the means whereby
Aristotelian philosophy can be placed in a more systematic framework
than the Stag rite’s own writings allow. For in Aristotelian terms,
natural philosophy includes the study of psychology: hence one and the
same being, the agent intellect, represent the upper terminus of physics
and the lower terminus of metaphysics. In this way, emanation allow
al-Farabi not only to fill in the gap between the theological and
ontological elements within metaphysics but also to forge a link between
the theoretical sciences of metaphysics and physics that is not clearly
articulated by Aristotle himself.

Practical philosophy
--------------------

The unity that al-Farabi forges between the theoretical sciences of
metaphysics and psychology is also mirrored in al-Farabi’s political
philosophy which, along with logic, represents the major focus of his
philosophical writings. While the rest of al-Farabi’s philosophy is
generally Aristotelian in character, supplemented by the Neo-Platonist
elements that have already been noted, al-Farabi’s political philosophy
is Platonic, and reflects Plato’s ideal of basing political philosophy
upon metaphysical foundations. Thus, al-Farabi’s two principal works on
political philosophy-the Siyasah madaniyyah and the Madinah
fadilah -also contain the fullest expression of his metaphysical views.
Although al-Farabi does devote some attention in these and other works
of practical philosophy to ethical issues such as the nature of
practical wisdom, the moral virtues and deliberation, most of
al-Farabi’s interest is on political theory, in particular the
requirements of the ideal state and its ruler, and the question of the
relationship between philosophy and religion within such a state.

In his work the Tahsil al-sa‘adah (“Attainment of Happiness”), al-Farabi
argues for the real and conceptual identity of the notions of
philosopher, legislator and Imam, and claims that the diversity of
religious and philosophical labels reflects nothing more than different
emphases on distinct aspects of a single reality. This means, in good
Platonic fashion that those who do not attempt to apply their
theoretical perfection to practical and political pursuits cannot claim
to be true philosophers: such people remain what al-Farabi calls “vain”
or futile philosophers.

Given the need to communicate this philosophy to the general populace,
such a philosopher must presumably also have rhetorical perfection to
practical and political pursuits cannot claim to be true philosophers:
such people remain what al-Farabi calls “vain” or futile philosophers.

Given the need to communicate this philosophy to the general populace,
such a philosopher must presumably also have rhetorical poetic and
imaginative abilities, and thus fulfil as well the conditions of
prophecy outlined in the psychological portions of al-farabi’s political
works (al-Farabi (1981b) 89-97, (1969a): 43-9; cf. Mahdi (1972a):
188-92).

Of course, al-Farabi recognizes that the ideal combination of prophecy
and philosophy, religious and political leadership, and moral and
intellectual virtue in a single ruler is something that is seldom if
ever realized in political practice. 15As a result, the harmony between
philosophical and religious elects that is theoretically possible, but
which requires a very specific historical development and fulfilment of
these ideal conditions, is not easy, and perhaps even impossible, to
realize in practice (al-Farabi (1969b): 152-7). Thus both of al-Farabi’s
major political treatises also outline the varieties of departures from
the ideal state that may occur, following the model of Plato’s
discussion of virtuous and vicious political regimes in the Republic.
Al-Farabi classifies the corruptions of the ideal political union into
three general categories: ignorant, wicked and errant cities, each of
which has several different types within it. The ignorant cities all
have in common their failure to comprehend the true nature of humanity,
its place in the cosmos and, hence, its natural end. Their ignorance of
human theology, they substitute some other false goal for the true end
discerned by philosophy. Al-Farabi isolates the following varieties of
ignorant cities: (1) indispensable cities, which seek mere subsistence
as their goal; (2) vile cities, which seek only to accumulate wealth;
(3) base cities, which exist solely for the sake of sensual
gratification; (4) democratic cities, whose goal is honour and fame; (5)
tyrannical cities, in which power and domination of others is the
principal goal; and (6) democratic cities, in which there is no single
motivating end, but each citizen is left to seek whatever he or she
deems best.

The wicked and errant states are those which possess now or once
possessed some sort of knowledge of the true human end, but fail none
the less to follow that knowledge. Wicked cities are those in which the
virtuous end is deliberately abandoned for another one, whereas errant
cities are those in which the leader personally has true knowledge of
the proper end that his city should follow, but deceives the citizens by
presenting them with false images and representations of that end.
Finally, al-Farabi also gives some attention to those whom he calls “the
weeds” in the virtuous cities, people who, for lack of ability or other
baser motives, inhabit the virtuous city and conform to its laws, while
failing to participate personally in its goals (al-Farabi (1964):
74-108, Mahdi and Lerner (1963):35-56; (1985)” 228-59). 16

Although one purpose of the foregoing classification of corrupt states
is clearly to educate philosophers so as to enable them to become
virtuous leaders of virtuous regimes, al Farabi’s focus upon the proper
discernment of the true human end as the defining characteristic of the
virtuous city reminds us that the ultimate motivation of his political
philosophy is to ensure that the conditions for happiness are met by all
people as far as possible. For this reason, al-Farabi concludes his
classification of cities and citizens with a consideration of human
happiness in eschatological terms, in which reward and punishment in the
afterlife is interpreted in accordance with al-Farabi’s belief that
human happiness ultimately consists in the assimilation with the agent
intellect that is achieved when one reaches the stage of acquired
intellect. 17Only the citizens of the virtuous city will be able to
achieve this goal and thereby survive after death when their actualized
intellectual souls separate from their bodies. Al-farabi implies that
this immortality is not personal, however, since the body, the principle
of numerical diversity within the human species, is no longer present,
and hence “the differences of the souls are equally indeterminable in
number” (1985: 264-5).

Those who lived in ignorance were not culpable: they will simply be
annihilated as a natural consequence of their failure to actualize their
intellectual powers, which is the condition for the soul’s survival
after death. The same is true for the citizens who have been misled by
their leaders in the errant cities. Punishment in the afterlife is
reserved for the citizens of the wicked cities and the rulers of the
errant cities, who possessed knowledge of the true end but deliberately
rejected it to pursue other ends. Their punishment consists in the
simple continuance of their corrupt desires after death, desires which,
because of their bodily roots, can no longer be fulfilled and so
eternally torment their possessors (al-Farabi (1985): 258-77).

Al-Farabi’s subsequent influence
--------------------------------

The picture that emerges from the variety of al-Farabi’s writings is an
impressive one.

Al-Farabi’s logical and epistemological achievements, which have only
recently come to light, have a very modern ring to them: his interest in
careful linguistic analysis as an essential tool for philosophical
precisions, and his broadening and evaluated, have a strong affinity
with recent trends in philosophy, in particular within the
Anglo-American world. But in al375

Farabi these interests were as much a result of the peculiar historical
circumstances in which he practiced philosophy as were his political and
metaphysical teachings. They reflected the need to address seriously the
sometimes competing claims between philosophy and religion, and to find
a niche for philosophy and its discourse in an Arabic and Islamic
milieu. Al-Farabi’s interest in types of rationality, in modes of
discourse and argumentation, and in the relations between ordinary and
philosophical challenge, although they remain philosophically important
in their own right.

The linguistic sensitivity that al-Farabi displays, his concern to
communicate philosophy to a wide variety of audiences and his careful
efforts to assimilate the Greek philosophical tradition into an Islamic
context are all hallmarks of al-Farabi’s writings that help to explain
the high esteem in which he was held by subsequent philosophers in the
Islamic, Jewish, and to a lesser extent Christian, traditions. We have
seen the debt that Avicenna openly acknowledged to al-farabi up as a key
authority, especially in logic, psychology and political philosophy. In
the Jewish philosophical tradition, Moses Maimonides gave al-Farabi the
highest praise among all his predecessors, once again in the area of
logic in particular: “As for works on logic, one should only study the
writings of Abu Nasr al-Farabi. All his writings are faultlessly
excellent.

One ought to study and understand the. For he is a great man”
(Introduction to Moses Maimonides (1963) Ix ). In the Latin West,
although al-Farabi’s writings were less extensively translated than
those of Avicenna and Averroes, works like his Ihsa’al-ulum and Risalah
fi’l-aql were of central importance in the early transmission of
Aristotelian thought, and gave Christian thinkers their first glimpse of
the wealth of new philosophical material that was to follow.

### Notes

###

1- Al-Farabi’s full name was Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Tarkhan
ibn Awzalugh (or Uzlugh) al-Farabi. The principal medieval biographies
from which information on his life are: Ibn al-Nadim (d.380/990) (1979):
599-602, 329-31; al-Mas‘udi (d.345/956) (1960): 39-41; Sa ‘id ibn Ahmad
ibn Sa‘id al-Taghlibi (d.463/1070) (1985): 137-40; Ibn Abi Usaybi’ah (d.
646/1248) (1903): 277-9. For convenient summaries of this data see
Walzer (1965): 778-9, as well as Walzer’s Introduction to al-Farabi
(1985): 2-5; Fakhry (1983): 107-9; and Madkour (1963): 450-2.

2- On the School of Baghdad see Meyerhoff (1930).

4- See Walzer, Introduction to al-Farabi (1985): 2-5 for a summary of
these tale; convincing arguments against their historicity are given in
Mahdi (1990):693-4, 705-7, 712-13.

3- Scholarly Interpretations of al-Farabi’s metaphysical and
psychological views written before the mid twentieth century must be
approached with caution because of the attribution to al-Farabi of a
number of treatises now believed to have been written by Avicenna or one
of his later followers.

These treatises include the Fusus alhikam (in al-Farabi (1890); see
Georr (1941-6) and Pines (1951); the Ta’liqat fi’lhikmah (in al-Farabi
(1927); see Michot (1982); the Zinunal-kabir alyunani (in al-Farabi
(1927); see Druart (1987a): 25 n. 9); and Ithbat (in al-Farabi (1927);
see madkour (1963): 452). The ‘Uyun al-masa’il and the related Da’awi
qalbiyyah are also of doubtful authenticity (see Cruz Hernandez
(1950-1); Rahman (1958): 21-2), although recently Lameer has argued for
restoring the ‘Uyun as genuinely Farabian (Lameer (1994): 24-30).

Rahman’s arguments against this text remain compelling, however. Marmura
(1985): 347 and Lameer (1994): 33-43 have questioned as well the
authenticity of the Kitab al-jam ‘bayna ra’yay alhakimayn Aflatun
al-ilahi wa- Aristutalis (al-Farabi 1960b), a work in which the
traditional Neoplatonic theme of the identity of Aristotle’s and Plato’s
teachings is upheld, and the sole text in which al-Frabi treats the
spurious Theology of Aristotle (based on Plotinus, Enneads, 4-6) as a
genuinely Aristotelian Text.

4- For general discussions of al-Farabi’s logic in its historical
context see Abed (1991), Elamrani-Jamal (1983), Eskanasy (1988), Gatje
(1971a), Hasnawi (1985), Langhade (1981) and Zimmermann in al-Farabi
(1981a).

5- The title of the work is usually translated as Book of Letters,
although Book of particles is equally possible. For studies of this text
see Arnaldez (1977), Vajda (1970), Mahdi (1972b).

6- For further consideration of al-Farabi’s poetics, see Black (1989 and
1990), Galston (1988), Heinrichs (1978) and Kemal (1991).

7- In addition to the discussion in the Kitab al-burban, al-Farabi also
wrote a short independent work on this topic, called the Shara’it
al-yaqin (“Conditions of Certitude”, in al-Farabi (1986-7) 4: 97-104).

8- For a discussion of other aspects of al-Farabi’s treatment of
Aristotelian demonstration, see Galston (1981).

9- The only appearances of this term occur in the spurious ‘Uyun
al-masa’il and Fusus al-hikam.

10- Often these are rendered as “possible” and “active”. In the Madinah
fadilah, al-Farabi also uses the Alexandrian term “material intellect”
as a synonym for the potential intellect.

11- These are the subdivisions of the meanings of “intellect” within
psychology, which is itself only one of six meanings of the term
identified in the Risalah fi’l-aql-aql.

12- The use of a dyadic model separates al-Farabi from earlier
Neoplatonic thinkers and from the later Avicenna, who use triadic models
to account for the emanation of a distinct rational soul for each
celestial body. Al-Farabi does not distinguish the soul as mover of the
sphere from its intellect. See, for example, al-Farabi (1964): 34-5; 53.

13- Thereare numerous studies of al-Farabi’s practical philosophy,
including Butterworth (1983): 226-30, Daiber (1986a), Mahdi (1975a and
1975b) and Strauss (1945 and 1957). The most comprehensive is Galston
(1990).

14- Al-Farabi also allows a plurality of rulers to pool their diverse
talents if no one person can be found to combine all of the qualities
needed by the virtuous ruler (al-Farabi (1985): 253-4).

15- Al-Farabi also outlines in some detail the nature of the false
religious beliefs that underlie the ignorant and errant views of the
human end in al-Farabi (1985): 286-329.

16- Of course, the reports about al-Farabi’s views in his lost
Nicomachean Ethics commentary have made the interpretation of these
passages problematic.

### BIBLIOGRAPHY

###

1- Al-Bayhaqi, Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Zayd (1946) Tarikh hukama al-Islam,
ed. M.Kurd ‘Ali (Damascus).

2- Al-Farabi (1890) Alfarabi’s philosophische Abhandlungen, ed. F.
Dieterici (Leiden). (1927) Rasa’il al-Farabi: (Hyderabad).

3- (1948): Risalah fi’l-‘aql, ed. Maurice Bouyges (Beirut).

4- (1959): “Kitab al-shi’r li-Abi Nasr al-Farabi”, ed. Mushin Mahdi,
Shi’r, 3:91-6.

5- (1960a): Sharh al-Farabi li-Kitab Aristutalis fi al-‘ibarah, ed. W.
Kutsch and S.Marrow (Beirut).

6- (1960b): Kitab al-jam‘ bayn ra’yay alhakimayn Aflatun al-ilahi
wa-Aristutalis, ed. Albert Nader (Beirut).
