Chapter One: What is Philosophy?
================================

This chapter tries to provide a definition of philosophy. Real universal
sciences are often defined by their subjects. Thus, in order to define
philosophy, we have to know its subject and for that purpose we have to
know what the subject of science in general is. In treating the subject
of science, we start our discussion by comparing philosophy with other
real universal science considering the variety of questions they
discuss(the scope of their realm).

The scope of philosophy To understand the range of philosophy, it is
better to consider the following philosophical question:

Is there a reality outside the mind? If there is, is it a knowable
reality? I f so, what, essentially, is knowledge?

Is there a substance called a ‘corporeal body ‘or there are only
corporeal accidents, such a colour, shape, heat and so on?

If there is such a substance, is it compound or simple ?if it is
compound , what is its simplest part?

Do accidents have any existence other than the substance they
characterize?

Does God, that is a being who is the cause of all things but needless of
any cause, exist?

Doe God have attributes? if so , in what way do these attributes exist?
Are they identical with existence of God or different from it ? Are they
limited or unlimited?

Does spirit exist? If so, is it material or immaterial? What about
angles?

Is there life after death?

What is movement and where does it occur? Does it occur only in the
attribute and accidents possessed by bodies or it takes place in the
depth of their existence as well? Do time and space exist? If so, what
is their reality?

Does the world have a temporal beginning and ending?

Does it have any spatially?

Does an existent become non-existent or vice versa? Once an existent
become nonexistent is it possible to bring it back into existence.

These are a few of the issue discussed in philosophy. But a careful
consideration of even these few questions will show how extensive the
realm of philosophy is. It discusses both the mind and the external
world. Its investigations range from the simplest parts of the body to
spirit, angels and god. It studies the accidents and the appearance and
also the essence and the depth of things. It concerns itself with all
that exists in the world and in the hereafter, from time without
beginning to eternity without end. Therefore, in contrast to other
fields of learning, the philosophical search is not limited to a certain
pare of the universe. Why is that so? The answer should be looked for in
the subject of science and philosophy. In general, each real science has
certain subject, which determines the range of its issues. The subject
of each of the sciences encompasses only a certain part of the universe,
but the subject of philosophy is general and inclusive.

The absolute existent and its laws
----------------------------------

As it has been mentioned above, the laws of all science deal with the
special existent and the one condition for the applicability of these
laws to an existent is that the existent should have a special quiddity.
Now, are there any laws whose application to an existent is not
conditional by the special quiddity of that existent, so that its mere;
existence ‘’ would suffice and the presence or absence of a special
quiddity would be irrelevant? In other words, are there any laws that
are laws of ‘’ being’’ rather than law of ‘’ being with a special
essence’’, laws of the absolute existent than those of an existent qua
its having a special quiddity, and in philosophical term, law of “being
qua being”? The answer is yes.

Philosophical laws are indeed of this nature. For example, the law of
causality (every essentially possible existent needs a cause) which is a
philosophical law, includes every possible existent, whether that
existent has or does not have a quiddity is a man, a horse, a tree,
gold, or an angel.

The subject Of Philosophy To Summarize, the laws of sciences are the
laws of the special existent and apply to an existent only qua its
possessing an essential determination; the laws of philosophy, however,
are the laws of the absolute existent and do not require that it should
possess a particular quiddity as a condition of their application. We
may conclude that the subject of all other sciences is the special
existent, that is, an existent qua its special essential determination.
All other science study existents once their quiddities are
determination. In other words, the subject of all other science is
quiddity while that of philosophy is existence or being.

The Definition of Philosophy
----------------------------

Keeping in mind its subject, we can define philosophy as follows:
Philosophy is that field of knowledge in which characteristic of the
absolute existent are discussed. It is that field of knowledge in which
qualities of ‘’ being’’ are studied, and as is commonly said, it is that
knowledge in which the states of an existent qua existent are discussed.

Questions
---------

1- Besides philosophy is there any other science that may include all
things within its realm? Why?

2- What is the subject of science and what role does it have in science?

3- What is the meaning of terms ‘’ special existent ‘’ and ‘’ absolute
existent?’’

4- What is the criterion by which we can distinguish between
philosophies?

5- What is the definition of philosophy?

6- What is the definition of philosophy?

7- Why the absolute existent is more general than the special existent
and is there anything more general that the solute existent? Why?

8- Which of the following proposition are philosophical and why Every
existent is either black or not black Every existent is either a cause
or effects Every moving object needs a moving force The cause of the
movement of many bodies is the gravity that exists between them. If some
of the elements that contribute to the existence of water did not exist,
water would not exist.

9- Consider the law ‘’pressure does not change the volume of water Say
whether the subject of this law is the special existence and why?
Rewrite it in a more form by applying the qualifiers ‘’qua’' to which
science does it belong?

### Notes

###

The two qualifies ‘universal ‘and ‘real’ are used in order to exclude
fields of leaning that deal with particular facts, such as history and
geography and conventional and arbitrary fields of scholarship, Such as
literature and jurisprudence from our discussion.

For the sake of clarity in this chapter the term ‘’ science ‘’ has been
used in contrast to ‘’ philosophy’’, and the term ‘’knowledge’’ and ‘’
learning’’ have been used in a sense more general than the other two.
Therefore, by science here we mean all science other than philosophy.

Insteadof the familiar term ‘’the subject of knowledge or learning’’ so
that it may include philosophy as well.

For further explanation, see Mortada Mutahari, Majmauah Asar (collected
worked) (Qom, Sadra Publication 1371) vol.6 pp. 469 - 473

Changing proposition 1 into proposition 2, which is more exact shows
that intellectual the true subject of this law is heart and its
metaphorical (unreal) subject is man. In philosophy in order to show
this kind of truth and metaphor (unreality) we use the term ‘’ qua’’
which is used in proposition 4 and say ‘’man qua possessing heat is
subject to the thermal exchange law. The meaning of this expression is
that man’s possession of heat mediates so that man can be subject to
such a law. In other words, instead of ruling that heat is subject to
such a law, the intellect rules that man is subject to it is man who has
heat. Therefore man’s possession of heat has been a medium so that the
intellect can metaphorically attribute the law related to heat to man.
Technically, in such cases philosophers say that heat acts as ‘’a medium
in the occurrence ‘’ or that it is ‘’a qualifying aspect ‘’ so that the
intellect could rule that man is subject to the thermal exchange law. In
philosophy, distinguishing the true subject of one stipulation from its
metaphorical subject and determining the medium in the occurrence are
very important and the qualifier ‘’qua’’ is often used for this purpose.
For further treatment of this topic see Collected Works, vol.
[^5]:n.pp.496 and 498

See Avicenna, Al-Shifa,Al-llahiyyat (Theology) ,(Qom, the library of
Ayatullah al- Maraashi al-Najafi, 1404 AH) pp. 10-[^12]:See also
collected Works, Vol.5,p. 130 and also p.131

See collected Works, vol.[^5]: 130 and 131.

See also inid. Vol 6, pp. 59(No.2) - [^64]:
