Chapter Two: Research Methodology in Philosophy
===============================================

The aim of this chapter is to define research methodology in philosophy.
For this purpose, we should first of all understand what is meant by ‘’
research methodology’’ in any particular field of study. Since research
methodology in a field of knowledge is nothing other than the method of
determine the truth or falsity of its constituent propositions and
because the truth or falsity of the propositions of a real universal
field of knowledge can only be determined by either a rational or an
empirical method, we must begin by explaining this last point, according
to which propositions are divided into a priori and a posterior.

Next, we shall divide different types of knowledge into rational and
empirical and finally try to prove that philosophy is a form of rational
knowledge.

A Priori and Posterior Propositions
-----------------------------------

Consider the geometrical proposition ‘’ the sum of the internal angles
of a triangle is 180 degrees’’ and the physical proposition ‘’ all
metals are expanded by heat.’’ Both of which are correct and compare
them with each other. It is clear that if in the course of experience we
came across a triangle whose qualities are different from those stated
in former proposition, we would not judge that proposition to be false
and invalid; however, if we found a kind of metal which did not have the
quality mentioned in the physical proposition we would consider that
proposition false and they deny its universality. What is the reason for
this difference? The reason lies in the methods used to prove the truth
or validity of these two propositions. The truth of the first
proposition is proved by a rational method while that of the second is
proved by an empirical one. By a rational method we mean a form of
demonstration that ultimately rests on primary, self-evident
propositions. Since understanding the truth of primary, self -evident
propositions and the law of reference in logic ,on which this types of
demonstration is based , are both independent from experience and the
intellect understanding the truth prior to experience and independent of
experience and does not need its help.

The truth of the second proposition, however can only be understood
following experience and though its assistance. The some can also be
said of false propositions in that the fallacy of some of them can be
understood independent of experience while only the help of experience
can ascertain that of others. In technical terms, proposition of the
second kind are called a posterior.

Therefore a prior proposition is one whose truth or falsity can only be
determined by an empirical method. It is important at this junction to
consider the following point.

### The first Point

###

The concepts employed in a proposition may have been acquired through
the sense but it may still be a priori if we can determine its truth or
falsity by a rational method and independent of the senses, like many
geometrical propositions.

Which though contain many sensible concepts, such as dot?Line surface,
circle, triangle etc. are all a priori since we can determine their
truth or falsity by the rational method and without the help of the
sense. In general the way parts of a proposition or the whole
proposition have entered the mind, whether it is through dreams,
inspiration etc. Does not make a proposition a priori or a posterior.
Whether a proposition a is a posterior depends only on the way we
determine its truth or falsity.

### The Second Point

###

Aposterior proposition is exceptive; that is, observed counter - example
can only question it universality while retains its validity or other
cases. In other words, though that proposition is false in its
universality, in its more particular form it may be true. Consequently,
another universal proposition but with a particular subject replaces the
invalidated universal proposition. A prior proposition, however is
non-exceptive, that is a rational counter example will indicate the
total invalidity of the proposition and we cannot claim its truth in any
other case. For example suppose a true geometrical proof demonstrates
that the total sum of the angles of an equilateral triangle is not 180
degree.

This counter example will show that triangle is 180 degree is not valid
and the invalidity of that cannot rationally judge that the total sum of
the angle of any triangle is 180 degree.

Rational and Empirical Forms of Knowledge
-----------------------------------------

Rational knowledge is that knowledge whose proposition are a priori
while empirical knowledge is that knowledge whose proposition are a
posterior In other words rational knowledge is the form of knowledge
whose proposition can be proved true or false by a rational method while
empirical knowledge is one whose propositions can be proved true or
false only by an empirical method.

Keeping in mind that by ‘’research methodology’’ in one kind of
knowledge we mean that method which determine the truth or falsity of
its proposition we can say. Rational knowledge is the kind knowledge is
one whose research methodology is empirical. From now on we shall use
the word ‘’ knowledge ‘’ to refer to all forms of knowledge and science
and the word ‘’science ‘’ in accordance with the current usage of the
term to indicate empirical knowledge alone.

### Philosophy is Rational Knowledge

###

Initially, using the reduction ad absurdum argument, we shall prove the
validity of this claim in respect to a single philosophical proposition,
such as the principle of causality as an example. Then in 3.2 we will
prove its validity concerning all philosophical propositions.

### Example: The law of Causality is not empirical

###

Let consider the principle of causality in it conventional sense: Every
phenomenon, namely everything crated in time (temporal) needs a cause.
Suppose this is and a posterior proposition and its truth or falsity can
be demonstrated by experience. We will try to show that, firstly this
cannot be done without employing a prior proposition and secondly, it
will lead to a vicious circle.

According to the practice followed by philosopher of science in
falsifiability or verifiability of empirical proposition , the above
proposition can be a posterior if is truth can be demonstrated by
experience (according to the principle of verifiability in the empirical
science ) or its falsity could be justified experimentally (according to
the principle of falsifiability in empirical science ). In other words
either its truth should be proved by experience and inductive
generalization or certain empirical states or inductive imagined. Which
if realized would demonstrate the inaccuracy of that proposition. To be
more precise either we have to show phenomena and secondly need a cause
and then generalize this finding to include all phenomenon needs a cause
or we must imagine certain states and conditions in which we could prove
by experience that is certain thing is first of all a phenomenon and
secondly does not need a cause is falsifiable and a posterior, therefore
in both approaches we must initially show by experience that certain
thing or things are phenomena. However, we can easily prove that,
firstly, this cannot be done through experience alone and without
employing a prior proposition and secondly, that it entails a vicious
circle.

To explain, we should say that being a phenomenon means being created in
time. This in turn means that the thing in question must be initially
non-existent and then later on become existent while we con not perceive
the existence to nonexistence of things through the sense (aided or
unaided ) This is so since perception require two preconditions:
firstly, the object in question must leave a trace of its effect on the
perceiving organ - of course this effects is going to be corporeal and
must pass though different stages until it reaches the brain - and
secondly the spirit must perceive this effects. Therefore only such
things can be sensible that effect the cells of one of the sense organ
In the light of this if we look closely into our perceived we will see
that the only things that can be perceived directly by the sense are
colour different kinds of noises, taste, smells, cold and heat,
smoothness and roughness, hardness and softness, dryness and wetness
.Lightness and heaviness, Moreover there are other things which are also
perceived through the sense, but not the same manner as the qualities
just referred to, for these do not directly affect the sense organ
rather assisted by a form of intellectual analogy, are perceived along
with those things which directly affect the sense organs,Wecall this
kind of perceived ‘’ indirect sense perception.’

Now the things that are perceived indirectly by the sense are different
kind of shaped. number, the position which things have in relation to
each other, in terms of being remote ,close ,joined or separated from
each other being above below to the left or to the right of each other
and so on. Some philosophers also hold that temporal succession of thing
and their movement can only be perceived indirectly by the sense.

Therefore certain attributes such as necessity, possibility,
impossibility, causality or influence, being an effect or affectability,
condition,conditioned, potentially, actuality, dependence, independenc ,
self- sufficiency, contrary , contradiction, temporality or being a
phenomenon, pre-eternity, substantiality, accidentally, different kind
of substance existence and non - existence can neither directly nor way
left to perceive the temporality of a thing and that is form the fact
that we do not perceive it at first and then come to perceive it. For
example, we do not initially perceive a light and then at a certain
moment we begin to see it. From this we conclude that it was
non-existent at the beginning and then it became existent; in other
words, it is created in time and is therefore a phenomenon.

However,in order to conclude, form not perceiving a thing for example
not seeing it, its non-existence and from perceiving it, for example
seeing it, its existence, we have to use other intermediary
propositions. 1 Every visible thing, which is not seen in a place, is
non-existent in that place and 2. Everything seen in place is existent
in that place. But these propositions, irrespective of their truth or
falsity are firstly a prior and secondly if we assume their truth and
try to prove their validity can be proved only through the laws of
causality. That isevery principle in other in order words that we are
trying to prove. This, needless to say is a vicious circle and
impossible to attain.

Demonstration
-------------

As was stated in the definition of philosophy, philosophical
propositions explain the characteristics and properties of existence
and, rarely, of non-existence and its properties. It was also explained
in 3.1 that neither existence, nor nonexistence, nor any of their
characteristics, such as necessity, possibility, impossibility,
casualty, being an effect, etc., could be experienced or perceived
through the senses. Naturally, then, the relationship between existence
and it characteristics or non-existence and its properties, which is the
subject of philosophical propositions, cannot be understood through the
senses or through experience. Therefore, these relationships can be
understood only by reason and on the basis of primary selfevident
propositions; in other words, it is only by the rational method that we
can determine the truth or falsity of philosophical propositions

Questions
---------

1- What do we mean by research methodology?

2- Define a priori and a posterior proposition.

3- What is the significance of the fact that posterior propositions are
exceptive and a priori propositions are nonexceptive?

4- Why is it that a priori propositions do not allow exceptions?

5- Does every a priori proposition necessarily consist of intangible
conceptions? Why?

6- Can we change particular or existential (at least some of them) into
universal propositions? If the answer is affirmative explain how?
Furthermore, give at least two examples showing such change.

7- Which of the following concepts derive directly or indirectly from
sense organs? Why? Movement, possibility, impossibility, body, shape,
necessity, existence, nonexistence, water, colour

8- Which of the following propositions are a priori and which are a
posterior? Why?

9- Every moving object needs a moving force.

10- Every corporeal body is either black or not black.

11- All acids are sweet in taste.

12- No physical body has a particular colour in itself. It is our eyes
that see things in different colours.

13- As long as an observer is looking at an object that object exists.
When he stops looking at it, it ceases to exist.

14- Suppose you are given a sheet of paper on which a geometrical shape
is printed and three specific lines in the drawing have been
highlighted. You are asked to prove that the three highlighted lines in
that drawing (and not in general way concerning every drawing with the
same characteristics) are equal. Is it possible to prove this point
simply by an exact ruler without employing any a priori propositions?
Why?

15- Suppose in response to your friend’s invitation you have decided to
his house, and you go there. Keeping this supposition in mind, answer
the following questions:

1- What a priori propositions must you assume to be true so that your
action - your claim to have made a decision to go to your friend’s house
and having carried out that decision - appears as reasonable? Mention at
least five propositions.

2- Why assuming that these propositions are true is necessary for the
rationality of that action?

3- To which types of knowledge does each of these propositions belong?

### Notes

###

1- For further explanation, see Majmouah Asar (Collected Works), vol. 6,
‘The Rational Theory’, pp. 332-[^334]:

2- For further illustration, see C.G. Jung, The Fundamental Questions of
Philosophy, chapter [^2]:

3- For further information on Verifiability and Falsifiability, see
Allen F. Chalmers, The Nature of Science, chapters 1-6; the Open
University Press, [^1982]:

4- See Avicenna, Al-Shifa, Al-Tabiyat (Natural Philosophy) (Qum, Library
of Ayatullah al-Maraashi al-Najafi, 1404 AH). 3 vols, vol. 2, p. [^53]:

5- Ibid. Pp. 139-[^141]: See also Sadr al-Mutaliheen, Al-Hikma
al-Mutaliyah (Transcendental Philosophy) (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath
al-Arabiyyah, 1981), 3rd Editon, 9 vols., vol. 8, section 4, chapter 12,
pp. 201-204.

[^6]: For further illustration see Collected work vol 6, ‘’ the way of
Acquiring Knowledge.’’ pp 245 - 254 See also indi vol 5 The Secondary
Intelligible, pp 266 - 292 and also ibidi vol. 10, Epistemo; ogy
pp.249 - 305

7- For further illustration see Collected Works vol. The Empirical
Theory, pp

8- 334 - 347

9- For another explanation ob the vicious circle see Collected Work Vol
6, pp 683- 684

10- For further explanation see collected work vol 6 pp 478 - [^480]:
