Chapter Three: The Relation between Science and Philosophy
==========================================================

In the last two chapters we learned that both the subject of science and
philosophy and their research methodology are different and thus science
can no more solve a philosophical problem than philosophy can solve
scientificone. In short philosophy and science cannot replace each
other.

However, this does not mean that the two disciplines are totally
disconnected and have no influence on each other. The present chapter
aims at explaining this point and is divided into three section 1The
impact of science on philosophy 2 The impact of philosophy on science
and 3. The priority of philosophy over science, which is the conclusion
draw from the two previoussection.

The impact of science on Philosophy
-----------------------------------

Philosophy questions are divided into two groups the first group is not
independent from science, in the sense that it is influenced by changes
and development in scientific theories while the second group is
independent for science. The first group is called philosophy after
science and the second Philosophy before science lets us now consider
these two types of philosophy issues.

### Philosophy after Science

###

The reason why the change and development of scientific theories
influences the outcome of the questions of ‘philosophy after science’ is
that in this group of questions scientific theories, in different ways,
are taken as presuppositions for philosophical questions. By a
presupposition we mean a statement that in a certain field of learning
is assumed to be true independent of any proof, for all or some of the
questions in that are dependent upon it. The reason its validity is
assumed independent of ay proof is either because it is self-evident, or
it has been taken for another discipline where it validity has been
proved already, or has been accepted with n evidence or reason
whatsoever. In what follows we will discuss the different ways in which
scientific theories are taken as presuppositions for philosophical
questions.

### The Scientific Theory raises a Philosophical Question

###

In some of the questions of ‘philosophy after science’, the
philosophical question can e discussed essentially on the basis of a
scientific presupposition. In such cases, science discovers a certain
thing with characteristics that are either apparently contradictory to
some philosophical laws so that the removal of this opposition would
create some new issues for philosophy or, at the least, application of
clear principles of philosophy to which will necessitate a new
intellectual analysis. For example, the discovery of energy, the
consequent appearance of the theory of the transformation of matter into
energy and the emergence of particles of matter from condensed energy
have the raised the questions in philosophy as to what the essence of
energy is. Does it have mass or not? If it does, what differentiates it
from ordinary bodies? If not, how can something possessing mass change
into something that has no mass? In any case, a new material form that
has not been discussed in philosophy heretofore has to be accounted for.

### The Scientific Theory as a step to Philosophical Demonstration

###

In such cases the philosophical issue is discussed on the basis of
tangible or intuitive issues or according to previous philosophical
discussions, rather than on the basis of scientific presuppositions.

However, the philosopher in his attempt to prove the validity of the
philosophical position must depend on the scientific theory as one the
premises of his demonstration. On other words, in these cases the
philosophical question has only a rational-experiment solution. For
example, in the philosophy of Avicenna, in order to prove that the
number of the abstract immaterial incorporeal existents is ten, the
Ptolemaic geocentric theory is employed.

### The Scientific Theory determines the Extensions of the Philosophical Theory

###

In these cases, in the premises used in proving a certain philosophical
theory or in the philosophical theory itself the philosopher employs a
concept that has a tangible extension, such as the concept of body, the
concept of expansion and the concept of contraction, which in the old
physics were called ‘penetration’ and ‘condensation’. The role of the
scientific the scientific theory is to make the extension of that
concept known to the philosopher. For example, the atomic theory, at the
time of its advent, showed that the true extensions of the body in
different philosophical precepts proved for body are not these observed
bodies, but rather the electrons and nuclei. With the fission of the
nucleus and the discovery of nuclear particles it has become clear that
the true extensions of body are electrons and nuclear particles, and so
on. In these cases, besides showing the extensions, the scientific
theory often corrects mistakes made by philosophers.

It is clear that in the above cases any change or development in the
scientific theory will result in a corresponding effect on the dependent
philosophical question. However, it should be kept in mind that few
philosophical questions fall within the category.

Philosophy before Science
-------------------------

It has already been said that ‘philosophy before science’ includes that
group of philosophical questions that are independent from science and
are therefore unaffected by any changes and developments that occur in
scientific theories. This group in turn is divided into two further
groups. One group does not take any scientific theory as a
presupposition at all. Here, not only philosophical questions introduced
independently from scientific theories but their solution also is purely
rational. No scientific theory is used in proving them and the
determination of the extension of the concept employed in them is not
based on scientific concepts. The fundamentality of existence, proving
the existence and attributes of God, the unity of divine essence and His
attributes and actions, the possibility of resurrection predestination,
freedom, and in general the most important philosophical questions are
included in this group. The other group consists of those that have both
a purely rational solution and also a rational-empirical solution that
depend on the scientific theories and presupposes them. It is clear that
this group is also independent of science, for if developments alter the
scientific theory in question and invalidate the rationalempirical
solution, it will not leave the question without a solution independent
of all experimentation can always be relied upon; the issue of the
immateriality of the soul, for example, is one such question.

The above issues, meanwhile, clearly show that the claim made in the
last chapter to the effect that philosophical propositions are a priori
is only applicable to ‘philosophy before science’ , which includes the
main philosophical questions, rather than to ‘philosophy after science’.
All the questions of ‘philosophy after science’ are of the posterior
type, for the validity or invalidity of their presupposed scientific
propositions can be determined only through experimentation. Thus,
demonstrating either the truth or the falsity of these questions
ultimately depends on experimentations as well.

### The Impact of Philosophy on Science

###

In the last section we explained the different types of scientific
propositions relied on in philosophy in order to investigate the way
science influences philosophy. In this section, however, we shall
explain the different types of philosophical presuppositions relied upon
by science so as to show the manner in which philosophy influences it.
For that purpose, we must first study the way in which the sciences are
dependent on philosophy, for every need necessitates presupposition of
particular philosophical law or laws.

### The Dependence of Science on Philosophy in Proving a Subject

###

It was said in chapter one that every real field of learning, including
every science, has a subject that in effect acts as an axis that gathers
the different propositions of that discipline around itself and gives
them the form peculiar to that particular field in such a way that all
the propositions of that knowledge in one way or another deal with that
particular subject; that is, they delineate it types and divisions, the
relationship between these divisions and the laws governing each of
them. It goes without saying that the subject of every field of learning
must exist outside the mind; otherwise its study will be a kind of fancy
rather than a scientific activity. Therefore, in every field of
learning, before we begin our studies, we must make sure that its
subject has objective existence.

If the existence of the subject of a certain field of learning is
evident, it will not need proof; however, if it is not evident, we have
to prove it or may even have to discuss its nature. Now, where can we
deal this issue? Is it in the particular field of learning itself? No!
For, every kind of knowledge begins with the assumption that its subject
exists, and no scientist qua scientist needs to prove the existence of
the subject of his study. Keeping in mind what was said in the first
chapter, proving the existence of things and determining their nature
are activities that belong only to the domain of philosophy and not to
that of any other intellectual discipline.

Therefore, those fields of study the existence or nature of whose
subject is not evident are dependent on philosophy.

Thus, the existence of the subject of these fields of learning and the
nature of this existence is a presupposition taken from philosophy.

### Dependence of Science on Philosophy in Ensuring the Universal and Necessity of its Laws

###

By law here we mean the genetic (takwini) laws employed in different
fields of learning, including science, which describe phenomena and
existents, rather than the conventional laws which are promulgated by
the legislative bodies of different countries. The salient
characteristic of every genetic law is its universality and necessity,
in other words, every law is universal and necessary.

The universality of a law means that, firstly, its subject does not
refer to a particular thing, or, technically speaking, it does not refer
to an individual; that is, it is a universal rather than a particular
concept. Accordingly, the terms used in a proposition indicating a
certain law should be common names, such as man, electron, or metal
rather than proper name such as Avicenna, Iran, or Rakhsh.

Therefore, the proposition ‘Avicenna is a scientist’ does not express a
law, for the term, ‘Avicenna’ which is the subject of this proposition
is a proper name and refers to only a particular person.

Secondly, the judgment and the predicate expressed in a law which admits
no exceptions include all the extensions of the subject the law applies
to, be they extensions that existed in the past, exist now, will exist
in the future, or any other hypothetical extensions. Accordingly, a
proposition indicating a law should be begin with a universal
quantifier, for instance, a word like ‘every’ or ‘none’ or other
synonymous words, but not with an existential quantifier, such as ‘some’
or its synonymies. Therefore, the proposition ‘Some metals are expanded
by heat’ does not express a law, but the proposition ‘every number is
either even or odd’ expresses a law. In logical terms, universal
proposition can express a law rather than particular (existential) or
personal propositions. In short, every law expresses a particular
judgment that includes all the things the subject of the law is
applicable to.

The necessity of a law means that once the condition is stated in the
law are present that law will never be violated; that is. With the
stated condition the subject of the law cannot exist without the
judgment mentioned in the law.

Therefore, the fact that all the previous, present and future extensions
of the subject possess this quality will not be enough for the law;
rather, besides these, once the conditions are present, the law must not
be violated. If we claim that the proposition ‘the freezing point of all
types of pure water under one atmospheric pressure if 0°C’ is a law,
this means that, firstly, this rule include all kinds of water in the
past, present and future, and even covers everything that is supposed to
be water. Secondly once the stated conditions are present, it will be
impossible for any type of water not behave in that manner. The result
is that in general, the universality and necessity of scientific laws
indicate that in equal conditions similar natural elements would
invariably behave in a similar fashion. In short, nature always behaves
in a fixed and unchanging manner.

In order to understand the importance of the universality and necessity
of scientific laws it will suffice to note that all the progress man has
made in industry and technology and the great civilisation he possesses
today is due to the discovery of these laws, and their whole importance
is due to their predictability. With their help, especially when they
put into mathematical terms, we can perceive the past, the present and
the future behaviours, conditions and states of phenomena, such as
calculating the age of the earth, perceiving the invisible symptoms of a
disease on the basis of its visible symptoms, predicting the exact time
of eclipses, predicting the exact time and place of landing of a missile
fired from a certain station, and so on. Finally, the power of
prediction of scientific laws is due to a number of factors that include
their universality and necessity. For if a scientific law were not
universal or necessary, even if we knew and provided all the necessary
conditions for the application of that law, there would be the
probability that the law would not be valid, and, therefore, in cases
that are supposedly similar to those that have been already experienced,
the law would not be applicable. There would also be the probability
that even in cases where the law has been applicable up to now, though
nothing has changed, the law would not be applicable any longer, and it
is clear that with the existence of such probabilities prediction would
be impossible. Therefore, because of the possibility of prediction
according to scientific laws, we cannot deny the universality and
necessity of these laws.

Now, on the one hand we know that the instruments of science are sense
and experience and, on the other, according to what was said in the
second chapter regarding the domain of those things that are understood
directly or indirectly by the senses, the universality of a scientific
law (continuous invariability in the behaviour of nature) and its
necessity (the impossibility of alteration in the behaviour of nature)
are not tangible objects, and according to all philosophers, including
the philosophers of science, they cannot be experienced. Therefore, n
science can possibly provide the required universality or necessity for
its laws. It is here that the sciences once again show their dependence
on philosophical presuppositions. For this purpose, they take as their
presupposition the three philosophical laws, namely ‘the principle of
casualty’, ‘the homogeneity of cause and effect’ and ‘casual necessity’.

Relying on these presuppositions, the scientist forms the scientific law
in his mind in a process compromised of four stages. In the first he
realizes that in general, on the basis of the principle of casualty,
some natural phenomena have a causal relationship with others. In the
second stage, he turns to nature and in the special samples selected for
the experiment, by employing empirical methods, he discovers in detail
which phenomenon is the exact cause of another phenomenon. For example,
he discovers that in a few samples of tested metals, heat has been the
cause of expansion. In the third stage, on the basis of the law of ‘the
homogeneity of cause and effect’, he declares that the discovered
relationship is universal (invariable and permanent); that is, in
similar samples the same relationship always exist. Therefore, when
heated, all other untested metals must also expand. Finally, in the
fourth stage, on the basis of the law of ‘casual necessity’, he declares
that the stated relationship is necessary and once these conditions are
present it cannot be violated.

Of the above four stages, the second stage is not certain; that is, in
the tested samples the scientist cannot be certain he has discovered the
real causal relationship. For example, he cannot be certain that in
those samples heating has been the only real cause of the expansion of
the metal. In this stage, ancient scientists used to employ the
philosophical presupposition, ‘something accidental cannot be persistent
or nearly persistent’. The purport of this law is that two phenomena
that always or often happen simultaneously, such as heating and metal
expansion, would necessarily have a kind of causal relationship with
each other, otherwise it would be impossible for them always o often to
occur at the same time. Philosophers of science reject this law, and
some famous philosophers, such as Avicenna, have also treated it with
great caution. In other words, they have been hesitant to employ it. In
any case, rejection of this law or hesitation over its use indicates
that in the mentioned example it is possible that the cause of the
expansion of the metal could be something other than heating. In that
case, in the mentioned samples the coincidence of expansion and heating
could be only accidental, and in some other metals that have not been
tested such a thing may not happen, and, consequently, at the time of
heating the metal may not expand. Therefore, we cannot be certain that
in the second stage we have discovered a real causal relationship.
Accordingly, though the other three stages are certain, the scientific
law, which is the result of all four stages, is not certain and there
will always be the possibility that certain new phenomena may be
observed or new experiments may be carried out where the scientific law
in question may not be applicable. In other words, a posterior
proposition is falsifiable and could be invalidated, or, as was said in
the previous chapter, exceptive. Therefore, this falsifibility and
invalidability stem from the negation of the law, ‘something accidental
cannot be persistent or nearly persistent’.

One must take note of the fact that the falsifibility and invalid
ability of the scientific law stems from the negation of the law
‘something accidental cannot be persistent or nearly persistent’ (in the
second stage) and does not negate the law of ‘casual necessity’ (in the
fourth stage).

Therefore, though the scientific law is falsifiable and can be
invalidated, it is necessary, otherwise it would necessitate that the
scientific law which applied to a certain number of samples in certain
conditions in the first test may not apply to the same samples in
exactly the same conditions in another test, and this would be
unacceptable, even by the scientists.

This is proved by the way scientist deal with invalidated scientific
laws. Modern science admits the invalidity of the laws of Newtonian
physics, nevertheless it still employs them in a certain domain of
nature where physical bodies have normal dimensions and velocity - in
technology and industry, for example - and on its basis it makes
predictions and is certain of the accuracy of these predictions. What is
the cause of this certainty? It is their belief in the law of ‘causal
necessity’. The scientist unconsciously believes that though these laws
are invalid and only by approximation - apply to the domain in question,
rather than exactly and without approximation, nevertheless these laws,
with this level of approximation, are necessarily always true in this
domain.

We cannot say that sometimes they are true in this domain and sometimes
they are not, or sometimes they are true with a certain level of
approximation and at other times with another level, etc. This is
nothing other than the application of the law of ‘causal necessity’.

We can conclude, then, that the principle of causality and the law of
‘the homogeneity of cause and effect’ and the law of ‘causal necessity’
are some of the necessary philosophical presuppositions of all sciences.

### Dependence of Science on Other Philosophical Presuppositions

###

In addition to what has already been said, sciences are dependent on
philosophy in other ways too and this indicates that sciences require
other philosophical presuppositions. For example, each science studies
its subject by describing it.

In fact, the goal of science is to understand the laws related to its
subject.

Therefore, before starting any investigation, every science must assume
that it is possible to know natural phenomena - including the phenomena
considered as the subject of that science - otherwise its entire would
be no more than an exercise in futility. Now, the question arises as to
what kind of knowledge determines the validity or invalidity of this
assumption or its limits and boundaries. The answer is that field of
learning that examines the question of knowledge, namely the field of
“epistemology” in philosophy. Therefore, the principle of ‘the know
ability of the world for man’ is one of the philosophical
presuppositions of all sciences. Moreover, all sciences employ the
‘principle of noncontradiction’ and we know that philosophy is the
proper place for careful investigation of contradiction and for defining
its conditions. Thus, this principles is one the philosophical
presuppositions of all sciences. Moreover, all sciences, more or less,
employ the principles of impossibility of contrary and the impossibility
of circle and infinite regress, while proving these principles and
solving problems with them belong to the domain of philosophy.
Therefore, these three principles are also among the philosophical
presupposition of sciences.

Besides the above mentioned philosophical principles, which are needed
by all sciences and are among common philosophical presuppositions,
there are other principles in philosophy which are needed only by
certain sciences; in other words, they are philosophical presuppositions
particular to those sciences, such as the principle of simplicity, the
question of the existence or non-existence of natural movements’, the
question of ‘the existence or nonexistence of absolute time’, the
question of ‘the existence or non-existence of absolute space’’, which
are used in nonhuman empirical sciences, and the question of ‘the
existence or nonexistence of the whole as something independent of the
parts’, the question of ‘determinism versus free will’, which are used
in human empirical sciences.

However, here we do not intend to list all the philosophical
presuppositions of sciences, and no doubt further investigation will
reveal more presuppositions.

The Priority of Philosophy over Science
---------------------------------------

So far we have seen that philosophy is assisted by scientific
presupposition and sciences are assisted by philosophical
presuppositions, with the difference that scientific presuppositions re
used only in some philosophical questions (philosophy after science) and
there is no scientific presupposition on which all philosophical
questions (philosophy before science) do not need the sciences all
together.

However, all scientific questions use general philosophical
presuppositions, such as ‘the principle of noncontradiction’, the
principle of ‘the know ability of nature’, ‘the principle of causality’,
the law of ‘the homogeneity of cause and effect’, the law of ‘causal
necessity’, and so on, especially the first and the second principles.
Consequently, all scientific questions without exception need
philosophy. Thus, we can have philosophy without science but no science
without philosophy. In other words, philosophy is not dependent on
science, but science is dependent on philosophy.

Couched in philosophical terms, philosophy has priority over science.
Moreover, the above distinction necessitates another difference related
to the way presuppositions are used. In explanation, we can say that the
general presuppositions on which all the questions of a science or a
number of sciences are dependent are not used as “means”, but the
presuppositions on which one or some questions of a particular field of
learning depends on often are. When we speak of a presupposition being
used as “means” we mean that it is used as a premise in demonstrating a
statement or statements in a particular field of learning. This kind of
presupposition is productive, because from its combination with other
premise of demonstration a kind of deduction is formed, which in turn
produces a conclusion, such as the principles of Euclidian geometry,
which are used as the premise of the demonstrating for proving the
propositions of that geometry. When we speak of a presupposition that is
not used as a “means”, on the other hand, we mean that presupposition
that is not used as a premise of a demonstration in any arguments;
nevertheless, the truth if that presupposition must be accepted in any
field of knowledge that includes it. As examples we can mention the
rules of interference in logic, the ‘principle of noncontradiction’, the
principle of ‘the know ability of the world’, the principle of
causality, the law of ‘the homogeneity of cause and effect’, the law of
‘causal necessity’, ‘the principle of simplicity’, assuming the
existence of the subject of a field of learning where the existence is
not evident, and so on. The philosophical presuppositions of the
sciences are often “non-means”, while the scientific presuppositions of
philosophy are often “means”. Closer to Islam. It is because of his
endeavours that today the philosophy of Avicenna is considered the most
nature complete and important expression of Peripatetic Philosophy in
the Islamic world. Thomas Aquinas the great medieval European
philosopher is one of his book admits this with great respect and
modesty.

At the end of his life Avicenna directed his attention to a philosophy
he called ‘the philosophy of the select’ and common people. What this
philosophy of the select is, is still most entirely clear for as it has
already been motioned his Al-Hikmah al- Mashriqiyyah (Oriental
Philosophy) that discussed this philosophy is not extant.

Nevertheless some philosopher in their study of the esoteric philosophy
of Avicenna, have come to the conclusion that the philosophy of the
select or the Oriental Philosophy is not purely demonstrative but rather
a kind of philosophy whose ultimate end is resting man from the
imperfect and limited either world and guiding him to the higher
spiritual world and the pure light, For further explanation see.

1- Ibn Qifti Tarkh al-Hukama edited by bahin Daraie Tehram Tehran
University press 137 pp 555 - 570

2- Hanry Corbin History of Islamic Philosophy Henry Thomas The great
Philosophy M.Notahharii Collected works nol 13 pp 80-86

3- See Avicenna Al-shifa section of Al-

Mantiq (Logic) and Al-Burhan (Argument) Qon the Library of Ayat Allah
Al-Masrashi al-Najafi 1404 AH 4 vols 3 pp 96 - 97

4- for further explanation se hastishenasi (Ontology) by the present
author fifty edition Chapter 4 the Second Problem pp 58-64

5- The principle if the Knowability of the world and the principle of
noncontradiction are both self-evident and therefore do not belong to
the question of any particular discipline, however because they the law
and precepts of the absolute existent and therefore, naturally, defining
their exact purports, investigating the condition of their validity and
refuting the objections made to them mainly belong to the domain of
philosophy, they are counted among the question of philosophy. Perhaps
in such cases using the term ‘question’ denotes a ‘statement’ that has
to be proved.

Therefore it would be better to call such principle ‘philosophical
statement “rather than” philosophical question ‘’

6- According to the principle of simplicity, nature performs its task in
the simplest way possible. This principle is employed in cases where in
order to explain a certain nature phenomenon there are two or more
acceptable theories. In such cases according to the principle of
simplicity the theory that provides the simpler explanation should be
preferred. The preference which scientists given to non- Euclidian
geometry concerning is very vast space is based on this principle.


