Chapter Four: Is Learning Philosophy Necessary?
===============================================

In this chapter we shall try to discover whether learning philosophy is
necessary and if it is for whom? In order to answer this question we
have to enumerate all the things this field of study can accomplish and
briefly explain it uses. We have to study these one by one and show
whether any of these function makes learning philosophy necessary and if
so will it be necessary for all people or only for certain group and in
the latter case which groups are these ? but before listing and
discussing the use of philosophy we have to clarify what is intended by
‘necessity ‘ and what is the standard o criterion for being necessary
.Therefore , we begin our discussion by defining ‘necessity ‘ and its
criterion and then list the used of philosophy and discuss their
necessity of philosophy and then explain its uses.

Necessity and its Criterion
---------------------------

Clearly enough what intended my ‘necessity ‘ here is not religion
necessity or legal obligation in contract to prohibition for the study
of such obligation belongs to the domain of jurisprudence rather than
philosophy. It is intellectual or rational necessity. For example, if
the intellects determine that acquiring a certain benefit is necessary
and philosophy is used to acquire such a benefit, it naturally declares
that learning philosophy necessary.

Now, let us turn our attentions to this benefit and ask why it is
necessary from a rational point of view, to acquire such a benefit? In
other word, what is the criterion by which reason declares a certain
benefit as necessary and another as unnecessary? It is certain that
according to the judgement of a sound mind all those things are
necessary whose absence would 1. Harm man’s individual or social life,
and 2 expose man to eternal punishment in the hereafter.

There is problem with the first criterion but regarding the second there
is a problem in that many people do not believe in a divinely revealed
faith and therefore have no reason to believe in eternal life and its
rewards or punishment s. On the other hand, so far in this book we have
not proved the existence of these things so that intellectually they
have to accept them.

Therefore, this criterion cannot be accepted under these conditions.

However, this objection is not acceptable since acceptance if this
criterion does not require certitude concerning the existence of eternal
life and the mere fact that it may exist would suffice, and no doubt
logically speaking such possibility exist.

The possibility mentioned above exist since, firstly no irrefutable
proof or convincing reason denying God existence, the next world or
other spiritual matter has been set forth. Therefore, we cannot be
certain of the non-existence of these things and the negation of the
certainty of their non- existence would lead to the possibility of their
existence. Secondly this is not a week possibility, for history shows
that even those who denied the prophet admitted that in their
behaviour,intelligence, andunderstanding of the truth they were far
ahead of their time. Thus those who have no faith in the divinely
revealed religions and the prophets still cannot deny the truthfulness
and intelligence of this prophet s. Moreover the holy scripture and the
history of religion show that all prophet, from Adam, peace be upon him,
to Mohammed, the seal of the prophet, peace be upon him and his
household, without exception have informed the people of the existence
of God and his oneness, the existence of the next world, the different
degrees of closeness to, or remoteness from God and paradise and hell.
Moreover many mystics from different nation and sects throughout history
have borne witness to some of these things. To a sound intellect his
great volume of evidence greatly increases the probability that such
things do indeed exist.

The reason tat for the acceptance of that criterion the mere probability
of the existence of these things is enough is that firstly from a
logical perspective not only preventing a definite harm is necessary but
so is a avoiding a probable one That is if someone thinks that there is
a chance he be exposed to certain harm and avoiding that harm would not
entail similar or greater harm, reason dictates that he should aroid
that harm.

According to the Quranic verse , Prophetic tradition and the teaching of
other holy scripture, the intentional denial of the spiritual truths
mentioned above and disbelieving them will incur internal punishment the
mildest of which is incomparably this world. The same dire consequence
is also in store for those who neglect issue concerning the hereafter.

Secondly from the rational perspective the mathematical expectation (the
amount of probability multiplied by the value of the probable ) of
dealing with spiritual and otherworld thing and also the mathematical
expectation of reflecting over and investigating these matters are
infinite , while the mathematical expectation of the greatest worldly
pleasure and joys is limited and as any sound reason would decree, once
in doubt , we should choose the thing whose mathematical expectation is
greater.

We can conclude, then that the second criterion also unproblematic and
on its basis we can infer the rational necessity of thing. On the ground
if these two criteria we can have an assessment of the uses of
philosophy and shoe that it is necessary for the following groups to
learn it.

1- Those who fear that natural sensuality may lead them into
philosophical sensationalism.

2- Those who have doubt abut their worldview.

3- Those whose worldview is exposed to doubts.

4- Those who are obliged to defend their religion rationally.

5- Those who feel the necessity to search for a deeper understanding of
divine knowledge.

6- Those scholars who are intellectually qualified to learn philosophy.

We should not forget, however , that in cases where learning philosophy
is declared to be unnecessary this should not be taken to mean that it
is undesirable In general there is no doubt that learning philosophy is
desirable.

The uses of Philosophy and their evolution
------------------------------------------

### 1- Satisfying the Sense of Curiosity

###

Philosophy, like any other field of scholarship satisfies mans curiosity
concerning question related o its subject matter. Clearly enough, if we
overlook its other characteristics and consider only this single quality
, learning philosophy would not be necessary for, although ignoring the
sense of curiosity altogether by completely repressing it is essentially
impossible , satisfying it cannot be said to make the study of
philosophy a necessity. Both in the past or at present there have been
many people who do not study any field of scholarship. Including
philosophy and so have ignored their instinctive curiosity,
nevertheless, they have enjoyed relatively comfortable lives and who
have attained spiritual stations.

### 2- Removing Double Ignorance

###

All forms of learning, including philosophy, put an end to man double
ignorance concerning issues related to their subject. For example, many
people wrongly believe in chance and accident, or mistakenly believe
that spirit is material, and by philosophical demonstration we can make
such people aware of their mistakes. Still however, if we overlook other
characteristics of philosophy and evaluate philosophy would not be
necessary. For in general man‘s ignorance of certain things neither
disrupts his life in this world nor ruin it in the hereafter. It is true
that it would be right to say that doubt ignorance about issues
discussed in philosophy can be harmful to his life in this world and the
another issue altogether and will be discussed in due course. Therefore
the mere removal of double ignorance does not make learning philosophy
necessary.

### 3- The Indispensable Foundation of Life.

###

What is meant by the above title is that life without philosophical
statement would be impossible. In order to understand the turn of this
claim we may consider one simple routine occurrence. Suppose that you
have returned from your friend’s house but you suddenly remember that
you have left your ring on his dinner table. You call him, describe the
ring to him and ask him if he has found it. After looking for it, he
tells you, “there is no ring on the table, but there is a ring under the
table which is yours.” The analysis of this simple occurrence shows that
it cannot be justified without presupposing a number of philosophical
statements.

For example, let us consider the statement; we have to presuppose the
concepts of existence, nonexistence, object or thing, essence or
substance (by which is meant the body of the table or the ring), space
and time. All these concepts are intellectual rather than tangible.
Moreover, to make this statement true, we have to assume the truth of
the following philosophical statement:

1- ‘A thing that is seen in a certain place must be there’.

Without presupposing this statement we cannot accept that there is a
ring under the table.

2- ‘A visible thing which is not seen in a certain place is not there.’
Without presupposing this statement we cannot accept that there is no
ring on the table.

3- ‘Behind these visible appearances, such as colour, shape and size,
there is a substance or an essence, in short a body, such as a ring or a
table, etc.’ Without presupposing this statement we cannot speak of the
ring or the table.

4- ‘The spatial position of a particular object is an accidental issue
and changing it would not result in turning that object into something
else.’ Without presupposing this statement we cannot be sure the ring
under the table is the same that was on the table.

5- ‘The temporal position of an object is an accidental issue and
changing it would not cause the thing in question to turn into something
else.’ Without presupposing this statement we cannot be sure whether the
present ring is the same as the one that existed before.

6- ‘The agreement of two contradictories or their simultaneous
elimination is impossible,’ which, applied both true and false, or
neither true nor false. It must necessary be either true or false.
Without presupposing this statement we can argue that your formed
statement is both true and false or it is neither true nor false.

7- Every body occupies a space and space is not an illusory or imaginary
things. Although this statement has nothing to do for the ring here and
there is based on ones belief in the existence of space.

Further reflection will perhaps rival more statement and presupposition.
If we look closely into our and other daily affair, we see that we use
much other philosophical statement, such ad causal necessity the law of
causal homogeneity, the law of the simultaneity of cause and affect the
impossibility of regress and so on. These philosophical statements exist
in all human minds people believe in them and constantly use them,
though perhaps not consciously. We many appreciate the function of these
statement in our every life if we imagine a situation in which they were
complete erased from the people minds for a shirt time or everyone
seriously believed them to be false we would seaside perceive , then ,
that in such a situation life would degenerate into utter choa.

Does the benefit just allude to make the study of philosophy necessary?
No for all people gradually perceive these statements and unconsciously
use them without any need to learn philosophy. Why these statement are
also called common sense conviction. Furthermore, no doubt they are not
clearly or precisely understood in their common sense usage. In
philosophy they become more exact, their meaning are clarified their
limit and boundaries are defined and objective to be answered. In short
their ambiguity is removed \<Still, we do not need this clarification to
manage our daily affair s and can content ourselves with their common
interpretation.

Defining the Border between Sense and Reason
--------------------------------------------

In order to delineate the border between sense and reason must return to
the hypothetical situation mentioned above.

Prior to our analysis of that situation , we could not recognise that
intellectual presupposition employed in it, believed it to be a
completely sensible occurrence and thought that in similar situation ,
namely in simple routine events, the intellect does not play an
important role.

However, after the analysis we begin to realise our mistake. Now what
kind of analysis is that? Certainly it is a philosophical analyse a
simple ordinary occurrence to determine precisely the contribution of
intellect in that occurrence and show that even in the simplest and most
sensible issues we cannot overlook the contribution of intellect and say
that our only mean id knowledge are the sense or only those statement
are valid that are confirmed by sense and experience. So, one of the
uses of philosophy is that it teaches man that the role of the sense in
his life is much more limited and that of the intellect much greater,
than what he be lives. In other words, learning philosophy liberates man
from that natural sensationalism which because of our natural life
affect.

However, does this benefit make learning philosophy fro all or most
people , since natural sensationalism does not create any problem for
our everyday life as most people are affected by it and still face no
difficulties in their lives. It is also not incompatible with admitting
intellectual accepts propositions or demonstrations so that it should
end with blasphemy and denial of life in the hereafter, and so come
under the second criterion. He who is affected by y this sensationalism
also admits the self-evident intellectual concepts and proposition and
accepts and employs their demonstrations that are founded on them and
can prove the existence of God and the next world by them. His only
mistake is that he thinks that many of these concepts and propositions
are sensible and empirical rather than intellectual. it is true that
those who fear that natural sensationalism nay lead them to
philosophical sensationalism, according to which all intellectual
concepts and study of God or the hereafter is possible, may find it
necessary to learn philosophy to understand the undeniable contribution
of intellect indifferent field of learning.

### 1- A Holistic Outlook

###

In the first chapter it was says that the subject of philosophy unlike
the subjects of other branched of knowledge is general and logistic and
therefore in contrast to other field of scholarship philosophical
investigation is not limited to a particular aspect of the world. This
difference makes philosophy unlike other kinds of knowledge, holistic
and comprehensive in its outlook that is it give us an outline and
picture of the whole world of being?

Does this characteristic make learning philosophy necessary? No for
acquiring such a picture to the required extent can also be obtained
through the conviction if a intellect and there is no need for learning
philosophy. No doubt the picture provide by philosophy is much more
exact and complete than the one set more desirable, but such an exact
picture according to the two criteria set forth earlier is unnecessary .

### 2- A Profound Outlook

###

Most of the people often look superficially at the phenomena they
encounter in this world. They see many things that are apparently
diverse and different and see no connection or similarity between them,
such as the fall of different bodies on earth the rotation of the moon
round the earth the flow and ebb of the sea, the arrow -like route of
the of canon shell, and the change of season However, scholars look at
these things more profoundly. On the basis of certain philosophy and
non- philosophical presupposition s and by experiment and reflection,
they look into phenomena are indeed similar to each other for it is only
one law (that appears in different forms) such as general gravel which
in one place appears in the form of the fall of bodies to earth and in
another place in the form of the rotation of the moon round the earth
and so on .Second on the basis of this one dominant law all apparently
diverse things and phenomena are linked with each other in a causal
relationship In short scientists do not content themselves with the
appearance and the surface of things and phenomena, but by probing them
deeply look at roots and see a united and coherent world. But how far
does this probing and looking in depth continue? It continues until they
come to presuppositions. As soon as they reach this point they stop and
scientific investigation comes to an end. However, philosophy start
precisely at this point and philosophical investigation begins here. In
its analysis confirmation, negation, endorsement, and explanation of
philosophical presuppositions of science, philosophy looks even more
deeply into things. Therefore in this journey from the surface of
phenomena to their depths, and in this profound investigation,
philosophy begins where all other branched of learning stop. It deals
with the roots on which other discipline depend and by the help of which
try to explore the phenomena we encounter in the world, philosophy looks
at root of all other field of learning and this is why it is deeper than
other discipline. This profound approach is not limited to philosophical
discussion about the presupposition of science but rather philosophy
discussions and perspective in general are essentially profound and
deep.

However does its deep outlook make learning philosophy necessary? The
answer is negative for most people, for though the deep philosophical
perspective is interesting and desirable its absence will not disturb
man life either in this world or in the next. we have all know ,many
people who did not have this deep outlook but incurred no great material
or spiritual harm because of it , it is true that if a society lacks
such deep thinkers altogether it ill face culture decay and
deterioration and no doubt this decadence may disturb its social life .

Therefore this characteristic makes it necessary that in every society
some learned and qualified people should study philosophy and
specialise.

Providing The Presuppositions of the other fields of Study
----------------------------------------------------------

It was explained in the last chapter that all branches of knowledge
posses some general particular philosophical presuppositions without
which research in those discipline would be either meaningless is
impossible. The principle of non- contradiction , the principle of the
possibility of knowledge , the principle of causality, the law of causal
necessity, the law of causal homogeneity , the law of the simultaneity
of cause and effect , the impossibility of circle and degree , the
impossibility of opposition , the principle if simplicity the existence
or nonexistence of nature , the existence or nonexistence of nature
movement, the existence or nonexistence of absolute space the existence
or non-existence of the whole as something independence from the part
determinism versus free will. The existence or non - existence of
quantity in the external world and many other philosophical laws and
proposition are among there presuppositions. Some of these are discussed
in philosophy , some other in type of philosophy that is used in
genitive constructions, such as the philosophy of the empirical science
, the philosophy of mathematic , the philosophy of the social science
and the philosophy of science and skill other problems, in their
different aspects are studied in both. We can say, then that it is
philosophy that provide many of the presupposition of the other field of
study depend, each discipline is dependent on a certain form of
philosophy and when that discipline is accepted and finds current and as
soon as that philosophy associated with it also become as that
philosophy is destroyed that particular discipline will also be
undermined. In short it is not the case that every philosophy can permit
any intellectual discipline to grow out of it or to be more evident in
the humanities and especially in the social science.

Does this characteristic make learning philosophy necessary?

The truth is that if we consider only this characteristic and disregards
the impact of these branches of knowledge on man private and social
life, still according to our two criteria the answer would be in the
negative, for the mere fact that philosophy provides the presupposition
of the other field of learning does not make learning ir necessary. It
is true, however that if we consider the impact of these intellectual
disciplines on man individual and social life it world is a different
story and we shall do this in 2.8.

### Providing The Fundamental Principle of Systems and Movement

###

As every intellectual disciple is dependent on true or false
philosophical presuppositions or in other words as every field of
learning is dependent on a type of philosophy, every social movement and
every human system are also dependent on a philosophy. The Nazi Fascist
and Marxist movement were dependent on the philosophies of Nazism
Fascism and Marxism. Less important movement such as those of the
Hippies, the Beatles, the Punks and the Raps are also dependant on their
philosophies. In general al big or small movement that have emerged or
will emerge have been influenced and will be influenced by a particular
philosophy. Every kind of human systems whether ethical, political,
legal economic or educational also depends on principle and
presuppositions most of which are essentially philosophy.

Thus it is the task of philosophy that provides the principle and
presuppositions of systems and movement. In short every true or false
social movement or human system is based on a particular philosophy true
or false. Social philosophers deal with these philosophies directly.
However other social classes also have some understanding of these
philosophies and in a general way and directly are affected by them
through the circulation of the ideal promoted by this philosopher and
because of this influence a particular philosophy becomes current in the
society and is widely accepted by the public. Clearly enough a society
will accept only those movement and system that are compatible with its
accepted philosophy. Accordingly, every with any type of philosophy.
Form this we can understand the hidden role of philosophy in man
individual and social life As we have already seen, because of this
characteristic philosophy plays a hidden role individual and social life
of the people so that absence of a true philosophy may lead to confusion
in those spheres and even lead to their Nazim Fascim and Marxism imposed
on the human society or on a part of it, proves this claim. Hence
according to the first criterion, there is no doubt that the existence
of a true philosophy is necessary to avoid such damages and this in true
make the study of philosophy necessary. Would it, however be necessary
for all people? The answer is no .in fact the existence of a number of
learned philosophy would be enough for once their thoughts circulate in
the society other will be duly influence.

Therefore because of this characteristic, it is necessary that you
should be some learned and well-qualified people to learned become
experts in philosophy.

Laying the Foundation of Worldviews
-----------------------------------

We have all seen or heard about sages whom no worldly joy or bliss could
make happily nor any misfortune or defeat downcast and forlorn. In
contract, we have seen many people who have been destroyed by small
miseries and misfortunes. Where is the root of this difference? it lies
in their attitude towards existence , themselves their future their
happiness or misfortune the world and its joy and pains. In short it
lies i their attitude toward the world and the position of man in it,
that is, in their ‘’ worldview’’ it would be no exaggeration if we say
that no aspect of man could be more important than his worldview for
this affects or rather determines all this action, his life in this
world and in the hereafter and all his private and social affairs.
Therefore in light of the two criteria already set forth, having a
correct worldview is necessary for every one A worldview or as it has
been described above, the individual attitude toward the world and man
positions in it contain three basic questions:

1- Is the cause of the world phenomena, including man only material
action and reaction and no non- material power has an role in their
creation or even the creation of matter its lf? And essentially is
existence equal to matter or is it rather that the material world is
only a part of the world of existence, depending for it realization on
another being that lies beyond it? in other words, does the world need a
god and if it does , does it need gods, or is it that the existence of
gods is impossible and the one God satisfies all that needs of being
including man?

2- Is man life confirmed to his life in this world, or does he also have
another life after death? And if he has another life is it limited or
eternal? In my case, what is its relationship with his life in this
world? This question entails another question Besides his corporeal body
does man have something else called ‘spirit’

3- What is the surest way to find the right plan for one private and
social life? Besides the conventional plans available to people, which
in practice result in contradictory conclusions; is there any other plan
whose validity is certain? The importance of the last question becomes
more apparent when the answer to the second question is affirmative;
that is, we come to the conclusion that man has an eternal life after
death and he has to prepare, with his voluntary work in this mortal
life, for felicity in the one to come. In that case, finding a sure
means that shows the relationship between the two lives and an exact
plan that can ensure eternal happiness becomes more urgent, and to the
extent that life after death is valued more, finding the way to ensure
happiness in it becomes more important. The first question is discussed
under the title of “Monotheism”, the second under ‘Resurrection’ and
third under ‘Prophet Hood’, which collectively account for the basic
convictions is also necessary.

Does this make learning philosophy necessary for all people? Still the
answer is negative. For most people, whose minds are not used to
critiquing and raising questions can, on the basis of common sense
convictions, find the correct answers to the philosophical questions
related to worldview. What makes people err in their attempt to find
worldview is the fact that they are prey to opposing inclinations rather
than lack of proof or ignorance of philosophy? Hence, the philosophical
nature of the questions discussed in worldview does not oblige people to
learn philosophy. It is true, however that his characteristic makes
learning philosophy necessary for the following two groups:

4- Those who have doubts about their worldview and are not certain
whether it is right or wrong. Their mind is active and meticulous, and
they cannot be satisfied with the simple proofs with which common people
are contented. No doubt such people need the help of philosophy.

5- Those who have the right worldview, the monotheistic worldview, and
have no doubt in it for the time being, but

Questions
---------

1- How many factors does the necessity criterion include? Name them.

2- What are the uses of philosophy?

3- Which groups have to learn philosophy?

4- What is the difference between philosophical propositions and their
corresponding common sense convictions?

5- By giving an example, show that philosophy looks at phenomena more
deeply than science and science looks at the phenomena more deeply than
convention!

6- Name the essential questions of worldview and explain them briefly.

7- It is possible that in Muslim countries, as long as the people
believe in Islam, economic systems that abolish private ownership to be
established and stabilized? Why? (In your answer you may also consider
the philosophical aspect of the question).

8- In the holy verse “When you threw, it was not you that threw, but God
who threw” (Anfal “8”:17) which refers to a pebble or an arrow thrown by
the prophet, peace be upon him and his household, two issues have been
admitted simultaneously:

1- Throwing is the Prophet’s action , peace be upon him and his
household (because of the expression “when you threw”);

2- Throwing is God’s action (becaus e of the expression “but God
threw”).

Explain on the solution of what philosophical question deep
understanding of the compatibility of the two depend?

3- Explain how deep understanding o f the verse “And God created you and
what you make” (Saffat “37”:96) depend on solving the philosophical
problem on solving the philosophical problem of how one action may have
two agents.

4- On understanding what philosophica l issue does deep understanding of
the holy verse “But you will not unless God wills” (Insan “76”:30)
depend?
