Chapter Five: Necessity, Impossibility, and Possibility
=======================================================

In this chapter terms such as ‘necessity’, ‘impossibility’, ‘necessity
by essence’, ‘impossibility by essence’, ‘possibility by essence’,
‘necessity by others’, and ‘impossibility by others’ are introduced.

Therefore, we start our discussion by giving a brief and indefinable
concept in philosophy, and then we will try to explain these terms in
the light of the two self-evident concepts of existence and
non-existence.

Necessity
---------

If we consider such items as ‘flower’, ‘even’, ‘white’, ‘sweet’, and
‘eight’, we will see that among these items only ‘even’ can be related
to ‘eight’, and ‘white’ to ‘flower’, and these relationships are
reflected in the mind of man in the two statements of ‘eight is even’
and ‘flower is white’. No doubt because ‘even’, ‘sweet’ or ‘eight’ have
nothing in common with ‘flower’, or ‘flower’, ‘white’, or ‘eight’, or
finally ‘white’, ‘sweet’, and ‘even’ with each other, there can exist no
statement in our mind describing their relationship, such as ‘eight is
sweet’ and so on. In other words, the statement ‘eight is an even
number’ expresses the relationship between the attribute ‘even’ and the
number eight and the statement ‘the flower is white’ indicates the
relationship between the attribute ‘white’ and the flower.

Now we turn our attention to the two mentioned relationships. It is
clear that the attribute ‘even’ and the number eight, unlike the
attribute ‘white’ and the flower are inseparable related to each other.
We cannot imagine any number eight that is not even. However, we can
imagine a flower that is not white, or even imagine certain states and
conditions where the white flower loses its whiteness and acquires
another colour. In philosophical terms it is said that the relationship
between ‘white’ and ‘flower’ is unnecessary. We can also put the
necessity or non-necessity of this relationship in a statement, and say,
for example, “Eight is necessarily even,” and “Flower is white but
unnecessarily.” In these two statements, besides showing the
relationship, we have identified its kind. In technical terms, words
such as ‘necessity’ or ‘non-necessity’, which show the kind of
relationship, are called ‘modes’.

We should know that concept such as necessity and non-necessity, or
necessary and unnecessary are evident and certainly need no definition
for their presence in the mind, and even such concepts cannot be
defined. These concepts are gradually and automatically are formed in
the human mind. Therefore, we do not intend here to define these
concepts, and have only tried to show to which concepts of the mind the
philosophers refer by the terms ‘necessity’ and ‘non-necessity’.

Necessity and impossibility
---------------------------

The above-mentioned necessity and nonnecessity were not specific to any
special attribute. In general, the relationship f each attribute with
the thing it describes is either necessary or unnecessary, that is, it
is either an attribute inseparable from that thing, or it is a separable
attribute.

‘Even’, for example, is the necessary attribute of number eight, whereas
whiteness is the unnecessary attribute of the flower. Now we turn our
attention to existence and non-existence.

As the relationship of one thing and its attributes could be either
necessary or unnecessary, the existence or nonexistence of one object
could be necessary or unnecessary. In other words, the existence of one
things can be necessary or unnecessary, and its non-existence can also
be necessary or unnecessary. In technical terms, things that have a
necessary existence are called ‘necessary’, and those whose
non-existence is necessary are named ‘impossible’. The necessity of
existence is also named ‘necessity’, and the necessity of nonexistence
is called ‘impossibility’. So, when we say something is necessary, we
mean its existence is necessary, it must exist, and its non-existence is
impossible.

On the other hand, when we say something is impossible, we mean its
non-existence is necessary, it should not exist, and its existence would
be impossible.

For further clarification of the issue, let’s consider one of the
phenomena, the storm, for example. Suppose that we know all the factors
responsible for the existence of the storm, and decisively judge that
the storm must exist. In other words, with this supposition the storm
will necessarily exist, and, in philosophical terms, it is necessary.
Now, suppose that some or all of these factors do not exist; then,
according to the judgment of the intellect, the storm should not exist.
In other words, with this supposition the storm would be necessarily
non-existent, and in philosophical terms it would be impossible.

Impossibility by essence and impossibility by other
---------------------------------------------------

If we suppose that the causes and factors necessary for the existence of
a storm do not exist, the storm will never exist. With this supposition,
the storm should be impossible. Moreover, we are all familiar with
concepts of ‘circle’ and ‘angle’, and we know that a circle can never
have and angle. Therefore, an angled circle or a circle with an angle
would be impossible.

Here we are faced with two impossible things; the storm and an angled
circle. Is there any difference between these two impossible things? No
doubt there is a difference. Although the storm is now impossible, we
can do something to remove this impossibility; in other words, its
impossibility is removable and separable, whereas the impossibility of
an angled circle can never be lifted.

What is the origin of this difference? What is its cause? Its cause is
that the impossibility of an angled circle emanates from its essence.
What we mean by the essence of a particular thing is the thing itself,
regardless of the existence or nonexistence of other things. Therefore,
if we want to consider the essence of a thing, we must consider only
that thing, irrespective of the existence or nonexistence of any other
thing. The essence of an angled circle, then, would be impossible. Why?
Because it is contradictory in its essence, circle being a closed
equidistant curve that has no angle. An angled circle would be, then, a
curve that both possesses and does not possess an angle. This, obviously
enough, is a contradiction, and every contradiction, no doubt, in
essence and in itself would be impossible. The storm, however, is not
contradictory in itself; its impossibility is not a part of its essence
so that it should be inseparable from it and make its existence
automatically impossible; rather, its impossibility is caused by
external factors, that is, things outside it have caused its
impossibility.

There are certain obstacles, for example, preventing its existence, or
there are certain factors that are necessary for its existence and have
not been realized yet.

It is clear that once those barriers are lifted or those necessary
causes are made available the storm will no longer be impossible. This
is why philosophers argue that the existence of an angled circle would
be ‘impossible by essence’ and its impossibility would be ‘an
impossibility by essence’ or ‘essential impossibility’, whereas the
existence of the storm, whose causes do not exist yet or there are
certain obstacles preventing it, is ‘impossible by other’ and its
impossibility is ‘impossibility by other’.

From what has already been said it becomes clear that the impossible by
essence can never exist, and it is impossible to find any extension for
it in the external world. It would not exist simply by changing states
and situations, by stipulating new conditions, or by changing particular
factors. The impossible by essence is absolutely nonexistent in any
state, unlike the impossible by other, which though in the present state
and situation and in the present condition cannot exist and can never
have an extension, in certain cases by changing the state, situation or
condition, and, in short, by changing the factors responsible or its
impossibility, it can exist.

Necessity by essence and necessity byother
------------------------------------------

We are already familiar with the philosophical term ‘essence’. The
essence of a particular thing is the thing itself regardless of other
things; therefore, our conception of the essences of a thing would be
equal to our conception of the thing without conceiving or stipulation
the existence or non - existence of any other things. Considering the
meaning of essence and the explanation given on the impossible by
essence and the impossible by other, we can easily understand at the
meaning of the necessary by essence and the necessary by other.

If there essence of a thing is necessary that is if exist necessary
without the mediation of any other the influence of any other factor,
dependence on any cause or condition or in short if it exists necessary
by itself and in more simple term, if its non- existence is
self-contradictory , such a thing would be necessary by essence it is
evident that if the essence of a thing is not necessary , but it becomes
necessary on stipulating certain causes and factors , such as thing
would be necessary by other , for in fact , it is made necessary by
external causes and factors ; it’s necessary is the result of those
cause Therefore necessity by essence is that necessities which results
from the thing itself and is dependent no on external factor necessity
by other however result from something other than the thing itself.

From what has been said we may after that it impossible to annihilate
the necessary by essence. We cannot make it non-existent by simply
changing some states situation as or conditional or my producing certain
factors the necessary by essence enjoys absolute existence under all
circumstances. However though in the present situation , state and
condition the necessary by other is necessary and con not be annihilated
once the situation , state and condition change or in short as soon as
the removal of the cause of it necessity become possible , it may lose
its state of necessary existence and become non-existence .

We many mention many examples of the necessary by other. All the
existent we may observe in our surroundings, such as different kinds of
element, plants animal and men are necessary by other. The tree that we
see is the effect is a claim of cause, such as water, air, certain,
degree of temperature and many other factors that may not be easily
enumerated. If this chain of cause stays as it is and none of the cause
change, this tree will necessary continue existing, and it will never
become non-existence. To destroy it, certain changes have to take place
in this chain. In that case, the tree would not be necessary and is
would become nonexistent.

This means that it the chain of these causes that makes the tree
necessary and its non - existence impossible. Accordingly, by changing
this claim its necessary might be lifted and it would become
non-existent. The necessary by essence is limited to the existence of
God. Philosophers have proved that it is only God who is necessary by
essence.

Possibility by essence
----------------------

So far we have understood that the impossible by essence is the thing
which when conceived without conceiving the existence or non-existence
of any other thing with itwe understand that is existence is self -
contradictory, and therefore impossible In itself rather than because of
any other factor. On the other hand, the necessary by essence is that
which is necessary by itself - contradictory and is impossible and
therefore its existence is caused by essence, that is it essence is
necessary neither in its existence nor non- existence and neither its
existence nor selfcontradictory such a thing would be possible by
essence Possibility then means that neither existence nor nonexistence
is necessary.

Therefore in order to understand whether a thing is possible by essences
or not we have to conceive only that thing without considering the
existence or non - existence of other things and examine it in regard to
existence and non-existence and consider it position. If we find that it
not contradictory i its existence that is tots existence is not
impossible and also it is not contradictory in its non- existence, that
is it non-existence is not impossible it will be possible by essence.

We can mention many examples of the possible by essence. All the things
we find in our surroundings, including ourselves are possible by
essence. However let us take the aforementioned storm as an example. you
may be asked to consider only the existence of it cause or factor , or,
in more philosophical; term to conceive only the essence of the storm,
say if the thing you have considered can ever find an extension band
whether its existence is self - contradictory. Your answer will be
negative, and your reason will be that in the past there have been many
storms. You might also be asked whether the non-existence if the thing
you have considered is impossible, and if is non- existence will be lf
contradictory.

Once again your answers will be negative, for usually she weather is
claim and there is no storm. Therefore, the storm is essentially neither
necessary nor impossible or in other words it possible by essence.

Compatibly of possibility by essence with necessity or impossibility by other
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is no doubt that possibility by essence is incompatible with
necessary or impossibility by essence. In other words, the possible by
essence can never become necessary or impossible by essence, for the
possible by essence is that which in itself is necessary neither in its
existence nor in its non- existence, whereas the necessary by essence or
the impossible by essence is that which is necessary in its existence or
in its non -existence , respectively. Therefore , there would be a
contradiction and an impossibility if a thing could be both possible and
necessary in its existence , Similarly there would also be a
contradiction and an impossibility if a single thing could be both
possible and impossible by essence , that is its non = existence be both
necessary and unnecessary .therefore the possible by essence cannot be
necessary or impossible by essence , that is possibility by essences in
incompatible with necessity or impossibility by essence.

Now is possibility by essence also incompatible with necessity or
impossibly by other? In other words, will there be any contradiction if
the possible by essence could be the necessary or the impossible by
other? The answer is no!

from the rational perspective there is no contradiction if a thing whose
existence or non- existence is essentially not necessary to become
necessary in its existence or non-existence by external factors just as
it is not impossible for a thing that is not luminous in itself to
become luminous by external factors, like iron for example which is
itself is not luminous and becomes luminous through heating. Thus
possibility by essence is compatible with necessary and impossibility by
other. However this is not all for as we shall demonstrate in chapter
eleven by priming the law of ‘causal necessary ‘everything that is
possible by essence is simultaneously necessary or impossible by others.

Turning to the example of the storm mentioned above, this is why once we
know that all the causes and factor of the storm are realized we will
judge at once that the weather must necessary be stormy, and that is
impossible for it to be otherwise. In other words the storm is
necessary, by which of course, we mean it is necessary by others for
allegedly this necessary is imposed on it by the cause and factors that
create it. Now if at the time we proclaim the necessity of the storm we
are asked if the same storm, irrespective of the causes of it creation,
necessarily exists and is necessary in it, we will definitely reply in
the negative at say that in itself it is still only possible.

The meaning of theses two simultaneous judgements made you the intellect
is that from the rational point of view the mentioned storm is
simultaneously possible by essence and between these two. In the same
way, possible by essence is show to be compatible with impossibility
other.

Question
--------

1- What is the meaning of necessity, impossibility or possibility?

2- What is the difference between the necessary by essence and the
necessity by other?

3- What is the difference between the impossible by essence and the
impossible by other?

4- Can the necessary by essence be possible by essence, too? Why?

5- Can the impossible by essence be possible by essence too? Why?

6- Which of the following items have necessary relationship with each
Earth and the situational movement Equilateral triangle and equal angles
Man and existence A man whose factors of creation have all been realized
and existence Dinosaurs and non- existence in the present states of
nature Edible salt and saltiness.

6- Can the possible by essence be necessary by other, too? If so,
demonstrate it by giving an example beside the one mentioned in this
book.

7- Can the possible by essence be impossible my others, to? If yes,
demonstrate it by giving an example besides that given in his book.

8- Give three example for things that are possible or impossible by
essence.

8- Which of the following is necessary by essence impossible by essences
our possible by essence and which are necessary or impossible my others?

A monster whose head alone is bigger than the earth, Phoenix, you
dinosaur and equilateral triangle with three unequal angles, earth the
movement of the earth round the sun, the movement of the sun round the
earth.

### Notes For further explanation

###

1- M. Motahhari, Najmooh Asar (collected works) vol. 10, pp. 77-83

2- We will try to prove this claim in the chapter on causal necessity we
will show there that the cause and factors that make one thing necessary
in its existence or nonexistence are the same cause and factors that
make it existent or existent or non-existent In other words, when the
cause of a thing exists that thing will necessarily exist and will be
necessary and naturally, it will become existent. When its cause does
not exist, it will necessarily be non-existent or impossible and
certainly will not exist.

3- This is one of the meanings of ‘essence’ in philosophy. there are
other meaning for this term in philosophy ,too, including quiddity,
which will be explained later (see Najmooah Asar vol. 10 notes p. 190)

4- Perhaps some may object that by definition the necessary b essence is
the thing whose essence necessarily exists, that is, it is necessary in
its existence without the mediation of anything else; in other words, it
is that essence whose nonexistence would amount to a contradiction.
Therefore, to realize that a thing is necessary by essence, we have to
imagine its essence and compare it with existence and nonexistence; know
that is existence is necessary and its nonexistence an absolute
impossibility. Now how have philosopher conceived the essence of God?
After all, can the essence of God be conceived so that it could be
consequently compared with existence or nonexistence? This objection
arise from the fact that they believe the way to understand that a thing
is necessary by essence is to conceive its essence and then compare this
conception with existence and nonexistence, whereas philosopher have not
understood the existence of the essential Necessary in that way; rather,
they have understood demonstrably that pure existence and the existence
our world would be impossible unless that which is necessary by essence
should have existed already. Therefore, no philosopher has ever claimed
that in conceiving the essence of different things he has come across a
certain thing that has necessary existence and whose non-existent is an
absolute impossibility. Perhaps this mistaken conception emanates from
the fact that concerning many things that are impossible by essence we
usually realize their impossibility by essence by simply conceiving
them.

5- For further explanation of the terms discussed in this chapter, see
Majmooah Asar, vol. 5. pp 180 and also pp. 367, 368.

6- Ibib. Vol 6, pp. 535, 536

7- Ibid. Vol. 10, pp. 97 - 104.

8- See Collected works, vol.10,pp.126

Chapter Six: Ashariyya and Mu‘tazila
------------------------------------

The M ‘tazila -literally ‘those who withdraw themselves’- movement were
founded by Wasil bin ‘Ata’ in the second century AH (eighth century AD).
Its members were united in their conviction that it was necessary to
give a rationally coherent account of Islamic beliefs. In addition to
having an atomistic view of the universe, they generally held to five
theological principles, of which the two most important were the unity
of God and divine justice. The former led them to deny that the
attributes of God were distinct entities or that the Quran was eternal,
while the latter led them to assert the existence of free will.

Ash‘ariyya-named after its founding thinker, al-Ash ‘ari-was the
foremost theological school in Sunni Islam. It had its origin in the
reaction against the excessive rationalism of the Mu‘tazila. Its members
insisted the reason must be subordinate to revelation. They accepted the
cosmology of the Mu‘tazilites but put forward a nuanced rejection of
their theological principles.

1. Historical Survey
--------------------

The Mu‘tazila originated in Basra at the beginning of the second century
AH (eight century AD). In the following century it became, for a period
of some thirty years, the official doctrine of the caliphate in Baghdad.
This patronage ceased in AH 238/AD 848 when al-Mutawakkil reversed the
edict of al-Ma’mun, which had required officials to publicly profess
that the Qur’an was the created word of God. By this time, however,
Mu‘tazilites were well established in many other centres of Islamic
learning, especially in Persia, and had split into two rival factions,
the Basran School and the Baghdad School. Although their links with
these two cities became increasingly tenuous, both schools flourished
until the middle of the fifth century AH (eleventh century AD), and the
Basran school only finally disappeared with the Mongol invasions at the
beginning of the seventh century AH (thirteenth century AD). After the
demise of the Mu‘tazila as a distinct movement, Mu‘tazilite doctrine -
by now regarded as heretical by Sunis - continued to be influential
amongst the Shi ‘ites in Persia and the Zaydis in the Yemen.

Al-Ash ‘ari (d. AH 303/AD 935) was a pupil of Abu ‘Ali al-Jubba’i (d. AH
303/AD 915), the head of the Basran School. A few years before his
master’s death, al-Ash ‘ari announced dramatically that he repented of
having been a Mu‘tazilite and pledged himself to oppose the Mu‘tazila.

In taking this step he capitalized on popular discontent with the
excessive rationalism of the Mu‘tazilites, which had been steadily
gaining ground since their loss of official patronage half a century
earlier. After his conversion al-Ash ari continued to use the dialectic
method in theology but insisted that reason must be subservient to
revelation. It is not possible to discuss al-Ash ‘ari’s successors in
detail here, but it should be noted that from the second half of the
sixth century AH twelfth century AD) onwards, the movement adopted the
language and concepts of the Islamic philosophies whose views they
sought to refute. The most significant thinkers among these later Ash
‘arites were al-Ghazali and Fakr al-Din al-Razi.

2. Cosmology
------------

Popular accounts of the teaching of the Mu‘tazilites usually concentrate
on their distinctive theological doctrines. To the philosopher, however,
their cosmology, which was accepted by the Ash‘ariyya and other
theological schools, is a more appropriate starting pint.

To the Mu‘tazila, the universe appears to consist of bodies with
different qualities: some are living while others are inanimate, some
are mobile while others are stationary, some are hot and some are cold,
and so on. Moreover, one and the same body may take on different
qualities at different times. For instance, a stone may be mobile when
rolling down a hill but stationary when it reaches the bottom, or hot
when left in the sun but cold after a long night. Yet there are some
qualities which some bodies cannot acquire; for example, stones are
invariably inanimate, never ability to combine living. How are the
differences between bodies, and between one and the same bodies at
different times, to be explained?

The answer given by the Mu‘tazilites is that all bodies are composed of
identical material substances (jawahir) or atoms (ajza’), on which God
bestows various incorporeal accidents (a‘rad). This view was first
propounded by Dirar ibn Amr (d. c. AH 200/AD 815) and elaborated by Abu
al-Hudhayl (d.c.AH 227/AD 841 or later), both of whom were early members
of the Basran School. Abu al-Hudhayl held that isolated atoms are
invisible mathematical points. The only accidents which they can be
given are those which affect their ability to combine with other atoms,
such as composition or separation, motion or rest. Conglomerates of an
atoms, on the other hand, can be given many other accidents such as
colours, tastes, odours, sounds, warmth and coldness, which is why we
perceive them as different bodies. Some of these accidents are
indispensable, hence the differences between bodies, whereas others can
be bestowed or withdrawn, thus explaining the differences between one
and the same body at different times.

This account of the world gained rapid acceptance amongst Islamic
theologians, although to begin with it was rejected by two Mu‘tazilites
of the Basran School, al-Nazzam (d.AH 221/Ad 836) and Abu Bakr al- Asamm
(d. AH 201/AD 816?). The former, who was Abu al-Hudhayl’s nephew, argued
that atoms which were mere mathematical points would not be able to
combine with one another and that, rather than being composed of atoms,
bodies must therefore be infinitely divisible. Abu al-Hudhayl replied
that Gods bestowal of the accident of composition on an isolated atom
made it three-dimesional and hence capable of combining (see Atomism,
ancient). Al-Asamm, on the other hand, objected to the notion of
accidents, arguing that since only bodies are visible their qualities
cannot have an independent existence. Abu al-Hudhayl retorted that such
a view was contrary to divine laws because the legal obligations and
penalties for their infringement were not directed at the whole person
but at one of his accidents’, such as his prostration in prayer or his
flagellation for adultery.

3. The Five Principles
----------------------

According to the Muslim heresiographers, who are our main source of
information about the Mu‘tazila, members of the movement adhered to five
principles, which were clearly enunciated for the first time by Abu
al-Hudhayl. These were (1) the unity of God; (2) divine justice; (3) the
promise and the threat; (4) the intermediate position; and (5) the
commanding of good and forbidding of evil.

The first and second principles are of major importance and will be
discussed in detail below. The third principle is really only an adjunct
of the second, and is here treated as such. The fourth principle is a
relatively unimportant doctrine which probably only figure in the list
because it was thought to have been the reason for the Mu‘tazila’s
emergence as a distinct movement; it is said that when Hasan al-Basri
was questioned about the position of the Muslim who committed a grave
sin, his pupil Wasil bin ‘Ata’ said that such a person was neither a
believer nor an unbeliever, but occupied an intermediate position. Hasan
was displeased and remarked, ‘He has withdrawn from us (i’tazila
‘annal’), at which Wasil withdrew from his circle and began to propagate
his own teaching. The historicity of this story has been questioned on
the ground that there are several variants: according to one version the
person who withdrew was Wasil’s successor Qayada. Moreover it is
noteworthy that at least one influential member of the Basran school,
Abu Bakr al-Asamm, rejected the notion of an intermediate position and
argued that the grave sinner remained a believer because of his
testimony of faith and his previous good deeds. This was also the view
of the Ash‘arites.

The fifth principle, which is derived from several passages in the
Qur’an (for example, Surah 9: 71), and which the Mu’tazilites understood
as an obligation incumbent on all Muslims to intervene in the affairs of
state, was rarely put into practice. For the Ash’arites, the commanding
of good and forbidding of evil was the prerogative of the head of state,
who acted on behalf of the Muslim community.

4. The Unity of God
-------------------

The first half of the shahada, the Muslim declaration of faith, is the
testimony that there is no god besides Allah. Thus the numerical unity
of God is axiomatic for all Muslims. Nevertheless, although the Qur’an
explicitly asserts that God is one, and equally explicitly rejects
polytheism and the Christian doctrine of the Trinity, it speaks of God’s
‘hands’ (Surah 38:75,) ‘eyes’ (Surah 54: 14) and ‘face’ (Surah 55:27),
and of his seating himself on his throne (surah 20:5), thus apparently
implying that he has a body.

Moreover, in describing the radiant faces of believers ‘looking towards
their Lord’ on the Day of resurrection (Surah 75:23), it suggests the
possibility of a beatific vision.

However, the Mu’tazilites emphatically rejected such notions, insisting
that God is not merely numerically one but also that he is a simple
essence. This led them to deny that he has a body or any of the
characteristics of bodies such as colour, form, movement and
localization in space; hence he cannot be seen, form, movement and
localization in space; hence he cannot be seen, in this world or the
next. The Mu’tazila therefore interpreted the Qur’anic anthropomorphisms
as metaphors-God’s hands’ are his blessing God’s ‘eyes’ are his
knowledge his ‘face’ is his essence and his seating himself on his
throne is his omnipotence - and argued that, since the Qur’an elsewhere
asserts that ‘sight cannot reach Him’ (Surah 6: 103), the phrase ila
rabbiha nazira means ‘waiting for their Lord’ rather than looking
towards him.

Some of the later Ash’arites accepted the Mu’tazilite position on the
Quranic anthropomorphisms. In al-Ash’ari’s own view, however, they are
neither to be dismissed in this way nor understood to imply that God has
a body like human beings. They are ‘rvealed attributes’, whose existence
must be affirmed without seeking to understand how (bi-la kayfa).

Furthermore, the possibility of beatific vision depends not on God’s
embodiment, but on his existence. God can show us everything which
exists. Since he exists, he can therefore show us himself. Hence the
statement that ‘sight cannot reach Him’ must apply only to this world,
where he impedes our vision.

Much more problematic than the Qur’an’s anthropomorphisms are the
adjectives which it employs to describe God. He is said, for instance.
To be ‘living’, knowing’, powerful’ and ‘eternal’. If we deny these
qualities to God, we must then attribute to him their opposites, which
are imperfections. But God is by definition free from imperfections;
therefore God must always have had these qualities. But does this mean
that he possesses the attributes of ‘life’, knowledge’, ‘power’, and
‘eternity’ and that they are distinct from his essence?

The Mu’tazilites reasoned that this was impossible because it would
imply plurality in the Godhead. When we speak of God as ‘living’,
knowing’, ‘powerful’ and ‘eternal’, we are, in their opinion, merely
considering him from different points of view. God’s ‘attributes of
essence’ (sifat al-dhat), as they are generally called, are a product of
the limitations and the plurality of our own intellectual faculties; in
reality they are identical with God’s essence. Thus, according to
al-Ash’ari (Maqalat: 484), Abu al-Hudhayl maintained that ‘God is
knowing by virtue of a knowledge which is His own essence’ and that he
is likewise powerful, living and eternal by a power, a life and an
eternity which are none other than his own essence. Al-Nazzam expressed
this even more forcefully when he said. ‘If I say that God knows, I
merely confirm the divine essence and deny in it all ignorance.

If I say that God is powerful living and so forth, I am only confirming
the divine essence and denying in it all powerlessness, mortality and so
forth (Maqalat: 484).

Al-Ash’ari himself rejected this reductionist account of the ‘attributes
of essence which made them artifacts of human reason, but his arguments
for doing so are far from compelling. He alleged that since in the case
of human beings knowing implies possessing knowledge as an entity
distinct from compelling. He alleged that since in the case of human
beings knowing implies possessing knowledge as an entity distinct from
the knower, the situation with God knew by his essence, he would be
knowledge.

Finally, al-Ash’ari’s assertion that attributes of essence’ are neither
other than God, nor identical with him is simply a retreat into paradox.
However, al-Ash’ari was not alone in wishing neither to affirm the
independent existence of these attributes nor to deny in outright.

Al-Jubba’i’s son Abu Hashim (d. AH 321/AD 933) attempted to resolve the
problem by introducing the idea of ‘state’ (hal). A state is not
something which exists or which does not exist; it is not a thing and it
cannot be known in itself, only with an essence. Nevertheless it has an
ontological reality.

According to Abu Hashim, there are in God permanent states such as his
mode of bring knowing’ (kawnuhu ‘aliman), ‘his mode of being powerful’
and so forth, which give rise to distinct qualitative. This compromise
was accepted by many of Abu Hashim’s fellow Mu’tazilites of the Basran
school, but was unanimously rejected by those of Baghdad.

In addition to the attributes of essence, the Qur’an employs a whole
series of adjectives such as ‘providing’ and forgiving’, which describe
God in relation to his creatures. It is easy to imagine a time when God
did not have these attributes. The Mu’tazilites called these attributes
of action’ (sifat al-fi’l) because they deemed them to come into being
when God acts. In their reckoning, God’s ‘speech’ belongs to this
category of attributes, for it does not make sense to think of his
commandments as existing before the creation of the beings to whom they
are addressed. Thus the Qur’an itself, although the Word of God, is
temporal and not eternal. It was created initially in the guarded
tablet’ (Surah 85:22) and subsequently recreated in the hearts of those
who memorize it, on the tongues of those who recite it and on the
written page.

Although not denying the existence of attributes of action, al-Ash’ari
insisted that ‘speech’ -along with ‘hearing’ and ‘vision’- was an
attribute of essence. He argued that if God’s word were not eternal, it
would have had to have been brought into being.

Furthermore, since it is an attribute, it could not have been brought
into being other than in an essence in which it resides. In which case
either God brought it into being in himself, or he brought it into being
in another. Bur if he had brought it into being in himself, he would be
the locus of things which come into being, which is impossible. If, on
the contrary, he had brought it into being in another, it is the other,
and not God, who would have spoken by the word.

5. Divine Justice and Human Destiny
-----------------------------------

In addition to championing the unity of God, the Mu’tazilites stressed
his justice. They held the good and evil are objective and that the
moral values of actions are intrinsic to them and can be discerned by
human reason. Hence God’s justice, he is thus bound to stand by his
promise to reward the righteous with paradise and his threat to punish
the wicked with hellfire.

More importantly, the reward and punishment which he metes out must be
merited by creatures endowed with free will (see Free will). Thus
although the Qur’an says that God guides and leads astray those whom he
wills (Surah 14:4) it cannot mean that will happen after the judgment,
when the righteous will be guided to paradise and the wicked will be
caused to stray far from it. With regard to our acts in this world, God
creates in us the power to perform an act but we are free to choose
whether or not to perform it. Many of the Mu’tazilites held that the
principle of justice made it requisite for God always to do for people
what was to their greatest advantage. Al-Jubba’i went as far as to claim
that God is bound to prolong the life of an unbeliever if he knows that
the latter will eventually repent. In view of this, al-Ash’ari is
alleged to have asked him about the likely fate of three brothers: a
believer, an unbeliever and one who died as a child.

Al-Jubba’i answered that the first would be rewarded, second punished
and the third neither rewarded nor punished. To the objection that God
should have allowed the third to live so that might have gained
paradise, al-Jubba’i replied that God knew that had the child lived he
would have become an unbeliever. Al-Ash’ari then silenced him by asking
why in that case God did not make the second brother die as a child in
order to save him from hellfire!

For al-Ash’ari, divine justice is a matter of faith. We know the
difference between good and evil solely because of God’s revelation, and
not by the exercise of our own reason. God makes the rules and whatever
he decrees is just, yet God himself is under no obligation: if he
wished, he could punish the righteous and admit the wicked to paradise
(see Voluntarism).

Moreover, to suppose as the Mu’tazilites did that human beings had free
will would be to restrict the sovereign freedom of the creator. On the
contrary, God creates in his creature both the power and the choice;
then he creates in us the actions which correspond to these.
Nevertheless, we are conscious of a difference between some actions,
such as the rushing of the blood through our veins which are
involuntary, and others, such as standing up or sitting down, which are
in accordance with our own will Al-ash’ari argues that by approving of
these latter actions, which God created in us, we ‘acquire’ them and are
thus held responsible for them.

*See also: Causality and necessity in Islamic thought; Free will; Islam,
concept of philosophy in, Islamic theology; Karaism*

*NEAL ROBINSON Routledge.*
