Chapter Six: Ibn Sina
=====================

Life and Works
--------------

Ibn Sina, Avicenna (370/980-429/1037), also known as al-Ra’ is (“Master
and Head”) is among the very few medieval Muslim thinkers to have
written an autobiography, which was completed by his student Abu Ubayd
al-Juzjani.² This autobiography was later transmitted by a number of
biographers, including al-Bayhaqi (d. 565/1170), al-Qifti (d. 646/1248),
Ibn Abi Usaybiah (d. 669/1270) and Ibn Khallikan (d.680/1282).

Ibn Sina was born in Afshanah (a small village neighbouring Bukhara, the
capital of the Samanid dynasty), where his farther ‘Abd Allah,
originally from Balkh, met and married Sitarah. They had three sons,
‘Ali, al-Husayn (Ibn Sina) and Mahmud. When Ibn Sina was about five
years of age, the family moved to Bukhara. There the farther was
appointed governor of Kharmayathnah, a village in the suburbs of
Bukhara.

The rest of the story of Ibn Sina’s life, education and career is well
known, and there is no need to recount it here in detail. Suffice it to
say that the most striking features of this story, as he and al-Juzjani
tell it, are (1) his completing the study of the Qur’an and Islamic
literature by the age of ten and the rest of the sciences, including
Islamic law, astronomy, medicine, logic and philosophy, by the age of
eighteen, and (2) his enormous productivity in spite of the unstable
political conditions under which he lived that forced him at times to
flee from one territory to another, to move in disguise and even to be
imprisoned. His great achievement in the various branches of learning
seems to have resulted from a rare memory that enabled him to retain by
heart, for example, the Qur’an and Aristotle’s Metaphysics; a high
intellectual curiosity that helped him consider and solve difficult
problems even in his sleep; and an inner determination that generated
extraordinary physical and intellectual energy. The number of works he
wrote (estimated to be between 100 and 250), the quality of his work and
his involvement in medical practice, teaching and politics all reveal an
unusual level of competence.

At a very early age, Ibn Sina was introduced to various religious,
philosophical and scientific teachings. For example, he was introduced
to the Epistles of the Brethren of Purity and Isma’ilism by his father,
who was a member of this sect. He was also exposed to the Sunni
doctrine, as his fiqh teacher Ismail al-Zahid, was a Sunni, and to
Twelve-

Imam Shi’ism. In addition, he was given some background in logic,
geometry and astronomy by his other teacher, al-Natili. He exercised his
independence of though very quickly, however. First, he dispensed with
reaches, continuing his education on his own; and second, he did not
adhere to any of the doctrines to which he was exposed.

Rather, he drew on various sources, selecting only what he considered
convincing. Thus, we see in his system traces of Platonism,
Aristotelians tendency, is not purely Aristotelian, as it is usually
considered. The theory of creation, for example, which is basically
Neo-Platonism, and that of prophecy, which is Islamic in essence, they
are but two examples of its many non-Aristotelian teachings. Al-Juzjani
confirms the uniqueness of this work and asserts that it is nothing but
the product of Ibn Sina’s own thought.6 Ibn SIna himself makes a similar
point, stressing his originality in this work, especially, in the Logic
and Physics.7

The most important of Ibn Sina’s books are al-Qanun fi’l-tibb (“The
Canon of Medicine”), al-shifa’ (“Healing”), al-Najah (“Deliverance”),
‘Uyun al-hikmah (“Sources of Wisdom”), Danishmama-yi- ‘ala’i (“the book
of Science Dedicated to ‘Ala’ al-Dawlah”) and al-Isharat wa’l-tanbihat
(“Remarks and Admonitions”). Al-Qanun fi’ltibb consists of five parts.
Translated into Latin a number of times, it was considered the most
important medical source both in the East and in the West for about five
centuries (i.e., until the beginning of the eleventh/seventh century)
and continues to be the primary source of Islamic medicine wherever it
is practiced to this day, such as the Indo-Pakistani subcontinent. The
enormous amount of material in al-Shifa’, which is the most detailed
philosophical work of Ibn Sina, is grouped under four main topics:
Logic, Physic into eight, and Mathematics into four. Physics (with the
exception of the two parts dealing with animals and plants, which were
completed after Mathematics) was the first to be written, followed by
Metaphysics, then Logic, and finally Mathematics. Al-Najah, which is a
summary of al-Shifa’, also consists of four parts. The Logic, physics
and Metaphysics of this work were prepared by Ibn Sina and the
Mathematics by al-Juzjani. ‘Uyun al-hikmah, known also as al-Mujaz
(“Epitome”). Seems to have been intended for class instruction in Logic,
physics and metaphysics. This is evident from the simplicity, clarity
and drevity with which the work is presented. Danishmama-yi ‘alai also
consists of four parts and is particularly significant in that it is the
first work of Islamic Peripatetic philosophy in the Persian language.
Al-Isharat wa’l-tanbihat, which is the most mature and most
comprehensive philosophical work of Ibn Sina, also consists of Logic,
Physics and Metaphysics. It closes with a treatment of mysticism, a
treatment in its Sufi sense than metaphysics. In addition, Ibn SIna left
a number of essays and poems. Some of his most important essays are Hayy
ibn Yaqzan (“The Living Son of the Vigilant”), Risalat al-tayr (“the
Epistle of the Bird”). His most important poems are al-Urjuzah fi’l-tibb
(an iambic poem on medicine),8 al-Qasidat al-muzdawijah (anode in
couples)9, and al-Qasidat al-‘dat al-ayniyyah (an ode whose verses end
with the letter’).10 He also wrote a number of Persian Poems.

Division of sciences
--------------------

Ibn SIna understands “the purpose of philosophy to be the determination
of the realities of all things, inasmuch as that is possible for a human
being”. There are two types of philosophy, theoretical and practical.
The former seeks knowledge of the truth; the latter of the good. 12 The
purpose of theoretical philosophy is to perfect the soul through
knowledge alone.

The purpose of practical philosophy is knowledge of what must be done;
so that the soul acts in accordance with this knowledge 13 Theoretical
philosophy is knowledge of things that exist not owing to our choice and
action. Practical philosophy is knowledge of things that exist on
account of our choice and action.

The individual subjects of theoretical knowledge are of two main types:
those to which movement can be attached, such as humanity, queerness and
unity and those to which movement cannot be attached, such as God and
the intellect. The former are again divided into those that cannot exist
unless movement is attached to them, such as humanity and sugariness;
and those that can exist without any movement being attached to them,
such as unity and multiplicity. The former of the last two types is
either such that it cannot be free movement either in reality or in
though (e.g., humanity and horsiness), or such that it can be fore from
movement in thought but not in reality (e.g., sugariness). 14

There are, therefore three branches of theoretical philosophy: that
which deals with things inasmuch as movement is attached to them both in
reality and in thought; that which deals with things inasmuch as
movement is attached to them in reality but not in thought; and that
which deals with things inasmuch as movement is attached to them neither
in reality nor in though, regardless of whether movement can be attached
to them, as in the case of unity, or cannot be attached to them, as in
the case of God. The first is physics, the second is pure mathematics
and the third is metaphysics. 15

Practical philosophy, on the other hand, is concerned with learning one
of the following: (1) the principles on which pubic sharing among people
is based, (2) the principles on which personal sharing among peoples is
based, or (3) the principles on which the affairs of the individual are
based. The first is the management; 16 and the third is management of
the individual, referred to as ethics.17The principles of practical
philosophy are derived from the divine shari ah, and its complete
definitions are made clear by the divine Shari’ah.18

The benefit of the science of management of the city is to make known
the manner in which sharing among people accurse for the purpose of the
well-being of the human body and of the preservation of humanity.

The benefit of the science of home management is to make known the type
of sharing that must take place among the members of the same home in
order to ensure their well-being. Such sharing occurs between husband
and wife, and child, and master and slave. The science of management of
the individual yields a twofold benefit-tomakeknown the virtues and the
manner of acquiring them in order to refine the soul, and to make known
the vices and the manner of avoiding them in order to purify the soul.19

Only an outline of the most important aspects of Ibn SIna’s philosophy
can be provided here. The most essential elements of this logic, which
he considers the introductory part to philosophy, 20 are discussed in
Chapter 48 below. Only a sketch of his general logical scheme will be
given in this chapter.

Logic
-----

Ibn Sina considers logic as the key to philosophy, whose pursuit
(knowledge) is the key to human happiness. Logic performs this function
by helping to derive unknown concepts and judgments from known ones,
thus increasing our degree of knowledge (concepts are mental objects
with no affirmation or negation; judgments are mental objects with
affirmation or negation). Logic does this by acting as a set of rules
for distinguishing the valid from the invalid explanatory phrases, which
embody concepts and are the instruments for moving from known concepts
to unknown ones, and proofs, which embody judgment and are the
instruments for moving from known judgments to unknown ones. Since the
valid leads to certitude and the invalid to falsehood, knowledge is
attained only through the use of logic, except when, on rare occasions,
God provides this knowledge without any human effort. 21

While the logician’s function is to open the way for the knowledge of
the natures of things, he or she is not concerned with such natures in
themselves or as they exist externally or in the mind but only with
concepts, representing these natures under the aspect of being subject
or predicate, individual or universal, essential or particular. 22 Only
when the concepts, of the natures of things are considered inasmuch as
they have certain states and a certain relationship to each other can
they help to move though from the known to the unknown. Even though the
primary concern of the logician is concepts inasmuch as they are
arranged in a certain manner, the logician must deal with expressions,
as arranged in a certain manner; the logician must deal with
expressions, as they are the only way to reason about or to communicate
concepts. 23 With this in mind, Ibn Sina opens his logical treatises
with discussions, of expressions, beginning with single expressions, the
smallest elements of the explanatory phrase and proof.

As the ultimate goal of the logician is to pave the way for knowledge of
the natures of things, universal expressions that mirror universal
concepts, which in turn mirror these natures, must be his or her
concern.

That is why most of the discussion of the single expression focuses on
the study of universal terms (the five periodical): genus, species,
difference, property and common accident. The main types of the
explanatory phrase, of a genus and a differences, is said to be the most
reliable form of the explanatory phrase.

The proof, which utilizes explanatory phrase as its parts these are the
propositions or premises - is of three types: syllogism, induction and
analogy. The conjunctive, the conditional and the exceptive. The
propositions that form the premises of the various types of the
syllogism fall into nine categories. Each of these categories derives
its assent or judgment from a different source, which will be indicated
here in parentheses following the name of the category of propositions:
sensible (from the external senses only); experiential or observational
(from memory of repeated sense experience); based on unanimous
traditions (from multiple testimonies); received (from scholars or
respected religious leaders); estimative (from the estimative power);
widespread (from being widely known); presumed (from the realization
that the opposite is possible); imagined (from resemblance to
propositions involving assent); primary (from the clarity of reason). 24

Demonstrations is the most reliable form of the syllogism composed of
propositions characterized by certainty, it leads to a conclusion with
certainty. Such propositions are primary, experiential, sensible or
widely known. A demonstration requires three elements: those principles
with which the demonstration is made (the premises), those issues that
are the object of demonstration (the problems), and those subjects in
which demonstration is made.

Ibn Sina usually closes his logical discussions with a study of
ambiguities, whether in expression or in meaning.

Physics
-------

Physic is concerned with the study of certain principles and of the
things that are attached to natural bodies. These intellect is
considered a natural principle inasmuch as it is the cause of holding
matter and form together and, as such, is the relation to the physics
realm is the agent intellect discussed in physics, and not inasmuch as
it has such and such a nature or such and such a relation to separate
principles or intelligible. The things that are attached to natural
bodies include motion, rest, time, place, void, the finite and so forth.

For example, every natural body is said to have a natural place and a
natural shape. All natural motions lead to a creative, circular motion
belongs to the heavenly bodies, which are followed by the bodies that
are subject to generation and corruption. This first of the latter type
of bodies in existence is the four elements: water, air, fire and earth.
These elements are subject to the celestial influences. 26 When the four
elements come together, their mixtures vary in temperament owing to the
influence of the celestial powers. This variation in temperament results
in the composition of these elements: minerals, plants and animals (the
last and highest of whom are human beings). The closer their temperament
is to equilibrium, the higher the form of the natural body. For this
reason, there is a gradation in being from minerals to plants to
animals, as well as a gradation of the various kinds subsumed under
every level of these three types of being. The closest temperament to
equilibrium causes the existence of human bodies, which have the highest
form in the terrestrial sphere -this form being the human soul. This
kind of soul is defined as “a primary perfection of an organic, natural
body to which it belongs to perform acts of life”. 27Primary perfection
is what gives actuality to the species of a thing, as shape gives
actuality to the sword. This is to be contrasted with secondary
perfection, which is what gives actuality to the actions and reactions
that follow upon the species, as does cutting for the sword. 28 The
discussion of the soul takes up a large portion of Ibn Sina’s Physic. We
are told that if the function of the soul is limited to nutrition,
growth and reproduction, it is a mere plant soul. 29 If sensation and
movement are added to these, then it is a mere animal soul. 30 The soul
of a human being includes these, but has a practical and the theoretical
faculties or intellects. 31 When this rational part occurs to a being,
that being becomes a human being. 32 Through conjunction with the agent
intellect that contains the intelligible, the theoretical part of the
rational soul receives its proper perfection, the perfection that makes
it what it is. This perfection is the best thing a human being can
achieve; at it is the best thing for any being to achieve is proper
perfection, which completes its nature.

A brief discussion of the animal and rational souls is now in order,
given the important role that they play in achieving this perfection. As
mentioned, the animal soul has sensation and movement. The sensitive
part consists of the external and the internal senses. The external
senses are, in order of necessity for animals, touch, taste, smell,
hearing and sight. The internal ones are common sense, representational
faculty, imagination, estimative faculty and memory. The common sense is
the faculty in which external sensations or forms of external objects
collect. It is the faculty that enables us to judge, for example, the
honey is sweet when we perceive honey visually, without the gustatory
sensation that it is sweet. The reason is that the faculty of common
sense simultaneously receives from the different external senses the
different sensations of the one external object, which we call honey.
This makes it possible for us to distinguish between the yellow colour
and the sweet taste of honey, while realizing at the same time that they
belong to the same object. The representational faculty retains the
forms that the common sense receives from the outside. The objects In
contrast, the objects of the common sense are present only when the
external objects are there - except in rare cases when they are poured
into the common sense from the internal senses, which either manufacture
them or receive them from the divine world. 33 The estimative faculty is
said to grasp sense notions that are different from the sense forms
grasped by the common sense. These notions are exemplified by the lamb’s
fear of the wolf. The memory retains the notions of the estimative
faculty, as the representational faculty retains the sense forms.
Finally, the imagination combines some objects of the representational
faculty and of memory with each other, while separating the rest from
each other. It must be mentioned that this faculty is called
imagination, but only if employed by the estimative faculty. If it is
employed by the intellect, it is called cognition. 34The locomotive part
of the soul is responsible for the motion of the organs by means of the
nerves and muscles due to the will. This motion is assisted by primary
and secondary instruments. The primary ones, which concern us here, are
either the imagination or the rational soul. These cause inclination
either in the direction of or away from a perceived object. Inclination
in the direction of an object is for an object that is imagined or
presumed to be useful.

When a power expresses such an inclination, it is called appetitive,
which the inclination itself is called a petition.

Inclination away from an object is for an object that is imagined or
presumed harmful. When a power expresses such an inclinations. It is
called irascible, while the inclination itself is called anger. Both
intellection and motion are affected by the condition of their
instruments. If, for example, the instrument of sight is diseased or has
aged, then sight declines or disintegrates totally. 35 The human or
rational soul performs either bodily actions and reactions, or purely
intellective actions. The former do not belong to it and proceed from it
and the body, whereas the latter belong to it and proceed from its
essence.

The actions that the rational soul performs in conjunction with the body
are exemplified by consideration of the particular matters that must be
done or avoided voluntarily, including the practical crafts such as
carpentry, farming and animal husbandry. Reactions, on the other hand,
are states consequent upon the preparations of the body and the rational
soul, such as the preparation for crying or shyness. The purely
intellective acts, which are performed by the rational soul, consist of
grasping the quiddities or natures of things as universal concepts, such
as “humanity” and “horsiness”. Such concepts cannot be grasped by any of
the external or internal powers, for these powers belong to the animal
world and thus whatever they grasp must be to some degree material and
particular. 36 Contrary to the animal powers, the rational soul can
grasp the quiddities or natures of things apart from matter and
particularity. From such universal concepts, it composes judgments
possessing certainty.

As mentioned, the rational soul has two parts, one with a capacity for
action and the other with a capacity for action and the other with a
capacity for knowledge. The former, called the practical intellect, is
directed towards the body. With it, one can distinguish between what
must and what must not be done, as well as between good and bad
particular things. This intellect is perfected through habits and
experiences. The latter, called the theoretical intellect, is directed
towards the divine world and enables one to receive the intelligible. 37

The theoretical intellect passes through four stages. Firstly, it is in
potentiality and has not yet formed any concepts or grasped any
intelligible. This is the potential or material (al-aql al-hayulani).
This intellect is called material, not because it is material in nature
but because it has the capacity for receiving intelligible forms as
matter has the capacity for receiving material forms.

Secondly, it is this potentiality actualized by the occurring of primary
intelligibles in it.

This is the habitual intellect (al-aql bi’lmalakah).

Thirdly, it is the acquisition of the intelligibles made constant. This
is the actual intellect (al-aql bi’l-fi’l). Fourthly, it is these
intelligibles themselves. This is the acquired intellect (al-aql
al-mustafad). 38

For a thing to move from potentiality to actuality, another thing, which
is already in actuality, must give it the form that actualizes it. What
body, because it must already possess the intelligible forms, which are
non-material and which it gives to our theoretical intellect. Therefore
it must be an intellect-this intellect being the agent intellect. The
agent intellect sheds its light on the objects of our imagination, which
have been received originally from the external world, thus making them
visible to our theoretical intellect, as the sun sheds its light on the
external things, thus making them visible to our sight. When the light
of the agent intellect reaches the objects of the imagination, it
renders them intelligible to our theoretical intellect by abstracting
them from matter. 39

Since the rational soul can receive the intelligible forms, it must be
in its substance of the nature of these forms. If what receives the
intelligible forms were a body or a power in a body, these forms would
be divisible, and a simple form could not be intelligible. Arguments are
advanced to show that the idea that the rational soul is immaterial. 40
It follows that the rational soul is simple, for multiplicity lies in
materiality. Because it is simple, it is indestructible. Contrary to
Alexander of Aphrodisias and al-Farabi, who believe that the only human
soul assured of indestructibility is that which knows at least some
realities -that which is completely deficient in such knowledge is
eventually destroyed-Ibn SIna considers all human or rational souls to
be indestructible? To him, knowledge of the realities of things is
necessary only for happiness but not for existence after death.

Metaphysics
-----------

Metaphysics 41is the science that provides knowledge of the principles
of theoretical philosophy. This it does by demonstrating through the
intellect the complete acquisition of these principles.42 Metaphysics
deals with the existent inasmuch as it exists, that is, with the general
or absolute existent and what is attached to it. In other words, the
subject of metaphysics is the existent, not inasmuch as it applies to
some things and inasmuch as something particular is attached to it, as
in physics and mathematics (such as quantity and quality, action and
reaction, which are attached to the objects of physics) but inasmuch as
it applies to the principle of existence and inasmuch as something
universal is attached to it (such as unity and multicity, potentiality
and actuality, eternity and coming into being, cause and effect,
universality and particularity, completeness and incompleteness,
necessity and possibility). 43 These qualities are essential accidents
of the particular existent. We understand from Ibn Sina’s logic that an
essential accident is one that does not constitute or enter into the
essence of a thing, yet necessarily accompanies it, as “laughter” for
“human being”. A nonessential accident neither constitutes the essence
of a thing nor necessarily accompanies it; however, it resides in it, as
“white” may reside in “human being”.

The existent is either substance or accident. A substance is anything
that is not in a subject, whether or not it is in matter. Thus substance
is of two main types: (1) that which is in matter, and (2) that which is
not in matter. The latter category is broken down into three types (2a)
matter, (2b) that which is accompanied by matter, and (2c) that which is
neither matter nor accompanied by matter. This scheme means that
substance is of four types: (1) form in matter, as the soul is in the
body (2a) matter with no form-this is absolute matter, which has no
existence in actuality but only in conception; (2b) the composite of
form and matter, as the human being is a composite of soul and body,
(2c) form separate from matter, as God or any intellect is neither
matter nor in contact with matter. 44Accident on the other hand, is in a
subject and is divided into nine types: quality, quantity, relation,
time, place, position, condition, action and reaction.

The existence of a thing is either necessary or possible (contingent).
Necessary existence is such that if the thing to which it belongs is
assumed to be non-existent, impossibility arises. Possible existence is
such that if the thing to which it belongs is assumed to be non-existent
or existent, no impossibility arises. 45Ibn Sina mentions that in other
contexts “possible, existence” could also be used in the sense of “being
in potentiality”. 46Necessary existencesare either that which always
belongs to a thing through that thing itself, or that which always
belongs to it through another. For example, the existence of burning is
necessary, not because of the burning itself, but because of the meeting
of two things, one naturally capable of burning and the other naturally
capable of being burnt. 57 What is necessary through itself cannot be
necessary through another and conversely. For example, if the existence
of A is necessary through A, itself, this existence cannot be necessary
through B.

Similarly, if it is necessary through B, it cannot be necessary through
A, itself. This is to say that if, is the second case, one considers A
in itself, one finds its existence non-necessary, or possible in itself.
If this is not the case, its existence would be either necessary in
itself, but this has been denied, or impossible without another. Its
existence through another is other than its existence without another.
By the former, it is necessary; by the latter, it is possible. 48

The existence of a being necessary in itself is determined on the basis
of two principles: first, the chain of possible beings at any time
cannot be infinite, thus, it must lead to a necessary cause external to
this chain - this cause being the Necessary Existent or Being, otherwise
known as God.

Being eternally prior in existence to everything and the source of the
existence of everything, this Existent is said to be the first cause. 50
It is free from matter, one and simple in all respects. 51 Thus it has
no genus or difference, the two necessary elements of a definition.
Therefore there is no definition of it, but only a name. Being
immaterial, it is purely good, for only in matter, the source of
privation, does evil lie.52 Owing to its immateriality, it is also an
intellect, and, owing to its simplicity, the intellect and the
intelligible in it are one.53 In itself, it is the Beloved and the
Lover, the pleasurable and the pleased. It is the Beloved because it is
the highest Beauty. It is the highest beauty because there is no highest
beauty than that of being a pure intellect, above all manner of
deficiency, and one in all respects. Suitable and apprehended beauty or
goodness is desired and beloved. The more the apprehended is beautiful,
the more the power of apprehension loves it and finds pleasure in it. 54

Thus the Necessary Being, who is most beautiful, perfect, and best, who
apprehends itself at this ultimate beauty and goodness and in the most
complete manner of apprehension, and who apprehends the apprehender and
the apprehended as one in reality is in essence, and by its essence, the
greatest lover and beloved and the greatest thing pleased and
pleasurable.

From this Necessary Being the rest of the existing things overflow
through the process of emanation. The first things that emanate are the
celestial intellects, followed by the celestial souls, the celestial
bodies and finally terrestrial beings. All these things emanate from it
in eternity; otherwise, a state would arise in it that was not there
before. But this is impossible in a being whose existence is necessary
in all respects. 56 This emanation is a necessary outcome of God’s
Essence and cannot be linked to any intention external to His Essence.
Firstly, there is nothing in Him external to His Essence-He is a total
simplicity, but He can be considered from different points of view. It
is only by virtue of such consideration that one can speak of His
Attributes. Secondly, even if it were possible for Him to have among
such Attributes any intention relating to the world. “The reason is that
every intended.

This is because if a thing is for the sake of another, that other is
more complete in existence than it.” 57 This is to say that whatever is
more complete in existence then another cannot intend that other.

God, therefore, cannot intend the world or anything in the world, since
He is more complete in existence than the world.

Even though neither God nor any other cause can be perfected essentially
by its effects and therefore cannot intend its effects or anything for
them, still it may lead accidentally to beneficial effects and, if it is
divine, know and be pleased with these effects. Health, for example, is
such “in substance and essence, not to benefit the sick; but it results
in benefiting the sick”.

58Similar to health, superior causes are what they are in themselves,
not to benefit anything else; but they do benefit other things
accidentally. They differ from health, though, in that they know the
things that exist. 59Still, providence is attributed to God, the first
cause of all things. Providence must be understood, however, not in the
sense of divine guidance of the world or concern about it. Rather,
providence is defined as God’s knowledge of the order of existence and
the emanation of this order inasmuch as that is possible, and His being
pleased with it. 60

Ibn Sina’s thought had a clear and strong impact on the East and on the
West, in science, literature and philosophy. The impact of his
philosophical thought, which concerns us here, was exhibited in a large
number of commentaries on his works and in other forms of writings it.
The best known of such commentaries are thoseof Ibn Kammunah, Fakhr
al-Din al-Razi and Nasir al-Din al-Tusi on al-Isharat, and Sadr al-Din
al-Shirazi on part of al-Shifa’. Among the most prominent Eastern
thinkers whose thought reflects that of Ibn Sina are al-Tusi,
Suhrawardi, Qutb al-Din al-Shiraz, Mir Damad, Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi
(Mulla Sadra) and the Syriac Christian Ibn al-Ibri.

Suhrawardi’s and al-Shirazi’s theories of illumination, for example,
stem from Ibn Sina’s “Oriental philosophy”. Also, their discussions of
being and essence were generated by Ibn Sina’s view on this subject.

Ibn al-Ibri too adheres closely to Ibn Sina’s analysis of God’s
relationship to the world, the presence of evil, and the nature and
unity of the human soul as well as the impossibility of the soul’s
pre-existence and transmigration. 61

But, as mentioned, not all those who felt the effect of Ibn Sina’s
thought responded to it positively. Ibn Sina had his strong critics,
such as al-Ghazzali and al-

Shahrastani in the East, and William of Auvergne and Thomas Aquinas in
the West.

These critics rejected primarily his ideas concerning God’s nature,
knowledge of particulars and relationship to the world, as well as the
eternity of the universe and the denial of the resurrection of the body.
Also, Ibn Rushd, who in his major work, The Incoherence of Incoherence,
seeks to defend philosophy as embodied primarily in Ibn Sina’s works,
charges that Ibn Sina misunderstood and distorted Aristotle at times.

Such opposition to Ibn Sina’s ideas, however, did not prevent even these
critics from borrowing heavily from him. Al-

Ghazzali’s logic and philosophical terminology, to give but two
examples, are, for the most part, those of Ibn Sina. Also, the
distinction Ibn Sina introduced in his theodicy, for example, between
evil in itself and evil for another was borrowed by Aquinas and from him
by Suarez. Because Ibn Sina’s works are not sufficiently know in the
West, however, the credit for this distinction is given in the West to
Aquinas.

Furthermore, two of Aquinas’s well-known proofs of God’s existence, that
from efficiency and that from contingency, as well as his distinction
between essence and existence, were also borrowed from Ibn Sina. The
numerous references Aquinas gives to Ibn Sina in Being and Essence and
elsewhere is sufficient to show the influence Ibn Sina had on his
prominent Christian philosopher and theologian whose ideas dominated
Western thought for so long. Gundissalinus, Albert the Great and Roger
Bacon are also among the Western thinkers whose work reflected elements
of Ibn Sina’s thought, especially with regard to the nature of the human
soul. No doubt the following factors facilitated Ibn Sina’s influence on
Latin philosophical circles; first, the translation parts of al-shifa’s
as early as the twelfth and thirteenth Christian centuries; and, second,
Ibn Sina’s efforts to synthesize Greek and Islamic though, an attempt in
which the West found the seed for a synthesis between Greek Philosophy
and Christianity.

### Notes

###

1- His full name is Abu ‘Ali al-Husayn ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Ali ibn
Sina - Abu ‘Ali being his nickname. Perhaps his titles, Master and Head,
refer respectively to his prominent rank in learning and his high
political position as a vizier (A. F. al- Ahwani, Ibn Sina (Cairo,
1958): 18). This would correspond to his other title, al-Hakim al-Wazir
(Wise man and Vizier). He was also known as Hujjat al-Haqq (Proof of the
truth).

2- He was one of Ibn SIna’s closest students, who accompanied during
most of his later life. For a translation of his bibliography see W.E.
Golham, The Life of Ibn Sina (Albany, 1974).

3- See Z.D. al-Bayhaqi, Tarikh hukama’ alislam, ed. M. K. ‘Ali
(Damascus, 1976): 52-72; A.H. al-Qifti, Tarikh al-hukama. ed. J. Lippert
(Leipzig, 1903): 413-26; I.A. Usaybi’ah, ‘Uyun al-anba’ fi tabaqat
alatibba’, Part Three, ed. Samith al-Zayn (Beirut, 1987): 2-28; I.
Khallikan, Wafayat al-a’yan wa anba’ abna’ alzaman, Part Two, ed. Ihsan
‘Abbas (Beirut, 1978): 157-[^62]:

3- See Ibn Abi Usaybi’ah, ‘Uyun al-anba’: [^5]:

4- For a list of Ibn Sina’s works, see G.C. Qanawati (Anawati),
Mu’allafat Ibn Sina (Cairo, 1955) and Y. Mahdavi, Fihrist-i musannafat-i
Ibn Sina (Tehran, 1954).

5- Ibn Sina, al-Shifa, al MAntiq, al-Madkhal (hereafter al-Madkhal), ed.
G. C.Anawati, M. al-Khudayri and A. F. al-Ahwani (Cairo, 1952): 2-[^4]:
Unless otherwise specified, all works referred to in the rest of this
chapter are bi Ibn Sina.

5- Ibid: 10

6- This is Ibn Sina’s longest poem, consisting of around one thousand
verses.

7- In this ode, which was written for al-Suhayli, Ibn Sina summarizes
the study of logic in a poetic form so that his brother ‘Ali could
remember it easily.

8- This poem on the soul is Ibn Sina’s best known.

9- Al-Madkhal: [^12]: Falsafah (philosophy) and hikmah (wisdom) are used
by Ibn Sina interchangeably.

10- Al-Madkhal: 14

11- Ibid.: 12

12- Ibid.: 12-13

13- Ibid. [^14]: For the division of the sciences, see also al-Shifa’,
al-Ilahiyyat (hereafter al-Ilahiyyat), I. ed. M. Y. Musa, S. Dunya and
S. Zayid (Cairo, 1960): 3-4; Mantiq al-Mashriqiyyin (Cairo, 1910): 6-7;
and ‘Uyun al-hikmah, ed. A. R. Badawi (Cairo, 1954): 17.

14- No specific name is given to the science of home management, but it
may be referred to as social science; it corresponds to the Greek
understanding of “economics”.

15- Al-Madkhal: 14

16- Uyun al-hikmah: 16

17- Ibid. For the division of the sciences, see also Ti’s rasa’il, ed.
Hasan ‘ASI (Beirut, 1986): 83-[^5]:

18- For a study of the relationship of logic to philosophy, see Shams
Inati, Remarks and Admonitions, Part One (Toronto, 1984): 9-[^11]:

19- Al-Madkhal: 19

20- Remarks and Admonitions, Part One: [^11]:

21- Ibid.: 12

22- Ibn SIna, al-Najah, ed. M. Fakhri (Beirut, 1985): 97-101; Remarks
and Admonitions, Part One: 28-9 and 118-[^28]:

23- The agent or active intellect (al-‘aql alfa”al) is, according to
Islamic philosophy, the intelligence governing the Moon. This term seems
to have been coined by al-Farabi, as al-Kindi before him seems
unfamiliar with it. Al-Kindi calls thisintellect instead the first
intellect. In any case, according to Ibn Sina, this intelligence is
caused by intellectual emanation proceeding from God and ending with the
human rational soul. The agent intellect is the last divine intelligence
and is responsible for administering the sublunary world. Its primary
function is to give corporeal form to matter and intellectual form to
the rational soul, hence its name the giver of forms (wahib al-suwar).
For a summary of Ibn Sina’s cosmology and natural philosophy see S.H.
Nasr, An Introduction to Islamic Como logical Doctrines (Albany, 1993):
215ff

24- Uyun al-hikmah: 33

25- Al-Shifa’, al-Tabi’yyat, al-Nafs (hereafter al-Nafs), ed. F. Rahman
(London, 1959):

26-.See also Tis’rasa’IL: 69, where the definition of the soul is given,
but there the perfection is not described as primary, and the body is
described as having “life in potentiality”.

27- Al-Nafs: [^11]: For the distinction between primary and secondary
perfections, compare with Aristotle, De anima, 2,412A.

28- Tis’ rasa’il: 55 and ‘Uyun al-hikmah: [^35]:

29- Tis’ rasa’il: 55-6 and ‘Uyun al-hikmah: 35-[^7]:

30- Al-Nafs: [^45]:

31- Tis’ rasa’il: [^51]:

32- Ibid. [^59]:

33- Al-Isharat wa’l-tanbihat, Part Two (published with Part Three and
Part Four), ed. S. Dunya (Cairo, 1958): 382 and Tis’ rasa’il:[^57]: For
a list of the faculties of the three parts of the soul; 58ff. for an
elaboration of the external senses; and 152-4 and 159ff. for an
elaboration of the internal senses. For a brief of the internal senses,
see ‘Uyun al-hikmah: 38-9.

34- Ibid. 39-[^40]:

35- Tis’ rasa’il: 57-8

36- Ibid.: 68

37- Ibid. 68-[^9]: For a discussion of the rational soul, see ‘Uyun
al-hikmah: 42-3.

38- For the relation of the agent intellect to us, see Tis’ rasa’il: 69
and Uyun alhikmah: [^43]:

39- For the immateriality of the rational soul, see ibid. 44-[^46]:

40- Ibn Sina also refers to this branch of philosophy as first
philosophy, divine science or wisdom in an absolute sense (al-Ilahiyyat,
1: 5).

40- Ibid.: 17

41- Al-Najah: 235-6 and ‘Uyun al-hikmah: [^47]:

42- See al-Najah: 237: al-Ilahiyyat, 1: 93; and ‘Uyun al-hikmah: [^48]:

43- Al-Najah: [^261]:

44- Ibid.

45- Ibid.

46- Ibid. 262 and ‘Uyun al-hikmah: [^55]:

47- Al-Najah: 271-[^2]:

48- Al-Ilahiyyat, 2: 342-[^3]:

49- Al-Najah: 264-[^5]:

50- For a detailed discussion of God’s Attributes, see al-Ilahiyyat, 1:
344-[^69]:

51- Al-Najah: [^280]:
