Chapter Seven: Mulla Sadra: His Teachings
=========================================

Sadr al-Din Shirazi, known as Mulla Sadra, appeared nearly a thousand
years after the rise of Islam and his works represent a synthesis of the
millennium of Islamic thought which preceded him. He was thoroughly
versed in the Qur’an and Hadith, Islamic philosophy and theology, Sufism
and even the history of Islamic thought, and must have access to an
unusually rich library. To all his knowledge must be added his own
intellectual powers as a philosopher and visionary and intuitive
capabilities as a gnostic (‘arif) who was able to have direct experience
of Ultimate Reality or what in the later school of Islamic philosophy
and theosophy is called “gnostic experience” (tajruba-yi ‘irfani). His
knowledge of the revealed sources of Islam was probably more extensive
than that of any other Islamic philosopher. It included intimacy not
only with the Qur’an, but also well-known commentaries, not only
prophetic Hadith but also sayings of the Shi’ite Imams whose
philosophical significance he revealed for the first time.

His Qur’anic commentaries and Sharh usul al-kafi (“Commentary upon the
Usul al-kafi” of Kulayni) and commentary upon the Light Verse (ayat
al-nur), both among the premier masterpieces of Islamic thought; attest
to his incredible mastery of the Qur’an and Hadith.

Mulla Sadra and earlier Islamic Philosophy
------------------------------------------

Mulla Sadra was also knowledgeable in the deepest sense in the schools
of Islamic philosophical thoughts before him. He knew Peripatetic
(mashsha’i) philosophy intimately, especially the thought of Ibn Sina,
upon whose Shifa’ he wrote a major commentary. But he was also well
acquainted with later Peripatetic, such as Nasir al-Din Tusi and Athir
al-Din abhati, upon whose al-Hidayah (“The Guide”) he wrote a commentary
which was destined to become one of his most popular works, especially
in India. He was also a master of Ishraqi thoughts and copied a number
of the visionary recitals of Suhrawardi in his own hand as well as
writing a major commentary in the form of glosses upon the Hikmat
al-ishraq (“Theosophy of the Orient of Light”) of the master of the
school of illumination. He was also well versed in both Sunni and
Shi’ite kalam or theology, especially the works of al-Ghazzali and Imam
Fakr al-Din Razi whom he cites often especially in the Asfar (“The Four
Journeys”) which is the masterpiece and like the mother of all his other
books. Moreover, he was well acquainted with Shi’ite kalam which
included Twelve -Imam Shi’ism to which he belonged as well as Isma’ilism
whose works he studied carefully including philosophical tracts such as
the Rasa’il (“Treatises”) of the Ikhwan al-Safa’.

Finally, it is most important to realize Mulla Sadra’s mastery of the
doctrines of Sufism or gnosis especially as taught by Ibn ‘Arabi.

In certain issues such as eschatology, he borrows heavily from the
Andalusian master, and the last book of the Asfar, in which he deals
with al-ma’ad or eschatology is in fact replete with extensive
quotations from Ibn ‘Arabi’s al-Futuhat almakkiyyah (“The Meccan
Illuminations”).

Moreover, he had a special love for Persian Sufi poetry and quotes from
its masters such as ‘Attar and Rumi even in the middle of his Arabic
works. Part of this knowledge is derived from the earlier masters of the
School of Isfahan such as its founder Mir Damad, a school which Mulla
Sadra belonged, but his knowledge in these matters goes beyond any of
his teachers and represents his own extensive study of the major works
and sources of Islamic thought.

The synthesis of previous schools of thought and modes of knowing
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Mulla Sadra synthesized not only various schools of Islamic thought but
also the paths of human knowledge. His own life, based upon great piety,
deep philosophical introspection and reasoning and purification of his
inner being until his “eye of the heart” opened and he was able to have
a direct vision of the spiritual world, attests to the unity of the
three major paths of knowledge in his own person. These three paths are
according to him revelation (al-wahy), demonstration or intellection
(alburhan, al-ta’aqqul) and spiritual or “mystical” vision
(al-mukashafah, almushahadah).

Or, to use another terminology prevalent among his school, he followed a
way which synthesized al-Qur’an, al-burhan and al-‘irfan, which
corresponds to the terms above.

Mulla Sadra’s epistemology is directly related to that Suhrawadi and the
school of Illumination in general, a school in which distinction is made
between conceptual knowledge (al-‘ibn al-busuli) and present knowledge
(al-‘ibn al-buduri), forms of knowledge which are unified in the being
of the possessor of knowledge on the highest level, a person whose
Suhrawardi calls hakim muta’allih, literally a wise man, philosopher or
theosophy who has become imbued with Divine Qualities and become
“God-like”. Conceptual knowledge is gained through concepts in the mind
of that which is to be known whereas present knowledge implies the
presence of the very reality to be known in the human intellect without
the intermediary of mental concepts such as when one knows oneself, the
intelligible or the divine realities. Such knowledge is illuminative and
beyond the realm of ratiocination, but it is not without intellectual
content. Mulla Sadra accepted this ishraqi thesis, to which he added the
significance of revelation as a foundational source of knowledge of a
philosophical or theosophical order. The tradition of Islamic philosophy
in Persia accepted fully this truth and awarded to Mulla Sadra the title
of Sadr al-muta’allhin, that is, foremost among those who according to
Suhrawardi belong to the highest category of possessors of metaphysical
knowledge. No higher title could be given to anyone in the context of
the world view in which later Islamic Philosophy functioned.

In any case the grand synthesis of Islamic thought created by Mulla
Sadra is based on the synthesis of these three ways of knowing through
which he was able to integrate the earlier schools of Islamic schools
into a unified world and create a new intellectual prospective known as
alhikmat al-muta’aliyah which a number of leading scholars of Islamic
philosophy who have written on him in European languages, such as Henry
Corbin and Toshihiko Izutsu, have translated as the “transcendent
theosophy” marks the birth of a new intellectual perspective in the
Islamic world, one which has had profound influence during the later
centuries in Persia as well as in Iraq and India, while the term
alhikmat al-muta’aliyah had been used in a more general and less defined
sense by a number of earlier Islamic thinkers such as Qutb al-Din
Shirazi. In analyzing the various aspects of Mulla Sadra’s thought we
are in reality studying the hikmat al muta’aliyah which became a
distinct school of Islamic thought much like the Peripatetic (mashsha’i)
and Illuminations (ishraqi) schools. Mulla Sadra was in fact so devoted
to this term that he used it as part of the title love his major opus
which is al-Asfar alarba’ah fi’l-hikmat al-muta’aliyah (“The Four
Journeys Concerning Transcendent Theosophy”).

The foundation of the “transcendent theosophy” and the whole metaphysics
of Mulla Sadra is the science of being (wujud), which is used by him to
denote both existence, in the sense of the existence of objects, and
existence that is not in any way privative but which also includes the
Divine Principle, bPure Being and even theAbsolute, which is beyond
being as ordinarily understood. Much of his writings, including nearly
all of the first book of the Asfar, is devoted to this issue and he
returns again and again to it in such works as al-Shawahid al-rububuyyah
(“Divine Witnesses”), al-Hikmat al-‘arshiyyah (“The Wisdom of the
Throne”), al-Mabda’ wa’lma’ad (“The Origin and the Return”) and
especially Kitab al-masha’ir (“The Book of Metaphysical Penetration”)
which is the most important summary treatment of this subject of his
writings.

The study of being
------------------

At the heart of the whole philosophical exposition of Mulla Sadra stand
the gnostic experience of being as Reality. Our usual experience of the
world is that of things which exist, this ordinary experience serving as
the basis of Aristotelian metaphysics which is based on existents
(mawjud). For Mulla Sadra, however, there occurred a vision in which he
saw the whole of existence not as objects which exist or existents but
as a single reality (wujud) whose delimitations by various quiddities
(mahiyyat) gives the appearance of a multiplicity which “exists” with
various existents being independent of each other.

Heidegger complained that Western metaphysics had gone astray since the
time of Aristotle by studying the existent (das Seiende), to use his
vocabulary, and that the proper subject of metaphysics was existence
itself or das Sein with whose study he was starting a new chapter in
Western Philosophical thought. As far as Islamic philosophy is
concerned, such a distinction was made three centuries before Heidegger
by Mulla Sadra who according to himself received through inspiration a
vision of reality in which everything was seen as acts of existence
(wujud) and not objects that exist (mawjud). The vast development of
Sadrian metaphysics is based on this basic experience of Reality and
subsequent conceptual distinctions made on the basis of this experience
of wujud as being at once one, graded and principal.

Mulla Sadra distinguishes dearly between the concept of being (mafhum
al-wujud) and the reality of being (haqiqat al-wujud). The first is the
most obvious of all concepts and the easiest to comprehend while the
second is the most difficult for it requires extensive mental
preparation as well as the purification of one’s being so as to allow
the intellect within to function fully without veils of passion and to
be able to discern wujud as Reality. That is why one of Mulla Sadra’s
most famous followers, Hajji Mulla Hadi Sabziwari, writes in the Sharh
almanzumah, which is a summary of the master’s doctrines, its (wujud’s)
notion is one of the best known things, but its deepest reality is in
the extremity of hiddenness.8

A consequence of the gnostic experience of being is the realization of
its unity, which is called wahdat al-wujud. This fundamental doctrine of
Sufi metaphysics is associated with Ibn Arabi but has possessed many
interpretations ranging from the extreme interpretation of it by the
Andalusian Sufi and philosopher Ibn Sab ‘in, according to whom only God
is real and nothing else exists in any way, to Ibn ‘Arabi’s
interpretations, which sees the manifested order as theophanies
(tajalliyat) of the Divine Names and Qualities upon the mirror of
nothingness, to the multiplicity of existence as the rays of the sun in
relation to the sun. The rays of the sun are not the sun and at the same
time is nothing but the sun.

In the Asfar, which contains a history of Islamic philosophy9as well as
his own teachings, Mulla Sadra deals extensively with various
understandings of this central doctrine before turning to the exposition
of b his own views. 10 In any case, wahdat alwujud is a cornerstone of
Sadrian metaphysics without which his whole world view would collapse.

A companion doctrine is tashkik al-wujud or the gradation of being.
Being is not only one but it also participates in a gradation or
hierarchy from the Being of God to the existence of the pebble on the
beach. Every higher level of wujud contains all the reality that is
manifested below it. Here Mulla Sadra basses himself upon the
Suhrawardian doctrine of differentiation and gradation according to
which things can be distinct from each other through the very element
that unites them such as the light of the candle and the light of the
sun which are united by being both light and yet are distinct from one
another also by light which is manifested in the two cases according to
different degrees of intensity.

Being is like light in that it possesses degrees of intensity while
being a single reality. 11 The universe in its vast multiplicity is
therefore not only unified but is also thoroughly hierarchical. One
might say that Mulla Sadra accepted the idea of the “great chain of
being” which has had such a long life in the West from Aristotle to the
eighteenth century but in the light of the unity of being which gives a
completely different meaning to the doctrine of cosmic and universal
hierarchy.

The views of wujud are complemented by the principle of asalat al-wujud
or principality of existence. To understand this doctrine, it is
necessary first of all to turn to the classical distinction in Islamic
philosophy between existence (wujud in its meaning of being related to
the world of multiplicity) and mahiyyah or quiddities which in its
original Latin form is derived directly from the Arabic mahiyyah. 12 All
objects are composed of these two components, the first corresponding to
the answer given to the question “is it?”, and the second to the
question “what is it?” The question posed in later Islamic philosophy,
and especially by Mulla Sadra, is which of these elements is principial
and bestows reality upon an object. Mulla Sadra’s own teacher Mir Damad
and Suhrawardi are considered as followers of the school of principality
of quiddity (asalat al-mahiyyah) whiles Ibn Sina is considered as a
follower of asalat al-wujud, although in his case this doctrine takes on
a completely meaning than in Mulla Sadra since the former did not
believe in wahdat al-wujud.

In any case in his youth, Mulla Sadra followed his teacher Mir Damad and
only after another visionary and gnostic experience came to realize that
it is wujud which bestows reality upon things and that the mahiyyat are
literally nothing themselves and are abstracted by the mind from the
limitation of a particular act of wujud. When we say that a horse
exists, following common sense we think that the horse is a reality to
which existence is added. In reality, however, what we perceive is a
particular act of wujud which through the very fact that it is
manifested is limited to a particular form which we perceive as a horse.
For those who have realized the truth, the fact that a horse exists
becomes transformed into the reality that the act of wujud which through
the very fact that it is manifested is limited to particular form which
we call horse. The form of mahiyya of the horse has no reality of its
own but derives all of its reality from the act of wujud.

Reality is then nothing other than wujud, which is at once one and
graded existential the reality of all things. The metaphysics of Mulla
Sadra can in fact be understood by understanding not only these
principles but also their interrelations. Wujud is not only once but
also graded. And it is not only graded but also principal or that which
bestowed reality upon all quiddities, which in themselves possess no
reality at all. The vast metaphysical edifice created by Mulla Sadra and
his whole theology, cosmology, psychology and eschatology rely upon the
three principles of whdat al-wujud, tashkik al-wujud and asalat al-wujud
and it is only in the light of these principles that his other doctrines
can be understood.

Trans-substantial motion and creation of the world
--------------------------------------------------

One of the most striking doctrines of Mulla Sadra is trans-substantial
motion (alharakat al-jawhariyyah) which is the basis of his explanation
of many of the most difficult problems of traditional philosophy
including the creation of the world and the whole meaning of becoming in
light of the Immutable and the Eternal. As is wellknown, earlier Islamic
philosophers, especially Ibn Sina, had followed Aristotelian natural
philosophy in accepting motion (al-harakat) only in the categories of
quantity (kamm), quality (kayf), situation (wad’) and place (‘ayn), all
of which are accidents and denied explicitly the possibility of motion
in the category of substance. Ibn Sina’s main argument was that motion
requires a subject that moves and if the very substance of an object
changes through Tran substantial motion, and then there will be no
subject for motion.

Mulla Sadra opposed this thesis directly by saying that any change in
the accidents of an object requires in fact a change in its substance
since accidents have no existence independent of substance. He asserts
that there is always “some subject” (mawudu’un ma) for motion even if we
are unable to fix it and delimit it logically. Mulla Sadra asserts that
the whole of the physical or even psychic or imagine universes which
extend up to the Immutable or luminous Archetypes are in constant motion
or becoming. Were it to be otherwise, the effusion (fayd) of being could
not reach all things. This trans-substantial motion, which Henry Corbin
calls “I’inquietude de l’etre” referring to the existence of the
universe below the level of the intelligible and archetypal realities,
is not to be, however, confused with the re-creation of the world in
every instant as taught by the Sufis. In the Sufi doctrine at every
moment the universe is annihilated and re-created.

Previous forms return to the Divine Order and new forms are manifested
as theophany. That is why this doctrine is called al-labs ba’d al-khal
(literally, dressing after undressing of forms).

In contrast Mulla Sadra’s doctrine has been called al-labs ba’d al-labs
(that is, dressing after dressing). This implies the form and matter of
an existent become themselves the matter for a new form and that this
process goes on continuously as if one were to put on one coat on top of
another. All beings in this world are moving vertically as a result of
trans-substantial motion until they reach the plenum of their archetypal
reality. The sperm become a foetus and grows to the form of a baby who
then is born and continues to grow from one form to another until he or
she reaches full maturity and the body becomes weaker as the soul grows
stronger until one dies and reaches the “imagine world” and finally the
Divine Presence. Each state of this movement contains the forms of the
earlier states of existence, while this Tran substantial movement
continues throughout all these stages.

It is important to emphasize that Mulla Sadra’s dynamic vision of the
world in constant becoming, which implies the continuous intensification
of the act of wujud within a particular being, must in any way be
confused with Darwinian evolution.

For Mulla Sadra, the beings of this world are manifestations of the
light of wujud cast upon their archetypal realities which through the
arc of descent (al-qaws alnuzuli) bring various creatures into the realm
of physical existent. Trans-substantial motion marks the ascent (al-qaws
al-su’udi) through which the ever increasing intensity of light of light
of wujud allows existents to return to their archetypal realities in the
supernal realm. For Darwinism, on the other hand, there are no such
things as archetypal realities and the species, far from reflecting
celestial archetypes, are merely forms generated by the flow of matter
in time. Furthermore, for evolution the role of wujud, its unity,
gradation and principality are meaningless whereas for Mulla Sadra they
contribute the vaery foundations of his metaphysics. Also for Mulla
Sadra trans-substantial motion teleological and has an important
spiritual role to play. The universe is moving toward a perfection which
is its purpose and end and the spiritual progress of humanity is also
achieved through a mode of transsubstantial motion. A saint is not only
more perfect than others. It might be said that him or her is of a more
intense degree than in less perfect human beings. It would therefore be
grave mistake, as committed by a number of modernist Muslim thinkers, to
equate al-harakat al-jawhariyyah with Darwinian evolution.

The doctrine of trans-substantial motion is the key for the solution of
many problems for Mulla Sadra, including that of the creation of the
world debated for eight centuries before him by the Islamic philosophers
and theologians. As is well known, the falasifah believed the world to
have had no origination in time but to have been originated beyond time
by God, the world thus being eternal (qadim) while the mutakallimun
claimed that the world was created in time (hadith), an issue which was
discussed in many classical works of Islamic thought such as
al-Ghazzali’s Tahafut alfalasifah.

The philosophers claimed that if the world were created in time, it
would require a change in the Divine Nature which is impossible because
God is immutable.

The theologians believed that if the world were qadim, then something
eternal would exist besides God and would not even be caused by Him.
Different Islamic thinkers sought to solve this problem in different
ways, including Mulla Sadra’s own teacher, Mir Damad, who came up with
the idea of al-huduth al-dabri, origination of the world not in time
(zaman) nor in eternity (sarmad), but in dahr or aeon, and he became
celebrated for the exposition of this doctrine.

Mulla Sadra rejected his dichotomy of views altogether by pointing to
the doctrine of trans-substantial motion. If the cosmos is changing at
every moment, at each instance of its being, it is different from what
it was before and what it is now was non-existent before (masbuq
bi’l-‘adam). Therefore, one can accept the doctrine that the world was
created from nothing (ex nihilo) while accepting the continuous and
uninterrupted effusion (fayd) of the light of being which none other
than the Divine Light is. He thus seeks to provide a philosophical
explanation for one of the most difficult of philosophical issues in not
only Islamic thought but Jewish and Christian as well.

The union of the intelligent and the intelligible
-------------------------------------------------

Another of Mulla Sadra’s major doctrines, again related inextricably to
the rest of his metaphysics, is that of the union of the intellect and
the intelligible (ittihad al-‘aqil wa’l-ma’qul). This doctrine was
asserted by Abu’l-Hasan al-Amiri in the fourth/tenth century but
rejected thoroughly by Ibn Sina and later Islamic philosophers. But it
was resurrected by Mulla Sadra and given a new meaning in the context of
the unity of wujud and trans-substantial motion.

According to him at the moment of intellection the form of the
intelligible (ma’qul), the possessor of intellect (‘aqil), and even the
intellect itself (‘aql) become united in such a way than one is the
other as long as the act of intellection lasts.

This doctrine is not only important for Mulla Sadra’s theory of
knowledge, but is also of great significance for the understanding of
the role of knowledge in human perfection.

Through trans-substantial motion the act of knowing elevates the very
existence of the knower. According to a hadith of the Prophet,
“knowledge is light” (al-‘ilm nurun), a principle which is also
foundational to Mulla Sadra’s thought. The unity of the knower and the
known implies ultimately the unity of knowing and being.

The being of man is transformed through the light of knowing and being.
The being of man is transformed through the light of knowledge and also
our mode being determines our mode of knowledge. In this profound
reciprocity is to be found the key to the significance of knowledge for
Mulla Sadra and of the idea that knowledge transforms our being even in
the posthumous state. The writings of Mulla Sadra are replete with
various applications of this doctrine and he returns again and again to
the principle of the ultimate of being and knowing.

The imaginal world and the archetypes
-------------------------------------

Mulla Sadra accepted the reality of the archetypes (al-a’yan al-thabitah
or almuthul al-nuriyyah) in conformity with the view of Suhrawardi and
against the claims of Muslim Peripatetics such as Ibn Sina. And he
brought many philosophical arguments to refute those who have denied
them.

There is in fact no doubt concerning the major role performed in Mulla
Sadra’s thought by the archetypes or “Platonic Idea”, pure intelligible
belonging to the domain of immutability which many have confused with
forms in the imagine world which although beyond matter nevertheless
still participate in becoming and transsubstantial motion. The latter
play a crucial role in the “transcendent theosophy” without in any way
replacing the immutable archetypes or luminous “ideas” in the Platonic
sense.

Considering the absence of the imagine world in Western philosophy for
many centuries, it is necessary to delve more deeply into the meaning of
‘alam al-khayal, the mundus imaginaries, which Corbin and I have
translated as the magine rather than imaginary world, considering the
pejorative connotation of the latter term in modern European languages.
The traditional hierarchy of being in the mainstream of Western thought
goes from the realm of material existence, to the psyche, to the
intelligible and angelic world with its own vast hierarchy and finally
to God who is Pure Being and for some Western metaphysicians, the Beyond
Being. This scheme was more or less followed by early Islamic
philosophers with adjustments related to the fact that they were living
and philosophizing in an Islamic universe.

Suhrawardi was the first to speak of the imagine world at least in the
microcosm. He was soon followed by Ibn ‘Arabi who elaborated upon this
theme and expanded the understanding of the imagine universe to make it
a central pillar of his understanding of the Islamic universe upon which
numerous Sufis and philosophers were to write important treatises.

It was, however, Mulla Sadra who gave the first systematic and
philosophical explanation of this world. He added to the view of
Suhrawardi that this world was added to man’s microcosmic reality
(khayal al-muttasil), the thesis that the imagine world has also macros
comic and objective reality independent and disconnected from man
(khayal al-munfasil). He emphasized that this world has even more
reality than the physical world. As for its characteristics, it is a
world possessing forms called alsuwar al-khayaliyyah (imaginal forms)
which, however, are not wed to matter, at least not the matter of the
physical world.

That is why they are also called al-muthul al-mu’allqah (suspended
forms). Nevertheless they are forms having colours, shapes, odours and
everything else that is associated with the forms of this world. This is
a world of concrete realities which, however, are not physical, the
world immediately above the physical, identified with the mythical
cities of Jabulqa and Jublsa, a world which the seers can experience in
this life and into which human beings enter at the moment of death. It
is a world in which we have subtle or imagine bodies (al-jism
al-khayali) as we have a physical body in this world.

Eschatology and resurrection
----------------------------

No Islamic philosopher has dealt in such great detail as Mulla Sadra
with eschatology andresurrection (al-ma’ad) concerning both the
individual and the cosmos. The fourth book of Asfra, much of it based on
Ibn ‘Arabi is the fastest and most detailed study in Islamic philosophy
of the soul (nafs) from its birth to its final meeting with God and
includes elements concerned with the phenomenology of death. If we were
to seek something like the Tibetan Book of the Dead in Islamic sources,
probably this fourth book of the Asfar would be the best candidate.
Moreover, Mulla Sadra devoted much space in his other major writings
such as al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma’ad and al-Shawahid al-rububiyyah to the
subject and wrote separate treatises devoted only to this subject such
as the Risalat al-hashr (“Treatise on Resurrection”).

Basing himself completely on traditional Islamic description of the
posthumous states and eschatological events, Mulla Sadra seeks to
interpret such terms as the Bridge of Sirat, the Balance and lower
paradise states as well as the infernal states in terms of the imagine
world. All these events related to death, judgment and the like as
mentioned in the Qur’an and Hadith take place in this world which itself
is an intermediate realm (al-barzakh) stretching from the al-barazikh
al-a’la or higher intermediate realms to al-barazikh al-asfal or lower
ones. The higher comprise paradise states although still not the supreme
heavens and the lower the infernal ones. This realm is in fact also a
kind of purgatory through which souls pass on their way to their final
beatitude or damnation.

Mulla Sadra speaks of a doctrine which at first seems somewhat strange
and can be understood only in the light of the doctrine of
trans-substantial motion. He claims that the soul (nafs) is created with
the body but becomes immortal and spiritual through the Spirit, or,
using his own terminology, the nafs or soul is jismaniyyat al-huduth wa
ruhaniyyat al-baqa. Its vertical ascent through transition motion in
fact does not cease in this world but continues after death as the soul
journeys through various intermediate realms in conformity with the
types of actions it has performed and its mode of being in this world.

In the great debate about whether resurrection is spiritual (ruhani) or
bodily (jismani), Mulla Sadra categorically favours badily resurrection
but he points that, upon death, individuals are bestowed with subtle
bodies (al-jism al-latif) which correspond in many ways to the astral
body or Paracelsus.

After death they are therefore not simply disembodied souls but possess
bodies which are “woven” of the actions that they have performed in this
world. They also enter a world which conforms to their inner nature. In
a sense an evil soul chooses hell because of the nature of its being at
the moment of death. Moreover, the reality of the body in this world is
to form the body and not its matter. In the final resurrection all of
the levels of one’s being are integrated including the form of the
physical body, which is the reality of the body, so that one can
definitely accept bodily resurrection as asserted by the Qur’an and
Hadith and at the same time provide intellectual demonstration for it on
the basis of the general principles of Sadrian metaphysics.

God’s knowledge of theworld Another difficult question discussed by
numerous philosophers and theologians is that of God’s knowledge of the
world. Al-

Ghazzali in fact considered the Peripatetic view that God only knows
universals and not particulars as one of the views of earlier thinkers
concerning this issue, while in al-

Shawahid al-rububiyyah he claims that God knows everything in a special
way which was unveiled to him by God and because of its complexity and
the difficulty of understanding it by the great majority of men he finds
it wiser not to reveal it fully. In other writings, including one of his
letters to his teacher, Mir Damad, he insists that he gained full
knowledge of this mystery through inspiration (ilham), unveiling (kashf)
and the “eye of certainty” (‘ayn alyaqin).

What Mulla Sadra does reveal of God’s knowledge of the world is based on
the thesis that whenever wujud is not mixed with non-existence and not
veiled by it, it manifests to itself never absent from itself.

Therefore the essence of this wujud knows itself and its essence is both
knowledge of itself and known by itself, since the light of wujud is
one, the veil covering the reality of things being nothing but
non-existence.

Therefore the essence of this wujud knows itself and its essence is both
knowledge of itself and known by itself, since the light of wujud is
one, the veil covering the reality of things being nothing but
non-existence. An since the Necessary Being possesses and Essence which
is beyond all composition and contingency, it is at the highest level of
perceiving and being perceived, of knowing and being known. This means
that since ultimately there is but one wujud which the wujud of all
things, therefore His Essence knows all beings that exist and there is
not an atom that he does not know as asserted by the Qur’an. The very
presence of the Divine Essence to Itself is none other than
undifferentiated knowledge which is at the same time also differentiated
knowledge.

And God’s differentiated knowledge is none other than their wujud. God’s
knowledge of existents is the very cause of their existentiation.

Mulla Sadra asserts that God’s knowledge of things has its own
hierarchy. There is first of all the level of solicitude (al-‘inayah)
which is His knowledge of things on the level of His own Essence. The
second level is that of undifferentiated decree (al-qada’ alijmali)
which is interpreted as the Pen (al-Qalam). As for forms which subsist
by the Qalam, their subsistence is subsistence by emergence (al-qiyam
al-suduri) for the Qalam has full dominion of all forms below it. The
third level is the Tablet (al-lawh), also called differentiated decree
(al-qada’ altafsili), which contains the archetypes and Platonic Ideas
of things, and their relation to the forms of this world is what of
principles to their reflections. The fourth level is destiny through
knowledge (al-qadar al-‘ilm) comprising the imagine world and that of
suspended forms of the physical world. Mulla Sadra considers this last
level to be below the level of direct Divine Knowledge since it marks
the mixture of forms with matter. But it is indirectly the subject of
Divine Knowledge since the principles of these forms belong to the
worlds above which God knows in an absolute and direct sense. Moreover,
every level mentioned by Mulla Sadra possesses wujud which gives it
reality and, according to the arguments given above, since there is only
one wujud as asserted by the doctrine of wahdat al-wujud, God knows all
existents by virtue of knowing His own Essence which is none other than
absolute wujud.

Some other principles of Sadrian teachings
------------------------------------------

There are numerous other principles expounded by Mulla Sadra and
founding elements of the “transcendent theosophy”.

In fact whereas Muslims inherited some two hundred topics from Greek
philosophy, Mulla Sadra discusses over six hundred, many of which are
drawn from further encounters between philosophy and the Islamic
revelation and further encounters between philosophy and theosophical
meditations upon the sayings of the Shi’ite Imams along the Qur’an and
Hadith. Here, because of the constraint of space, we shall mention only
two of the best known of these principles, not already discussed above.
One is the famous thesis that “the Truth in its simplicity contains all
things” (basit al-haqiqah kull al-ashya’) which is the direct
consequence of the unity and principality of wujud. By this principle
Mulla Sadra means that the truth (al-haqiqah) in its state of pure
simplicity and before becoming “combined” with quiddity (almahiyyah),
that is, Pure Being, contains all things since the reality of things is
their existence and Pure Being is the source of all wujud and therefore
in a sense contains the reality of all things. Mulla Sadra appeals to
this principle in many of his writings in solving some of the most
complicated philosophical issues.

Another well-known principle is that “the soul in its unity is its
entire faculty” (al-nafs fi wahdatihi kull al-quwa). This is also a
consequence of his ontology as well as trans-substantial motion. It
means that the various faculties of the soul are not like accidents
added to the substance of the soul. Rather, the soul is each of its
faculties when it identifies itself with this or that function related
to a particular faculty. That is why the perfecting of any faculty
affects itself in its unity and the perfection of the soul through
trans-substantial motion also affects its faculties. It also emphasizes
the unity of the soul above and beyond what one finds in the faculty
psychology of the Peripatetic.

Also many of the older topics of philosophy are changed completely by
seeing them in the light of Sadrian metaphysics. An outstanding example
is the question of cause and effect or causality (al-‘illahwa’l277
ma‘lul or al-‘alliyyah). Mulla Sadra accepts the Aristotelian doctrine
of the four causes and commentaries upon it by Ibn Sina and other
earlier Islamic philosophers, but transforms them completely by
considering the relation between cause and effect in light of the
doctrine of the principality of wujud. He thereby combines horizontal
and vertical causes and his discussion if these subjects in all his
works contain some of his most exalted gnostic (‘irfani) expositions. In
studying them one is presented with a knowledge which satisfies both the
mind and the heart and can lead those who can understand and have
sympathy for gnosis and sapience practically into a state of ecstasy.
There are many other principles transformed by Sadrian metaphysics which
we cannot discuss here because of the limitation of space. What has been
presented here is only by way of example.

Mulla Sadra’s Qur’anic commentaries
-----------------------------------

None of the philosophers throughout the history of Islamic philosophy
has paid much attention to the Qur’an as source of philosophical and
theosophical knowledge and none has written as many commentaries upon
the Qur’an as has Mulla Sadra, whose commentaries are the continuation
of his “transcendent theosophy” an organic outgrowth of the inner
meaning of the Qur’an as understood by Mulla Sadra who asserts again and
again the harmony between revelation (al-wahy) and intellect/reason
(al-‘aql). He in fact asserts that the intellect, of which reason is the
reflection upon mental plane, is humanity’s inner prophet which
manifests it only in those who are, in the language of Qur’an “firmly
rooted in knowledge” (alrasikhun fi’l-‘ilm).

Mulla Sadra wrote commentaries upon a number of chapters and verses of
the Qur’an: al-Fatihah (“The Opening”), al-Baqarah (“The Cow”), ayat
al-kursi (“The Throne Verse”), ayat al-nur (“Light Verse”), Sajdah
(“Prostration”), Ya Sin (“YS”), al-Waqi’ah (“The Event”), al-Hadid
(“Iron”), al-Jum’ah (“The Congregation”), al-A’la (“The Most High”),
al-Tariq (“The Morining Star”) and al-Zalzal (“The Earthquake”).
Moreover, he wrote a number of works dealing with the science of
Qur’anic commentary. These include Asrar al-ayat (“Mysteries of Qur’anic
Verses”), which deals especially extensively with eschatological matters
to which the Qur’an refers; Mutashabih al-qur’an (“On the Metaphorical
Verses of the Qur’an”), dealing with those verses of the Qur’an whose
outward meaning is not clear in contrast to the muhkamat or “firm”
verses whose outward meaning is clear, and Mufatih al-ghayb (“Keys to
the Invisible World”), which is one of his most important works and in
which he discusses his method of Qur’anic commentary.

Mulla Sadra distinguishes between commentators who see only the outward
meaning of Sacred Text and who are like those who see only the shell of
a nut and disregard the fruit within, and those who pay attention only
to what they consider the inner meaning while disregarding the outer
form. He opposes both methods and states that, if these were to be the
only choices, he would prefer the exoteric commentaries because they at
least preserve the outward container of the revelation. But the best
method is to deal with the inner meaning without going against the
external sense of the words of the Qur’an as understood by the Islamic
community. And he adds that only those whom the Qur’an calls “firm in
knowledge” (al-rasikhun fi’l-‘ilm), who have received their knowledge
through divine inspiration without any spectre of doubt in their minds
and hearts, have the right to carry out spiritual hermeneutics (ta’wil)
of God’s Word.

Mulla Sadra considers the Qur’an to be the same as being itself. Being,
like the Qur’an, possesses letter (huruf) which are the “keys to the
invisible world’ and from their combinations verses (ayat) are formed
and from them the chapters (suwar) of the Sacred Book. Then from the
combinations of the chapters, there results “the book of existence”
(kitab al-wujud) which manifests itself in two ways as al-furqan, or
discernment, and al-qur’an, or recitation (both of these terms being
names of the Qur’an). The furqani aspec of the book is the macrocosm
with all its differentiations, and the qur’ani aspect is the spiritual
and archetypal reality of man or what is generally called universal man
(al-insan alkamil).

Therefore, the keys (mafatih) to the invisible world, as far as the
revealed Qur’an is concerned, are also the keys to the understanding of
the invisible dimension of the world of external existence and man’s
inner being and vice versa. The Qur’anic commentaries of Mulla Sadra
occupy an exalted place in the annals of the Qur’anic commentaries as
well as in the philosophical hermeneutics of a sacred text, and it are a
pity that so little attention has been paid to them in scholarships in
Western languages.

The influence of Mulla Sadra
----------------------------

The vast synthesis created by Mulla Sadra was to have a profound
influence upon later Persian thought as well as in India and Iraq. It is
not true that his thought dominated the whole philosophical scene in
Persia, because it has had its detractors to this day, but it has
certainly been the most important influence on the intellectual scene in
Persia during the past three and a half centuries. Temporarily eclipsed
after his death because of adverse political conditions, the
“transcendent theosophy”

was revived during the Qajar period in both Isfahan, the older centre of
Islamic philosophy, and Tehran which was now becoming the foremost
center for the study of hikmah. That School such as Hajji Mulla Hadi
Sabziwari in Khurasan and Mulla Ali Mudarris in Tehran. They continued
very much in the line Mulla Sadra although they began to write more in
Persian rather than Arabic in accordance with the general tendency of
the period which was witness to the revival of philosophical Persian.
And this tradition has continued unbroken to this day to such an extent
that the extensive group of students studying the Islamic subjects in
the traditional madrasahs, especially those of Qom, and who are
interested in the “intellectual sciences” (al-‘ulum al-‘aaliyyah), are
mostly followers of Mulla Sadra.

In India the influence of Mulla Sadra began to manifest itself from the
middle of the eleventh/seventeenth century almost from the time of his
death. His writings, especially the Sharh al-hidayah (“Commentary upon
the ‘Guide’ of Athir al-Din Abhati”) became widespread, and the latter
book even came to be known as Sadra; people received distinction by
saying that they had studied Sadra. This tradition affected many later
figures and has survived to this day. It is interesting to recall that
Mawlana Mawdudi, the founder of the Jama’at-I islami of Pakistan and
India, that is the founder of one of the most important
politico-religious movements in the Islamic world in the
fourteenth/twentieth century, translated parts of the Asfar into Urdu in
his youth. As for Iraq, Mulla Sadra has been thought continuously during
the past three centuries especially in centres of Shi’ite learning such
as Najaf. One of Iraq’s foremost Islamic thinkers of the
fourteenth/twentieth century, Muhammed Baqir al-Sadr, displays in a
typical fashion the influence of Mulla Sadra upon contemporary Iraqi
indigenous scholars with a philosophical bent.

In conclusion, it is interesting to note that the revival of Islamic
philosophy in Iran during the Pahlavi period, especially from the 1950s
onward even in semi-modernized circles, was primarily around the figure
of Mulla Sadra, many of whose works have been edited and printed during
the past forty years while numerous analyses of the “transcendent
theosophy” have been made in Persian as well as Arabic. At the same time
Mulla Sadra has now been introduced to the West and other parts of the
non-

Islamic world by such scholars as Henry Corbin, Toshihiko Izutsu, S.H.
Nasr and Mehdi Mahaghegh, , with the result that there is now a great
deal of interest in his works in the West as well as in parts of the
Islamic world such as the Arab countries, Turkey, Indonesia and Malaysia
which did not show much interest in later Islamic philosophers in
general and Mulla Sadra in particular until recently. Moreover, numerous
theses are being written throughout the world on him and his school. In
any case Mulla Sadra is not only one of the greatest intellectual
figures of Islamic history, but his thought is very much a part of the
contemporary Islamic world and continues to exercise great influence
upon many aspects of current Islamic thought, especially the
philosophical, theological and theosophical.


