Chapter Eight: Al-Kindi
=======================

Abu Yusuf Ya’qub ibn Ishaq al-Kindi is generally held to have been the
first Muslim philosopher. This does not mean, however, that the Muslims
prior to al-Kindi had no cognizance at all of Greek philosophical ideas.
On the contrary some philosophical knowledge, though fragmentary, can be
attributed to the early Mu’tazili kalam.

Some of their main representatives - Abu’l-Hudhayl al-‘Allaf and
al-Nazzam -developed a theology built on certain Greek philosophical
elements. Thus the theologian Abu’l-Hasan al-Ash’ari named Aristotle as
the source of some of Abu’l-Hudhayl’s doctrines, and al-Baghdadi blamed
al-Nazzami for having borrowed from Greek philosophers the idea the idea
of matter being infinitely divisible. The impact of Greek philosophy
upon early Mu’tazili kalam is eveident and has been stated also by early
Muslim theologians and heresiographers. But this impact remained after
marginal; for none of the early Mu’tazili theologians ever elaborated an
encyclopediac system of Greek philosophy as this was out the range of
their interests.

It was al-Kindi who pursued this aim and who may therefore rightly be
called the first Muslim philosopher, whereas the representatives of
Mu’tazili kalam were theologians and no philosophers. This fact alone
puts al-Kindi in some opposition to the Mu’tazili with whom he should
not be identified.

Ibn al-Nadim listed some 260 titles of al-Kindi’s, and ernomous
scientific bibliography, even if many of the works may have been of
small extent. Al-Kindi’s treatises encompass the whole classical
encyclopedia of sciences: philosophy, logic, arithmetic, spherical,
music, astronomy, geometry, cosmology, medicine, astrology, etc.,
according to Ibn al-Nadim’s arrangement. Ibn al-Nadim’s bibliographical
list reveals al-Kindi’s predilection for natural science. Only few
manuscripts, approximately ten per cent of all his literary output, have
come to light and been edited up to now. It seems that the vast majority
of the manuscripts have been lost. It is hardly surprising that later
Muslim philosophers rarely quote from any of al-Kindi’s philosophical
treatises. Both facts -loss of the bulk of his manuscripts and the lack
of reference to him by later authors -need an explanation. Some books
may have been lost already during the reign of the caliph al-Mutawakkil
who fought vehemently against the rationalizing tendencies of his time
and confiscated for a while al-Kindi’s library. The famous
eighth/fourteenth century historian Ibn Khaldun adds further proof to
the lack of manuscripts when he says: “We have not found any information
concerning (al-Kindi’s) book (called al-Jafr), and we have not seen
anyone who has seen it. Perhaps it was lost with those books which
Hulagu, the ruler of Baghdad threw into the Tigris when the Tatars took
possession of Baghdad and killed the last caliph, al-Musta’sim.” The
obscurity of al-Kinda’s language, due to lack of an Arabic philosophical
terminology, rendered his writings hard of access and made them obsolete
while al-Farabi’s philosophical oeuvre eventually overshadowed them.

Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani al-Mantiqi recorded the ruler of Sijistan,
Ja’far ibn Babuyah, as having criticized al-Kindi because of his bad
language.

It is, nevertheless, the merit of al-Kindi to have made access to Greek
philosophy and science possible and to have established from rare and
obscure sources the foundation of philosophy in Islam, partly continued
and enlarged later on by al-Farabi.

Al-Kindi enjoyed the confidence and support of the seventh and eighth
‘Abasid caliphs, al-Ma’mun and his brother and successor. To al-Mu’tasim
he dedicated his On First Philosophy, and some other treatises to the
caliph’s son Ahmad with whose education he was entrusted. Unlike his
contemporary Hunayn ibn Ishaq, al-Kindi knew neither Greek nor Syriac.
He therefore commissioned or adopted translations, e.g. those made by
Ibn Na’ima, Eustathius (Astat) and Ibn al-Bitriq. The old translations,
commissioned or used by al-

Kindi, still lack the high philological standards set later on by Hunayn
ibn Ishaq.

But it was al-Kindi who broke new ground in a fertile soil and
introduced into the Arabspeaking world the first translations of Greek
philosophy. He was above all interested in gathering and translating
works of Plato and Aristotle, both of whom he mentioned by name. But
under the cover of these two philosophers other pseud epigraphic works
became known, e.g. Porphyry’s paraphrase of part of Plotinus’ Enneads
known as Aristotle’s Theology. Al-Kindi, however, had a good grasp of
the genuine works of Aristotle. He commissioned a translation of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics and commented upon some of Aristotle’s logical
writings, such as Categorize, De interpretation, Analytica posterior and
Analytica priora - and also on De caelo, as we are informed by Ibn
al-Nadim. He had before him even the otherwise lost Aristotelian
dialogue Eudemus, a fragment of which he transmitted.

Al-Kindi was eager to intgroduce Greek philosophy and science to his
Arabicspeaking “co-linguists” (ahl lisanina), as he often stressed, and
opposed the orthodox matakallimun who rejected foreign knowledge. As
long as he enjoyed the caliphs’ protection he was free to do so and did
not feel compelled to defend his philosophical stand as was the case
with so many later scientists who came under pressure at the hand of the
orthodox legalists. As long as al-Kindi clung to tenets held by Late
Greek Neo-Platonists, mostly Christians, who believed in one God who had
created the world out of nothing, he was in apparent harmony with the
divine law of Islam. But as soon as he adopted pagan philosophical
doctrines, especially those of Aristotle, he openly deviated from the
revealed truth of Islam. His view adduced in the name of Aristotle -
that one should gratefully accept any contribution to truth, wherever it
comes from, even from Greek philosophy - is incompatible with the
exclusive postulate of Islam as the sole mediator of truth.

Al-Kindi’s own philosophical stand reflects the doctrines he found in
Greek Classical and, above all, Neo-Platonism sources. His treatises On
Definitions and Descriptions of Things may be accepted on the whole as
the base of his own views. He supposedly extracted the definitions from
Greek literature with the intention of giving a summary of Greek
philosophy in definitions.

As I have shown elsewhere, many of these definitions from Aristotelian
works and his predilection for Aristotle cannot be ignored even where he
extracted from spurious sources which were at the time attributed to
Aristotle. The lemmata and their arrangement correspond to a
Neo-Platonist source. God is referred to in the first definition as the
“First Cause”, similar to Plotinus’ “First Agent”, an expression al-

Kindi has likewise made use of, 26or to his “the One is the cause of the
cause”. 27The subsequent definitions in al-Kidi’s treatise are arranged
in an order that distinguishes between the upper world and the lower
world. The former is marked by the definitions of Intellect, Nature and
Soul, followed by definitions of body (jirm), Greation (ibda), Matter
(hayula). Form (surah), etc. Thus al-Kindi conceived an upper world of
uncreated spiritual beings and a lower of created corporeal beings.

The soul is an un-created, spiritual being, whereas Matter, Time and
Place are finite, created and corporeal. Creation (ibda) in this Muslim
context is Creation from nothing in time. 28 Both worlds, the upper and
the lower one, go finally back to one and the same source which is the
common cause of everything. From this final source which is the Godhead
everything proceeds subsequently by hypostases.

In his treatise On Definitions and Descriptions of Things al-Kindi
explained the world through emanation, a system that later was adopted
and enlarged also al-Farabi. 29 The Muslim orthodox, however, was on the
whole irritated by the attempt to explain creation as an incessant
outflow from the ultimate source, an argument that could not be upheld
by scriptural evidence.

They were especially offended by extolling Intellect to immediate
proximity to God as His first hypostasis. Emanating from the Uppermost
Cause, everything passes through, and develops from, the reflexion of
the first intellect. Thus the intellect was to replace the angels as the
mediator of divine truth. Al-Farabi took the sharp edge off the doctrine
of emanation by equating the Active Intellect with the Angel Gabriel and
by explaining prophecy as the result of the soul’s faculty of
imagination.

Nevertheless, emanation could not explain the divine act of creation in
a way acceptable to the orthodox community of the faithful. “It should
be known,” said Ibn Khaldun, “that the (opinion) the (philosophers) hold
is wrong in all its aspects. They refer all existential to the first
intellect and are satisfied with (the theory of the first intellect) in
their progress toward the Necessary One (the Deity). This means that
they disregard all the degrees of divine creation beyond the (first
intellect).”

Al-Kindi did not intend to explain the “progress toward the Necessary
One”, i.e. the way of attaining knowledge of God, as an intellectual
progress. On the contrary, towards the end of his On First Philosophy he
made it clear beyond all doubt that God cannot be comprehended by
intellect. 31

Account to al-Kindi the philosopher is unable to make any positive
statement concerning God. All he is able to state is in the negative:
that “He is no element, no genus, and no contingent accident”. 32

Thus al-Kindi’s philosophy leads to a negative theology, i.e. where God
is described only in negative terms. In this he followed Plotinus 33who
taught: “We state, what is not; what is, we do not state. 34If the
intellect is unable to lead people to knowledge of God in positive
terms, philosophy is not superior to theology. On its “progress towards
the Necessary One” philosophy reaches up to the intellect, but does not
go “beyond the intellect”, to use again Ibn Khaldun’s words. 35

What is “beyond the intellect”? For the Muslim faithful it is the world
of the angels.

They are God’s messengers and are the mediators between humans and God.
It is the Angel Gabriel, as the Muslim faithful say and not the
intellect, as the philosophers have it who conveyed the divine
revelation to the Prophet. The angelic essence is of “pure perception
and absolute intellection”. 36 Al-Kindi does not speak of angels.
According to him the intellect is in immediate proximity with God. The
longest text of al-Kindi’s treatises that have come down to our time is
his on First Philosophy (only the first part of this treatise has been
preserved). This is another name for metaphysics. Aristotle had called
metaphysics the “first philosophy”. 37 Al-

Kindi, adopting this name, explained its meaning in the following way:
Knowledge of the first cause has truthfully been called “First
Philosophy”, since all the rest of philosophy is contained in its
knowledge.

The first cause is, therefore, the first in nobility, the first in
genus, the first in rank with respect to that knowledge which is most
certain; and the first in time since it is the cause of time. 38

The first cause is, therefore, explorerand it is the intellect that
transmits “most certain knowledge” of it. The aim of writing his
treatise was to establish “the proof of His Divinity and the explanation
of His Unity” as al-Kindi declared in the introduction. 39 In spite of
the intellectual certainty which can be attained of the Deity, al-Kindi
admits at the end of his treatise that the intellect is able to describe
God only in negative terms.

God’s unity stood at the very centre of the Mu’tazili doctrine so that
the Mu’tazilah were called accordingly “the people (who made) the
confession of (God’s) unity (the basis of their creed)” (ahl al-tawhid).

Supported by the evidence of Mu’tazili themes like God’s unity in
al-Kindi’s philosophical writings, al-Kindi was held to be “the
philosopher of the Mu’tazilite theology”. 40Later researches, however,
made it evident that this statement, linking al-Kindi peremptorily with
the Mu’tazilah was brought to light by further research. 41

One point of dissent was the structure of matter. Most of the Mu’tazilah
was of the opinion that matter consisted of small and indivisible
particles, i.e. atoms. They were led to this opinion by supposing that
everything created is finite in spatial and temporal extension. Hence
they conclude that the divisibility of matter must also be finite. So
they assumed the existence of atoms. Al-Kindi, however, denied the
atomistic structure of matter, a topic he elaborated in his treatise On
the Falsity of the Statement of Whoever Thinks that a Body Exists that
is Indivisible. He adopted Aristotle’s view of the continuous structure
of matter. This difference of opinion had a great impact on many parts
of the physical sciences. The Mu’tazilah accepted the discontinuity of
matter and believed in the existence of a vacuum, denied by Aristotle.

Contrary to the Mu’tazilah, however, al-Kindi conceived matter as being
continuous and of un-intermittent structure, but not of infinite
extension. The universe is a finite body, a statement that al-Kindi
expounded in a separate treatise. By its finiteness the universe is
separated from the immaterial, upper world of the spiritual beings.

Right after the introduction of his treatise On Allah’s Unity and the
Finiteness of the Body of the Universe al-Kindi stated six primary
propositions which can rationally be comprehended “without mediation”
(ghayr mutawassit). Al-Kindi referred obviously to those propositions
“that cannot be proved syllogistically by means of a middle term”. 45
Propositions of this kind convey knowledge that cannot be proved
(anapodeiktos), i.e. that is achieved a priori (‘ilm awwal, ilm badihi).
As an example of a proposition that conveys primary knowledge al-Kindi
stated that, if one joins two finite bodies one with the other, the new
body is again finite. It is, however, impossible to disjoin a certain,
finite part from a body which is held to be infinite. This is to prove
that the corporeal world is finite.

In the same way al-Kindi proved that time is finite. For you cannot pass
a certain amount of time and suppose that rest of time is infinite and
eternal.Likewise al-Kindi proved that the world cannot be eternal and
that is created in time (muhdath).Al-Kindi’s arguments go ultimately
back to the late school of Alexandria. John Philoponus (Arabic Yahya
al-Nahwi) used them in his refutation On the Eternity of the World
against Proclus. 48He wrote his book in the year 529 against the
Neo-Platonist philosopher Proclus. 49 Philoponus’ refutation on the
Eternity of the world against Proclus was translated into Arabic 50 and
furnished al-Kindi with some philosophical arguments which were current
among Christian Philosophers in late Hellenistic Alexandria. This has
been attested by a recently found text of John Philoponus in an early
Arabic translation. 51

Al-Kindi has been influenced to a great extent also by Proclus. Traces
of his Institution theosophy,52 they attest to al-Kindi’s efforts at
harmonizing the Aristotelian and the Neo-Platonist systems of philosophy
within the religious climate of Islam.

Al-Kindi’s predilection for Aristotle’s philosophy, witnessed already in
his treatise On Definitions and Descriptions of Things is most
strikingly felt also in his on First Philosophy. In writing this
treatise al-Kindi lavishly quoted from Aristotle’s Metaphysics. 53 But
it seems that the subject matter used by al-kindi differed from the text
now generally accepted. Book Alpha elatton allegedly written by Pasicles
of Rhodes, a nephew of Eudemus, was apparently missing, but appears in
‘Abd al-Latif Ibn Yusuf al-Baghdadi’s 54 parahrase of Airstotle’s
Metaphysics, although in a reversed order, i.e. preceding book Alpha.55
Although al-Kindi elaborated many of the ideas that go back to
Aristotle’s Metaphysics, his on First Philosophy is not a mere
paraphrase of this book. For him relied extensively also upon other
books of Aristotle. Thus many of al-Kindi’s conceptions reflect ideas
expressed by Aristotle in his physics, De anima and categorised, to name
only those books most quoted. 56

As well as giving a summary of Aristotle’s Metaphysics he supplemented
his on first Philosophy by drawing upon other writings of Aristotle.

The knowledge of the true nature of things, the foremost aim of
philosophy, was not confined to the world of senses. For al-Kindi
philosophy included also knowledge of the divinity. 57 This led to the
merging of physics and metaphysics, science and theology. For later
Muslim generations this amalgamation became offensive. The faithful
accused the philosophers of valuing intellectual speculation higher than
the revered tradition and establishing the articles of faith as correct
through reasoning and not through tradition. 58

Thus al-Kindi’s philosophy, and especially his natural theology,
contained already the seeds of the later conflicts between the orthodox
and the intellectuals in Islam. Only as long as he was protected by the
caliph al-Mu’tasim was he safe to engage in philosophy.

Al-Kindi did not conceal his indebtedness to earlier and alien
philosophers by acquiring the truth “wherever it comes from”. 59 For him
the truth of the philosopher cannot differ from the truth of the Muslim
faithful. Philosophy and theology served one end: the knowledge of the
True One, of God.

Acclimatizing philosophy in an Islamic society was made easier through
the medium of texts of late Greek philosophy.

From among these texts it was the so-called Theology in which al-Kindi
took an interest.

Falsely attributed to Aristotle, the Theology was in the nineteenth
century identified as Porphyry’s paraphrase of Plotinus’ Enneads, 4-6.
60 With all these texts at his disposal al-Kindi elaborated a philosophy
that was an able instrument to support by rational arguments the Muslim
belief founded upon revelation and tradition, thus creating harmony
between speculation and revelation.

In spite of this apparent harmony al-Kindi’s language is distinct from
that of the Qur’an.

Instead of “Allah”, which is the common name of God in the Qur’an and
even in kalam literature, al-Kindi used “al-bari” (Creator) or
“al-‘illat al-ula’ (the First Cause).

The former name is recorded only once in the Qur’an ; 61 the latter is
of course completely missing from the Qur’an and the Holy Scriptures,
for the faithful reject as polytheism the idea that God Almighty is the
first of a series of causes that emanate from Him. God is for the
faithful the only cause, the Creator of all. Al-Kindi referred to
creation out of nothing by the word ibada which replaced the Qur’qnic
khalq, jirm was chosen instead of jism, etc.

The choice of language gives the impression that al-Kindi deliberately
avoided the corresponding Qur’anic expressions, holding aloof the
language of speculation from the inimitable languages of Qur’an.

“First Philosophy” means the knowledge of the True One. Whereas
everything is the effect of what precedes and the cause of what follows,
the True One is the only cause. The world, emanating ultimately from the
first cause, is thus dependent on, and connected with, the True One, but
is separated from Him by being finite in time and space. The oneness of
the first cause is contrasted with the plurality of the created world:
everything has five predicables: genus, species, difference, property
and accident. The modes of existence are explained by the categories.
Al-Kindi is in full harmony with Islam in Stating that the world has
been created out of nothing and is created in time, having come into
existence after not having existed. This is not only his religious credo
but also his conviction as philosopher.

Al-Kindi was, apart from metaphysics, also interested in mathematics and
natural sciences. His efforts to study the whole encyclopedic range of
sciences proved him to be a true follower of Aristotle. With regard to
his strong inclination towards mathematics he even surpassed Aristotle.

He wrote a treatise entitled that Philosophy cannot be acquired except
with a Knowledge of Mathematics. 62 His predilection for mathematics is
emphasized also in his treatise On Definitions and Descriptions of
Things.

Many of the definitions are expressed in a double way: physically
(minjihat) and mathematically (min jihat al-ta’lim). 63 It was also in
the field of mathematical computation that he exerted his greatest
authority as teacher. His two famous pupils, Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn
‘Umar al-Balkhi (Allbumasar in Medieval Latin literature) 64 and
Abu’l-‘Abbas Ahmad ibn al-Tayyib as- Sarkhs, 65 continued and enlarged
the mathematical research of their teacher. 66

Al-Kindi’s strong inclination for mathematics probably influenced also
the so-called Brethren of Purity in the late fourth/ tenth century.
Favouring practical application of science, al-Kindi elaborated a system
of calculating the efficacy of medical drugs.

This becomes necessary since the physicians moved over from simple to
compound drugs. The first physician recorded as having used compound
drugs was Abu’l-Hakam from Damascus. 67 In order to achieve the intended
efficacy the pharmacist had to calculate the right proportion of the
ingredients of the drug.

Al-Kindi undertook to divide the medical ingredient into grades
according to the strength of their curative properties. 68 He was also
the author of many treatises and handbooks of medical and pharmaceutical
concern. 69

In one of these medical treatises, recently found, al-Kindi again
connected medicine with mathematics by giving the rule for calculating
in advance the critical days of a developing disease. 70 Being the
quickest planet in the firmament, the moon was held to influence acute
diseases.

On certain days of the lunar monthly revolution the diseases were held
to change for the better or the worse. This theory, already expounded by
Galen, was further elaborated by al-Kindi.

Al-Kindi’s mathematical curiosity did not halt even before the Holy
Scripture. He wrote a treatise On the Duration of the Reign of the
Arabs, 71 and based his calculation upon the letters at the head of
twenty-nine chapters of the Qur’an. They from fourteen enigmatic words
that contain fourteen different letters out of the twentyeight letters
of the Arabic alphabet. By adding the numerical value of each of these
letters, counting only once those letters which are repeated several
times, one receives the approximate number of years of Arab rule until
the Mongols in 656/1258 conquered Baghdad and “Arab hegemony was lost.

It is generally held that al-Kindi’s philosophy is in harmony with the
Muslim creed. This is supported for example by the argument that
al-Kindi speaks of creation out of nothing. It should be kept in mind,
however, that in his treatise on Definitions and Descriptions of Things
al-Kindi speaks of the existence of an upper world that is above the
world of creation. This is incompatible with the Muslim faith. The same
is true with regard to the theory of emanation, which opposed the
article of faith that the world was created in one instant by God’s
command.

It is difficult, if not impossible, to give a conclusive judgment of an
author whose literary work has been preserved only to a very small
extent. Nevertheless, the treatises that have come down to us and Ibn
al-Nadim’s bibliographical list that contains the titles of al-Kindi’s
writings allow us to express an approximate evaluation of al-Kindi as
philosopher and scientist. Such an evaluation has to take into account
that al-Kindi could not have recourse to any of his “co-linguists”.
There were, it is true, also learned men besides al-Kindi who
commissioned scientific translations or translated themselves, like the
sons of Musa ibn Shakir, Hunayn ibn Ishaq, Thabit ibn Qurrah and ‘Umar
ibn al-Farrukhan, as we are told by Abu Ma’shar.73 But al-Kindi was the
first to transfer Greek philosophy systematically from foreign literary
sources and to channel it into his Islamic environment where philosophy
was received with coldness and even with hostility. At some time in his
life he enjoyed the support of the caliph. But, like most of the later
philosophers, he had no authority as an academic teacher because there
was no official philosophy teaching. He kept himself aloof through his
choice of language from colliding with the orthodox faithful or the
mutakallimun.

Apart from metaphysics he engaged in research on almost all the natural
and mathematical sciences.

Though Latin translations, al-Kindi influenced medieval European
philosophers. They became acquainted with works from the whole spectrum
of his literary output, especially with those that dealt with natural
sciences and mathematics. 74Gerard of Gremona 75 and Avendauth 76
translated several of al-Kindi’s scientific works, among them on Optics
(Deaspectibus) which Roger Bacon, 77 dealing with the speed of light,
used. 78

Also translated by Gerard of Cremona were On Degrees (of compound
Medicines), One Sleep and Vision, and on the Five Essences (De quinque
essentiis) 79 cited also by Roger Bacon in his Nature and Multiplication
of Light or species. 80 De quinque essentiis was one of the main sources
for the knowledge of al-Kindi the philosopher until Abu Ridah edited in
1950 a collection of fourteen treatises mostly on philosophical
subjects.

Besides these works only fragments of other works were known from
medieval secondary sources. Thus for example the historian al-Mas’udi 81
cited from a treatise of al-Kindi in his Muruj al-dhahab, 82 where he
denied the possibility of artificially producing gold and siver. Abu
Bakr Muhammad ibn Zakariyya’ al-Razi 83 wrote a refutation of this
treatise. 84

### Notes

###

1 c. 185/801-252/[^866]:

2 Died c. 235/[^849]:

3 Died between 220/835 and 230/[^845]:

4 260/873-324/[^935]:

5 Ritter (1929-39): [^486]:

6 Died 429/[^1037]:

7 Laoust (1965):

8 Corbin (1964): 219; lvry (1974): 22ff.

9 Died 380/[^990]:

10 232/847-247/[^861]:

11 732/1332-808/[^1406]:

12 Ibn Khalbun (1970), 2: 562f 13 Died c. 375/[^985]:

14 Wiedemann (1970), 2: 562

15 Died 339/950

16 Died 218/[^833]:

17 died 227/842

18 192/808-260/[^873]:

19 Astat/Eustatius translated Aristotle’s Metaphysic; ‘Abd al-Masih ibn
Na’imah translated Porphyry’s interpretation of Plotinus’ Enneads, 4-6,
known as Aristotle’s Theology (cf. Brockelmann (1937), Suppl.

1:364) and Yahya ibn al-Bittriq translated Aristotle’s De caelo, De
anima, Plato’s Timaeus, possibly also writings of Proclus, e.g the
summary of his Institutio theological (cf. Endress (1973) passim).

20 Walzer (1963): [^14]:

21 Cf. e.g Abu Ridah (1950): [^260]:8;

Rosenthal (1956),2: [^445]:

22 Walzer (1945), 29: 20f. Ess (1966): [^235]:

23 Abu Ridah (1950): 103; cf. Gutas (1975):

196, Nr 69

24 Klein-Franke (1982b): 191 -[^216]:

26 E.g Abu Ridah (1950): 207, I. 11; cf.

Rosenthal (1952): 474; Plotinus (1959):

275; (1955): [^184]:

27 Plotinus (1963). [^8]:18.

28 Walzer (1963): 189; Endress (1973): [^231]:

29 Died 313/[^925]:

30 Ibn Khaldun (1958), 3: [^250]:

31 Abu Ridah (1950): 160, I. 6; Walzer (1963): 188

32 Abu Ridah, op. cit.

33 Ibid: 205-[^70]:

34 Plotinus (1959): 324=Enn. [^5]:3(49), 14.6:

‘kai legomen ho me estin, ho de estin Ou legomen:.

35 Supra ann. 11; cf. Zintzen (1983): 312-28, esp. [^314]:

36 Ibn Khaldun (1958), 1: [^195]:

37 Cf. the Neoplatonic philosopher Simplicius (first of sixth century)

commenting on Aristotle’s De caelo 277b 10, in Simplicus (1894):
[^269]:31.

38 Ivry (1974): 56, [^1]: 6.

[^39]:Ibid.59.1.3.

40 Walzer (1950): [^9]:

41 Ivry (1974): 27ff.

[^42]: Ibn al-Nadim (1871): 259, 1. 19.

43 Abu Ridah (1950): 201-[^7]:

[^44]:Ibid. 202. 1.4.

45 Aristotle (1831): Analytica Priora 72b 19:

amesos =ghayr mutawassit, cf. Bohm (1967): [^67]:

46 Abu Ridah (1950): 201-[^7]:

[^47]:Ibid. 207, 1. 1.

48 Philoponus (1899)

49 412-[^85]: This year was remarkable also because of two other events:
the Roman Emperor Justinian closed the school of philosophers in Athens
(cf. Gibbon, chapter 40) and St. Benedict founded the religious order
named after him.

50 Ibn Abi Usaybi’ah (d. 668/1270)

(1882/4), 1: 105, [^1]: 5.

51 Pines (1972): 320-[^52]:

52 Especially with reference to prop. 1-3

and prop. 5; Endress (1973): 242ff.

53 Ivry (1974): 205-[^7]:

54 557/1162-629/[^1231]:

55 Neuwirth (1977-8): 84-[^100]:

56 Ivry (1974): 205-[^7]:

57 Abu Ridah (1950): 104,[^1]: 5.

58 Ibn Khaldun (1958), 3: [^347]:

59 Abu Ridah (1950): 103, [^1]: 4. This reminds one of Pliny, who
admitted: “We are swept by the puffs of the clever b INS of Greece”;

Pliny (1963), 8:188f.

60 Steinschneider (1960): [^77]:

61 Surah 59 (al-Hashr): [^24]:

[^62]: Ibn al-Nadim (1871): 255 ult.

[^63]: Klein-Franke (1982b): 194.

64 Died 272/[^886]:

65 Died 286/[^899]:

66 Rosenthal (1943): [^17]:

67 Fl. Second half of the first/seventh century; cf. Klein-Franke
(1982a): [^35]:

68 Harig (1974): 148 and [^200]:

69 Sezgin (1970): 244-[^7]:

[^70]: Klein-Franke (1975): 161-88.

71 Loth (1875): 261-[^309]:

72 Hitti (1958): 484; Rosenthal (1949): 122;

Plessner (1962): 184f.; Noldeke (1919), part 2: 68-[^78]:

73 Ibn Abi Usaybi’ah (1882/4), 1: 207;

Wiedemann (1970), 2: [^551]:

74 Thorndike and Kibre (1963), col. 1731 et passim.

75 c. 1114-[^87]:

76 First half of the sixth/twelfth century; cf.

Alverny (1954), 1: 19-[^43]:

[^77]: c. 1214 too soon after 1292.

78 Grant (19749; [^396]:

[^79]: Ibid., 494.

80 Nagy (1897).

81 Died 345/[^956]:

82 al-Mas; udi (1974), 5: 159f.

83 Died 313/[^915]:

84 Ibn Abi Usaybi’ah (1882/4), 1: 316, [^1]: 12;

Ranking (1913): 249, Nr 40: “Responsio ad Philosophum el-Kendi eo quod
artem al-

Chymiae in impossibili posuerit”;

Wiedemann (1970), 1: 51ff.

### Bibliography

###

1- Abu Ridah, M. A. (1950) Rasa’il al-Kindi alfalsafiyyah (Cairo).

2- Alverny, M.T. d’ (1954) “Avendauth”, in Homenaje a Millas-Vallicrosa
(Barcelona).

3- Aristotle (1831): Aristotelis Opera, ed. I.Bekker (Berlin).

4- Atiyeh, G. (1985) Al-Kindi: the Philosopher of the Arabs (Islamabd).

5- Bohm, W. (1967) Johannes Philoponos Grammatikos von Alexadrien
(Munich).

6- Brocklemann, C. (1937-49) Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur
(Leiden).

7- Corbin, H. (1964) Histoire de la philosophie islamique (Paris).

8- Endress, G. (1973) Proclus Arabus: Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der
Institutio Theologica in arabischer Ubersetzung (Beirut).

9- Ess, J. van (1966) Die Erkenntnislehre des Aduddin al-Ici:
Ubersetzung und Kommentar des ersten Buches seiner Mawaqif (Wiesbaden).

10- Gibbon, E. (1890) the Decline and, fall of the Roman Empire :(
London).

11- Grant, E. (1974) a Source Book on Mediaeval Science (Cambridge,
Mass.).

12- Gutas, D. (1975) Greek Wisdom Literature in Arabic Translation: a
Study of the Graeco-Arabic Gnomologia (New Haven).

13- Harig, G. (1974) Bestimmung der Intensitat im medizinischen System
Galens (Berlin).

14- Hitti, Ph. K. (1958) History of the Arabs (London).

15- Ibn ABi Usaybi’ah (1882/4) ‘Uyun al-anba’fi tabaqat al-atibba’, ed.
A. Muller (Cairo and Konigsberg).

16- Ibn Khaldun (1958) The Muqaddimah: an Introduction to History,
trans. F. Rosenthal, 3 vols (New York).

17- Ibn al-Nadim (1871) kitab al-fihrist, ed. G.Flugel (Leipzig).

18- Ivry, A. L. (1974), Al-Kindi’s Metaphysics: a Translation of Ya’qub
al-Kindi’s Treatise “On First Philosophy” (fi al-Falsafah al-Ula) with
Introduction and Commentary (Albany).

19- Klein-Franke, F. (1975) Die Ursachen der Krisen bei akuten
Krankheiten: Eine wiederentdeckte Schrift al-Kindi’s, Israel Oriental
Studies (Tel Aviv).

20- (1982a) Vorlesungen uber die Medizin im Islam, Sudhoffs Archiv:
Zeitschrift fur Wissenschaftsgeschichte, Beiheft 23 (Wiesbaden).

21- (1982b) “al-Kindi’s On Definitions and Descriptions of Things”, Le
Museon: Revue des Etudes Orientales, 95.

22- Laoust, H. (1965) Les Schismes dans L’Islam (Paris).

23- Loth, O. (1875) “al-Kindi als Astrolog”, in Morgenlandische
Forschungen: Festchrift fur H.L. Fleischer (Leipzig) (repr. 1981).

Al-Mas’udi (1974) Les Prairies d’Or, ed. B.de Meynard and P. de
Courteille, revue et corrigee par C. Pellat, Publications de
l’Universite Libanaise: Section des Etudes Historiques XI (Beirut).

24- Nagy, A. (1897) “Die philosophischen Abhandlungen des Ja’qub Ben
Ishaq Al-Kindi”, Beitrage zur Geschichte der Philosophie des
Mittlealters, 2(5)

25- (Munster). Neuwirth, A. (1977/8) “Neue Materialien zur arabischen
Tradition der beiden ersten Metapysik-Bucher”, Die Welt des Islams,
n.s., 17.

26- Noldeke, Th. 1919 Geschichte des Qorans (Leipzig).

27- Philoponus (1899) De aeternitate mundi contra Proclum, ed. H. Rabe
(Leipzig).

28- Pines, S. (1972) “An Arabic Summary of a Lost Work of John
Philoponos”, Israel Oriental Studies, 2.

29- Plessner, M. (1962) “Picatrix”: Das ziel des Weisen von
Pseudo-Magriti (London).

30- Pliny (1963) Natural History, with English trans., 10 vols, vlo. 8
by W.H.S Jones (Cambridge Mass.).

31- Plotinus (1955) Plotinus apud Arabes: Theologia Aristotelis ET
fragmenta quae supersunt, ed. ‘A. Badawi (Cairo).

32- (1959) Opera, 2, Enneades 4-6, ed. P. Henry and H.-R. SCHwyzer
(Paris).

33- (1963), Enneades 6, ed. And trans. E.Brehier (Paris).

34- Ranking, S.A. (1913) “The Life and Works of Rhazes”, Acts of the
XVII. International Congress of Medicine (London).

35- Ritter, H. (1929-39) Die dogmatischen Lehren der Anhanger des Islam
von Abu ‘l-

36- Hasan ‘Ali ibn Isma’il al Ash’ari (Leipzig).

37- Rosenthal, F. (1943): Ahmad B. At-Tayyib, as-Sarahsi (New Haven).

38- (1952) “As-Saih al-Yunani: and the Arabic Plotinus Source”,
Orientalia, Commentarii Periodici Pontificii Instituti Biblici, 21.

39- (1956) “al-Kindi and Ptolemy”: in Study orientalistici in onore, di
Gorgio Levi Della Vida, 2 vols (Rome).

40- Sezgin, F. (1970) Geschichte des arabischen Schriftutums, 3
(Leiden).

41- Simplicius (1894) De caelo, ed. I.L. Heiberg, in Commentaria in
Aristotelem Graeca, 7 (Berlin).

42- Steinscheneider, M. (1960) Die arabischen Ubersetzungen aus dem
Griechischen (Graz) (repr.) (Beihefte zum Cantralbatt fur
Bibliothekswesen, 12, 1893).

43- Thorndike, L. and Kibre P. (1963) A Catalogue of Incipits of
Mediaeval Scientific Writings in Latin (London).

44- Walzer, R. (1945) Bulletin of the John Rylands Library, 29: 160-83.

45- (1950) “The Rise of Islamic Philosophy”, Oriens, 3. (1963) Greek
into Arabic (Oxford).

46- Wiedemann, E. (1970) Aufsatze zur arabischen
Wissenschaftsgeschichte, 2 vols (reprint) (Hildesheim).

47- Zintzen, C. (1983) “Bemerkungen zum Aufstieg der Seele in Jamblichs
De Myteriis”, in Platonismus und Christentum:Festschrift fur Heinrich
Dorrie, ed. H.D.

48- Blume and F. Mann (Jahrbuch Antike und Christentum, Suppl. 10)
(Munster).
