The Spread of Islam
===================

In order to understand how medicine developed in the middle ages, we
have to look back at the history and find out the important things that
happened during the Seventh Century.

In 570 A.D., a man was born in a small city in the Arabian peninsula,
called Mecca (Haykal 1976), his name was Mohammed. In 610 A.D. he
declared a new religion, Islam. In 632 A.D., he died after uniting the
Arab tribes who had been torn by revenge, rivalry, and internal fights.
Out of these mostly illiterate nomadic people, he produced a strong
nation that encountered and conquered, simultaneously, the two known
empires at that time, namely, the Persian and Byzantine Empires.

In a man's life-time, the Islamic Empire extended from the Atlantic
Ocean on the West, to the borders of China on the East. In 711 A.D.,
only 80 years after the death of their prophet, the Arabs crossed to
Europe to rule Spain for more than 700 years. In 732 A.D., they
threatened Paris and their thrust was stopped at Tours and Poiter
(Eigeland 1976). In 831 A.D., the Moslems of North Africa invaded Sicily
and ruled it for 200 years. By 846 A.D., they controlled the southern
part of Italy and encountered Rome (Hitti 1977).

The hold of the Moslems over Italy remained so firm that Pope John VIII
(872-882 A.D.) deemed it prudent to pay tribute for two years (Hitti
1977) In 869 A.D., the Arabs captured Malta (Ibn-Khaldun). In the tenth
century, from Italy and Spain, the Arabs extended their raids through
the Alpine passages into mid-Europe.

In the Alps, there are a number of castles and walls which tourists
guides attribute to the invasion of the Moslems of Sicily. In the
southern part of Italy and in Sicily, a great civilization was
established and through which the torch of knowledge spread to Europe,
mainly through the University of Salerno in the southern part of Italy
(Hitti 1977, Parente 1967).

The expansion of the Moslems in Europe was not limited to those from
North Africa and Spain. The Moslems, under the Ottoman Empire, invaded
Europe from the East. They occupied a good part of Middle Europe and
besieged Vienna twice, once during the reign of Sulayman 1 (1520-1566
A.D.) and the other during the reign of Mohammed IV (1648-1687 A.D.)
(Hitti 1977).


**Islam and the Promotion of Culture and Science**

As the Moslems challenged the civilized world at that time, they
preserved the cultures of the conquered countries. On the other hand,
when the Islamic Empire became weak, most of the Islamic contributions
in art and science were destroyed. This was done by the Mongols who, out
of barbarism, burnt Baghdad (1258 A.D.), and by the Spaniards, who out
of hatred, demolished most of the Arabic heritage in Spain. The
difference between the Arabs and these was the teachings of Islam
which:

1. Stressed the importance and respect of learning. For example, the
first word revealed to the Moslems' prophet Mohammed was "Read". In
Mohammed's era, a captured enemy was freed if he paid a ransom or taught
ten Moslems writing and reading. In their holy book, the Qur'an, the
importance of knowledge has been repeatedly stressed as it says "Those
who know and those who do not are not equal."

The prophet Mohammed stressed learning by saying. "One hour of teaching
is better than a night of praying." One of the early princes, Khalid fbn
Yazid (end of the 7th century), gave up his treasure for the study of
medicine and chemistry. He studied medicine under John the Grammarian of
Alexandria, and chemistry under Merrinos the Greek (Haddad 1942). He
also encouraged several Greek and Coptic medical books to be translated
into Arabic.

2. Forbade destruction. On conquering Mecca, the prophet Mohammed
strongly stated that no homes, animals, or trees should be destroyed.
His followers abided with these principles when conquering other
countries.

3. Encouraged cleanliness and personal hygiene. Islam instructed them
to approach God in their prayers five times a day with bodies and
clothes spotlessly clean.

4. Developed in them the respect of authority and discipline. For
example, realizing the scourges and terror of plague, their prophet
Mohammed (p.b.u.h.) decreed that "no man may enter or leave a town in
which plague broke out." And to make this law all the more binding and
effective, he promised the blessing of heaven to those who die of plague
by stating that if a man died of plague he would be considered a martyr
(Haddad 1942). Thus Mohammed (p.b.u.h.) laid for the Moslems the laws
governing corden and quarantine for the first time in history and made
it work.

5. Tolerated other religions. The Islamic religion recognizes
Christianity and Judaism and considers their followers to be people with
holy books like Moslems. Moreover, they candidly treated the Jews at an
era when the latter were persecuted in Europe. Dr. Jacob Minkin, a
reputable Rabbi and scholar says "It was Mohammadan Spain, the only land
of freedom the Jews knew in nearly a thousand years of their
dispersion...

While during the Crusades, the armored Knights of the Cross spread
death and devastation in the Jewish communities of the countries through
which they passed, Jews were safe under the sign of the Crescent. They
were not only safe in life and possessions, but were given the
opportunity to live their own lives and develop a culture so unique and
striking that it went down in history as the 'Golden Ages'. The Moors,
the Muslim conquerors of Spain in 711, were not religious fanatics. They
were strong in their faith but generous with regard to the religious
convictions of others....

"The Ranaissance of Art in Italy, says George A. Dorsey, has blinded us
to the Renaissance of Science in Spain, which fostered science, promoted
culture, encouraged learning, and set a premium on intellectual
pursuits, no matter whether the intellect was Moslem, Christian or Jew.
Not since the days of Greece had the world known such thirst for
knowledge, such passion for learning, such spirit shared by the prince
and the courtien alike" (Minkin 1968).

The Arabs were assimilated by the vast new countries they reached. From
this marriage of genuine characters and righteousness with the ancient
and well established civilizations, a great new nation was born. It is
difficult to identify this new breed as Arabs, because although the
language was Arabic, all the scientists were not necessarily from the
Arabian Peninsula.

It is also equally difficult to describe it as Islamic, because
although the majority of the scientists were Moslems, sponsored by
Moslem rulers, and governed by the Islamic law, yet some scientists were
Christians or Jews, especially at the early phase of the lslamic
civilization: the translation period to Arabic, and the decline part:
the translation period to Latin and Hebrew. Therefore, in this article,
the adjectives Arabic or Islamic will be used as synonyms.


