Medicine Before Islam
=====================

In order to comprehend the contributions of Arabs to medicine,we must
have in our minds a picture of the condition of medicine before they
arrived to the scene. Generally speaking, two elements are required for
medical practice:

Manpower and hospitals

A. Manpower before Islam:

There were medical centers in different parts of the world which were
later either under control of the Arabs or in touch with them. For
example, in Syria, medicine was advanced and was greatly influenced by
the Byzantine civilization which affected also the economic and
administrative systems (Hammameh 1962). From the fifth century on, the
Greek was the language of learning in Syria. The knowledge of the Arabs
of the Greek civilization was mainly through the Syrian scholars who
translated it into Arabic.

In Egypt, Alexandria was another center for culture. The Arabs got in
touch with both the ancient Egyptian and Greek civilizations through the
Egyptian scholars. In Persia, there was a medical school in a city
called Jundi-Shapur in which medicine was highly developed.

The Abbasi Caliphs during the 8th century encouraged the Persian
physicians to translate into Arabic the medical knowledge therein, to
build medical centers in Baghdad, the capital of their empire, and to
run newly built hospitals. With further expansion east, the Arabs
through contacts with India and China, brought ideas and methods, not
only in medicine, but also in mathematics, chemistry, philosophy, etc.

**B. Hospitals Before Islam:**

Hospitals as we know them now probably were not present. True, there
were places for the sick to stay, but these were mainly temples or
annexes to temples that were run by priests. Gods were supposed to play
a major role in the art of healing. For example, the Goddess Toueris was
the Egyptian symbol of fecundity and protectress of the pregnant and
parturient.

She was shown as a standing pregnant hippopotamus carrying the
hicroglyph meaning protection in one paw, and the sign of life in the
other. Small figures of Toucris were popular as amulets (Speert 1973).
In those days, sanctuary, prayers, inactation, and hypnosis were
integral parts of the therapy.

Characteristic Features of Hospitals in the Islamic Civilization

During the Islamic civilization, hospitals had much developed and
attained specific characteristics:

1. Secular: Hospitals served all peoples irrespective of color,
religion, or background. They were run by the government rather than by
the church, and their Directors were commonly physicians assisted by
persons who had no religious color. In hospitals, physicians of all
faiths worked together with one aim in common: the well-being of
patients.

2. Separate wards: Patients of different sexes occupied separate wards.
Also different diseases especially infectious ones, were allocated
different wards.

3. Separate nurses: Male nurses were to take care of male patients, and
vice versa.

4. Baths and water supplies: Praying five times a day is an important
pillar of Islam. Sick or healthy, it is an Islamic obligation; of course
physical performance depends on one's health, even he can pray while
laying in bed. Before praying, washing of face, head, hands, and feet
must be done, if possible. For certain conditions, a bath is obligatory.
Therefore, these hospitals had to provide the patients and employees
with plentiful water supply and with bathing facilities.

5. Practicing physicians: Only qualified physicians were allowed by law
to practice medicine. In 931 A.D., the Caliph Al-Mugtadir from the
Abbasid dynasty, ordered the Chief Court-Physician Sinan Ibn-Thabit to
screen the 860 physicians-of Baghdad, and only those qualified were
granted license to practice (Hamarneh 1962).

The counterpart of Ibn- Tbabit, Abu-Osman Sai'd Ibn-Yaqub was ordered
to do the same in Damascus, Mecca, and Medina. The latter two cities
were in need for such an act because of hundreds of thousands of
pilgrims visiting them every year. This was to prevent taking advantage
of these pilgrims and to curb the spread of diseases among them.

6. Rather medical schools: The hospital was not only a place for
treating patients, but also for educating medical students,
interchanging medical knowledge, and developing medicine as a whole. To
the main hospitals, there were attached expensive libraries containing
the most up-to-date books, auditoria for meetings and lectures, and
housing for students and house-staff.

7.Proper records of patients: For the first time in history, these
hospitals kept records of patients and their medical care.

8. Pharmacy: During the Islamic era, the science and the profession of
pharmacy had developed to an outstanding degree. The Arabic materia
medica became so rich and new drugs and compounds were introduced
because the Muslims had contact with almost all the known world at that
time, either through control or trade. Their ships sailed to China and
the Philippines, and their convoys made trades with black Africa, Europe
and Asia. Chemistry became an advanced science, and there were means and
need for a specialization called pharmacy.

Thus, the main Arabian hospitals were models for medieval hospitals
built later in Europe. They were rather medical schools to which those
seeking advanced medical knowledge, from the East or West, attended.

**The Reasons for the High Standard of Islamic Hospitals**

In the Islamic Empire, the hospitals attained a golden era unsurpassed
in previous history. The reasons behind such a high standard include:

1. Being part of a civilization as a whole:The people were prosperous;
thus, they were capable of taking care of their health and of seeking
the best available treatment. Also, lslam stresses the necessity of
seeking treatment of every disease; the Prophet says "For every disease,
God created a cure." The required sciences for good medical care were at
a high standard e.g. the Arabs were advanced in chemistry, mathematics,
administration, pharmacy, medicine, etc. They gave the world the system
of numbering which have replaced the cumbersome Roman numerals.

The world owes to them the knowledge of the following chemical
reactions, namely sublimation, precipitation, filtration, distillation,
etc. The great.

Arab chemist Jabir Ibn- Hayan discovered sulphuric and nitric acids.
According to Webster Dictionary, the words sugar, alcohol, alkali,
syrup, coffee, cotton, all are Arabic words. Fielding H. Garrison, the
author of the well-known work on the "History of Medicine" said: "...The
Saracens themselves were the originators not only of algebra, chemistry,
and geology, but of many of the so- called improvements or refinements
of civilization, such as street lamps, window-panes, firework, stringed
instruments, cultivated fruits, perfumes, spices, etc... "

2. High prestige of physicians: The physicians in this era earned a
high prestige. Although anyone, irrespective of his social status, can
study medicine, yet the route was long and tedious. He had to finish
Islamic studies, philosophy, astronomy, art, chemistry, etc. before
being accepted as a medical student. Therefore, the physician was a
cultured person who had wisdom and knowledge. In fact, the Arabic
translation of a physician is "Hakim" which means sage. In the 9th and
10th century, the Court- Physician was in the protocol ahead of the
Chief-Justice.

Many eminent physicians, as we will discuss later, showed enough
talent, social knowledge, political capabilities, and wisdom to be
appointed by the Caliphs as prime ministers (Visiers). Owing to the high
prestige and connections of physicians, generous funds for hospitals
were easily obtained.

3. Rulers' involvement in public services: The Caliphs of the Islamic
empire built magnificent hospitals for one or more of the following
reasons:

a. Religion: Their religion stated that money spent on charity is a
good investment for Judgment Day.

b. Eternity: The Pharoahs of Ancient Egypt sought eternity by building
pyramids, the rulers of Islam sought the same thing by building mosques,
hospitals, and schools carrying their names.

c. Politics: To show their people that they cared, and were interested
in them, the rulers built hospitals.

Whatever the motive of the ruler, the population benefited and good
hospitals were erected.

4. Adequate financing to run the hospitals:The rulers set aside
generous funds to run these hospitals. Also the philanthropists gave
generously, thus following their religious beliefs and imitating their
rulers. In Islam, there is a special system called Al-Waqf. A person can
donate part or all of this wealth to charity.

The government takes care of such a donation, and its revenues help to
maintain and build mosques, hospitals, and schools. Another source of
funds and an important pillar of Islam is alms-giving (2 1/2% of
property value). Collected alms goes to the state treasury which takes
care of charitable organizations. Very few hospitals in the Islamic era
were private. Thus, patients fees constituted an unimportant source of
funding.


