Specific Hospitals
==================

The capital of the Islamic empire kept changing from one dynasty to the
other. In each capital, an important medical center developed. Thus, by
the end of the 13th century, there were many medical centers spread
throughout the Arab world. Space does not allow the description of all
the hospitals built throughout these centuries. We, therefore, chose
some of the important ones which will be described according to the
region where they were developed.

**1. In El-Sham
**
El-Sham at that time included what is known now as Syria, Lebanon,
Jordan, and Palestine, Damascus and Jerusalem were the important
cities.

a. In Damascus: The first known hospital in Islam was built in Damascus
in 706 A.D. by the Umayyad Caliph, Al-Walid (Hamarneh 1962). The most
important hospital built in Damascus in the middle ages was named
Al-Nuri Hospital, after King Nur Al-Din Zinki, in 1 156. This hospital
was built during the Crusade Wars to fulfill a need for a well-equipped
and well-staffed hospital. It turned out to be not only a first class
hospital, but also a first class medical school.

The king donated to the hospital a whole library rich in medical books.
It is important to understand why books were expensive and limited in
number in the middle ages. This was because they were hand-written as
printing was not used until the middle of the fifteenth century. The
hospital adopted medical records, probably the first first in history.
From its medical school, many eminent physicians graduated, an example
is Ibn Al-Nafis, the scholar who discovered the pulmonary circulation as
will be discussed. The hospital served the people for seven centuries
and parts of it still exist.

b. In Jerusalem: In 1055 A.D., the Crusaders built Saint John Hospital.
By the end of the eleventh century, it grew to such an extent to include
a hospital, a palace for knights, and a convent for the nursing sisters.
The medical activities of the hospital were tremendous because of the
large number of daily admissions of patients, pilgrims, and wounded
soldiers. After the liberation of Jerusalem by Salah Al-Din in 1187
A.D., the hospital name was changed into Al-Salahani Hopital. He
expanded the hospital which continued to serve the people until its
destruction by an earthquake in 1458 A.D.

2. In Iraq and Persia: In 750 A.D., Baghdad was built to be the capital
of the Abbasid dynasty by the Calip Abu-Gaifar Al- Mansur. In 766 A.D.,
he assigned the dean of the medical school of Jindi Shapur, Judis
Ibn-Babtishu', to be the Court- Physician and to establish hospitals
proportionate to the glory and prosperity of Baghdad.

When Harun Al-Rashid followed (786-809 A.D.), he ordered the grandson
of Ibn-Bahtishu and his Court-Physician, Jibril, to build a special
hospital named Baghdad Hospital. This hospital developed into an
important medic center. One of its chiefs was Al-Razi, the eminent
Internist.

In 918 A.D., the Caliph Al-Mugtadir built two hospitals in Baghdad. One
was on the east side of the city which he named Al-Sayyidah Hospital,
after his mother. The other was on the west side which he named, Al-
Mugtadiri Hospital, after himself.

Another important hospital was named Al-Adudi Hospital. It was built in
981 A.D. after King Adud Al-Dawlah. It was the most magnificent hospital
built in Baghdad before modern time. The Caliph wanted to outdo his
predecessors. It was furnished with the best equipment and supplies
known at the time. It had interns, residents, and 24 consultants
attending its professional activities. Haly Abbas, who wrote the famous
book "Liber Regius (Al-Malaki)", was one of the staff. It was destroyed
in 1258 when the Mongols, led by Holagu the grandson of Ghingiz Khan,
invaded Baghdad.

**3. In Egypt:**

In 872 A.D., Ahmed Ibn-Tulun built a hospital called Al-Fusta Hospital
in the City Al-Fustat which is now in old Cairo. It served the growing
Cairo population for six centuries. It was divided into separate wards.
On admission, the patients were given special apparel while their
clothes, money, and valuables were stored until the time of their
discharge.

In 1284 A.D., King Al-Mansur Qalawun built an important hospital named
Al-MansuriHospital . The story behind its construction is interesting.
King Al-Mansur Qalawun was an officer in the Arabian army fighting the
Crusaders. While in the Holy Land, he fell sick and was admitted to Al-
Nuri Hospital.

On recovery, he vowed that if he ever became the ruler of Egypt, he
would build a great hospital in Cairo even more magnificent than Al-Nuri
Hospital for, the sick. poor, and rich alike. At the dedication
ceremony, he asked for a cup of wine from the pharmacy. After drinking
it he declared that by taking that portion as a medication, he was
signifying that the hospital was serving all people. from the king to
the least of his subjects (Hamarneh 1962).

e. It was the best hospital built then as reported by the contemporary
historians such as Ibn-Battota and El-Kalkashandi. It had different
sections for different diseases. Music therapy was used as a line of
treatment for psychiatric patients. It served 4,000 patients daily. The
patient's stay in the hospital was free moreover on his discharge, the
patient was given food and money for compensation for being out of work
during his hospital stay. Al-Mansuri Hospital has served Cairo for seven
centuries since it has been built. It is now used for ophthalmology and
called Mustashfa Qalawun. Its ancient door is preserved in the Islamic
Museum of Cairo.

**4. In North Africa (Al-Maghrib Al-Arabi):**

a. Tunisia: In 830 A.D., Prince Ziyadat Allah I, built Al-Qayrawan
Hospital in a district of the Qayrawan city called Al-Dimnah.
Subsequently all hospitals in Tunisia were called Dimnah instead of
Bimaristan as they were called in the East, which is a Persian word
meaning a hospital. The Qayrawan Hospital was characterized by spacious
separate wards waiting rooms for visitors and patients, and female
nurses from Sudan, an event representing the first use of nursing in
Arabic history. The hospital also included a chapel for prayers.

b. Morocco: In 1190 A.D., the king Al-Mansur Ya'qub Ibn-Yusuf, built a
hospital in the capital city, Marakesh, named it the Marakesh Hospital.
It was a huge hospital beautifully landscaped with fruit trees and
flowers. Water was brought by aqueducts to all sections. Patients were
provided with special apparel: one for winter and another for summer.
The pharmacy was taken care of by specialists called the Sayadlah. There
was an expensive private section where a patient was charged what is
equivalent to $ 1501 day. One thousand years ago, this fee was quite
expensive.

**5. Al-Andalus (Spain):**

In 1366 A.D., Prince Muhammed Ibn-Yusuf Ibn Nasr, built the Granada
Hospital in the city of Granada which had expanded to half a million
population. The hospital represented the beauty of the Arabic
architecture in Spain and served the people until the fall of Granada in
1492 A.D.


