Method of Therapy in Islamic Medicine
=====================================

The patients were treated through a scheme starting with physiotherapy
and diet; if this failed, drugs were used, and at last, surgery would be
resorted to. The physiotherapy included exercises and water baths. The
Arabs had an elaborate system of dieting and were aware of food
deficiencies. Proper nutrition was an important item of treatment.

Drugs were divided into two groups: simple and compound drugs. They
were aware of the interaction between drugs; thus, they used simple
drugs first. If these failed, compound drugs were used which are made
from two or more compounds. If these conservative measures failed,
surgery was undertaken.

**Medical Ethics in Islam**

The medical profession was a well respected specialty and its Ieaders
kept it this way by laying down proper ethics. Al-Tabari, the chief
physician in 970 A.D., described the Islamic code of ethics as follows
(Hamamch 1971, Levy 1967):

I. Personal characters of the physician:

The Physician ought to be modest, virtuous, merciful, and un addicted
to liquor. He should wear clean clothes, be dignified, and have well-
groomed hair and beard. He should not join the ungodly and scaffers, nor
sit at their table. He should select his company to be persons of good
reputation. He should be careful of what he says and should not hesitate
to ask forgiveness if he has made an error. He should be forgiving and
never seek revenge. He should be friendly and peacemaker. He should not
make jokes or laugh at the improper time or place.

**II. His obligation towards patients:**

He should avoid predicting whether a patient will live or die, only God
(Allah) knows. He ought not loose his temper when his patient keeps
asking questions, but should answer gently and compassionately. He
should treat alike the rich and the poor, the master and the servant,
the powerful and the powerless, the elite and the illiterate. God will
reward him if he helps the needy. The physician should not be late for
his rounds or his house calls. He should be punctual and reliable.

He should not wrangle about his fees. If the patient is very ill or in
an emergency, he should be thankful, no matter how much he is paid. He
should not give drugs to a pregnant woman for an abortion unless
necessary for the mother's health. If the physician prescribes a drug
orally, he should make sure that the patient understands the name
correctly, in case he would ask for the wrong drug and get worse instead
of better. He should be decent towards women and should not divulge the
secrets of his patients.

**III. His obligation towards the community:**

The physician should speak no evil of reputable men of the community or
be critical of any one's religious belief.

IV. His obligations towards his colleagues:

The physician should speak well of his acquaintances and colleagues. He
should not honor himself by shaming others. If another physician has
been called to treat his patient, the family doctor should not criticize
his colleague even if the diagnosis and the recommendations of the
latter differ from his own. However, be has the obligation to explain
what each point of view may lead to since his duty is to counsel the
patient as best as he can. He must warn him that combining different
types of therapy may be dangerous because the actions of different drugs
may be incompatible and injurious.

**V. His obligations towards his assistants:**

If his subordinate does wrong, the physician should not rebuke him in
front of others, but privately and cordially.

**Islamic Physicians**

Medicine in Islam passed through three stages:

I. The first stage is the stage of translation of foreign sources into
Arabic. It extended mainly during the seventh and eighth centuries. II.
The second stage is the stage of excellence and genuine contribution in
which the Islamic physicians were the leaders and the source of new
chapters to medicine. This stage extended during the ninth through the
thirteenth centuries.

III. The third stage is the stage of decline where medicine, as well as
other branches of science, became stagnant and deteriorated. The stage
started mainly after the thirteenth century.

During the first stage, Syrian and Persian scholars did a marvelous job
by translating honestly the ancient literature from Greek and Syriac in
Arabic. Thcy translated different branches of science including
philosophy astrology, and medicine. The works of Hippocratcs (460-370
BC), Aristototle (384-322 BC), and Galen (131-210 A.D.) were among those
translated From Arabic, the classic Greek literature was translated into
Latin, then into Greek because most of the original scripts were lost
and the only source was the Arabic translation.

If the Arabs did only one thing, namely, preserving the ancient
literature and handing it honestly to Europe, that would have been a
sufficient contribution in itself. The Moslem rulers encouraged
translation, e.g. Khalif Al-Mamun Al-Abbassi paid the translator the
weight of his translation in gold (Haddad 1942). Among the eminent
physicians who took part in the first stage were Jurjis lbn-Bakhtisliu,
his grandson Jibril, Yuhanna Ibn-Masawaya, and Hunain Ibn-Ishak; most of
them were Christians, yet they were respected and well treated by the
Moslem rulers.

It is said, rightly or wrongly, that the history of a nation is the sum
total of the history of a few of its individuals. Ths is particularly
true in the history of medicine during the Arab period. In every stage
of its development we find men of outstanding repute, the sum total of
whose efforts has constituted this magnificent chapter. It is impossible
to give an account of all the important physicians of Islwn.

We thus are going to discuss some of those who were known to Medieval
Europe and whose books affected its thinking and practice for centuries
(Table 1), I chose an internist, Al-Razi (Razes); a surgeon, Al-Zahrawi
(Abulcasis); the physician-philosopher of Islam, Ibn-Sina (Avicenna);
the philosopher-physician of Islam, Ibn-Rushd (Averroes); a pioneer in
physiology, Ibn-Al-Nafis; and a Jewish Arab, Ibn- Maimon (Maimonides).


