Al-razi (razes) 841-926 A.d.
============================

His full name is Abu-Bakr Mohammaed Ibn-Zakaria Al-Razi, known to the
Western World as Razes. He was born in Ray, a suburb of Tehran, the
capital of modern Persia (Profile of Iran 1977, Sarton 1950). He first
studied music which was his main interest in his early life. He was a
skillful player on the lute. He then studied philosophy, and later
medicine. But he was a better physician than a philosopher ,

He first became the Court-Physician of Prince Abu Saleh Al-Mansur, the
ruler of Khorosan. Then he moved to Baghdad where he became the Chief
Physician of the Baghdad Hospital and the Court-Physician of the Caliph.
He had a good basis of physics and chemistry as well as medicine.

He published several books which were translated into Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, and Greek. One of his main books is "Al-Mansuri" (Liber
Al-Mansofis) which he dedicated to his patron Prince Al-Mansur. It was
composed of ten treatises and included all aspects of health and
disease. He defined medicine as "the art concerned in preserving healthy
bodies, in combating disease, and in restoring health to the sick." He
thus showed the three aspects of medicine namely, public health,
preventive medicine, and treatment of specific diseases. he listed seven
principles for the preservation of health:

1. Moderation and balance in motion and rest.

2. Moderation in eating and drinking.

3. Elimination of superfluities.

4. Improvement and regulation of dwelling places.

5. Avoidance of excessive evil happenings before they become
uncontrollable.

6. Maintenance of harmony in ambitions and resolutions.

7. Acquisition of reticence through possession of good habits including
exercise.

He also published another book called "Al-Murshid". In it, he
emphasized the important lines of therapy that we mentioned earlier. He
described the different types of fever including continuous, relapsing,
and hectic. He stated that fever can be a symptom of a disease or a
disease in itself. He introduced mercury as a therapeutic drug for the
first time in history, which was later adopted in Europe. He realized
that a man normally does not want to get sick, and he wants to recover
as soon as possible.

However, if a patient does not have the will or the desire to get well,
the physician's hands are tied and cannot help him. He stressed the
continued medical education of the physician. He advised him to record
his own observations. He encouraged him to meet with other physicians to
discuss medical problems. He recommended that the physicians should try
solving these problems rather than depending on others for finding
solutions.

Another book written by Al-Razi was named "Al-Hawi", which means the
complete text. It was composed of 22 volumes. It was one of the main
text books in the medical school in Paris, especially its 9th volume on
pharmacology.

He wrote a treatise on measles and smallpox called "de Peste or de
Pestilentia" which was translated to Latin in 1565 A.D. It is a
masterpiece in clinical medicine (Browne 1962). It describes the
clinical difference between the two diseases so vividly that nothing
since has been added (Keys 1971).


**AL-Zahrawi (ABULCASIS, BUCASIS, ALZAHRAVIUS) 930-1013 A.D.**

His full name is Abu-Al-Qasim Khalaf Ibn'Abbas Al-Zahrawi. He had been
known in the Western World as Abulcasis, Bucasis or Alzahravius. He is
the famous surgeon of the Arabs. In 930 A.D., he was born in Al-Zahra, a
suburb of Cordova. He attended the University of Cordova which had been
established for one and a half centuries. At that time Cordova had a
population of one million (Hitti 1977). It was the magnificent capital
of Al- Andalus where culture and science were at their peak in Europe.
In military power the Moslems also reached their zenith, not only in
Spain but also throughout Europe after King Abdel-Rahman III defeated
the Spanish kings of Navarre, Castile, and Leon at the north in 997
A.D.

Al-Zahrawi became an eminent surgeon. lie was appointed as the
Court-Physician of King Abdel-Rahman III. He spent a productive life in
Practicing medicine, especialy in surgery and medical writings. He died
at the age of 83.

He wrote mainly four books. One of them is "Al-Tastif Liman Ajiz'an
Al-Ta'lif' which is the best medieval surgical encyclopedia. It was used
in Europe until the 17th century. He stressed the importance of basic
sciences: "... Before practicing, one should be familiar with the
science of anatomy and the functions of organs so that he will
understand them, recognize their shape, understand their connections,
and know their borders.

Also he should know the bones, nerves, and muscles, their numbers,
their origin and insertions, the arteries and the veins, their start and
end. These anatomical and physiological bases are important, and as said
by Hippocrates: 'These are many physicians by title and a few by
practice.' ... If one does not comprehend the anatomy and physiology, he
may commit a mistake that can kill the patient. I have seen someone, who
pretended to be a surgeon, incised an aneurysm in the neck of a woman ,
mistaking it for an abscess.The woman bled to death."

Heller stated that Al-Zahrawi described the ligature of arteries long
before Ambrose Pare (Khairallah 1942). Al-Zahrawi also used cautery to
control bleeding. He used wax and alcohol to stop bleeding from the
skull during cranial surgery. Sprengel said that Al-Zahrawi was the
first to teach the lithotomy position for vaginal operations (Khairallah
1942). Al-Zahrawi also described the tracheotomy operation and performed
it as an emergency on one of his servants.

He was the first to write on orthodontia. He showed evidence of great
experience from details of clinical picture and surgical procedures e.g.
his description of varicose veins stripping, even after ten centuries,
is almost like modern surgery (Al-Okbi 1971): "... Have the leg shaved
if it is much hairy.

The patient gets a bath and his leg is kept in hot water until it
becomes red and the veins dilate; or he exercises vigorously. Incise the
skin opposite the varicose vein longitudinally either at the ankle or at
the knee. Keep the skin opened by hooks. Expose, dissect, and separate
the vein. Introducc a spatula underneath it.

When the vein is elevated above the skin level, hang it with a blunt
rounded hook. Repeat the procedure about three fingers from the previous
site and hang the vein with another hook as previously done. Repeat the
procedure at as many sites along the varicose vein as necessary. At the
ankle, ligate and strip it by pulling it from the incision just above.
When it reaches there, repeat at the higher incision until all of it is
stripped.

Ligate the vein and then excise it. If difficulty is encountered in
pulling it, ligate its terminal part with a string and pass it under the
spatula and dissect it further. Pull gently and avoid its tearing
because if it does, it becomes difficult to strip all of it and can
cause harm to the patient.

When you have stripped it all, put alcohol spanges at the sites of the
skin incisions and take care of the incisions until they heal. If the
varicose vein is tortuous, you have to incise the skin more frequently,
at each change of direction. Dissect it and hang it with the hooks and
strip it as previously described. Do not tear the vein or injure it. If
this happens, it becomes difficult to strip it. The hooks used should be
blunt, eyeless, and rounded, otherwise it can injure the vein".

He also wrote about fracture of the skull (Al-Okbi 197 1): "... The
types of skull fractures are numerous, their shapes are different, and
their causes are many. For example, some skull fractures are due to a
blow by a sword that splits the whole skull and reaches the dura, the
same as the ax does to the wood, therefore it is called axial fracture.
Sometimes the sword does not split the skull completely, it is thus
called incomplete axial fracture. Such a fracture can be small or big.

Another type is comminuted fracture Which can be due to a hit by a
stone or a fall on a stone; and this fracture can reach the dura or only
be limited to the outer part of the bone. This fracture can also be
small or big. A third type is the hairy type of skull fracture which is
so tiny and linear like a hair.

A fourth type is the depressed fracture which occurs due to a fail or a
blow so the bone is depressed like a brass jar when hit by a blunt
instrument. This usually happens when the bone is soft as children. The
types of these fractures are diagnosed by examining the wound, removing
the debris and contused pan of the scalp, exposing the skull, and
feeling it by the spatulas. The hairy fracture is difficult to discover
and can be diagnosed by exposing the skull, and smearing it with ink;
the linear fracture thus appears stained."

In the treatment of fractures of the skull, Al- Zahrawi wrote: "... If
the patient shows serious signs such as high fever, repeated vomiting,
exophthalmos, convulsions, and coma, do not touch him because he is
probably going to die. Otherwise, treat him as follows: first shave the
patient's head. In comminuted depressed fractures, these pieces of bone
should be removed as will be explained. If in the process of the
patient's examination or during surgery bleeding occurs, it can be
controlled by pressure using towels soaked in alcohol and by wax. Then
after control of the bleeding, the small pieces of bone are removed
using special forceps .

To remove the depressed fracture, first, make trephines in the healthy
bone around it. These trephine instruments should not penetrate beyond
the skull into the soft tissues underneath, thus they are called non
penetrating trephines. They have a rounded ring in their proximal end to
prevent them from penetrating beyond certain depths. You should have a
number of these trephines that can stop at different depths depending on
the thickness of the skull. Connect the holes in the skull using special
saws.

First, use a fine small saw, then larger ones. These should be sharp
and made of steel. Avoid cutting the dura by the trephine or saw. Once
the depressed bone is freed, remove it gently, then smoothen the edges
of the skull by special instruments. Wash with alcohol and treat the
wound with packs soaked with ointment."

Al-Zahrawi described many dental operations such as dental extractions,
fixation, re implantation, and artificial teeth. He described referred
tooth pain and cautioned the physician against removal of the healthy
tooth to which pain is referred. He used gold threads to fix teeth
because other metals would tarnish and cause a reaction. Chapter 6 of
his book was all devoted to foreign bodies of the ear and their
treatment. He also devoted one whole chapter to mid wifery, giving tips
to midwives, and describing the problems of difficult labor and
obstetrical manoeuvre.

He recommended decompression of the fetal head for obstructed labor and
described the instruments used. He described the management of liver
abscess by treating it into two stages (Khairallah 1942). The first
stage was to allow adhesions around it and to close it from the
peritoneal cavity. The second stage was to incise it. ..."If the
procedure is done in one stage, the pus may spread to the whole abdomen
and the patient may die."

He described a total of 200 surgical and dental instruments most of
them were original (Fig. 3). He said "... Choose your instruments
carefully beforehand according to the operation. However, you should
design other devices if needed." Thus he encouraged the physician to be
innovative.

During the time of Al-Zahrawi, surgery in the Islamic world became a
respected specialty practiced by reputable physicians. On the contrary
in Europe, surgery was belittled and practiced by barbers and butchers.
In 1163 A.D., the Council of Tours declared the following resolution
"Surgery is to be abandoned by the schools of medicine and by all decent
physicians."


