Ibn-el-nafis 1208 - 1288 A.d.
=============================

In 1208 A.D., Ala'El-Deen Ibn-El-Nafis was born in a small town near
Damascus called Kersh (Fig. 7) (Ibrahim 1971). He learned medicine and
philosophy in Damascus and spent most of his life in Cairo. He was a
physician, a linguist, a philosopher, and a historian. He was the first
chief of Al-Mansuri Hospital in Cairo and the dean of the School of
Medicine in 1284 A.D.

During this era, the medical profession together with other branches of
science were passing a crisis. The Mongol Tartar invasion and
destruction of Baghdad in 1258 A.D. caused an injury to the Islamic
civilization from which it never recovered. It destroyed forever the
Caliphate, symbolic unity of the Arabian Empire, and the preeminence of
Baghdad as a center for learning.

Also during that period Islamic culture was declining in Spain. It was
then Cairo and Damascus the centers for education and medical prestige.
There, the medical profession was characterized by the freedom of
discussion and expression of opinion, something that was very new in
medicine and not known to Europe until the 17th century when introduced
to England by Sedenbam (Ibrahim 1971).

Ibn-El-Nafis was a dedicated person. He used to start his day after
dawn prayers by making rounds at the hospital, followed by case
discussions with students and colleagues, then hospital administration.
His evenings were spent reading, writing and discussing medicine and
philosophy with frequent scholar guests at his home in El-Hussein
District in Old Cairo. His house was an example of beautiful Arabic
architecture, made of marble with a fountain in the central hall.

In the history of mankind, there are persons whose importance is
revealed with the flight of time and their truth glows with the passage
of centuries; Ibn-El-Nafis is one of those. He wrote many books, ten of
them in medicine and a special one in philosophy. In the latter book
"Fadel Ibn- Natik", he tried to present the counter point of the
philosophical view of Avicenna expressed in his book "Hai Ibn-Yakzan".

He was an authority in theology on which he wrote several books, e.g.
"The complete Message of the Prophet" and "Al-Ragol Al-Kamel" (The
Perfect Man) supporting unitarianism. Ibn-El-Nafis had an important
character, not being a follower but a scholar. This was evident in his
writings whether in philosophy or medicine.

In medicine he wrote many books, two of them are "Mujaz Al-Qanun" which
means the "Summary of the Canon". In these two books which were based on
avicenna's writings, he criticized the short comings of Avicenna's book
and of Galen's views and added to them. That is why he was named by some
as Avicenna the Second.

For example be wrote "... We have relied chiefly on his (Galen)
teachings, except in a few details which we think are wrong and were not
given after a thorough investigation. In describing the function of the
organs, we have depended on careful investigation, observation, and
honest study, regardless of whether or not these fit with the teachings
and theories of those who have preceded us."

Ibn-El-Nafis added lights to the physiology of the circulation. In the
ancient history, Erasistratus of the Alexandria Scbool (310 B.C. - 250
B.C.) believed that blood was contained only in the eight side of the
circulation, namely the veins and the fight side of the heart. The left
side of the circulation, namely the left side of the heart and the
arteries were supposed to contain air because arteries were found empty
when an animal was sacrificed, hence the name "arteria".

When Galen came (131 - 210 A.D.), he described blood to pass from the
right side of the heart to the left side through minute openings in the
septum of the heart, then it mixed with air from the lungs, and
sequently distributed to the whole body. For centuries this was the
prevalent belief and no one, including the Arab physicians and their
eminent writer Avicenna, could dare to challenge this sacred view.
Ibn-El-Nafis did. Five times he stated in unmistakable terms that "...
the blood from the right chamber of the heart must arrive at the left
chamber, but there is no direct pathway between them.

The thick septum of the heart is not perforated and does not have
visible pores as some people thought or invisible pores as Galen
thought. The blood from the right chamber must flow through the vena
arteriosa (pulmonary artery) to the lungs, spread through its substance,
he mingled with air, pass through the arteria venosa (Pulmonary vein) to
reach the left chamber of the heart... " (Salem 1968). In describing the
anatomy of the lung Ibn-El-Nafis stated: "The lung is composed of.

first, the bronchi: second, the branches of the arteria a venosa; and
third, the branches of the vena arteriosa; all of these are connected by
loose porous flesh ... The need of the lung for the vena arteriosa is to
transport to it the blood that has been thinned and warmed in the heart,
so that what seeps through the pores of the branches of this vessel into
the alveoli of the lung may mix with what is of air therein and combine
with it ... and the mixture is carried to the left cavity of the heart
by the arteria venosa" (Haddad 1936).

Ibn-El-Nafis also made other contributions in the circulation.
Avicenna, following Galen's description of the anatomy, stated that the
human heart has three ventricles. Ibn-El-Nafis rejected that as he said
"...And his statement ((Avicenna's) that the heart has three ventricles
is not correct, as the heart has only tow ventricles..." He was also the
first to describe the coronary circulation as he wrote "...Again, his
statement (Avicenna's) that the blood in the right side is to nourish
the heart is not true at all, for the nourishment of the heart is from
the blood that goes through the vessels that permeate the body of the
heart... "

Three centuries after the discovery of the pulmonary circulation by
Ibn- El-Nafis, others, such as Michael Servetus, Realdus Colombus, Carlo
Ruini, Andrea Cesalpino, and Francois Rabelais, claimed the same thing
(Mayerhof 1935). There is a strong suspicion that these authors obtained
their knowledge from the Arabic literature which was available at that
time to the European investigators without giving credit to Ibn-El-Nafis
(Keys 1971, Haddad 1942).

It is considered to be more than a coincidence that Servetus would
discover the pulmonary circulation, and also to write a book, similar to
that of Ibn-El-Nafis, on Unitarianism. Servetus was burnt with his book,
"Restitutio Christianismi" in Geneva in October 1553 at the order of
Calvin because he was considered heretic.


