The Arabs and Ophthalmology
===========================

The Arabs were much interested in ophthalmology. In the ninth century,
Hunayn Ibn-Ishak (Joannitius) translated to Arabic the Greek literature
on the eye. As mentioned before, Al-Razi described the changes in the
caliber of the eye produced by relaxation and contraction of the iris.
He also described the cataract operation.

In 1050 A.D. at Baghdad, Ali Ibn-Isa (Jesu Haly) wrote the classic book
on ophthalmology, Tathkirat Al-Kahhalin (A Note for the Oculists). As
stated by Cunistan (1921), it is the oldest book in its original
language on diseases of the eye. In a clear and logical style, the
author described trachoma, conjunctivitis, and cataract, and prescribed
treatment (Keys 1971).

Avicenna described the six extrinsic muscles of the eyeball.

In the thirteenth century, Ibn Abu-Al-Kawafer wrote a book on
therapeutic ophthalmology entitled "Natigat-El-Fikr fi Ilag Amrad
El-Bassar" (Conclusions from Expelience on Treatment of Diseases of the
Eye). According to Kahil (1929) is one of several textbooks of
ophthalmology considered to be superior to any written in Europe up to
the eighteenth century.

ARABS AND ANESTHESIA

Being an obstetric anesthesiologist, I feel obligated to write a little
more on the contributions of the Arabs to both anesthesia and
obstetrics.

First, in anesthesia, the Arabs described in detail the pharmacology of
important narcotics such as opium and other central nervous system
depressants such as hyoscyamus and hashish (Khairallal 1942). Burton
(1886 A.D.) stated that "anesthetics have been used in surgery
throughout the East for centuries before ether and chloroform became the
fashion in the civilized West. In a Treatise on the Canon of Medicine by
Gruner it is stated by Avicenna under the article 8l4 ANESTHETICS:"If it
is desirable to get a person unconscious quickly, without him being
harmed, add sweet smelling moss to the wine, or lignum aloes.

If it is desirable to procure a deeply unconscious state, so as to able
the pain to be borne which is involved in painful applications to a
member. place darnel-water into the wine, or administer fumitory,
opiuium, hyoscyamus (half dram doses of each); nutmeg, crude aloes-wood
(4 grains of each). Add this to the wine, and take as much as is
necessary for the purpose. Or. boil black hyoscyamus in water, with
mandragore bark, until it becomes red. Add this to the wine."

The Arabs also introduced "the Soporific Sponge" which was commonly
used for anesthesia in the middle ages. The sponge was soaked with
aromatics and narcotics to be sucked and then held under the nostril to
provide anesthesia prior to surgery (Keys 1971).

Avicenna wrote more than 1,000 years ago about the effect of pain on
ventilation: "Pain dissipates the bodily strength and interferes with
the normal functions of the organs. The respiratory organs are inhibited
from drawing in air, and consequently the act of breathing is interfered
with, and the respiration becomes intermittent, rapid, or altogether
unnatural in rhythm" (Gruner 1930).

**ARABS AND OBSTETRICS
**
Hynayn Ibn-Ishak (Joannitius, 809-873 A.D.) translated the work of the
Greek pioneer in obstetrics, Paul of Aegina, into Arabic. Hunayn also
translated to the Arabic world most of the work of Hippocrates, Galen,
and Ptolemy. Moreover, he was a gifted physician and philosopher. Ali
Ibn-Al- Abas Al-Majusi (Halle Abbas) who died in 994 A.D. was the first
to describe in his book "Al-Kitab Al-Malaki" (The Royal Book) that the
uterine contractions are the cause of delivery of the fetus (Keys 1971).
Before him, it was thought that the uterine contractions were only as
indication of the onset of labor; subsequently the fetus would swim its
way out of the womb and birth canal.

Most of the deliveries were performed by midwives at home. For
complicated obstetrics Al-Zahrawi offered advice to midwives as
mentioned


