Memorandum on Matrimonial Laws
==============================

Extract From The Covering Note
------------------------------

*The following memorandum was written by Maulana Sayyid Sa’eed Akhtar
Rizvi for submission before the Commission on the laws of Marriage,
Divorce and succession, set up by the Kenya government under the
Chairmanship of Mr. Justice Spry, of Kenya High Court.*

*The terms of reference for the Commission are:*

*"To consider the existing laws relating to marriage, divorce and
matters relating thereto;*

*"To make recommendations for a new law providing a comprehensive and,
so far as may be practicable, uniform law of marriage, and divorce
applicable to all persons in Kenya, which will replace the existing*
*law on the subject comprising customary law, Islamic law, Hindu law and
the relevant acts of Parliament and to prepare a draft of the new law;*

*"To pay particular attention to the status of women in relation to
marriage and divorce in a free democratic society".*

*The Commission had earlier sent questionaires to all interested
parties, and the Supreme Council sent their answers (also written by
Maulana Sayyid Sa’eed Akhtar Rizvi) to the Commission beforehand.*

*The Commission sat for hearing in Mombasa from 21st August, 1967. Our
delegation appeared before the Commission on 22nd August. Along with the
memorandum, a comprehensive set of "Islamic laws" and a collection of
lectures on Usul-e-Deen "Islam", both written and compiled by Maulana
Sayyid Sa’eed Akhtar Rizvi, were presented before the Commission.*

*Needless to say that Maulana’s effort in this respect has been most
commendable; and I have no hesitation to admit that the following
submission would not have been successful without his guidance and
assistance.*

*The members of the delegation were Mulla Ashgherali M. M. Jaffer (Hon.
Gen. Secretary), Mr. Hassan A. M. Jaffer (Hon. Treasurer), Maulana
Sayyid Sa’eed Akhtar Rizvi, Maulana Sheikh Maqbool Hussain (Mombasa),
Mr. Bashir H. Pira and I.*

*The Hon. General Secretary of the Khoja Shi’a Ithna-’Ashari Supreme
Council, Mulla Asgherali M. M. Jaffer, acted as the spokesman of the
Shi’a Ithna-’Asharis; and read out the submission before the Commission.
He also replied to the questions put forward by the Commission, and
clarified several points relevant to the laws of marriage, divorce etc.
according to Shi’a school.*

*Mohamedau Meghjl,*  
*President,* *Shi’a* *Ithna-’Ashari* *Supreme Council,*  
*P.O. Box 1085, Mombasa.*

*\*\*\*\*\**

1. On behalf of the Shi’a Ithna-’Ashari Community of Kenya, we take the
liberty of making this submission for the consideration of the
Commission.

2. In this submission, we are confining our remarks to religious laws
pertaining to Marriage, Divorce, Will and Inheritance of the Shi’a
Ithna-’Ashari Sect of Islam.

3. It is appreciated that multiple social problems arising out of the
abuse or misinterpretation of customary, traditional or religious laws,
in general practice, give cause for serious concern to the Government;
and the Government in its desire to secure the welfare of its people in
that respect, is confronted with a difficult task of eradicating social
evils.

Any effort in this direction is worthy of support and deserves all the
co-operation. But, we feel that the idea of enacting a Common Law to
replace the existing Islamic Laws is not the right one. Even traditional
customs (not having any religious authority behind them) are hard to
change. This becomes even more dangerous in cases like Islamic Law which
are an integral part of our religion, which are not confined to rituals
only. These Laws cannot be violated without incurring a sense of guilt
and sin.

Therefore, we feel that the best way would be to "Let hundred flowers
bloom." National unity does not demand that all citizens should have the
same dialect or the same religious belief. So why is it considered
essential that there be a Uniform Law of Marriage and Divorce applicable
to all persons in Kenya.

4. Our Shi’a Ithna-ashen Sha’riah is not based upon "Ra'i" (Opinion) or
"Qiyas" (analogy). It is based wholly on the Qur'an and the traditions
of the Holy Prophet and our Twelve Imams.

5. As this Commission is concerned with matters of matrimony and
succession, we must point out that the fundamental rules and many
details of succession are given in the Qur'an. In fact, this subject is
dealt with more fully in the Holy Book. Likewise, the fundamental rules
of marriage and divorce are based upon the Qur'an.

The details which are not explicit in the Qur'an are explained in the
traditions as mentioned above.

Our religious scholars who are called Mujtahid do not give any ruling by
their opinion, analogy or Consensus. There is no such authority given to
anybody in our School of Law. They may differ in interpreting certain
traditions concerning some minor details, but even then that difference
is a difference in interpretation, not of opinion.

The Shi’a Ithna-’Ashari Sect follows in all religious matters the
rulings of the greatest Mujtahid of the time. He is considered the
representative of our Twelfth Imam and he is the final authority on all
religious matters. In him vest in certain cases the powers of
guardianship of children, guardianship in marriage and divorce,
executorships of the Will and estate of a deceased and such matters.

Ithna-’Ashari school of Islamic Law is a well-knit entity. We cannot
change or amend one or two aspects of it without destroying the whole
fabric.

For example:

(1) Marriage and divorce rules have direct bearing on legitimacy or
otherwise of a child; on virtue or sin of togetherness of the man and
the woman; on their mutual right of inheritance and that of the child;
apart from the social and legal embarrassments.

(2) In Islamic Law a man cannot use anything obtained illegally (in
religious sense) either for secular or for religious purposes.
Therefore, if a change is made in the Laws of succession and someone is
given more than his due share according to Qur'an, his whole life would
become miserable. His daily life would be a long list of transgressions;
his prayers, pilgrimages, food and clothing would, in the religious
sense, become unlawful.

Thus it is clear that the pattern of laws of marriage, divorce and
inheritance cannot be changed; otherwise this would constitute a direct
interference in our religion.

6. With regards to the Commission's desire "to pay particular attention
to the status of women in relation to marriage and divorce in a free
democratic society" we wish to submit as under:-  
 (a) In our School of Law a women have such rights, privileges and
safeguards since Fourteen Centuries, most of which were unimaginable in
non-Islamic Societies up to the last century and some of which are ahead
of the so-called modern time.

(b) Islam according to Shi’a school has given a woman right to contract
herself in marriage if she is adult and discreet.

(c) Islam has given the woman an independent identity. A Muslim woman
owns her property even after marriage and husband cannot interfere with
it.

(d) She can sue her husband, can give evidence against him. She inherits
from him by right and he from her. This mutual right of inheritance was
given when no society ever thought about it.

7. A woman's share is, normally, half of that of a man. But this is
quite logical. Islam has made man responsible for the maintenance of his
family. No such burden is laid upon women. Even a rich wife is entitled
to get her maintenance from her husband though he may be poor. As the
maintenance of the family is the responsibility of man, he has been
given double share in almost all inheritances.

Also, the woman gets the dowry which goes from husband to wife. The
ratio of shares as laid down in the Qur'an is, therefore, most
reasonable.

8. Islamic Laws relating to Will do not allow a person to will away more
than one third of his net estate. Thus the financial position of the
would-be heirs is always secure and beyond any encroachment by anyone.
This security is still lacking in many societies which allow a man to
give all his estate to a perfect stranger.

(a) Now we come to some of the matrimonial affairs:

**Polygamy:** African Society was, and to a certain extent is, a
polygamous society. Islam also permits polygamy. It has allowed four
wives at a time and has enjoined equality in treatment of all wives.

(b) It should be remembered that polygamy is not a compulsory thing nor
is it advocated. It is just permission with certain limitation and
conditions. And in some of the circumstances this permission proves
extremely useful.

For example: If the wife is chronically ill, or is barren, or for some
other reasons it is not desirable for the couple to live as husband and
wife. The remedy offered by certain societies is to divorce the wife and
remarry. But is this justice? Is it kind or noble to turn out a woman in
her old or middle age from her home, just because she remains sick or
she happens to be barren? Islam discourages such cruelty by permitting
polygamy.

10. (a) **Divorce:** There is no need to emphasize that in certain
conditions divorce is the only remedy left for a couple. The usefulness
of the divorce system can be seen from the fact that even Hindus and
many Christians have been compelled by sheer force of necessity to enact
divorce laws.

(b) We must point out at the outset that the Shi’a Ithna-’Ashari school
of Islamic Law has laid down strict rules based upon the Qur'an and
traditions, concerning divorce.

(c) Divorce has been declared by the Holy Prophet to be the “most
despised of all legal things.”

(d) Qur'an has established the machinery for reconciliation whenever
there is any discord between husband and wife.

(e) **Conditions of Divorce:** The divorce is allowed provided it is
pronounced in the presence of two "Adils" (men of approved probity)
witnesses who hear the words and understand the nature of divorce. The
divorce must, be pronounced in approved, formula.

Further, it is also necessary that the husband must be adult, sane, and
of sound understanding, acting on his own free will and not under the
fit of rage or duress, and that he should have the distinct intention to
dissolve the marriage.

So far as wife is concerned, she at the time of divorce must be in a
state of purity, and that divorce cannot be pronounced even in a period
of purity in which the husband has had sexual intercourse with her.

If any of the above mentioned conditions is violated, the divorce is
null and void. • *'*

(f) Three divorces cannot be given at one time. If somebody says that he
gives three divorces, even one will not be valid.

(g) In most cases, the divorce is revocable and the husband is bound to
maintain the divorced wife during the period of "Iddat" (normally three
months) in his house unless she opts to leave.  
 (h) During the said period of "Iddat", the husband has right to revoke
the divorce by words or action and there will be no need for any
formality.

These strict rules have always been observed by our sect. Thanks to our
Sha’riah, divorces in Shi’a Ithna-’Ashari Sect are very rare.

11. **Right of Woman Regarding Dissolution of Marriage:** Woman has not
been given a right to divorce her husband. The reason is not very
difficult to understand. Family is the basic society of humanity and as
every society needs a final authority to keep it well-organized, the
family also must have a supreme head. Islamic Law has given that place
to the husband, and the husband has been given the right to give
divorce.

But the wife is entitled to ask for divorce in many cases: e.g.  
 (1) She can ask for a Khula which can be agreed upon by the husband;

(2) She can request the Mujtahid to grant her divorce in cases where the
husband has disappeared, or neglects to maintain her.

(3) In case of insanity of the husband, whether it occurred before or
after the marriage, she has the right to cancel the marriage without any
need to refer the case to Mujtahid.

(4) And she can nullify the marriage after referring the case to the
Mujtahid, if the husband is impotent.

12. In our submission, we have pointed out earlier that a uniform law in
a cosmopolitan society such as that of Kenya is not essential for
national unity. We now beg to submit that peaceful co-existence and
goodwill among the people attached to diverse religious beliefs and laws
can only be brought about if freedom is granted to them to practice such
laws, and act accordingly.

It won’t be out of place to mention here that Islam has a comprehensive
set of Theology embracing all walks of life, and that its behests and
directions are not confined to rituals and liturgy only. It is a code of
life that gives a detailed treatment to the social, matrimonial, moral,
as well as commercial conduct in human life.

It will, perhaps, be of interest to know that Tanzania has recently
published the Statements of Islamic Law. This is the Subsidiary
Legislation under the Restatement of Islamic Law Act (No. 56 of 1964).
Gazette Supplement No. 34 of 27th June 1967 refers. This timely move in
Tanzania established that any country advocating freedom of worship and
religious practice can safely accommodate diverse laws in respect of
marriage, divorce, inheritance or any such matters. It also shows that
such a move is practicable. May we add that it also implies that such a
codification is conducive to better understanding and relationship in
country where amiable environment is to be created, and we commend the
Commission to recommend a similar move in Kenya.

13. To try to draw a fine line between the Qur'an and Islamic Law is
never imaginable. Any attempt to disrupt or in the wordings of the term
of reference of the Commission to "replace Islamic Law" will be
unacceptable. As explained above, the Muslim Law is based on the Holy
Quran and replacing the Muslim Law is tantamount to replacing the Holy
Quran.

14. We have submitted the questionnaire sent by the Commission duly
completed along with the Codified Islamic Law (in English) according to
Shi’a School of Law relating to Marriage, Dissolution of Marriage, Will,
Inheritance, Acknowledgment and Wakf, and we shall be glad to answer any
questions arising there from and submit clarifications required.

Dated, Mombasa, 22nd August, 1967


