Memorandum on Tanzania White Paper on Uniform Marriage Law
==========================================================

*Note: This Memorandum unavoidably incorporates some paragraphs from the
Memorandum submitted to the Kenya Govt.’s Commission.*

On behalf of the Shi’a Ithna-’Ashari Community of Tanzania, we take the
liberty of submitting the following views on the Government proposals on
Uniform Law of Marriage (Government's Paper No. 1 of 1969).

The claimed aim of the proposals is to remove the present condition in
which "the existing laws do not recognize all the marriages contracted
under different laws as equal.”

But, is it necessary, for this purpose, to enact a uniform law of
marriage? Can this object not be easily achieved by bringing all the
marriages under the jurisdiction of one court and under one register of
marriages?

In 1964, the 'Restatement of Islamic Laws Act' was passed to the effect
that the rules of Islamic Laws of marriage be codified. A Subsidiary
Legislation' under that Act was published as the Supplement No. 34 in
the Gazette of 27th June, 1967. This was supposed to be the first
installment.

We wonder why that policy could not be continued, or even extended to
cover the different customary as well as the Hindu and Christian
marriage laws. These laws could be codified and brought under the
jurisdiction of one court.

Then, and only then, could a comprehensive chapter be added dealing with
the conflict of law, some examples of which have been given in the White
Paper.

We appreciate that multiple social problems arising out of the abuse or
misinterpretation of customary or religious laws, in general give cause
for serious concern to the Government. The Government, in the efforts to
secure the welfare of its people, in that respect, is confronted with
the task of eradicating social evils.

Any effort in this direction is worthy of support and deserves all
co-operation. But we feel that the idea of enacting a common law,
repealing the Restatement of Islamic Laws Act, is not the right one.

Even traditions (not having any divine authority behind them) are hard
to change. This becomes even more dangerous in cases like the Islamic
Law which is an integral part of our religion. These laws cannot be
violated without incurring a sense of guilt and sin.

Therefore, we feel that the best way would be to "let a hundred flowers
bloom." National unity does not demand that all citizens should have the
same dialect or the same religious belief. Why is it considered
essential to have a uniform law of marriage and divorce applicable to
all people in Tanzania?

Our Shi’a Ithna-’Ashari Sha’riah is not based upon "Ra'i" (Opinion) or
"Qiyas" (Analogy). It is based wholly on the Qur'an and the traditions
of the Holy Prophet and our Twelve Imams.

As the White Paper is concerned with matters of matrimony, we must point
out that our fundamental rules of marriage and divorce are based upon
the Qur'an. Details which are not explicit in the Qur'an are explained
in the traditions.

Our religious scholars who are called Mujtahid do not give any ruling by
their opinion, analogy or consensus. There is no such authority given to
any body in our school of law. They may differ in interpreting certain
traditions concerning some minor details, but even then that difference
is a difference in interpretation, not of opinion.

The Shi’a Ithna-’Asharis follow in all religious matters the rulings of
the greatest Mujtahid of the time. He is considered the representative
of our 12th Imam and he is the final authority on all religious matters.

In him rests in certain cases the powers of guardianship of children,
marriage and divorce, executorship of the will and state of a deceased
and such matters.

Ithna-’Ashari school of Islamic Laws is a well-knit entity. We cannot
change or amend one or two aspects of it without destroying the whole
fabric:'

For example marriage and divorce rules have direct bearing on legitimacy
of a child; on virtue or sin of togetherness of the man and the woman;
on their mutual right of inheritance and that of the child; apart from
other social and legal implications.

In Islamic Law a man cannot use anything obtained illegally (in
religious sense) either for secular or-for religious purposes.
Therefore, if a change is made in the laws of succession, for instance,
and someone is given more than his due share according to Quran, his
whole life would become miserable. His daily life would be a long list
of transgressions; his prayers, pilgrimages, food and clothing would, in
the religious sense, become unlawful.

Thus it is clear that the pattern of laws of marriage, divorce and
inheritance cannot be changed. Otherwise, this would constitute a direct
interference in our religion.

Regarding the rights of a woman in Muslim Law we wish to submit that:

In our school of Law, a woman has such rights, privileges and safeguards
for the past fourteen centuries, most of which were unimaginable in
non-Islamic societies up to the last century and some of which are ahead
of the so called modern time.

Islam, according to Shi’a school, has given a woman right to contract
herself in marriage if she is adult and discreet.

Islam has given the woman an independent identity. A Muslim woman owns
her property even after marriage and a husband cannot interfere with it.

She can sue her husband, can give evidence against him. She inherits
from him by right and he inherits from her. This mutual right of
inheritance was given when no society ever thought about it.

A woman's share is, normally, half of that of man. But this is quite
logical. Islam has made man responsible for the maintenance of his
family. No such burden is laid upon a woman.

Even a rich wife is entitled to get her maintenance from her husband
though he may be poor. As the maintenance of the family is the
responsibility of man, he has been given double share in almost all
inheritances.

The woman gets the 'Mahr' (it is not the 'bridge-price which is foreign
to Islamic thinking) which goes from husband to wife. The ratio of the
shares as laid down in the Qur'an is, therefore, most reasonable.

Islamic laws relating to will do not allow a person to will away more
than one third of his net estate. Thus the financial position of the
would-be heirs (including the wife) is always secure and beyond any
encroachment by any one. This security is still lacking in many
societies which allow a man to give all his estate even to a stranger.

Now coming to the White Paper itself, there is one proposal which in its
present form, cuts deep at the root of all religions. It is the
suggestion that "If a man cohabits with a woman for a period of more
than two years then he would be presumed to have married that Woman, and
if they have children such children would be deemed to be legitimate
children of such spouse."

If the intention is to provide safety to a genuine wife whose marriage
was not registered or whose marriage certificate was lost, the word
'co-habit' does not convey the idea.

It should be changed to "living together as man and wife in a family
atmosphere, provided it is possible for them to marry and one of the
spouses claims marriage which is not refuted by the other spouse; or in
case of death of either spouse, it is commonly known that they were
married and it is not proved that there was no marriage at all.

Also, as we have mentioned earlier, in Islam a wife has no
responsibility to maintain her husband. Thus the proposal of the White
paper to make the wife liable to maintain her husband goes completely
against Qur'anic injunctions.

As a debate is going on the question of polygamy, it is necessary to
reaffirm that we are fully convinced of the desirability, nay, and
essentiality of polygamy in many cases. African society, as the White
Paper rightly affirms, is a polygamous society. Islam agrees with it.
But Islam has put the limit to four wives at a time and has enjoined, by
specific regulations, equality in treatment and rights of all wives, as
the White Paper desires.

It should be remembered that polygamy is not a compulsory thing nor is
it advocated. It is just permission with certain limitation and
conditions. And in some of the circumstances this permission proves
extremely useful.

For example: If the wife is chronically ill, or is barren, or for some
other reasons it is not desirable for the couple to live as husband and
wife. The remedy offered by certain societies is to divorce the wife and
re-marry. But is this justice? Is it kind or noble to turn out a woman
in her old or middle age from her home, just because she remains sick or
happens to be barren?

Islam discourages such cruelty by permitting polygamy.

This is quite apart from the statistical findings that women out-number
men in Tanzania, 100 women to 95 men; or that in certain calamities,
like war, men have to face death more than the women. If polygamy is not
allowed by the society it will compel five per cent women in the country
to resort to prostitution.

We think this much will suffice to show the wisdom of the White Paper in
recognizing polygamy as a lawful and "useful" institution. But, in its
present form, the White Paper will not serve the required purpose.

What will happen if in spite of the conditions necessitating a second
marriage, the first wife refused to 'Voluntarily and freely agree to
convert the monogamous marriage” into a polygamous one? Will it not
force the man "into a position whereby he has either to divorce his
first wife or co-habit (illegally) with the other woman", with all its
inevitable undesirable effects?

A better course is to require the man to go to the proposed marriage
tribunal or board of his community and convince them of his needs. If
they agree, the refusal of the first wife should not be entertained at
all.

We assume that, as there is no question of changing the nature of
marriage in a Muslim marriage, a Muslim will not need the consent of his
first wife (or wives) before marrying another one.

Divorce
-------

There is no need to emphasize that in certain conditions divorce is the
only remedy left to a couple. The usefulness of the divorce system can
be seen from the fact that even Hindus and many Christians have been
compelled by sheer force of necessity to enact divorce laws.

The White Paper recognizes this necessity. Also it must be remembered
that Islam, while admitting of its necessity in some cases, has declared
it to be the "most abominable of all legal provisions" to be resorted to
in case of extreme hardship only.

The Qur'an has established the machinery for reconciliation, and many
Muslim communities have such committees. Unfortunately some quarters
have disregarded this important system completely. This abuse of the
legality of divorce must be stopped and the attempt of White Paper to
curb this tendency is very welcome.

Conditions of Divorce
---------------------

We must point out at the outset that the Shi’a Ithna-’Ashari school of
Islamic Laws has laid down strict rules based upon the Qur'an and
traditions concerning divorce. The divorce is allowed provided it is
pronounced in the presence of two "Adil" (men of approved probity)
witnesses who hear the words and understand the nature of divorce. The
divorce must be pronounced in approved formula.

Further, it is also necessary that the husband must be adult, sane, and
of sound understanding, acting on his own free will and not under the
fit of rage or duress, and that he should have the distinct intention to
dissolve the marriage.

So far as a wife is concerned, she at the time of divorce must be in a
state of purity, and that divorce cannot be pronounced even in a period
of purity in which the husband has had sexual intercourse with her.

If any of the above mentioned conditions is violated, the divorce is
null and void.

The Muslim law does not give the right of divorce to the woman. And any
suggestion that the woman should be given right to divorce her husband
is going to be an 'interference with religious precepts' which; the
White Paper repeatedly says, is not the intention of the Government.

A family is the basic society, and like every society, it needs a final
authority to maintain discipline and well-being of the members. Islam
has given that place to the husband who has been given right to give
divorce.

But a Muslim Woman is entitled to ask for dissolution of marriage or
even nullify it herself, in the following cases:-

• She can ask for 'Khula' which may be agreed upon by the husband;

• She can request the Mujtahid (who is the ‘Qadh’ in Shi’a Ithna-’Ashari
sheriat) to grant her divorce if the husband has disappeared, or
neglects to maintain her;

• She can cancel the marriage if the husband is insane, or becomes
insane after marriage.

• And she can nullify the marriage (after referring the case to the
Mujtahid) if the husband is impotent.

It will be necessary, while drafting the bill, to recognize the divorce
granted by the Mujtahid and the nullification of marriage so far as the
Shi’a Ithna-’Ashari marriages are concerned.

The above mentioned rules have a bearing on the provision of the White
Paper concerning the husband who has disappeared. The granting of
divorce by the Mujtahid (or in case of non-Ithna-’Asharis or non-Muslims
by the judge) is a far better solution than to presume the husband dead
(for the purpose of his marriage) and alive (for other purposes,
including the other marriages, if any) at one, and the same time!

As the White Paper rightly recognizes the divorce given by a Muslim
husband as final, and requires the court to register such divorce
without any further investigation, we want to emphasize that such
divorce should be effective from the date of pronouncement of the
formula of divorce by the husband, and not from the date of
registration.

The White Paper requires a Muslim intending to marry to give notice of
his intention, 21 days before, to "a Sheikh authorized by the Minister
to solemnize marriages."

It has overlooked the fact that a Muslim boy and girl can solemnize the
marriage themselves without any need to "call a Sheikh and ask him to
perform the marriage”. We are sure it is not the intention of the
Government to create a new version of Islam which would have
institutionalized clergy like Christianity. So why this reference to a
Sheikh authorized by the Minister? It is needless to say that this idea
goes extremely against Islam.

Also we fail to see any need for this proposal of *2*1 days notice.
Suppose a girl from Kigoma and a boy from Pangani (both presently
residing at Dar-es-Salaam) inform the priest of their community at
Dar-es-Salaam that they want to be married. That priest is not expected
to publish or announce the proposed marriage in newspapers or on radio.
So, how can he know if there is any legal hitch against that marriage?

And, after all, there will not be even one case of such illegal
intention in one thousand marriages. We think, it is better to omit this
provision and substitute it with another one to the effect that if it
becomes known even after marriage that they could not be married
lawfully, the marriage would be null and void from the beginning.

So far as the registration of marriage and divorce is concerned, in our
community marriage registers have been in existence for over 125 years,
and we issue the couples with the marriage certificates.

But we must emphasize most forcefully that the validity of the marriage
or divorce should not be made subject to registration. Non-registration
may be made an offence; but it should not affect the validity of the
marriage or divorce.

Likewise, in other respects also, if a marriage is correct, according to
religion, it should not be considered void if it contravenes any
conditions imposed by the White Paper. Otherwise, it would be a direct
interference in religion.

The purpose of this memorandum is to bring home to the Government that
enactment of laws should strive to preserve the religious laws of
different communities living under one flag, especially when such laws
have far reaching effect on such fundamentals as the marriage and family
life.

As we have pointed out earlier, in Islam the law and the religion are
inseparable, since our laws emanate from the Qur'an; needless to say
that if any law is enacted which contravenes either the Qur'anic
injunctions or the Hadith, it will naturally cause a considerable unrest
in the minds of the Muslim public and therefore the whole Muslim
community will be perturbed.

In the end, we would like to sum up our views as follows:-

We demand that instead of enacting a uniform law for all, the
"re-statement of Islamic Laws Act" should remain in force for the
Muslims and the Subsidiary Legislations under that Act be drafted,
published and given effect to as soon as possible.

So far as the proposals of this White Paper are concerned we completely
agree that "marriage must be a voluntary union" (para 6 of the English
version of White Paper); that the couple should not be within prohibited
degree of affinity or consanguinity (para 9); that "either espouse may
own his or her own separate property” (para 19); that the wife should be
able to give evidence against her husband (para 21); that there should
be provision of divorce "if the marriage has completely broken down" and
that the "divorces should not be treated lightly" (para 24); and that
there should be marriage conciliation boards and that due recognition
should be given to such boards which exist in venous communities prior
to the proposed new legislation," (para 25).

We agree to the following proposals with certain conditions and
qualifications:-

Minimum age of 15 and 18 years for the girls and boys respectively (para
7) and registration of marriage (para 17), and of divorce (para 27) are
good things and we agree with them provided, their violation does not
make a marriage or divorce null and void.

A Muslim's pronunciation of divorce formula is recognized in the White
Paper as the evidence of complete break-down of marriage and the court
is supposed to "issue a certificate dissolving the marriage.

We accept this proposal, provided the said certificate is retrospective
with effect from the date of pronouncement of the formula of divorce by
the husband.

We are in complete accord with the proposal to allow a monogamous
marriage to be converted into polygamous. But we do not think it
practical to insist on the consent of the first wife (para 12). The
husband should have a right to approach the proposed marriage board and
their decision should be final.

Also, we assume that a Muslim marriage being a potentially polygamous
one, a Muslim husband will not be governed by this provision.

We think that the proposal to presume a husband (who has disappeared for
5 years) as dead is not the sound one. The right way is to allow the
judge (or Mujtahid) to grant divorce if the circumstances demand it.

The right of the woman to demand divorce or dissolve or nullify the
marriage must be limited to the circumstances mentioned earlier in this
memorandum. Any legislation going beyond that limit will be a direct
interference in our religion.

We vehemently denounce the proposal that co-habiting with a woman for
any period (the limit of 2 years is quite arbitrary) makes the couple
legally husband and wife. Unless the wording is changed as proposed in
para 11 of this memorandum, this proposal cannot be acceptable.

We totally disagree with the proposal of making wife responsible to
maintain her husband (para 19).

We think that the proposal requiring 21 days notice is absolutely
useless, and coupled, in case of the Muslims, with the phrase "notice
would be sent to the Sheikh, who is authorized by the Minister to
solemnize marriage" acquires a very alarming note, as it appears to
establish an institutionalized clergy which is absolutely against
Islamic fundamentals. Therefore, we cannot agree with it.


