A Glance At the Author’s Biography
==================================

Written by Allama Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq as-Sadr

The previous head of the Legal Ja’fari Cassation counsel

The Islamic world today highly appreciates the personality of the late
great mujtahid[^1] Sayyid Abdul Husayn Sharafuddeen, who has made himself
as an entail for the sake of the public Islamic benefit.

This beloved personality, with its greatness and fame, has filled the
sights and hearings when the life has been flourished with the useful
existence of this great man.

The time has folded this bright page but its fragrance is still
spreading with its abundant knowledge, great effects, benevolent works
and august services for the sake of Allah, the religion and the nation.
This great man strove and endeavored as possible as he could along his
life inviting the Muslims to unite, to agree with each other and to
avoid the bad sectarianism through his eloquent speeches, crowded
meetings and valuable eternal books.

The first work of him was before half a century. It was his book
“Al-Fusool al-Muhimma fee Ta’leef al-Umma”, which he had written in 1327
A.H. He thought of the solidarity of the umma, in a time when no one
thought of it except a very few learned persons of that age. He [^1]
Mujtahid is a person accepted in Shiism as an authority on the
interpretation of Islamic law.

(14)

discussed then in his “al-Fusool al-Muhimma” the obstacles that acted
as stumbling blocks in the way of the unity of the umma. He uncovered
those obstacles in a clear eloquence and decisive proofs, which did not
let any way to suspicion and doubt. Al-Fusool al-Muhimma was a book of
clear scientific facts, which the imam of the knowledge and eloquence
had formed in his bright Alawite literary style in order to unite the
umma under the banner of monotheism and solidarity. Those discussions
were accurate in thinking and eloquent in expressing that they were as
something new for the Islamic studies before that date.

Those studies, in their noble Islamic aim, are to be in every house to
guide the straying, to lead the confused and to direct people to the way
of Ahlul Bayt,[^1] whom Allah has purified from uncleanness and who have
been the equivalents of the Book and the leaders of the umma to the
truth and to the straight path.

Two years after his book had been published, Sayyid Sharafuddeen
traveled to Egypt to invite for the Islamic unity through his speeches
and moving sayings. His hopes had been refreshed by the Egyptians
discussions and the Azharite “muraja’at”,[^2] which had happened between
him and the allama of Egypt Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri, the head of
al-Azhar University. Those friendly meetings had solved many problems
and questions.

They both had exchanged their passions to each other and each of them
had found in his friend abundant knowledge, magnanimity and
determination to invite for unity that had to be among the fair ulama.
As a result of those discussions and reviews was the book of
“al-Muraja’at” by Sayyid Sharafuddeen that had spread allover the
Islamic world in several editions.

A very fine saying was said by Sayyid Sharafuddeen in the beginning of
his book al-Muraja’at about these meetings. He said: “How well it is
when the ulama meet with pure spirits, pleasing sayings and

[^1] Ahlul Bayt: the Prophet’s progeny (s).
[^2] Al-Azhar is a centre of Islamic and Arabic learning centered on the
mosque of that name in Cairo, Egypt. Muraja’at means reviews.

(15)

prophetic morals! Whenever an aalim[^1] is in this neat garment, he will
be in goodness and blessing and people will be in safe and mercy. No one
of people will refrain from telling such an aalim of his real opinion or
what there is inside him. Such was the aalim and imam of Egypt and such
were our meetings, which we thanked infinitely.

I complained to him my passion and he complained to me the same thing.
It was a lucky hour that inspired to us to think of something, by which
Allah might reunite the umma. Among what we had agreed upon was that the
two sects; the Shia and the Sunni were Muslims believing in pure Islam.
They are equal in what the Prophet (s) has brought and there is no
difference between them concerning a basic origin of the religion that
may spoil their belief in pure Islam and there is no dispute between
them except for the differences between the mujtahids concerning some
verdicts due to their different points of views in interpreting those
verdicts out of the Qur’an, the Sunna, the consensus and the fourth
evidence (reason) and all these differences do not lead to separation
(between the Muslims) nor to serious disputes. There is no any reason
for this dispute, whose sparks have scattered since the existence of
these two names; Sunni and Shia.”

In such a high Islamic spirit our master Sayyid Sharafuddeen acted
throughout his life, whose long years did not add to him save
determination and insistence on this path.

It was for this continuous Islamic jihad that we found the different
Islamic sects had agreed on loving and appreciating him and on looking
at him with admiration and respect.

And now his name is gratified by every tongue and his eternal books are
in every house and are read by all people, who compete to have them and
to present them to anyone looking forward to the high Islamic culture.

Libraries and presses here and there make reading these books easy and
offer them to the readers in the best way that fits their [^1] Aalim is
the singular form of ulama. Aalim is a jurisprudent or a scholar.

(16)

importance. May Allah make the all succeed in the way of goodness and
righteousness.

Here we show in summary the biography of this great man, whose life has
been filled with glory, lessons and examples, so that to make this
bright page as lessons teaching the umma jihad, unity, sincerity,
cordiality and devoutness for the sake of the general Islamic welfare,
to which Sayyid Sharafuddeen has devoted his long life. We pray Allah to
help us in serving Him and achieving His rights.

What we mention here is a drop from an ocean of what we have known
about this man. May Allah benefit His people with this man’s knowledge
and pen and make the umma walk in his guidance and act according to his
sayings, maxims and instructions.

**His birth and upbringing**

Sayyid Sharafuddeen was born in Kadhimiyya[^1] in 1290 A.H. from Alawite
parents. His father was the great allama Sayyid Yousuf Sharafuddeen and
his mother was Az-Zahra’ the daughter of ayatollah Sayyid Al-Hadi
As-Sadr the father of the great religious authority Sayyid al-Hasan
as-Sadr (may Allah have mercy upon them all).

The lineage of Sayyid Sharafuddeen[^2] from his two parents reaches to
Imam Musa al-Kadhim[^3] (s). Muhammad al-Awwal (the first) is the [^1] In
Iraq.

[^2] He is Sayyid Sharafuddeen bin (the son of) Sayyid Yousuf bin Sayyid
Jawad bin Sayyid Issma’eel bin Muhammad the grandfather of the two
families aal (the family of) as-Sadr and aal Sharafuddeen bin Sayyid
Ibraheem (surnamed as Sharafuddeen) bin Sayyid Zaynul Aabideen bin
Sayyid Ali Nooruddeen bin Sayyid Nooruddeen Ali bin Sayyid Izzuddeen
al-Husayn bin Sayyid Muhammad bin Sayyid al-Husayn bin Sayyid Ali bin
Sayyid Muhammad bin Sayyid Tajuddeen (known as Abul Hasan) bin Sayyid
Muhammad (surnamed as Shamsuddeen) bin Sayyid Abdullah (surnamed as
Jalaluddeen) bin Sayyid Ahmad bin Sayyid Hamza bin Sayyid Sa’dullah bin
Sayyid Hamza bin Abul Sa’adat Muhammad bin Abu Abdullah (the chief of
the chiefs of the Talibites in Baghdad) bin Abul Harth Muhammad bin Abul
Hasan Ali (known as Ibnul Daylamiyya) bin Abu Tahir bin al-Husayn
al-Qat’iy bin Musa Abu Sibha bin Ibraheem al-Murtadha bin Imam al-Kadhim
bin Imam as-Sadiq bin Imam al-Baqir bin Imam Zaynul Aabideen (as-Sajjad)
bin Imam Abu Abdullah al-Husayn bin Imam Ali bin Abu Talib (peace be
upon them all).

[^3] He is the Seventh imam of the Shia.

(17)

son of the great mujtahid Sayyid Ibraheem (surnamed as Sharafuddeen),
who is the common grandfather of the two families; aal[^1] as-Sadr and
aal Sharafuddeen. These two families were together in Baghdad known at
that time as aal al-Husayn al-Qat’iy, from which was the family of the
two great scholars Sharif al-Murtadha and Sharif ar-Radhiy.

In his honorable grandfather Sayyid al-Hadi’s house, Sayyid
Sharafuddeen was born under the care of his grandfather. He was beloved
and preferred by his grandfather and by the all. His uncle (my father)
Sayyid Muhammad al-Husayn as-Sadr[^2] was his mate and friend. They
learned together because they were near in age, aim and thinking.

Beside them (in the school of the house) was his (Sayyid
Sharafuddeen’s) youngest aunt[^3] participating them their learning,
studying and discussing. Sayyid Sharafuddeen often mention that with too
much pride.

[^1] Aal means “the family of”.
[^2] He was born in Kadhimiyya in 1288 A.H. and died in it in 1330
A.H.
[^3] She (may Allah have mercy upon her) was an example of virtue,
intelligence, good memory, quick-witted, honesty and piety. She composed
poetry in standard and colloquial Arabic. She was interested in holding
meeting of consolation in Ashura (the tenth day of Muharram when Imam
al-Husayn had been martyred) and the anniversaries of the deaths of the
infallible imams in her house. The reciters (women) used to recite her
poetry, which she composed for those occasions, in those meetings. Women
often referred to her about the legal questions. On every event, she
quoted for the women the fatwa of her brother Imam al-Hasan as-Sadr,
whom she followed in her taqlid.

She was buried in the private graveyard of aal as-Sadr beside her
father and relatives’ tombs. Her death caused wide sorrow in Baghdad and
Kadhimiyya and for Sayyid Sharafuddeen, who was in Aamila in Lebanon. He
held a meeting of consolation there and many famous personalities of the
country had attended the meeting, at the head of whom was the great
mujtahid Sheikh Abdul Husayn aal Sadiq, who had recited his wonderful
poem, in which he had mentioned the dead woman’s brother Imam al-Hasan
as-Sadr. He recited:

An imam but if no “No” was there We could say he was a prophet getting
wisdom from the Best of the wise

(18)

**His study**

In the eighth year of his old his father Yousuf returned to Aamila[^1]
after he had finished his studies and got a certificate of absolute
ijtihad[^2] from the ulama of Iraq. His mother wished to stay near her
family (in Iraq) to educate her only son (Sayyid Sharafuddeen) and to
prepare for him the suitable sphere beside his grandfather and his uncle
but his father did not agree to this wish because of his great love to
him (to his son). He promised her that he himself would educate him and
then he would send him back to Iraq in the proper time. She accepted
this condition.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen kept to his father and learned from him what he
needed of sciences of the Arabic language, logic, eloquence, Fiqh and
Usool.[^3] His name shone among his fellow boys and his superiority was
known while he was too young yet.

When Sayyid Sharafuddeen became seventeen years old, his father married
him to his uncle’s daughter (the mother of allama Sayyid Muhammad
Ali[^4]) and then sent him to Iraq to complete his studies.

In a few years Sayyid Sharafuddeen became very well-known in ijtihad
and in accuracy and firmness of evidencing in arguments and
deliberations. He became famous in deciding lessons of Fiqh and Usool
profoundly, quick-wittedly and quick-derivationally. He solved difficult
questions in a shortest way leading to the intended aim.

[^1] In Lebanon.
[^2] In Islamic law, the independent or original interpretation of
problems not precisely covered by the Qur’an, Hadith (traditions
concerning the Prophet's life and utterances), and scholarly consensus;
therefore the mujtahids (qualified jurists) had the right to give their
personal judgments on the problems, after trying their best in
researching, depending on firm evidences and proofs derived from the
legal sources of the Shariah.
[^3] Fiqh: jurisprudence, Usool: basic principles of religion.
[^4] He was one of the prominent scholars. He was born in Najaf (in
Iraq) in 1318 A.H. and died in Mountain Aamil (in Lebanon) after a long
disease. He wrote an important book called Sheikhul Abtah about the
biography of Abu Talib (Imam Ali’s father) and the evidences that proved
his faith and high position in Islam. It was one of the profoundest
Islamic studies showing the great intelligence of its author and his
high culture and wide knowledge. The book was published in Baghdad when
the author was still in Iraq
(19)

He wrote many researches on fiqh while he was in holy Najaf in a style
like the style of the book Madarikul Ahkam fee Sharh Shara’i’ul Islam,
which had been written by his uncle Sayyid Muhammad bin Ali bin
al-Husayn,[^1] who was known of his great knowledge, his high ability in
deriving verdicts and discussing the problems of fiqh in a scientific
way showing his accuracy and discernment in dealing with difficult
problems and vague matters. Sayyid Sharafuddeen had learned from other
than the ulama of Iraq such as Aakhund Mulla Muhammad Kadhim
al-Khurasani, Sheikh ash-Sharee’a al-Isfahani, Sayyid Kadhim al-Yazdi
and the two great authorities Sayyid Issma’eel as-Sadr[^2] and his uncle
Sayyid Hasan as-Sadr and their likes of the ulama and leaders of the
umma.

He asked his grandfather ayatollah Sayyid al-Hadi[^3] too much questions
about everything. Sayyid Sharafuddeen said in his book Bughyatur
Raghibeen about his grandfather: “…as for the sciences of Arabic
language, he was unequalled especially in meanings and rhetoric. I
always made use of his knowledge about what I could not understand from
the problems of (al-Mutawwal) by at-Taftazani. He guided me to them with
the light of his eloquence and the brightness of his evidences and then
those problems became to me as bright as the sun. How often I referred
to him about the difficult matters in logic and sciences of the Arabic
language and he pleased me and droved my doubts away. He, though lofty
and old, came to argue with [^1] Sayyid Muhammad, the author of Madarikul
Ahkam, died in 1206 A.H. when he was eighty-eight years old. He was the
brother of our grandfather Sayyid Nooruddeen Ali from his father and our
grandfather was the brother of Sheikh Hasan, the author of al-Ma’alim,
from his mother. [^2] Sayyid Issma’eel as-Sadr died in 1338 A.H. Sayyid
Hasan as-Sadr was born in Kadhimiyya in 1272 A.H. and died in 1354 A.H.
Each of them was a general imam and authority for the Shia allover the
Islamic world.

[^3] He was born in 1235 A.H. and died in 1316. He was buried in his
private graveyard in the yard of the holy shrine of Imam Kadhim (s) in
Kadhimiyya-Baghdad. His biography had been mentioned in al-Bughya in
details and also had been mentioned in Takmilatul Amal written by his
son Imam al-Hasan as-Sadr. A’lam ash-Shia and Takmilatul Amal is a book
including biographies of thousands of the Shia ulama of the different
ages. This book shows the greatness of the Shia and their high position
in knowledge and the eternity of their ulama in history. It is one of
the best books of biographies.

(20)

me pleasantly, went on debating with me delightfully and forced me to
argue with him. I swear by his high morals and his sacredness that I
have never asked him about a problem or a question, unless I found the
answer ready with him without needing to refer to any book as if he has
prepared before and got ready to the answer.”

Sayyid Sharafuddeen studied and researched too much and asked too much
about the difficult problems whenever he met a great jurisprudent. It
showed his care, accuracy and his love to debate and to get use.

When arguing about a subject, he did not like to dispute, to refute or
to criticize uselessly but he offered a matter in order to get benefit
and to make other get benefit without priding before the others or
trying to hurt the feelings of the others when a dispute flared-up. He
was known as abundant in knowledge and firm in evidence. He seldom
participated in an argument, unless he was the winner. This had made a
prestige for him among all people and a sanctum inside the hearts
whenever scientific arguments flared-up.

Whenever he participated in arguments, he respected the others and
listened to them carefully and he never made anyone feel that he was
proud before him due to his knowledge or position but he treated him as
an opponent to a rival even there was a great difference between them in
all criteria. When he became twenty-three years old, he became one of
the notable mujtahids. He became well-known in the scientific milieu in
a way that seldom a jurisprudent got such a position in these few years
of old.

His infinite ijtihad was one of the agreed-upon facts among all of his
fellows and those, who had been acquainted with him. At his age there
was no one in holy Najaf from the personalities of Aamila that had
equaled him in his virtue, fame and being loved and respected by all
people.

His learning was not limited in Najaf, but he often moved between
Najaf, Kadhimiyya, Samarra’ and Kerbala’[^1] and met with the ulama,

[^1] Najaf, Kadhimiyya, Samarra’ and Kerbala’ are religious centers in
Iraq.

(21)

mujtahids and brilliant students of those centers. This made his name
be mentioned in every scientific forum or any meeting of literature.
Before he left Najaf, he had sent for his brother the great allama
Sayyid Shareef in order to take care of him and to instruct him before
going back to Aamila. He loved him very much besides that he set great
hopes on him because he had found that he was brilliant and too eager to
learn more and more.

Sayyid Shareef did not disappoint his brother. He got ready seriously
to study and learn. Only a few years passed when the Sayyid began to
feel his favors and high position in his emigrant abode.

He went back to Aamila and his absolute ijtihad was confessed by the
great mujtahids. Besides his abundant knowledge, he was a poet from the
first class. His poetry was delicate, clear, firm, accurate in meaning,
eloquent in wording and wonderful in style.

Sayyid Shareef went back to his father and brother and the all gathered
together. The scientific debates were held again between the father and
his two sons as if they were between brothers and friends. They
reactivated with their debates their old times when once they were in
their scientific place of emigration.

Dispute and disagreement about scientific matters might arise between
them but their faces always appeared smiling and their hearts were full
of indulgence. Some tears might fall down from the father’s eyes out of
happiness and the two sons wiped them and bowed to kiss the father’s
hands. The father seemed happy and contented. He began invoking Allah to
benefit the umma with them and with their knowledge.

But alas! This happiness did not last long. Sayyid Sharafuddeen lost
his father and soon after a short time he was afflicted by the loss of
his brother Sayyid Shareef. This great loss took away his patience and
endurance though he was a mountain that could not be shaken by violent
storms. He often recited his brother’s emotional poetry and tears fell
down.

(22)

He became distressed with pains and greifs but he turned to Allah
thanking Him in any case and resorting to His power. Glory Be to Him.

**His return to Mountain Aamil**

Sayyid Yousuf Sharafuddeen contacted with the ulama of Iraq, in whom he
had trusted, asking them about his son to know their opinion about his
knowledge and piety. They replied certifying his son’s abundant
knowledge, high morals, wide information and unequalled piety that
pleased the father’s heart, delighted his eyes and comforted his
conscience.

The clear answers of the ulama which certified the absolute ijtihad of
the son made the father ask the son to come back to his country because
of the urgent need for his ijtihad, knowledge, teaching and reforming.
The son had not save to obey his father’s order although he was eager to
stay longer or in fact forever in Iraq, the country of his uncles and
cousins and the place of his birth, growing up and studying.

He returned to the country and the day of his return was a witnessed
day in the history of Aamila. He was received by the ulama, the leaders
and the public until the boundaries of the Mountain from the highway of
Sham.[^1] The people of the villages of Aamila came from everywhere until
the city of Soor became overcrowded with the welcomers and the groups
that had come to receive Sayyid Sharafuddeen acclaiming with la ilaha
illallah and allahu akbar[^2] as if they were like the first Muslims when
they had received the Prophet (s) when he arrived at Mecca.

The moon shone to us from Thaniyyatul Wada’

Thanking (Allah) became due as long as a caller would

invite for Allah
[^1] Nowadays Damascus. But then, Sham encompassed the present Syria,
Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine.
[^2] There is no God but Allah and Allah is great.

(23)

The coming of Sayyid Sharafuddeen to Soor was a cause for people to
hold meetings and an incentive for Sayyid Sharafuddeen to visit his
brothers of the great ulama, who recalled-by the return of the Sayyid-
their previous days of learning and studying, and so they got ready
again to debate and discuss the accurate useful matters. Those debates
showed his great scientific ability, which appeared via his correct
opinions through the discussions and exchange of views. People took a
clear and live impression about the scientific personality of Sayyid
Sharafuddeen and so his name was mentioned by every tongue.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen found some freedom near his father. The father
sometimes went to Shahh00r and sometimes he was seen in Soor. The
atmosphere of the meeting was a scientific atmosphere. They discussed
the necessary matters together because people were in need to know how
to deal with such matters.

At the first when returning to his country Sayyid Sharafuddeen stopped
establishing legal verdicts (fatwa) and he just tried to end the
disputes of people peacefully regarding the position of his father, who
was so cautious in establishing verdicts although he was one of the
great mujtahids. People were obliged to go to Shaqra’ to ask about their
affairs the great religious authority at that time Sayyid Ali
al-Ameen,[^1] who wrote to Sayyid Yousuf telling him that his son was
just and absolute mujtahid and that he had not found his equal among the
ulama of Aamila. Then people began to go to Sayyid Sharafuddeen for
their affairs regarding his high position. His father himself asked
disputers to go to his son whenever it was necessary.

In a few years his name spread everywhere and his fame filled the
country and he became a great authority in issuing fatwas and [^1] Sayyid
Ali al-Ameen had gone to great mujtahid and highest authority at that
time Sayyid Muhammad Hasan ash-Shirazi to get permission (in ijtihad)
but Sayyid ash-Shirazi referred him to his disciple, who was entrusted
with such tasks, ayatollah Sayyid Hasan as-Sadr. After some
deliberations he was permitted to be as absolute mujtahid. The
permission was offered to al-Mirza, who signed it. Sayyid al-Ameen was
the only one among the ulama of Aamila, who had got certificate, which
paved the way to him to have the absolute scientific and public
leadership in Aamila after his return to it from Iraq.

(24)

answering different problems.

**His travel to Egypt**

Sayyid Sharafuddeen had traveled to Egypt twice. The first time was in
1329 A.H. and the second was in 1920 AD. after issuing his fatwa of
jihad against the French and being sentenced to death by them.

In the first time he went to visit Egypt with his uncle (my father)
Sayyid Muhammad Husayn as-Sadr. My uncle had told us about this visit
when mentioning the biography of his uncle in his book Bughyatul
Raghibeen. He said: “In 1329 A.H. he liked to tour. He began his tours
with visiting the Kaaba to offer the hajj and to be honored by visiting
good Medina. He was too eager to offer hajj and to visit the sacred
places. Then he refreshed the old times and humored his loving fellows,
who celebrated his being among them in an unequalled way. This made my
mother so happy and glad that she found in him the delight of her eyes
and the joy of her heart.

Then after sometime he sailed from Beirut to Egypt. I was with him to
prepare all his affairs. Our travel got great results that served the
religion and the belief of the Shia. It might be the best travel with
best results and benefits.” Sayyid Sharafuddeen had mentioned what had
happened between him and the great professor Sheikh Saleem al-Bishri,
the jurisprudent of Egypt and the sheikh of al-Azhar at that time.

As a result of those deliberations the book al-Muraja’at was written by
Sayyid Sharafuddeen. It spread in seven editions throughout the Islamic
world. It was one of the best works known in the present age in the
field of the Islamic studies through its abundant knowledge, profundity
of research, clarity of intention, firmness of style and eloquence of
thinking and expressing.

The second time he resorted to Egypt after he had been sentenced to
death by French authorities, that found his existence in Lebanon
dangerous to their benefits and as an obstacle in the way of their
imperial efforts and aims. The ulama, the men of letters and the Islamic
learned groups, who had known about him since before, welcomed him so
warmly in (25) Egypt. He invited for Islamic unity and mutual
understanding between all the sects. It was he, who had said his eternal
word about the two sects; the Shia and the Sunni: “Politics has
separated them, so let politics gather them.” Allama Sayyid Rasheed
Redha had recorded this word in his magazine (al-Manar) at that time
regarding highly this Islamic spirit of Sayyid Sharafuddeen.

**His national jihad**

The jihad of Sayyid Sharafuddeen at the time of the Ottomans was
limited to religious jihad because the government in Lebanon was a
Muslim government offering religious rituals as they had been
established by Islam. But when the French came, they occupied the
country, spread corruption, annulled the Islamic laws and controlled
people against their own will where no one could be remain silent before
such a status. Sayyid Sharafuddeen began warning people of that
oppression and injustice and began holding meeting with those, whom he
had trusted and felt their support and national magnanimity inciting to
what honorable situations the nation was in need of.

No doubt that the spiritual class was the first to volunteer to
undertake this duty where it had the public and absolute religious
leadership. Sayyid Sharafuddeen thought to begin with the ulama first,
deliberating about a consolidated plan that should be regarded by the
all. He invited them to a congress held in Wadi al-Hajeer. The ulama and
leaders of the country had attended the congress. Sayyid Sharafuddeen
issued a fatwa of announcing jihad. The all supported his fatwa and then
they went back to their towns preparing their firm plans against the
French as possible as the circumstances allowed to.

People began to come to Sayyid Sharafuddeen’s house signing protest
notes confirming their objection to the French rule and requesting full
independence.

The French knew about the matter. They sent Ibnul Hallaj, who was a
Christian from Soor, to break into Sayyid Sharafuddeen’s house, to

(26)

assassinate him and to take whatever documents asking for independence
he would find. Sayyid Sharafuddeen knew that, so he gave all the
documents he had to his mother. Ibnul Hallaj did not find anything he
looked for. When he tried to attack Sayyid Sharafuddeen, Sayyid
Sharafuddeen knocked him down to the ground so he went back disappointed
and shameful.

People heard of breaking into Sayyid Sharafuddeen’s house. They
gathered from all the villages of Aamila until the city of Soor became
overcrowded with them. Sayyid Sharafuddeen thanked them for their high
sentiment and national spirit. He asked them to go back to where they
had come from. They came back waiting for his obeyed order.

When the crowd separated and the French knew the intents of Sayyid
Sharafuddeen, they sent a great army toward the village of Shahhor,
where Sayyid Sharafuddeen had gone to. They burned his house there.
Before that, they had occupied his house in Soor and plundered his big
library, which had the most valuable printed and manuscript books
especially his own manuscripts that had been written by himself, which
we referred to previously. When the army entered Shahhor, Sayyid
Sharafuddeen was there but he hastened to leave putting his aba over his
turban and Allah blinded the army not to see him. He reached a cave[^1]
near the river and hid in it all the day and when he knew that the army
had left he returned to Shahhor under the darkness. He spent the night
there and then he left towards Sham disguisedly and he reached there
peacefully. King Faysal the First welcomed his guest warmly and honored
him in a good way.

[^1] It is said that this is the same cave, in which one of Sayyid
Sharafuddeen’s grandfathers has hidden when fleeing from al-Haza’ir, the
famous tyrant, and Allah has saved him from the injustice of the
arrogant when he has set out towards Iraq resorting to his infallible
grandfathers.

(27)

**In Damascus**

When Sayyid Sharafuddeen settled down in Damascus, he sent for his
family and relatives, who joined him soon. The name of Sayyid
Sharafuddeen became so famous and known until he became one of the
leaders of intellect and thinking. He made speeches in many occasions
that raised his position among all classes of people. These speeches
showed his great knowledge and apposite thinking. His house in
as-Salihiyya quarter in his country was always open for people. People
of different classes always went to him.

People of Salihiyya found in this man benevolence and kindness as if he
was their kind father, who carried out their affairs. He found them in
need for money and knowledge so he aided the poor and taught the
children in a school established in a simple house to educate the rising
generation.

What drew the attentions was the visits of the high officials to him in
his hose where no one of them had ever visited any of the ulama before
him. Yousuf al-Adhma (the martyr of Maysaloon) often visited Sayyid
Sharafuddeen and admired him and admired his situations too much. After
the French had occupied Sham, Sayyid Sharafuddeen was obliged to leave
to Palestine and then to Egypt after he had sent his family and
relatives to Mountain Aamil spreading here and there.

**In Egypt**

Sayyid Sharafuddeen arrived at Egypt disguising in ordinary Arabic
uniform with a kaffieh and a headband like the usual uniform of the
people in Iraq.

He attended one of the celebrations that was crowded with people. He
was still in his formal Arabic uniform when he ascended the minbar and
said: “If I do not stop where the army of death crowds,

then let my feet not take me to the way of highness!”

(28)

People began clapofping so loudly. He felt that they thought it was
him, who had said this verse. He followed up saying: “May Allah have
mercy upon the poet of Ahlul Bayt, Sayyid Haydar al-Hilli when saying:
If I do not stop where the army of death crowds,

then let my feet not take me to the way of highness!” Then clapping
rose again louder than before. Admiration increased from everywhere. He
began his speech with his orotund voice and his prophetic manners and
Alawite utterance. He pleased the crowds with his high eloquence and
bright evidences. He controlled words and meanings however he liked.

This led people to ask and to insist on asking about the great
personality of this man, whom they felt his great virtue even though he
had disguised behind a kaffieh and a headband. Whispers and inquiries
increased until one of them announced that he (Sayyid Sharafuddeen) was
the man of knowledge, patriotism and devotion. He was the brave hero. He
was the fighter, who had fought against the imperialists. He was the son
of Haydar al-Karrar.[^1] He was Sayyid Abdul Husayn Sharafuddeen.

Among the attendants of the celebration there was the famous writer Mey
Ziyada. Sayyid Sharafuddeen’s playing with his ring on his finger during
making his speech drew her attention. She said: “I do not know whether
the ring is more obedient to his finger or eloquence is more obedient to
his tongue!”

**In Palestine**

Sayyid Sharafuddeen thought to be nearer to his country, so he left
Egypt at the end of 1338 A.H. to a village in Palestine called Alma
lying near the boundaries of Mountain Aamil and it was under the rule of
the British. His house there was as his house in Soor. It was always
visited by people. It was the abode of guests and the destination of
needy [^1] It was one of Imam Ali's surnames.

(29)

people. Meetings were held in it besides deliberations on knowledge,
literature, politics and different affairs. It was a strange chance that
Sayyid Sharafuddeen was in Alma fleeing from the rule of the French
while Sayyid Muhammad as-Sadr was in Lebanon fleeing from the rule of
the British and both of these two leaders had fought against the
imperialists and had been sentenced to death.

Sayyid Muhammad as-Sadr found that the nearness of Alma to Mountain
Aamil would give him a good opportunity to meet with Sayyid Sharafuddeen
at the boundaries of Palestine. He sent his messenger and companion in
jihad Mawlood Mukhlis[^1] to Sayyid Sharafuddeen informing him of Sayyid
Muhammad as-Sadr’s wish to visit him but Sayyid Sharafuddeen did not
prefer this meeting for fear of the British and he put off this visit
until a suitable time when the circumstances would permit that. You will
see the details of this event later on inshallah.

**His return to his country (Mountain Aamil)**

Sayyid as-Sadr chose to live in Lebanon when he had been sentenced to
death. The French knew his high position among the leaders and the
public and knew the high position of his father Sayyid al-Hasan as-Sadr
and his great religious authority, to which the Shia allover the Islamic
world referred to. All that made them respect and regard Sayyid
(Muhammad) as-Sadr so highly.

Sayyid Muhammad as-Sadr seized the opportunity and asked them (the
French) to pardon Sayyid Sharafuddeen and to let him come back to his
country, which was awaiting for him impatiently. Sayyid as-Sadr
succeeded in his task. Here we quote the saying of Sayyid Sharafuddeen
in his book Bughyatur Raghibeen when talking about the history of that
period. He said under the title of (as-Sadr in Damascus): “When he
found

[^1] Mawlood Basha came to Alma wearing ordinary Arabic cloths
pretending as if he was a merchant of sheep. He went to Sayyid
Sharafuddeen’s house as a guest. No one of the people of the village
felt anything about this guest because they had accustomed to see guests
from different classes in the house of Sayyid Sharafuddeen.

(30)

that he could not stand longer against the power of the British, Sayyid
as-Sadr retreated from his lair with some ulama and leaders of intellect
in Iraq and began roving in the deserts with no provisions save the
provision of a faithful soul and a firm determination. Days and nights
passed with these men following after the guides of sons of deserts.

When he reached Sham, he had in Damascus a house, which became as a
house of a generous leader, who came and went high respectedly. Between
the celebration of the patriots and the welcome of the French, he kept
on his peaceful jihad and his leadership turned into an intellectual
front, via which he wrote bills and sent telegrams to the League of
Nations and to everyone having anything to do with the Iraqi case, which
had to be settled in the bets way. During that time he had visited
Mountain Aamil, which had been still looking forward to meet him and so
eager to see him. The people crowded around him getting from his
guidance and celebrating to welcome and glorify him. Wonderful
celebrations were held in Sayda (Sidon), Soor, Nabatiyya, Bint Jubayl
and Shahhor. Speechers and poets did well in praising him and showing
his virtues and aspects of his rising. We then were like him. He had
fled from Iraq and we had fled from Lebanon for the sake of Allah. He
wished to meet with us when we were in Palestine but the caution for my
self from the French and for him from the British prevented me from
meeting him. He met the French leaders, who respected him, and
interceded for me with them and so I could return to my country. The
High Commissioner General Gorou regarded him too much. We returned to
Lebanon after he had returned to Iraq.”

Thus Sayyid Sharafuddeen had recorded that period, which had preceded
his return to his country with faithfulness and fidelity. It was not
strange to the high morals of that great man.

The returns of the two Sayyids to their countries were celebrated by
their peoples splendidly as if they were unequalled events.

Poets competed to show their feelings in live poetry, which was of the
best poetry of the present age.

A group of great men of literature, who had not participated in any
celebration of literature before, participated in those celebrations,

(31)

which were full of eternal Arabic literature, just because of their
sentiments agitated with sincerity and allegiance that made them
announce their sentiments before the public. That was because of the
great patriotic sacrifices of these two men that had glorified the fame
of their countries in the world of history.

Poetry in the two countries was the same in the aim and feelings
towards these two leaders. Poets often congratulated with their poems
the great religious authority Sayyid Hasan as-Sadr, who was the father
of Sayyid Muhammad as-Sadr and the uncle of Sayyid Sharafuddeen. When
Sayyid Sharafuddeen returned to his country after his jihad, he became
the absolute leader for people in their affairs of life and religion as
one of the poets had said:

**Leadership came to him submissively**

It did not fit save him and he did not fit save it.

**His delving in traditions**

The ulama were interested in studying the prophetic traditions
throughout all the ages. They distinguished the true ones from the
fabricated ones. They knew the reliable and the unreliable narrators as
well with no difference in that between the Shia and the Sunni but the
Shia added to the traditions of the Prophet (s) the traditions narrated
from Ahlul Bayt (s) because they were from their grandfather’s
traditions. In fact Ahlul Bayt (s) were as copies of their grandfather
Muhammad (s).

Sayyid Sharafuddeen was not limited to the traditions of his imams and
their narrators only but also he studied thoroughly the traditions
mentioned by our Sunni brothers. Whoever referred to any of his books or
works would find this fact clearly. The ones from among our Sunni
brothers, whom he depended on in mentioning traditions, were too many.
He mentioned them in his thesis Thabtul Athbat fee Silsilatur Riwat.

I think that what he has written to confirm the principles of his
doctrine is nonesuch and unequalled in our present age.

(32)

The last of what he had written was his book an-Nass wel-Ijtihad, which
if you read, you will feel that when he has written it, he was at the
top of intellect and at the utmost skill of expression and description.
He delved so deeply into research and argument until he made one feel
that his ideas, expressions and patience in researching and inquiring
had not known any meaning of weakness or being aged. This is the aspect
of the exalted intellectual ulama of the progeny of Ahlul Bayt (s),
whose bodies become old whereas their minds still supply the life with
power and activity throughout the ages.

**His letters**

His letters were distinguished by eloquence, honest aims and variety of
subjects such as knowledge, literature, guidance, sociology,
jurisprudence, history, sermons and maxims.

Sometimes he sent to his sons in their institute in Holy Najaf[^1]
letters full of paternal and educational guidance and all what a student
of religious studies needed of sermons, maxims and instructions to light
his way and sometimes he sent letters to his followers in their
countries of emigration, in which he sent to them paternal
recommendations to unite on one aim and to be like a compact structure.
His scientific institute (Ja’fari College) was the seed of these liberal
emigrants.

Sometimes he sent letters to the kings, leaders, politicians and
officials. He advised them as a responsible alim who had to advise the
officials to act with justice among the people, to help wronged people
and to take lessons from the past and from the experiences of the
others. His letter to King Husayn after losing his rule was one of the
most eloquent letters that had ever been written by the Arabs. It was a
long letter having a historical record of what Ahlul Bayt (s) had
faced

[^1] In Holy Najaf there were Sayyid Sharafuddeen’s sons; the great
allama Sayyid Muhammad Ali and his two brothers the genius poet Sayyid
Muhammad Redha and the famous writer of the Arabs Sayyid Sadruddeen and
their cousin allama Sayyid Nooruddeen Sharafuddeen, who was the prime
chancellor of the High Legal Ja’fari court of appeal in Beirut.

(33)

of ordeals and disasters.

The reply of King Husayn was full of sentiments and appreciations. He
began his letter with the following verse of one of the poets: “If the
notables of my tribe were pleased with me,

The mean would still be displeased”.

Many of his letters were spread here and there. Some of their copies
were collected by his cousin and secretary Sayyid Ali Sharafuddeen, who
was trusted and reliable in saving his letters and valuable works. We
hope that he may permit to publish them so that the Arabic library may
be enriched with bright Alawite literature.

**His prose**

His prose was too eloquent and bright and firm in style and each part
confirmed the other that no writer whatever ability of eloquence he had
could not omit even a word of it or replace it by another one because
Sayyid Sharafuddeen thought and thought before he began to express his
thoughts. He chose the best after he thought best.

He tried a sentence by his sharp sense before he dictated it to his
clerk. His expressions always had a sense of good poetry. His prose has
a special nature that a reader will know whose prose it is before he
sees the name of the writer.

His eloquence was clear in all what he had written and his style
transmigrated into his accurate scientific meanings to make them
brighter and more glamorous. We know no one in our present time that may
be compared with him in eloquence, accuracy of meanings and clearance of
intent in all what he has written whether scientific or Islamic
subjects.

**His speeches**

His speeches were distinguished by firm expression, accurate
description and bright style. He always improvised his speeches and this
did not prevent him from concentrating on his concept and showing his
meanings in high eloquence. His speeches were too far from affectation
and mannerism. So were

(34)

his books, works, lectures and daily talks. Thus was his ordinary life.
His pure soul wished goodness to all people whether friend or enemy,
near or far. His big heart was full of love and sympathy toward
everyone. He was a great example in his Alawite morals and his pure
manners throughout his eternal life. This high Alawite soul had its
great effects on his sayings and doings. He rushed into actions to a
degree that his likes were rare and rushed into his speeches like a
flood until it had been said that no one equalled him among his likes.

Once I traveled to Lebanon in 1350 A.H. and I saw him making a speech
in the big Mosque every afternoon of the first ten days of Muharram. The
title of his speeches of every day was (Aal[^1] Muhammad and who aal
Muhammad is). Every day he talked about an hour showing people the
greatness of Ahlul Bayt (s) in the Book, the Sunna and among people. He
specified the tenth day for Imam Husayn (s). The meeting was in the
morning in the house of one of the notables of Soor, who was a close
relative of Sayyid Sharafuddeen. He talked about the rising of Imam
Husayn (s), its reasons, aims and great results in supporting Islam and
confirming the religion. He ended his speech with the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (s). He mixed his speech with crying and made people cry bitterly
until they were about to lose their consciousness.

His speech lasted for three continuous hours. If that subject (aal
Muhammad) was recorded and published, it would be a great book
collecting the virtues of Ahlul Bayt (s) and their biographies that
every Muslim had to know.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen had great speeches in Beirut, Damascus, Palestine
and Egypt that could not be forgotten. The journalists had recorded many
of them at that time. Some of them were published in the newspapers.
They were available with his secretary, who had added them to the
letters we mentioned previously.

[^1] Aal means the family or the progeny of.


