Part 3
======

prohibited it!” Abdullah bin Umar said: “Do you see that if my father
has prohibited it and the messenger of Allah (s) has practiced it, we
should follow my father or follow the messenger of Allah (s)?” the man
said: “We should follow the messenger of Allah (s).” Abdullah bin Umar
said: “The messenger of Allah (s) has practiced it.” There are many
other true traditions in the books of Hadith denying this act of Umar
(when prohibiting the pleasure of hajj).

In the Farewell Hajj (the last hajj of the Prophet (s)) there was a
clear evidence on this matter. Refer to Sahih of Muslim[^1] to see that
the Prophet (s) had announced it before more than one hundred Muslims;
men and women of the umma, who had come from different countries to
offer the hajj with the Prophet (s). When the Prophet (s) announced
that, Suraqa bin Malik bin Khath’am got up and asked: “O messenger of
Allah, is this pleasure for this year only or forever?” The Prophet (s)
interlaced his fingers and said: “Umra has entered into the hajj, umra
has entered into the hajj forever, forever.”

Imam Ali (s) came from Yemen (during the season of the hajj) and found
that Fatima (s) had put off her ihram and put on colored clothes and
darkened her eyes with kohl. He denied that. She said: “My father has
ordered me to do that.” Imam Ali (s) went to the Prophet (s) asking him
about the matter. The Prophet (s) said: “She is true. She is true…”

**22. Temporary marriage**

Allah and His messenger have legislated temporary marriage and the
Muslims practiced it during the time of the Prophet (s) until he left to
the better world and they practiced it after that during the reign of
Abu Bakr until he died. When Umar became the caliph, the Muslims still
practiced temporary marriage until he forbade it one day when he said
from above the minbar: “Two pleasures were practiced at the time of the
messenger of Allah but I forbid them and punish for

[^1] vol.1 p.157.

(225)

them; the pleasure of the hajj and temporary marriage.”[^1] Allah has
permitted temporary marriage when He said in the holy Qur'an: “Then as
to those whom you profit by, give them their dowries as appointed.
Qur'an, 4:24” Kinds of marriage in Islam are four. Allah has legislated
them in four verses in the sura of an-Nissa’ (women). We have detailed
them in our book about temporary marriage.

As for the true traditions about temporary marriage, they are too many
and they have been mentioned in all books of Hadith. Muslim mentioned in
his Sahih[^2] a tradition narrated by Abu Nadhra saying: “Ibn Abbas often
permitted practicing temporary marriage while ibn az-Zubayr forbade it.
This was mentioned to Jabir bin Abdullah. He said: “It has occurred
before me. We often practiced temporary marriage during the time of the
messenger of Allah but when Umar became the caliph,[^3] he said: “Allah
has permitted to His messenger as He liked by His will.[^4] Complete the
hajj and the minor hajj and avoid temporary marriage. Whoever practices
temporary marriage I will stone him.”[^5]

We have studied this subject deeply and carefully and then we indicated
the truth in our books; al-Fusool al-Muhimma (the important chapters),
Masa’il Fiqhiyya (juristic questions), The Answers of Musa Jarallah and
what has been published in al-Irfan

[^1] Ar-Razi protested, in his book at-Tafseer al-Kabeer when talking
about the verse (Then as to those whom you profit by, give them their
dowries as appointed( against prohibiting temporary marriage by Umar.

[^2] Vol.1 p.467.

[^3] This saying shows clearly that prohibiting temporary marriage has
not been determined before Umar.

[^4] Would that someone knows if this word could justify a way to
prohibit temporary marriage! Had Umar thought that this matter concerned
the Prophet (s) especially or concerned his time only? Certainly not!
Lawful things of Muhammad are lawful until the Day of Resurrection and
his unlawful things are unlawful until the Day of Resurrection.

[^5] Stoning is one of the punishments of the Heaven which cannot be
legislated except by a prophet. One, who believes in the permissibility
of temporary marriage, has concluded its decree from the Book and the
Sunna. If he is right in his conclusion, he cannot be blamed and if he
is mistaken unintendedly, he is considered to be in obscurity and so he
cannot be punished.

(226)

Magazine, vol.36 part ten in which we have covered all the sides of the
subject. We have explained that into eight chapters:

1. The essence of temporary marriage with its requirements and legal
limits.
2. The consensus of the umma on its legality in Islam.
3. The evidences of the Qur'an on its legality.
4. Its legality according to the Sunna.
5. The pretense of those who say that it has been abrogated and their
evidence.
6. Traditions showing that the caliph Umar has abrogated it.
7. The companions and their successors who have denied that from the
caliph.[^1]
8. The opinion of the Shia and their evidences on the subject.
We have just intended to show the truth in our study on this subject.
Our evidences have been derived from the Book, the Sunna and the

[^1] Among them was Abdul Melik bin Abdul Aziz bin Jurayj Abu Khalid
al-Mekki who was one of the famous scholars among the companions’
successors. Ibn Khillikan mentioned his biography in his book wafiyyat
al-A’yan, ibn Sa’d in his Tabaqat, vol.5 p.361 , ibn al-Qaysarani in his
book al-Jam’ Bayna Rijal as-Sahihayn, p.314 and ath-Thahabi in his Mizan
and he said about him: “He is one of the reliable scholars, who has been
trusted by the all. He has got married to ninety women in temporary
marriage. He thought that temporary marriage was permissible. He was the
jurisprudent of Mecca at his time.”

Al-Ma’moon also during his reign has denied prohibiting temporary
marriage (by Umar) and ordered his officials to announce its
permissibility-as mentioned by ibn Khillikan in his book Wafiyyat
al-A’yan when talking about the biography of Yahya bin Aktham. Muhammad
bin Mansoor and Abul Ayna’ once came to al-Ma’moon. They found him
brushing his teeth and saying angrily (repeating the saying of Umar) :
“Two pleasures were practiced at the time of the messenger of Allah and
at the time of Abu Bakr but I (Umar) prohibit them! Who are you (this is
the complement of al-Ma’moon) O you scarab, so that you prohibit what
the messenger of Allah and Abu Bakr have practiced?” Muhammad bin
Mansoor wanted to talk with al-Ma’moon but Abul Ayna’ made a sign to him
and said: “A man saying so about Umar bin al-Khattab, how can we talk to
him?!” they did not talk to him. Then Yahya bin Aktham came to him and
warned him that sedition might take place (if he permitted temporary
marriage)…”

(227)

consensus of the umma. Let the fair researchers ponder on what we have
written about this subject and then they are free to judge whether it is
permissible or not.

**23. Changing the azan[^1]**

We have researched on the traditions concerning the azan during the
time of the Prophet (s) and we have not found this statement “prayer is
better than sleeping” as a part of the azan. In fact this statement was
not in the azan even at the time of Abu Bakr. Umar had ordered this
statement to be added to the azan after passing of some period of his
caliphate when he liked that and admired it to be in the azan of Fajr
(dawn) prayer. He determined that and ordered people to announce it when
calling the azan. Many true traditions about this matter have been
narrated from the infallible imams (s).

The books of Hadith of other than the infallible imams (s) have had
many such traditions. Malik mentioned in his Muwatta’: “Once the caller
of azan came to Umar bin al-Khattab to announce the time of Fajr prayer
and he found Umar sleeping. He said to him: “Prayer is better than
sleeping.” Umar admired that and ordered him to add it to the azan of
Fajr.”

Az-Zarqani said in his book Sharh al-Muwatta’[^2] when commenting on
this word: “Ad-Darqutni mentioned this tradition in his Sunan from
Waqee’ from al-Umari from Nafi’ from ibn Umar that Umar had said to his
caller (of azan): “When you reach “Come to success!”[^3] in the azan of
Fajr prayer, say: Prayer is better than sleeping! Prayer is better than
sleeping!” It was also narrated by Sufyan from Muhammad bin Ajlan from
Nafi’ from ibn Umar from Umar.”

This tradition has also been mentioned by ibn Shayba from Hisham bin
Urwa and has been mentioned by some other Sunni scholars. There was no
any value for the (false) tradition narrated by Muhammad bin Khalid bin
Abdullah al-Wasiti from his father from Abdurrahman bin Isshaq from
az-Zuhri from Salim that his father

[^1] Azan is the call for the prayers (in their times).
[^2] Vol.1 p.25.
[^3] Hayya alal falah.

(228)

had said: “Once the Prophet (s) consulted the Muslims about what should
attract their attentions to the times of the prayers. Some of them
suggested using a trumpet but the Prophet (s) disliked it because it was
used by the Jews. Some others suggested using a bell but the Prophet (s)
disliked it too because it was used by the Christians. At that night a
man from the Ansar called Abdullah bin Zayd and Umar bin al-Khattab were
inspired with the call (azan) in their dreams. In the same night
Abdullah bin Zayd al-Ansari came to the Prophet (s) and told him of what
he had seen in dream. The Prophet (s) ordered Bilal to announce it as
the azan. Then Bilal added to it “prayer is better than sleeping” and
the Prophet (s) approved it.” Ibn Maja mentioned this tradition in his
Sunan.

This tradition is null because it has been narrated by Muhammad bin
Khalid bin Abdullah al-Wasiti, about whom Yahya has said: “He is an
immoral man.” Once again he has said about him: “He is nothing
(unreliable)!”

Ibn Adiy said about him: “Ahmad and Yahya denied his traditions
especially when he narrated from his father. He had many other denied
traditions.” Abu Zar’a said about him: “He is weak (untrusted).” Yahya
bin Mo’een said: “Muhammad bin Khalid bin Abdullah is a liar. When you
meet him, slap him!”

Ath-Thahabi talked about him in his Mizan and mentioned the criticism
and defects ascribed to him by the scholars.

Like this tradition was the tradition narrated by Abu Mahthoora when he
had said: “I said: “O messenger of Allah, would you please teach me the
azan?” The Prophet (s) rubbed over my head and said to me: “You say
“Allah is great, Allah is great” loudly and then you say in a low voice
“I witness that there is no god but Allah , I witness that there is no
god but Allah, I witness that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah, I
witness that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah” then you say loudly “I
witness that there is no god but Allah, I witness that there is no god
but Allah, I witness that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah, I witness
that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah, come to prayer, come to prayer,
come to success, come to success” if is Fajr prayer you say then “prayer
is better than sleeping, prayer is better than sleeping, Allah is great,
Allah is great, there is

(229)

no god but Allah, there is no god but Allah”.

Abu Dawood mentioned this tradition from Abu Mahthoora in two ways; one
from Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Abu Mahthoora from his father from his
grandfather, the other from Othman bin as-Sa’ib from his father, who was
unknown as ath-Thahabi had said in his Mizan. Muslim has mentioned this
tradition of Abu Mahthoora in his Sahih but it has not had this
statement “prayer is better than sleeping”. Soon you will see the
tradition mentioned by Abu Dawood and others that has been narrated by
Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Zayd about the azan that Bilal has announced
after it has been dictated to him by Abdullah bin Zayd. It has not had
“prayer is better than sleeping” although it was the azan of Fajr
prayer.

As for Abu Mahthoora, he was one of the freed captives of Mecca[^1] and
he was one of those, whom the Prophet (s) gifted in order to reconcile
them to Islam. When the Prophet (s) went back from Hunayn victoriously,
he was the most hated one to Abu Mahthoora and his orders and principles
were the most hated things to him too. Abu Mahthoora often mocked at the
Prophet’s caller (who announced azan) but the pouch of silver coins,
which the Prophet (s) had given, the booties of Hunayn, which the
Prophet (s) had spread among the freed captives, who were his enemies
and who had fought him for a long time, his great morals towards whoever
had announced shahada from among the hypocrites besides his severity
towards the unbelievers and that the Arabs began to become Muslims group
by group, all that forced Abu Mahthoora and his likes to announce
shahada by their tongues whereas their hearts were still occupied by the
idols. He did not emigrate until he died in Mecca.[^2] Allah is more
aware of his inners!

The Prophet (s) had said a word about three men; Abu Mahthoora, Abu
Hurayra and Samra bin Jundub. He warned them by saying:

[^1] When the Muslims conquered Mecca, the Prophet (s) forgave the
polytheists and set them free.
[^2] Refer to al-Issaba, Abu Mahthoora’s biography.

(230)

“The last to die of you, will be in Hell.”[^1] This was a wise manner of
the Prophet (s) to keep the hypocrites away from running the affairs of
the Muslims. As the Prophet (s) was aware of the inners of these three
men, so he wanted his umma to doubt the three of them and then to avoid
them all. He wanted his umma not to entrust any of them with any affair
of Islam and the Muslims. He said that he, who would die after his two
friends, would be in hell but he had generalized his saying without
giving any specification about certain one of them that any of the three
men could be the one who would be in Hell. Days and nights passed and
the word of the Prophet (s) remained as it was. The Prophet (s) left to
the better world but without specifying his word; therefore the men of
understanding were obliged to keep all the three men away from any
affair of social rights in Islam that was to be entrusted to the
reliable and trustworthy people of the umma. If these three men were not
same in being avoided, the Prophet (s) definitely would specify one of
them in order not to wrong the others.

If you say: the Prophet (s) might have defined one of them with
something but that certain thing had been ignored because of the long
time that had passed.

We say: if there was some definition that had specified one of them,
then the three of them would have not feared that warning in the same
way.[^2] There was no difference in this matter between not assigning one
of them or that assignment had become unknown because the result would
be the same for us. We would regard the three in the same way.

If you say: the one, who had been said to be in Hell, could not be
known before the death of the first and the second ones and then the
remaining one after the two would be the one whom the Prophet (s) had
meant by his saying and so the saying of the Prophet (s) would not be
general or ambiguous.

[^1] Refer to Samra’s biography in al-Istee’ab, al-Isaba and other
books.
[^2] As it is well-known by whoever studies their affairs after this
threat.

(231)

We say: first it is impossible for the prophets (s) to hide the truth
or to delay it until its necessary time may pass. In this matter the
required time was connected with the threat and the Prophet (s) would
have indicated it if any one of the three had had any respect because
men, since they became Muslims, would be tried by the civil rights like
imamate in offering prayers, witnesses in legal trials, issuing fatwas,
judging and the likes, which required fairness, truthfulness and piety.
If these three men deserved not to be kept away from all that civil
rights and positions, the Prophet (s) would not delay declaring the
truth concerning them. Far be it from the Prophet (s) to prevent any one
from getting his right and far be it from him to disgrace someone
innocent and to keep him on that disgrace, which he does not deserve,
until he dies (before his two friends)! And second: by Allah, we have
tried our best as possible as we could in researching and studying the
fixed facts but we could not know which one of these three men had died
before the others. The sayings about the dates of their deaths were
either contradicted[^1] or alike and common. Hence we could not depend on
any of them.

Third: the high morals of the Prophet (s), whom Allah has said about:
(Certainly a Messenger has come to you from among yourselves; grievous
to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous respecting
you; to the believers (he is) compassionate) would not let him face an
innocent one, whom he respected, with such a severe word. The Prophet
(s), who had exalted personality and manners, would never surprise an
innocent one with something bad that he did not deserve. If there was a
good one among these three men, the Prophet (s) would not include him in
this bad surprise; but it had been revealed to him by Allah to warn the
umma against these men and their likes. (Nor does he speak out of
desire. It is naught but revelation that is revealed).

[^1] Some historians said that Samra had died in the year fifty-eight of
hijra and Abu Hurayra in fifty-nine whereas other historians said that
Abu Hurayra had died in fifty-seven of hijra and so on for the three of
them. As for the alike dates, some historians said that the three of
them had died in fifty-nine of hijra without referring to the time, the
day or the month in which they had died.

(232)

He, who knew the opinion of our Sunni brothers of the four sects about
the start of the azan and iqama[^1] and about legislating them, would not
be astonished to find them submitting to adding to them or omitting from
them. They thought that azan and iqama had not been legislated by Allah
via revealing them to the Prophet (s). They did not think that the
Prophet (s) had announced them as divine rites determined by Allah but
they were just a result of dreams seen by some companions as they had
narrated in their traditions which they considered as true and
recurrent. Here are some of these traditions which they consider as the
truest ones of them.

Abu Umayr bin Anass narrated from some of his uncles of the Ansar that:
“The Prophet (s) thought about prayers; how to make people gather to
offer them at their prescribed times. It was said to him: “Raise a
banner and when people see it, some of them will announce that it is
time to offer prayer.” He did not approve this idea. Some people
mentioned to him the trumpet but he disliked it and said it was used by
the Jews. Others suggested using a bell. He said that it was used by the
Christians. At the first he disliked it but then he ordered to make a
bell of wood.

Abdullah bin Zayd, when he saw the Prophet (s) concerned in the matter,
began to think much about it. He was inspired in his sleep with a vision
showing him how to do the azan. He went to the Prophet (s) and said to
him: “O messenger of Allah, while I was in light sleep, someone came to
me and taught me the azan.” Umar bin al-Khattab had seen that vision in
his sleep but he kept it secret for twenty days and then he informed the
Prophet (s) of it. The Prophet (s) said to him: “What prevented you from
telling me that?” Umar said: “Abdullah bin Zayd preceded me in telling
you and then I felt shy.” The Prophet (s) said: “O Bilal, get up and do
as Abdullah bin Zayd will instruct you!” Then Bilal announced the
azan…”[^2] Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Zayd al-Ansari said that his
father

[^1] A prerequisite call to the prayer.
[^2] It has been mentioned by Abu Dawood in his Sunan, vol.1 chap. Start
of Azan and it has been mentioned in many other books of Hadith. The
Sunni scholars have considered it as a true tradition.

(233)

Abdullah bin Zayd had said: “When the messenger of Allah (s) had
ordered a bell to be made in order to make people gather to offer the
prayers, I saw in sleep that someone carrying a bell in his hand came to
me. I asked him: “Do you sell this bell?” He said: “What will you do
with it?” I said: “We will call for prayers by it.” He said: “Shall I
guide you to what is better than this?” I said: “Yes, please!” He said:
“You say: Allah is great, Allah is great, Allah is great, Allah is
great, I witness that there is no god but Allah, I witness that there is
no god but Allah, I witness that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah, I
witness that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah, come to prayer, come to
prayer, come to success, come to success, Allah is great, Allah is
great, there is no god but Allah.”[^1] After a moment he said to me:
“When you stand up to begin the prayer, you say: Allah is great, Allah
is great, I witness that there is no god but Allah, I witness that there
is no god but Allah, I witness that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah,
come to prayer, come to success, the time for prayer has come, the time
for prayer has come, Allah is great, Allah is great, there is no god but
Allah.”

In the morning I went to the Prophet (s) and told him of what I have
seen in my sleep. He said: “It is a true vision inshallah. Go with Bilal
and instruct him what you have seen in your sleep. Let him announce it
because his voice is more dulcet than yours.” I went with Bilal and
began teaching him the azan and then he announced it. Umar, from inside
his house, heard the azan. He came dragging his garment and saying: “O
messenger of Allah, I swear by Him, Who has sent you with the truth,
that I have seen like what he has seen…”[^2]

Malik abbreviated the tradition in his Muwatta’. He mentioned that
Yahya bin Sa’eed had said: “The Prophet (s) wanted to use two pieces

[^1] This azan-as the narrators, who had narrated this tradition from
Abdullah bin Zayd, claimed-was the first azan in Islam. As you see, it
does not have “prayer is better than sleeping” although it was for Fajr
prayer. Then wherefrom has it come to be a part of the azan, O you
Muslims?!

[^2] Mentioned by Abu Dawood as-Sajistani in his Sunan, at-Tarmithi in
his Sahih, ibn Hayyan in his Sunan, ibn Khuzayma in his Sunan, ibn Maja
in his Sunan and other scholars of Hadith.

(234)

of wood[^1] in order to gather the people to offer the prayers after
beating them with each other. At that time Abdullah bin Zayd al-Ansari
had seen in his sleep two pieces of wood. He said (in his sleep): “These
two pieces of wood are like the ones that the messenger of Allah wants
to gather people for prayers with.” It was said to him: “Do you not
announce azan for prayer?” He was taught the azan in his sleep. In the
morning he came to the Prophet (s) and told him of that. Then the
Prophet (s) ordered the azan to be announced.”[^2]

Ibn Abdul Birr said: “Some of the companions had narrated the story of
Abdullah bin Zayd about the start of azan in different wordings but near
meanings. The resources of these traditions are recurrent and
accepted…”[^3]

In commenting on these traditions I say:

First: the Prophet (s) would not have to consult the people in
legislating the divine verdicts of the Sharia. He had just followed the
divine orders that Allah had revealed to him “Nor does he speak out of
desire. It is naught but revelation that is revealed. The Lord of Mighty
Power has taught him. Qur'an, 53:3-5” All the prophets have not
consulted their peoples about the divine verdicts “Nay! they are honored
servants. They do not precede Him in speech and (only) according to His
commandment do they act. Qur'an, 21:26-27” Allah has said to his
messenger and the last of His prophets, Muhammad (s): “Say: I only
follow what is revealed to me from my Lord; these are clear proofs from
your Lord and a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe. Qur'an,
7:203” and “Say: It does not beseem me that I should change it of
myself; I follow naught but what is revealed to me; surely I fear, if I
disobey my Lord, the punishment of a mighty day. Qur'an, 10:15” and
“Say: I am not the first of the messengers, and I do not know what will
be done with me or with you: I do not follow

[^1] Az-Zarqani said in his book Sharh al-Muwatta’ when commenting on
this tradition: “It is the bell; a long piece of wood that is beaten
with a smaller one to produce sound.” Az-Zarqani here has a noticeable
comment on the tradition of Abdullah bin Zayd. I ask the researchers to
refer to Sharh al-Muwatta’, vol.1 p.120-125.

[^2] For details, refer to Sharh al-Muwatta’ by az-Zarqani.

[^3] Sharh al-Muwatta’ by az-Zarqani.

(235)

anything but that which is revealed to me, and I am nothing but a plain
warner. Qur'an, 46:9” Allah has warned His messenger of hastiness even
with a movement of the tongue. He has said: “Do not move your tongue
with it to make haste with it. Surely on Us (devolves) the collecting of
it and the reciting of it. Therefore when We have recited it, follow its
recitation. Again on Us (devolves) the explaining of it. Qur'an,
75:16-19” Allah has praised the saying of His messenger by saying: “Most
surely, it is the Word brought by an honored Messenger. And it is not
the word of a poet; little is it that you believe. Nor the word of a
soothsayer; little is it that you mind. It is a revelation from the Lord
of the worlds. Qur'an, 69:40-43” and “Most surely it is the Word of an
honored messenger. The processor of strength; having an honorable place
with the Lord of the Dominion. One (to be) obeyed, and faithful in
trust. And your companion is not gone mad. Qur'an, 81:19-22”

Second: reason regards the consultation mentioned in these traditions
as null. Consultation with people has no any role in legislation the
divine laws; therefore it was impossible for the Prophet (s) to consult
his companions about the principles of the Sharia. Would Allah need the
opinions of His servants to determine the laws of His Sharia? “And if he
had fabricated against Us some of the sayings. We would certainly have
seized him by the right hand. Then We would certainly have cut off his
aorta. And not one of you could have withheld Us from him. Qur'an,
69:44-47”

Yes, the Prophet (s) consulted his companions about the affairs of this
worldly life such as meeting the enemy, stratagems of war and the likes.
He followed in that the saying of Allah: “and take counsel with them in
the affair; so when you have decided, then place your trust in Allah.
Qur'an, 3:159” In this concern the Prophet (s), in order to reconcile
his companions, could consult them although the revelation sufficed him
away from his companions’ opinions; but as for the laws of religion it
was not possible for him save to follow the revelation.

Third: these traditions showed that the Prophet (s) was confused and
this could not be possible for the infallible prophet, who was so close
to Allah and whom Allah had loved and preferred to all of the

(236)

creatures of the worlds. These traditions showed the Prophet (s) in a
confused state until he became in need of people’s consultation; once he
disliked using a bell and then he ordered the bell to be used and then
he gave up the bell and submitted to the vision of Abdullah bin Zayd!
This was impossible for Allah and His messenger, who was the master and
the last of the prophets and who was the trustee of the mission and
revelation of Allah.

In fact the visions of other than the prophets could not be relied on
according to the consensus of the umma. Fourth: these traditions
contradict each other and this leads to brush them aside especially the
two traditions we have just mentioned above; the one narrated by Abu
Umayr bin Anass from some of his uncles of the Ansar and the one
narrated by Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Zayd from his father. Would that
you ponder on them to see the contradiction between them especially what
concerns the vision of Umar!

These two traditions limit the vision to ibn Zayd and Umar whereas the
tradition of the vision mentioned by at-Tabarani in his book at-Tafseer
al-Awsat shows that the vision (of the azan) has been seen by Abu Bakr
too. There are other traditions showing that this vision has been seen
by fourteen men of the companions as in Sharh at-Tanbeeh by al-Jubayli.
It has also been mentioned that those, who had seen the vision at that
night, were seventeen men of the Ansar besides Umar who was the only one
of the Muhajireen. Another tradition said that Bilal had seen the vision
of the azan too. There are many other contradictions about the subject.
Al-Halabi mentioned some of them which were so astonishing and he tried
to bring these contradictions close together but he failed.[^1]

Fifth: al-Bukhari and Muslim had ignored this version at all. They had
not mentioned it in their Sahihs neither from ibn Zayd nor from Umar bin
al-Khattab nor from any other because it had not been proved to be true.
They mentioned in their Sahihs that Umar had said: “The Muslims, when
they had come to Medina, gathered together and assigned the time of
prayer without calling. One day

[^1] In his Seera, vol.2 chap. Azan.

(237)

they discussed this matter. Some of them said: “Let us use a bell like
the Christians!” Others said: “Let us use a trumpet like the Jews!” Then
Umar said: “Why do you not send someone to call out the time of
prayers?” The Prophet (s) said: “O Bilal, get up and call out for the
prayer!” Then Bilal called out.”

This is all what has been mentioned in the Sahihs of al-Bukhari and
Muslim about legislating the azan. They have ignored anything concerning
the start of azan other than this. This tradition contradicts all the
previous traditions mentioned about the vision of azan. This tradition
shows that the azan has started according to Umar’s suggestion and not
according to his vision or the vision of Abdullah bin Zayd or anyone
else.

Also this tradition shows clearly that the Prophet (s) has ordered
Bilal to call out the azan during the meeting of consultation, in which
Umar was present, whereas those traditions of the vision shows that the
Prophet (s) has ordered Bilal to call out the azan at the dawn when ibn
Zayd has told the Prophet (s) about his vision that it was one night
after the consultation at least where Umar was not there but he has
heard the azan while he was in his house and then he came dragging his
garment and saying: “I swear by Him, Who has sent you with the truth,
that I have seen in my sleep as he has seen.”

I adjure you by Allah, could you bring this tradition close to those
ones? Certainly not! I swear by Allah and the truth! Al-Hakim has
ignored the traditions of the vision of azan and iqama. He has never
mentioned any of them in his Mustadrak as the two sheikhs; al-Bukhari
and Muslim have done. This shows that these traditions are untrue.

Al-Hakim took on himself to follow all the true traditions that
al-Bukhari and Muslim had not mentioned in their Sahihs and since he
himself had not mentioned the traditions talking about the vision of
azan in his Mustadrak, so it has become clear that these traditions were
not true. Al-Hakim had said a word showing that these traditions of the
vision were null and they were just fabricated lies. He said: “The two
sheikhs (al-Bukhari and Muslim) ignored the tradition of Abdullah

(238)

bin Zayd about the vision and azan because Abdullah had died before
this event (of the azan)…”[^1]

What confirmed this fact was that the azan, according to the Sunni, had
started after the battle of Uhud. Abu Na’eem mentioned in his book
Hilyatul Awliya’ when talking about the biography of Umar bin Abdul Aziz
that Abdullah al-Umayri had said: “Once the daughter of Abdullah bin
Zayd bin Tha’laba came to Umar bin Abdul Aziz and said to him: “I am the
daughter of Abdullah bin Zayd. My father participated in the battle of
Badr and he was martyred in the battle of Uhud.” Umar said to her: “Ask
for whatever you like!” He gifted her (what she asked him for).” If
Abdullah bin Zayd had seen the vision of azan as they pretended, his
daughter would have mentioned that to Umar bin Abdul Aziz as she had
mentioned his fighting in Badr and his martyrdom in Uhud.

Sixth: Allah has ordered the believers not to preceded Allah and His
messenger and not to raise their voices above the voice of the Prophet
(s), lest their deeds would be vain. Allah has said: “O Ye who believe!
Put not yourselves forward before Allah and His Messenger; but fear
Allah: for Allah is He Who hears and knows all things. O you who
believe! do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, and do
not speak loud to him as you speak loud to one another, lest your deeds
became null while you do not perceive. Qur'an, 49:1-2”

The reason behind the revelation of these verses was that some people
of bani Tameem had come to the Prophet (s) asking him to appoint a man
from them as a chief over them. Abu Bakr said:[^2] “O messenger of Allah,
appoint al-Qa’qa’ bin Ma’bad as chief over them!” Umar bin al-Khattab
said immediately: “O messenger of Allah, appoint al-Aqra’ bin Habis from
bani Mujashi’.” Abu Bakr said to Umar: “You just want to oppose me!”
They disputed before the Prophet (s) and their voices became too loud.
Then Allah revealed these verses to the Prophet (s) because Abu Bakr and
Umar had preceded the Prophet (s) and hastened in giving their
opinions

[^1] Al-Mustadrak, vol.4 p.348.
[^2] Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.3 p.127.

(239)

besides their disputing and clamoring before the Prophet (s). Allah has
addressed all the believers with these verses to be as a rule for them
how to behave before the Prophet (s). These verses have forbidden every
faithful man and faithful woman from being opinionated before the
Prophet (s) and from preceding him in everything. The saying of Allah:
(O Ye who believe! Put not yourselves forward before Allah and His
Messenger) means that no Muslim has the right to give his opinion on a
matter before Allah and His messenger would determine. As if those men,
who preceded the Prophet (s) in giving their opinions, deemed themselves
to be of high ranks that they had the right to decide on the public
affairs; therefore Allah had warned the believers of their mistake and
showed them their obligation that they would have not to exceed.

The saying of Allah: (O you who believe! do not raise your voices above
the voice of the Prophet) refuted the concept of that those people had a
right to decide on the affairs of the Muslims or they had a special
position near Allah and His messenger for that whoever raised his voice
above the voices of the others thought that he had a special rank or
authority over the others and this could not be possible or accepted
from anyone in the Prophet’s presence.

He, who ponders on the sayings of Allah: (fear Allah: for Allah is He
Who hears and knows all things) and (lest your deeds became null while
you do not perceive), will find the truth as it is.

And he, who knows that Allah has not approved what Abu Bakr and Umar
have done when opinionating before Allah and His messenger, will be
certain that Allah does not permit people to consult on legislating the
laws of His Sharia. Would that our people know!

Seventh: azan and iqama are parts of the very daily obligations and He,
Who has legislated them, is the same Who has legislated the daily
obligations. They are the greatest divine rites, with which the Islamic
umma has been distinguished from all the other nations and religions.
They (azan and iqama) are examples of high eloquence, magnificent
meanings and exalted aims. They announce the truth too openly; Allah is
great, I witness that there is no god but Allah, I witness that Muhammad
is the messenger of Allah-with praising him and praying Allah to bless
him, come to prayer, come to success,

(240)

come to the best of deeds. He, who calls out these facts, does not fear
save Allah and does not submit to any tyrant. This is an alive mission
as one of the scholars has said about it. As if you see that all the
life listens and assents to it and as if man begins prayer since the
first moment when he hears the first words of the azan and iqama. Man
contacts with the world of the unseen since he listens to azan and
iqama.

It is a mission, in which the earth and the heaven meet together and
the submission of man mixes with the greatness of the Creator. The
eternal truth comes to man’s mind at every time of prayers, as if it is
a new tiding! Allah is great, Allah is great, there is no god but Allah,
there is no god but Allah…it is the call of azan, with which the Muslims
get ready to offer the prayers. It is the alive call which utters the
eternal fact; the fact that is too simple but too wonderful because it
is the richest fact that is in no need of being repeated throughout the
ages and at the same time it is the fact that is in need much more of
being repeated among the businesses of this worldly life and the signs
of mortality.

A Muslim becomes in a state of praying since he hears the azan inviting
him towards the prayer. Through the azan a Muslim remembers the
greatness of Allah and this is the essence of the essence of the
prayers.

The calmness of the night opens up with it (azan) as if it is one of
the live phenomenon of nature to which hearings and souls assent, birds
and trees listen, water and air hasten and all the world rises to
respond since the first call of the caller…[^1] In short, azan and iqama
are things that the human beings could never contrive even if all of
them would gather together. To Allah we resort and Him we ask not to
make us among those who distort the bright facts especially those of the
laws of Allah, His Sharia and His signs. Eighth: the Sunni’s traditions
about the start of azan and iqama

[^1] Da’iy as-Sama’ (the caller of Heaven) by Professor al-Aqqad,
p.136-142.

(241)

contradict the true traditions narrated from the infallible imams of
Ahlul Bayt (s). And definitely any tradition that contradicts the true
traditions of Ahlul Bayt (s) has no any value near us. In the book
Wassa’il ash-Shia ila Ahkam ash-Sharia it is mentioned that Imam Abu
Abdullah Ja’far as-Sadiq (s) has said: “When Gabriel has brought the
azan to the Prophet (s), he (Gabriel) uttered the azan and the iqama and
then the Prophet (s) ordered Ali to send for Bilal. When Bilal came, the
Prophet (s) taught him the azan and ordered him to announce it (at the
times of the prayers).” This has been mentioned by Muhammad bin Ya’qoob
al-Kulayni, as-Sadooq Muhammad bin Ali bin Babwayh al-Qummi and the
sheikh of the Shia Muhammad bin al-Hasan at-Toossi. It suffices us that
the truthfulness and piety of these scholars could never be doubted.

Sheikh Shahid Muhammad bin Mekki has mentioned in his book ath-Thikra
(the memory) that Imam as-Sadiq (s) has dispraised some people, who
pretended that the Prophet (s) had taken the azan from Abdullah bin Zayd
al-Ansari. Imam Sadiq (s) said: “Gabriel has revealed it (azan) to your
prophet and you pretend that the Prophet (s) has taken it from Abdullah
bin Zayd!”

Al-Halabi in his Seera mentioned that Abul Ala’ had said: “Once I said
to Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyya (Imam Ali’s son): “We narrate that the azan
has started according to a vision that a man from the Ansar has seen in
his sleep.” He became too angry and said: “You have come to a basic
principle of Islam and a sign of your religion and pretended that it has
been issued according to a vision that a man of the Ansar had seen in
his sleep; a vision that it could be true and could be false or it could
be a bad dream!” I said to him: “But this tradition is spread among
people.” He said: “By Allah, it is the very untruth…”

Sufyan bin al-Layl said: “Once I visited al-Hasan bin Ali (s) in
Medina. The people, in his meeting, discussed the matter of azan before
him. Some of them said that the azan had started after a vision seen by
Abdullah bin Zayd. Al-Hasan bin Ali (s) said: “The matter of azan is
greater than that. Gabriel has called out the azan and iqama in the
Heaven and then he has revealed them to the

(242)

messenger of Allah…”[^1] Haroon bin Sa’d narrated from Shahid Zayd bin
Imam Ali bin al-Husayn (s) from his fathers that Imam Ali (s) had said:
“The messenger of Allah has been taught the azan in the night of his
ascension to Heaven when prayer has been determined as an
obligation.”[^2]


